6

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Wearable, Wireless EEG Solutions in Daily Life
Applications: What are we Missing?
Vojkan Mihajlović, Member, IEEE, Bernard Grundlehner, Member, IEEE,
Ruud Vullers, Senior Member, IEEE, and Julien Penders

Abstract—Monitoring human brain activity has great potential
in helping us understand the functioning of our brain, as well as in
preventing mental disorders and cognitive decline and improve our
quality of life. Noninvasive surface EEG is the dominant modality
for studying brain dynamics and performance in real-life interaction of humans with their environment. To take full advantage of
surface EEG recordings, EEG technology has to be advanced to a
level that it can be used in daily life activities. Furthermore, users
have to see it as an unobtrusive option to monitor and improve
their health. To achieve this, EEG systems have to be transformed
from stationary, wired, and cumbersome systems used mostly in
clinical practice today, to intelligent wearable, wireless, convenient,
and comfortable lifestyle solutions that provide high signal quality. Here, we discuss state-of-the-art in wireless and wearable EEG
solutions and a number of aspects where such solutions require
improvements when handling electrical activity of the brain. We
address personal traits and sensory inputs, brain signal generation and acquisition, brain signal analysis, and feedback generation. We provide guidelines on how these aspects can be advanced
further such that we can develop intelligent wearable, wireless,
lifestyle EEG solutions. We recognized the following aspects as
the ones that need rapid research progress: application driven design, end-user driven development, standardization and sharing of
EEG data, and development of sophisticated approaches to handle
EEG artifacts.
Index Terms—Daily life EEG, EEG, EEG system development
requirements, electroencephalography (ECG), intelligent systems,
wearable EEG, wireless EEG.

I. INTRODUCTION
ESIDES the numerous benefits that the technological inventions brought to the healthcare domain, especially in
surgical and monitoring applications within hospitals, they also
facilitated raised awareness of people about their own health.
Promoting health is crucial not only for the younger generation
if they would like to have a prosperous and long life, but also
for the elderly if they would like to live independently and to
stay mentally fit for a longer period [1]. Today, more and more
people try not to only maintain their health status and prevent
illness, but also to improve their quality of life by promoting
their health in various ways. This group of people forms a large
community that is currently ‘underserved’ in the health device

B

Manuscript received December 15, 2013; revised April 11, 2014; accepted
May 22, 2014. Date of publication June 3, 2014; date of current version December 30, 2014.
V. Mihajlović, B. Grundlehner, and J. Penders are with the Holst Centre/IMEC, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: vojkan.mihajlovic@
imec-nl.nl; bernard.grundlehner@imec-nl.nl; julien.penders@imec-nl.nl).
R. Vullers is with the Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612
AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: R.J.M.Vullers@tue.nl).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2328317

market space [2]. Having technology that will enable monitoring and characterizing human health is a prerequisite for the
next (r)evolution in the healthcare arena—empowered users that
will take care of their own health and that will assist healthcare
providers in interpreting and improving users conditions [3].
However, transferring the technology used in hospitals to users’
homes proves to be challenging. Most in-hospital solutions for
monitoring and managing health are by design too cumbersome
or too complex to be used outside hospitals and require expert
assistance. The only solutions available on the market that entered users’ homes are weight scales, blood pressure monitors,
and activity monitors (i.e., advanced accelerometers).
However, to have a more holistic view of someone’s health,
users would need to be aware of more aspects of their health
status other than their weight, blood pressure, and activity. Attempts to bring more sophisticated technologies that can estimate human health metrics, such as electrocardiography (ECG)
and electroencephalography (EEG), have been addressed in the
research community in recent years. These systems are placed in
a completely uncontrolled environment, outside of the experts’
hands and eyes and specially designed rooms. On the one hand,
recordings with such systems have limited or no use to health
care practitioners. Experts are neither confident in the quality
of acquired data nor in the sources of physiological changes
that are recorded by such devices. On the other hand, the users
have neither sufficient knowledge to ensure proper usage of devices nor to interpret the extracted information in the correct
way. Therefore, substantial development efforts are required to
bridge this gap.
Among noninvasive daily life brain activity monitoring
modalities, EEG is the only one that uses sensors and mounting
capabilities such that it can be worn during free locomotion. It
is superior to functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIR) in
terms of temporal resolution and brain areas that can be monitored [4]. Namely, fNIRs can only be used at the forehead
(regions not covered with hair) and detect the blood oxygenation level (similar to fMRI) which cannot capture fast changes
in the brain. Other modalities, such as fMRI and positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetoencephalography (MEG)
either have low temporal resolution or are impractical to be
adapted for daily life recording. Despite the many uses of EEG
in the clinical domain, EEG is rarely brought outside hospitals
and is considered to be too noise prone to be used in daily life
applications [5].
While current research efforts on understanding our brain
mainly focus on invasive EEG recordings, mostly in animals
and occasionally in humans, there is still a lot to be learned

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

from noninvasive EEG monitoring [6]. The main obstacle for
utilization of noninvasive EEG in daily life situations seems to be
rooted in the inadequacy of solutions used to acquire and process
brain signals and ineffectiveness of the feedback information.
Standard practice in EEG monitoring (in hospitals) requires
a cumbersome and lengthy preparation procedure which can
also lead to painful and unpleasant experiences. It involves skin
preparation and gel-electrode application, mounting a number of
wired sensors and connecting electrodes to the main acquisition
unit and a PC. This is far from being user-friendly, comfortable,
and convenient, and also result in stigmatization of users and
limits the use to clinical or controlled (ambulatory) environments. As such, it is used only in a limited number of clinical
applications where no alternatives exist, such as epilepsy prediction and monitoring [7] and monitoring brain recovery after
injury [8].
Such issues indicate that we need substantial progress in developing technology for convenient, wireless, wearable EEG
monitoring on one hand and in developing applications that
can utilize the developed technology and foster the making of
a database of knowledge in different brain research areas on
the other. Several research centers have recognized this need
and engaged in either developing lifestyle EEG solutions or
technology to be used in such solutions [9]–[12]. A few such
developments also lead to commercially available EEG systems: Neurosky’s MindWave, MindSet and Necomimi [13],
Emotiv Epoc headset [14], InteraXon Muse [15], g.tec gSahara [16], Quasar DSI 10/20 [17], Mindo Sepia, Trilobite and
Coral [18], Neuroelectrics Enobio [19], and Cognionics 16
to 64 channel headsets [20]. Also, within Holst Centre/imec,
an EEG monitoring headset with four active sensor chips is
available [21].
Although some of these devices have been available for a
number of years, none of them has achieved larger penetration in the EEG application market so far. They are used in
research laboratories around the world for brain–computer interface (BCI) investigations or for gaming applications built
using BCI technology [22]. Based on this niche usage of EEG
devices, one might argue that there is no need for daily life
EEG monitoring. Although it might seem that this is the case
today, we believe that the rising trend of users concerned with
their mental health and the increased prevalence of mental disorders, such as depression and burnout will change this status
[2]. Furthermore, due to safety concerns on roads and the severe
impact of human error in critical jobs, monitoring mental state
using such technology might also be included in legislation [23].
Finally, assessing conditions of people after a traumatic event
(e.g., brain injury and stressful events) [24] and improving the
condition of healthy subjects and people with cognitive problems through the usage of neurofeedback [25], [26] (e.g., peak
performance training and ADHD treatments) are among the few
application areas that start to explore the usage of lifestyle EEG
solutions.
The aim of this paper is to sketch a number of reasons behind
the failure of the current lifestyle EEG devices in penetrating
one of the mentioned application areas and to provide suggestions and guidelines how these obstacles can be overcome in

7

Fig. 1. Aspects that should be considered when designing and developing
intelligent wireless, wearable EEG solutions for daily life applications.

the future. The question that we would like to answer can be
formulated as follows: What is required to make an EEG solution intelligent in terms of acquiring superior signal quality
across different real life use cases, while at the same time providing comfort and convenience, being of assistance to users
and providing meaningful information to them?
We took a more holistic approach than in the two recent
overviews of wireless EEG systems [27], [28]. The work by
Casson et al. [27] focuses on power consumption and compression requirements, while Lee et al. [28] puts the emphasis on
dry electrode development and deficiencies of signal processing approaches. We looked at aspects ranging from brain signal
generation to end user applications. These aspects are depicted
in Fig. 1 and include the following:
1) personal traits, previous and current environmental stimuli, and knowledge on how EEG signals are generated and
transmitted through biological tissue;
2) capturing EEG signals from electrodes and low-power,
miniaturized technology used for acquiring, amplifying,
processing, and transmitting EEG signals;
3) algorithms and methods used for EEG signal preprocessing, artifact handling, feature extraction, and feature interpretation;
4) methods to process and present fusion of context-related
brain activity.
In the sections to follow, we discuss the state-of-the-art in
EEG solutions keeping these aspects in mind, identifying the
areas that require fast progress in the coming years. Wherever
possible, we highlight directions which could advance the stateof-the-art for these different aspects. We discuss each of the
listed aspects in detail in Sections II to V. Then we discuss the
overall design and development requirements for a daily life
EEG system, focusing on the identified critical areas, in Section
VI. These critical areas include the application- and user-driven
design and development, standardization and sharing and handling real-life artifacts. The paper is concluded in Section VII.

8

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

II. SOURCE FEATURES AND SIGNAL GENERATION
A. Personal Traits
Electrical activity of the brain evolves with the maturation
and aging of the brain and is heavily impacted by a number of
personal traits. We can learn a lot about our development and
cognitive evolution by monitoring our brain activity. However,
due to the cumbersome and impractical procedure of EEG monitoring, EEG has never made it as a part of routine health checks
and has also never been included in systematic research on human health status. No large EEG studies exist that look into
the impact of demographics (age, gender, and race/ethnicity) on
EEG and there is a lack of studies that look into the association between personal traits and EEG in normal healthy adults,
children, and elderly.
Only a handful of studies discuss the gender differences, typically focusing on network or spectral maturation in children
[29], [30], or adult sleep related rhythms [31], [32]. We are
not aware of any systematic study that looks into EEG differences with respect to race. Only recently, there is more attention to monitoring children’s EEG activity as an indication of
proper development [33] and to monitoring cognitive decline in
the elderly [34]. This was mainly motivated by the increased
prevalence of conditions such as attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) or autism spectrum disorders (ASD) among
children [35] and indications that EEG changes can help in extracting early markers of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia [36].
Furthermore, there are no large publicly available databases that
contain EEG activity of the normal healthy population. Neither
is there a consensus on how to store the EEG information and the
context in which it is recorded, nor on what features to extract
from EEG signals for characterizing mental traits and states of
a person.
Having EEG systems that will enable daily life measurements of electrical brain activity would facilitate the possibility
to monitor larger populations with diverse personal traits and
hence would enable generation of large databases. However,
knowing what useful information can be extract from the recordings stored into the database would in a great sense determine
whether the users would embrace the wireless EEG technology.
Therefore, data collection and understanding of EEG features
across different user traits have to go hand in hand. This would
also call for standardization in terms of recording and exchange
formats, as well as integrating EEG information with information from other sensors that can capture the context that a user
is currently in. Furthermore, including information on demographics of users would be required.
B. Sensory Input
An EEG signal is a result of a number of concurrent neuronal
activities occurring in our brain. They include our current mental
state (changes) and cognitive processes, various external inputs
to our senses and various internal inputs and outputs to our
internal organs [37]. For example, a person having his/her eyes
closed (i.e., preventing visual input) results in a completely
different EEG signature all over the brain compared to the same

person having his/her eyes open [38]. Therefore, knowing the
current status and the history of information coming from our
senses and traveling back and forth in our body, is important for
understanding EEG activity at a certain moment.
Current solutions for monitoring EEG, as well as the existing
data formats, do not support integration of such information
sources in daily life. Only supported use cases are related to
monitoring evoked responses during a defined task (sensory
evoked potentials or event-related potentials—ERPs) with
clearly specified event markers [39]. This is expected given that
the EEG monitoring was predominantly done in a controlled lab
environment with detailed specification of recording protocols.
These protocols include a fixed set of context and sensory
inputs. However, as soon as the EEG equipment moves into an
uncontrolled daily life environment, monitoring the contextual
information and especially the sensory input, would become an
important design requirement.
Lifestyle EEG devices of the future have to be open for integration with sensors that can capture other physiological signals
(e.g., ECG, GSR) or contextual information (cameras, GPS locators). Furthermore, formats used for storing EEG have to be
somehow extended or have the possibility to be linked to the data
incoming from these auxiliary sensors. Similarly to capturing
and storage of personal traits, this also calls for standardizing
contextual information capturing and storing, for the purpose of
proper documentation and exchange.
C. Neuronal Activity
Noninvasive EEG is the electrical potential measured on the
scalp. It stems from neuronal activity below the scalp area where
an electrode is placed. As the electrical potentials generated by
neurons have to travel a relatively long distance through the
surrounding tissue to the scalp surface and due to sheer number
of neurons within different brain regions, surface EEG cannot
record the activity of individual neurons. Rather, it represents
the summation of electrical activity of thousands to millions
of spatially aligned neurons [6]. As such, EEG provides poor
spatial resolution, compared to modalities that monitor blood
oxygenation, such as fMRI and fNIRs. However, EEG can provide high temporal resolution—to a millisecond range, similar
to MEG. As MEG is not suitable for daily life monitoring, EEG
is the optimal choice for studying dynamic processes and coupling of different regions in the brain during challenges imposed
in our daily life.
Furthermore, by using novel techniques, such as different
variants of nonparametric low resolution brain electromagnetic
topography (LORETA) [40] and other parametric source localization methods (for a recent review we refer to [41]), spatial
localization of brain activity becomes possible. To apply those
methods, high density EEG recordings (i.e., larger number of
EEG electrodes) are required, as well as the head/brain template.
Due to the sheer number of available MR recordings and/or derived head models the latter is not an issue today. Also nowadays,
the former can be realized with dry electrode solutions [20]. Although the resolution of these spatial maps cannot be compared
to the resolution of fMRI, in contrast to fMRI, EEG is able to

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

monitor brain activity during daily routines. While fNIRS also
provide higher spatial resolution, the difficulty of applying this
technology through hairy regions and the low temporal resolution of the signal, makes them only usable as an add-on to the
EEG devices that would provide high spatial resolution at the
frontal brain regions.
With further understanding on how synchronous activity of
neurons results in EEG patterns [42] and how cortical fields
are generated [43], we can expect that monitoring of neuronal
population activity in real-life EEG applications would become
possible. More concurrent EEG and fMRI recordings [44] that
can be used to both correlate the temporal and spatial activities on one hand and estimate the precision of EEG source
localization methods on the other, are needed. As this is a research field that is experiencing large expansion, we can expect
substantial progress in this area. The only remaining question
is in designing and developing EEG acquisition systems that
would provide sufficient signal quality required for precise temporal and spatial characterization of brain activity (discussed in
Section III).

D. Conductive Tissues
In EEG measurements, we assume that the tissue between the
source of the electrical signals (neurons) and an EEG sensor that
captures the brain activity merely 1) smears the signal coming
from a large population of neurons and 2) attenuates it due to
the conductive properties of different tissue layers. Nevertheless, inhomogeneities of skin, skull, dura mater, cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), and pia mater, can have substantial impact on EEG
[45]. The conductivity of the skull has the largest impact on
the overall conductivity and yet it is poorly understood [46].
Furthermore, although neglected in the EEG monitoring, CSF
might have a large effect on the recorded EEG scalp magnitude.
It can lead to increased or decreased spatial blurring of the EEG
signals, which can also be modified due to the head position and
movement [47]. Understanding these properties is of particular
importance for longitudinal monitoring (over a lifespan) that
might involve constant changes in the conductive tissue properties of a person. At a young age and with brain atrophy due
to normal aging or neurodegenerative diseases, assessing these
properties becomes crucial as the brain tissue volume changes.
Furthermore, understanding conductive properties provides
essential information for the source localization type of applications, where small model errors can lead to inaccurate source
localization [48]. Hence, better understanding of the conductive
behavior of the tissues beneath the scalp will ensure more accurate source estimation and also comparability of EEG activity
measured at the surface of the scalp. Together with the more
accurate model for the electrode–skin contact conductivity (see
next section), they should facilitate superior brain activity monitoring. Better cataloging of brain and skull models is required
for precise evaluation of the impact of conductive tissues on the
acquired brain signal. Also, large comparative studies that look
into how properties of the tissue layers impact the propagation
of the electrical brain activity would yield useful information.

9

Fig. 2. Modeling electrode–skin contact when using a) electrodes with conductive gel and b) dry electrodes with pins.

III. SIGNAL ACQUISITION
A. Electrode–Tissue Interface
EEG recordings in clinical applications are typically performed with the use of silver/silver-chloride (Ag/AgCl) electrodes that are in contact with the scalp through electrolytic
gel. The electrolyte serves two purposes, 1) it bridges the ionic
current flow from the scalp and the electron flow in the electrode and 2) it increases adhesion of the electrode to the scalp
[49]. To further improve signal quality, the scalp is frequently
cleaned and, especially in clinical applications, skin on the scalp
is abraded. Such well-prepared electrode–tissue interface (ETI)
results in a fairly stable electrical contact that can be modeled
as a series of two resistors-capacitor (RC) circuits, two resistors, and two potential sources [50], as shown in Fig. 2(a).
The RC circuits depict resistive and capacitive components at
the electrode–electrolyte (Cee ) and at the skin–electrolyte (Cse )
interface. The resistors represent electrolyte (Rg ) and tissue
(Rt ) resistances, or the ones characterizing electrode–electrolyte
(Ree ) and skin–electrolyte (Rse ) resistive properties. The two potential sources represent electrode–electrolyte half-cell potential
(Ehc ) and skin–electrolyte potential difference (Ese ). When skin
is properly prepared and electrodes are properly applied, this
model represents quite accurately the interface. Furthermore,
the typical impedance magnitudes at the frequency of interest
(below 100 Hz) are lower than 10 kΩ and the conductive properties of the interface (i.e., contact potentials) remain stable [51]
at least until the electrolyte starts to dry out.
However, the abrasion process, as well as the use of conductive gel makes the whole EEG setup inconvenient for practical
applications, especially in daily life settings. The application of
electrolyte and the electrodes, even when simple EEG caps are
used, requires expert assistance. The setup process is lengthy as
it includes preparing the skin, applying the gel, positioning the
electrodes (or the cap), and ensuring that the EEG signal quality

10

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

level is acceptable. Additionally, the user (or expert) has to remove the electrolyte and clean the user’s head afterward and
also clean and dry the electrodes (and the cap) that were used.
This takes time and requires additional effort. That is why recent
technological developments are focusing on sensors that do not
use conductive gel and skin preparation. These are so called dry
(or dry-contact) electrodes and typically for EEG applications
they include pins to penetrate the hairy regions [52].
Such solutions are already available, offered by imec [21],
gTec [16], Quasar [17], Mindo [18], and Cognionics [20]. Electrodes provided are either Ag/AgCl or gold-plated. To improve
user comfort and electrode-skin contact, electrodes with springloaded pins are sometimes used [53]. These dry electrodes can
be reused until the top conductive layer wears off. While dry
electrode systems demonstrate short setup time and increased
user comfort, they are faced with decreased signal quality compared to ambulatory EEG systems [54]–[56] (although some
publications claim similar signal quality to gel-based systems
[11], [52], [53]). The decrease of the signal quality is caused by
the fragile and complex ETI.
When using dry electrodes, the absence of electrolyte makes
the transition of ionic tissue currents to electrode electron currents much more complex. This results in more dominant capacitive components and in the increase of impedance at the
interface. The interface requires larger stabilization time and is
more prone to noise and disturbances [56]. Also, the frequency
response of the ETI over the frequencies of interest might vary
and can be unstable over time [57]. Such dry ETI cannot be
modeled by the same way as the electrolyte ETI and just removing the components related to electrolyte, as proposed in
[52], does not yield good modeling results [58]. To provide a
more accurate model of the interface, special components need
to be introduced. These include 1) the Warburg element (Zw )
that models the ion diffusion and 2) the constant phase element
(CPEse ) that models the double layer at the contact interface.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2(b), where we present a hypothetical
model of the contact between the skin and dry electrode with a
number of pins.
Furthermore, forces applied by the electrode support structure (e.g., headset) on the dry electrodes can vary and as there is
no adhesion between the electrode and the skin, dry electrodes
can glide over the skin surface and can produce various deformations of the skin beneath the electrodes. While this is not so
pronounced in flat or ring electrodes, it has large impact in dry
electrodes with pins [57]. In real life situations, when a person is
freely moving, the artifacts stemming from movements can be
substantially enlarged (see Section IV). Therefore, continuously
monitoring contact properties in terms of, e.g., ETI, can be of
great importance in estimating the EEG signal quality [21]. In
summary, we know little about the dry electrode–skin model
and especially how changes over time impact contact properties. Therefore, to provide a full understanding of measured
EEG signals, we urgently have to apply our knowledge to dry
ETI. Besides several studies that address this issue [56]–[58],
there is not much focus on this aspect. We believe that rapid
progress is required if we are going to see dry electrodes replace
the conductive gel ones in the future.

Fig. 3.

Existing wearable wireless EEG devices.

B. Miniaturized and Ergonomic EEG Headsets
In recent years, we have seen an increasing number of products and product concepts on the market that target EEG acquisition in a more convenient way than traditional systems, mainly
using dry electrodes. Depending on the foreseen application,
the mechanical designs may vary. In general, the mechanical
design needs to keep the electrodes in place since gel or glue
is not used in such devices. For long-term monitoring applications, for which usage during daily-life activities is foreseen, the
design should be unobtrusive. For headsets that target the neuroscience community or medical diagnostics, speed of application
and uncompromised signal quality are crucial. In these cases,
the design will need to assist in capturing the highest possible
signal quality. For serious games, based on BCI approaches,
the design objective should not necessarily be unobtrusiveness,
but user friendliness, ease of use, robustness, and ‘fool-proof’
designs.
Here we present a number of existing systems and we discuss
how the different systems may be useful in different application
spaces. Since the number of existing devices is too large to be
discussed exhaustively here, we have selected devices that are
commercially available and that vary greatly in the way how
design tradeoffs are made. They are depicted in Fig. 3.
Neurosky’s [13] product range is based on a one-channel measurement platform with dry electrodes. The single measurement
channel is typically positioned at the forehead, which allows for
frontal recordings. Patient ground and reference are positioned
at the earclip. The dry electrode on the forehead is made of a
stainless alloy. Data is wirelessly transmitted to a PC or a smartphone using Bluetooth (BT). Having the lowest price-tag of all
products, it seems to target the low-end consumer market.
The Epoc (Emotive) [14] is amongst the most widely available
and used devices. With 14 channels scattered around the head
and low cost, it provides a flexible and versatile research platform. Data is wirelessly transmitted through a proprietary radio
link. The system allows for 12-h continuous transmission. With
a very attractive price-tag, the Epoc also targets the low-end

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

consumer space. However, a substantially more expensive license is needed to get access to the raw EEG data and use the
Epoc as a research vehicle.
Imec’s headset [21] has four channels, based on an eightchannel wireless acquisition platform. It uses dry Ag/AgCl
coated electrodes (Biopac EL120) with pins to move away hair
and touch the bare skin. To increase user comfort and provide sufficient force at each electrode, they are mounted within
spring-loaded holders. A proprietary protocol is used for wireless transmission of the data. The battery allows for 20 h of continuous transmission. The system is designed around low-power
and integrated electronics, allowing for system miniaturization
for systems having low number of channels and flexibility in
headset solution designs.
Quasar’s [17] DSI 10/20 is an EEG headset with 21 channels.
The aim of the system is an ambulatory EEG recording and it includes mechanical and electrical mechanisms to reduce motion
artifacts. Data is wirelessly transmitted through a proprietary
system which requires a USB dongle. It allows continuous EEG
transmission for 24 h. The focus of this device seems to be on
achieving the highest signal quality possible but with a high
price-tag.
A recent development is g.tec’s [16] g.Nautilus platform. It
can be combined with a cap system with active dry electrodes
(g.Sahara) which allows for recordings according to the International 10–20 System. Dry electrodes are fabricated with
gold-plated pins. The data is wirelessly transmitted through a
proprietary radio link. The device can operate continuously for
8 h without charging.
A notable recent development is the in-ear EEG measurement platform developed by Imperial College [59]. It allows for
unobtrusive EEG measurements. However, since the devices described in the publication are not available on the market and
since the field of in-ear EEG measurements is unexplored to
date, we do not discuss it further in this paper.
As indicated, these headsets are either designed or developed
to serve the low-price market at a cost of compromising signal
quality and/or robustness, or provide high quality EEG signal
while having a much larger price tag. Irrespective of this, all
these headsets are neither tailored to serve for a particular application, nor toward personal preferences of a designated user.
Consequently, complaints can be heard about some of these solutions. These include headsets not fitting all user head shapes
well, electrodes not covering the claimed locations on the head,
or systems being too cumbersome or too uncomfortable to wear.
This suggests that extensive effort has to be placed in designing
the optimal headset that would be appreciated by users. For this
task, e.g., designing a headset that covers only a certain brain region (required for the application), can be helpful. Furthermore,
understanding the application, in terms of wearability and coverage of brain regions, is a first step in designing and developing
novel, intelligent and wearable EEG headsets.
C. Wireless and Wearable EEG System Designs
We compared the systems presented in the previous section
along a number of characteristics, depicted in Table I. Values

11

are only reported if disclosed by the manufacturer. A number of empty fields indicate that a large number of essential
system characteristics are not disclosed for some systems, particularly for Emotiv and Neurosky. Among the reported characteristics, in this section, we discuss dc offset tolerance, ac
or dc coupling, common-mode rejection (CMR), and wireless
communication protocols. We believe that those aspects require
further elaboration.
A dc offset between the potential of the patient and the potential at the inputs of the instrumentation can be the result of
several mechanisms, such as charging of capacitance at the skin
to electrode interface, ion diffusion, and charge distributions in
the skin. It cannot be avoided and will depend, amongst others,
on the electrode material and electrode design. The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standard specifies a
minimal dc tolerance of ±300 μV. However, this requirement
was probably defined with traditional (gel) electrodes and skin
preparation in mind. It is therefore questionable whether this is
still sufficient when using dry electrodes, or when other electrode materials are being considered.
The IEC standard specifies a minimum bandwidth of 0.5 to
50 Hz for EEG equipment. This may be sufficient to cover the
most common diagnostic purposes, but extended bandwidth is
required for certain paradigms (dc to 600 Hz). Especially when
frequencies close to dc are being investigated, a dc-coupled
system may be necessary. However, differential dc offsets may
be in the order of hundreds of mV, which is an order of magnitude
above the amplitude of the ac EEG signal. The amplification of
these systems cannot be very high and therefore a very sensitive
A/D convertor (typically 24 bits) is required. Hence, dc coupled
systems typically require a higher number of ADC bits than ac
coupled systems.
CMR was very important in the days of analog equipment,
when EEG was still printed on paper without the possibility
to properly filter the signal [60]. Power-line interference at 50
or 60 Hz and cable motion have been affecting the ability of
the neurologist to evaluate the recordings. A high CMR ratio (CMRR) meant that power-line interference was reduced
as much as possible. Nowadays, with digital signal processing
techniques readily available on any PC software, the requirements for CMRR are much less stringent since power-line interference can be easily filtered out. Also, techniques such as
driven right leg (DRL) circuitry [61] significantly reduce the
impact of power line noise. Still, care should be taken not to
let the power-line interference overload the amplifier, for which
reduction of common-mode noise is still a useful technique.
Another way to avoid power-line interference and cable motion artifacts is the use of active electrodes [62]. While active
electrode systems typically have lower CMRR (since the system
is built using different components), it can be argued that lower
CMRR can be tolerated, since power-line interference and cable
motion artifacts hardly get a chance to enter the signal chain.
CMRR is not very effective when the contact impedances of
reference and channel electrodes differ [60], [63]. In case of
traditional EEG recordings, the contact impedance is reduced to
below 10 kΩ by skin abrasion. The application space considered
here does not allow for skin abrasion and will therefore have to

12

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF AVAILABLE WEARABLE WIRELESS EEG DEVICES
NeuroSky
CMRR
Input impedance
Bandwidth
Channel number
Noise
Bit number
Coupling
Dynamic range
DC offset
Electrodes
Wireless protocol

3–100 Hz
1

Dry
BT

Emotiv Epoc

14

Wet
Proprietary

Quasar
> 120 dB
47 GΩ
0.02–120 Hz
12
3 μVpp
16
AC
10 mVpp
±200 mV
Dry
Proprietary

tolerate (significantly) higher contact impedances. As a result,
the contact impedance difference between reference and channel electrodes (in absolute sense) will turn the common mode
signal into differential signals, which will not be reduced by the
CMR techniques.
Concluding, we can state that CMRR is not as important
as it used to be thanks to digital signal processing techniques.
At the same time it will become less effective when using dry
electrodes without skin abrasion. Active electrodes may be a
better way to prevent power-line interference from entering into
the signal chain.
Wireless transmission solutions include either the use of Bluetooth (BT) technology or proprietary protocols for data transmission. While BT is widely used for data transfer, the sheer
amount of raw data transmitted during an EEG recording makes
this protocol quite power hungry. However, as most portable
devices support BT, such a solution makes it portable and easily accessible by users. If longevity and independence are more
important requirements for the design of an EEG system, other
energy efficient solutions might be used. One option is Nordic
radio [64] or ZigBee [65]. Also, if a system is designed for
a specific application, a significant part of processing can be
performed within a microprocessor, such that only relevant information is transmitted, making the use of BT low energy a
more suitable option. However, note that BT low energy is not
suitable for transmission of raw EEG data.

IV. BRAIN ACTIVITY ANALYSIS
A. Signal Preprocessing
Before the analysis of EEG signals, a signal preprocessing
step is performed. The preprocessing step can involve a number
of procedures with the aim to trim EEG data such that noise
and artifact components that entered the EEG system are reduced (i.e., ideally removed) and the EEG signal is prepared for
analysis. Preprocessing can involve some or all of the following:
1) rereferencing of recorded signals;
2) band-pass filtering the signals;
3) resampling the signals;
4) signal epoching or segmentation;
5) selection of the clean EEG segments.

g.Nautilus

imec

IEC Standard

0.1–40 Hz
32

0.3–100 Hz
8(4)
4 μVpp
12
AC
1.6 mV
±500 mV
Dry
BT

0.5–50 Hz

24
DC

Dry
Proprietary

< 6 μVpp

> 1.5 mV
±300 mV
Gel

Most EEG systems collect a potential difference between a
set of electrodes on the scalp (that capture local area EEG signal) and a common reference electrode positioned at a location
where EEG activity is absent (a so-called monopolar montage).
Due to difficulty in finding a ‘neutral’ EEG position on the head
(especially in compact EEG headset solutions), an option where
all electrodes are located over regions capturing brain activity
might be more suitable (bipolar montage). In this case, potential
difference between pairs of two electrodes is measured. Irrespective of the montage type, an application might require potential
differences between arbitrary electrodes, hence rereferencing is
often applied in the preprocessing step.
Techniques such as common average reference and Laplacian filtering are also often used in rereferencing with the goal
of ‘simulating’ a neutral spot and minimizing the impact of
noise and artifacts [6]. These methods give good results if the
quality of the recorded EEG signal is high and similar across all
electrodes. In real-life measurements with dry electrodes (see
previous section), this might not be the case, hence using such
(re-)referencing methods might not improve the signal quality.
Furthermore, not knowing which channels and which signals
are used for rereferencing, might pose serious problems when
comparing signal analysis outcomes of different rereferencing
methods. For lifestyle applications, where we can often expect a
reduced set of electrodes to be used, proper referencing methods
need to be carefully chosen for a specific application and they
have to be properly documented.
EEG data is usually band-pass filtered before the analysis is
performed. Depending on the frequency range of interest and the
intended signal analysis, the filter characteristics can be quite
different. They can include the use of high-pass filtering (e.g.,
0.1 Hz) for event-related potential (ERP) studies or specific frequency band filtering used in spectral analysis, e.g., 8–13 Hz
filtering for alpha activity monitoring. Also, a power line notch
filter is almost always applied to remove artifacts stemming
from electrical instruments in the vicinity. However, knowing
only the frequency range of filters does not uniquely determine
how the data is preprocessed. Additionally, improper filter implementations (i.e., filter type, infinite or finite response, order)
can result in removing a portion of EEG activity [66]. Hence,
filter implementation has to be carefully chosen and properly
documented.

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

In general, EEG data is typically resampled for offline EEG
analysis, since sampling frequencies of acquisition systems can
be as high as 4 kHz. In the analysis of EEG, we are usually
interested in frequencies lower than 100 Hz, hence resampling
to 256 or 128 Hz is often used. Resampling can reduce noise
and is useful for saving transmission power in case of real-time
system design.
The analysis of EEG signals is typically performed per epoch,
where epoch length can range from one second in case of ERPs,
to one minute in case of sleep analysis. Furthermore, depending
on the application and the type of analysis, overlap is introduced between these epochs. Selecting different epoch duration
and epoch overlap percentage can result in different algorithm
performance, e.g., on BCI communication speed [67]. All these
steps have to be carefully selected and captured by the system
(for recording or comparison purposes).
Finally, extracting clean EEG segments can be performed
manually, automatically using signal processing methods, or
as a combination of the two (semiautomatic). The most commonly used approach that precedes any signal analysis is visual
inspection and manual removal of segments that are contaminated. In clinical practice this is done by clinicians experienced
in EEG monitoring. Although this is considered the most robust
solution, disagreements may exist between experts. Either establishing clear rules on how contaminated segments are identified
by clinicians or providing clear documentation of the process,
would help in repeatability of this manual step and support
overall agreement. Such manual methods may be acceptable for
off-line signal analysis application, however, they are not suitable for real-time lifestyle ones. For such applications, this step
is based on signal processing methods that can extract signal
features useful in separating ‘clean’ from contaminated EEG.
These methods can be considered as part of the EEG artifact handling approach. As handling EEG artifacts is one of the main
obstacles in real-life applications of wireless and wearable EEG
solutions, we dedicated the next section to this topic.
B. EEG Artifacts
In case of EEG, the term artifact denotes all the electrical signals produced by sources other than the human brain, but captured by an EEG acquisition system. There are several slightly
different classifications of artifacts observed in EEG recordings,
based on the sources or nature of the artifact. The classification
used in this paper is derived from the ones discussed in papers
by Geetha et al. [68] and Sweeney et al. [5], with the addition
of motion artifacts. The five artifact classes identified are:
1) environmental artifacts;
2) EEG recording equipment artifacts;
3) artifacts due to improper EEG system usage;
4) systemic physiological artifacts; and
5) motion artifacts.
Here, we first introduce these artifacts and then discuss how
they can be handled.
1) Environmental Artifacts: Environmental artifacts, also
known as interference, encompass artifacts due to power lines
that are in our environment (so called 50 or 60 Hz hum) and

13

electromagnetic interference (EMI) that can be produced either
in measurement cables, or in a human body (which acts as an
antenna), emitted by an external source. These are the major
sources of interference in the physiological measurements due
to capacitive coupling of the measurement cables, mains supply, and other devices. However, as this interference is typically
either outside the frequency range of interest for EEG (EMI), or
at a fixed frequency (50/60 Hz), it can be easily removed by a
proper EEG system design and/or by filtering them in the signal
preprocessing step. The solutions involve hardware or software
implementations of band pass filtering and using techniques
such as CMR and DRL discussed in Section III. Such issues
are minimized in wireless devices, due to low power, shorter
cables, and the absence of grounding. Furthermore, this interference can be further reduced by shielding or twisting cables
and using active sensor chips as described in Section III.
2) EEG Recording Equipment Artifacts: EEG recording
equipment artifacts stem from EEG instrumentation and originate from the circuit components and communication lines. The
former can usually be observed as a thermal noise, shot noise, or
pink noise when recording the EEG signals. The latter typically
results in spiky signal, cross-talk between different channels, or
in enhancement of environmental artifact components. Usage
of adequate components and proper system design and evaluation is required to eliminate or minimize such artifacts. Since
lifestyle wireless EEG systems will be used in uncontrolled
environments, a more versatile and more extensive battery of
system tests is required (compared to what is required in IEC
standard) to ensure this, as discussed in Section III.
3) Artifacts Due to Improper EEG System Usage: Artifacts
due to improper usage result in a measurement error. They stem
from variations in the preparation and setup, as well as misuse
of the measurement device. Although this problem is almost
nonexistent in a clinical environment, for lifestyle applications
it is a reality. Artifacts due to improper usage can be observed
during the preparation/setup or in the early phases of monitoring.
Improper positioning of the electrodes or the headset, as well as
improper electrode (and skin) preparation are typical examples.
Using dry electrodes integrated into the headset and having
contact impedance and signal quality indication, is one option
that helps mitigating the former problem, both at the start as
well as during the measurement. Furthermore, having a user
interface that would help in preparing, adjusting and testing the
setup avoids such artifacts. Most existing solutions (including
the ones discussed in previous sections) do not offer this way of
assistance to users.
4) Physiological Artifacts: Physiological artifacts are the
distortions in the signal of interest due to other physiological processes in the body. They can be classified into following
categories:
1) Artifacts produced by eye movement and eye blinks.
2) Artifacts produced by muscle tension.
3) Artifacts produced by cardiac activities.
a) EOG: The most common artifacts in EEG recordings
are eye blinks and eye movements. They have the highest impact
in the frontal areas of the head. Changes in the resting potential
of the retina during eye-blinks and eye-movements as well as

14

Fig. 4.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Artifacts produced by a) eye-blinks and b) head movements.

muscle activities of the eye lid during blinks produces disturbances in EEG. They can be measured with electrooculograph
(EOG). These disturbances are mainly present in low frequency
components of the EEG, i.e., up to 10 Hz. EOG artifacts can
have amplitudes of up to 1 mV that attenuate with distance toward the occipital sites. By measuring EEG during eyes closed
limits the impact to only eye movement. However, EOG signals
are always present during EEG measurements. An example of
eye blink artifacts can be seen in Fig. 4(a).
b) EMG: Jaw, facial, and neck muscles also produce electrical activity that can impact EEG. This activity can be measured using electromyograph (EMG) and it is most prominent
over the temporal lobes. The largest EEG activity can be observed when jaw muscles are used (teeth clenching and chewing) and during head movements that involve neck muscles.
Unlike EOG, EMG spreads over a wide frequency range, typically from 20 Hz to few hundred Hz. The amplitude of the
EMG signal can be in the order of mV across the whole EEG
spectrum. Since head muscle activations are an inherent part of
normal daily routines, solutions that handle such artifacts have
to be devised.
c) ECG: Heart also generates an electrical signal that can
be recorded in numerous positions on a human body, including
the head. The signal is called electrocardiograph (ECG). ECG
artifacts influence the frequency content in the 0.5–40 Hz frequency range. Hence, it is important to recognize and handle
situations where such a signal contaminates EEG. Similarly to
EMG artifacts, methods for ECG artifact removal exist, but the
topic is not fully explored [69]. The beating of the heart also produces artifacts that stem from voltage changes in the area near
the blood vessels that contract and expand. They are strongest
over temporal arteries and veins. Heart beats artifacts are low
in amplitude and can have an impact in the lower frequency
range (0.5–3 Hz). Therefore, they can impact the performance
in systems for overnight recordings and especially in characterization of deep or slow-wave sleep (stage N3 of NREM) and
K-complexes observed during stage N2 of NREM sleep.
5) Motion Artifacts: User motion results in the a) changes
in the measurement geometry, b) coupling between sensors and
the skin surface, and c) tissue deformation. Motion artifacts

are complex artifacts that can impact all previously mentioned
artifacts. The most dominant phenomena that contributes to
the motion artifact is the change in relative position of electrode to the tissue (skin). It influences the size of the contact
surface, introduces skin deformation and produces changes on
the interface layer (due to changes in conductive gel thickness/amount or the amount of sweat), which in turn results in
electrical coupling. As a result, there is significant electrical
signal distortion. Movement artifacts produced during normal
activities, including locomotion, can have amplitudes that are
an order of magnitude larger than signals produced by brain
activity, as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). They are larger when dry
electrodes are employed instead of conductive gel ones, due
to the more complex electrode–skin contact, as discussed in
Section III. Unlike previously described artifacts which exhibit
stereotypical behavior, motion artifacts are nonstationary timevarying electrical signals. This makes them more difficult to
handle than other electrical disturbances. Therefore, the nonstationary EEG signal is mixed with the time-varying motion
artifacts signal, as well as more stationary physiological artifact.
Handling such artifacts is among the grand challenges for daily
life EEG monitoring as the magnitude of these artifacts is huge
and impact a wide frequency range.
6) Handling Artifacts: Most current EEG recording protocols rely on artifact avoidance and manual or semiautomatic artifact removal methods. While there is a substantial progress in
automatic reduction of environmental and recording equipment
artifacts, only a few solutions exist that offer fully automatic
artifact handling methods for physiological and motion artifacts
[5]. These are mostly focused on EOG artifact reduction for
conductive gel recordings, as these artifacts are always present
in EEG recordings and exhibit a clear pattern [see Fig. 4(a)].
Handling artifacts can be done either by artifact rejection
or artifact reduction methods. In both cases, the first step is
the detection of motion artifact in an EEG segment. Artifact
rejection refers to the process of detecting artifacts and rejecting
the complete recorded trials or EEG segments (i.e., epochs)
contaminated by them. While for long-term EEG monitoring,
rejecting a certain amount of EEG epochs contaminated by
artifacts might be an accepted solution, it might also result in

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

a substantial loss of data, leading to insufficient information
for proper data analysis. Ideally, a real-time automatic artifact
reduction is preferred.
Artifact reduction (removal) is a process of identifying artifact components in the EEG signal and separating them from
the neuronal sources. Most artifact reduction techniques assume
that the recorded signal is a combination of the signal of interest
and the artifact signal such that their combination is additive in
nature. Furthermore, these techniques assume that the number
of recorded signals is larger than the number of signal sources,
as most of EEG recordings are done with more than eight electrodes. With such assumptions, the removal of artifact is simplified to minimizing the error between the output signal and
the signal of interest. Artifact reduction approaches might use
only EEG signals in artifact reduction, but might also include
auxiliary information sources that capture physiological signals
(EOG, ECG, and EMG) or movement (accelerometers and gyroscopes). In most cases, techniques that are applied when solely
EEG signals are used in most cases include linear combination
and regression, blind source separation (BSS) methods (such as
ICA and PCA), wavelet transforms, and empirical mode decomposition (or a combination of these methods). When a referential
signal that depicts the artifact component is available, adaptive
filtering, Wiener filtering, and Bayesian filtering are used. For a
recent overview, we refer to [5], [68].
Numerous approaches exist for the removal of EOG artifacts
and they are mostly based on regression and (semi-) automatic
BSS [70], [71]. Although there are several approaches for the
reduction of EMG artifacts, handling EMG artifacts is not extensively explored [69]. Finally, reducing ECG and motion artifacts
during daily life activity is still in its infancy, given that only
few approaches are available in the literature. At this point in
time, we lack suitable and comprehensive physiological and
motion artifact handling methods. This is also the case for the
EEG recordings with gel electrodes and becomes a larger hurdle when EEG solutions with dry electrodes in an uncontrolled
lifestyle environments are used.
Due to the complexity and detrimental nature, motion artifacts are by far the biggest hurdle that intelligent, wireless, and
wearable EEG systems have to overcome. Due to the complexity
of these artifacts, contextual information has to be used. Such
information can be provided by either gyroscope [72], [73] or
accelerometers [74]. The work by O’Regan et al. [72], [73]
demonstrates that such contextual information can be used to
detect and categorize motion artifacts. However, the outcome of
the motion artifact reduction presented by Sweeney et al. [74]
shows limited usefulness of accelerometers. A two-step method,
that first identifies the type and the extent of motion artifact and
then tries to reduce it based on the approach tailored toward that
specific artifact would result in better motion artifact reduction
[67]. Furthermore, additional contextual information, such as
ETI might be a more useful reference source for motion artifact reduction [75], given also their origin discussed in Section
IV. Furthermore, to what degree can combination of ETI with
other contextual information modalities (such as gyroscopes
and accelerometers) help in motion artifact reduction is yet to
be determined.

15

C. Feature Extraction and Interpretation
Algorithms for extracting EEG features and EEG feature interpretation are very diverse and involve different techniques
and tools [76], [77]. These algorithms are based on spatiotemporal linear or nonlinear signal processing methods, the usage of averaging methods (e.g., for ERPs) and supervised or
nonsupervised classification algorithms. More recently, graph
theory algorithms are introduced for studying brain networks
(e.g., resting state networks). Wireless, wearable EEG applications are (and will be) using the available solutions already
exploited and tested in various EEG application domains. The
only differences might be in 1) the need for real-time processing
of signals, which would be the most dominant case and 2) in the
number of electrodes that might need to be reduced due to design. More stringent boundaries have to be considered in terms
of algorithm complexity, the number of features simultaneously
extracted, limitations on using supervised learning approaches
and graph theory algorithms.
A number of toolboxes exist that provide a vast amount of
implementations of algorithms used for EEG feature extraction and interpretation. EGLAB [78] and OpenViBe [79] are
the most frequently used ones. We believe that these toolboxes
will provide a sound base for developing application-specific
implementations. The optimal EEG feature extraction and interpretation algorithms will heavily depend on the aim of the
application. For example, alpha–theta neurofeedback application would require the implementation of essential EEG spectral
feature extraction, while monitoring the progress of Alzheimer
disease would require complex coherence and network analysis,
as well as more advanced classification algorithms. In summary,
the pool of required feature extraction and interpretation approaches is varied and the important question is how to translate
these into particular solutions. One potential option is the inclusion of the algorithm implementations in the hardware (e.g.,
microprocessor) to facilitate more convenient EEG solutions.
V. OUTPUT INTERFACE
A. Information Fusion
EEG applications require sophisticated software tools for signal processing (including artifact handling, feature extraction
and feature interpretation discussed in previous sections) and for
information feedback generation. Currently available software
tools and systems range from open source, general purpose ones,
such as EEGLAB [78] and OpenViBe [79], to proprietary ones
designed to work with specific acquisition equipment and for
specific applications, such as Applied Neuroscience NeuroGuide [80] and ANT Neuro software tools [81]. The applications
can record or read EEG data only in a proprietary data format
or some of the formats which are designed for EEG data interchange, such as European Data Format—EDF. Although EDF
is designed to be the ‘standard’ for EEG recordings, it comes in
different flavors and different versions, making storage and exchange of EEG recordings, as well as creation of shareable EEG
databases, extremely difficult. The lack of support for capturing
contextual information (including other physiological signals),

16

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

makes comprehensive EEG data recording and exchange virtually impossible.
Most existing software tools support a number of signal and
artifact processing algorithms and different ways of visualizing the output. The algorithms typically include a subset of
general purpose temporal and spatial signal analysis, coherence and phase analysis, blind source separation, and optionally
application specific methods such as spike sorting (for epilepsy
applications) and source localization (for neuroimaging studies)
[6], [77]. These tools neither support sophisticated signal analysis methods nor provide sophisticated algorithms for handling
motion artifact. Except for few of them (such as OpenVibe [79]
and BCI2000 [82]), they do not support real-time signal analysis
algorithm implementation, which makes the information fusion
from EEG signal analysis algorithms difficult.
Wearable and wireless EEG applications would require instantaneous processing and information fusion. Hence, time and
memory efficient implementations of algorithms on a portable
device or within a microprocessor are required. The proper implementation choice would be driven by the application for
which the EEG system is designed. The two extreme examples
that illustrate the need for application tailoring are 1) alpha activity monitoring and 2) source localization while performing
locomotion. The former can be based on a single channel estimation of the spectral power of alpha activity and a simple
artifact rejection algorithm based on standard deviation of the
EEG signal. The latter must at least include substantial preprocessing, including motion artifact reduction and spatio-temporal
filtering techniques on a number of EEG channels, as well as
application of a source localization method in real-time. Therefore, the success of the EEG information fusion modules depend
on the proper treatment of available EEG information before the
feedback generation step [83], [84].
B. Feedback Generation
Today’s EEG solutions are designed either for clinicians who
monitor brain activity (e.g., ANT Neuro and NeuroGuide), or
for gaming and communication applications of BCI (e.g., OpenViBe [79] and BCI2000 [82]). The former include cluttered presentations of raw EEG data for each EEG channel (which might
be in the order of 128 or 256), EEG spectra for each channel and
additional information specific to a certain application for which
the software is designed. The latter are typically much simpler
and may include only a cursor with a few letters displayed on the
screen. It is debatable whether the former provides more comprehensive information over the current brain activity. However,
the latter might actually provide the information that the user
is required to see (e.g., navigation status and which steps are
performed). This illustrates the challenge in the feedback generation for the future wireless and wearable EEG solutions.
The way how feedback is tailored toward a specific application and how it addresses the current user needs through feedback, might make a difference in whether a particular EEG
system would penetrate the market or not. Unlike the current
EEG feedback generation options, which are mostly designed to
be displayed on a large screen, the very nature of the wearable

Fig. 5. Artistic feedback visualizing the concentration of two persons engaged
in interaction. The level of concentration is associated with the number of flowers
present on the display.

EEG would require completely different feedback generation
approaches. These can include visual display on tablets, smartphones, or watches and will not focus on displaying raw EEG
in all channels but on the intelligent depiction of a semantic
concepts derived from, e.g., EEG spectral power, coherence, or
brain region activation. Fig. 5 illustrates one way of visualizing the level of concentration of a user, by depicting a garden
flowers growing when concentration level is high. Also, EEG
activity can potentially be integrated with other contextual or
physiological concepts [85]. Other sensor modalities might be
used for communicating the information on EEG, such as audio
[86] or textile feedback [87], which might be more suitable for
a specific application. It is open for discussion whether such
modalities, or the ones that include artistic components, are
more appealing to end users.
VI. DISCUSSION
In the previous sections, we have illustrated the state-of-theart on different aspects of wireless and wearable EEG solutions
for daily life applications. This overview is by far not exhaustive, but we have illustrated current problems and pitfalls in
the design of such systems and suggested direction for future
progress. This section summarizes the presented overview and
emphasizes what in our view are the most important aspects
that will determine the future prospects of intelligent, wearable,
wireless EEG solutions. We argued that the main reason for the
absence of EEG solutions in daily life is in the lack of integration
of knowledge that comes from a number of different disciplines.
The proper design and development of an intelligent wireless
and wearable EEG solution has to be driven by the application
at hand, tailored toward the end user and must handle artifacts
that can be encountered during daily life usage. The design and
development of such intelligent EEG solution has to encompass all or most of the relevant aspects of the EEG signal path
illustrated in Fig. 1:
1) personal traits, previous and current environmental stimuli, and knowledge on how EEG signals are generated and
transmitted through biological tissue;

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

2) capturing EEG signals from electrodes and low-power,
miniaturized technology used for acquiring, amplifying,
processing, and transmitting EEG signals;
3) algorithms and methods used for EEG signal preprocessing, artifact handling, feature extraction, and feature interpretation;
4) methods to process and present fusion of context-related
brain activity.
A. Application-Based Design and Development
Although monitoring EEG activity is quite useful in itself
for clinical applications, in the lifestyle arena, wireless EEG
systems have to provide clear benefits for users. Due to the inherent difficulty in designing a complete EEG solution, most
nonclinical EEG solutions are designed for general purpose
EEG applications with a lack of support for sophisticated signal
processing and effective feedback generation. They suffer from
a number of forced tradeoffs that severely limit the usefulness of
such systems. For example, Emotiv Epoch [14] has a suboptimal
design for a number of applications, given the fixed electrode
position, which is not according to the 10–20 system and has
suboptimal headset design. Lower quality of acquired signals is
observed by many research groups. This is partially compensated by offering software development kits for implementing
signal processing algorithms. The solution offered by Neurosky
[13] is oversimplified in the design such that it can only be used
for toy applications in a niche market (i.e., a small set of serious
games). To avoid the signal quality evaluation issues, it can only
be used in specific set of games for which signal processing and
interface design is provided.
Currently, no EEG solutions available on the market are designed with a specific EEG application in mind, as discussed
in Section III. The typical applications of brain activity monitoring in real-life, currently based on gel-electrodes and usually
not on wearable and wireless technology, include the ones focused on communication and control. They fall into a category
of BCI applications [22]. Apart from such applications, brain
activity monitoring is applied in several areas of neurofeedback,
which can be considered both as healthcare and as lifestyle solutions. Examples include treating ADHD [26], PTSD [88], and
peak performance training [25]. A few areas where wireless
EEG solutions are starting to be used are drowsiness detection
[23], emotion recognition [89], and mental fatigue estimation
[90]. Such applications require different number of electrodes
located over different cortical regions. For example, alpha peak
neurofeedback training requires one or more electrodes over the
central or parietal sites. Basic signal processing methods could
be used to extract spectral power (or spectral peaks) and simple visual or auditory feedback mechanisms can be employed.
However, emotion recognition applications might require electrodes positioned over the frontal areas of the brain, extraction of spectral content, network features and potential source
localization. Signaling the emotional state of a user in a desired
format is also required.
By careful selection of the desired application and design and
development of the intelligent lifestyle EEG solution toward

17

this application will provide the necessary edge required for
wider penetration on the marker. Tailored headset design and
specific (dry) electrode integration over the selected scalp area
has to be addressed. Knowledge on conductivity of the tissue
and the skin–tissue interface, as well as signal acquisition and
transmission properties of the system have to be available, as
discussed in Sections II and III. The correct signal analysis
methods have to be selected and implemented to handle artifacts
and noise and to extract the right information, as discussed in
Section IV. Finally, as presented in Section V, the outcome of
the signal processing has to be visualized to serve the purpose
of a particular application and to make sense to the end user of
the EEG solution.
B. User-Driven Design and Development
Proper design of EEG systems including the end-user needs
is an essential factor in wider adoption of such systems in ambulatory as well as home monitoring applications. Particularly,
if we would like to attract users to use brain activity monitoring
as a tool in their personal health management. Convenience and
comfort of a user are aspects that could differentiate between the
technology that will be used by niche user groups and the one
that will be a mainstream solution. Currently available wearable
and wireless EEG solutions have several features that are not
convenient and comfortable (as discussed in Section III). Most
systems use rigid or spring-loaded pins which are mounted in a
headset, either through an elastic or spring-loaded handle or directly within it. As these headsets are not lightweight, the result
is a solution which is not appreciated by end users. In intelligent
wearable and wireless EEG solutions, electrodes used to obtain
EEG signal have to be designed to make direct contact to the
skin without the use of any adhesives. More advance concepts
have to evolve to minimize obtrusiveness and stigmatization of
users. Electrodes should be able to penetrate the hair, independent of the hair length, type, and density and at the same time
be comfortable to wear. One option is to develop electrodes and
headsets with different design parameters to accommodate different hair lengths and densities, as well as different head shapes
and sizes. For example, if dry electrodes with pins are used, they
might be designed with different pin lengths, pin diameters, or
pin density, to accommodate for comfort and improve signal
quality.
Furthermore, an average user is not familiar with the ways
of how to apply and use EEG equipment. The intelligent EEG
solution has to educate and help the user to obtain EEG signals
of desired quality. It should be designed such that the user positions the electrodes at the required location simply by placing
the headgear solution, or by providing (audio or visual) guidance
to the user that will help in positioning the headgear. Furthermore, it has to indicate to the user whether the electrode–skin
contact is satisfactory in each electrode and guide the user to
readjust the positioning of some of the electrodes or the whole
headgear. If the contact becomes poor or unstable during the
recording, the system has to notify the user and to help achieve
the stable contact. These are some of the requirements that need
to be addressed in the design and development of feedback

18

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

generation and visualization discussed in Section V. Also, the
user should not be required to take any actions after the usage
of the headset and to just remove the headset and continue with
regular activities, i.e., no need for hair washing or cleaning the
scalp. Currently, none of the commercially available systems
supports such requirements.
Finally, EEG solutions should enable a certain degree of personalization, both in terms of the performance of the system,
as well as ergonomics and feedback. A user needs be able to,
e.g., tune neurofeedback ‘power’ to his/her speed of learning
or change the visual feedback provided from a simple bar to
a more appealing visual feedback (such as the one presented
in Fig. 5). The user needs to be able to adjust the headset and
pressure exerted by electrodes according to his/her preference.
Furthermore, an EEG system should be configurable to accommodate for personal traits and states, as well as various sensory
inputs discussed in Section II. Overall, the requirements extend
throughout all aspects of the EEG signal path depicted in Fig. 1.
Addressing personalization with those aspects might not only
result in less aversion toward the use of such devices but also to
more frequent and more effective usage of the device itself [91].
C. Importance of Standardization and Sharing
As stated in the introduction, in the future, we can expect
empowered users taking control of their health. The scientific
community has to strive in giving the right tools and knowledge
into the hands of users. This requires abundance of available
data and systems for EEG measurement, as well as agreed monitoring and measurement protocols and data formats. To prevent
problems in exchanging EEG data as well as analysis methods,
more effort is required in standardizing the recording formats
and especially on the recording protocol and the context capturing during the recording or monitoring sessions (including
environmental or physiological cues other than EEG). This is
discussed in Section II where personal traits and sensory inputs are presented, as well as in other sections that discuss the
acquisition and data processing.
The status at this moment is far from desirable. A large number of different storage formats exist, including the various versions of the EDF intended to ensure standardization [92]. There
are no clear specifications on the use of protocols. Finally, there
is no consensus on the method used to acquire contextual information. All these aspects have to be considered to make
large public databases of EEG recordings and exhaustive analysis toolboxes to extract the precious knowledge from our brain
activity and make it available for a wide audience of users interested in maintaining and improving their health. An European
Union BNCI Horizon project [93] and the US Government initiative called The Brain Research through Advancing Innovative
Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) [94] are two frameworks that have
the opportunity to address these issues on a global scale. It is up
to the members of these frameworks to realize the importance of
the issue of standardization and sharing and address it urgently.
D. Handling Artifacts
Due to the detrimental impact of various artifacts, artifact
handling becomes the crucial aspect of lifestyle EEG monitoring

in uncontrolled environments, when the user is able to freely
move. While a) environmental artifacts, b) recording equipment
artifacts, and c) artifacts due to improper usage can be handled
by proper signal filtering, system design, and correct usage,
physiological and motion artifacts are much more difficult to
handle (see Section IV). Obviously, it is not suitable to have
manual handling of such artifacts due to the cost and the amount
of recorded data in case of offline analysis applications and
due to the real-time applications which we expect will be the
most dominant use case. Avoiding artifacts by refraining from
head and body movements would oppose the very purpose of
lifestyle monitoring. Therefore, approaches that can identify the
presence of physiological and motion artifacts and reduce the
impact of these artifacts are a great challenge for intelligent
wireless lifestyle EEG solutions.
Handling motion artifacts is a perfect example that also illustrates the importance of application design, user-driven development, standardization and sharing, as well as the know-how on
all the aspects on the EEG path discussed in Sections II to V. For
example, if an application does not require constant continuous
monitoring of EEG, having simple standard deviation thresholding based artifact rejection methods might be sufficient for the
required data analysis. Generation of motion artifact databases,
with correct capturing of contextual information (including, e.g.,
acceleration and ETI) can offer irreplaceable platform for testing different motion artifact handling algorithms and exchanging experience within the research community. Having a wellestablished ETI model and head conductivity model helps in
translating continuous ETI information into the artifact component of the captured electrical activity during motion artifacts.
Efforts into designing headsets and dry electrodes to minimize
motion artifact impact and provide comfort to the user lead to
greater user acceptance and higher signal quality. System design
optimization using active sensor chips with local signal processing to reduce the artifact at the input of the system can also help.
Finally, fine-tuning signal processing to reduce the contribution
of such artifacts and proper communication to a user about the
quality of the obtained EEG-based information would introduce
completely new functionality to the intelligent EEG solution.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented guidelines toward developing intelligent
wearable, wireless, convenient, and comfortable lifestyle EEG
solutions that provide high signal quality. We discussed a number of aspects where existing solutions require improvements to
facilitate further progress. These aspects include personal traits
and sensory inputs, brain signal generation and acquisition, brain
signal analysis, and feedback generation. Where appropriate, we
provided suggestions on how to overcome current pitfalls. We
argued that the most critical areas, which progress will to a
large extent determine the evolution and deployment of wireless, wearable, lifestyle EEG systems, are the following ones:
1) application driven design of EEG solutions;
2) user driven development of EEG systems;
3) standardizing and sharing of EEG data and contextual
information;
4) handling artifacts in daily life EEG.

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

Addressing these challenges in future research, design, and
development endeavors would help in bringing EEG solutions
to a more advanced level. With such devices at hand, users
interested in promoting their quality of life and mental health,
as well as the ones in need of cognitive monitoring solutions,
would be able to enjoy the full potential of EEG monitoring.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Young and J. Whelan for
their valuable comments and suggestions on how to improve the
quality of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] C. L. Keyes, “Promoting and protecting mental health as flourishing:
A complementary strategy for improving national mental health,” Amer.
Psychologist, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 95–108, 2007.
[2] IBM, “The Future of Connected Health Devices,” 2011.
[3] D. Samoocha, D. J. Bruinvels, N. A. Elbers, J. R. Anema, and A. J. van der
Beek, “Effectiveness of web-based interventions on patient empowerment:
A systematic review and meta-analysis,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 12,
no. 2, p. e23, 2010.
[4] J. Pan and X. Jiao, “New application, development and aerospace prospect
of fNIR,” Engineering, vol. 5, no. 5B, pp. 47–52, 2013.
[5] K. T. Sweeney, T. E. Ward, and S. F. McLoone, “Artifact removal in physiological signals—practices and possibilities,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 488–500, May 2012.
[6] E. Niedermeyer, and F. L. da Silva, Eds., Electroenephaligraphy: Basic
Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields. 5th ed., Baltimore,
MD, USA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2005.
[7] S. Noachtar and J. Rémi, “The role of EEG in epilepsy: A critical review,”
Epilepsy Behavior, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 22–33, 2009.
[8] S. D. Vidgeon and A. J. Strong, “Multimodal cerebral monitoring in
traumatic brain injury,” J. Intensive Care Soc., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 126–133,
2011.
[9] C.-T. Lin, L.-W. Ko, J.-C. Chiou, J.-R. Duann, R.-S. Huang, S.-F. Liang,
T.-W. Chiu, and T.-P. Jung, “Noninvasive neural prostheses using mobile and wireless EEG,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, no. 7, pp. 1167–1183,
2008.
[10] X. Chen, and Z. J. Wang, “Design and Implementation of a wearable,
wireless EEG recording system,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Bioinformatics
Biomed. Eng., 2011, pp. 1–4.
[11] T. O. Zander, M. Lehne, K. Ihme, S. Jatzev, J. Correia, C. Kothe, B. Picht,
and F. Nijboer, “A Dry EEG-System for scientific research and braincomputer interfaces,” Frontiers Neuroscience, vol. 5, no. 53, pp. 1–10,
2011.
[12] A. Matsumoto, S. Patki, B. Grundlehner, A. Verwegen, J. Xu, S. Mitra, and
J. Penders, “Compact wireless EEG system with active electrodes for daily
healthcare monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consumer Electron.,
2013, pp. 204–205.
[13] NeuroSky. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.neurosky.
com
[14] Emotiv. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://emotiv.com
[15] InteraXon. Dec. 2013, [Online]. Available: http://www.interaxon.ca
[16] g.tec. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.gtec.at
[17] Qasar. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.quasarusa.com
[18] Mindo. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://mindo.com.tw
[19] Neuroelectrics. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.
neuroelectrics.com
[20] Cognionics. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.cognionics.
com
[21] S. Patki, B. Grundlehner, A. Verwegen, S. Mitra, J. Xu, A. Matsumoto,
J. Penders, and R. F. Yazicioglu, “Wireless EEG system with real time
impedance monitoring and active electrodes,” in Proc. Biomed. Circuits
Syst. Conf., 2012, pp.108–111.
[22] B. Aliston, S. Dunne, R. Leeb, and J. R. del Millán, “Recent and Upcoming BCI Progress: Overview, Analysis, and Recommendations,” in
Towards Practical Brain–Computer Interfaces: Bridging the Gap from Research to Real-World Applications. 1st ed., New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2012.

19

[23] C.-T. Lin, C.-J. Chang, B.-S. Lin, S.-H. Hung, C.-F. Chao, and I.-J. Wang,
“A real-time wireless brain-computer interface system for drowsiness
detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 214–222,
Aug. 2010.
[24] W. C. Ziai, D. Schlattman, R. Llinas, S. Venkatesha, M. Truesdale, A.
Schevchenko, and P. W. Kaplan, “Emergent EEG in the emergency department in patients with altered mental states,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol.
123, no. 5, pp. 910–917, 2012.
[25] D. Vernon, T. Dempster, O. Bazanova, N. Rotterford, M. Pasqualini, and
S. Andersen, “Alpha neurofeedback training for performance enhancement: reviewing the methodology,” J. Neurotherapy: Investigations Neuromodulation, Neurofeedback Appl. Neurosci., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 214–227,
2009.
[26] M. Arns, S. de Ridder, U. Strehl, M. Breteler, and A. Coenen, “Efficacy of
neurofeedback treatment in ADHD: The effects on inattention, impulsivity
and hyperactivity: A meta-analysis,” Clinical EEG Neuroscience, vol. 40,
no. 3, pp. 180–189, 2009.
[27] A. J. Casson, D. C. Yates, S. J. M. Smith, J. S. Duncan, and E. RodriguesVillegaz, “Wearable Electroencephalography,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Mag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 44–56, May/ Jun. 2010.
[28] S. Lee, Y. Shin, S. Woo, K. Kim, and H.-N. Lee, ‘Review of Wireless
Brain–Computer Interface Systems” in Brain–Comput. Interface Syst.—
Recent Progress Future Prospects. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2013.
[29] Z. Martinović, V. Jovanović, and D. Ristanović, “EEG power spectra
of normal preadolescent twins. Gender differences of quantitative EEG
maturation,” Clin. Neuropsychol., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 231–248, 1998.
[30] H. W. Hanlon, R. W. Thatcher, and M. J. Cline, “Gender differences in
the development of EEG coherence in normal children,” Developmental
Neuropsychology, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 479–506, 1999.
[31] R. Armitage and R. F. Hoffmann, “Sleep EEG, depression and gender,”
Sleep Med. Rev., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 237–246, 2001.
[32] J. Carrier, S. Land, D. J. Buysse, D. J. Kupfer, and T. H. Monk, “The
Effects of Age and Gender on Sleep EEG Power Spectral Density in the
Middle Years of Life (Ages 2060 Years Old),” Psychophysiology, vol. 38,
no. 2, pp. 232–242, 2001.
[33] M. de Haan, Ed., Infant EEG and Event-Related Potentials. Hove, U.K.:
Psychology Press, 2013.
[34] E. Stomrud, O. Hansson, L. Minthon, K. Blennow, I. Rosén, and E. Londos, “Slowing of EEG correlates with CSF biomarkers and reduced cognitive speed in elderly with normal cognition over 4 years,” Neurobiology
Aging, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 215–223, 2010.
[35] G. Russell, L. R. Rodgers, O. C. Ukoumunne, and T. Ford, “Prevalence of
parent-reported ASD and ADHD in the UK: Findings from the millennium
cohort study,” J. Autism Developmental Disorders, p. ePub, 2013.
[36] R. Lizio, C. Babiloni, C. D. Percio, N. Marzano, A. Soricelli, E. Salvatore,
R. Ferri, F. Consentino, G. Tedeschi, P. Montella, S. Marino, G. Rodriguez,
F. Nobili, F. Vernieri, F. Ursini, C. Mundi, G. B. Frisoni, and P. M. Rossini,
“Cortical sources of resting state EEG rhythms reflect disease progression
over 1 year in mild cognitive impairment and alzheimers disease patients,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 124, no. 11, pp. e203–e204, 2013.
[37] S. L. Bressler and V. Menon, “Large-scale brain networks in cognition:
Emerging methods and principles,” Trends Cognitive Sci., vol. 14, no. 6,
pp. 277–290, 2010.
[38] R. J. Barry, A. R. Clarke, S. J. Johnstone, C. A. Magee, and J. A. Rushby,
“EEG Differences between eyes-closed and eyes-open resting conditions,”
Int. J. Psychophysiology, vol. 118, no. 12, pp. 2765–2773, 2007.
[39] C. C. Duncan, R. J. Barry, J. F. Connolly, C. Fischer, P. T. Michie, R.
Näätänen, J. Polich, I. Reinvang, and C. V. Petten, “Event-Related potentials in clinical research: Guidelines for eliciting, recording, and quantifying mismatch negativity, P300, and N400,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120,
no. 11, pp. 1883–1908, 2009.
[40] R. D. Pascual-Marqui, C. M. Michel, and D. Lehmann, “Low resolution
electromagnetic tomography: A new method for localizing electrical activity in the brain,” Int. J. Psychophysiology, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 49–65,
1994.
[41] R. Grech, T. Cassar, J. Muscat, K. P. Camilleri, S. G. Fabri, M. Zervakis,
P. Xanthopoulos, V. Sakkalis, and B. Vanrumste, “Review on solving the
inverse problem in EEG source analysis,” J. NeuroEngineering Rehabil.,
vol. 5, no. 25, p. ePub, 2008.
[42] S. Musall, V. von Pföstl, A. Rauch, N. K. Logothetis, and K. Whittingstall,
“Effects of neural synchrony on surface EEG,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 1045–1053, 2014.
[43] G. Deco, V. K. Jirsa, P. A. Robinson, M. Breakspear, and K. Friston, “The
dynamic brain: From spiking neurons to neural masses and cortical fields,”
PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 4, no. 8, p. e1000092, 2008.

20

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[44] K. Mullinger and R. Bowtell, “Combining EEG and fMRI,” Methods
Molecular Biol., vol. 711, pp. 303–326, 2011.
[45] P. Wen, “The impact of inhomogeneous tissue anisotropy on potential distribution within head model,” Australasian Phys. Eng. Sci. Med.,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 115–118, 2003.
[46] M. Stenroos and O. Hauk, “Minimum-norm cortical source estimation in
layered head models is robust against skull conductivity error,” NeuroImage, vol. 81, pp. 265–272, 2013.
[47] J. K. Rice, C. Rorden, J. S. Little, and L. C. Parra, “Subject position affects
EEG magnitudes,” NeuroImage, vol. 64, pp. 476–484, 2013.
[48] Z. A. Acar and S. Makeig, “Effects of forward model errors on EEG source
localization,” Brain Topography, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 378–396, 2013.
[49] J. G. Webster, Ed., Medical Instrumentation: Application and Design. 4th
ed., New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2009.
[50] M. R. Neuman, “Biopotential Electrodes” in Medical Instrumentation:
Application and Design. 4th ed., New York: Wiley, 2009.
[51] P. Tallgren, S. Vanhatalo, K. Kaila, and J. Voipio, “Evaluation of commercially available electrodes and gels for recording of slow EEG potentials,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 116, no. 4, pp. 799–806, 2005.
[52] Y. M. Chi, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and non-contact
biopotential electrodes,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 106–
119, 2010.
[53] L.-D. Liao, I.-J. Wang, S.-F. Chen, C. Jyh-Yeong, and C.-T. Lin, “Design,
fabrication and experimental validation of a novel dry-contact sensor for
measuring electroencephalography signals without skin preparation,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5819–5834, May 30, 2011.
[54] G. Gargiulo, P. Bifulco, R. A. Calvo, M. Cesarelli, C. Jin, and A. van
Schaik, “A mobile EEG system with dry electrodes,” in Proc. IEEE
Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf., 2008, pp. 273–276.
[55] V. Mihajlović, G. Garcia-Molina, and J. Peuscher, “Dry and water-based
EEG electrodes in SSVEP-Based BCI applications,” Biomed. Eng. Syst.
Technol., vol. 357, pp. 23–40, 2012.
[56] A. Searle and L. Kirkup, “A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulating
bioelectric recording electrodes,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 271–
283, 2000.
[57] S. Iskander-Rı́zk, “Dry electrode-skin contact impedance evaluation for
reliable EEG measurements,” Master’s thesis, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, 2013.
[58] V. Mihajlović, and B. Grundlehner, “The effect of force and electrode
material on electrode-to-skin impedance,” in Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circuits
Syst. Conf., 2012, pp. 57–60.
[59] D. Looney, P. Kidmose, C. Park, M. Ungstrup, M. L. Rank, K. Rosenkranz,
and D. P. Mandic, “The in-the-ear recording concept: user-centered and
wearable brain monitoring,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 32–42, Nov.
2012.
[60] T. C. Ferree, P. L. Luu, and G. S. Russel, and D. M. Tucker, “Scalp
electrode impedance, infection risk, and EEG data quality,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 112, no. 3, pp. 536–544, 2011.
[61] A. C. M. van Rijn, A. Peper, and C. A. Grimbergen, “High-Quality
recording of bioelectric events. Part 1: interference reduction, theory
and practice,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 389–397,
1990.
[62] M. F. Chimeno and R. Pallàs-Areny, “A comprehensive model for power
line interference in biopotential measurements,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 535–540, Jun. 2000.
[63] E. M. Spinelli, M. A. Mayosky, and R. Pallàs-Areny, “A practical
approach to electrode-skin impedance unbalance measurement,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1451–1453, Jul. 2006.
[64] Nordic Semiconductor. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.
nordicsemi.com
[65] Zigbee Alliance. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.
zigbee.org.
[66] G. A. Rousselet, “Does filtering preclude Us from studying ERP timecourses?” Frontiers Psychology, vol. 3, no. 131, p. ePub, 2012.
[67] V. Mihajlović, H. Li, B. Grundlehner, J. Penders, and A. C. Schouten,
“Investigating the impact of force and movements on impedance magnitude and EEG,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2013, pp. 1466–1469.
[68] G. Geetha and S. N. Geethalakshmi, “Scrutinizing different techniques
for artifact removal from EEG signals,” Int. J. Eng. Sci. Technol., vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 1167–1172, 2011.
[69] M. Fatourechi, A. Bashashatiemail, R. K. Wardemail, and G. E.
Birchemail, “EMG and EOG artifacts in brain computer interface systems: A survey,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 118, no. 3, pp. 480–494,
2007.

[70] R. J. Croft and R. J. Barry, “Removal of ocular artifact from the EEG: A
review,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 5–19, 2000.
[71] A. Schlögl, C. Keinrath, D. Zimmermann, R. Scherer, R. Leeb, and G.
Pfurtscheller, “A fully automated correction method of EOG artifacts
in EEG recordings,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 98–104,
2007.
[72] S. O’Regan and W. Marnane, “Multimodal detection of head-movement
artefacts in EEG,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 218, no. 1, pp. 110–120,
2013.
[73] S. O’Regan, S. Faul, and W. Marnane, “Automatic detection of EEG
artefacts arising from head movements using EEG and gyroscope signals,”
Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 857–874, 2013.
[74] K. T. Sweeney, S. F. McLoone, and T. E. Ward, “The use of ensemble
empirical mode decomposition with canonical correlation analysis as a
novel artifact removal technique,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60,
no. 1, pp. 97–105, Jan. 2013.
[75] A. Bertrand, V. Mihajlović, B. G. C. V. Hoof, and M. Moonen, “Motion artifact reduction in EEG recordings using multi-channel contact
impedance measurements,” in Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf.,
2013, pp. 258–261.
[76] A. Bashashati, M. Fatourechi, R. K. Ward, and G. E. Birch, “A survey
of signal processing algorithms in brain–computer interfaces based on
electrical brain signals,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. R32–R57, 2007.
[77] S. Sanei and J. A. Chambers, Eds., EEG Signal Processing. 1st ed., New
York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2007.
[78] A. Delorme, and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, pp. 9–21, 2004.
[79] Y. Renard, F. Lotte, G. Gibert, M. Congedo, E. Maby, V. Delannoy, O.
Bertrand, and A. Lécuyer, “OpenViBe: An open source software platform
to design test and use brain-computer interface in real and virtual environments,” Presence: Teleoperators Virtual Environ., vol. 19, pp. 35–53,
2010.
[80] Applied Neuroscience NeuroGuide. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available:
http://www.appliedneuroscience.com
[81] ANT Neuro. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available: http://www.ant-neuro.com
[82] G. Schalk, D. J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer, and J. R.
Wolplaw, “BCI2000: A general-purpose brain–computer interface (BCI)
system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1034–1043, Jun.
2004.
[83] D. P. Mandic, Ed., Signal Processing Techniques for Knowledge Extraction
and Information Fusion. 1st ed., New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008.
[84] M. Schels, S. Scherer, M. Glodek, H. A. Kestler, G. Palm, and F.
Schwenker, “On the discovery of events in EEG data utilizing information
fusion,” Comput. Statistics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 5–18, 2013.
[85] B. Kellihan, T. J. Doty, W. D. Hairston, J. Canady, K. W. Whitaker, C.-T.
Lin, T.-P. Jung, and K. McDowell, “A real world neuroimaging system to
evaluate stress,” Foundations Augmented Cognition, vol. 8027, pp. 316–
325, 2013.
[86] G. J. van Boxtel, A. Denissen, M. Jäger, D. Vernon, M. K. J. Dekker, V.
Mihajlović, and M. M. Sitskoorn, “A novel self-guided approach to alpha
activity training,” Int. J. Psychophysiology, vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 282–294,
2011.
[87] G. Pfurtscheller, G. Müller-Putz, R. Scherer, and C. Neuper, “Rehabilitation with brain-computer interface systems,” Computer, vol. 41, no. 10,
pp. 58–65, 2008.
[88] H. Wahbeh and B. S. Oken, “Peak high-frequency HRV and peak alpha
frequency higher in PTSD,” Appl. Psychophysiology Biofeedback, vol. 38,
no. 1, pp. 57–69, 2013.
[89] Y.-P. Lin, C.-H. Wang, T.-P. Jung, T.-L. Wu, S.-K. Jeng, J.-R. Duann,
and J.-H. H. Chen, “EEG-Based emotion recognition in music listening,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1798–1806, Jul. 2010.
[90] A. Craig, Y. Trann, N. Wijesuriya, and H. Nguyen, “Regional brain
wave activity changes associated with fatigue,” Psychophysiology, vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 574–582, 2012.
[91] O. Sourina, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, and M. K. Nguyen, “EEG-Based personalized
digital experience,” Universal Access Human–Comput. Interaction. Users
Diversity, vol. 6766, pp. 591–599, 2011.
[92] European Data Format. (2013, Dec.). [Online]. Available:
http://www.edfplus.info
[93] BNCI Horizon 2020. (2014, Apr.). [Online]. Available: http://bncihorizon-2020.eu
[94] The Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN). (2014, Apr.). [Online]. Available: http://www.nih.gov/
science/brain/

MIHAJLOVIĆ et al.: WEARABLE, WIRELESS EEG SOLUTIONS IN DAILY LIFE APPLICATIONS: WHAT ARE WE MISSING?

21

Vojkan Mihajlović (M’13) received the M.Sc. degree in computer science from the Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Niš, Serbia, in 2002, and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from University
of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 2006.
He worked as a Senior Scientist for Philips Research on technologies for convenient acquisition of
electrical signals of the brain and algorithms and
methods for brain (EEG and fMRI) signal analysis, as
well as on neurophysiological models for cognitive
stress. The application areas of his research included
brain–computer interface for communication and control, neurofeedback for
relaxation, and treating cognitive problems and lifestyle applications for stress
and burnout prevention. Since August 2012, he has been with the Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, where he is responsible for developing
signal processing solutions for wearable and wireless EEG technology and exploring novel EEG application domains. He holds seven patents.

Ruud Vullers (SM’12) received the M.Sc. degree
in physics at the Radboud University of Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands, in 1994. He received
the Ph.D. degree from K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in 2000, for his thesis entitled, “Lithography
on nanometer dimensions, using local oxidation of
titanium thin films by atomic force microscopy”.
He worked for Philips Research Laboratories, on
the fabrication and design of thin film coils for use
in magneto–optical Storage and recordable Blu-ray
Disc development. In 2006, he joined IMEC at the
Holst Centre, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, where he was Principal Scientist in
body area networks and is currently the Guest Researcher at Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, in the Microsystems group. He has (co-)
authored more than 150 papers in the field of wireless sensor nodes and energy
harvesting technologies. He is a Member of the MEMS, PowerMEMS, and
BodyNets Technical Program Committee. He holds 11 patents (of which three
are US).

Bernard Grundlehner (M’12) received the M.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 2002.
He started his career in the area of automotive
R&D, focusing on acoustic signal processing, speech
intelligibility, and multimedia integration. He joined
imec, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2007, where he
has been working on several topics related to biomedical signal analysis, including ECG analysis, emotion
monitoring and bio-acoustics, in which he focused on
multivariate signal processing, pattern recognition,
and statistics. He is currently responsible for the development of the Wearable
EEG platform, algorithms for EEG signal improvement, clinical validation of
the EEG prototypes and industrialization. He has (co-) authored over 25 papers
and conference proceedings in the field of biomedical signal processing and
acquisition.

Julien Penders received the M.Sc. degree in systems engineering from University of Liege, Liege,
Belgium, in 2004, and the M.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering from Boston University, Boston, MA,
USA, in 2006.
He is currently the Program Manager at the Holst
Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, where
he leads the activities on body area networks. He is
responsible for the development of integrated wearable health monitoring systems, development of embedded algorithms and the evaluation of integrated
prototypes in field studies. He has (co-) authored over 50 papers in the field of
body area networks and autonomous wireless sensor networks and is the author
of two book chapters on the topic. He serves on the Technical Committee on
Information Technology for Health, on the Technical Program Committee for
the Wireless Health conference, and is an Associate Editor for the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society conference.
Mr. Penders was a 2004/2005 Fellow of the Belgian American Educational
Foundation.

