IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

1137

A Novel Computerized Tool to Stratify Risk
in Carotid Atherosclerosis Using Kinematic
Features of the Arterial Wall
Aimilia Gastounioti, Member, IEEE, Stavros Makrodimitris, Spyretta Golemati, Member, IEEE,
Nikolaos P. E. Kadoglou, Christos D. Liapis, and Konstantina S. Nikita, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Valid characterization of carotid atherosclerosis (CA)
is a crucial public health issue, which would limit the major risks
held by CA for both patient safety and state economies. This paper investigated the unexplored potential of kinematic features
in assisting the diagnostic decision for CA in the framework of a
computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) tool. To this end, 15 CAD schemes
were designed and were fed with a wide variety of kinematic features of the atherosclerotic plaque and the arterial wall adjacent to
the plaque for 56 patients from two different hospitals. The CAD
schemes were benchmarked in terms of their ability to discriminate between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients and the
combination of the Fisher discriminant ratio, as a feature-selection
strategy, and support vector machines, in the classification module,
was revealed as the optimal motion-based CAD tool. The particular
CAD tool was evaluated with several cross-validation strategies and
yielded higher than 88% classification accuracy; the texture-based
CAD performance in the same dataset was 80%. The incorporation
of kinematic features of the arterial wall in CAD seems to have a
particularly favorable impact on the performance of image-datadriven diagnosis for CA, which remains to be further elucidated in
future prospective studies on large datasets.
Index Terms—Carotid atherosclerosis (CA), computer-aided diagnosis (CAD), kinematic features, motion analysis, ultrasound
(US).

I. INTRODUCTION
AROTID atherosclerosis (CA) is a chronic degenerative
disease, gradually resulting in the formation of lesions
(plaques) in the inner lining of the carotid artery. Atherosclerotic plaques may lead to severe narrowing of the arterial lumen
with detrimental impact on blood supply and major risks for

C

Manuscript received December 24, 2013; revised March 31, 2014; accepted
May 29, 2014. Date of publication June 9, 2014; date of current version May
7, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Operational Program “Competitiveness and Entrepreneurship” and Regional Operational Programmes of
the National Strategic Reference Framework 2007–2013 and “SYNERGASIA”:
“Collaborative projects of small and medium scale.” The work of A. Gastounioti was supported in part by a scholarship from the Hellenic State Scholarships
Foundation.
A. Gastounioti, S. Makrodimitris, and K. S. Nikita are with the School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University
of Athens, Athens 10682, Greece (e-mail: gaimilia@biosim.ntua.gr, stamakro@gmail.com, knikita@ece.ntua.gr).
S. Golemati is with the First Intensive Care Unit, Medical School, National Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 10679, Greece (e-mail:
sgolemati@med.uoa.gr).
N. P. E. Kadoglou and C. D. Liapis are with the Attikon University General
Hospital, National Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 10679, Greece
(e-mail: nkado@med.uoa.gr, liapis@med.uoa.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2329604

cerebrovascular disorders; it is well established that CA highly
predisposes to cerebral ischemic events, with the majority of
stroke events being provoked due to the disease [1]. The high
morbidity, disability, and mortality rates associated with stroke
in Europe [2] and in the United States [3], in combination with
the negative predictions for the future based on the current secular trends [4], pose a major need for valid risk assessment and
optimal treatment selection (carotid revascularization or conservative therapy with medication and dietary) for patients with
CA.
In current clinical practice, the therapeutic decision for patients with asymptomatic CA (i.e., with no history of CAinduced neurological disorders) relies on the ultrasonographically measured degree of lumen stenosis [5]. However, there is
evidence that this marker is not sufficient [6], thereby motivating
the development of computer-aided-diagnosis (CAD) systems,
which incorporate additional markers to assist treatment planning. In particular, the development of CAD systems which
are based on 2-D ultrasound (US) image analysis is considered as a grand challenge by the scientific community, because
1) traditionally, vascular physicians select US examination in
diagnosis and follow-up for patients with CA, 2) the use of
affordable imaging techniques, such as US, is crucial to avoid
increasing the socioeconomic burden of the disease, and 3) 2-D
US is traditionally available on commercial US systems [7], [8].
A typical CAD tool consists of two main modules, namely
the feature-selection module, which spares the most clinically
useful features from redundant ones, and the classifier, which is
trained, using the selected subset of features. Advanced methods of image processing allow the extraction of a large number
of features, which may be difficult to interpret and to classify.
Therefore, feature selection is a crucial step in the CAD design to simplify both the feature vector and the classifier. It is
also very important to enhance the computational performance
of the CAD system in terms of execution time and memory
requirements.
Table I summarizes key studies in the particular research
area [9]–[17], which are based on the analysis of B-mode
US, i.e., the typical 2-D US imaging modality for the carotid
artery wall. In all cases, the underlying idea was computerassisted discrimination of high-risk atherosclerotic lesions
from low-risk ones, by estimating image-based features of
symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with CA and using
the estimated features to train appropriately designed CAD
tools.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1138

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

TABLE I
KEY STUDIES ON DEVELOPING COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS, WHICH
ARE BASED ON B-MODE US IMAGE ANALYSIS TO STRATIFY RISK IN
ATHEROSCLEROTIC CAROTID ARTERIES

Study / year
[9]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[10]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

2003
2007
2007
2009
2011
2012
2012
2012
2013

Classifiers

Feature
selection

Maximum
accuracy

SOM, kNN
NN
SVM, PNN
SVM, PNN
SVM, PNN
SVM, kNN, PNN, DT
SVM
SVM
SVM

ST
ST
PCA
PCA
ST
ST
ST
ST
ST

73.1%
99.1%
73.4%
73.7%
85%
89.5%
79.3%
83.7%
91.7%

SOM: self-organizing maps; kNN: k-nearest neighbor; SVM: support
vector machines; NN: neural network; PNN: probabilistic neural network; DT: decision trees; ST: statistical tests; PCA: principal component
analysis.

In most studies, feature selection was based on statistical tests,
while a few ones used principal component analysis (PCA) to
remove redundant features [12], [13]. Multiple classifiers, such
as self-organizing maps [9], support vector machines (SVM)
[10], [12]–[17], k-nearest neighbor (kNN) [9], [14], decision
trees (DT) [14], neural networks [11], and probabilistic neural
networks (PNN) [10], [12]–[14], were used, with SVM, PNN,
and kNN being most popular in the field. Moreover, DT and
discriminant analysis (DA) have been successfully used in CAD
tools for other vascular disorders involving the coronary artery
[18] and the pulmonary vessel tree [19], respectively.
Regarding image-based features, plaque texture has been
thoroughly investigated, with very encouraging results by CAD
tools [7]. The morphology of the arterial wall has also been
included in a limited number of CAD systems, without gaining
as much attention [7]. The role of kinematic features, which
are estimated with motion analysis from B-mode US image
sequences and represent dynamic phenomena and mechanical
interactions occurring during the cardiac cycle (CC), remains
unexplored, though. None of the related studies has considered
kinematic features in CAD systems for CA, while only a few
research groups have investigated potential motion-based risk
markers [20], [21].
Based on the above, the objective of this study is to elucidate the role of kinematic features of the arterial wall in
computer-assisted risk stratification in CA by identifying an
optimal motion-based CAD tool for the disease. To this end,
15 CAD schemes are designed by combining three featureselection methods with five classifiers; specifically, two statistical methods, namely the Fisher discriminant ratio (FDR) and
the Wilcoxon rank-sum test (WRS), and PCA are used for feature selection, while SVM, kNN, PNN, DT, and DA are used in
the classification module. Subsequently, kinematic features of
the atherosclerotic plaques and normal parts of the arterial wall
adjacent to the plaques are estimated for 56 symptomatic and
asymptomatic patients with CA from two different hospitals.
The designed CAD schemes are, then, fed with the estimated
kinematic features, they are optimized in terms of their design

Fig. 1. Examples of (a), (b) B-mode US images of the carotid artery, and (c),
(d) the selected ROIs for patients from (a), (c) the Attikon University Hospital
of Greece and (b), (d) the St. Mary’s Hospital of UK.

parameters, and they are benchmarked in terms of their ability
to discriminate between symptomatic and asymptomatic cases.
Finally, the optimal CAD scheme is also benchmarked against
texture-based classification in the same dataset.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. US Image Data: Acquisition and Preprocessing
A total of 56 elderly patients (aged 50–90) with established
CA (diagnosed carotid stenosis >50%), who were referred
to the St. Mary’s Hospital of U.K. (N = 28) [21] and the
Attikon General University Hospital of Greece (N = 28) [22]
for carotid artery US scanning, were selected. Among those
patients, 28 (St. Mary’s: 18, Attikon: 10) had experienced an ischemic cerebrovascular event, i.e., stroke or transient ischemic
attack (“symptomatic” group), while 28 patients (St. Mary’s: 10,
Attikon: 18) had no neurological symptoms (“asymptomatic”
group), within a 6-month time period before the time of examination. No statistically significant differences were found
in the ages or in the degrees of stenosis between patient subgroups (“symptomatic” and “asymptomatic” or “St. Mary’s”
and “Attikon”). The differences in US image recordings of the
two hospitals, in terms of US equipment and operator, form a
challenging dataset, which constitutes a key feature of this study.
The local institutional review boards approved US image examinations and all subjects gave their informed consent to the
scientific use of the data. For each subject, the carotid artery was
scanned in the longitudinal direction according to a standardized protocol (dynamic range, 60 dB; persistence, low) and a
B-mode US image sequence was recorded at a rate higher than
25 frames/s for at least 3 s (2–3 consecutive CCs). Dynamic
B-mode US imaging of longitudinal sections of the arterial
wall allows the estimation of tissue motion in two dimensions,
namely longitudinal, i.e., along the vessel axis, and radial, i.e.,
along the vessel radius, and perpendicular to the longitudinal

GASTOUNIOTI et al.: NOVEL COMPUTERIZED TOOL TO STRATIFY RISK IN CA USING KINEMATIC FEATURES OF THE ARTERIAL WALL

1139

Fig. 2. Schematic presentation of the steps followed to estimate statistical measures of (a) pixel-wise kinematic and (b) pair-wise strain indices, using the results
of motion analysis for a ROI or a pair of ROIs. D-T-S: diastole-to-systole.

one. Fig. 1(a) and (b) shows examples of B-mode US image
recordings for patients with atherosclerotic plaques at the posterior arterial wall.
For each clinical case, an experienced vascular physician
traced four regions of interest (ROIs), namely the posterior
(PWL) and anterior wall-lumen (AWL) interfaces, and the
plaque top (PTS) and bottom surfaces (PBS) [see Fig. 1(c) and
(d)]. PWL and AWL are normal parts of the arterial wall adjacent
to the plaques and they were included in motion analysis, because recent studies have revealed US image-based features of
healthy parts of the arterial wall close to the plaque as potential
risk markers for CA [21], [23]. Subsequently, image intensities
([0: black, 255: white]) were linearly adjusted so that the median
grey level value of the blood was 0, and the median grey level
value of the adventitia was 190 [24]. This preprocessing step
was necessary to ensure comparable measurements between the
two subsets of image recordings.
B. Feature Extraction
All pixels composing the four ROIs, as well as the whole
plaque region (i.e., the region contoured by PTS and PBS), were
selected as motion targets. The radial and longitudinal positions
of the targets across time were estimated using ABMKF−K2 , a
recently proposed motion estimator with enhanced accuracy in
motion tracking of the arterial wall from both artifacts-free and
artifacts-corrupted image recordings [21], [25].

From the produced waveforms, a wide variety of kinematic
and strain indices can be estimated (see Fig. 2). Specifically,
kinematic indices can be produced by estimating target-wise indices representing 1) median and standard deviation in velocities
during the CC, 2) motion amplitudes, defined as the absolute
difference between the corresponding maximum and minimum
target positions, and 3) diastole-to-systole displacements, for
each CC [see Fig. 2(a)]. Strain indices can be estimated, using
motion waveforms for pairs of pixels [Fig. 2(b)] and they express relative movements between ROIs or local deformations
in an ROI during the CC [21], [26]. In all cases, descriptive
statistical measures of the mean (over the CCs) values of the
target- or pair-wise indices are calculated.
In this study, 1144 kinematic indices for PWL, AWL, PTS,
PBS, and the plaque region were estimated. Moreover, 93 strain
indices were used to express relative movements between 1)
PWL and AWL, 2) PTS and PBS, 3) PTS and PWL or AWL,
and 4) PBS and PWL or AWL (if the plaque was located at
the posterior or the anterior wall, respectively), and local deformations in PWL, AWL, and PTS. As a result, a total number
of 1236 kinematic features were produced for each patient. Table II defines the aforementioned features, following the index
encoding of Fig. 2.
For direct comparisons of the CAD performance in the same
study group, using either kinematic or textural features, plaque
texture was measured by applying a multiresolution approach
for image analysis, which is based on wavelet packets [10].

1140

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

TABLE II
KINEMATIC FEATURES WHICH WERE ESTIMATED FOR EACH PATIENT, USING
THE PRODUCED MOTION WAVEFORMS OF THE TARGETS OF A ROI OR A PAIR OF
ROIS
ROI(s)

Index encoding of Fig. 2

Kinematic features

I1–I154
I1–I154
I1–I154
I1–I154
I1–I528

F1–F154
F155–F308
F309–F462
F463–F616
F617–F1144

I529–I535
I550–I556
I529–I535
I549–I556
I536–I542
I529–I535
I550–I556
I536–I549
I529–I542
I529–I542

F1145–F1159

Kinematic indices
PWL
AWL
PTS
PBS
plaque region
Strain indices
PWL
AWL
PWL, AWL
PTS
PTS, PBS
PTS, PWL, or AWL
PBS, PWL, or AWL

F1160–F1173
F1174–F1180
F1181–F1194
F1195–F1208
F1209–F1222
F1223–F1236

ROI: region of interest; PWL: posterior wall-lumen, AWL: anterior walllumen; PTS: plaque top surface; PBS: plaque bottom surface.

Briefly, for each patient, systolic and diastolic images were decomposed up to three levels using the wavelet packets, leading
to 126 detail subimages. Then, the mean and standard deviation
of image intensities of the produced subimages were estimated,
resulting in a total number of 252 textural features. This approach was selected among other textural measures, considering that wavelet-based image decomposition is a state-of-the-art
methodology in the area of texture analysis and it has been used
in the latest studies on texture classification of atherosclerotic
tissue from B-mode US images [10], [14]–[17].
C. Design of CAD Schemes
In this study, 15 CAD schemes were designed, based on
combinations between three feature-selection methods (FDR,
WRS, and PCA) and five classifiers (SVM, PNN, kNN, DT, and
DA). In the following, the main underlying principles and the
corresponding parameterization (based on previous experience
in the particular research area [9]–[19]) of these modules are
briefly described.
Feature selection aims at the identification of those features,
which are able to better separate the “symptomatic” and “asymptomatic” groups. In FDR and WRS, a feature is considered to
have a strong discrimination power, if it corresponds to a high
FDR value and a low p-value, respectively. Therefore, features
are sorted in descending FDR value or ascending p-value, and
an optimal feature subset is a set of m features, consisting of the
1st, 2nd, . . . , mth features. In PCA, the set of features is converted into a reduced number of uncorrelated features (principal
components), while retaining most of its information content.
This transformation is defined in such a way that the first principal component has the largest possible variance, i.e., it accounts
for as much of the variability in the data as possible, while components having variance less than a threshold (thr) are removed.

The design parameter of both FDR and WRS is m (in [1–100]),
while PCA is affected by thr (in [0.0001–0.1]).
SVM are learning machines based on intuitive geometric principles, aiming to the definition of an optimal hyper plane, which
separates the training data so that a minimum expected risk
is achieved [27]. Compared to other classifiers, SVM is less
affected by the so-called “curse of dimensionality” and is therefore suitable for large sets of features [28]. The training method
is based on a nonlinear mapping of the dataset, using kernels
that have to satisfy Mercer’s theorem. In this study, a Gaussian
radial basis function (RBF) kernel was used. In this case, the
SVM training algorithm is affected by the parameter s (in [0.5–
10]), defining the spread of RBF, which has to be appropriately
adjusted to optimize the performance of the classifier.
The PNN is a multilayered feedforward neural network,
which is faster, more accurate, and less sensitive to outliers
than multilayer perceptron networks [29]. The first layer (input
layer) computes distances from the input vector to the training
input vectors and produces a vector whose elements indicate
how close the input is to a training input. The second layer
(radial basis layer) takes into account the classes to which the
training examples belong to and produces a vector of probabilities for the input vector. In this layer, an RBF is applied to
each distance to compute the influence for each training vector.
Finally, a competitive output layer picks the maximum of these
probabilities and classifies the input vector to the corresponding
class. In this study, a Gaussian RBF was used and the design
parameter of PNN was s (in [0.5–10]). kNN is conceptually similar to PNN; kNN is a simple classifier, in which a feature vector
is assigned the class that is most common among its k nearest
neighbors, based on some similarity measure (distance function) [30]. The classification performance of kNN depends on
the parameter k (in [3–11]) and the distance function (in {city
block, Chebyshev, standardized Euclidean, cosine, Euclidean,
Hamming, Jaccard, Minkowski}).
A DT consists of internal nodes (i.e., nodes with outgoing
edges) and leaves (or decision nodes) that form a rooted tree.
Each internal node splits the instance space into two or more subspaces and each path from the root to a leaf is transformed into a
rule by conjoining the tests along the path to form the antecedent
part and taking the leaf’s class as the class prediction. Therefore,
in a DT classifier, a set of rules for the different classes is derived
from input features of the training data and is then used to classify a new input vector [31]. For optimal performance of the DT,
the most suitable split criterion (in {Gini, twoing, deviance})
and the transformation function (tf) for the posterior probabilities (scores) should be defined. In this study, the following
tfs were investigated for scores x: {x, 2x − 1, log(x/(1 − x)),
“set score for the class with the largest score to 1, and scores
for all other classes to 0,” “set score for the class with the
largest score to 1, and scores for all other classes to −1”,
1/(1 + e∧ (−x)), 1/(1 + e∧ (−2x)), 2/(1 + e∧ (−x)) − 1, sign
of x}.
DA is a classification method, which assumes that different
classes generate data based on different Gaussian distributions.
The DA classifier is trained with a fitting function, which estimates the parameters of a Gaussian distribution for each class,

GASTOUNIOTI et al.: NOVEL COMPUTERIZED TOOL TO STRATIFY RISK IN CA USING KINEMATIC FEATURES OF THE ARTERIAL WALL

while a new vector is classified by finding the class with the
lowest misclassification cost. In DA, the only parameter which
needs to be defined is the type of DA, i.e., linear, quadratic,
diagonal linear, or diagonal quadratic DA [32].

1141

TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF 15 OPTIMIZED CAD SCHEMES, GENERATED
BY COMBINING THREE FEATURE-SELECTION METHODS WITH FIVE
CLASSIFIERS, USING KINEMATIC FEATURES OF THE ARTERIAL WALL
Classifier Feature selection

SVM

PNN

kNN

DT

DA

FDR
WRS
PCA

0.88
0.80
0.70

0.75
0.64
0.57

0.82
0.75
0.73

0.75
0.68
0.80

0.71
0.68
0.77

D. Optimization and Benchmarking
The designed CAD schemes were implemented in MATLAB
(The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA), using the Bioinformatics and the Statistics Toolboxes. Subsequently, they were fed
with the set of kinematic features, i.e., vectors of 1236 motionbased indices for 56 patients, and were optimized in terms of
the corresponding design parameterization, i.e., the parameters
of both the feature-selection and the classification modules. The
optimization step was necessary to reveal the full potential of
motion-based CAD schemes. The CAD performance was measured in terms of classification accuracy, i.e., percentage of correctly classified cases, using leave-one-out cross validation. In
leave-one-out, a single observation (patient) is used as the testing sample, and the remaining observations compose the training dataset; this is repeated such that each observation is used
once as the testing sample. Leave-one-out is a popular resampling technique for performance evaluation for classification
schemes, because it preserves unbiased results for small-sized
samples [33].
The potential of the optimal motion-based CAD scheme was
further validated with the following two-step process. First, the
corresponding CAD performance was compared with the optimal performance, which can be achieved by a texture-based
CAD scheme in the same dataset. To this end, the designed
CAD schemes were fed with vectors of 252 textural features
for 56 patients and the optimal texture-based CAD scheme was
identified with the same aforementioned optimization process.
In a second step, the performance of the optimal motionbased CAD scheme was measured using eight different crossvalidation strategies, namely tenfold, hold-out, repeated random
subsampling with either overlapping (resub1) or nonoverlapping
(resub2) training and testing sets in both stratified and nonstratified versions [33]. Stratified strategies produce more valid conclusions on the generalization performance of the classifier than
nonstratified ones, because stratification assures that the training dataset is reasonably representative. In this step, the CAD
performance was measured in terms of classification accuracy,
sensitivity (percentage of correctly classified symptomatic patients as symptomatic), and specificity (percentage of correctly
classified asymptomatic patients as asymptomatic). The area
under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was
also used to measure the CAD performance; the ROC curve describes the inherent discrimination capacity of the CAD scheme
and the area under the ROC curve (auc) ranges from 0.5 (random
discriminatory accuracy, which represent no realistic classifier)
to 1.0 (perfect discriminatory accuracy) [34].
III. RESULTS
Table III presents the classification accuracy that was
achieved by each motion-based CAD scheme after having been
optimized. FDR generally yielded higher accuracy values than

Boldface indicates maximum accuracy.

Fig. 3. Computing time, in s, of three feature selection methods (left axis) and
five classifiers (right axis) for different dataset sizes (i.e., # of patients).

TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF 15 OPTIMIZED CAD SCHEMES, GENERATED
BY COMBINING THREE FEATURE-SELECTION METHODS WITH FIVE
CLASSIFIERS, USING TEXTURAL FEATURES OF THE ARTERIAL WALL
Classifier Feature selection

SVM

PNN

kNN

DT

DA

FDR
WRS
PCA

0.66
0.71
0.63

0.63
0.64
0.57

0.70
0.71
0.66

0.73
0.71
0.80

0.68
0.71
0.64

Boldface indicates maximum accuracy.

other feature-selection methodologies, while SVM and kNN
were the most effective classifiers. These CAD components
were also computationally efficient (see Fig. 3). Highest classification accuracy (88%) was achieved by the combination of
FDR (with m = 23) with an SVM classifier (with s = 5.73).
In an attempt to also assess the computational cost in cases of
medium- and large-scale clinical studies, the CAD components
were applied to synthetic datasets consisting of 1236 motionbased indices for 50–300 patients. According to the results (see
Fig. 3), the presented CAD schemes would be sufficiently efficient in such cases.
Table IV presents similar results for texture-based CAD
schemes. In this case, the DT classifier yielded higher classification performances than other classifiers, while the WRS
was the most effective feature-selection methodology. The optimal performance (80%) was achieved by the combination of
the PCA (with thr = 0.017) with the DT classifier (with Gini
as split criterion and tf = “set score for the class with the largest
score to 1, and scores for all other classes to 0”).

1142

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 4. Bar charts for the classification accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and
auc, when eight different stratified or nonstratified cross-validation strategies
were applied to the optimal motion-based CAD scheme.

Based on the comparison of Tables III and IV, it was concluded that the incorporation of kinematic features in CAD was
superior to texture-based CAD, in terms of classification performance. The bar charts of Fig. 4 summarize the results from
the CAD performance evaluation of the optimal motion-based
CAD scheme, using eight different cross-validation techniques.
In all cases, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and auc were higher
than 0.74, 0.67, 0.83, and 0.70, respectively. However, if only
the stratified cross-validation methods are considered, the minimum accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC values were
higher (0.88, 0.82, 0.96, and 0.90, respectively). At this point,
it is also worth mentioning that the optimal motion-based CAD
scheme reached classification accuracy of 96%, when it was
applied separately to the patients of each hospital.
Table V lists the 23 kinematic features, which are used in the
optimal motion-based CAD scheme. For each feature, the index
(according to the encoding of Table II), a short description, the
mean values in the two patient groups (i.e., symptomatic and
asymptomatic groups), and the FDR between the two patient
groups are presented. Considering the descriptions of the features, this CAD scheme incorporates kinematic indices, which
represent motion properties of AWL, PTS, and the whole plaque
region, as well as strain indices, which express local deformations in PWL and the relative longitudinal movement between
PTS and the healthy part of the wall adjacent to the plaque
(PWL or AWL). Generally, compared with asymptomatic patients, symptomatic ones were found to have higher radial and
lower longitudinal movements of AWL. Moreover, the same
patient group displayed higher inhomogeneity in radial and longitudinal movements within PTS; the same was observed for
radial and longitudinal movements within the plaque region. In
addition, it was found that, in symptomatic patients, local deformations in the longitudinal direction both between different
regions of PWL and between PTS and PWL/AWL increased
with respect to asymptomatic subjects.
IV. DISCUSSION
Valid risk stratification in CA is a crucial public health issue
toward enhanced patient safety and low socioeconomic burden

of the disease. Motivated by recent findings, which suggested
that motion-based markers are able to contribute to objective
characterization of atherosclerotic plaques in the carotid artery
[21], this study went one step further by thoroughly investigating
that the CAD scheme which reveals the full potential of motion
analysis in risk stratification in CA. The novelty of this work
lies not only in the incorporation of motion analysis in CAD
tools for CA, which has not been attempted in related published
work (see Table I), but also in the framework which was used to
identify and evaluate the optimal motion-based CAD scheme.
The special features of this framework, which are hereafter
described, enhance validity and they limit bias in the generated
conclusions on the CAD performance. First, a medium-sized,
yet carefully designed, balanced, and challenging, dataset was
used; the study group consisted of two equal-sized subsets of
patients from two different hospitals. Moreover, a wide variety
of kinematic features of the plaque and healthy parts of the arterial wall adjacent to plaque were investigated. In addition, in an
attempt to consider intra-ROI variability of motion properties
and to avoid invalid results due to outliers, motion-based measurements were repeated for multiple targets, or pairs of targets,
of the selected ROIs. From the CAD aspect, the optimal CAD
scheme was selected among 15 alternatives, which were first
systematically optimized for the particular clinical application in
terms of their design parameterization. The most effective CAD
tool was further evaluated using several cross-validation techniques, which are suitable for relatively small datasets. Finally,
to provide objective comparisons with state-of-the-art work in
the field, the optimal motion-based CAD scheme was benchmarked against the texture-based CAD performance.
Among 15 candidate CAD schemes, a combination of the
SVM classifier and the FDR feature-selection tool was revealed
as the optimal choice for motion-based plaque classification.
In this case, classification accuracy reached 88%, which was
maintained in all the evaluation tests using different stratified
cross-validation strategies (see Fig. 4). The same CAD scheme
achieved 96% classification accuracy when applied separately
to the patient data of each hospital. This is considered a reasonable finding, as US examination by the same operator using the
same US equipment reduces heterogeneity in image recordings
for cases with similar kinematic features of the arterial wall; in
this case, motion analysis, which is affected by US image quality [21], [25], reveals potential differences between subgroups
of patients even on relatively small datasets. However, larger
datasets may be necessary to maximize the CAD performance
and maintain high classification accuracy for multisource image
recordings.
Based on the above, and considering that none of the related
studies (see Table I) has tested CAD schemes on multisource
image recordings, direct comparisons can be performed only for
the single-source CAD performance (96%). These comparisons
place the proposed CAD scheme among the most effective ones,
while the multisource CAD performance (88%) also falls within
the range of previously published results, thereby revealing the
potential of motion analysis in the field. This conclusion is
further reinforced if we consider that the particular CAD scheme

GASTOUNIOTI et al.: NOVEL COMPUTERIZED TOOL TO STRATIFY RISK IN CA USING KINEMATIC FEATURES OF THE ARTERIAL WALL

1143

TABLE V
LIST OF KINEMATIC FEATURES WHICH ARE INCORPORATED IN THE OPTIMAL MOTION-BASED CAD SCHEME
Index

S

AS

FDR

Index

Description

S

AS

FDR

0.222

0.102

0.244

F197

0.303

0.421

0.188

0.114
−0.367

0.025
−0.172

0.347
0.276

F214
F289

0.111
0.926

0.027
0.675

0.312
0.192

–0.036

0.265

0.177

F295

Minimum of std of longitudinal
velocity
Median of std of radial velocity
Maximum of D-T-S displacement
angle
Minimum of absolute longitudinal
D-T-S displacement

0.033

0.059

0.270

Kurtosis of radial motion
amplitude

3.259

2.751

0.205

F426

Skewness of longitudinal motion
amplitude

0.567

0.185

0.187

F413

Kurtosis of total motion amplitude

3.336

2.719

0.228

F461

0.771

0.470

0.175

F419

Skewness of amplitude angle

0.266

0.604

0.192

F462

Skewness of absolute radial
D-T-S displacement
Kurtosis of absolute D-T-S radial
displacement

3.519

2.746

0.240

Kurtosis of std of longitudinal
velocity
Kurtosis of total D-T-S
displacement
Kurtosis of absolute D-T-S
longitudinal displacement

3.954

3.230

0.195

F1062

0.898

0.912

0.192

3.762

2.782

0.283

F1070

0.831

0.842

0.186

4.093

3.148

0.247

F1074

Correlation (0°) of radial D-T-S
displacement
Correlation (90°) of radial D-T-S
displacement
Correlation (135°) of radial D-T-S
displacement

0.817

0.820.

0.195

12.710

21.141

0.223

F1150

Skewness of LSI

–2.043

–3.519

0.236

2.541

1.442

0.287

over targets of AWL
F163
F165
F176
F181
over targets of PTS
F406

over targets of plaque region
F665
F749
F793

Description

Maximum of median radial
velocity
Median of median radial velocity
Minimum of median velocity
angle
Skewness of median velocity
angle

over pairs of targets of PWL
F1151
Kurtosis of LSI
over pairs of targets of PTS and PWL/AWL
F1214
Skewness of LSI

For Each Feature, the Index (according to the encoding of Table II), a Short Description, the Mean Values for Symptomatic (S) and Asymptomatic (AS) Patients, and the Fisher
Discriminant Ratio (FDR) Between the Two Groups of Patients are Presented.
std: standard deviation; D-T-S: diastole-to-systole; PWL: posterior wall-lumen, AWL: anterior wall-lumen; PTS: plaque top surface; LSI: longitudinal strain.

also outperformed the texture-based CAD performance in the
same dataset.
With SVM having been particularly popular in studies toward
US-image-based characterization of atherosclerotic plaques, the
results of Table III confirmed the suitability of this classifier to
the development of CAD tools for CA. However, it is worth
mentioning that, for textural features, the CAD performance was
maximized by a CAD scheme which relied on the combination
of the DT classifier with PCA. Given that DT [14] and PCA [12],
[13] have been used in a limited number of texture-based CAD
tools for CA and their combination has not been investigated,
this finding would be very useful in the design of future studies
on texture-based classification of atherosclerotic plaques.
The optimal motion-based CAD scheme incorporates 23
kinematic and strain features which are related with motion
properties of AWL, PWL, PTS, and the whole plaque region, as
well as relative movements between PTS and the healthy part of
the wall adjacent to the plaque. Although different indices were
identified as potential risk markers in the latest authors’ works
where only the patients from the St. Mary’s [21] or the Attikon
hospital were considered [22]; all studies revealed that the mobility features of the atherosclerotic lesion itself and healthy
parts of the wall close to the lesion are equally important in
risk stratification in the disease. Based on these results, plaque
vulnerability seems to be significantly affected by dynamic phenomena which occur in a wide region around the atherosclerotic
lesion. In this study, these dynamic phenomena were captured
in 2-D motion analysis. Although it has been recently suggested
that 2-D motion carries sufficient information for characterizing

the arterial wall [21], [22], [35], investigating the CAD contribution of out-of-plane motion constitutes an interesting future
perspective.
The performance of the proposed motion-based CAD scheme
provides an encouraging feedback on the role of kinematic features of the arterial wall in the therapeutic decision for CA and
it is expected to motivate the incorporation of motion analysis
in future-related studies designing CAD tools for the disease.
Inspired by recent studies on cerebral aneurysms [36], [37], it
would also be interesting to combine image-based motion analysis with computational fluid dynamics in an attempt to gain
insight in the biomechanical behavior of vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions. Kinematic features seem to have the potential to
contribute to valid clinical assessment of the disease phenotype, which remains to be proved by future retrospective and
prospective studies on enriched datasets with frequent patient
follow-ups.
V. CONCLUSION
This study revealed the potential of motion analysis in risk
stratification in CA, by proposing a novel CAD scheme, which
is based on kinematic features to assist the identification of
vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions. The proposed CAD scheme
is a combination of an FDR feature-selection module with an
SVM classifier and it achieved 88% classification accuracy in
a challenging dataset consisting of patients from two different
hospitals. The motion-based CAD performance was thoroughly
evaluated using multiple cross-validation techniques and it was
also found to be superior to texture-based characterization of

1144

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

atherosclerotic plaques in the same dataset. Based on the above,
motion analysis seems to have a valuable role in the field of
image-driven CAD for CA and should be included in future
attempts toward personalized and objective diagnosis for the
disease.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the expert clinicians of the
Irvine Laboratory, St. Mary’s Hospital of U.K. (Prof. A. N. Nicolaides), and Dr. C. Gkekas, Dr. J. D. Kakisis, and Dr. A. Koulia
from the Department of Vascular Surgery, Attikon University
General Hospital of Greece for their valuable contribution in
collecting the US image data. The authors would also like to
thank N. Tsiaparas for his help on texture analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] D. R. Labarthe, Epidemiology and Prevention Of Cardiovascular Diseases: A Global Challenge. Boston, MA, USA: Jones & Bartlett Learning,
2011.
[2] M. Nichols, N. Townsend, R. Luengo-Fernandez, J. Leal, P. Scarborough, and M. Rayner, “European cardiovascular disease statistics (2012),”
Eur. Heart Netw. Eur. Soc. Cardiol., Brussels, European Society of
Cardiology, Sophia Antipolis. Available: http://www.escardio.org/about/
Documents/EU-cardiovascular-disease-statistics-2012.pdf
[3] V. L. Roger, A. S. Go, D. M. Lloyd-Jones, E. J. Benjamin, J. D. Berry, W.
B. Borden, D. M. Bravata, S. Dai, E. S. Ford, C. S. Fox, H. J. Fullerton,
C. Gillespie, S. M. Hailpern, J. A. Heit, V. J. Howard, B. M. Kissela, S.
J. Kittner, D. T. Lackland, J. H. Lichtman, L. D. Lisabeth, D. M. Makus,
G. M. Marcus, A. Marelli, D. B. Matchar, C. S. Moy, D. Mozaffarian,
M. E. Mussolino, G. Nichol, N. P. Paynter, E. Z. Soliman, P. D. Sorlie,
N. Sotoodehnia, T. N. Turan, S. S. Virani, N. D. Wong, D. Woo, and M.
B. Turner, “Heart disease and stroke statistics—2012 update. A report
from the American Heart Association,” Circulation, vol. 125, no. 1, pp.
e2–e220, 2012.
[4] C. D. Mathers and D. Loncar, “Projections of global mortality and burden
of disease from 2002 to 2030,” PLoS Med., vol. 3, no. 11, p. e442, 2006.
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17132052
[5] M. Tendera, V. Aboyans, M. L. Bartelink, I. Baumgartner, D. Clément, J.
P. Collet, A. Cremonesi, M. De Carlo, R. Erbel, F. G. Fowkes, M. Heras, S.
Kownator, E. Minar, J. Ostergren, D. Poldermans, V. Riambau, M. Roffi, J.
Röther, H. Sievert, M. van Sambeek, and T. Zeller, “ESC Guidelines on the
diagnosis and treatment of peripheral artery diseases: Document covering
atherosclerotic disease of extracranial carotid and vertebral, mesenteric,
renal, upper and lower extremity arteries: The task force on the diagnosis
and treatment of peripheral artery diseases of the European Society of
Cardiology,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 32, no. 22, pp. 2851–2906, 2011.
[6] A. R. Naylor, “Time to rethink management strategies in asymptomatic
carotid artery disease,” Nature Rev. Cardiol., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 116–124,
2011.
[7] S. Golemati, A. Gastounioti, and K. S. Nikita, “Toward novel noninvasive and low-cost markers for predicting strokes in asymptomatic carotid
atherosclerosis: The role of ultrasound image analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 652–658, Mar. 2013.
[8] K. S. Nikita, “Atherosclerosis: The evolving role of vascular image analysis,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1–3, 2013.
[9] C. I. Christodoulou, C. S. Pattichis, M. Pantziaris, and A. N. Nicolaides,
“Texture-based classification of atherosclerotic carotid plaques,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 902–912, Jul. 2003.
[10] N. N. Tsiaparas, S. Golemati, I. Andreadis, J. S. Stoitsis, I. Valavanis,
and K. S. Nikita, “Comparison of multiresolution features for texture
classification of carotid atherosclerosis from B-mode ultrasound,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 130–137, Jan. 2011.
[11] S. Mougiakakou, S. Golemati, I. Gousias, A. N. Nicolaides, and K. S.
Nikita, “Computer-aided diagnosis of carotid atherosclerosis based on ultrasound image statistics, Laws’ texture and neural networks,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 26–36, 2007.
[12] E. C. Kyriacou, C. S. Pattichis, M. A. Karaolis, C. P. Loizou, C. I.
Christodoulou, M. S. Pattichis, S. Kakkos, and A. Nicolaides, “An integrated system for assessing stroke risk,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 43–50, Sep.–Oct. 2007.

[13] E. Kyriacou, M. S. Pattichis, C. S. Pattichis, A. Mavrommatis,
C. I. Christodoulou, S. Kakkos, and A. Nicolaides, “Classification of atherosclerotic carotid plaques using morphological analysis on ultrasound images,” Appl. Intell., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 3–23,
2009.
[14] U. R. Acharya, S. V. Sree, M. M. R. Krishnan, F. Molinari, L. Saba, S. Y. S.
Ho, A. T. Ahuja, S. C. Ho, A. Nicolaides, and J. S. Suri, “Atherosclerotic
risk stratification strategy for carotid arteries using texture-based features,”
Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 899–915, 2012.
[15] N. N. Tsiaparas, S. Golemati, I. Andreadis, J. Stoitsis, I. Valavanis, and K.
S. Nikita, “Assessment of carotid atherosclerosis from B-mode ultrasound
images using directional multiscale texture features,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 23, p. 114004, 2012. Available: http://iopscience.iop.org/09570233/23/11/114004/
[16] U. R. Acharya, O. Faust, S. V. Sree, F. Molinari, L. Saba, and A. Nicolaides,
“An accurate and generalised approach to plaque characterization in 346
carotid US scans,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1045–
1053, Apr. 2012.
[17] U. R. Acharya, O. Faust, V. Sree S., A. P. Alvin, G. Krishnamurthi,
J. C. Seabra, J. Sanches, and J. S. Suri, “Understanding symptomatology of atherosclerotic plaque by image-based tissue characterization,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 66–75,
2013.
[18] M. G. Tsipouras, T. P. Exarchos, D. I. Fotiadis, A. P. Kotsia, K. V. Naka,
and L. K. Michalis, “Automated diagnosis of coronary artery disease based
on data mining and fuzzy modeling,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 447–458, Jul. 2008.
[19] C. Zhou, H. P. Chan, B. Sahiner, L. M. Hadjiiski, A. Chughtai, S. Patel, J.
Wei, P. N. Cascade, and E. A. Kazerooni, “Computer-aided detection of
pulmonary embolism in computed tomographic pulmonary angiography
(CTPA): Performance evaluation with independent data sets,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 3385–3396, 2009.
[20] M. McCormick, T. Varghese, X. Wang, C. Mitchell, M. A. Kliewer,
and R. J. Dempsey, “Methods for robust in vivo strain estimation in
the carotid artery,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 22, pp. 7329–7353,
2012.
[21] A. Gastounioti, S. Golemati, J. S. Stoitsis, and K. S. Nikita, “Adaptive
block matching methods for carotid artery wall motion estimation from
B-mode ultrasound: In silico evaluation & in vivo application,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 58, no. 24, pp. 8647–8661, 2013.
[22] A. Gastounioti, V. Kolias, S. Golemati, N. N. Tsiaparas, A. Matsakou, J.
S. Stoitsis, N. P. E. Kadoglou, C. Gkekas, J. D. Kakisis, C. D. Liapis, P.
Karakitsos, I. Sarafis, P. Angelidis, and K. S. Nikita, “CAROTID—A webbased platform for optimal personalized management of atherosclerotic
patients,” Comput. Method Programs Biomed., vol. 114, no. 2, pp. 183–
193, 2014.
[23] I. M. Graf, F. H. B. M. Schreuder, J. M. Hameleers, W. H. Mess, R.
S. Reneman, and A. P. G. Hoeks, “Wall irregularity rather than intimamedia thickness is associated with nearby atherosclerosis,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 955–961, 2009.
[24] A. Gastounioti, S. Golemati, and K. S. Nikita, “Computerized analysis
of ultrasound images: Potential associations between texture and motion
properties of the diseased arterial wall,” presented at the IEEE Int. Ultrasonics Symp., Dresden, Germany, 2012.
[25] A. Gastounioti, S. Golemati, J. Stoitsis, and K. S. Nikita, “Comparison of
Kalman-filter-based approaches for block matching in arterial wall motion
analysis from B-mode ultrasound,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 22, no. 11, p.
9, 2011. Available: http://iopscience.iop.org/0957-0233/22/11/114008
[26] S. Golemati, J. S. Stoitsis, A. Gastounioti, A. C. Dimopoulos, V. Koropouli, and K. S. Nikita, “Comparison of block matching and differential
methods for motion analysis of the carotid artery wall from ultrasound
images,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 852–858,
Sep. 2012.
[27] J. C. Burges, “A tutorial on support vector machines for pattern recognition,” Data Min. Knowl. Disc., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–43, 1998.
[28] L. Shutao, J. T. Kwok, H. Zhu, and Y. Wang, “Texture classification using
support vector machines,” Pattern Recog., vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 2883–2893,
2003.
[29] D. F. Specht, “Probabilistic neural networks,” J Neural Netw., vol. 3, pp.
109–118, 1990.
[30] J. Han, M. Kamber, and J. Pei, Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques.
3rd ed. Waltham, MA, USA: Elsevier, 2012.
[31] J. R. Quinlan, “Induction of decision trees,” Machine Learning. vol. 1,
Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer, 1986, no. 1, pp. 81–106.
[32] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. H. Stork, Pattern Classification. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2000.

GASTOUNIOTI et al.: NOVEL COMPUTERIZED TOOL TO STRATIFY RISK IN CA USING KINEMATIC FEATURES OF THE ARTERIAL WALL

[33] P. Refaeilzadeh, L. Tang, and H. Liu, “Cross-Validation,” Encyclopedia of
Database Systems. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 532–538.
[34] T. Fawcett, “ROC graphs: Notes and practical considerations for data
mining researchers,” HP Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, USA, Tech. Rep.
HPL-2003–2004, 2003.
[35] G. Zahnd, L. Boussel, A. Marion, M. Durand, P. Moulin, A. Serusclat, and
D. Vray, “Measurement of two-dimensional movement parameters of the
carotid artery wall for early detection of arteriosclerosis: A preliminary
clinical study,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1421–1429,
2011.
[36] T. Passerini, L. M. Sangalli, S. Vantini, M. Piccinelli, S. Bacigaluppi, L.
Antiga, E. Boccardi, P. Secchi, and A. Veneziani, “An integrated statistical
investigation of internal carotid arteries of patients affected by cerebral
aneurysms,” Cardiovascular Eng. Technol., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 26–40, 2012.
[37] L. M. Sangalli, P. Secchi, S. Vantini, and A. Veneziani, “A case study in
exploratory functional data analysis: Geometrical features of the internal
carotid artery,” J. Am. Statist. Assoc., vol. 104, no. 485, pp. 37–48, 2009.

Aimilia Gastounioti (M’10) received the Diploma
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA),
Athens, Greece, in 2009, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Biomedical Simulations and Imaging Laboratory, NTUA.
She has (co-)authored 17 papers in scientific
journals and international conferences and one book
chapter. She has also worked as a Researcher in two
National and two European R&D projects on biomedical engineering. Her current research interests include medical image processing and analysis, and machine learning toward
computer-aided clinical diagnosis.
Since 2012, Ms. Gastounioti has been a Scientific Reviewer of the IEEE
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, the Wiley-Scanning, and
the Elsevier-Ultrasonics, as well as in various international scientific conferences. She has participated at the organizing committees of three international
scientific conferences. She is a Member of the Technical Chamber of Greece.

Stavros Makrodimitris was born in Athens, Greece,
in 1991. He received the Diploma degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Athens, Greece,
in 2013. He is currently working toward the Master’s
degree program on bioinformatics at the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, and
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Mr. Makrodimitris is a Member of the Technical
Chamber of Greece.

Spyretta Golemati (M’97) received the Diploma degree in mechanical engineering from the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Athens,
Greece, in 1994, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in bioengineering from Imperial College of Science, Technology, and Medicine, University of London,
London, U.K., in 1995 and 2000, respectively.
She was a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, NTUA. She is currently a Lecturer in Department of Biomedical
Engineering, National Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens. Her research
interests include ultrasound imaging and signal analysis, arterial biomechanics,
and respiratory mechanics. She has coauthored 26 papers in international scientific journals, seven book chapters, and 40 papers in international conference
proceedings. She is an Associate Editor in Elsevier’s Ultrasonics journal.

1145

Nikolaos P. E. Kadoglou received the Diploma degree from the Medical School,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, in 2000, and the
Master of Science degree in exercise and health from the Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, in 2004. He received the Ph.D. degree from the Medical School,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece, in 2008, and the second Ph.D. degree
from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, in 2013, and the Postdoctoral
degree from the Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens, Athens,
Greece, in 2013.
He completed the specialty training in Cardiology in 2013 and since then
he has been working as an Attending Cardiologist in the Department of Vascular Surgery, Attikon University Hospital of Athens, Athens, Greece, and in
private office. He has (co-)authored 55 papers in scientific journals with impact
factor and numerous citations (725, h-index 14). He has performed more than
100 oral announcements and posters presentations in international and national
congresses and has awarded three grants for postgraduate studies. He has participated as a Principal Investigator in eight international research projects.
Christos D. Liapis received the Diploma degree, in
1972 and the Ph.D. degree, in 1982 from the Medical
School of Athens, Athens, Greece.
He is currently the Head of the Department of
Vascular Surgery, Athens University Medical School,
Athens, Greece, and is involved in several ongoing
national and international studies. His 35-year career
in vascular surgery spans major academic and clinical
posts from the U.S. to Europe. During his term as the
Secretary-General of the UEMS Division and Board
of Vascular Surgery from 1999 to 2004, he played a
key role in the Board Examinations, European Vascular CME and the establishment of Vascular Surgery as an independent Specialty Section in Europe. He
served as the President of the European Society of Vascular Surgery from 2004
to 2005. He is currently the President of the International Society for Vascular
Surgeons. He has written more than 300 articles and a number of books.
Konstantina S. Nikita (M’96–SM’00) received the
Diploma degree in electrical engineering and the
Ph.D. degree from the National Technical University
of Athens (NTUA), Athens, Greece, and the M.D. degree from the Medical School, University of Athens,
Athens, Greece.
Since 2005, she has been a Professor at the School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NTUA. She
has also served as the Deputy Head of the School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering of the NTUA.
She has authored or co-authored 176 papers in refereed international journals and chapters in books, and more than 300 papers
in international conference proceedings. She is the Editor of four books in English, and author of two books in Greek. She holds two patents. She has been
the Technical Manager of several European and National R&D projects. Her
current research interests include biological effects and medical applications of
radiofrequency electromagnetic fields, biomedical telemetry, biomedical signal
and image processing and analysis, simulation of physiological systems, and
biomedical informatics.
Dr. Nikita has been the Honorary Chair/Chair of the program/organizing
committee of several international conferences and she has served as the
Keynote/Invited Speaker at international conferences, symposia and workshops
organized by NATO, WHO, ICNIRP, IEEE, URSI, COMCON, PIERS, etc. She
has been the advisor of 22 completed Ph.D. theses, several of which have received various awards.
She is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, the IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, the
Wiley-Bioelectromagnetics, the Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing, and a Guest Editor of several international journals. She
has received various honors/awards, among which, the Bodossakis Foundation
Academic Prize (2003) for exceptional achievements in “Theory and Applications of Information Technology in Medicine.” She has been a member of the
Board of Directors of the Atomic Energy Commission, of the Hellenic National
Academic Recognition and Information Center, and of the Hellenic National
Council of Research and Technology. She is a member of the Hellenic National
Ethics Committee, a Founding Fellow of the European Association of Medical
and Biological Engineering and Science, a member of the Technical Chamber
of Greece and of the Athens Medical Association. She is also the Founding
Chair and the Ambassador of the IEEE-Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, Greece chapter and the Vice Chair of the IEEE Greece Section.

