648

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Fast and Adaptive Detection of Pulmonary Nodules
in Thoracic CT Images Using a Hierarchical
Vector Quantization Scheme
Hao Han, Lihong Li, Senior Member, IEEE, Fangfang Han, Bowen Song, William Moore,
and Zhengrong Liang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Computer-aided detection (CADe) of pulmonary nodules is critical to assisting radiologists in early identification of
lung cancer from computed tomography (CT) scans. This paper
proposes a novel CADe system based on a hierarchical vector quantization (VQ) scheme. Compared with the commonly-used simple
thresholding approach, the high-level VQ yields a more accurate
segmentation of the lungs from the chest volume. In identifying
initial nodule candidates (INCs) within the lungs, the low-level
VQ proves to be effective for INCs detection and segmentation, as
well as computationally efficient compared to existing approaches.
False-positive (FP) reduction is conducted via rule-based filtering
operations in combination with a feature-based support vector machine classifier. The proposed system was validated on 205 patient
cases from the publically available online Lung Image Database
Consortium database, with each case having at least one juxtapleural nodule annotation. Experimental results demonstrated that
our CADe system obtained an overall sensitivity of 82.7% at a
specificity of 4 FPs/scan. Especially for the performance on juxtapleural nodules, we observed 89.2% sensitivity at 4.14 FPs/scan.
With respect to comparable CADe systems, the proposed system
shows outperformance and demonstrates its potential for fast and
adaptive detection of pulmonary nodules via CT imaging.
Index Terms—Computer-aided detection (CADe), computed tomography (CT) imaging, false positive (FP) reduction, lung nodules, vector quantization (VQ).

I. INTRODUCTION
CCORDING to the up-to-date statistics from the American Cancer Society [1], lung cancer is the leading cause of
cancer-related deaths with over 159 000 deaths estimated for the
United States alone in 2013, and the overall five-year survival
rate for lung cancer is merely 16%. The survival rate increases
to 52% if it is localized, and decreases to 4% if it has metastasized. Therefore, to detect lung cancer at earlier stages is of

A

Manuscript received December 12, 2013; revised April 27, 2014; accepted
May 23, 2014. Date of publication June 4, 2014; date of current version March
2, 2015. This work was supported in part by the NIH/NCI under Grants
#CA082402 and #CA143111. (Corresponding author: Zhengrong Liang.)
H. Han, B. Song, W. Moore, and Z. Liang are with the Department
of Radiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794 USA
(e-mail: haohan@mil.sunysb.edu; bowen@mil.sunysb.edu; william.moore@
stonybrookmedicine.edu; Jerome.Liang@stonybrookmedicine.edu).
L. Li is with the Department of Engineering Science and Physics, College
of Staten Island of The City University of New York, Staten Island, NY 10314
USA (e-mail: lihong.li@csi.cuny.edu).
F. Han is with the Northeastern University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110819,
China (e-mail: neuhanfangfang@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2328870

great importance [2], and computer-aided detection (CADe) in
supplement to radiologists’ diagnosis has become a promising
tool to serve such purposes [3].
Detection of pulmonary nodules has a crucial effect on the
diagnosis of lung cancer, but the detection is a nontrivial task,
not only because the appearance of pulmonary nodules varies
in a wide range, but also because nodule densities have low
contrast against adjacent vessel segments and other lung tissues.
Computed tomography (CT) has been shown as the most popular
imaging modality for nodule detection [2], [4], because it has
the ability to provide reliable image textures for the detection of
small nodules. The development of lung nodule CADe systems
using CT imaging modality has made good progress over the
past decade [5], [6]. Generally, such CADe systems consist of
three stages: 1) image preprocessing, 2) initial nodule candidates
(INCs) identification, and 3) false positive (FP) reduction of the
INCs with preservation of the true positives (TPs).
In the preprocessing stage, the system aims to largely reduce
the search space to the lungs, where a segmentation of the lungs
from the entire chest volume is usually required. Because of
the high image contrast between lung fields and the surrounding body tissue, image intensity-based simple thresholding is
effective, and is currently the most commonly used technique
for lung segmentation [7], [8]. However, the determination of
an accurate threshold is greatly affected by image acquisition
protocols, scanner types, as well as the inhomogeneity of intensities in the lung region, especially toward the segmentation of
pathological lungs with severe pathologies [9], [10]. This paper proposes an adaptive solution to mitigate the difficulty of
thresholding-based method in lung segmentation.
After defining the search space (i.e., the lung volume), INCs
detection is the next step to build a CADe system. Various
INCs detection techniques have been extensively studied in recent years, such as multiple thresholding [11], [12], nodule enhancement filtering [13], [14], mathematical morphology [15],
[16], and genetic algorithm template matching [17], [18], among
many others. The most commonly used multiple thresholding
approach aims to find connected components of similar image
gray-values. Though intensity-based thresholding methods are
computationally cheaper than other pattern-recognition techniques for the detection of INCs, they also suffer considerable
drawbacks. For example, it is difficult to adaptively determine
multiple thresholds, because pulmonary nodules with a wide intensity range are embedded in an inhomogeneous parenchyma
background. On the other hand, pattern-recognition techniques

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HAN et al.: FAST AND ADAPTIVE DETECTION OF PULMONARY NODULES IN THORACIC CT IMAGES

are complicated and usually computational intensive. This paper
proposes an efficient means which shares the adaptive natures of
pattern-recognition techniques and the simplicity of intensitybased thresholding methods.
Sufficient detection power for nodule candidates is inevitably
accompanied by many (obvious) FPs. A rule-based filtering operation [17], [19], [20] is often employed to cheaply and drastically reduce the number of obvious FPs, so that their influence
on the computationally more expensive learning process can
be eliminated. In general, FP reduction using machine learning
has been extensively studied in the literature. Compared with
unsupervised learning that aims to find hidden structures in unlabeled data, supervised learning, which aims to infer a function
from labeled training data, is more frequently used to design a
CADe system. The rules learned from the training dataset can
be applied to the differentiation between nodules and nonnodules in the test dataset. A number of supervised FP reduction
techniques have been reported for the characterization of INCs,
such as linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [11], [17], artificial
neural network (ANN) [16], [21]–[23], and support vector machine (SVM) [14], [19], [20]. This paper takes the advantages
of both the rule-based filtering operation and the SVM learning
for FP reduction. Expert rules are learned from prior knowledge
of true nodules annotated by the radiologists, while the classification rule for SVM is learned from two-dimensional (2-D)
and three-dimensional (3-D) features extracted from the labeled
subset.
Inspired by our previous work [24], [25], we have proposed
a hierarchical vector quantization (VQ) approach to address the
preprocessing and INCs detection issues in an adaptive manner, aiming to overcome the drawbacks of global thresholding
methods. Compared with the existing approaches, the hierarchical VQ can be an alternative with either comparable detection
performance and less computational cost, or comparable cost
and better detection performance.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
describes the details of each module employed in the proposed
CADe system. Section III reports the experimental outcomes
on validating the proposed CADe system using the largest publicly available database built by the Lung Image Database Consortium (LIDC) and the Image Database Resource Initiative
(LIDC–IDRI). Section IV discusses the experimental results,
the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed CADe system, as well as the future work to improve the CADe system.
Section V draws conclusions of this study.
II. METHODS
This section will provide details of the proposed CADe system for lung nodules. The top-level block diagram of the proposed CADe system is depicted in Fig. 1. In the preprocessor
block, the chest volume is extracted from the field-of-view of the
image volume by simple thresholding (where the outside of the
chest volume does not have anatomical structures). In the detector block, the two lungs are first separated from their surrounding
anatomical structures via high level VQ and a connected component analysis. In order to include juxta-pleural nodules (i.e.,

649

Fig. 1. Top-level block diagram of the proposed CADe system for pulmonary
nodules.

nodules grow near, or originate from the parenchyma wall), the
initial lung mask is refined by a morphological closing operation. Then, low-level VQ is employed to identify and segment
the INCs within the extracted lung volume. In the classifier
block, the obvious FPs are first excluded from the INCs via
rule-based filtering operations, and then the SVM classifier is
trained to further separate nodules from nonnodules based on the
2-D and 3-D features of the INCs. More details on the proposed
CADe system are given by the following sections.
A. Self-Adaptive VQ Algorithm for Image Segmentation
VQ was originally used for data compression in signal processing [26], and became popular in a variety of research fields
such as speech recognition [27], face detection [28], image compression and classification [29], and image segmentation [24],
[30], [31]. It allows for the modeling of probability density functions by the distribution of prototype vectors. The general VQ
framework evolves two processes: 1) the training process which
determines the set of codebook vector according to the probability of the input data; and 2) the encoding process which assigns
input vectors to the codebook vectors. The well-known Linde–
Buzo–Gray (LBG) algorithm [26] has been widely used for
the design of vector quantizer. The algorithm aims to minimize
the mean squared error and guarantees to converge to the local
optimality. However, the following properties of the LBG algorithm limit its application: 1) it relies on the initial conditions,
and 2) it requires an iterative procedure and long computation
times. Hence in our previous work, the self-adaptive online VQ
scheme [24] was proposed to speed up the vector quantizer,
where the training and encoding processes are conducted in a
parallel manner.
Medical image segmentation is the key step toward quantifying the shape and volume of different types of tissues in
a given image modality, which are used for 3-D display and
feature analysis to facilitate diagnosis and therapy. The main
idea of VQ for image segmentation is to classify voxels based
on their local intensity distribution rather than single voxel intensity. The local intensity distribution can be described by a
vector of voxel intensities. Fig. 2 illustrates three typical configurations of the local intensity vector that can be used by the
VQ algorithm. In this study, the 3-D first-order neighborhood
was employed to form the local intensity feature vector. Chest
CT volume data consists of a huge quantity of body voxels,
where each voxel has a local intensity vector. Such big data requires intensive computing effort to process. To greatly reduce
the computational complexity, a dimension reduction technique
[32] can be applied in the local feature vector space. Upon a

650

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Fig. 2. Three typical configurations of the local intensity vector: (a) the
3-D first-order neighborhood to form a 7-D local intensity vector; (b) the
3-D up-to-second order neighborhood to form a 11-D local intensity vector;
(c) the 3-D up-to-third order neighborhood to form a 23-D local intensity vector. The current voxel is marked by an asterisk.

linear Karhunen–Loéve (K–L) transformation of the local intensity vectors via the principal component analysis (PCA), we
choose the first few principal components (PCs) that contribute
at least 95% of the total variance for optimizing the dimension
of the local vector space. Only the selected PCs will be retained
to form the feature vector for VQ, and the remaining PCs with
very little information will be neglected.
VQ models the local statistics, analyzes group features, and
classifies each voxel in the dimension-reduced feature space.
VQ scans from the first voxel to the last one in a contiguous
manner. For a given volume of interest (VOI), VQ begins with
only one class initialized (i.e., the current total number of classes
K  = 1) and its representative vector c1 is the local feature
vector of the first voxel. Since the setup of initial condition is
data-oriented, the VQ algorithm is fully automatic. For each
following voxel i, the squared Euclidean distance between its
local feature vector ωi and the representative vector ck of every
existing class k = 1, . . . , K  is calculated by
d(ωi , ck ) =

P


(ωip − ck p )2 .

(1)

p=1

Here, the local feature vector ωi and each representative vector
ck are both of dimension P, which was previously determined by
PCA. The finite set codebook CB = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cK  } is then
exhaustively searched for the nearest codevector cm in such that
d(ωi , cm in ) = min  {d(ωi , ck )}.
1≤k ≤K

(2)

Let T denote the threshold for intercluster distance, so that if
d(ωi , cm in ) > T , a new class K  = K  + 1 is generated subject to the constraint of maximum class number K. Otherwise,
if d(ωi , cm in ) = d(ωi , ck ) < T or K  = K, the representative
vector ck of the current class k is updated after adding a new
member xi into the class k. After a whole scan of the VOI,
the representative vector, prior probability, and covariance of
each cluster are generated. Meanwhile, all voxels have been
classified under the nearest neighbor rule, where the exhaustive
search under condition of (2) ensures the optimal classification
result. As described previously, our VQ algorithm only depends
on two parameters: K and T. The maximum class number K
can be determined according to radiologists’ prior knowledge

of how many major tissue types are perceived in the specific
VOI. To set an appropriate value for the classification threshold,
T is more crucial than the setting of K. If T is too large, only
one class could be obtained. On the other hand, if T is too small,
redundant classes might occur. According to extensive numerical experiments, a robust choice for T would be the maximum
PC variance of the local intensity vector series. In addition, to
avoid the situation of resulting class number being less than the
expected number of tissue types, the class separation threshold
T may be tuned to be the variance of the second or higher-order
PC. Since the classification threshold T is data-oriented, the
VQ algorithm is self-adaptive. The proposed VQ-based image
segmentation algorithm is outlined as follows:
1) Perform PCA to obtain the K–L transformation matrix for
the target VOI, determine the reduced dimension P for the
local intensity vector space, and calculate the K–L transformed local intensity vector ωi = {ωi1 , ωi2 , . . . , ωiP }
for each voxel i = 1, . . . , I.
2) Set the classification threshold T as the maximum PC
variance, and set a value for the maximum class number
K based on prior anatomical knowledge.
3) i = 1, set the first voxel label v1 = 1, its local intensity
vector ω1 as the representative vector c1 for the first class,
n1 = 1 as the number of voxels belonging to class 1, and
K  = 1 as the current number of classes.
4) i = i + 1, calculate the squared Euclidean distance
d(ωi , ck ) between the local intensity vector ωi of the
current voxel and the representative vector ck for each
existing class k = 1, . . . , K  .
5) Let d(ωi , cm ) = min1≤k ≤K  {d(ωi , ck )}, if d(ωi , cm ) <
T or K  = K, the label for the ith voxel is vi = m. cm is
updated by cm = (nm ∗ cm + ωi )/(nm + 1), and nm =
nm + 1. Otherwise, a new class K  = K  + 1 is generated
with representative vector cK  = ωi , and the current voxel
is labeled as vi = K  s.t. K  <= K.
6) Repeat from step 4) until i = I to complete a whole scan.
7) If K  < K, repeat steps 1) to 6) for another whole scan
while setting the classification threshold T to be the variance of the second or higher-order PC until reaching the
desired number of tissue types K  = K.
In this paper, we mainly focus on demonstrating the merits
of VQ in the detection of INCs, from where a novel CADe
system is proposed to efficiently detect pulmonary nodules. The
proposed hierarchical VQ scheme is detailed below.

B. INCs Detection via a Hierarchical VQ Scheme
A very important but difficult task in the CADe of lung nodules is the detection of INCs, which aims to search for suspicious
3-D objects as nodule candidates using specific strategies. This
step is required to be characterized by a sensitivity that is as
close to 100% as possible, in order to avoid setting a priori upper bound on the CADe system performance. Meanwhile, the
INCs should minimize the number of FPs to ease the following
FP reduction step. This section presents our hierarchical VQ
scheme for automatic detection and segmentation of INCs.

HAN et al.: FAST AND ADAPTIVE DETECTION OF PULMONARY NODULES IN THORACIC CT IMAGES

651

Fig. 4. Comparison of simple thresholding and VQ for lung segmentation.
Panel (a) shows a raw CT image with dense pathologies on the left lung lobe.
Panel (b) illustrates the lung mask obtained by simple thresholding, and panel
(c) is the lung mask obtained by the two-class high level VQ, which is robust to
intensity inhomogeneity.

Fig. 3. Image intensity or gray-level distribution of voxels in HU obtained
from chest body volume of one CT scan of our datasets. Similar distributions
can be obtained from other scans.

1) Lung Segmentation by High Level VQ: First of all, since
the chest CT images in the LIDC database were acquired under
different scanning protocols, a standardization of CT intensities
was carried out to preprocess our target datasets. Then by imposing an empirical threshold of −500 hounsfield unit (HU) [11],
[12] on the entire CT scan, we could separate the chest body
volume from the surrounding materials, such as air, fastening
belts, CT bed, and other background materials.
In order to ensure nodule detection being performed within
the lung volume, the segmentation of lungs from the body volume is desired. Fig. 3 shows the histogram plot of the intensity
of chest body volume from a typical lung CT scan, where we
observe a clear separation of two major classes (i.e., the air
tissue and other dense body tissue). Hence, it is reasonable for
the proposed high level VQ to use these two major classes for
segmentation. Of note, “high level” in the context of this paper refers to the operation of segmenting lungs from the entire
chest volume. Since the lung parenchyma and the air in other
organs have similar image intensities, they were classified into
the low-intensity class.
Most existing approaches utilize the outcome from simple
thresholding to extract lungs from the chest volume. Though
thresholding is computationally inexpensive, the associated side
effect, called “salt and pepper” noise [33], diminishes the computational advantage. Furthermore, because of relatively high
contrast between pathologic abnormalities and normal lung
parenchyma, it is known that the conventional thresholding
methods fail to extract complete lungs from such scans [9]. The
proposed high level VQ scheme can avoid this failure on lung
segmentation, as shown by the rectangular regions marked in
Fig. 4. Although both thresholding and VQ are intensity-based
approaches, VQ classifies each voxel based on its local intensity features rather than the single voxel intensity used by simple
thresholding. Moreover, most simple thresholding approaches

set a uniform threshold for all CT scans, which is unrealistic,
while the similarity threshold in VQ is adaptively determined
for each scan. This makes VQ more robust to intensity inhomogeneity and image noise.
With high level VQ, the obtained initial lung mask corresponds to the largest and the second largest (if left and right
lungs are disconnected due to pathologic abnormalities) connected components in the low-intensity class, where the holes
inside the extracted lung mask are filled by a flood-fill operation. Furthermore, in order to include juxta-pleural nodules
into consideration, a 3-D morphological closing operation using a spherical structuring element of radius 15 mm is applied
to close the boundary in the binary lung mask.
2) INCs Detection by Low Level VQ: After extraction of the
lungs from the entire chest volume, the low level VQ aims to
simultaneously detect and segment nodules within the much
smaller VOI—the lung volume. Hereby, “low level” also indicates the operation of VQ with a more diversified classification
compared to the high level VQ. In contrast to the high-level operation, the low-level classification becomes more challenging
when it comes to the determination of an appropriate value for
the maximum class number K.
Fig. 5 shows the histogram plot of lung voxel intensities
from one chest CT scan of the LIDC database. Statistically, the
observed distribution in Fig. 5 consists of both high and low frequency parts. Each part is asymmetric and left skewed, which
can be decomposed into two Gaussian components. Hence,
this intensity distribution can be eventually represented by four
Gaussian mixtures. Based on physicians’ input, we interpret
the four classes as low-frequency parenchyma, high-frequency
parenchyma, blood vessels, and INCs.
To further investigate the maximum class number K, we conducted repeated experiments of applying VQ to lung voxel classification with different K values. Consistent with our histogram
analysis, we found that the four-class setting yielded the most
stable segmentation result across different scans. Since the average intensity of lung nodules is relatively higher than the other
three types of tissues, the class with the highest average intensity was extracted as the INCs class. The overall flowchart
of the proposed hierarchical VQ scheme for INCs detection is
illustrated through Fig. 6.

652

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

lung parenchyma appear to have various radii, opening disks
of different radii were adopted to treat varying levels of vessel attachment. In order to keep small nodules while removing
attached vessels, the lower bound of opening disk radius was
set to be the smallest—one pixel. The upper bound on disk size
was experimentally determined by examining the sensitivity for
annotated nodules in the studied dataset.
The rule-based filtering operation was separately conducted
for INCs obtained at each opening level, as well as for the original INCs without opening operation to preserve small solitary
nodules. The final INCs after filtering operations were formed
by a logical union operation of the filtered INCs at all levels.
For the INCs obtained at each opening level, obvious FPs
are first filtered out using the size rule on volume-equivalent
diameter, which is calculated by
Fig. 5. Histogram of lung voxel intensities from one chest CT scan of the
LIDC database. Each bin corresponds to the frequency of observing voxels
having intensity within a specific range. Statistically, the observed distribution
can be decomposed into four normal-tailed Gaussian mixtures as represented
by the four bell-shaped curves.

R1 = [(INC voxels × voxel volume)/(4π/3)]∧ (1/3).

(3)

Because blood vessels are elongated in shape, we also establish
the elongation rule to exclude vessel-like structures with large
elongation values. And the elongation in 3-D space is defined
by
R2 = max(dx, dy, dz)/min(dx, dy, dz).

(4)

In addition, because pulmonary nodules are usually compact in
shape, we define the following compactness rule:


R3 = (dx × dy × dz)/ [max(dx, dy, dz)]∧ 3 .
(5)
In (4) and (5), dx, dy, and dz are the maximal projection lengths
(in mm) of an INC object along X, Y, and Z axes, respectively.
Rules defined in (3)–(5) together can capture the major shape
characteristics of pulmonary nodules. In this study, the threshold
values for R1 , R2 , and R3 were determined experimentally.
Given the true nodule (or TP) annotations in the studied dataset,
we can compute the aforementioned three shape features for
each true nodule. Then based on the range of each feature, we can
set a conservative threshold for each filtering rule. Combining
these three expert rules, a candidate will be treated as a false
detection and excluded from further analysis if the following
expression is true:
R1 < 3.0 R1 > 30.0 R2 > 3.0 R3 < 0.1.
Fig. 6.

Flowchart of the proposed hierarchical VQ scheme for INCs detection.

C. False Positive Reduction from INCs
1) Rule-Based Filtering Operations: It is challenging to
thoroughly separate nodules from attached structures due to
their similar intensities, especially for the juxta-vascular nodules (the nodules attached to blood vessels). Since the thickness
of blood vessels varies considerably (e.g., from small veins to
large arteries), a 2-D morphological opening disk with radius
of 1 up to 5 pixels was adopted to detach vessels at different degrees. Of note, 2-D rather than 3-D opening operation
is favored here because of the anisotropic nature of the LIDC
data, where 2-D operations have been found to outperform 3-D
operations for relatively thick-slice data [11]. Since vessels in

(6)

2) Feature-Based SVM Classification: A supervised learning strategy is carried out using the SVM classifier to further
reduce FPs. Our feature-based SVM classifier relies on a series of features extracted from each of the remaining INC after
rule-based filtering operations. Table I lists the definitions of
extracted features by four categories, including geometric or
shape features, intensity features, gradient features, and Hessian eigenvalue based features. Both 2-D and 3-D features are
extracted for the first three groups of features. It is noted that
the image resolution difference is taken into account for the
calculation of all related features. All 2-D features are extracted
from the largest area slice of INC segmentation, and the 2-D
segmentation at maximum area slice is dilated for five layers
to obtain the “outside” region for 2-D feature computation. For
3-D features, the “outside” region is defined by dilating the 3-D
INC segmentation using a spheroidal structuring element that

HAN et al.: FAST AND ADAPTIVE DETECTION OF PULMONARY NODULES IN THORACIC CT IMAGES

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF FEATURES FOR SVM CLASSIFICATION
No.

Feature

Category

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9–10
11–16
17–18
19
20–23
24–25
26
27
28-29
30–31
32–33
34–35
36–37
38–39
40–41
42–45
46–49

Area
Diameter (max 2-D bounding box length)
Eccentricity = ellipse foci/major axis length
Circularity = Area/[π (Diameter/2)2 ]
Volume
Elongation = max(dx, dy, dz)/min(dx, dy, dz)
Compact1 = projection on X-Y plane/(dx × dy)
Compact2 = (dx × dy × dz)/[max(dx, dy, dz)]3
Mean and stdev of 2-D square compactness
Min, max, mean, stdev, skewness, and kurtosis
Inside versus outside mean, and stdev separation
Inside versus outside contrast
Mean, stdev, skewness, and kurtosis
Inside versus outside mean and stdev separation
Inside versus outside contrast
XY gradient magnitude separation inside
Radial gradient mean and stdev inside
Radial gradient mean and stdev outside
Radial gradient mean and stdev separation
Mean and stdev of 3-D gradient magnitude
Radial gradient mean and stdev inside
Radial gradient mean and stdev outside
Radial gradient mean and stdev separation
Min, max, mean, and stdev of tubeness
Min, max, mean, and stdev of blobness

2-D geometric
2-D geometric
2-D geometric
2-D geometric
3-D geometric
3-D geometric
3-D geometric
3-D geometric
3-D geometric
2-D intensity
2-D intensity
2-D intensity
3-D intensity
3-D intensity
3-D intensity
2-D gradient
2-D gradient
2-D gradient
2-D gradient
3-D gradient
3-D gradient
3-D gradient
3-D gradient
3-D Hessian
3-D Hessian

has a radius of five pixels in the X–Y plane and extends by a
single slice along each direction of the Z-axis.
Several of the features in Table I warrant some explanation.
Specifically, the 2-D square compactness is computed on each
relevant slice of the INC segmentation. The separation features
(such as standard deviation separation) are computed using the
difference of the inside and outside statistics divided by their
sum. The inside and outside contrast is defined as the difference
between the inside and outside means divided by the sum of the
inside and outside standard deviations. For the gradient features,
the XY gradient magnitude separation feature is defined as the
mean separation between the magnitudes of gradients along
the X- and Y-axis directions. Since pulmonary nodules usually
have symmetric appearance, a radial gradient feature is also
incorporated. It defines the projection of gradient magnitude on
the radial vector, and represents the gradient strength along the
radial direction. The 3-D Hessian features are computed using
eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix, which has been shown in the
literature to be potentially useful to distinguish blob-like and
tubular objects [13], [34]. Since the shape of most nodules is
close to a blob and the shape of blood vessels are tubular, both
tube-likeness and blob-likeness features [35] are defined to feed
our SVM classifier.
In this study, the LIBSVM [36] classifier with the commonly
used radial-basis-function (RBF) kernel is employed. The decision rule in our binary SVM classifier is whether the INC
tends to be a TP or FP, and the basic idea for SVM is to construct an optimal classification boundary that maximizes the
intercluster distance. Specifically, the remaining INCs after the
rule-based filtering operations are randomly and equally split
into two subsets with the same proportion of true nodules. Sup-

653

pose the labeling information in subset 1 is known, a binary
SVM classifier could be trained in subset 1 and applied for the
classification of subset 2. Subsequently, subset 2 is switched to
be the training set and subset 1 is treated as the testing set. This
is indeed a two-fold cross validation. To alleviate the possible
biases due to the selection of training and testing datasets, we
repeated the random grouping process for sufficient times (e.g.,
50). The classifier performance can be summarized via receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of the decision scores
from each SVM run. By searching the optimal operating point
on the averaged ROC curve, we can obtain the classification
sensitivity and specificity, which are defined as follows
Sensitivity =

TP
TP + FN

(7)

Specificity =

TN
.
TN + FP

(8)

Here TP, FN, TN, and FP denote the number of true positives,
false negatives, true negatives, and false positives, respectively.
III. RESULTS
The proposed CADe system was validated on a subset of
the largest publicly available database—LIDC–IDRI [37]. A
complete set of the annotated scans is available online at
http://cancerimagingarchive.net. The LIDC–IDRI images were
collected under different scanner manufacturers, variable spatial resolution and different X-ray imaging parameters (e.g., slice
thicknesses: 0.45–5.0 mm; in-plane pixel size: 0.461–0.977 mm;
total slice number: 96–605 slices; tube peak potential energies:
120–140 kV; and tube current: 40–627 mA).
Different from most CADe systems that did not report how
well the system would perform for juxta-pleural nodules [38], in
this study, we aim to particularly emphasize the performance of
our CADe system subject to the large presence of juxta-pleural
nodules. The LIDC–IDRI database has 226 scans with at least
one juxta-pleural nodule annotation. Among those scans, 21
were not included for evaluation due to the following reasons.
One scan shows a tube inside patient’s airway which leads to
the leakage of lung volume by the connected component analysis. Four scans were excluded because of severe image streak
artifacts induced by the failure of image reconstruction. We
also excluded two cases with incorrect annotation of nodule
positions. The remaining 14 cases have at least one groundglass opacity (GGO) nodule, which would not be considered
in this current study. Therefore, a total of 205 chest CT scans
in the LIDC database were utilized to evaluate the previously
presented CADe system.
Fig. 7 shows the size distribution of the 490 nodules in the
205 studied datasets. These nodules were annotated with an
agreement level of as low as one (i.e., each nodule was annotated by at least one out of the four radiologists). We can see
that almost all of the nodules are within 3–30 mm in volumeequivalent diameter, and the majority are small nodules with
a size of less than 10 mm. Each nodule’s relation with lung
parenchyma was also summarized. Among all 490 nodules, 99

654

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Fig. 7. Size (volume-equivalent diameter) distribution of the nodules in the
205 datasets of this study.

Fig. 8. One original lung CT image and the corresponding PCA selected
component images in the K–L domain. (a) The original image; (b) the first PC;
(c) the second PC; (d) the third PC.

are well-circumscribed, 68 are juxta-vascular, and 323 are juxtapleural nodules. In terms of structural appearance, 283 are solid
nodules while 207 are part-solid nodules.

Fig. 9. Examples on the performance of INCs detection and rule-based filtering operations. From top to bottom row: chest CT image; high-level VQ
outcome; border-corrected lung mask; low-level VQ segmentation result; INCs
after VQ; INCs after rule-based filtering.

B. INCs Detection and Rule-Based Filtering Performance
A. Evaluation of the PCA for Feature Extraction
The purpose of local intensity feature extraction is to retain
the major image information for reducing the computational
burden. Fig. 8 shows an example of one original lung CT image and the corresponding three-component images in the K–L
domain selected by PCA, with a decreasing order of significance. It is clear that the first three PCs represent the dominant
information. Those PCs beyond the third one contain even less
information. PCA not only preserves the true image information, but also largely boosts the computational efficiency for our
VQ algorithm.

For INCs detection, all of the 490 nodules from the 205 chest
CT scans were detected by the proposed hierarchical VQ approach. Hence, the sensitivity is 100%, and the number of FPs at
this prescreening stage is about 1526 per scan. The subsequent
rule-based filtering operations preserved 475 of the nodules detected by VQ and brought the overall detection sensitivity to
96.9%. But the average number of FPs was significantly reduced from 1526 to 138.7 per scan, which corresponds to a FP
reduction rate of more than ten times. Three examples showing the performance of hierarchical INCs detection followed by
rule-based filtering operation are illustrated through Fig. 9. The

HAN et al.: FAST AND ADAPTIVE DETECTION OF PULMONARY NODULES IN THORACIC CT IMAGES

655

TABLE II
AUC VALUES FOR SVM CLASSIFICATION OF INCS
Features
Geometric Features
Intensity Features
Gradient Features
Hessian Features
Gradient + Geometric Features
Gradient + Intensity Features
Gradient + Hessian Features
Gradient + Intensity + Geometric
Gradient + Intensity + Hessian
All Features

AUC mean

AUC stdev

0.9257
0.8968
0.9656
0.8641
0.9669
0.9771
0.9651
0.9743
0.9753
0.9776

0.0071
0.0104
0.0046
0.0115
0.0055
0.0041
0.0050
0.0050
0.0047
0.0044

first example contains a huge juxta-pleural nodule. The second
example shows a part-solid juxta-pleural nodule, while the last
example has a juxta-vascular nodule in the left lobe and a solitary
nodule in the right lobe. In these examples, the proposed scheme
is effective to detect all the TPs while substantially reducing the
FPs.
C. Performance of FP Reduction by SVM Classification
After rule-based pruning of the obvious FPs, we further reduced the FPs via feature-based SVM classification. Two-fold
cross validation was used to estimate the generalization capabilities of the SVM classifier. INCs were randomly and equally
split into two folds, and each fold consisted of 237 true nodules and 14 217 FPs. Each fold was used as the training set
for once, and the other fold was treated as the testing set. This
two-fold cross validation was repeated for 50 times to generate
the averaged SVM classification result.
Table II shows the values of area under the ROC curve (AUC)
in different feature spaces based on the 50 times average. For
group-wise feature comparison, two-sample t-test was utilized
to compare the mean of AUC value for different groups of
features. Statistical analysis showed that the gradient features
achieved a significantly higher AUC value than any of the other
groups of features (one-sided p-value < 0.0001), and the geometric features were suboptimum, better than either of the intensity or Hessian features (one-sided p < 0.0001). The Hessian
features alone yielded the least AUC value, significantly lower
than the intensity features (one-sided p < 0.0001). According
to the principle of forward feature selection, the next step is to
compare the classifier performance by joining any of the other
three groups of features with the gradient features selected in the
previous step. Two-sample t-test showed that the AUC value in
the “gradient + intensity” feature space was significantly higher
(one-sided p < 0.0001) than the AUC value generated in either
the “gradient + geometric” or the “gradient + Hessian” feature
space. It also outperformed the previously selected gradient
features (one-sided p < 0.0001). Furthermore, we compared the
performance of the SVM classifier with the addition of either
geometric or Hessian features to the “gradient + intensity” feature space. Statistical analyses showed the AUC value with the
addition of either geometric or Hessian features was, however,
significantly lower than that for the previously selected “gra-

Fig. 10. Averaged ROC curves showing the SVM classifier performance as a
function of the step-wise selected features.

dient + intensity” feature set (one-sided p < 0.05). Finally, all
the four groups of features were combined together, but using
all the extracted features still could not yield better performance
than using only the “gradient + intensity” features (two-sided
p = 0.5565).
Thus, the best feature subset for the SVM classifier is the combination of gradient and intensity features. Fig. 10 illustrates the
averaged ROC curves under different feature combinations. The
optimal operating point for the best feature subset corresponds
to a sensitivity of 92.7% at a specificity level of 93.3%.
D. Performance on Detection of Juxta-Pleural Nodules
In particular, we further conducted an experiment to examine
the performance of our CADe system to the detection of juxtapleural nodules, where the SVM classification was exclusively
applied on the juxta-pleural INCs. Technically, the corrected
lung mask for each scan is firstly eroded by five layers, and
any INC with at least one voxel outside this eroded mask will
be treated as a juxta-pleural candidate. The INCs that do not
meet such criterion are categorized as internal candidates. The
sensitivity and specificity of our CADe system before entering
the SVM classifier could be summarized for the detection of
juxta-pleural nodules exclusively. Among the 15 nodules that
were mistakenly excluded by our filtering rules, seven are juxtapleural nodules. This indicates a sensitivity of 97.8% for the
detection of 323 juxta-pleural nodules, and the number of FPs
within juxta-pleural INCs was in average 53.8 per scan. Again,
two-fold cross validation was used to evaluate the performance
of the SVM classifier. Each fold consisted of 158 true nodules
and 5512 FPs. This random cross-validation process was also
repeated for 50 times to generate a series of AUC and ROC
results.
The test AUC values of the SVM classification based on different features are summarized in Table III. For the group-wise
feature comparison, two-sample t-test indicated that the gradient features outperformed any of the other three groups of
features (one-sided p < 0.0001). The intensity features were
suboptimal, better than either of the geometric or Hessian

656

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE III
AUC VALUES FOR SVM CLASSIFICATION OF JUXTA-PLEURAL INCS
Features
Geometric Features
Intensity Features
Gradient Features
Hessian Features
Gradient + Geometric Features
Gradient + Intensity Features
Gradient + Hessian Features
Gradient + Intensity + Geometric
Gradient + Intensity + Hessian
All Features

AUC mean

AUC stdev

0.8907
0.9031
0.9659
0.8225
0.9651
0.9703
0.9621
0.9685
0.9677
0.9684

0.0099
0.0091
0.0050
0.0153
0.0064
0.0050
0.0060
0.0065
0.0055
0.0058

Fig. 11. Averaged ROC curves of the step-wise selected features for the SVM
classification of juxta-pleural nodule candidates.

features (one-sided p < 0.0001), while the Hessian features had
the least contribution to the SVM classification. Upon forward
selection of another group of features, the “gradient + intensity”
features generated a significantly higher AUC value than either
of the “gradient + geometric” or “gradient + Hessian” features
(one-sided p < 0.0001). There was also a significant increment
of AUC value compared to that for the gradient features alone
(one-sided p < 0.0001). In the next feature selection step, we
added either geometric or Hessian features to the “gradient +
intensity” feature space. Two-sample t-test showed there was no
significant difference in AUC value by combining the geometric features (two-sided p = 0.1396), and the AUC value after
the inclusion of Hessian features was even significantly lower
(one-sided p = 0.0093). Finally, the AUC value using all the extracted features was compared with that using the “gradient +
intensity” features only. Statistical test showed that the AUC by
utilizing all available features was, however, significantly lower
(one-sided p = 0.0417) than the AUC using only a subset of
features at a significance level of 0.05. The averaged ROC plot
of Fig. 11 indicates that the optimal operating point in the best
“gradient + intensity” feature space corresponds to a sensitivity
of 91.2% and a specificity of 92.3%.

E. Comparison with Existing Methods
We compared the detection accuracy and speed of our CADe
system with those of existing systems that also evaluated the
LIDC–IDRI database. We selected five CADe systems that
showed detection capability or reported detection speed. The
detection of INCs in [22] was based on a multithreshold surfacetriangulation approach, and the features used as input to their
ANN classifier were volume, roundness, maximum density,
mass, and principal moments of inertia. Opfer and Wiemker
[39] used a 2-D filter to extract the seeds of INCs on each slice
image, and then applied a SVM classifier with six complex
features to reduce the FPs. Based on maximum intensity projection processing and Zernike moments, a feature extraction
algorithm in [20] was employed to enhance the SVM for FP
reduction. Sahiner et al. [40] extracted the INCs by two segmentation algorithms of region growing and 3-D active contour,
while the following LDA classification employed three groups
of features based on the gradient field, Hessian matrix, and the
size and shape of the segmented object. Tan et al. [23] proposed a fixed-topology ANN classifier based on 45 geometric,
position, and intensity features.
Although the detection parameters and target datasets (number of cases, number of nodules, and agreement level of nodules)
employed in those methods are different, it is still meaningful
to attempt making relative comparisons. Summary of comparison with the existing systems is shown in Table IV, where the
ROC analysis results have been interpreted in terms of the freeresponse form. In this study, by considering the detection rate
of 96.9% after our VQ and rule-based filtering operations, the
proposed CADe system achieved an overall detection sensitivity of 82.7% at 4 FPs/scan. Consequently, our CADe system
shows not only comparable detection performance but also less
computational cost by using the fast hierarchical VQ approach.
On average, the detection of INCs consumed about 20–25 seconds per scan on a DELL Personal Computer with a processor
speed of 2.26 GHz. This is about ten times faster than existing
methods.
Moreover, we also compared the performance of our CADe
system with four published systems that were devoted to the
identification of juxta-pleural nodules. De Nunzio et al. [41]
proposed a multiscale α-hull approach to identify juxta-pleural
nodules by patching lung border concavities, and then fed the
located nodules to an ANN classifier for FP reduction. In another study [17], a conventional template matching approach
was employed to detect nodules in the lung wall area, and only
four features were used to eliminate FP findings. Retico et al.
[21] presented an approach to tackle the detection of internal
and subpleural nodules, respectively, and both algorithms were
finally combined as one assembled CADe system for evaluation.
In [21], the INCs detection was based on a spherical-enhanced
filter, and the FP reduction was carried out via a voxel-based
neural network approach. Later on, another CADe system [42]
was particularly developed for pleural nodule identification using directional-gradient concentration method in combination
with a morphological opening-based procedure. Each identified candidate was characterized by 12 morphological and

HAN et al.: FAST AND ADAPTIVE DETECTION OF PULMONARY NODULES IN THORACIC CT IMAGES

657

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF PROPOSED CADE SYSTEM WITH EXISTING SYSTEMS USING THE LIDC–IDRI DATABASE
CADe Systems
Golosio et al. [22]
Opfer and Wiemker [39]
Riccardi et al. [20]
Sahiner et al. [40]
Tan et al. [23]
The proposed system

Number of cases

Number of nodules

Nodule size used

Agreement level

Average FPs/scan

Sensitivity (%)

Detection time (seconds)

84
–
154
48
125
205

148
127
387
73
259
490

> = 3 mm
> = 4 mm
–
3–36.4 mm
> = 3 mm
> = 3 mm

1
1
1
1
1
1

4.0
4.0
4.0
4.9
3.0
4.0

45.0
76.0
49.0
79.0
66.4
82.7

–
180–300
–
–
–
20–25

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF PROPOSED CADE SYSTEM WITH EXISTING SYSTEMS ON JUXTA-PLEURAL NODULE IDENTIFICATION
CADe Systems

Number of cases

Number of nodules

Agreement level

Average FPs/scan

Sensitivity (%)

De Nunzio et al. [41]
Lee et al. [17]
Retico et al. [21]
Retico et al. [42]
The proposed system

57
20
39
42
205

78
24
27
25
323

–
–
2
2
1

–
14.15
10
6
4.14

66.5
71.0
74.0
72.0
89.2

textural features, which were analyzed by a rule-based filter
and a neural classifier. Table V shows the summary of system
performance comparison. The optimal operating of our CADe
system achieved an overall sensitivity of 89.2% at 4.14 FPs per
scan. Compared with the existing methods in Table V, our CADe
system was evaluated via a much larger dataset and, therefore,
it outperforms in terms of not only the detection accuracy (including both sensitivity and specificity), but also the statistical
power.

Fig. 12. Examples of juxta-pleural nodules that were missed by 2-D closing
operation but recovered by 3-D closing operation.

IV. DISCUSSIONS
Since LIDC–IDRI images were collected from several different institutions, the evaluation of such databases was much more
challenging than evaluation on images acquired from a single
institution. Another challenge to the capability of our CADe
system is to deal with juxta-pleural datasets. As we know, juxtapleural nodules are usually semispherical or spiculate in shape,
making them relatively difficult to detect. In addition, because
they have similar intensities to the pleural wall, segmentation algorithms often fail in correcting the lung borders to include such
nodules. Therefore, it is meaningful to stress-test any CADe system in the presence of irregularly-shaped juxta-pleural nodules.
This study collected 205 chest CT scans with at least one juxtapleural attachment to evaluate the proposed CADe system. For
this regard, this study is unique.
The nodule size distribution in Fig. 7 shows the representativeness of the studied datasets, where about 74% of the nodules
are less than 10 mm. This is clinically valuable in the sense that
the detection of small nodules is crucial to detecting lung cancer
at early stages. Besides the substantial presence of small nodules, the consideration of nodules with low agreement level also
places a challenge to the detection power of our CADe system.
It is worth mentioning that a proper correction of the lung
boundary is critical, because failure to include some juxtapleural nodules makes it impossible for VQ to recover them

in the later stages. Different from some previous works using
2-D closing operation, we adopted the 3-D morphological closing strategy to close the lung boundary. Fig. 12 portrays two
challenging juxta-pleural nodules that were excluded by the
2-D closing operation but recovered by the 3-D operation, which
turns to be more robust for lung border smoothing.
Though the proposed hierarchical VQ scheme was able to
detect all nonGGO nodules in the studied datasets, more efforts
are desired to deal with the associated large number of FPs. One
possible solution is to merge clusters close to each other so that
separated portions of a single object may be associated. Another
solution is to incorporate more features into the feature vector for
VQ, such as geometric features (e.g., shape index, curvedness)
and texture features (e.g., local binary pattern, Haralick, and
Gabor features). By considering sophisticated features, FPs with
low contrast to true nodules are expected to be identified by some
unique feature characteristics other than just the image intensity.
In addition, we also investigated the feasibility of boosting low
level VQ for the detection of GGO nodules. Some of the GGO
nodules in LIDC database may be recovered by increasing the
maximum class number for VQ and selecting two or more highintensity classes as the INCs.
It has been widely acknowledged that the inclusion of
rule-based filtering before the computationally expensive

658

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

classification step will enhance the performance of CADe systems. Since intensity-based VQ could barely separate nodules
from other attaching structures with similar intensities, preprocessing of the detected INCs is necessary to segment the juxtavascular nodules, which are otherwise prone to be excluded by
expert rules. For computational simplicity, all the INCs are refined via morphological opening, because basic morphological
operations are often effective for most juxta-vascular cases [15].
The selection of appropriate radius for opening disk is important
to preserving TPs to the highest degree. As a result, the detection
rate after rule-based pruning retained at a relative high level of
96.9% as we desired and expected. Challenges also persist in
determining the thresholds for expert rules. If too strict, it will
lower the sensitivity of the CADe system. If too loose, too many
FPs will render a difficulty to the following SVM classification.
Replacing empirical filtering rules with semisupervised learning
is an ongoing topic for future research.
Both Tables II and III demonstrate that among all single-group
features of interest the directional gradient features contribute
the most, which is consistent with our observation that most pulmonary nodules are symmetric in appearance while nonnodule
structures are not. It is interesting to observe that the geometric
features outperformed the intensity features for the classification
of all INCs, but in contrast, the intensity features are superior
to the geometric features for the classification of juxta-pleural
INCs only. This is reasonable because juxta-pleural nodules
have a large variation in shape, and therefore shape-based features from the training set may not be representative for the
testing dataset. It is also noted that the Hessian features show
the lowest differentiation power among the four groups of features of interest. This may due to the fact that most tubular-like
objects have already been excluded at the rule-based filtering
stage, and thus, the advantage of using Hessian eigenvalues to
differentiate tubular from blob structures may be diminished.
While the features incorporated in the SVM classifier have been
commonly-used by published works on lung nodule detection,
more sophisticated features such as texture features for nodule
malignancy diagnosis [43] can be incorporated to improve the
performance of our CADe system.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel CADe system was proposed for fast
and adaptive detection of pulmonary nodules in chest CT scans.
Based on our previous work of self-adaptive online VQ for image segmentation [24], we developed a hierarchical VQ scheme
for INCs detection. The high-level VQ proves to be feasible
to replace the commonly-used simple thresholding scheme for
extraction of the lungs with higher accuracy, as well as comparable processing time and automation level. The following
low-level VQ illustrates adequate detection power for nonGGO
nodules, and is computationally more efficient than the stateof-the-art approaches. In this study, simple expert rules were
firstly employed to exclude obvious FPs from being considered
by the sophisticated feature-based SVM classifier. The SVM
classification results indicated that gradient features contributed
the most against any of the other three groups of features (ge-

ometric, intensity, and Hessian features). The forward feature
selection strategy showed that the SVM classifier performed the
best in the “gradient + intensity” feature space rather than for
any other feature combinations. The optimal operation of the
SVM classifier yielded a sensitivity of 92.7% and a specificity
of 93.3%. In terms of free-response ROC analysis, the proposed
CADe system achieved an overall sensitivity of 82.7% at 4.0
FPs per scan. Compared with existing CADe systems evaluated
on the same lung image LIDC database, our approach showed a
comparable detection capability but a lower computational cost.
In particular, we reported the performance of our system for the
detection of juxta-pleural nodules. The outcome from our CADe
system, with an overall sensitivity of 89.2% at a specificity level
of 4.14 FPs per scan, is promising for tackling this challenging detection task. In a nutshell, the proposed hierarchical INCs
detection approach is fast, adaptive, and fully automatic. The
presented CADe system yields comparable detection accuracy
and more computational efficiency than existing systems, which
demonstrates the feasibility of our CADe system for clinical
utility.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would appreciate M. J. Salerno for English editing of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Siegel, D. Naishadham, and A. Jemal, “Cancer statistics,” CA Cancer
J. Clin., vol. 63, pp. 11–30, 2013.
[2] C. I. Henschke, D. I. McCauley, D. F. Yankelevitz, D. P. Naidich,
G. McGuinness, O. S. Miettinen, D. M. Libby, M. W. Pasmantier,
J. Koizumi, N. K. Altorki, and J. P. Smith, “Early lung cancer action
project: Overall design and findings from baseline screening,” Lancet,
vol. 354, no. 9173, pp. 99–105, 1999.
[3] A. El-Baz and J. Suri, Lung Imaging and Computer Aided Diagnosis.
Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2011.
[4] H. MacMahon, J. H. M. Austin, G. Gamsu, C. J. Herold, J. R. Jett,
D. P. Naidich, E. F. Patz, and S. J. Swensen, “Guidelines for management of small pulmonary nodules detected on CT scans: A statement from
the Fleischner society,” Radiology, vol. 237, no. 2, pp. 395–400, 2005.
[5] B. van Ginneken, S. G. Armato 3rd, B. de Hoop, S. van
Amelsvoort-van de Vorst, T. Duindam, M. Niemeijer, K. Murphy,
A. Schilham, A. Retico, M. E. Fantacci, N. Camarlinghi, F. Bagagli,
I. Gori, T. Hara, H. Fujita, G. Gargano, R. Bellotti, S. Tangaro, L.
Bolaños, F. De Carlo, P. Cerello, S. Cristian Cheran, E. Lopez Torres,
M. Prokop, “Comparing and combining algorithms for computer-aided
detection of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography scans: The ANODE09 study,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 707–722, 2010.
[6] A. El-Baz, G. M. Beache, G. Gimel’farb, K. Suzuki, K. Okada,
A. Elnakib, A. Soliman, and B. Abdollahi, “Computer-aided diagnosis
systems for lung cancer: Challenges and methodologies,” Int. J. Biomed.
Imag., vol. 2013, pp. 1– 46, 2013.
[7] J. Pu, J. K. Leader, B. Zheng, F. Knollmann, C. Fuhrman, F. C. Sciurba, and D. Gur, “A computational geometry approach to automated
pulmonary fissure segmentation in CT examinations,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imag., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 710–719, May 2009.
[8] S. Ukil and J. M. Reinhardt, “Anatomy-guided lung lobe segmentation in
X-ray CT images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 202–214,
Feb. 2009.
[9] I. Sluimer, M. Prokop, and B. van Ginneken, “Toward automated segmentation of the pathological lung in CT,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 24,
no. 8, pp. 1025–1038, Aug. 2005.
[10] E. M. van Rikxoort, B. de Hoop, M. A. Viergever, M. Prokop, and
B. van Ginneken, “Automatic lung segmentation from thoracic computed
tomography scans using a hybrid approach with error detection,” Med.
Phys., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 2934–2947, 2009.

HAN et al.: FAST AND ADAPTIVE DETECTION OF PULMONARY NODULES IN THORACIC CT IMAGES

[11] T. Messay, R. C. Hardie, and S. K. Rogers, “A new computationally
efficient CAD system for pulmonary nodule detection in CT imagery,”
Med. Image Anal., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 390–406, 2010.
[12] W. Choi and T. Choi, “Genetic programming-based feature transform
and classification for the automatic detection of pulmonary nodules on
computed tomography images,” Inf. Sci., vol. 212, pp. 57–78, 2012.
[13] Q. Li, S. Sone, and K. Doi, “Selective enhancement filters for nodules,
vessels, and airway walls in two- and three-dimensional CT scans,” Med.
Phys., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 2040–2051, 2003.
[14] A. Teramoto and H. Fujita, “Fast lung nodule detection in chest CT images using cylindrical nodule-enhancement filter,” Int. J. Comput. Assisted
Radiol. Surg., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 193–205, 2013.
[15] C. I. Fetita, F. Preteux, C. Beigelman-Aubry, and P. Grenier, “3-D automated lung nodule segmentation in HRCT,” in Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI 2004, (Lecture Notes
in Computer Science Series). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2003,
vol. 2878, pp. 626–634.
[16] K. Awai, K. Murao, A. Ozawa, M. Komi, H. Hayakawa, S. Hori, and
Y. Nishimura, “Pulmonary nodules at chest CT: Effect of computer-aided
diagnosis on radiologists’ detection performance,” Radiology, vol. 230,
no. 2, pp. 347-d352, 2004.
[17] Y. Lee, T. Hara, H. Fujita, S. Itoh, and T. Ishigaki, “Automated detection of
pulmonary nodules in helical CT images based on an improved templatematching technique,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 595–604,
Jul. 2001.
[18] J. Dehmeshki, X. Ye, X. Lin, M. Valdivieso, and H. Amin, “Automated
detection of lung nodules in CT images using shape-based genetic algorithm,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 31, pp. 408–417, 2007.
[19] X. Ye, X. Lin, J. Dehmeshki, G. Slabaugh, and G. Beddoe, “Shape-based
computer-aided detection of lung nodules in thoracic CT images,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng.., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1810–1820, Jul. 2009.
[20] A. Riccardi, T. S. Petkov, G. Ferri, M. Masotti, and R. Campanini,
“Computer-aided detection of lung nodules via 3-D fast radial transform,
scale space representation, and Zernike MIP classification,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1962–1971, 2011.
[21] A. Retico, P. Delogu, M. E. Fantacci, I. Gori, and A. Preite Martinez,
“Lung nodule detection in low-dose and thin-slice computed tomography,”
Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 525–534, 2008.
[22] B. Golosio, G. L. Masala, A. Piccioli, P. Oliva, M. Carpinelli, R. Cataldo,
P. Cerello, F. DeCarlo, F. Falaschi, M. E. Fantacci, G. Gargano, P. Kasae,
and M. Torsello, “A novel multithreshold method for nodule detection in
lung CT,” Med. Phys., vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 3607–3618, 2009.
[23] M. Tan, R. Deklerck, B. Jansen, M. Bister, and J. Cornelis, “A novel
computer-aided lung nodule detection system for CT images,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 5630–5645, 2011.
[24] D. Chen, Z. Liang, M. R. Wax, L. Li, B. Li, and A. E. Kaufman, “A novel
approach to extract colon lumen from CT images for virtual colonoscopy,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1220–1226, Dec. 2000.
[25] H. Han, L. Li, F. Han, H. Zhang, W. Moore, and Z. Liang, “Vector
quantization-based automatic detection of pulmonary nodules in thoracic
CT images,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Rec. Nucl. Sci. Symp./Med. Imag. Conf.,
2013, pp. M22–41.
[26] A. Gersho and R. M. Gray, Vector Quantization And Signal Compression,
Boston, MA, USA: Kluwer Academic, 1992.
[27] C. C. Chang and W. C. Wu, “Fast planar-oriented ripple search algorithm
for hyperspace VQ codebook,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 1538–1547, Jun. 2007.
[28] C. Garcia and G. Tziritas, “Face detection using quantized skin color
regions merging and wavelet packet analysis,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 264–277, Sep. 1999.
[29] K. L. Oehler and R. M. Gray, “Combing image compression and classification using vector quantization,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 461–473, May 1995.
[30] L. Li, D. Chen, H. Lu, and Z. Liang, “Segmentation of brain MR images:
A self-adaptive online vector quantization approach,” Proc. SPIE, 2001,
vol. 4322, pp. 1431–1438.

659

[31] L. Li, D. Chen, H. Lu, and Z. Liang, “Comparison of quadratic and
linear discriminate analyses in the self-adaptive feature vector quantization
scheme for MR image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Soc. Mag. Reson. Med.,
2001, vol. 9, pp. 809.
[32] K. Fukunaga, Introduction to Statistical Pattern Recognition. New York,
NY, USA: Academic Press, 2nd ed, 1990.
[33] R. C. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, USA: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007.
[34] Y. Sato, C. F. Westin, A. Bhalerao, S. Nakajima, N. Shiraga, S. Tamura, and
R. Kijinis, “Tissue classification based on 3-D local intensity structures
for volume rendering,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 160–180, Apr.–Jun. 2000.
[35] B. Sahiner, Z. Ge, H.-P. Chan, L. M. Hadjiiski, N. Bogot, P. N. Cascade,
and E. A. Kazerooni, “False-positive reduction using Hessian features in
computer-aided detection of pulmonary nodules on thoracic CT images,”
in Proc. SPIE, vol. 5747, pp. 790–795, 2005.
[36] C. C Chang and C. J. Lin, “LIBSVM: A library for support vector machines,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–27, 2011.
[37] S. G. Armato, G. McLennan, L. Bidautb, M. F. McNitt-Gray, C. R. Meyer,
A. P. Reeves, B. Zhaoc, D. R. Aberle, C. I. Henschked, E. A. Hoffman,
E. A. Kazerooni, H. MacMahon, E. J. R. van Beeke, D. Yankelevitzd,
A. M. Biancardi, P. H. Bland, M. S. Brown, R. M. Engelmann,
G. E. Laderach, D. Maxd, R. C. Pais, D. P.-Y. Qingf, R. Y. Roberts,
A. R. Smith, A. Starkey, P. Batrah, P. Caligiurii, A. Farooqid, G. W. Gladish, C. M. Jude, R. F. Munden, I. Petkovskaj, L. E. Quint, L. H. Schwartzk,
B. Sundaram, L. E. Doddl, C. Fenimore, D. Gur, N. Petrick, J. Freymann,
J. Kirby, B. Hughes, A. V. Casteele, S. Gupte, M. Sallamm, M. D. Heath,
M. H. Kuhn, E. Dharaiya, R. Burns, D. S. Fryd, M. Salganicoff, V. Anand,
S. Vastagh, B. Y. Croft, and L. P. Clarke, “The lung image database consortium (LIDC) and image database resource initiative (IDRI): A complete
reference database of lung nodules on CT scans,” Med. Phys., vol. 38,
pp. 915–931, 2011.
[38] Q. Li, “Recent progress in computer-aided diagnosis of lung nodules on
thin-section CT,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 31, no. 4–5, pp. 248–
257, 2007.
[39] R. Opfer and R. Wiemker, “Performance analysis for computer-aided lung
nodule detection on LIDC data,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 6515, pp. 1–9, 2007.
[40] B. Sahiner, L. M. Hadjiiski, H. P. Chan, J. Shi, T. Way, P. N. Cascade,
E. A. Kazerooni, C. Zhou, and J. Wei, “The effect of nodule segmentation
on the accuracy of computerized lung nodule detection on CT scans:
Comparison on a data set annotated by multiple radiologists,” Proc. SPIE,
vol. 6514, pp. 65140L-1–65140L-7, 2007.
[41] G. De Nunzio, A. Massafra, R. Cataldo, I. De Mitri, M. Peccarisi,
M. E. Fantacci, G. Gargano, and E. Lopez Torres, “Approaches to juxtapleural nodule detection in CT images within the MAGIC-5 collaboration,”
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 648, pp. S103–S106, 2011.
[42] A. Retico, M. E. Fantacci, I. Gori, P. Kasae, B. Golosio, A. Piccioli,
P. Cerello, G. De Nunzio, and S. Tangaro, “Pleural nodule identification
in low-dose and thin-slice lung computed tomography,” Comput. Biol.
Med., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 1137–1144, 2009.
[43] F. Han, H. Wang, B. Song, G. Zhang, H. Lu, W. Moore, H. Zhao, and
Z. Liang, “A new 3-D texture feature based computer-aided diagnosis
approach to differentiate pulmonary nodules,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8670,
pp. 86702Z-1–86702Z-7, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

