478

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Nonnegative Matrix Factorization for the
Identification of EMG Finger Movements:
Evaluation Using Matrix Analysis
Ganesh R. Naik, Member, IEEE, and Hung T. Nguyen, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Surface electromyography (sEMG) is widely used in
evaluating the functional status of the hand to assist in hand gesture recognition, prosthetics and rehabilitation applications. The
sEMG is a noninvasive, easy to record signal of superficial muscles
from the skin surface. Considering the nonstationary characteristics of sEMG, recent feature selection of hand gesture recognition
using sEMG signals necessitate designers to use nonnegative matrix
factorization (NMF)-based methods. This method exploits both the
additive and sparse nature of signals by extracting accurate and reliable measurements of sEMG features using a minimum number
of sensors. The testing has been conducted for simple and complex finger flexions using several experiments with artificial neural
network classification scheme. It is shown, both by simulation and
experimental studies, that the proposed algorithm is able to classify ten finger flexions (five simple and five complex finger flexions)
recorded from two sEMG sensors up to 92% (95% for simple and
87% for complex flexions) accuracy. The recognition performances
of simple and complex finger flexions are also validated with NMF
permutation matrix analysis.
Index Terms—Artificial neural network (ANN), auto regression
(AR), flexions, gestures, hand gesture recognition, nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF), principal component analysis (PCA), root
mean square (RMS), surface electromyography (sEMG).

I. INTRODUCTION
URFACE electromyography (sEMG) is the electrical
recording of the muscle activity from the surface by the
muscle cells when these cells are electrically or neurologically
activated [1], [2]. It is detected from superficial muscles by using surface electrodes, has rich motor control information, and
is closely related to the strength of muscle contraction. Hence,
it is an obvious choice for control of the prosthesis and other
similar applications. In the recent past, myoelectric signals are
extensively used for prosthetic and rehabilitation applications
[3]–[7]. Researchers have been working extensively on various
technical aspects of myoelectric classification techniques such
as electrode placement [8], [9], selection of proper hand gestures
[6], feature selections [10], and selection of proper classifier algorithms [11]–[14] to improve the classification rate.

S

Manuscript received January 12, 2014; revised March 28, 2014; accepted
May 6, 2014. Date of publication June 3, 2014; date of current version March 2,
2015. This work was supported by the UTS Chancellor’s Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship Grant.
The authors are with the Centre for Health Technologies, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo NSW 2007, Australia (e-mail:
Ganesh.Naik@uts.edu.au; Hung.Nguyen@uts.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2326660

In the recent past, matrix factorization algorithms such as
independent component analysis (ICA), principal component
analysis (PCA), and nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF)
have been used for several pattern recognition and data mining
applications [15]–[18]. ICA is one of the widely used multivariate data analysis technique for source separation and identification. It has produced effective results not only in general Blind
Source Separation (BSS) problems but also used as a source
separation and identification tool in sEMG gesture analysis [9],
[15]. ICA transforms a multidimensional linear vector data into
statistically independent information (also known as independent components). For ICA algorithm, it is the requirement that
the sources must be linear and highly independent. Sometimes
this assumption may not be practicable, especially when we are
dealing with fewer sensors, hence one need to explore other
matrix factorization methods such as PCA and NMF [19].
PCA is an orthogonal linear feature projection method, used
for dimensionality reduction of data. PCA finds orthogonal
eigenvalues having greatest variance in the data. In general, the
number of principal components is less than the original data.
The PCA is based on the concepts of correlation and covariance.
Hence, in PCA, the assumption being made is that the sources
of interest in the data are uncorrelated both in spatial and temporal domains [20]. In contrast, NMF only requires nonnegative
elements in the mixed data [19].
NMF has been widely used for data mining and pattern recognition applications [21]. However, its applications are not exploited widely in sEMG-based applications. Jiang et al. presented a DOF-wise NMF algorithm to extract the neural control
information from the sEMG signals [22]. Theis and Garcia,
compared the effectiveness of various sparse NMF and BSS
methods for sEMG signal decomposition [23]. Yazama et al.
used NMF and evolutionary method to classify different gestures [24]. Ajiboye and Weir identified various sEMG patterns
using NMF and muscle synergies [25].
In myoelectric prostheses design, it is normally assumed that
the necessary control information can be extracted from the surface myoelectric signal. The choice of an appropriate feature
set is crucial for the classifier. Moreover, it has been acknowledged in the literature that the classification accuracy in a pattern recognition framework is more affected by the choice of the
feature set than by the classification algorithm itself [14], [26].
Hence, in this research study, we propose an NMF-based sEMG
pattern recognition system that is able to accurately classify different finger actions and gestures without requiring a large number of electrodes using back propagation (BP) neural network

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

NAIK AND NGUYEN: NONNEGATIVE MATRIX FACTORIZATION FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF EMG FINGER MOVEMENTS

classifier. The specific aims of this research are to classify simple
and complex finger movements recorded from two sEMG sensors using NMF and neural network, and to assess the feasibility of NMF myoelectric classification techniques for classifying
simple and complex finger flexions.
The recognition performance of the proposed NMF myoelectric scheme is also evaluated with an NMF permutation matrix
via simulations. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the
“Theory” section explains theoretical concepts of NMF in brief.
The “Methodology” section describes the experimental design
and feature extraction methods, while the “Data analysis” section explains neural network classifier design for the proposed
scheme in detail. The “Results and Discussion” section presents
the case study and analysis of the results and the “Conclusion”
section concludes the work.

Fig. 1.

II. NONNEGATIVE MATRIX FACTORIZATION

(2)

The decomposition of X into W and H can be determined by
optimizing an error function between the original data matrix
and the decomposition. NMF uses different cost functions for the
optimization. Lee and Seung [27], [28] have used two different
cost functions with the corresponding update rules for W and
H. The most common and simple cost function is the Euclidian
distance, which can be written as
J = X − W H .

(3)

This cost function needs to be minimized with the constraint
that W, H ࣙ 0.
This optimization problem is solved using number of different techniques, which include gradient method, fixed point
iteration method, and so forth. In order to solve NMF problem,
Lee and Seung [27], [28] proposed simple multiplicative update
equations. Their algorithm uses an extended version of gradientbased update equations with a special multiplying factor. These
update equations are
H (n + 1) = H (n) ×

WT · X
(W T W · H)

X · HT
.
(W · H · H T )

(4)

Proofs of the update equations are given by Lee and Seung
[27], [28].
For the proposed research, the NMF is considered as follows.
The full NMF model is written as
Xm ×n = Wm ×r × Hr ×n
⎡
⎤
⎛
x1
w11
⎢ x2 ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎜ ..
Xm ×n = ⎢ . ⎥ , Wm ×r = ⎝ .
⎣ .. ⎦
w1m
xm
and

(5)
···
..
.
···

⎞
wr 1
.. ⎟
. ⎠
wr m

(6)

⎡

(1)

where E is the error and W and H have dimensions m × r and r
× n, respectively. When E ࣈ 0, the NMF equation simplifies to
X = W H.

Schematics of the finger flexion classification model.

W (n + 1) = W (n) ×

NMF is a lately developed method for finding parts-based,
linear representations of nonnegative data. NMF is one of the unsupervised learning models used for data mining. It is a method
for dimensionality reduction that respects the nonnegativity of
the input data while constructing a low-dimensional approximation. In contrast to other matrix factorization models such as
PCA and ICA, NMF strictly requires both matrices W and H
to have nonnegative entries, which means that the data can be
described using only additive components. Hence, the obtained
decompound matrix can express the original matrix by linear
combination of only addition without subtraction. A m × n nonnegative data matrix X, where each column is a sample vector,
can be approximated by NMF as
X = WH + E

479

Hr ×n

⎤
h1
⎢ h2 ⎥
⎢ ⎥
=⎢ . ⎥
⎣ .. ⎦
hr

where X is the m × n (m muscles, n observations) filtered and
rectified EMG signal, W is the m × r column-wise matrix of
muscle activities, and H is r × n matrix of time-varying neural
inputs. X is given, and W and H are determined using an NMF
algorithm.
III. METHODOLOGY
Most of the previous research studies have presented myoelectric classification using multiple sEMG sensors to achieve
better classification rate [7], [14], [26]. However, usage of multiple sEMG sensors are not practicable for prosthetic and stroke
rehabilitation research, as they may cause inconvenience for the
patients wearing too many sensors on their body. Hence, in this
research study, we propose a myoelectric control scheme for
simple and complex finger flexions using only two sEMG sensors. The schematics diagram of the proposed research study is
shown in Fig. 1, which is composed of sEMG signal collection
part, feature selection part, neural network classification part,
and hand gesture recognition part. The feature selection part
takes the responsibilities for selecting and computing features
of sEMG signals by the use of root mean square (RMS) and auto

480

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

regressive coefficients (AR). In artificial neural network (ANN)
classification part, the ANN system is adopted to train the proposed model according to the selected sEMG features and the
initialization construction. The trained classification model is
applied for testing the accuracy of the hand gesture recognition
system.
A. Data Acquisition and Preprocessing
For this research, we have used the sEMG dataset that were
collected and first utilized by Khushaba et al. [29]. This sEMG
datasets repository contains the sEMG data used for detecting
individual and combined fingers movements using two channels
for ten different finger movements. The sEMG data acquisition
and experimental protocol are described in detail by Khushaba
et al. [29]. The brief description of their data acquisition procedure are explained below: the EMG data were acquired from
eight normally limbed individuals (six males and two females),
recording two channels of EMG from electrodes (Delsys DE
2.x series EMG sensors) placed on the right forearm during
ten finger and hand motions. EMG data were collected from
two muscles: extensor and flexor muscles. Sequences of six
trial sets of ten different classes of motion were performed by
each subject from one day. Each trial set consisted of ten finger
movements.
For this research, we categorized the sEMG finger movements’ data (taken from Khushaba et al. EMG datasets repository [29]) into two classes, they are 1) simple finger movements
and 2) complex finger movements. Simple finger class consisted
of the following finger movements, they are: thumb flexion (TF),
index flexion (IF), middle flexion (MF), ring flexion (RF), little
flexion (LF). The complex finger movements consisted of the
following finger movements: thumb-index flexion (TIF), thumbmiddle flexion (TMF), thumb-ring flexion (TRF), thumb-little
flexion (TLF) and hand close (HC). These data were recorded
for a duration of 5 s each. Shoulder and elbow positions were
fixed with an arm support of the chair for all subjects. Measured surface EMG signals were sampled at 4000 Hz and were
amplified with a gain of 1000 × using an EMG measurement
system (Bagnoli Desktop EMG Systems, Del-sys Inc.). Movement artifact (< 20 Hz), power-line interference (50 Hz), and
high-frequency noise (> 450 Hz) were also removed. In total,
960 recordings with a length of 20 000 samples (5 s) were available for analysis (8 subjects × 2 muscles × 10 motions × 6
sets). The overall gesture recognition scheme is shown in Fig. 1.
B. Data Processing—Feature Extraction
Initially, the sEMG data were resampled to 1000 samples/s
(original sampling rate was 4000 samples/s), rectified and divided into overlapping windows of 256 samples length with a 64
samples increment (25% overlapping) between windows. This
segmentation scheme was used for all numerical experiments
in this study. One of the examples of the rectified and sampled windows used for the NMF source separation algorithm is
shown in Fig. 2. Feature sets investigated in this study include
the combination of AR model (fourth order) coefficients and
the RMS values of the signals (AR + RMS) [26], [30]. These

Fig. 2. One of the examples of the rectified and sampled windows used for
the NMF source separation algorithm.

features have been shown to be effective signal representation
for sEMG pattern recognition with relatively low computational
complexity. Researchers have shown that both AR and RMS can
achieve higher performance than that of other feature extraction
methods, such as Fourier Transform and Wavelet Transform for

NAIK AND NGUYEN: NONNEGATIVE MATRIX FACTORIZATION FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF EMG FINGER MOVEMENTS

the detection of various hand and finger movements with EMG
signals. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that AR coefficients are computationally efficient and robust to displacements
in electrode positions [14].
1) Auto Regressive Coefficient: This feature models individual sEMG signal as a linear autoregressive time series and
provides information about the muscle’s movement/contraction.
It is defined as follows:
p
ai xk −1 + ek
(7)
xk =
i=1

where ai represents AR coefficients, p is the AR model order,
and ek is the residual white noise [31].
2) Root Mean Square: RMS is one of the widely used features for the analysis of the sEMG signals [32]. It is modeled as
amplitude modulated Gaussian random process that relates to
constant force and nonfatiguing contraction. The mathematical
definition of RMS feature can be expressed as

1 N
x2 .
(8)
RMS =
i=1 i
N
For each type of finger movements (simple and complex), the
aforementioned features are extracted from the NMF separated
segmented (256-ms window) sEMG signals and fed as input to
the neural network classifier.
C. Data Classification and Cross-Validation
Using Neural Network
In order to determine the robustness of the proposed finger
movements’ recognition scheme, the choice of pattern recognition algorithms and statistical methods are highly important.
In the proposed scheme, we used feed-forward BP type ANN
classifier to identify/classify different finger movements. The
ANN configurations are capable of managing useful information from the extracted sEMG features and can represent them
through layers of weighted neurons and biases between the layers [33], [34].
The designed BP neural network consists of three layers, they
are: input, hidden, and output layers, respectively. Apart from
input layer, each of the layers has a weight matrix W, a bias vector b, and an output vector a. The ANN network is optimized
with suitable hidden layers to obtain better classification accuracy. The BP neural network algorithm usually sets the weights
and biases to minimize the mean square error by using gradient
of the performance function [33]. The classification accuracy
of the data features can be computed statistically using crossvalidation method. The training and testing in the BP neural
network architecture are performed with an equal number of
datasets selected randomly for each user.
Cross validation is the statistical method of separating a sample of data into subsets such that the data analysis is initially
carried out on a single subset, whereas the other subset(s) are
reserved for subsequent use in confirming and validating the
initial data analysis. The initial and the other subset(s) of data
are called the training set and the validation or testing sets respectively [34]–[36]. One of the frequently used cross validation
methods is the holdout method. In this method, the dataset is

481

separated into two mutually exclusive sets, called the training
set and the testing set [34], [37]. Initially, the function approximator fits a function using the training set only and later, the
function approximator is asked to envisage the output values
for the data in the testing set (unknown dataset). The mean absolute test set error is acquired to evaluate the model and for
random selection of training and testing of feature vectors. For
this research, a random subsampling cross-validation method is
used. This method implements data split and each split arbitrarily selects a fixed number of examples without replacement. For
each data split, we retrain the BP neural network classifier from
scratch with the training feature vectors and estimate with the
test feature vectors. The true classification accuracy is achieved
as the average of the separate estimates [34], [36]–[38].
The BP neural network is trained with several sets of data features that are extracted from the NMF separated sEMG signals
(features from sEMG signals after NMF) for predefined finger
movements. The size of the hidden layer and other parameters
of the network are chosen iteratively after experimentation with
the BP neural network algorithm. These experiments use sigmoid as the threshold function and gradient descent and adaptive
learning with momentum as the training algorithm. Each dataset
consists of an input feature vector attained from a particular type
of finger flexion and its matching output vector.
For each of the training sessions, the weights and biases for input hidden layers are saved and used in the next training session
iteratively until a satisfactory simulation results are achieved. A
learning rate of 0.05 and the default momentum rate are found
to be suitable for stable learning of the network. The training
stops when the network converges and the network error is less
than the target error. The weights and biases of the network are
saved and used for testing the network. The data are divided
into training, validation, and test subsets. One-fourth of the data
are used for the validation set (25%), one-fourth for the test
set (25%), and one-half for the training set (50%). The RMS
and AR sEMG features are the inputs to the BP neural network
classifier. The outputs of the BP neural network classifiers are
the different simple and complex finger movements. The classification performance is quantified by the overall Classification
Accuracy
Classiﬁcation Accuracy
=

No. of Correct Classiﬁcations
.
Total No. of Correct Classiﬁcations

(9)

D. Permutation (Global Matrix) Analysis
NMF technique generates a solution if there exists a unique
W and H such that (2) is satisfied. In NMF, the Global matrix
(G) is computed using the following equation:
G = W Aest

(10)

where G represents Global matrix, W unmixing matrix, and Aest
represents estimated mixing matrix, respectively. If the number
of sources equal to number of observations, Aest = inv(W ) else
Aest = pinv(W ).
Source dependency and independency can be computed using
determinant of Global matrix. According to the mathematical

482

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
LIST OF CLASSIFICATION RATES WITH SIMPLE FINGER FLEXIONS: TF, IF, MF, RF, AND LF
Gestures

TF
IF
MF
RF
LF

Mean classification ± SD

Participants
Subject 1

Subject 2

Subject 3

Subject 4

Subject 5

Subject 6

Subject 7

Subject 8

96.7
90
93.3
93.3
98.3

95.6
91.2
92.5
92.4
96.2

94.8
89.3
92.6
91.5
97.1

96.7
89.6
93.1
93.8
97.2

96.3
90.2
93.5
93.6
98.1

95.8
91.3
93.2
92.8
97.5

96.2
91.1
92.8
92.6
97.4

95.5
90.4
92.7
93.1
97.3

95.95±0.65
90.39±0.75
92.96±0.36
92.89±0.74
97.39±0.64

Fig. 3. Average classification results (%) Mean and SD for the two finger
flexion methods.

principle, determinant values are closer to zero for linear dependency and closer to one for linear independency [9], [15]. NMF
has a scaling problem like other factorization methods such
as ICA and PCA. Hence, prior to the measure of dependency
and independency, the determinant of G need to be normalized.
Frobenius norm is one of the widely used matrix norm found in
the literature and is defined as follows:


m in{m ,n }

m 
n
 
√

2
∗

|gij | = trace G G = 
σi2
GF =
i=1 j =1

i=1

(11)
where G∗ denotes the conjugate transpose of G, σi are the singular values of G, and the trace function is used. The Frobenius
norm is submultiplicative and is very useful for numerical linear algebra. This norm is often easier to compute than induced
norms, and provides the most effective normalization values [9],
[15].
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Table I shows the average classification results for the simple
finger flexion movements. From the results (see Table I and
Fig. 3), it can be seen that the proposed NMF-ANN classification
model was able to classify five simple finger flexion movements
up to 93.92 ± 0.63% accuracy. The mean and standard deviation

Fig. 4. Confusion matrix showing the error distribution for the simple finger
movements’ classification. In a confusion matrix, the results in the diagonal are
the correct classification rates, while the results outside the diagonal are the
errors.

(SD) of intersubject variability results is shown in Fig. 3 and
the detailed results are explained using confusion matrix (see
Fig. 4). This was also confirmed by the statistical analysis, where
all p-values obtained from the control’s results were significant
(p-value < 0.001). From an examination of the errors in the
confusion matrix (see Fig. 4), it can be observed that the errors
occurred mainly with the simple flexion movements of the ring,
middle, and index fingers. As for the thumb movements, overall
results showed a small confusion between thumb and little finger
flexion.
Table II shows the average classification results for the complex finger flexion movements. The mean and SD of classification results are shown in Fig. 3. From the results (see Table II and
Fig. 3), it can be seen that the proposed NMF-ANN classification
model was able to classify five complex finger flexion movements up to 87.58 ± 0.36% accuracy. All p-values obtained from
the experimental results were significant (p-value < 0.002). The
detailed classification results are also explained using confusion

NAIK AND NGUYEN: NONNEGATIVE MATRIX FACTORIZATION FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF EMG FINGER MOVEMENTS

483

TABLE II
LIST OF CLASSIFICATION RATES WITH COMPLEX FINGER FLEXIONS: TIF, TMF, TRF, TLF, AND HC
Gestures

TIF
TMF
TRF
TLF
HC

Mean classification ± SD

Participants
Subject 1

Subject 2

Subject 3

Subject 4

Subject 5

Subject 6

Subject 7

Subject 8

93.3
88.3
86.7
85.3
84.2

92.1
87.6
87.2
86.1
85.1

92.4
88.2
86.8
86.2
84.9

91.8
87.9
87.2
85.8
85.2

91.9
87.5
86.8
85.5
84.7

92.2
88.1
86.9
85.6
84.6

93.1
87.7
87.3
85.9
84.8

91.6
88.1
86.9
86.1
85.1

92.30 ± 0.61
87.93 ± 0.30
86.98 ± 0.23
85.81 ± 0.32
84.83 ± 0.33

TABLE III
NMF GLOBAL MATRIX (AVERAGE) RESULTS FOR SIMPLE
AND COMPLEX GESTURES
Simple and Complex finger flexions
TF
IF
MF
RF
LF
TIF
TMF
TRF
TLF
HC

Fig. 5. Confusion matrix showing the error distribution for the complex finger
movements’ classification. In a confusion matrix, the results in the diagonal are
the correct classification rates, while the results outside the diagonal are the
errors.

matrix (see Fig. 5). By observing the errors in the confusion
matrix (see Fig. 5), it can be perceived that the errors occurred
mainly with the complex flexion movements of the TRF, TLF,
and HC. Overall results show a small confusion between TIF
and TMF. Furthermore, there is a good performance for thumb
related flexions, which is unique to this study.
From the results (see Tables I and II) it can be seen that
the proposed classification model is able to classify the simple
finger flexions up to 95% and complex flexions around 87%.
Hence, NMF Global matrix is evaluated in order to evaluate
the discrepancy in results. Table III and Fig. 6 explain the NMF
Global matrix results. From the results, it can be seen that Global
matrix values are around 0.95 and 0.67 for simple and complex
finger movements, respectively. This indicates that NMF separated simple finger flexion features are more independent as
compared to complex finger flexions (see Fig. 7). From the
aforesaid, we can infer that NMF method is able to make simple
flexion features sparser as compared to complex flexion features.
This is also reflected in the discrepancy in overall classification
results.

Normalized Global matrix values
0.94 ± 0.02
0.93 ± 0.03
0.93 ± 0.02
0.95 ± 0.02
0.96 ± 0.01
0.67 ± 0.02
0.68 ± 0.01
0.68 ± 0.02
0.67 ± 0.01
0.68 ± 0.02

Fig. 6. Normalised determinant values indicating independence values for the
simple and complex finger flexions.

Fig. 7. Average Mean and SD plot for determinant values indicating independence levels.

484

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Given the success of utilizing sEMG signals in decoding the
intended wrist and finger movements, there has been significant
research done to achieve more dexterous individual finger control using both high- and low-density EMG electrodes. Recently,
researchers have used high-density sEMG electrodes to identify
different hand and finger movements [30], [39]–[41]. Highdensity EMG is a noninvasive technique that collects sEMG
signals from many closely spaced electrodes. One of the advantages of this arrangement is that the information collected
from these electrodes can be used to create topographic maps
at each electrode location and to examine the muscle activity patterns during different hand and finger movement tasks.
Moreover, processing of sEMG signals using high-density electrodes provides a quantification of both the temporal and spatial
characteristics of the electric muscle activity. However, a reduction in the number of electrodes, without compromising the
classification accuracy, would significantly simplify the requirements for controlling state-of-the-art prostheses. For instance,
Andrews et al. reported a unique technique targeting the optimal electrode locations for EMG based finger control using
fewer number of sensors [42]. In another study, Khushaba et al.
proposed a novel technique to identify finger and hand movements using only two electrodes [29]. In most recent study, Naik
et al. proposed ICA-based signal processing technique for optimal electrode configuration using only a very few electrodes
[9]. This research study demonstrated higher classification rate
using an NMF-based pattern recognition system. Moreover, an
NMF-based system requires only two sets of bipolar electrodes
that can be easily mounted by the user and trained using ten
examples of the actions (five simple and five complex actions).
Higher classification results of simple gestures also demonstrate
that such a system is easy to train and employ, making it suitable
for use by an individual without expert assistance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, classification of simple and complex finger
flexion movements based on NMF and neural network classifier
is proposed. The sparseness and additive patterns of NMF are
adopted to extract simple and complex features of sEMG signals. Backpropagation ANN is used for hand gesture recognition
based on feature values of sEMG signals. Finally, the robustness of NMF is evaluated using permutation matrix analysis.
The hand gesture recognition model, based on sEMG signals by
using the NMF and ANN, is a novel sEMG gesture recognition
method. It can adapt to the additive and nonstationary characteristic of sEMG and can increase the recognition accuracy of
sEMG actions that are recorded from two sEMG sensors.
The proposed research study has several potential applications in prosthetics, for the elderly and week people with special
needs. The usage of small number of electrodes makes prosthetic
control easy, where the EMG electrodes may be placed above
the amputation point. Moreover, such a system also gives both
amputees and disabled a natural and seamless means of commands and helps in controlling devices. However, at present,
this system has only been tested with able-bodied individuals
and there is a need for testing the same on subjects who have suf-

fered amputations to test the efficacy of this technique. Though
this research study reports experiments conducted for simple
and complex finger flexions, this technique is also suitable for
the analysis of other complex actions and hand postures, where
cross-talk due to overlapping adjacent muscles is an issue.
In conclusion, the sparseness and additive features of the
NMF method can obtain multiple characteristics of sEMG signal and classify the corresponding actions better. Moreover,
NMF is able to identify the complex nature of EMG signals
using minimum number of sEMG sensors (recorded from two
sEMG sensors), which is very useful for prosthetics and rehabilitation applications. Currently, work is underway to compare
the proposed research study with the conventional myoelectric
pattern recognition methods in terms of feature extraction, computational cost, and classification accuracy. Our future work
will concentrate on challenges toward implementing a practical sEMG-based gesture recognition system for amputees and
stroke survivors. These include determining acceptable electrode locations, cross-talk removal, extracting substantial motor
control information, optimizing electrode configurations, and
dealing with the challenges of the sEMG recording in a dynamic environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of
Dr. R. Khushaba, who made the sEMG database available for
this research study.
REFERENCES
[1] C. J. De Luca, L. Donald Gilmore, M. Kuznetsov, and S. H. Roy, “Filtering the surface EMG signal: Movement artifact and baseline noise
contamination,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, pp. 1573–1579, 2010.
[2] E. Criswell, Cram’s Introduction to Surface Electromyography. Boston,
MA, USA: Jones & Bartlett, 2010.
[3] P. Zhou, X. Li, F. Jahanmiri-Nezhad, W. Z. Rymer, and P. E. Barkhaus,
“Duration of observation required in detecting fasciculation potentials in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using high-density surface EMG,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 9, p. 78, 2012.
[4] Z. O. Khokhar, Z. G. Xiao, and C. Menon, “Surface EMG pattern recognition for real-time control of a wrist exoskeleton,” Biomed. Eng. Online,
vol. 9, p. 41, 2010.
[5] C. Castellini and P. Van Der Smagt, “Surface EMG in advanced hand
prosthetics,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 100, pp. 35–47, 2009.
[6] H. Huang, T. A. Kuiken, and R. D. Lipschutz, “A strategy for identifying
locomotion modes using surface electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 65–73, Jan. 2009.
[7] A. H. Al-Timemy, G. Bugmann, J. Escudero, and N. Outram, “Classification of finger movements for the dexterous hand prosthesis control
with surface electromyography,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 608–618, May 2013.
[8] A. J. Young, L. J. Hargrove, and T. A. Kuiken, “The effects of electrode
size and orientation on the sensitivity of myoelectric pattern recognition
systems to electrode shift,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9,
pp. 2537–2544, Jun. 2011.
[9] G. R. Naik, D. K. Kumar, and M. Palaniswami, “Signal processing evaluation of myoelectric sensor placement in low-level gestures: sensitivity
analysis using independent component analysis,” Expert Syst., vol. 31,
pp. 91–99, 2014.
[10] A. Phinyomark, P. Phukpattaranont, and C. Limsakul, “Feature reduction
and selection for EMG signal classification,” Expert Syst. App., vol. 39,
pp. 7420–7431, 2012.
[11] G. Li, A. E. Schultz, and T. A. Kuiken, “Quantifying pattern recognitionBased myoelectric control of multifunctional transradial prostheses,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 185–192,
Apr. 2010.

NAIK AND NGUYEN: NONNEGATIVE MATRIX FACTORIZATION FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF EMG FINGER MOVEMENTS

[12] P. Kaufmann, K. Englehart, and M. Platzner, “Fluctuating EMG signals:
Investigating long-term effects of pattern matching algorithms,” in Proc.
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 6357–6360.
[13] P. Geethanjali and K. Ray, “Statistical pattern recognition technique for
improved real-time myoelectric signal classification,” Biomed. Eng.: Appl.
Basis Comm., vol. 25, pp. 1–9, 2013.
[14] L. Hargrove, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A training strategy to reduce classification degradation due to electrode displacements in pattern
recognition based myoelectric control,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control,
vol. 3, pp. 175–180, 2008.
[15] G. R. Naik and D. K. Kumar, “Estimation of independent and dependent
components of non-invasive EMG using fast ICA: Validation in recognising complex gestures,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 14,
pp. 1105–1111, 2011.
[16] L. Zhang, W. Dong, D. Zhang, and G. Shi, “Two-stage image denoising by
principal component analysis with local pixel grouping,” Pattern Recogn.,
vol. 43, pp. 1531–1549, 2010.
[17] H. Abdi and L. J. Williams, “Principal component analysis,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Rev.: Comput. Statist., vol. 2, pp. 433–459, 2010.
[18] N. Bertin, R. Badeau, and E. Vincent, “Enforcing harmonicity and smoothness in Bayesian non-negative matrix factorization applied to polyphonic
music transcription,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 18,
no. 3, pp. 538–549, Mar. 2010.
[19] A. A. Khaliq, I. M. Qureshi, and J. A. Shah, “Unmixing functional magnetic resonance imaging data using matrix factorization,” Int. J. Imag.
Syst. Tech., vol. 22, pp. 195–199, 2012.
[20] I. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
2005.
[21] A. Cichocki, R. Zdunek, A. H. Phan, and S.-I. Amari, Nonnegative Matrix
and Tensor Factorizations: Applications to Exploratory Multi-Way Data
Analysis and Blind Source Separation. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2009.
[22] N. Jiang, K. B. Englehart, and P. A. Parker, “Extracting simultaneous and
proportional neural control information for multiple-DOF prostheses from
the surface electromyographic signal,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56,
no. 4, pp. 1070–1080, Apr. 2009.
[23] F. J. Theis and G. A. Garcia, “On the use of sparse signal decomposition in
the analysis of multi-channel surface electromyograms,” Signal Process.,
vol. 86, pp. 603–623, 2006.
[24] Y. Yazama, Y. Mitsukura, M. Fukumi, and N. Akamatsu, “Recognition
from EMG signals by an evolutional method and non-negative matrix
factorization,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Knowl.-Based Intell. Inform. Eng.
Syst., 2003, pp. 594–600.
[25] A. Ajiboye and R. Weir, “Muscle synergies as a predictive framework for
the EMG patterns of new hand postures,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, p. 036004,
2009.
[26] K. Englehart and B. Hudgins, “A robust, real-time control scheme for
multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 7, pp. 848–854, Jul. 2003.
[27] D. Seung and L. Lee, “Algorithms for non-negative matrix factorization,”
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 13, pp. 556–562, 2001.
[28] D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung, “Learning the parts of objects by non-negative
matrix factorization,” Nature, vol. 401, pp. 788–791, 1999.
[29] R. N. Khushaba, S. Kodagoda, M. Takruri, and G. Dissanayake, “Toward improved control of prosthetic fingers using surface electromyogram
(EMG) signals,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 39, pp. 10731–10738, 2012.
[30] X. Zhang and P. Zhou, “High-density myoelectric pattern recognition toward improved stroke rehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1649–1657, Jun. 2012.
[31] Y. H. Huang, K. B. Englehart, B. Hudgins, and A. D. C. Chan, “A
Gaussian mixture model based classification scheme for myoelectric
control of powered upper limb prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1801–1811, Nov. 2005.
[32] T. Y. Fukuda, J. O. Echeimberg, J. E. Pompeu, P. R. G. Lucareli, S.
Garbelotti, R. O. Gimenes, and A. Apolinário, “Root mean square value
of the electromyographic signal in the isometric torque of the quadriceps.
hamstrings and brachial biceps muscles in female subjects,” J. Appl. Res.,
vol. 10, pp. 32–39, 2010.
[33] M. Ibn Ibrahimy, R. Ahsan, and O. O. Khalifa, “Design and optimization
of Levenberg-Marquardt based neural network classifier for EMG signals
to identify hand motions,” Meas. Sci. Rev., vol. 13, pp. 142–151, 2013.

485

[34] G. R. Naik and D. K. Kumar, “Subtle electromyographic pattern recognition for finger movements: A pilot study using BSS techniques,” J. Mech.
Med. Biol., vol. 12, pp. 1–19, 2012.
[35] A. Krogh and J. Vedelsby, “Neural network ensembles, cross validation, and active learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1995,
pp. 231–238.
[36] R. Setiono and H. Liu, “Neural-network feature selector,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Net., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 654–662, May 1997.
[37] M. Abdechiri, K. Faez, and H. Bahrami, “Neural network learning based
on chaotic imperialist competitive algorithm,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Workshop
Intell. Syst. Appl., 2010, pp. 1–5.
[38] W.-T. Sung and Y.-F. Liu, “Neural network approaches to data fusion calculation and correction in wireless sensor network—A case study comparison between BPN, RBFN and GRNN,” Int. J. Nonlin. Sci. Num.,
vol. 14, pp. 395–411, 2013.
[39] M. Rojas-Martı́nez, M. Mañanas, J. Alonso, and R. Merletti, “Identification of isometric contractions based on high density EMG maps,” J.
Electromyogr. Kines., vol. 23, pp. 33–42, 2013.
[40] H. Daley, K. Englehart, L. Hargrove, and U. Kuruganti, “High density electromyography data of normally limbed and transradial amputee
subjects for multifunction prosthetic control,” J. Electromyogr. Kines.,
vol. 22, pp. 478–484, 2012.
[41] M. Rojas-Martı́nez, M. A. Mañanas, and J. F. Alonso, “High-density
surface EMG maps from upper-arm and forearm muscles,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil, vol. 9, p. 1186, 2012.
[42] A. Andrews, E. Morin, and L. McLean, “Optimal electrode configurations
for finger movement classification using EMG,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 2987–2990.

Ganesh R. Naik (M’08) received the B.E. degree
in electronics and communication engineering from
the University of Mysore, Mysore, India, in 1997,
the M.E. degree in communication and information
engineering from Griffith University, Brisbane, Qld,
Australia, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering, specializing in biomedical engineering and signal processing from RMIT University,
Melbourne, Vic., Australia, in 2009.
Since 2013, he has been a Chancellor’s Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney, Ultimo,
N.S.W., Australia. As an early career researcher, he has edited nine books, authored more than 80 papers in peer reviewed journals, conferences, and book
chapters over the last five years. He serves as an associate editor for two Springer
journals (Circuits, Systems, and Signal Processing and Australasian Physical &
Engineering Sciences in Medicine).
Dr. Naik received the Baden–Württemberg Scholarship from the University
of Berufsakademie, Stuttgart, Germany (2006–2007). In 2010, he received an
ISSI overseas fellowship from Skilled Institute Victoria, Melbourne.

Hung T. Nguyen (SM’99) received the Ph.D. degree
in 1980 from the University of Newcastle, Callagha,
N.S.W., Australia.
He is a Professor of electrical engineering at the
University of Technology, Sydney, Ultimo, N.S.W.
He is the Dean at the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology and the Director at the Centre
for Health Technologies. His research interests include biomedical engineering, advanced control, and
artificial intelligence. He has developed biomedical
devices for diabetes, disability, and cardiovascular
diseases.
Dr. Nguyen is a Fellow of the Institution of Engineers, Australia, the British
Computer Society, and the Australian Computer Society.

