2806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Microwave-Based Stroke Diagnosis Making Global
Prehospital Thrombolytic Treatment Possible
Mikael Persson∗ , Member, IEEE, Andreas Fhager, Member, IEEE, Hana Dobšı́ček Trefná,
Yinan Yu, Student Member, IEEE, Tomas McKelvey, Senior Member, IEEE, Göran Pegenius,
Jan-Erik Karlsson, and Mikael Elam

Abstract—Here, we present two different brain diagnostic devices based on microwave technology and the associated two first
proof-of-principle measurements that show that the systems can
differentiate hemorrhagic from ischemic stroke in acute stroke patients, as well as differentiate hemorrhagic patients from healthy
volunteers. The system was based on microwave scattering measurements with an antenna system worn on the head. Measurement data were analyzed with a machine-learning algorithm that
is based on training using data from patients with a known condition. Computer tomography images were used as reference. The
detection methodology was evaluated with the leave-one-out validation method combined with a Monte Carlo-based bootstrap step.
The clinical motivation for this project is that ischemic stroke patients may receive acute thrombolytic treatment at hospitals, dramatically reducing or abolishing symptoms. A microwave system
is suitable for prehospital use, and therefore has the potential to
allow significantly earlier diagnosis and treatment than today.
Index Terms—Microwave system, stroke diagnostics, subspace
distance classification.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE global cost of stroke, including direct health care cost,
direct nonmedical cost, and indirect cost, is hard to assess

Manuscript received January 28, 2014; revised April 22, 2014; accepted May
16, 2014. Date of publication June 12, 2014; date of current version October 16,
2014. This work was supported in part by VINNOVA (Swedish Government
Agency for Innovation Systems) within the VINN Excellence Centre Chase, by
the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research within the Strategic Research
Centre Charmant, and partly by the Swedish Research Council under Grants
4627 and 12170. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Persson is with the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden, and also with MedTech West,
41345 Göteborg, Sweden (e-mail: mikael.persson@chalmers.se).
A. Fhager is with the Signal Processing and Biomedical Engineering, Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296
Göteborg, Sweden, and also with MedTech West, 41345 Göteborg, Sweden
(e-mail: andreas.fhager@chalmers.se).
H. D. Trefná is with the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers
University of Technology, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden, and also with MedTech
West, 41345 Göteborg, Sweden (e-mail: hanatre@chalmers.se).
Y. Yu and T. McKelvey are with the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Göteborg, Sweden (e-mail:
mckelvey@chalmers.se; yinan@chalmers.se).
G. Pegenius is with the Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Institute
of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, Göteborg University,
40530 Göteborg, Sweden (e-mail: pegenius@neuro.gu.se).
J.-E. Karlsson is with the Neuro-division, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
41345 Göteborg, Sweden (e-mail: jan-erik.karlsson@vgregion.se).
M. Elam is with the Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, Göteborg University,
40530 Göteborg, Sweden, with Neuro-division, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 41345 Göteborg, Sweden, and with MedTech West, 41345 Göteborg,
Sweden (e-mail: mikael.elam@neuro.gu.se).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2330554

but the total 2010 European cost has been estimated to 64.1
billion € [1]. While the cost for society is huge, the human cost
of stroke is horrific. Out of the sufferers of stroke, 5 million
people/year die and another 5 million are permanently disabled
[2]. The incidence of stroke in patients below 65 years of age is
increasing and presently constitutes 20% of all strokes. Almost
80% of all strokes are ischemic (obstructed blood flow), while
the rest are hemorrhagic (bleeding into brain or on the surface
of the brain). In the western world, stroke is placed third among
reasons for acute death, and first among reasons for neurological dysfunction, resulting in most days of hospital nursing and
therefore the most costly disease within western world health
care [3]. Among stroke survivors, 20% have serious remaining
dysfunctions. A much larger proportion has less conspicuous
dysfunctions, which still seriously affect quality of life for the
patient and relatives.
Early thrombolytic treatment of ischemic stroke (IS) is today an established procedure [4]–[6], but could be disastrous
if performed on a patient with a hemorrhagic stroke. Computer
tomography (CT) and sometimes magnetic resonance imaging
are used to exclude hemorrhagic stroke. The sooner after onset
of symptoms the thrombolytic therapy is initiated, the better the
effect. According to European guidelines, treatment after 4.5 h
has elapsed since start of symptoms is not approved as the potential benefit does not outweigh the risk for hemorrhagic complications, which increases with time. While 20–30% of patients
arriving at specialized stroke centers may receive thrombolytic
treatment [7], [8] only 1–8% of the entire stroke patient population are given such treatment [9], mainly due to long lead
times in transport to and from the diagnostic instruments [10],
[11]. Although solutions for CT scanning in ambulances have
been presented [12], the global scale of this clinical dilemma
motivates efforts to develop new simplified diagnostic procedures capable of prehospital differentiation between ischemic
and hemorrhagic strokes.
Several different technologies have been researched with the
aim to develop a compact system that can be used to distinguish ischemic from hemorrhagic stroke in a prehospital setting. Ultrasonography can be used to identify large-vessel occlusions in acute stroke care [13] but cannot exclude hemorrhagic
transformation of the resulting ischemic regions. Impedance
tomography has been proposed as a possible technology to detect Intra Cerebral Hemorrhage (ICH) in an animal model [14]
and impedance spectroscopy has been suggested as a method
to detect stroke-related brain asymmetries in man [15]. While
less developed in medical diagnostics, microwave propagation
in human tissues has an advantage over both impedance and

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PERSSON et al.: MICROWAVE-BASED STROKE DIAGNOSIS MAKING GLOBAL PREHOSPITAL THROMBOLYTIC TREATMENT POSSIBLE

ultrasound via the easy penetration of the human scull. This is
the fundamental basis for the present effort.
Microwave imaging techniques for biomedical applications
have been researched for almost three decades. Due to the inherent scattering nature of propagating microwaves in inhomogeneous media, computationally very demanding algorithms are
used. It is not until the latest 5–10 years that the required computational power has become readily available and that clinically
relevant results have been obtained. A large part of the efforts has
been devoted to microwave imaging for breast cancer detection.
Currently, this application has come to a phase of initial clinical
studies [17]–[19] where encouraging results have been obtained.
The microwave technique is dependent on the existence of a
dielectric contrast between different tissues. A number of studies
of the dielectric properties of different human tissue have been
made [20]–[23], and there is a clear indication of a significant
contrast between blood and white and gray brain matter. Originating in our own work with microwave tomography applied to
breast cancer detection [24], we have developed a helmet with
microwave patch antennas, signal processing methods based on
a machine-learning algorithm, and have performed numerical
and phantom studies of hemorrhagic stroke detection [25], [26],
with encouraging results. This application is currently attracting
increasing interest among researchers. Recently, both numerical studies [27], [28] as well as a phantom study [29] show the
ability to detect the presence and location of a bleeding stroke
inside the skull. The ambition with our research project is to
develop a system that can be used upon arrival in the emergency
room, or by ambulance personnel at the scene of incident. The
relative simplicity and size of a microwave-based diagnostic system underlined the possibility of creating an ambulance-based
prehospital diagnostic system for stroke patients.
As already mentioned, a mobile CT-equipped stroke unit enabling prehospital diagnosis and treatment has been developed,
and a recent trial showed that it achieved a marked reduction of latency from symptom-onset to thrombolytic treatment
compared to previous interventional studies [9], [12]. Although
CT-equipped vehicles constitute a formidable technical achievement, they may primarily be a solution for countries with a
well-organized and financed health care system, densely populated areas with well-developed traffic and telecommunication
infrastructure. Affordable and easily transported equipment for
the diagnosis of stroke will remain a priority for countries not
meeting this description. A microwave-based system has the advantage of being completely safe and without side effects. The
method also has the potential of becoming quite cost effective as
the component costs are driven down by the considerably larger
telecom industry. Apart from prehospital diagnosis and treatment, another application of microwave-based stroke detection
may be for monitoring patients undergoing thrombolytic therapy
or patients hospitalized after a transitory ischemic attack.
In this paper, we discuss the background, design, and signal
analysis of two microwave-based stroke detection systems.
We have also performed proof of concept testing using the
two prototype systems on patients and healthy volunteers. In
the first study, we used a bicycle helmet, in which ten patch
antennas were mounted. Measurements were performed using

Fig. 1.

2807

Three-dimensional distribution of the isosceles triangle patch antennas.

Fig. 2. (a) Transmission channels measured between each antenna pair.
(b) Scattered signal due to accumulated blood pool.

a standard network analyzer and switch box. In the second
study, a custom-built helmet with 12 antennas was used. This
time a dedicated and integrated network analyzer and switching
solution were used.
II. MEASUREMENTS
A. Fundamental Principles for Measurements
Stroke diagnosis with a microwave system is based on measurements and analysis of signals that are transmitted through
the brain. The antennas are distributed over the entire head to
achieve high detection sensitivity. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.
One at a time, each antenna is used as a transmitter, with the
remaining antennas in receiving mode [see Fig. 2(a)]. In total, a large number of transmission measurements are made.
The basis for detection is to analyze the scattered wave pattern caused by the variations in dielectric contrast in healthy
and normal tissue. The dielectric properties of white and gray
brain matter at the frequency 1.0 GHz have been measured to
r = 38.6, σ = 0.62 S/m and r = 52.3, σ = 0.99 S/m, respectively [20]–[23]. The corresponding properties for blood have
been measured to r = 61.1 and σ = 1.58 S/m. The fact that
the properties of blood are different from white and gray matter

2808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

also provides the basis for detecting the pool of blood caused
by a hemorrhagic stroke. Also in the case of an IS caused by a
blood clot obstructing a vessel, there exists a basis for detection,
[see Fig. 2(b)]. The dielectric properties are strongly dependent
on the circulation of blood and the oxygenation level. To our
knowledge, no in vivo measurements have been made of the
dielectric properties of a brain area influenced by reduced circulation. However, tests on bovine brain tissue have shown that
dielectric parameters change as a function of time after death
[30]. However, these measurements were made at a lower frequency range, i.e., 20 kHz–100 MHz, than those used in these
studies.
B. Prototype Design Principle
In this section, the design of the two systems is described. In
order to provide a comfortable fit, patch antennas with a flat surface facing the skull were used. To accommodate varying skull
size/shape of patients, containers of soft plastic were placed between skull and antennas and filled with water to fill the gap.
The use of the plastic containers ensured a good electromagnetic
coupling between the antennas and the skull. The measurements
were made with a two-port network analyzer integrated with a
switch matrix module and computer-controlled in order to automate the measurement procedure for all antenna pairs. The
power was about 1 mW, transmitted from one antenna at the
time. This is about 100 times lower than the maximum averaged
output power of 125 mW that is transmitted from a GSM-cell
phone. No adverse effects are therefore expected from use of
the developed systems.
The patch antennas used in the these two systems were the
same as those used in the hyperthermia applicator developed at
Chalmers [31]. This reference contains a detailed description of
the antenna. In the second system, the antennas were slightly
modified with the connector placed on the side of the antenna
rather than on the back. However, the change of positions was
made such that the antenna characteristics were unaltered. This
type of antenna is more broadband than for example a monopole
or a dipole. In the present helmet-design, the antenna operates
close to the skull, i.e., in the near field. In addition to the antenna design, the structures in close proximity of the antenna,
e.g., plastic containers, skull, helmet, etc., are also influencing
the antenna performance. The characterization of the individual
antennas and the antenna array must therefore be made in realistic operating conditions, i.e., when it is worn. Under such conditions, the reflection coefficients show a resonance frequency
at 1.2–1.3 GHz. An individual variation can be seen between
antennas, due to the reasons just mentioned. The reflection coefficient is typically below −10 dB in a 500-MHz band around
the resonance frequency. To illustrate this, the reflection coefficients showing the typical response for three of the 12 antennas,
in the second system, are plotted in Fig. 3. For the transmission
coefficient, the maximum value is typically found, in the range
0.8–1.3 GHz. The reason for this lower frequency range is that
conductivity of brain tissue increases with frequency, and that
the propagation distance between different antenna combinations varies. These two parameters, distance and conductivity,

Fig. 3. Examples of reflection coefficients for three different antennas on the
helmet. The remaining antennas show similar characteristics.

Fig. 4. Examples of transmission coefficients between the antenna on the front
and the back of the skull, and between the antennas on the front and its closest
neighbor.

together determine at which frequency the maximum transmission is obtained. The resulting maximum transmission coefficient is typically in the range of −20 to −40 dB. Transmission
coefficients above −40 dB are typically found in a band 1.0–
1.5 GHz around this maximum, and this is where we expect to
obtain the best diagnostic performance for our system. In this
frequency range, signals propagating through the thickest part
of the head are above the noise floor of the microwave measurement units, and can thus reliably be detected by all antenna
pairs. In the present studies, every channel was measured over a
large band of frequencies, 0.3–3.0 GHz, which is more than we
expect to be useful. Also the transmission coefficients are affected by the same variability due to near-field effects as are the
reflection coefficients. To exemplify, transmission coefficients
for neighboring antennas, i.e., the pair with the highest transmission, and the diagonally opposing antennas, i.e., the antennas
with the lowest transmission, have been plotted in Fig. 4.
At the lower end of the measured frequency band, a large
variability is seen in the measurements, even between measurements on the same patient. This can be understood in terms
of capacitive coupling between the antennas, cables, and the
surroundings, and makes the measurements less reliable, since

PERSSON et al.: MICROWAVE-BASED STROKE DIAGNOSIS MAKING GLOBAL PREHOSPITAL THROMBOLYTIC TREATMENT POSSIBLE

they are influenced by sources originating from outside the skull.
At the upper end of the frequency scale, disturbances can also
be anticipated, both in terms of reduced signal strength caused
by the increasing losses in the tissue, but also due to variability
introduced by the decreased wavelength. When wearing the helmet, there will be individual variations in the fitting due to the
physique of the patient, e.g., skull size, amount of hair, amount
of water in the water containers, and positioning of the helmet, etc. In terms of wavelengths, these variations increase with
frequency and cause corresponding uncertainty in the data.
The signal analysis aims at extracting useful information with
respect to the optimal antenna performance range and to remove
the effect of errors. It is however difficult to exactly determine
the limits where the data are useful or not. The approach in these
studies has been to consider the useful frequency interval as unknown and as a parameter to be determined in the development
procedure and in the clinical testing.

2809

Fig. 5. First prototype system, in which the ten antennas have been mounted
on a bicycle helmet. To the right, in the helmet, plastic bags used for the matching
liquid can be seen.

C. Technical Development in Preparation for Clinical Tests
In the development toward a microwave-based stroke diagnostics device, the first step was to design an antenna system that
could be fitted on the head and used for microwave scattering
measurements. This was performed as a numerical study in the
simulation software CST [25]. The simulation was based on a
head model from the Visible Human Project [32] male dataset.
In this model, a spherical volume of blood was placed in order
to simulate a hemorrhagic stroke [25]. The bleeding was centered 45 mm below the skin surface and positioned just below
one antenna. Bleedings ranging 5–30 mm in radius were used
for the simulations. When comparing the signal with that of a
normal brain, a detectable variation in the range 0.5–3 dB in
the signal amplitude was found. This is within practically measurable limits and an encouraging result. The results are similar
when the bleeding is placed between two antennas, but instead
using transmission data for the detection.
A prototype system was then designed and built. It consisted
of antennas sending and receiving microwave signals, mounted
in a helmet. The helmet is shown in Fig. 5. In this prototype, ten
antennas were used, and they are here visible because plastic
containers for the matching liquid have been partly removed. In
the right part of the helmet, it can however still be seen. This is
the same helmet that was used in the first patient study.
In this system, a total of 45 independent transmit–receive
channels were measured. A single-frequency measurement
gives the scattering parameter, and measurements were performed over a large number of frequencies. The microwave
measurement device was a fully computer-controlled system
built on a two-port network analyzer (Agilent E8362 B PNA)
as the transmit/receive unit. To fully automatize the experiment,
a 2:32 switch multiplexer module (Cytec CXM/128-S-W) was
used. The channel isolation was 120 dB.
As a next step, this system was used in a lab test using tissue
realistic phantom material. The helmet shown in Fig. 5 was
used for these measurements. The aim was to model bleedings
of different sizes, and to measure and classify these bleedings.
By mixing sugar, salt, water, and agar, a brain phantom with

Fig. 6. (a) Brain/blood phantom. (b) Subspace distance plotted for four different bleeding phantoms.

the same dielectric properties as gray matter was created [see
Fig. 6(a)]. Using the same ingredients, with different relative
ratios, phantom material with the same properties as blood was
also created. Measurements were made on the brain phantom,
before and after insertion of blood phantoms of volumes 1, 3, 5,

2810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 7. Second prototype system, in which the 12 patch antennas have been
mounted on a custom-built supporting structure.

and 10 ml. The measurement data were analyzed with a subspace
distance measure and has been reported in [33]. The results of the
analysis are shown in Fig. 6(b). Two main features of importance
to our detection problem are worth noting. First, the subspace
distances of all cases with a bleeding included are separated
from the nonbleeding case. Second, the subspace distance is
increasing monotonically with bleeding size. The error bars
show the variation in the leave-one-out (LOO) validation.
During the lab tests and also the first patient study, it became
clear that the first prototype was not optimally designed for its
purpose. The main problem was the mechanical strength of the
structures holding the antennas in place were too weak. For
the second patient study, a more robust custom-built helmet
structure with 12 antennas was constructed [see Fig. 7]. This
gave 66 independent transmit–receive channels and a custom
built and integrated network analyzer and switching solution
were used. Specifications of the network analyzer were similar
to the previous system; however, signal isolation in the switch
was 80 dB.

with IS belong to another linear subspace. Labeled training data
are used to identify bases for these subspaces. In addition, since
data from both classes share many common features, reduced
size subspaces for each class are formed. This is accomplished
by removing some of the directions in the subspaces that have
the smallest angles between them. The principle of detection in
the algorithm is based on projecting the data sample under test
onto the two reduced subspaces and calculating the Euclidean
distance of the projected data sample. The largest distance determines which class is selected, i.e., if a hemorrhagic stroke is
detected or not. A decision offset can be introduced to change
the performance of the detector and thereby improve the probability of detection, at the cost of an increased false alarm rate.
The detection algorithm is a development of the original idea
of a subspace classifier, i.e., CLAFIC (see [16]). The so-called
matched subspace detectors [34] are also based on similar ideas.
In Section III-A, information on measurement data, its structure, and the data preprocessing applied are described. A thorough description of the classification algorithm is presented in
Section III-B, and the method of validation is detailed in
Section III-C.
A. Measurement Data and Preprocessing
The raw measurement data provided by the antenna array
system are samples of the complex scattering matrix for a given
set of frequencies. For a fixed frequency ωk , the scattering matrix
element with row index i and column index j describe the
complex gain sij (ω) between the transmission antenna j and
the receiving antenna i. For reciprocal systems, the scattering
matrix is symmetric sij (ω) = sj i (ω). Hence, for a reciprocal
antenna system with na ports the scattering matrix has, at most,
2
a
d = n a +n
unique values.
2
Each matrix element is normalized across the frequency dimension to equalize the power between channels. The magnitude of the scattering parameters has a large dynamic range. To
mitigate this effect, all normalized scattering values are transformed using the complex logarithm function. Finally, all values
from one measurement is embedded into a single complex vector x ∈ C d . Hence, the elements of the data vector x are the
elements of the set
{log(sij (ωk )/cij )|k = 1, . . . , nω , 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ na }

III. SIGNAL ANALYSIS
The microwave measurement data, in terms of the scattering parameters of the transmission channels, were then used in
a hemorrhagic stroke-detecting algorithm. The algorithm was
trained using measurements from subjects with known conditions, i.e., supervised learning. Data from each channel are preprocessed by scaling the values such that the total signal power
is equal for all channels. The complex values from all channels
are organized into a single complex vector. Finally, the data are
transformed by employing the logarithm to each element of the
data vector in order to bring the data to a better numerical range.
The algorithm is based on the assumption that the noise-free
data vector from subjects with a hemorrhagic stroke belongs to
a linear subspace and that the corresponding data from subjects

where nω is the number of measured frequencies and


nω
 1 
cij = 
|sij (ωk )|2
nω

(1)

(2)

k =1

is the normalization constant.
B. Supervised Learning and Classification
A detection or classification algorithm is a function which
maps the data vector x ∈ C d into a discrete variable c called a
class label
c = f (x).

(3)

PERSSON et al.: MICROWAVE-BASED STROKE DIAGNOSIS MAKING GLOBAL PREHOSPITAL THROMBOLYTIC TREATMENT POSSIBLE

Here, we consider the binary classification problem, and hence,
c is binary, i.e., c ∈ {+, −}, a class of positives and a class of
negatives. If a (statistical) model exists describing the underlying mechanism of how samples x and the corresponding class
label are connected, the function f can be derived in various
ways [37]. In supervised learning, the function f is inferred by
selecting f from a class of functions based on a set of available labeled training samples {(ci , xi )}. The stroke detection
algorithm is based on a supervised learning method.
Here, the set of classification functions is implicitly defined
by an assumed model of the data. We assume data samples x
corresponding to class c are generated according to
x=

mc


(4)

k =1

where U 0c is a matrix containing the basis vectors u0c,k as its
columns, and α represents the corresponding basis weight vector for the 
specific sample x. The vector e is the error between
c
0
the model m
k =1 uc,k αc (k)k and the measurement x. The integer mc is the dimension of U 0c , and we assume it is significantly
smaller than the data dimension, i.e., mc  d.
Estimates of the bases are determined using training data for
each class, respectively. All training data samples for one class
are assembled into a matrix


(5)
X c = x1c , x2c , . . . , xtcc
where xic

denote sample i with label c, and tc denote the number
of training samples with label c. Let the singular value decomposition (SVD) [38] be given by
	


0 
 Σc
H

⊥
(6)
Xc = U c U c
V cV ⊥
c
⊥
0 Σc

where Σc contains the mc largest singular values of X c . The
matrix U c ∈ C d×m c is an estimate of the basis of class c. If
the SNR is high, or if mc  tc , the range space of U c will be
approximately the same as the range space of U 0c in (4).
Since the bases of the two classes are derived from samples of
data which are noisy, the estimated bases will be perturbed. Signal directions in the two signal subspaces which are nearly colinear will particularly lead to a high variability of the outcome of
the classifier. Hence, dimensions in the two signal spaces which
are nearly colinear are removed. Proximity between subspaces
is measured using the principal angles.
Definition 1 (Principal angles) [38]: The principal angles
0 ≤ θ1 ≤ · · · ≤ θm ≤ π/2 between the subspaces spanned by
U + ∈ C d×m + and U − ∈ C d×m − are defined as
cos(θk ) =

max

q ∈U + r ∈U −

q T r = q Tk r k

subject to

(7)

q = r = 1
q T q i = 0,

The vectors q 1 and r 1 defined by (7) are hence the vectors
from the two spaces spanned by U + and U − , respectively,
which have the smallest angle between them. Assuming, m+ =
H
m− and U H
+ U + = U − U − = I, the SVD decomposition of the
H
matrix product U + U − readily yields a solution to the principal
angle problem
H
UH
+ U − = Y diag(cos θ1 , . . . , cos θm )Z .

r T r i = 0,

i = 1, . . . , k − 1

where q i and r i are the principal vectors and m =
min(m+ , m− ).

(8)

Here,
Y =
Z=

u0c,k αk + e = U 0c α + e

2811




y1

y2

...

ym

z1

z2

...

zm




(9)

are unitary matrices, and diag(cos θ1 , . . . , cos θm ) is a diagonal
matrix with the nonnegative singular values on the diagonal
and
1 ≥ cos θ1 ≥ · · · ≥ cos θm ≥ 0.
Reduced bases with the r closest directions removed are given
by


U r + = U + y r +1 . . . y m


(10)
U r − = U − z r +1 . . . z m .
The discrimination rule is defined by

+, when δ(x) + β > 0
f (x) =
−, when δ(x) + β ≤ 0

(11)

where
H
2
2
δ(x) = U r + U H
r + x − U r − U r − x


H
= xH U r + U H
r + − U r − U r − x.

(12)

The second equality in (12) follows since
H
UH
r + U r + = U r − U r − = I.

The rule can be interpreted as follows. The data vector x is
projected onto the subspaces spanned by the matrices U r + and
U r − , respectively. The label is selected according to which
of the projected vectors have the largest Euclidean length. A
nonzero value of the decision offset β in (11) can be used to
bias the detection toward class + if β > 0 and toward class
− if β < 0. In comparison with [16] and [34], the step where
the nearly colinear subspaces are removed is here added. This
methodology was introduced in [35] and [36].
In the stroke detection application, three consecutive measurements are performed on each subject yielding the measurement set {xi |i = 1, 2, 3}. In order to reduce the variance of the
classification result, a modified discrimination rule according
to

+, when δ({xi }3i=1 ) + β > 0
i 3
f ({x }i=1 ) =
(13)
−, when δ({xi }3i=1 ) + β ≤ 0

2812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

is employed where
1
H
i 2
i 2
U r + U H
r + x  − U r − U r − x 
3 i=1
3

δ({xi }3i=1 ) =

1  iH
H
i
x (U r + U H
r + − U r − U r − )x
3 i=1
3

=

(14)

which in effect uses the average of the three subspace distances
as the input to the threshold function in (13).
C. Performance Assessment by Cross Validation
The performance of the classification algorithm is measured
by calculating the empirical sensitivity and specificity using
LOO cross validation. In standard LOO cross validation, one
sample is removed from the training dataset and saved for testing the derived classifier. This procedure is repeated for all data
samples, and finally, the empirical performance rates are calculated. The method gives unbiased performance estimates but
has a high variance [37]. In this application, three measurements from each subject are at hand. A straightforward use of
the LOO approach, treating the three measurements as independent samples, would bias the result toward an overoptimistic
performance. Hence, a modified LOO validation is employed,
where all three data samples from one subject are removed when
forming the training set. To reduce the variance of the performance estimate, a Monte Carlo-based bootstrap method [39] is
used where, in each LOO step, a sequence of training datasets
are formed by randomly selecting one measurement out of the
three for each of the subject, excluding the LOO subject. For
each training dataset, the classification function f (·) is constructed, and the data from the subject left out are tested. The
average performance is then estimated as the empirical outcome
over all the randomly created training sets. In this application,
100 random training sets are used.
As the classification function is parameterized by the decision offset β in (13), the empirical estimates of the performance
measures are a function of this offset. A receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve is a visualization of how the sensitivity
and specificity are related by plotting them against each other
[40]. The result is a curve (parametrized by the offset β) which
starts at coordinate (0,1) and ends at (1,0). The area under this
curve (AUC) is a measure of the quality of the detector. An area
of 1 corresponds to the case when the detector perfectly can separate the two classes, and area of 0.5 corresponds to a detector
which randomly assigns the class label, e.g., coin tossing.
IV. CLINICAL TESTING
We have made two consecutive explorative proof of principls
studies, with the two different prototypes, performed at different
hospital departments at Sahlgrenska University Hospital. While
aiming for a microwave-based investigation as early upon onset
of the stroke as possible, the experimental nature of the study
did not allow a delay of routine clinical procedures. Only patients with clinically and/or radiologically established ICH or
IS, without a history of previous cerebrovascular events, were

Fig. 8. Summary of detector performance illustrated as an empirical ROC
curve for ICH versus IS patients. The empirical performance is based on data
from MF01 study and is obtained using a LOO Monte Carlo method. The ROC
curves are parametrized by the decision offset β in (11). The AUC is 0.88.

included in the studies. In each investigation, three consecutive microwave measurements were performed. Patient safety
follow up was performed one day after the microwave-based investigation. Written, informed consent was obtained from each
patient, before any study related procedure was initiated. The
studies were approved by the local Ethical Review Board, and
conducted according to Good Clinical Practice and the revised
Declaration of Helsinki.
A. First Clinical Study
The first study was performed at the Department of Clinical Neurophysiology by engineering and neurophysiology staff.
Here, we summarize the main results from this study, performed
with the same device used for our phantom studies (cf., above,
Fig. 5). The device was used to investigate 20 patients, diagnosed with acute stroke. The patients were studied in a time
window of 7–132 h after stroke onset, defined as last awareness
of healthy condition. Out of the 20 patients enrolled, nine patients were suffering from ICH and 11 patients from IS. Table I
in the Appendix provides more detailed data about the patients.
Scattering measurements in the frequency range from 885 to
1670 MHz were used in this study. Given the limited number
of patients in the study, the LOO Monte Carlo approach described in Section III-C was used to assess the performance of
the algorithm on these data.
The resulting ROC curve is shown in Fig. 8. The AUC is
0.88 gives an indication of the strength of the detection algorithm. This result is obtained by removing four nearly colinear
dimensions resulting in a final subspace dimension of 4. Finally,
the scatterplot in Fig. 9 shows the averaged squared subspace
distance difference for each patient based on a LOO validation
method. The patients are arranged along the x-axis according to
the time between stroke onset and the measurement occasion.

PERSSON et al.: MICROWAVE-BASED STROKE DIAGNOSIS MAKING GLOBAL PREHOSPITAL THROMBOLYTIC TREATMENT POSSIBLE

2813

Fig. 9. Illustration of the distribution of the decision variable, the difference
between the squared subspaces distances evaluated for all patients in a LOO
validation. The x-axis corresponds to elapsed time from onset of stroke to time
of measurement. Data are from ICH versus IS in the first clinical study.

With the hemorrhagic detector aimed at identifying all nine patients with an ICH, seven out of 11 IS patients were separated
from the ICH group whereas four were not.
B. Second Clinical Study
The second study was performed bedside within a neurology
ward, by nursing staff. The patients were studied in a time window of 4–27 h after stroke onset, defined as last awareness of
healthy condition. The performance of the microwave measurement system with the associated algorithm was evaluated on
the clinical data generated by measurements on 25 hospitalized
stroke patients. Out of the 25 patients enrolled, ten patients were
suffering from ICH and 15 patients from IS; see Table II in the
Appendix for more detailed information. The nurses performing the microwave-based assessment were blinded regarding
the result of clinical and radiological investigations performed
at admission. In addition, a group of healthy control subjects
(n = 65, 36 male, age range 23–74), recruited via advertisements within the hospital and university, was investigated.
The available data were grouped into two classes. In each
case, all measurements from patients with a bleeding stroke
formed one class (ICH ten subjects). The second class was
formed in one of the following two ways:
1) Data from patients with an ischemic stroke (IS 15 subjects)
2) Data from healthy subjects (healthy 65 subjects)
We will refer to these test cases as 1) ICH versus IS, 2) ICH versus healthy. In each of the cases, the objective of the detection is
to discriminate ICH subjects from the others. The measurement
bandwidth utilized was 857–1493 MHz and in the classification
algorithm we remove 5 nearly colinear dimensions resulting in
a final subspace dimension of 4. The results from the detection
of ICH patients, expressed as empirical probabilities from the
Monte Carlo investigations are summarized in Figs. 10–12. The

Fig. 10. Summary of detector performance illustrated as empirical ROC
curves for ICH versus IS patients (upper graph) and ICH versus Healthy group
(lower graph). The empirical performance is based on data from MF02 Study and
is obtained using the Monte Carlo method. The ROC curves are parametrized
by the decision offset β in (11). The AUC is indicated in the legend of the plot
for each graph.

resulting ROC curves are shown in Fig. 10 where the upper
graph illustrates the ICH versus IS case and the lower graph
the ICH versus healthy case. The ICH versus IS case gave an
AUC of 0.85, and ICH versus healthy case resulted in an AUC of
0.87. Note that the performance is increased when more subjects
are included in the training data as compared to the base-line
ICH versus IS case. Best performance is obtained when we discriminate ICH patients from healthy volunteers. In Fig. 11, it
is illustrated how different values of the decision offset β influence the sensitivity and specificity. The upper graph is for the
ICH versus IS case, and the lower graph is for the ICH versus
healthy case. Finally, Fig. 12 depicts a scatter plot from test case
1, ICH versus IS, illustrating the averaged squared subspace distance difference for each patient, based on the LOO validation

2814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 12. Illustration of the distribution of the decision variable, the difference
between the squared subspaces distances evaluated for all patients in a LOO
validation. The x-axis corresponds to elapsed time from onset of stroke to time
of measurement. Data are from case 1 ICH versus IS in MF02 study.

Fig. 11. Summary of detector performance illustrated as how the sensitivity
and specificity vary with the decision offset β in (11) for ICH versus IS patients
(upper graph) and ICH versus Healthy group (lower graph). The empirical
performance is based on data from MF02 Study and is obtained using a Monte
Carlo method.

method. The patients are arranged along the x-axis according to
the time elapsed between stroke onset and measurement. With
the hemorrhagic detector aimed at identifying all ten patients
with an ICH, 14 out of 15 IS patients were clearly separated
from the ICH group whereas 1 was not. As shown in Fig. 12,
the variability of the results is increased for patients measured
10 h after stroke onset.
V. DISCUSSION
We have designed and built microwave-based measurement
systems that can differentiate ICH from IS in acute stroke patients and ICH patients from healthy volunteers. Results from
two different clinical pilot-studies demonstrate the effectiveness and limitations of the method developed. The finding,

that our first- and second-generation systems generated similar stroke detection results is interesting as the two studies
were made with completely different prototypes, performed at
two separate departments at the hospital. Our continued clinical
studies will evaluate improved analysis paradigms, as well as
nonrigid caps carrying the antennas, with the ultimate aim to
introduce a simple and affordable prehospital stroke diagnostic
procedure.
The classification algorithms used for these two studies were
derived using labeled sets of training data. The results in Fig. 10
show an increased performance when healthy patients are used
for training. That the comparison of ICH versus 65 healthy
controls gave a better performance than the comparison ICH
versus 15 IS was an expected finding, in all probability due to
IS-related brain edema increasing with the latency from IS onset.
At 99.9% sensitivity to detect ICH, the proportion of IS patients
safely differentiated was approximately 30%, whereas at 90%
ICH sensitivity, 65% of IS patients could be differentiated. A
larger dataset resulting from an ongoing clinical study involving
several hospitals in Sweden, aiming for as early investigation
as possible, is expected to increase the predictive power of the
algorithms, i.e., the capacity for ICH versus IS differentiation.
However, even without such an improvement, the differentiating
capacity reported here is of considerable clinical interest given
the low percentage of IS patients presently being diagnosed in
time to get thrombolytic treatment (cf., Section I). In a recent
Swedish trial, a higher priority level given to stroke patients
by the prehospital emergency medical service reduced time to
arrival at a stroke unit and increased the percentage of patients
receiving thrombolytic treatment from 10% to 24% [41]. Adding
reasonably safe prehospital information about type of stroke
may be expected to improve these figures further, as well as the
prehospital treatment and triage [9].

PERSSON et al.: MICROWAVE-BASED STROKE DIAGNOSIS MAKING GLOBAL PREHOSPITAL THROMBOLYTIC TREATMENT POSSIBLE

Needless to say, an introduction of prehospital thrombolytic
treatment based on a microwave scan diagnosis will have to
await studies of larger clinical cohorts, and a full clinical
translation can only be achieved when stroke clinicians in a
nonblinded bedside situation can compare data provided by
microwave-based classification to clinical status and other diagnostic procedures. Furthermore, we have presented the measurement system as a stroke detector and illustrated the performance
in terms of sensitivity and specificity measures in order to illustrate the merits of the system. However, the detector is based on
comparing two derived measures, i.e., the sizes of the measured
signal projected onto the subspaces representing each class. In a
clinical setting, we believe the physician will directly use these
continuous measures in order to complement other diagnostic
sources before making a final diagnosis.
VI. CONCLUSION
For the first time, a proof of principle has been presented that
microwave-based measurements can differentiate ICH from IS
in acute stroke patients as well differentiate ICH from healthy
volunteers. The relative simplicity and size of microwave-based
systems compared to CT or MR scanners make them easily
applicable in a prehospital setting. We suggest that microwave
technology could result in a substantial increase of patients
reaching a stroke diagnosis in time for introduction of thrombolytic treatment. The socioeconomic ramifications of such a
development are obvious not only in the industrial world but
also, and perhaps even more so, in the developing world.

TABLE I
PATIENT AND STROKE CHARACTERISTICS, CLINICAL STUDY 1

Age
39
73
56
68
59
55
64
65
65
79
64
76
46
62
86
62
70
53
37
64

Gender

Diagnosis

F
F
F
M
M
M
F
M
M
F
F
M
F
M
M
M
F
M
M
F

IS
ICH
IS
IS
IS
IS
ICH
ICH
IS
ICH
IS
IS
IS
ICH
ICH
ICH
ICH
ICH
IS
IS

Right F
Left F
Left T
Right TO
Left F
Left FTP
Left BG
Left TP
Right FTP
Right BG
Right BG
Left F, INS
Left FTP
Right BG
Left BG
Left BG
Right THAL
Left THAL
Right TF
Left TO

TABLE II
PATIENT AND STROKE CHARACTERISTICS, CLINICAL STUDY 2

Age Gender Diagnosis
58
73
84
83
79
68
89
40
85
76
86
60
74
53
59
65
83
86
62
80
89
82
61
89
67

F
F
F
F
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
M
F
M
F
F
M
M
F
F
F
F
F
F

IS
IS
IS
ICH
IS
ICH
ICH
ICH
IS
IS
IS
IS
IS
ICH
ICH
IS
IS
IS
IS
ICH
IS
IS
ICH
ICH
ICH

Site of
lesion

Volume
(ml)

Left FT, INS
Right P
Left CAPS E, INS
Left BG, VENT PEN
Right COR RAD
Left FP, SAH PEN
Left C SEMI
Left BG
Right T, INS
Right F, BG
Right F
Right COR RAD
Not visualized
Left THAL, VENT PEN
Left BG
Right TP
Left F
Not visualized
Right COR RAD
Right FP, SDH
Left FT
Right TP
Left BG, VENT PEN
Right BG, VENT PEN
Left THAL

36
6,1
3,8
3,6
0,7
13
2,5
18
19
105
2,2
1,1
17
2,4
48
12
3,2
18
206
38
35
82
3,1

Latency stroke
to study
NIHSS at
(h:min)
investigation
18:10
15:30
16:15
16:35
10:30
26:45
21:30
24:20
23:35
14:30
25:05
15:00
20:55
10:42
4:28
21:52
21:02
4:57
24:55
13:16
19:27
6:27
20:05
23:44
11:28

2
2
1
12
2
13
22
12
1
18
6
1
0
17
4
1
3
9
8
10
26
17
22
11
7

Abbreviations: NIHSS—National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, IS—Ischemic Stroke,
ICH—Intracerebral Haemorrhage, F—Frontal, T—Temporal, O—Occipital, P—Parietal,
BG—Basal Ganglia, INS—Insula, THAL—Thalamus, CAPS E—Capsula Externa, COR
RAD—Corona Radiata, VENT PEN Ventricular Penetration, SAH PEN—Subarachnoidal
Haemorrhage Penetration, C SEMI—Centrum Semiovale, SDH—Subdural Haemorrhage.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

APPENDIX

Site of
lesion

2815

Volume
(ml)

Latency stroke
to study
(h:min)

NIHSS at
investigation

137
19
16
29
25
287
10
19
99
3,3
6,0
22
139
6,8
3,2
17
4,0
0,5
53
47

132:00
25:00
55:05
77:10
49:55
128:00
60:40
19:38
62:13
26:10
94:20
47:10
37:15
36:10
7:30
23:35
21:15
19:40
26:05
27:55

22
9
14
5
10
14
5
7
14
7
4
11
8
4
4
18
5
2
1
13

Abbreviations: NIHSS—National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, IS—Ischemic Stroke,
ICH—Intracerebral Haemorrhage, F—Frontal, T—Temporal, O—Occipital, P—Parietal,
BG—Basal Ganglia, INS—Insula, THAL—Thalamus.

The authors would like to acknowledge the company Medfield Diagnostics AB for financing and supporting the clinical
measurements. Patient measurements were performed by research nurses L. Håkansson and L. Farashbandi, supported by
an engineer S. Kidborg.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Olesen, A. Gustavsson, M. Svensson, H. U Wittchen, and B. Jönsson,
“CDBE2010 study group; European Brain Council. The economic cost of
brain disorders in Europe,” Eur. J. Neurol. vol. 19, pp. 155–162, 2012.
[2] The Atlas of Heart Disease and Stroke, World Health Organization, Geneve, Switzerlan, 2004.
[3] T. Kjellström, B. Norrving, and A. Shatchkute, “Helsingborg Declaration
2006 on European stroke strategies,” Cerebrovasc Dis., vol. 23, pp. 231–
241, 2007.
[4] The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke
Study Group, “Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke,”
N Engl J. Med., vol. 333, pp. 1581–1588, 1995.
[5] H. P. Adams Jr., G. del Zoppo, M. J. Alberts, D. L. Bhatt, L. Brass,
A. Furlan, R. L. Grubb, R. T. Higashida, E. C. Jauch, C. Kidwell, P.
D. Lyden, L. B. Morgenstern, A. I. Qureshi, R. H. Rosenwasser, P. A.
Scott, and E. F. M. Wijdicks, “Guidelines for the early management of
adults with ischemic stroke: a guideline from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council, Clinical Cardiology Council, Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention Council, and the
Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular Disease and Quality of Care Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary Working Groups: The American
Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this guideline as an educational tool for neurologists,” Circulation, vol. 115, pp. e478–e534, 2007.

2816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

[6] European Stroke Organisation Executive Committee, “Guidelines for
management of ischaemic stroke and transient ischaemic attack,” Cerebrovasc. Dis., vol. 25, pp. 457–507, 2008.
[7] J. C. Grotta, W. S Burgin, A. El-Mitwalli, M. Long, M. Campbell, L. B.
Morgenstern, M. Malkoff, and A. V. Alexandrov, “Intravenous tissue-type
plasminogen activator therapy for ischemic stroke: Houston experience
1996 to 2000,” TextitArch. Neurol., vol. 58, pp. 200–2013, 2001.
[8] A. Meretoja, D. Strbian, S. Mustanoja, T. Tatlisumak, P. J Lindsberg, and
M. Kaste, “Reducing in-hospital delay to 20 min in stroke thrombolysis,”
TextitNeurology, vol. 79, pp. 306–313, 2012.
[9] K. Fassbender C. Balucani, S. Walter, S. R Levine, A. Haass, and
J. Grotta, “Streamlining of prehospital stroke management: the golden
hour,” TextitLancet Neurol., vol. 12, pp. 585–596, 2013.
[10] G. W. Albers and J. M. Olivot, “Intravenous alteplase for ischaemic
stroke,” Lancet, vol. 369, pp. 249–250, 2007.
[11] California Acute Stroke Pilot Registry (CASPR) Investigators. Prioritizing interventions to improve rates of thrombolysis for ischemic stroke.
Neurology vol. 64, pp. 654–659, 2005.
[12] S. Walter, P. Kostopoulos, A. Haass, I. Keller, M. Lesmeister, T.
Schlechtriemen, C. Roth, P. Papanagiotou, I. Grunwald, H. Schumacher,
S. Helwig, J. Viera, H. Körner, M. Alexandrou, U. Yilmaz, K. Ziegler, K.
Schmidt, R. Dabew, D. Kubulus, Y. Liu, T. Volk, K. Kronfeld, C. Ruckes,
T. Bertsch, W. Reith, and K. Fassbender, “Diagnosis and treatment of patients with stroke in a mobile stroke unit versus in hospital: a randomised
controlled trial,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 11, pp. 397–404, 2012.
[13] F. Schlachetzki, M. Herzberg, T. Hlscher, M. Ertl, M. Zimmermann, K. P.
Ittner, H. Pels, U. Bogdahn, and S. Boy, “Transcranial ultrasound from
diagnosis to early stroke treatment: Part 2: Prehospital neurosonography
in patients with acute stroke: The Regensburg stroke mobile project,”
Cerebrovasc. Dis., vol. 33, pp. 262–271, 2012.
[14] C. H. Xu, L. Wang, X. T. Shi, F. S. You, F. Fu, R. G. Liu, M. Dai, Z. W.
Zhao, G. D. Gao, and X. Z. Dong, “Real-time imaging and detection of
intracranial haemorrhage by electrical impedance tomography in a piglet
model,” J. Int. Med. Res., vol. 38, pp. 1596–1604, 2010.
[15] G. Bonmassar, S. Iwaki, G. Goldmakher, L. M Angelone, J. W. Belliveau,
and M. H. Lev, “On the measurement of electrical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) of the human head,” Int. J. Bioelectromagn., vol. 12, pp. 32–46, 2012.
[16] S. Watanabe and N. Pakvasa, “Subspace methods in pattern recognition,”
in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Pattern Recog., 1973, pp. 25–32.
[17] P. M. Meaney, M. W Fanning, T. Raynolds, C. J Fox, Q. Fang, C. A.
Kogel S. P. Poplack, and K. D. Paulsen, “Initial clinical experience with
microwave breast imaging in women with normal mammography,” Acad.
Radiol., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 207–218, Feb. 2007.
[18] S. P. Poplack, T. D Tosteson, W. A. Wells, B. W Pogue, P. M. Meaney,
A. Hartov, C. A Kogel, S. K. Soho, J. J Gibson, and K. D. Paulsen,
“Electromagnetic breast imaging: Results of a pilot study in women
with abnormal mammograms,” Radiology, vol. 243, no. 2. pp. 350–359,
May 2007.
[19] M. Klemm, I. Craddock, J. Leendertz, A. Preece, and R. Benjamin, “Experimental and clinical results of breast cancer detection using UWB
microwave radar,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int.Symp., 2008,
vols. 1–9, pp. 3014–3017.
[20] K. R. Foster, J. L Schepps, R. D. Stoy, and H. P. Schwan, ‘Dielectric
properties of brain tissue between 0.01 and 10 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 24 pp. 1177–1187, 1979.
[21] A. Peyman, S. J. Holden, S. Watts, R. Perrott, and C. Gabriel, “Dielectric properties of porcine cerebrospinal tissues at microwave frequencies:
In vivo, in vitro and systematic variation with age,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 2229–2245, 2007.
[22] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[23] G. Schmid, G. Neubauer, and P. R. Mazal, “Dielectric properties of human
brain tissue measured less than 10 h postmortem at frequencies from 800
to 2450 MHz,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 423–430, 2003.
[24] A. Fhager, P. Hashemzadeh, and M. Persson, “Reconstruction quality and
spectral content of an electromagnetic time-domain inversion algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1594–1604, Aug. 2006.
[25] H. D. Trefná, and M. Persson, “Antenna array design for brain monitoring,”
in Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[26] M. A. Khorshidi, T. McKelvey, M. Persson, and H. D. Trefná, “Classification of microwave scattering data based on a subspace distance with application to detection of bleeding stroke,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Workshop
Computat. Adv. Multi-Sensor Adaptive Process., Dec. 2009, pp. 301–304.
[27] R. Scapaticci, O. M Bucci, I. Catapano, and L. Crocco, “Differential
microwave imaging for brain stroke followup,” Int. J. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 2014, p. 312528, 2014.

[28] M. Guardiola, L. Jofre, S. Capdevila, and J. Romeu, “UWB brain differential imaging capabilities,” presented at the 6th Eur. Conf. Antennas
Propagation, Gothenburg, Sweden, Mar. 26–30, 2012.
[29] B. J. Mohammed, A. M Abbosh, S. Mustafa, and D. Ireland, “Microwave
system for head imaging,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 63, no. 1,
pp. 117–123, Jan. 2014.
[30] A. Surowiec, S. S Stuchly, and A. Swarup, ‘Postmortem changes of the
dielectric properties of bovine brain tissues at low radiofrequencies,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 7, pp. 31–43, 1986.
[31] H. Došı́čbek Trefná, J. Vrba, and M. Persson, “Evaluation of a patch
antenna applicator for time reversal hyperthemia,” Int. J. Hyperthermia,
vol. 26, pp 185–197, Mar. 2010.
[32] M. J. Ackerman, “The visible human project,” J. Biocommun, vol. 18,
p. 14, 1991.
[33] M. A. Khorshidi, T. McKelvey, M. Persson, and H. D. Trefná, “Classification of microwave scattering data based on a subspace distance with application to detection of bleeding stroke,” presented at the 3rd Int. Workshop
Comput. Adv. Multi-Sensor Adaptive Process., Aruba, Dutch Antilles,
Dec. 13–16, 2009.
[34] L. Scharf and B. Friedlander, “Matched subspace detectors,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 2146–2157, Aug. 1994.
[35] Y. Yu and T. McKelvey, “Unified subspace classification framework developed for diagnostic system using microwave signal,” presented at the
21st Eur. Signal Process. Conf., Marrakech, Marocco, Sep. 2013.
[36] Y. Yu, Classification of High Dimensional Signals With Small Training
Sample Size with Applications Towards Microwave Based Detection Systems, Lic. Thesis, Chalmers Univ. Technol., Göteborg, Sweden, 2013.
[37] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical
Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, 2nd ed. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2009.
[38] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, 2nd ed. Baltimore,
MD, USA: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1989.
[39] B. Efron and R. J. Tibshirani, An Introduction to the Bootstrap. London,
U.K.: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1994.
[40] M. H. Zweig and G. Campbell, “Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)
plots: A fundamental tool in clinical medicine,” Clin. Chem., vol. 39, pp.
561–577, 1993.
[41] A. Berglund and L. Svensson, “Higher prehospital priority level of stroke
improves thrombolysis frequency and time to stroke unit: the Hyper Acute
STroke Alarm (HASTA) Study,” Stroke, vol. 43, pp. 2666–2670, 2012.

Mikael Persson (M’10) received the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees from the Chalmers University of Technology,
Göteborg, Sweden, in 1982 and 1987, respectively.
In 2000, he became a Professor in electromagnetics and in 2006 a Professor in biomedical electromagnetics at the Department of Signal and Systems,
Chalmers University of Technology. Since 2010, he
has been the Head of the Division of Signal Processing and Biomedical engineering, Chalmers University of Technology. His main research interests
include electromagnetic diagnostics, monitoring and
treatment, including microwave hyperthermia, stroke diagnostics, EEG source
localization, and microwave system design. He is the author/coauthor of more
than 200 refereed journal and conference papers.

Andreas Fhager (M’07) received the M.Sc. degree
in engineering physics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Chalmers University of
Technology, Göteborg, Sweden, in 2001 and 2006,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor and the
Head of the Biomedical Electromagnetics Research
Group at the Department of Signals and Systems,
Chalmers University of Technology. His research interests include signal processing, algorithm and systems development for microwave tomography, and
imaging intended for medical diagnosis and treatment applications.

PERSSON et al.: MICROWAVE-BASED STROKE DIAGNOSIS MAKING GLOBAL PREHOSPITAL THROMBOLYTIC TREATMENT POSSIBLE

Hana Dobšı́ček Trefná received the M.Sc. degree
in biomedical engineering from the Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic, and the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the
Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden, in 2004 and 2010, respectively.
She is currently an Assistant Professor in the
Biomedical Electromagnetics Research Group at the
Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology. Her research interests include the engineering development and testing of
microwave hyperthermia systems as well as periodical medical diagnosis and
treatment applications of microwaves.

2817

Göran Pegenius received the B.Sc. degree from the
University of Göteborg, Göteborg, Sweden, in 1986.
Since 1995, he has had a position as Research
Technician at the Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital and
Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg.

Yinan Yu (S’12) received the Bachelor of Science
degree in communication engineering from Nankai
University, Tianjin, China, and the Master of Science degree in communication engineering from the
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg,
Sweden. She is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree on the subject of signal reconstruction and
classification at Chalmers University of Technology.
From March 2013 to March 2014, she was a
Visiting Student at Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ, USA. Her research interests include machinelearning techniques for multiclass, multilabel classification problems, feature
transformation and selection for reducing complexity, kernel analysis, and techniques of handling large-scale data.

Jan-Erik Karlsson was born in Åmål, Sweden, in
1960. He received the B.Sc. degree in chemistry
from the University of Göteborg, Göteborg, Sweden, in 1989, and studied at the Medical School,
Göteborg University, from 1981 to 1986. He received
the Ph.D. degree in medicine from Göteborg University, in 1993. In 1994, he finished his internship at
Mölndal County Hospital and received the MD licence.
After residency at the Department of Neurology,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, he was
appointed as a Specialist in neurology in 2000. He was appointed as a Senior
Consultant in neurology and the Head of the Stroke Unit, Sahlgrenska University Hospital in 2002 and has held this position since. His clinical research work
has focused on acute stroke treatments, mainly intravenous thrombolysis and
endovascular intervention treatments. He has participated as an Investigator and
Principal Investigator in about 15 clinical trials, both academic and industrial.

Tomas McKelvey (S’91–M’99–SM’07) received the
Electrical Engineering education at Lund University,
Lund, Sweden, from 1987 to 1991 and the Ph.D. degree in automatic control from Linköping University,
Linköpin, Sweden, in 1995.
Between 1995 and 1999, he held research and
teaching positions at Linköping University and became docent in 1999. Between 1999 and 2000, he
was a Visiting Researcher at the University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia. Since 2000, he has been
with the Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, and since 2006, a Full Professor position, and since 2011, the
Head of the Signal Processing group. His research interests include model based
and statistical signal processing, system identification, control, machine learning and image processing with applications to biomedical engineering, active
safety systems, and combustion engines.

Mikael Elam received the M.D. degree from the
University of Göteborg, Göteborg, Sweden, in 1982,
and specialist certification in clinical neurophysiology from the Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, in 1990. Academically, he received
the Ph.D. degree in experimental neurophysiology/neuropharmacology from the Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical Faculty of
the Göteborg University, in 1985.
He was appointed as a Senior Consultant at the
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, in 1995. He became
an Associate Professor in 1990 and Professor/Chairman of the Göteborg Department of Clinical Neurophysiology in 2001. His main research interests include
autonomic neuroscience, including central and peripheral nervous system control of cardiovascular function. He has authored/co-authored more than 130
peer-reviewed original research publications; Hirsch index 32.

