2796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fetal Heart Rate Classification
Using Generative Models
Shishir Dash, J. Gerald Quirk, and Petar M. Djurić∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents novel methods for classification
of fetal heart rate (FHR) signals into categories that are meaningful for clinical implementation. They are based on generative
models (GMs) and Bayesian theory. Instead of using scalar features
that summarize information obtained from long-duration data, the
models allow for explicit use of feature sequences derived from local patterns of FHR evolution. We compare our methods with a
deterministic expert system for classification and with a support
vector machine approach that relies on system-identification and
heart rate variability features. We tested the classifiers on 83 retrospectively collected FHR records, with the gold-standard true
diagnosis defined using umbilical cord pH values. We found that
our methods consistently performed as well as or better than these,
suggesting that the use of GMs and the Bayesian paradigm can
bring significant improvement to automatic FHR classification approaches.
Index Terms—Accelerations, decelerations, fetal heart rate, generative models, mixture models, variability.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE continuous assessment of fetal health is considered
necessary to prevent fetal injury or death during or before
labor. Nowadays, electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) has permeated obstetrical practice almost completely, as opposed to being
used merely for complicated pregnancies when the technology
was first introduced in the 1960s [1]. EFM involves simultaneous
monitoring of the fetal heart rate (FHR) as well as the maternal uterine pressure (UP) signal. In 2002, nearly 85% of live
births in the U.S. (3.5 million women) underwent EFM [2]. The
technology offers obvious advantages compared to old methods
like periodic auscultation with a fetoscope. Other methods include umbilical or scalp blood-sampling to determine pH values
and nonestablished techniques such as vibro-acoustic stimulation, fetal pulse oximetry, and near-infrared spectroscopy [3].
However, none of these techniques has become as ubiquitous as
FHR-UP monitoring.

T

Manuscript received August 22, 2013; revised June 4, 2014; accepted June
6, 2014. Date of publication June 12, 2014; date of current version October
16, 2014. The work of P. M. Djurić was supported by the NSF under Award
CCF-1320626. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. Dash is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790 USA (e-mail:
shishir.dash@stonybrook.edu).
J. G. Quirk is with the Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Medicine, Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY
11790 USA (e-mail: J.Gerald.Quirk@stonybrookmedicine.edu).
∗ P. M. Djurić is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790 USA (e-mail:
petar.djuric@stonybrook.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2330556

For a long time, EFM has been based predominantly on visual
analysis of FHR patterns [4]. Therefore, it is subjective and
plagued with high false positive rates, even when based on
consensus guidelines prescribed by the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) [5]. According
to these guidelines, there are three categories of FHR tracings:
Category 1 corresponds to normal, Category 2 to indeterminate,
and Category 3 to abnormal traces. Not only is the task of
labeling highly labor intensive, but also very much prone to
errors due to the long acknowledged issue of inter- and intraobserver variability [3], [6]. In addition, noise, artifacts, fetal and
maternal movements induce significant nonstationarity while
the lack of beat-to-beat resolution in Doppler recordings (which
constitute the majority of FHR traces) greatly compromises the
quality of the data.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for classification
of FHR signals into categories that are meaningful for clinical
implementation. We describe how we 1) extract informative features of fetal status from FHR records, 2) define class-specific
models for observed feature vectors, 3) use a set of training
data to estimate the parameters for each class-specific model,
and 4) choose the class of a newly observed feature vector.
To this end, our primary contribution is the use of the generative model (GM) classification framework in combination with
sequences of FHR-UP features as classifier inputs. With this approach, we aim at accurately describing both local and long-term
changes in FHR-UP dynamics, an approach that differs from the
standard techniques of FHR analysis. We elaborate on the differences between our approach and the standard techniques in
Section I-A, where we also provide background on the related
study. In Section II, we describe in detail our feature extraction,
segmentation, and our GMs. We have compared, in Section III,
the classification performance of the proposed methods with
that of two existing ones, both briefly described in Section II.
Finally, in Sections IV and V, we conclude with a discussion of
these results and possible advancements.
A. Background
The first critical step for FHR classification is the identification of informative features from the FHR-UP signals. A
recent comprehensive review of features for FHR analysis can
be found in [7]. These features may be morphological [8], linear (e.g., mean and variance), nonlinear (e.g., entropy or fractal
dimensions) [9], or power spectral density estimates [10]. Our
previous studies have also revealed informative features derived
from the time series of fractional changes in successive FHR
samples [11]. Another approach from [12] focused on the dynamic relationship between the UP and FHR signals, considered

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DASH et al.: FETAL HEART RATE CLASSIFICATION USING GENERATIVE MODELS

as input and output, respectively, and using the system gain and
phase delay as features for discrimination.
Features extracted from FHR signals are then used as input to
a classification system. For instance, rule-based classifiers have
been addressed in [8] and neural networks in [13]. In [14], three
different techniques were exploited for feature selection (principal component analysis, group of adaptive models evolution,
and neural networks) followed by direct correlation of welldiscriminating feature sets with FHR pathology. Binary particle
swarm optimization has also been employed for automated feature selection, followed by classification using support vector
machines (SVMs) [15], neural networks, and grammatical evolution [16] techniques.
All of the aforementioned approaches have used summary
feature values derived from long-duration time series (typically
10–20 min and sometimes up to 60 min). As a result, they typically do not account for the natural nonstationarity and variation
present in FHR dynamics. Also, the system identification (SI)
approach in [12] is unable to find a direct relationship between
FHR and UP signals for a large number of records. A possible
reason is the reliance on a linear model for SI that does not account for nonlinear interactions such as higher frequency variations from sharp decelerations or variability coincident with
decelerations.
As part of our previous research [11], [17], [18], we have explored a number of features, including some derived directly
from physician’s domain knowledge. They include baseline
FHR trend and variability, contraction rates, and numbers and
types of episodic variations such as accelerations and decelerations. An important characteristic of these signals is their rich
dynamic nature. We exploit the idea of partitioning each T second FHR record into sequences of much shorter (t-second
duration) segments and describing each segment by discrete
features including “FHR variability” or “presence of accelerations.” Each FHR record can thus be represented by a sequence
of feature values, which is then used as an input to a Bayesian
classification system capable of finding shared patterns among
feature sequences from different records. For modeling the feature sequences, we use the framework of GMs. Similar ideas
have been used previously in several fields including text classification [19], [20], image processing [21], representation of electroencephalogram and electrocardiogram data [22], and adult
heart rate data [23].
II. METHOD
In this section, we describe our feature extraction and classification methods. We also briefly present two existing methods,
which we use for performance comparison. They are 1) an expert system (ES) based on the NICHD guidelines, and 2) the
approach from [12] that exploits heart rate variability (HRV)
metrics, the gain, and the delay of the UP-FHR input–output
system.

2797

classifier from [12]. For the proposed GM classification methods, we employ segmented versions of features from the first
group, and more specifically, of accelerations, decelerations,
and variability.
1) NICHD Features: The NICHD consensus guidelines for
EFM trace interpretation are widely used in obstetric facilities
across the United States [5]. They describe a) general rules
for visual assessment of morphological features in the FHRUP recording, b) a guide to mapping numerical features into
qualitative “symptoms”, and c) if–then rules for final diagnosis
of the trace. We have described the implementation of these
guidelines in [17], and provide only a brief outline here.
Prior to carrying out feature extraction, some preprocessing
is performed to remove various artifacts including ones due to
movement, and to interpolate over missing beats if the gaps
are small. First, from the UP signal, we detect the presence of
maternal contractions using a mode estimation technique described in [17]. We then estimate the baseline heart rate using
a windowed median-filtering algorithm on the FHR time series,
with a 5-min moving window, which is advanced on a sampleto-sample basis. Then, we identify episodic deviations from
this baseline and annotate any significant upward (downward)
divergence-and-return to baseline as an acceleration (deceleration). For FHR regions free of accelerations and decelerations,
we estimate FHR “variability” by calculating the interquartile
range of the debaselined FHR time series. The thresholds for
detection of contractions, baseline FHR, accelerations, and decelerations were derived from the NICHD guidelines, and minor
tuning was done to improve this detection in our previous publication [17]. We have used these same thresholds for analysis
of our current dataset.
2) SI and HRV Features: In [12], it was assumed that FHR
(denoted y) is composed of three different components: a) baseline heart rate corresponding to average cardiac output (the dc
component), b) response to changes in maternal UP signals, and
c) variability due to sympathetic-parasympathetic modulation.
These three components are modeled as follows:
1) the FHR baseline signal yBL in the 0–4.5-mHz frequency
range as a linear trend,
2) the FHR response to UP ySI in the 4.5–30-mHz frequency
range as the output of filtering the maternal UP with a
filter whose impulse response function is estimated from
training data, and
3) the FHR response to the autonomic nervous system dynamics yHRV in the 30–1000-mHz frequency range as
the output of an autoregressive model driven by a white
Gaussian noise input.
From these components, five different features are obtained:
1) the offset of the linear fit to yBL , 2) the gain, 3) delay of the
impulse response function used to model the UP-ySI dynamics,
4) the low frequency (30–150 mHz), and 5) movementfrequency (150–500 mHz) components of the power spectral
density of yHRV .

A. Feature Extraction

B. Segmentation and Feature Discretization

We distinguish two groups of features: 1) the NICHD features of the ES classifier and 2) SI and HRV features used by the

Let a given contiguous input time-series pair (FHR and UP)
be denoted {y, u}, and have length T fs samples, where fs is

2798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. Example of a feature sequence (displayed as a row of symbol numbers at the top) extracted from an FHR (in blue)-UP (in green) record. The size of the
alphabet H x was 34 and the segment length was t = 60 s. FHR units are beats per minute (bpm) while UP is scaled to percentage values.

the sampling frequency. In order to make feature sequences
amenable to analysis using GMs, we first partition both y and u
into synchronized segments of length tfs samples with no overlap. For each segment (indexed by j), a discretization module
assigns a feature value xj by using an Hx -sized alphabet. We
illustrate this process below.
1) Let the (normalized) FHR variability of the jth segment
be denoted by vj , where vj ∈ [0, 1]. If this segment is
not classified as an acceleration or deceleration, then we
discretize this to a label ξj in the following way:
⎧
1,
vj ∈ [0, b)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ 2,
vj ∈ [b, 2b)
(1)
ξj =
⎪ ...
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
Hv , vj ∈ [1 − b, 1]

information from both FHR and UP signals in a single discrete
feature type x. An example of a feature sequence is shown in
Fig. 1. We recognize here that, unlike other existing FHR feature extraction methods (such as in rule-based systems) which
also consider the baseline FHR as a feature, the restriction of
one label per segment forces us to choose between the baseline
FHR value and the variability for all segments not classified as
acceleration/deceleration episodes. We chose to stick to FHR
variability instead of baseline because this is recognized as being more informative of fetal health in previous studies, including our own [7], [11], [14], [17], [18]. We denote the feature
sequence from the ith FHR record as xi = {xi,1 , . . . , xi,d i },
where the second subscript identifies the segment and di is the
total number of segments in the ith record. We model these
feature sequences using GMs as follows.

where b = 1/Hv is a bin width which controls the granularity of discretization.
2) If segment j has at least 50% of samples classified as being
part of an acceleration, the label ξj takes a value depending
on the type of acceleration. Its values are quantified as
ξj = Hv + 1 (normal), ξj = Hv + 2 (prolonged), or ξj =
Hv + 3 (baseline change). Thus, HA = 3.
3) If segment j has at least 50% of samples classified as being
part of a deceleration, the label ξj takes a value depending
on the type of deceleration, that is, ξj = Hv + HA + 1
(early), ξj = Hv + HA + 2 (late), ξj = Hv + HA + 3
(variable), ξj = Hv + HA + 4 (no associated contraction), or ξj = Hv + HA + 5 (baseline change). Thus,
HD = 5.
4) We assign the final feature value xj as follows: If segment
j of the UP signal u has at least 50% of samples classified
as part of a contraction, then the feature xj = ξj + Hv +
HA + HD ; otherwise, xj = ξj . Therefore, Hx = 2(Hv +
HA + HD ).
Thus, the two important parameters for controlling the feature resolution are the segmentation period t and the bin width
b. Note that through this procedure, we have combined available

C. Classification
Let each data record be generated by one of K possible
classes. Given a set D of N feature-class pairs {xi , Ci }, our
goal is to infer, for some newly observed feature vector xn , its
unobserved (hidden) class Cn = k, k = 1, 2, . . . , K.
1) GM Classifiers:
a) Naı̈ve Bayes GM: A common simplifying assumption
when studying sequential data is that the probability of a feature
instantiation in a certain segment is independent of the feature
instantiations in other segments. This is referred to as the naı̈ve
Bayes assumption. The feature order does not matter, and the
feature sequence can be encoded easily via a multinomial distribution. Then, for the ith record, given its class Ci = k, an
attribute value for feature x in each of the di segments is generated by the probability distribution θ k = [θk ,1 , θk ,2 , . . . , θk ,H x ]
whose support is the range of possible feature values 1, . . . , Hx .
Next, for the prior of class probability π and the distribution
parameters θ k , we use, respectively, Dirichlet distributions. The
reason is that the Dirichlet distributions are conjugate to the
multinomial distribution, and thus enable analytical solutions
for integrating out parameters when calculating a posteriori
probabilities. The respective hyperparameters for these priors

DASH et al.: FETAL HEART RATE CLASSIFICATION USING GENERATIVE MODELS

2799

Fig. 2. Directed acyclic graph of (a) the N datasets and K possible classes of the generative naı̈ve Bayes model and (b) the first-order Markov structure encoding
time-dependence in each (ith) FHR-UP record.

are α and λ and are assumed to be known. Thus, the GM for the
N data records is [the graphical model is shown in Fig. 2(a)]
1) Generate the class probability π = [π1 , π2 , . . . , πK ] ∼
Dirichlet(α1 , . . . , αK ).
2) For each class k, generate θ k = [θk ,1 , θk ,2 , . . . , θk ,H ] ∼
Dirichlet(λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λH ).
3) For each data record i = 1, . . . , N , draw the class Ci ∼
Categorical(π), i.e., P (Ci = k|π) = πk .
4) For each data record i = 1, . . . , N , for each segment
j = 1, . . . , di , and given Ci = k, draw the feature value
xi,j , xi,j ∼ Categorical(θ k ), that is, P (xi,j = h|Ci =
k, θ k ) = θk ,h .
Given a corpus of training records D, one can estimate the
class and feature probabilities of the model as follows:
π̂k ∝ (αk + sk ),

θ̂k ,h =

qk ,h + λh

Nk + λ h

(2)

h

where sk is the number of training records in class k, qk ,h is
the number of occurrences of feature value h in all training
records of class k, and Nk is the total number of segments, also
in all training records of class k. Given the parameter estimates
γ̂, we can calculate the likelihood of a feature sequence being
generated according to the naı̈ve Bayes model as
P (xn |Cn = k, γ̂) = π̂k

Hx


q
θ̂k ∗,,hh , n

(3)

h=1

where q∗,h,n denotes the number of occurrences of feature value
h in the nth feature sequence.
b) First Order Markov-Chain GM: The naı̈ve assumption
that the feature values of each segment are independent of the
segment index is a considerable leap of faith, since in general,
FHR signals (like most real-world time series) exhibit correlations across time. A simple first-order Markov assumption
encodes this via the following framework: given knowledge of
class Ci = k, a feature value for each of the di segments of
record i, except the first segment, is generated using the H × H
transition probability matrix Ψk . The feature value of the first
segment is generated by a probability distribution φk .

Once again, we endow the model with Dirichlet priors for
the cluster probability π and the parameters φk and ψ k ,h (each
row of the transition matrix). The respective hyperparameters
for these priors are denoted α, η, and β, and are assumed to
be known. Thus, the GM for N data records is [the associated
graphical model for the ith record is given in Fig. 2(b)]:
1) Generate the class probability π = [π1 , . . . , πK ] ∼
Dirichlet(α1 , . . . , αK ).
2) For each class k, generate the probabilities
of initial feature value φk = [φk ,1 , . . . , φk ,H ]
∼ Dirichlet(η1 , . . . , ηH ).
3) For each class k and each feature value, generate the feature value transition probabilities ψ k ,h =
[ψk ,h,1 , . . . , ψk ,h,H ] ∼ Dirichlet(β1 , . . . , βH ).
4) For each data record i = 1, . . . , N , draw the class Ci ∼
Categorical(π), i.e., P (Ci = k|π) = πk .
5) For each data record i = 1, . . . , N , draw the feature
sequence xi according to P (xi = [h1 , . . . , hd i ]|Ci =
di

k, φ, ψ) = φk ,h 1
ψk ,h j −1 ,h j .
j =2

Given a corpus of training records D, one can estimate π by
(2), φk ,h , and ψk ,g ,h as follows:
ηh + rk ,h
,
φ̂k ,h = 
ηh + sk

βg ,h + zk ,g ,h
ψ̂k ,g ,h = 
.
βg ,h + qk ,g

h

(4)

h

Here, rk ,h is the number of occurrences of h in the first segments
of class-k records in D and zk ,g ,h is the number of transitions
from g to h in class-k records in D. Given the parameter estimates, we can calculate the likelihood of a feature sequence being generated according to a given category-specific first-order
Markov model as
P (xn = {xn ,1 , . . . , xn ,d n }|Cn = k, γ̂)
= π̂k φ̂k ,x n , 1

Hx


z

ψ̂k ∗,,gg,h, h , n

(5)

h=1

where z∗,g ,h,n denotes the number of occurrences of feature
transitions g → h in the nth feature sequence.

2800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

TABLE I
NICHD RULES FOR FHR CATEGORIZATION
Category 3 (Abnormal)
Absent baseline variability AND
• Any Recurrent Variable OR Recurrent
Late decelerations OR
• Baseline Rate is Bradycardia.

Category 2 (Indeterminate)

Category 1 (Normal)

Any of the following is true:
• Baseline rate is Bradycardia AND variability is not Absent
• Baseline rate is Tachycardia
• Baseline variability is Minimal
• Baseline variability is Absent AND Recurrent decelerations are Absent
• Baseline variability is Marked
• Presence of Recurrent Variable decelerations AND variability is Minimal OR
Moderate
• Presence of Recurrent Late decelerations AND variability is Moderate
• Presence of Prolonged decelerations.

c) Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) Decision: Once the parameters of the assumed model are estimated from D, we can
compute the approximated a posteriori probability distribution
of the class of the nth test data record given the obtained feature
sequence xn . We have

with the authors’ methods, we obtained accuracy values for all
four by using a wide range of values for the SVM parameters
(the scaling factor σ for radial basis function kernel, and the box
constraint C for the SVM soft margin [24]).
D. Performance Assessment

P (Cn = k|xn , D) ∝ P (Cn = k|π̂)P (xn |Cn = k, γ̂ k )
∝ (αk + sk )P (xn |Cn = k, γ̂ k )

All of the following are true:
• Baseline rate is Normal
• Baseline variability is Moderate
• No Recurrent Variable or Recurrent Late
decelerations detected.

(6)

where P (xn |Cn = k, γ̂ k ) is the likelihood of class k, γ̂ k is the
set of estimated parameters (e.g., {θ̂ k , φ̂k } for the naı̈ve Bayes
model), and P (Cn = k|π̂) is the prior probability of class k.
The likelihood of the feature sequence can be calculated from
(3) and (5).
If we make a decision based on the MAP rule, the estimated
class is obtained from
Ĉn = arg max P (Cn = k|xn = {xn ,1 , . . . , xn ,d n }, D). (7)
k

2) NICHD ES Classifier: In a previous study on FHR-UP
classification [17], we had converted the NICHD guidelines
into a decision-tree type algorithm. For grouping the records
into three categories, this method uses the if-then rules from
Table I. From a clinical perspective, Category 3 represents fetal
compromise, Category 2 is indeterminate fetal status (there may
be some evidence of compromise but not convincing enough),
and Category 1 is normal status. In this system, no special
significance is given to local changes in FHR-UP patterns, and
attributes such as “baseline variability” are summarized from
the entire 20-min dataset.
3) SVM Classification Using System ID and HRV (SI-HRV)
Features: In [12], the SI-HRV features were used as input to an
SVM using a Gaussian kernel to allow for nonlinear boundaries
between groups. The authors used two different SVMs for the SI
and HRV features, respectively, and combined their results using
OR conditions to get a final categorization. That is, if any one
of the SI or HRV classifiers classified the data as “abnormal,”
the final classification was also “abnormal.” We used the same
method for our data, too. For each fold of cross validation, we
obtained separate SVMs using a) only the SI features, b) only
the HRV features, and c) all five SI-HRV features, yielding three
different arrays of test classification results. An additional result
was obtained by combining the classifier output from SI and
HRV SVMs using the OR condition. In order to be consistent

1) Data: Our database consisted of deidentified EFM files
from 201 different babies (admitted to the neonatal intensive
care unit at the Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony
Brook, NY) for which postdelivery umbilical cord pH values
were available for 111. FHR and UP monitoring was done for
each of them using either internal (fetal scalp ECG) or external
(Doppler) monitors. All consent and approval guidelines were
followed rigorously. Out of these 111 files, we found that 83
had usable EFM data from singleton pregnancies. We restricted
analysis to the last half an hour of available EFM data. For this
time period, each baby could have one or more contiguous EFM
epochs1 with breaks in between (resulting from excessive noise
or electrode drop-off). Automated preprocessing, as explained
in Section II-A1, was always followed by a visual inspection,
in order to confirm that the automatically “cleaned-up” record
was actually usable for further analysis. In consultation with
our collaborating physician, we fixed the threshold for fetal
distress to be pH ≤ 7.15. That is, if the cord pH was greater
than 7.15, the baby was assumed to be “healthy” (Category 1),
otherwise “not healthy” (Category 2). This labeling was treated
as the gold-standard classification. This yielded 23 datasets in
Category 2 and 60 in Category 1. There were, on average, 2.4
nonoverlapping epochs in each dataset.
2) Classifier Modifications: We tested several modifications
of the GM and SVM classifiers on our data, and have shown
the results in Table II. The first column for each subtable in (a)
and (b) contains the type of classifier used. The suffix C, E, or
CT at the end of the type denotes “cumulative,” “epoch-level,”
or “threshold-based cumulative” classification, respectively. In
cumulative classification, all the features obtained from all the
EFM epochs for a given baby were simply concatenated together without regard for breaks in the data, making a single
long feature sequence for each subject. This yielded 83 discrete
x sequences, corresponding to the 83 babies. In epoch-level
1 We

define an epoch as a sequence of nonoverlapping segments.

DASH et al.: FETAL HEART RATE CLASSIFICATION USING GENERATIVE MODELS

2801

TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR (A) GM AND (B) ALL OTHER METHODS
(a)
GM Method
GM-MM-C
GM-NB-C
GM-MM-E
GM-NB-E
GM-MM-CT
GM-NB-CT
GM-MMorNB-C
GM-MMorNB-E
GM-MMorNB-CT

(b)

t ∗ (s), b ∗

Best TNR, TPR

Best WRA

95, 0.0100
115, 0.1000
45, 0.0158
15, 0.0501
45, 0.0316
45, 0.0794
115, 0.0200
45, 0.0158
115, 0.1259

0.817, 0.478
0.842, 0.348
0.820, 0.436
0.757, 0.300
0.725, 0.587
0.800, 0.435
0.817, 0.609
0.768, 0.473
0.742, 0.500

0.295
0.189
0.256
0.057
0.312
0.235
0.425
0.241
0.242

Method
SVM-SI-E
SVM-HRV-E
SVM-SIHRV-E
SVM-SIorHRV-E
SVM-SIorHRV-CT
NICHD-E
NICHD-CT

σ ∗, C ∗

Best TNR, TPR

Best WRA

0.25, 1024.00
0.50, 0.50
0.50, 0.13
0.25, 512.00
0.25, 1024.00
–
–

0.566, 0.436
0.710, 0.436
0.706, 0.345
0.415, 0.508
0.175, 0.826
0.163, 0.883
0.0833, 0.9130

0.003
0.146
0.051
−0.077
0.001
0.047
-0.004

The second column in each table shows the parameter values yielding highest performance in terms of WRA. The best performances are in bold.

classification, we did not perform this concatenation, but instead treated each contiguous epoch of EFM data as a separate
dataset. However, the gold-standard diagnosis for each such
epoch was still assumed to be equal to the baby’s final diagnosis
(based on pH). There was a total of 201 discrete x sequences
corresponding to 201 EFM epochs obtained from the 83 babies. Lastly, in CT classification, we first performed epoch-level
classification. Then, for a given test baby i∗ , we classified it as
Category 2 only if at least one of baby i∗ ’s epochs was classified
as Category 2 (thus the term threshold-based, where “1 epoch”
is the threshold for deciding abnormality).
Another level of classifier modification was introduced by
combining classifier results using OR conditions. For instance,
for the cumulative GM paradigm, we applied the OR logic to the
decisions made by the GM-MM-C and GM-NB-C classifiers.
This is denoted as GM-MMorNB-C. That is, we first used each
of the MM and NB models to make an initial decision whether an
epoch was Category 2, and if at least one of these two decisions
was positive, we called the dataset “Category 2.” This is similar
to the method used in [12], in which classifier decisions from
two different SVMs (one using SI features, and the other using
only HRV features) were ORed to yield the final classification.
Similar combinations were performed for the SVM methods as
well.
3) Classifier Performance Evaluation: We assessed classification performance using the ten-fold stratified cross-validation
method. This is acknowledged to be an effective method for
measuring classifier performance [25]. Under this method, we
partitioned the dataset into ten different nonoverlapping groups,
with the proportions of Categories 1 and 2 being the same in
each group. We then treated each group as a test dataset, using
the datasets in the remaining nine as training data. Each such
group-testing is called one “fold” of cross validation. Thus, in
each fold, we used approximately 90% of the data for training
and 10% for testing, and the partitioning ensures that each file
was treated as a test dataset exactly once when all ten folds were
evaluated. We calculated a confusion matrix by comparing the
class-labels obtained for all datasets with the gold-standard categorization. We repeated this process for ten different random
partitions of the dataset, to get an empirical confidence measure. We note that, when comparing different classifiers for a

given run, we tested all the methods using exactly the same
cross-validation partition, so as to ensure a fair comparison. We
compared the classifier performance (measured using the costinsensitive weighted relative accuracy (WRA) [25], [26]) for all
GM methods using a range of parameter values for data segment
length t and bin width b, and for all SVM methods by varying
the scale parameter values σ and box constraint C. WRA is
an unbiased accuracy measure that subtracts the component of
true positive score that is attributable to chance, and is defined
as WRA = 4 × cost × (TPR − FPR)/(1 + cost)2 , where TPR
and FPR denote the true and false positive rates, respectively.
When the cost for misclassification is zero-one, as in this study,
the range of WRA is [−1, 1]. Then, WRA = TPR − FPR.
III. RESULTS
Table II shows the classification performance evaluation results for all methods considered here. We have divided them into
two subtables, with Table II(a) containing the best WRA values
for the various GM-based classifiers, and Table II(b) containing
those of the SVM and NICHD methods. The second column
in each subtable contains the parameter values for which the
best classifier performance was obtained. TPR and TNR denote
the median of the true positive and true negative rates across
all cross-validation runs. For each method, we varied the corresponding parameter values and looked for all (TPR, TNR) pairs
such that TNR was at least 0.7 (similar to the search performed
in [12]), assuming that would be a clinically reasonable rate. If
a particular method did not yield a TNR >= 0.7 for any of its
parameter values, we decreased the TNR threshold by 0.01 in
steps, and repeated the search. Finally, out of these candidates,
we selected the best performing parameters as those that yielded
the best WRA.
One can see that the GM-MMorNB-C method had the best
accuracy among all the methods considered (82% specificity
and 61% sensitivity; these are, respectively, ≈10 and 17 percentage points higher than the best SVM method). In general,
the accuracies obtained from the GM methods were higher than
those of the SVM and NICHD methods.
Fig. 3 shows the variation of the WRA when using the GMMMorNB-C method, as a function of the bin width and for three
different values of t. In a similar vein, Fig. 4 shows the variation

2802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 3. Error bars representing median ± interquartile range of WRA of
classification using the GM-MMorNB-C method as a function of the bin width
b and for three different t values.

results such that NICHD-ES categories 2 and 3 are mapped to
“not healthy.” The best result from this is shown in the second
to last row of Table II(b).
Fig. 5 shows the empirical pmfs calculated for the variability symbol alphabet [from 1 to Hv of (1)] from the complete
database of 83 records. Only the first 20 levels are shown for
clarity, which correspond to the low-variability spectrum. One
can see the difference between the pmfs of Category 1 and
Category 2. The difference is enhanced when we consider the
segments in which contractions occur [see Fig. 5(b)]. The pmf
of Category 2 appears to be bimodal and that of Category 1
unimodal. Fig. 6 shows the corresponding empirical pmfs for
the acceleration and deceleration symbols. For segments with
contractions [see Fig. 6(b)], the probability of early, late, and
variable decelerations is higher for Category 2 recordings. Interestingly, this trend is reversed when only segments without
contractions are considered [see Fig. 6(a)]. Also, the presence
of normal accelerations with or without contractions has significantly different probabilities depending on which category of
data we look at. Thus, the addition of segment-specific information and the fusion of feature-data from the uterine signal allows
many more degrees of freedom to separate the two classes.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 4. Error bars representing median ± interquartile range of WRA of
classification using the SVM-HRV-E method as a function of σ and for three
different values of C .

TABLE III
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR NICHD-ES CLASSIFICATION
NICHD-ES

pH-based
labeling

1
2

1

2

3

23
7

117
53

1
0

of the WRA when using the SVM-HRV-E method for different
values of the C and σ parameters.
As explained in Table I, the NICHD-ES classifier produces, as
a decision for a given FHR dataset, one of three category values.
Table III shows the confusion matrix obtained when comparing
this to the pH categorization. In order to compare this method’s
performance to the GM and SVM approaches, we transform the

The proposed approach in this paper is probabilistic, where
we aimed at employing classifiers based on GMs. Our method
implements learning of the needed probability distributions and
follows up with the use of Bayes’ rule. Although several stateof-the-art machine learning techniques have already been used
for automated FHR-UP classification, to our knowledge, the predominant paradigm has been discriminative. Unlike GMs, the
discriminative models do not naturally allow for the estimation
of a posteriori distributions of all the variables of interest. The
GMs are also much more flexible in expressing dependencies
among different variables [27], but their implementations are
computationally more intensive.
More specifically, with GMs, one can achieve improved detection of new data that are outliers under the model and whose
predictions have low accuracy [28]. In our problem, we can
view the abnormal traces as outliers because they are simply
relatively rare, which further justifies the use of these models.
This problem has long been recognized as a significant obstacle
to FHR analysis.
We also compared our results to those obtained by [12], where
the SI-HRV features were used as inputs to a classification system, but without directly accounting for local variations. The
authors had found that for “pathological” datasets,2 the gain and
delay of the impulse response function between UP (as input)
and FHR (as output) were increased. This finding is consistent
with previous research on timing of acute intrapartum hypoxic
injury (e.g., in [29]) and by the physicians’ practice of regularly
looking for the influence (or lack thereof) of contractions on
episodic variations such as decelerations [30]. In the present
study, we found that our methods consistently performed at par
2 Defined as postdelivery arterial umbilical cord base deficit >12 mmol/L, or
showing evidence of hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, or death.

DASH et al.: FETAL HEART RATE CLASSIFICATION USING GENERATIVE MODELS

2803

Fig. 5. Category-specific empirical pmfs for the variability symbols occurring in segments (a) without and (b) with uterine contractions. Here, the discretization
parameters used were t = 115 s, b = 0.02. Only the first 20 variability symbols are shown for ease of visualization, with higher-valued symbols corresponding to
higher variability values.

Fig. 6. Category-specific empirical pmfs for the acceleration (A) and deceleration (D) symbols occurring in segments (a) without and (b) with uterine contractions.
Here, the discretization parameters used were t = 115 s, b = 0.02.

with or better than the SI-HRV method (see Table II). Figs. 3
and 4 show that, in general, the SVM approach is less sensitive
to the parameter settings than the GM approach. However, in
terms of absolute performance, this insensitivity does not allow
it to reach the WRA values achieved by the GM approaches. Additionally, we note that the original approach by [12] called for
the use of an OR condition on the results of two separate SVM
classifications, followed by a CT classification. This method, in
our current study, was found to have a worse performance than
simply using the HRV features in a single SVM. In other words,
the SI features do not seem to yield much information for this
dataset.
The marked decrease in the ES classifier performance may be
due to the hard if-then conditions and to failures when “symptoms” of more than one category are detected. We also observed
that for several data sets, the ES classifier found symptom combinations that did not fit to any of the three NICHD categories.
Although one can design the ES classifier to pool all such outcomes into Category 2 (“indeterminate”), this increases the rate
of false Category 2 detection.

In contrast to our findings in our previous study [18], we found
that binning the acceleration and deceleration features into different types, did increase performance. One reason for this could
be that, unlike the study in [18] that used features extracted
from long stretches of data, we are using collections of shortsegment-features. In [18], a discrete feature of, say, a deceleration subtype Dl (“existence of late decelerations”) was assumed
to take a truth value if there existed even one late deceleration
in the full 20-min record. This is different from saying, as in
the present study, that there existed a sequence of decelerationsegments, with, say 20 early deceleration-segments and five late
deceleration-segments. Thus, we believe, this approach gives a
more complete picture of the FHR record and improves the
classification performance.
Computational issues in the GM methods studied here are
also lessened. Since the GM classifiers are based on Bayesian
parameter learning of discrete feature sequences, they can be interpreted as simple counting operations. Thus, they are considerably faster than, say the SVM classifiers, which have to solve an
optimization problem every time training is performed on a new

2804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

dataset. However, rule-based classification is the fastest, since
after the set of features has been found, it simply goes through
a check-list of if-then-else conditions, and does not involve any
minimization or counting operation. Furthermore, we note that
from our initial experiments, the classification performance was
not unduly influenced by the choice of Dirichlet hyperparameters. We used a pseudocount of one wherever required, but we
have also tried the analysis with higher values which resulted in
only minor changes in WRA values.
Finally, GMs can naturally be used in unsupervised learning
[27], [31]. This is very important since most supervised FHR
classification methods are constrained by the absence of a reliable gold-standard. Possible reasons for the lack of it are 1) an
abnormal tracing may be classified as gold-standard “normal”
after interventions had been made to improve fetal status and
the criterion for normality is avoiding injury/death [32], and
2) objective markers, like umbilical/arterial pH or Apgar score,
can show poor correlation with FHR patterns [33]. The other
issue is related to Category 2, which is notoriously broad and
which in practice includes everything that is deemed not to fall
in Categories 1 or 3 [34]. Unsupervised classification of signals
that belong to neither Category 1 nor 3 may provide information
for improved diagnosis, for which GMs are ideally suited.
One limitation of the current study is dealing with noisy segments. In a previous version of the study, we had adopted a
rule of removing noisy segments (defined as any segment in
which more than 30% of the samples had been interpolated over
during preprocessing) entirely from the analysis. This process,
however, can create complications because it forces feature segments before and after a removed region to become adjacent,
potentially confounding the parameter updates if there are long
stretches of noise. To tackle this in the present study, we chose
simply to not designate any segment as noisy, thus keeping all
the segments connected. Instead, we went back and made the
preprocessing step more robust, and additionally did detailed
visual inspection/correction to make sure the number of truly
noisy segments in the final feature sequence was as low as possible. This process was kept the same for all the classification
methods studied. We acknowledge that this may not be the best
way to deal with noisy segments, especially in real-time settings, and are working to improve this aspect in our ongoing
research.
Another limitation is that in clinical situations, data are acquired consecutively in time, and the classification of entire
epochs is not very useful in such situations. One would, instead,
like to have a system that can raise an alarm whenever an “atrisk” pattern of feature sequences is raised. One possibility is
to analyze T -second epochs of FHR-UP data updated every t
seconds to include a new incoming segment. Then, if more than
E such epochs are deemed to fall in the “at-risk” category, one
can raise an alarm. At present, we are exploring this possibility. We note that the CT classification paradigm addressed in
Sections IID-2 and III can give us some clues about the efficacy
of this method. In particular, we can see from Table II(a) that
the GM-MM-CT method provides comparable performance to
the best classifier (GM-MMorNB-C), but has a decreased specificity (72% versus 81%).

One of the important goals of our ongoing research is to
answer questions about whether we can use feature sequences
from early labor to predict what happens to a fetus after delivery.
Physicians suggest that this may require more input data than
is available from just the FHR and UP signals, particularly information about the types and timings of interventions made by
obstetric personnel to assist in patient comfort and smooth delivery (drugs, changes in maternal positions, etc.) and biophysical
measurements like oxygen saturation and blood pressure.
Finally, as mentioned in Section I, it is important to note
that Doppler-derived FHR recordings, by virtue of being noninvasive, are far more common than fetal ECG-derived ones.
Although FHR derived from fetal scalp ECG is typically much
more noise-free, it relies on the insertion of an electrode into the
fetal scalp. As a consequence, the patient must be in labor and
the fetal membranes must be ruptured. Importantly, it cannot be
used in patients not yet in labor or in those who are at risk for
infecting their fetus via ascending infection. So, ECG is typically only used when there is a critical requirement for accurate
FHR readings. One goal of our ongoing research is to analyze how the FHR acquisition modality affects the classification
performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed new methods for classification
of FHR signals using the paradigm of GMs. We first mapped
raw FHR patterns to specific feature-types, and then from the
obtained feature sequences, we estimated the parameters of
class-specific GMs. We used these models in conjunction with
Bayesian techniques to develop classifiers that separate the FHR
data records into three clinically useful categories, and compared the results to two existing methods. Our methods performed as well as or better than both, thus suggesting the potential of GMs in making accurate automatic FHR diagnosis a
possibility.
REFERENCES
[1] F. G. Cunningham, K. Leveno, S. Bloom, C. Y. Spong, and J. Dashe,
Williams Obstetrics, D. M. Twickler and G. D. Wendel, Eds. New York,
NY, USA: McGraw-Hill Medical, 2010.
[2] J. A. Martin, B. E. Hamilton, P. D. Sutton, S. J. Ventura, F. Menacker, and
M. L. Munson, “Birth: Final data for 2002,” Nat. Vital Statist. Report, vol.
52, pp. 1–102, 2003.
[3] Z. Alfirevic, D. Devane, and G. Gyte, Continuous Cardiotocography
(CTG) as a Form of Electronic Fetal Monitoring (EFM) for Fetal Assessment During Labour (Review). New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2007.
[4] R. K. Freeman, T. J. Garite, M. P. Nageotte, and L. A. Miller, Fetal
Heart Rate Monitoring. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, 2012.
[5] G. A. Macones, G. D. V. Hankins, C. Y. Spong, J. Hauth, and T. Moore,
“The 2008 National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
workshop report on electronic fetal monitoring: Update on definitions, interpretation, and research guidelines,” J. Obstetric, Gynecologic, Neonatal
Nursing, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 510–515, 2008.
[6] J. T. Parer and E. F. Hamilton, “Comparison of 5 experts and computer
analysis in rule-based fetal heart rate interpretation,” Amer. J. Obstetrics
Gynecol., vol. 203, no. 5, pp. 451–e1, 2010.
[7] V. Chudáček, “Automatic analysis of intrapartum fetal heart rate,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Dept. Cybern., Czech Tech. Univ., Prague, Czech Republic,
2011.
[8] J. Pardey, M. Moulden, and C. W. Redman, “A computer system for
the numerical analysis of nonstress tests,” Amer. J. Obstetrics Gynecol.,
vol. 186, no. 5, pp. 1095–1103, 2002.

DASH et al.: FETAL HEART RATE CLASSIFICATION USING GENERATIVE MODELS

[9] J. Spilka, V. Chudáček, M. Koucký, L. Lhotská, M. Huptych, P. P. Janku,
G. Georgoulas, and C. Stylios, “Using nonlinear features for fetal heart
rate classification,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
350–357, 2011.
[10] A. Reddy, M. Moulden, and C. W. G. Redman, “Antepartum highfrequency fetal heart rate sinusoidal rhythm: Computerized detection and
fetal anemia,” Amer. J. Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 200, no. 4, pp. 407.e1–
407.e6, 2009.
[11] S. Dash, J. Muscat, J. G. Quirk, and P. M. Djurić, “Classification of fetal
heart rate series,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
2012, pp. 629–632.
[12] P. A. Warrick, E. F. Hamilton, D. Precup, and R. E. Kearney, “Classification of normal and hypoxic fetuses from systems modeling of intrapartum
cardiotocography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 771–779,
Apr. 2010.
[13] Y. Noguchi, F. Matsumoto, K. Maeda, and T. Nagasawa “Neural network
analysis and evaluation of the fetal heart rate,” Algorithms, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 19–30, 2009.
[14] V. Chudáček, J. Spilka, B. Rubackova, M. Koucky, G. Georgoulas, L.
Lhotska, and C. Stylios, “Evaluation of feature subsets for classification
of cardiotocographic recordings,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2008, pp.
845–848.
[15] G. Georgoulas, C. Stylios, V. Chudáček, M. Macas, J. Bernardes, and
L. Lhotska, “Classification of fetal heart rate signals based on features
selected using the binary particle swarm algorithm,” in Proc. World Congr.
Med. Phys. Biomed. Eng., 2006, pp. 1156–1159.
[16] G. Georgoulas, D. Gavrilis, I. G. Tsoulos, C. Stylios, J. Bernardes,
and P. P. Groumpos, “Novel approach for fetal heart rate classification
introducing grammatical evolution,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 69–79, 2007.
[17] S. Dash, J. Muscat, J. G. Quirk, and P. M. Djurić, “Implementation of
NICHD diagnostic criteria for feature extraction and classification of fetal
heart rate signals,” in Proc. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2011, pp. 1684–1688.
[18] S. Dash, J. G. Quirk, and P. M. Djurić, “Learning dependencies among
fetal heart rate features using Bayesian networks,” in Proc. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 6204–6207.
[19] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent Dirichlet allocation,”
J. Mach. Learning Res., vol. 3, pp. 993–1022, 2003.
[20] C. Wang, D. M. Blei, and D. Heckerman, “Continuous time dynamic topic
models,” in Proc. CoRR, 2012, vol. abs/1206.3298.
[21] E. Sudderth, “Graphical models for visual object recognition and tracking,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts
Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2006.
[22] J. Wang, P. Liu, M. F. H. She, S. Nahavandi, and A. Kouzani, “Bag-ofwords representation for biomedical time series classification,” in Proc.
CoRR, 2012, vol. abs/1212.2262.
[23] S. Saria, D. Koller, and A. Penn, “Learning individual and population
level traits from clinical temporal data,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., Predictive Models Personalized Med. Workshop, 2010.
[24] C. Campbell and Y. Ying, Learning With Support Vector Machines,
R. J. Brachman and T. Dietterich, Eds. San Rafael, CA, USA: Morgan
and Claypool, 2011.
[25] R. Kohavi, “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 1995,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1137–1145.
[26] N. Lavrač, P. Flach, and B. Zupan, Rule Evaluation Measures: A Unifying
View. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1999.
[27] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, vol. 1. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2006.
[28] C. M. Bishop, “Novelty detection and neural network validation,” IEEE
Proc.: Vision, Image Signal Process., vol. 141, no. 4, pp. 217–222,
Jan. 1994.
[29] F. Cowan, M. Rutherford, F. Groenendaal, P. Eken, E. Mercuri, G. M.
Bydder, L. C. Meiners, L. Dubowitz, and L. S. de Vries, “Origin and
timing of brain lesions in term infants with neonatal encephalopathy,”
Lancet, vol. 361, no. 9359, pp. 736–742, 2003.
[30] A.-K. Sundström, D. Rosén, and K. G. Rosén, Fetal Surveillance.
Göteborg, Sweden: Neoventa, 2000.
[31] M. Jordan, “On discriminative vs. generative classifiers: A comparison of
logistic regression and naı̈ve Bayes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 14, 2002, pp. 841–848.
[32] C. Elliott, P. A. Warrick, E. Graham, and E. F. Hamilton, “Graded classification of fetal heart rate tracings: Association with neonatal metabolic
acidosis and neurologic morbidity,” Amer. J. Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 202,
no. 3, pp. 258.e1–258.e8, 2010.

2805

[33] J. T. Parer, T. King, S. Flanders, M. Fox, and S. J. Kilpatrick,
“Fetal acidemia and electronic fetal heart rate patterns: Is there
evidence of an association?” J. Maternal-Fetal Neonatal Med.,
vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 289–294, 2006.
[34] S. L. Clark, M. P. Nageotte, T. J. Garite, R. K. Freeman, D. A. Miller,
K. R. Simpson, M. A. Belfort, G. A. Dildy, J. T. Parer, R. L. Berkowitz,
et al., “Intrapartum management of category II fetal heart rate tracings:
Towards standardization of care,” Amer. J. Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 209,
pp. 89–97, 2013.

Shishir Dash received the B.Tech. degree in instrumentation engineering from the Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, India, in 2007, and the M.S.
degree in biomedical engineering from Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, USA, in 2009. He recently received the Ph.D. in electrical engineering
from Stony Brook University.
His research interests include signal processing, algorithm development, and general applications
of machine learning. Previously, he has worked on
projects in feature extraction, time-series modeling
and Bayesian methods for analysis of ECG, heart rate, and pulse-oximeter data.
Dr. Dash is a Member of the IEEE Signal Processing and Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Societies.

J. Gerald Quirk received the B.S. degree from
Manhattan College, Riverdale, NY, USA, the Ph.D.
degree in anatomy and embryology, and the M.D.
degree from S.U.N.Y. Downstate Medical Center,
Brooklyn, NY, USA. He subsequently completed the
Residency in obstetrics and gynecology from the
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA, and the Fellowship in maternal fetal medical from Southwestern Medical School, Parkland
Memorial Hospital, Dallas, TX, USA.
He is currently a Professor of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive medicine at Stony Brook University Medical Center,
Stony Brook, NY. His research interests include the area of fetal lung maturation, elective fetal monitoring, perinatal medicine, and the biology of the cancer
marker CA-125.
Dr. Quirk has been an Invitational Lecturer in the USA, Europe, and Southeast
Asia. He has served on the International Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.
He is a Member of several professional societies and has served on several
committees such as SMFM and SGI. He has also served as the Cochair of the
Committee on Obstetric Practices of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists.

Petar M. Djurić (F’06) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from the University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering from the University of Rhode
Island, Kingston, RI, USA.
He is currently a Professor in the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, USA. His research interests include the area of signal and information processing with primary interests in the theory of signal
modeling, detection, and estimation; Monte Carlobased methods; distributed signal processing; and applications of the theory in
a wide range of disciplines. He has been invited to lecture at many universities
in the United States and overseas.
Dr. Djurić was a Recipient of the IEEE Signal Processing Magazine Best
Paper Award in 2007 and the EURASIP Technical Achievement Award in
2012. From 2008 to 2009, he was a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Signal
Processing Society. He was on numerous committees of the IEEE and was a
Member-at-Large on the Board of Governors of the Signal Processing Society.

