2028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Voxel-Based Dipole Orientation Constraints for
Distributed Current Estimation
Damon E. Hyde∗ , Frank H. Duffy, and Simon K. Warfield

Abstract—Distributed electroencephalography source localization is a highly ill-posed problem. With measurements on the order
of 102 , and unknowns in the range of 104 − 105 , the range of feasible solutions is quite large. One approach to reducing ill-posedness
is to intelligently reduce the number of unknowns. Restricting solutions to gray matter is one approach. A further step is to use the
anatomy of each patient to identify and constrain the orientation of
the dipole within each voxel. While dipole orientation constraints
for cortical patch-based approaches have been proposed, to our
knowledge, no solutions for full volumetric localizations have been
presented. Patch techniques account for patch surface area, but
place dipoles only on the surface, rather than throughout the cortex. Variability in human cortical thickness means that thicker
regions of cortex will potentially contribute more to the EEG signal, and should be accounted for in modeling. Additionally, patch
models require cortical surface identification techniques, which
can separate them from the extensive literature on voxel-based
MR image processing, and require additional adaptation to incorporate more complex information. We present a volumetric
approach for computing voxel-based distributed estimates of cortical activity with constrained dipole orientations. Using a tissue
thickness estimation approach, we obtain estimates of the cortical
surface normal at each voxel. These let us constrain the inverse
problem, and yield localizations with reduced spatial blurring and
better identification of signal magnitude within the cortex. This
is demonstrated for a series of simulated and experimental data
using patient-specific bioelectric models.
Index Terms—Biomedical imaging, electroencephalography.

I. INTRODUCTION
OLUTION of the electroencephalography (EEG) source
localization problem is typically done in one of two manners. The so-called dipole-based solutions place a small number
of dipoles within the head, and seek to optimize their location
and orientation such that the collected data is best described by
the model [1]–[5]. Distributed solutions, by contrast, identify
a large number of potential dipole locations, each associated

S

Manuscript received October 18, 2013; revised February 8, 2014; accepted
March 6, 2014. Date of current version June 14, 2014. This work was supported
by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke under Grant
K25NS067068. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. E. Hyde is with the Computational Radiology Lab, Boston Children’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail: damon.
hyde@childrens.harvard.edu).
F. H. Duffy and S. K Warfield are with the Computational Radiology Lab,
Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA
(e-mail: fhd@sover.net; simon.warfield@childrens.harvard.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2312713

with either a volumetric region (voxel) or a patch on the cortical
surface. Localization is achieved by estimating the orientation
and magnitude of all dipoles simultaneously [6]–[9]. However,
because the EEG source generators are dipoles, these solutions
must solve for three variables at each solution location [10].
These correspond to the intensity of the dipole oriented along
each of the three primary axes, and allow for arbitrary dipole
orientations to be computed.
One difficulty encountered in distributed EEG source localization is the severely ill-posed and underdetermined nature of
the problem [11]. With at most a few hundred electrodes, the
inverse problem is solving for thousands or tens of thousands of
unknowns. Any approach for intelligently reducing the number
of unknowns will help to improve the resulting localizations.
The question that remains is what approach should be used to
achieve this reduction. The solution grid could be coarsened;
however, voxels larger than approximately 0.5 cm will be unable to accurately describe the cortical geometry, and individual
voxels may span multiple gyri. While a solution can still be
computed, it may not be closely related to the true cortical
activity. Another approach, which we make use of here, is to
restrict the solution to only those voxels lying within cortical
tissues [12]–[14]. While this will reduce the number of voxels
under consideration, each voxel will still have three unknowns
associated with it, to account for variable dipole orientation.
The scalp voltage changes measured by EEG are the result
of large areas of cortical tissue firing in synchrony [15]. While
the activity of individual neurons will generate cortical currents,
these signals are far too small to induce a measurable scalp voltage change [16]. A measurable signal requires a large number
of firing neurons oriented in a similar direction. Because of this,
the EEG signal is thought to arise primarily from pyramidal
neurons within cortical tissue [17]. These neurons are oriented
roughly orthogonal to the cortical surface. Thus, when a cluster
of neighboring neurons is firing, the induced currents will reinforce one another and generate a bulk current large enough to
be measured by EEG. This typically requires the activation of
several square centimeters of cortical surface [11].
Given that the pyramidal neurons are oriented approximately
orthogonal to the cortical surface, it is reasonable to assume
that the dipoles associated with activity in that region of the
brain will be similarly oriented [13]. If these orientations can
be identified from structural imaging scans, they can easily be
incorporated into the source localization problem, thereby reducing the number of unknowns by a factor of three. Rather than
solving for the dipole intensity along each primary axis, only
a single magnitude value will need to be obtained, because the
dipole orientation is assumed known a priori.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HYDE et al.: VOXEL-BASED DIPOLE ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS FOR DISTRIBUTED CURRENT ESTIMATION

Methods for using constrained dipole orientations in cortical
patch-based distributed source localization solutions have previously been published [13], [14]. However, rather than obtaining
a dipole orientation at each voxel within a regular grid, these
methods are based around using the cortical surface as a solution space. An estimate of the cortical surface is first estimated
from the available MRI data [18]. The computed discrete surface estimate is represented with triangles, and the complexity
of the discrete surface is reduced until the number of surface
triangle patches matches the desired number of unknowns. The
vector normal to each triangle is then used as the cortical surface normal at that location, and an appropriately oriented dipole
generated for each patch. From this, a lead field matrix is computed to relate activity at those dipoles to changes in measured
scalp EEG data.
There are two primary downsides to the use of these cortical surface techniques. First, MRI can noninvasively and with
minimal risk obtain a wealth of prior structural and functional information about a subject. Fully incorporating this information
will be critical to the future development of EEG localization
techniques. An extensive literature exists describing automated
algorithms for the analysis of MRI scans, and because MRI
images are inherently voxel based, these algorithms typically
operate in the same regime. Thus, additional computation is necessary to relate voxel-based prior information from MRI with
surface-based EEG localization techniques. When using volumetric EEG localization, particularly when the solution space
is an integer downsampling of the intrinsic grid of the available
MRI, incorporation of this information is greatly simplified.
Second, these techniques assume that cortical current activity exists only as dipoles at the cortical surface. While the use
of dipole modeling is a convenient and necessary approximation to produce computationally tractable solutions, they do not
represent physical reality [19]. The neurons of the gray matter
that generate these currents occupy space in three dimensions;
they stretch from the boundary with white matter to the pia
mater at the surface of the cortex. Current sources and sinks
will likewise be distributed throughout the cortical volume, and
thus, truly accurate modeling of cortical activity would require
the dense placement of dipoles throughout the cortex, rather
than along a single bounding surface. Cortical potential imaging techniques avoid this particular limitation by reconstructing
estimates of voltage potential at the cortical surface rather than
estimates of current activity [20]. However, because they reconstruct on a surface rather than volumetrically, these techniques
still require additional computation to incorporate voxel-based
prior information.
For these reasons, we believe that inverse solutions using
voxel-based dipoles distributed throughout the cortex offer a
more accurate approach to modeling of the EEG signal, and
a more natural representation, both bioelectrically, and from
the perspective of incorporating prior information from MRI.
As described previously, constraining dipole orientations is a
well-reasoned method for reducing the ill-posedness of the
EEG inverse problem. However, to our knowledge, no method
for implementing dipole orientation constraints in voxel-based

2029

solutions has previously been presented. Here, we present such
an approach.
Constraining dipole orientations requires that estimates of the
cortical surface orientation be computed. To obtain these, we
make use of an algorithm originally designed for computing tissue thickness measurements from voxelized MR images [21].
The approach operates by iteratively adding layers of cortex
to the underlying white matter. At each step, Laplace’s equation is used to compute streamlines through the cortex, and the
thicknesses computed by a Eulerian partial differential equation
(PDE) approach [22]. After each addition, the resulting thicknesses are compared against the expected thickness, given the
number of added layers. Those voxels with excess thickness are
labeled as sulci. The procedure is repeated until all cortical voxels have been checked, or the maximum number of iterations
has been reached. Limiting the number of iterations ensures that
the individual voxels erroneously labeled as cortex during the
segmentation procedure are excluded from the process.
A byproduct of solving Laplace’s equation at the final iteration is a vector field describing shortest path streamlines between
the white matter and the exterior cortical surface. We interpret
these as estimates of the cortical surface normal at each point
within the cortex. Because the EEG solution space has a direct
physical association to the MRI, incorporation into the EEG
inverse solution is quite direct.
This voxel-based MRI analysis method allows us to obtain estimates of the local cortical surface orientation for each
voxel within the cortex. Variable cortical thicknesses are intrinsically accounted for, because thicker cortical regions will
have a greater number of voxels between the white matter and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Because the bioelectric model is constructed on the same voxelized space the MRI is collected in,
image processing algorithms for operating on MRI are easily incorporated. Additionally, any reconstruction approach designed
for voxelated solutions can be applied to this problem without
further modification, as is necessary when, for example, applying the low resolution electromagnetic tomography (LORETA)
inversion approach to cortical surface-based models. There, a
cortical connectivity graph must be constructed, and the graph
Laplacian used to implement LORETA. By remaining in a fully
voxelated space, we are able to directly apply LORETA without
the intermediate step of a connectivity graph; the connectivity
is implicit in arrangement of the solution grid.
Our results demonstrate that for a range of simulated and
experimental data, using multiple patient-specific bioelectric
models, the use of cortical orientation constraints reduces the
spatial smoothing of the solution and offers improved capacity
to resolve the magnitude of the cortical signal activity. Our
reconstructions are consistently of equal or better quality than
those obtained from unconstrained localization methods. At
the same time, computational requirements are reduced by two
thirds, as only the magnitude at each dipole must be obtained.
These results suggest that when available MRI is sufficient to
perform segmentation, dipole orientation constraints should
be computed and used to reduce computation and improve
localization accuracy.

2030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

II. DISTRIBUTED SOURCE LOCALIZATION
The measured scalp EEG signal y can be related to the underlying cortical current activity s by the linear relationship [23]:
As = y + n

(1)

where A is the so-called lead field matrix, of size Ne × 3 ∗ Nv ,
with Ne being the number of electrode measurements, and Nv
the number of voxels in the solution space. For each spatial
voxel, there are three columns in the associated lead field matrix, to account for current activity along each of the primary
axes, and allow arbitrary dipole orientations. The parameter n
represents noise in the measurements. For EEG, this is a combination of measurement noise, modeling errors, and background
confounding cortical activity that has propagated to the scalp
surface.
A common assumption is that the noise n is a zero mean
Gaussian with covariance Σn . Thus, the prior probability of the
collected data, given the cortical activity, will also be Gaussian,
p(y|s) ∼ N (As, Σn ). A maximum likelihood estimate can be
obtained by finding the image which maximizes the probability
of the data. However, given that A is highly underdetermined,
there will be an entire manifold of potential solutions, rather
than a single unique one. In order to obtain a unique estimate of
the current activity, regularization must be applied, which corresponds in a Bayesian sense to introducing a prior probabilistic
model for the image s. A maximum a posteriori solution can
then be obtained by solving
ŝ = arg max p(y|s)p(s).
s

(2)

Assuming a Gaussian distribution for the image with p(s) ∼
N (0, λΣx ), taking the log-likelihood of (2) results in [24]:
ŝ = arg min As − y2Σ −1 + λ2 s2Σ −1
.
x
s

(3)

N

Here, s2B is the weighted norm sT Bs, and the term λ is included to account for the unknown scaling between the data and
image probability models. This equation can also be interpreted
as a combination of a data matching term and a model matching
term, with the parameter λ used to control their relative weights.
From this, an inverse solution can be obtained as [25]:

−1
1
T
T
y.
(4)
AΣx A + 2 Σn
ŝ = Σx A
λ
This equation serves as the basis of our solution approach. Construction of the lead field A and image prior covariance Σx ,
as well as the incorporation of dipole orientation constraints,
will be discussed below. To select the parameter λ, we use the
L-Curve approach [26].
A. Dipole Constraints
The orientation of the dipole at each voxel in (4) is not fixed.
If the orientation of each dipole is known, that information can
easily be incorporated into the solution by
Af = AC

(5)

where C is a matrix of size 3 ∗ Nv × Nv encoding the dipole
orientations. Each column of the matrix will have three nonzero
values, in the 3k, 3k − 1, and 3k − 2 positions for the kth voxel.
The values in each of these positions corresponds to the magnitude of the unit normal dipole along each of the X, Y , and
Z axes, respectively. Replacing A with Af in (4) results in an
optimization problem with fixed dipole orientations, where the
unknowns being solved for correspond to the magnitude of the
current activity at each voxel.
B. Image Covariance
Solution of (4) requires knowledge of the image covariance matrix Σx . Several approaches to constructing this covariance matrix have been previously presented. Two of the
more commonly used methods for distributed source localization are the weighted minimum norm (WMNE) and LORETA
approaches [23], [27].
Because the ability of the leadfield matrix A to reconstruct
sources drops off exponentially with depth [23], simple approaches to solving (4) will lead to solutions which are unnaturally biased toward cortex near the surface of the scalp. To
compensate for this, the WMNE approach uses a diagonal matrix for the covariance Σx [23]. At each voxel, the covariance is
assumed to be directly related to the magnitude of the associated
column of the lead field matrix. This leads to the equation

−1
Σx = WT W
(6)
with W being a diagonal matrix defined as
W = Ω ⊗ I3

(7)

to account for the presence of three individual dipoles within
each voxel. The values of Ω are then computed as

 3
	
Ωii = 
AT3(i−1)+j A3(i−1)+j
(8)
j =1

where Ak is the kth column of the lead field matrix. This makes
the variance at each voxel proportional to the magnitude of the
sum of the three dipoles associated with that voxel.
In the constrained case, with only a single lead field column
per voxel, the computation of W is simplified to


(9)
Wii = ATi Ai
because each column within the lead field matrix corresponds
to the signal magnitude from a particular voxel, rather than an
individual component of a three dimensional dipole.
While the WMNE approach can improve resolving capacity,
the voxels within the solution space still lack correlation with
one another. This can lead to solutions which are a combination
of individual high magnitude voxels and artifacts that provide a
better fit to the data but do not represent true cortical activity.
Another commonly made assumption about the structure of
the solution image is that it is spatially smooth. The LORETA
approach combines this spatial smoothness constraint with the

HYDE et al.: VOXEL-BASED DIPOLE ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS FOR DISTRIBUTED CURRENT ESTIMATION

2031

not expect it to significantly affect our results when comparing
constrained and unconstrained dipoles.
B. FD Model

Fig. 1. Anisotropic Conductivity Tensors Fiber orientation is denoted by
color, with red denoting left-right, green marking anterior-posterior, and blue
being superior-inferior.

same covariance estimates used for the WMNE. This results
in [27]:

−1
Σx = WT T W
(10)
where  is a matrix implementing a first-order approximation
to the Laplacian operator on the space of cortical voxels, and
W is the same weighting matrix as described previously for the
WMNE algorithm. LORETA was originally formulated for a
solution space which incorporated all voxels within the head.
It is important to note that here, we restrict our solutions to
lying within voxels identified as cortex by the segmentation procedure. This has the effect of transforming the original spatial
Laplacian used in LORETA into a graph Laplacian, based on
the spatial connectivity of the cortical voxels. A Laplacian regularization function induces correlations over long distances, but
those distances are related to connectivity, not physical spatial
location. Thus, by restricting the solution space to lie only within
cortical voxels, our Laplacian regularizer results in a lower degree of cortical smoothing than is seen in the original LORETA
implementation. Note that this does not contradict our previous statement about the simplicity of implementing solutions
in a grid-based space. The graph Laplacian can be obtained directly from the standard LORETA matrix through elimination
of columns and recompilation of values along the diagonal. No
explicit relationships need be computed or stored.
III. FORWARD MODEL CONSTRUCTION
A. Registration and Image Segmentation
Using structural MRI, the intracranial cavity was identified
and a tissue class segmentation obtained to identify gray matter,
white matter, and CSF [28], [29]. Residual distortion and patient
motion in the DWI was compensated for by aligning the DWI
to the T1w MPRAGE scan with appropriate reorientation of
gradients [30], [31]. Robust least squares was used to estimate
tensors from the DWI, which were displayed by color-coding
[32], as shown in Fig. 1.
To generate the scalp region, a manual threshold was applied
to the T1 weighted MRI, and a morphological approach was
used to fill any resulting holes. The skull region was generated
by dilating the intracranial cavity from the tissue class segmentation, a technique previously used by other authors [33].
Skull segmentation from MR imaging can be a difficult problem, and the dilation approach approximates true bone volume
with sufficient accuracy for source localization. While improved
skull modeling may result in higher absolute accuracy, we do

Electrical propagation within the head can be modeled using
the quasi-static approximation to Maxwell’s equations within
an inhomogeneous, anisotropic medium [16]:
(∇ · (σ∇Φ) = −∇ · j) ∈ Ω

(11)

here, j are the cortical current sources, σ is the spatially varying
conductivity within the head, Φ is the voltage potential, and Ω
is the physical head region. On the head surface (Γ = ∂Ω), the
Neumann boundary conditions apply [16]:
(σ∇Φ · n̂ = 0) |Γ .

(12)

To obtain a numerical solution, we use a finite difference (FD)
approach that allows for arbitrary anisotropic conductivities
within each computational node [34]. A transition layer technique ensures that the FD representation is valid at every point
within the volume.
C. Isotropic Tissue Conductivities
To construct a bioelectric model, each voxel within the head
must be assigned a conductivity tensor. For the gray matter,
CSF, skull, and soft tissue regions identified by the segmentation procedure, we use isotropic conductivities. The conductivities used for each of these tissue types were [16]: soft tissue
= 0.33S/m, skull = 0.012S/m, CSF = 1.79S/m, and gray
matter = 0.33S/m.
D. White Matter Anisotropy
Conductivity within white matter regions is highly
anisotropic, owing to the tract-based nature of white matter.
Signals conduct much more easily along the length of the cell
bodies than they do across cell walls. It has previously been
demonstrated that the conductivity in white matter is directly
related to the diffusion of water, as measured by dtMRI [35].
We make use of Tuch’s method to compute anisotropic conductivity tensors from the corresponding coregistered diffusion
tensor, using the full fractional linear relationship between diffusion and conductivity tensors [35]. The diffusion tensor is
decomposed using an eigendecomposition, and the eigenvalues
related to the eigenvalues of the conductivity tensor as


3(dv − de )(βd + 2)
σ v = σe 1 +
dv (4βd3 − 5βd − 2) + de (8βd3 − 7βd + 2)
(13)
where σv is the conductivity tensor eigenvalue to be computed,
de is the extracellular diffusion coefficient, dv is the measured
diffusion tensor eigenvalue, and βd is a dimensionless contrast
factor defined as βd = (di − de )/(di + 2de ) with di being the
intracellular diffusion coefficient. We use values of di = 0.117,
de = 2.04, and σe = 1.52 as established in [35]. Thus, the orientation of the diffusion tensor is retained, while the magnitude
of each orientation is appropriately scaled.

2032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 2. Sulci Identification Procedure (a) Original segmentation showing white matter (white), gray matter (gray), and CSF (black). (b) First layer of cortex
added to white matter (light gray). No thickness violations. (c) Second layer of cortex added. Voxel in red show high thickness and is labeled as sulcus. (d) Third
layer added. All voxels in red subsequently labeled as sulci.

E. Lead Field Computation
The lead field bases approach was used to compute a lead
field matrix from the constructed FD problem [36]. For each
electrode (all electrodes are referenced to a common ground
located at Cz), a set of source currents were generated, corresponding to a current source at the electrode in question and a
current sink at the reference electrode. Solution of the FD problem yields a map of electric potential at each computational
node. Taking the gradient of this voltage field at each point provides the sensitivity of the measurement between that electrode
and the common reference to the presence of current sources
at each point within the head. The resulting sensitivity vector
corresponds to a particular row of the lead field matrix.
IV. CORTICAL ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS
To constrain the solution dipoles at each voxel, we must first
obtain an estimate of the local cortical surface orientation at
each point. To do this, we use an algorithm originally developed
as a voxel-based approach for computing cortical tissue thicknesses [21]. Additionally, this algorithm also identifies the locations of sulci which were missed during the initial segmentation
due to partial volume errors. While statistical segmentation can
identify tissue types with a high degree of accuracy, it is limited
by the resolution of the available MR images. Our structural images are typically collected with approximately 1-mm isotropic
voxels. Within sulci, the CSF layer separating one gyrus from
another may be thin enough that each voxel actually comprises
a mixture of CSF and gray matter but the segmentation procedure will only assign a single tissue label. With an understanding of how the brain is structured, however, these sulci can be
identified from the segmentation and accurate surface estimates
obtained.
The algorithm obtains these sulci locations by iteratively
building layers of cortex on top of the white matter, as shown
in Fig. 2. After each additional layer of cortex is added, tissue thicknesses are computed. For the newly added voxels, the
computed thickness is compared against the expected thickness
given the number of layers which have been added. If the thickness at a particular voxel is higher than expected, this is most
likely due to having brought the two sides of a sulcus together.

When this occurs, the voxels responsible are labeled as sulci
rather than cortex, and the algorithm then proceeds with the
next iteration.
Determination of the cortical thickness at each iteration is
done by solving Laplace’s equation on the current cortical layer.
Sources are placed within the white matter voxels, and sinks are
placed outside the current cortical sheet. Taking the gradient of
the solution to Laplace’s equation yields streamlines from the
white matter out through the cortex. A Eulerian PDE approach
is then used to compute the thicknesses from those streamlines [22]. Note that this differs from the integrated trajectory
approach used in [21].
The brain can be seen as topologically equivalent to a sphere,
a fact exploited by algorithms for brain inflation [37]. To ensure
that the proper topology is maintained, we add two additional
steps to the sulci extraction algorithm. First, in defining the initial white matter region upon which to build the cortical layers,
we identify the single largest connected component of white
matter from the original segmentation. This eliminates individual voxels which may have been labeled as white matter, and
ensures that we start with a region which will yield the proper
cortical topography. Second, after each additional layer of cortex is added, we do a topology check. This check ensures that
the newly added voxels do not connect disparate regions of cortex together, which would change the topology of the cortical
surface. Voxels which violate this are then labeled as sulci rather
than cortex.
Fig. 3(b) shows an example segmentation as originally obtained from the MR images. The final segmentation after modelbased sulci extraction is seen in Fig. 3(c). Note that there are a
significant number of sulci visible in the T1 images of 3(c) that
are not seen in the original segmentation. These appear clearly
after the model-based sulci extraction; however, the extent of
these sulci appears to be overestimated. This is due to, in effect, changing the label for voxels with partial volume artifacts.
Labeled as cortex by the original segmentation, they are here
relabeled as CSF. Because these voxels are comprised of some
amount of gray matter, they are potential sources of cortical
activity. We address these voxels again below in Section IV-A.
At the end of the sulci extraction procedure, we have two
images of interest. The first is a relabeled segmentation, with

HYDE et al.: VOXEL-BASED DIPOLE ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS FOR DISTRIBUTED CURRENT ESTIMATION

2033

need to use this to appropriately constrain the localization problem. This is done by using (5) to incorporate the constrained
lead field into (4). Because the matrices involved are of size
Ne × Ne , direct solution is then possible, and the parameter λ
is selected using the L-Curve approach [26]
V. RESULTS
A. Simulated Data
Fig. 3. Brain Segmentation Before/After Model-Based Sulci Extraction
(a) Axial slice of collected T1 data used for segmentation. (b) Original segmentation obtained using automated procedure. (c) Segmentation following model
based sulci extraction.

probable sulci locations identified. The second is the gradient
field, computed from the solution to Laplace’s equation on the
cortical region identified during the final thickness computation
step. This will now allow us to compute estimates of the cortical surface orientation within voxels labeled as sulci by the
aforementioned iterative algorithm.
A. Normals Within Labeled Sulci
As stated previously, those voxels labeled as sulci by the
extraction procedure are likely comprised of some mix of gray
matter and CSF. From examining Fig. 3, it is clear that the
extracted sulci are larger than what is actually within the brain,
and will have tissue capable of contributing to the EEG signal.
However, the extraction procedure only produces estimates of
the cortical surface normal for those voxels labeled as cortex in
the final step. To estimate dipole orientations for these additional
voxels, we interpolate from those computed.
We use the dipole orientations of neighboring voxels to compute an estimate of the orientation within the sulcal voxels. For
each voxel labeled as sulci by the iterative procedure, we use the
cortical surface normals at each of the 26 neighboring voxels to
build the matrix:
⎤
⎡
x1 x2 . . . x26
⎥
⎢
(14)
M = ⎣ y1 y2 . . . y26 ⎦ .
z1

z2

...

z26

Applying the SVD to this matrix yields M = UΣVT . The matrix U defines the principle components of the neighboring normal vectors. The vector corresponding to the greatest singular
value is then used as the estimate of the cortical surface normal
within that voxel.
B. Dipole Orientation Constraints
The process of solving the sulci extraction problem yields information about the cortical surface orientation as a byproduct.
The streamlines obtained at each voxel location during the final
step of the algorithm can be used as local estimates of the cortical surface normals, and estimates of dipole orientation can be
obtained for sulcal voxels through the interpolation procedure
described in Section IV-A. At this point in the procedure, we
have an estimate of the dipole orientation for every voxel that
was within the originally segmented cortical region. We now

To evaluate the performance of constrained versus unconstrained dipoles, we first performed a number of simulation
studies using the patient-specific bioelectric models constructed
for seven different epilepsy patients. Using a parcellation of each
patient’s cortex [38], regions were identified where primary active dipoles were to be placed, and simulated target images were
generated. Two sources of noise were accounted for. First, confounding background activity was added to the target image.
This noisy image was used to generate simulated EEG measurements, which contain Gaussian white noise was then added
to simulated measurement error. Simulations were performed
using 128 electrode locations, corresponding to a 128 lead EEG
head net from Electrical Geodesics (Eugene, OR). Because of
differences in cortical topology, the number of solution voxels
in each of the seven cases varied, from a maximum of 11 463 to
a minimum of 7241 voxels. For the unconstrained solutions, the
number of unknowns was three times this number, to account
for computing dipole magnitude along each of the cardinal directions at each voxel location.
1) Active Regions: For each of the seven bioelectric models,
three separate target images were generated, corresponding to
one, two, or three active cortical regions. For the single active
region case, the right superior parietal lobule was activated. With
two source regions, activity was present in the right anterior
supra-marginal gyrus and the posterior middle temporal gyrus.
Finally, for three source regions, there was activity in the left
angular gyrus, the posterior aspect of the right inferior temporal
gyrus, and the right anterior supra-marginal gyrus.
These three combinations of active cortical regions were selected to provide a range of difficulties in source reconstruction. For distributed source localizations (and highly ill-posed
inverse problems in general), increasing the number of active
targets often increases the difficulty of accurately reconstructing
them [39]. This is particularly important for imaging in epilepsy,
as multiple cortical regions may contribute to an epileptic network which ultimately gives rise to the seizure activity. Being
able to accurate identify these multiple active regions and identify the underlying epileptic network is crucial to making the
appropriate decisions regarding interventional surgery.
2) Image Noise: For each simulated cortical activity map
(three per bioelectric model, 21 total), two sources of noise
were each added at a range of levels to generate simulated measurements for inversion. First, confounding background cortical
activity was added to each target image. This was done by activating dipoles at every voxel in the cortex, with magnitude
along each principal axes distributed as independent zero-mean
Gaussians with variance equal to a percentage of the intensity within the target region. Noisy images were generated for

2034

noise percentages between 5% and 25% of image intensity, in
5% increments. Simulated EEG data was then generated using
these noisy images. Due to the confounding activity, this data
contains signals, correlated with the columns of the lead field
matrix, from both the target image and background noise. The
signal to noise ratio (SNR) associated with the ratio of target
image signal to noise image signal was approximately 4 dB
with 5% image noise, and was reduced to approximately −3dB
at 25% noise.
To this noisy simulated EEG data, additional Gaussian white
measurement noise was added, at levels of 0–15 dB, in 5-dB
increments. While individual interictal spikes associated with
epileptic activity can have signal SNRs in the range of 1.5 dB
[40], a common approach in source analysis is to align the
peaks of multiple similar spikes and average the signals. This
helps to average out both measurement noise and background
confounding activity, leading to SNRs of 10 dB or higher for
the averaged spikes [41].
Using this combination of noise models means that the noise
in the final signal used for source localization contains components both correlated and uncorrelated with the bioelectric
model. With a total of 20 noise combinations per target image,
we performed a total of 420 source localizations, to give us a
better understanding of how localization accuracy is affected by
noise sources.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 4. MAG and RDM Distributions With Changing Measurement SNR
In all box plots, the box denotes the median, and the 25th and 75th percentiles.
The whiskers show total signal range, and outliers are plotted with +’s. (a) Box
plots of RDM values for measurements SNR levels of 0–15 dB. Results with
unconstrained dipole orientations are on the left (in red), and results with dipole
orientations constraints are on the right (in blue). (b) Corresponding MAG plots.
(a) Topography. (b) Magnitude.

B. Comparison Metrics
To quantitatively evaluate the performance benefits obtained
by constraining dipole orientations, we make use of two metrics: the relative difference metric (RDM), and the magnitude
difference (MAG). The RDM is used to compare the topography
of two signals against one another. For two discrete signals ua
and ub , this is computed as [42]:

⎛
⎞

m
[i]
[i]
	
u
u
a

⎝

⎠ (15)
− 
 b
RDM = 
m
[i] 2
[i] 2
m
i=1
i=1 (ub )
i=1 (ua )
Here, ua and ub are the two quantities being compared, both
being vectors of length m. This provides a measure of the difference in topography between the two signals, and evaluates
how closely the shape of each of the two regions matches.
While the RDM provides a measure of topographic distance,
it provides no information about the magnitude difference between the two vectors. To examine these changes, we use the
magnitude metric (MAG) [42]:


m
[i] 2
i=1 (ub )
(16)
MAG = 

m
[i] 2
(u
)
a
i=1
C. Quantitative Results
As show in Fig. 4, the topography and magnitude errors
demonstrate that using constrained dipoles orientations offers
a significant improvement in image accuracy. Across all measurement noise levels, RDM decreases from a mean of 1.24 with
unconstrained dipole orientations (plotted in red) to a mean of

Fig. 5. MAG and RDM Distributions with Changing Number of Active
Regions (a) Box plots of RDM values for 1–3 target regions. Results with
unconstrained dipole orientations are on the left (in red), and results with dipole
orientations constraints are on the right (in blue). (b) Corresponding MAG plots.
(c) Percentage improvement in RDM. (d) Percentage improvement in MAG.
(a) Topography. (b) Magnitude. (c) Topography. (d) Magnitude.

0.99 with constrained dipoles (plotted in blue). MAG (minimized at MAG=1), improves from a mean value of approximately 0.42 with unconstrained orientations to approximately
0.55 with constrained dipoles. Fig. 4 also demonstrates that
additive white Gaussian measurement noise has only a small
effect on the resulting localizations. Because the measurement
component of the noise is uncorrelated with the columns of the
lead field matrix, its presence, even at lower SNRs, does not
significantly impact the ability to reconstruct. This may also be
a side effect of the image noise, as lead field correlated noise in
the simulated EEG is the dominant noise component. Changes
in measurement SNR are thus simply small by comparison.
Fig. 5 presents the changes in RDM and MAG as the number
of active target regions is varied. Improvements in both MAG
and RDM are seen for all numbers of target regions. As the
number of targets is changed, so too does the RDM error. With
one target, mean RDM improves from 1.3 to 1.07; for two targets, from 1.18 to 0.92; and for three targets, from 1.22 to 0.99,

HYDE et al.: VOXEL-BASED DIPOLE ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS FOR DISTRIBUTED CURRENT ESTIMATION

2035

combination of increased magnitude and an increased number
of voxels involved is enough to actually reduce the MAG error.
D. Qualitative Results

Fig. 6. MAG and RDM Distributions with Changing Image Noise Levels
(a) Box plots of RDM values for image noise levels of 5% –25%. Results with
unconstrained dipole orientations are on the left (in red), and results with dipole
orientations constraints are on the right (in blue). (b) Corresponding MAG plots.
(c) Percentage Improvement in RDM. (d) Percentage Improvement in MAG.
(a) Topography. (b) Magnitude. (c) Percentage improvement in topography.
(d) Percentage improvement in magnitude.

for unconstrained and constrained dipole orientations, respectively. Using constrained dipoles also results in improvements to
MAG: from 0.43 to 0.58 with one target; from 0.43 to 0.54 with
two targets; and from 0.41 to 0.52 with three targets. Fig. 5(c)
and (d) present these results as percentage improvements. Depending on the number of targets, median RDM improvement is
between 18% and 23%. MAG error sees a median improvement
between 25% and 30%.
Results for RDM and MAG as noise in the cortical activity
image is increased are show in Fig. 6. In this, benefits can clearly
be seen to using constrained dipoles at all noise levels. However,
as noise is increased, mean RDM with constrained dipoles can
also be seen to increase. As image noise is increased from 5%
to 25%, mean RDM error increases from 0.93 to 1.05. This
is compared to an increase with unconstrained dipoles of only
1.22 to 1.26. Thus, as the number of target regions is increased,
the benefit to using constrained dipoles is reduced, but still
remains. This can also be observed as a change in the percentage
benefit in Fig. 6(c), where the benefit of using constrained dipole
orientations is shown to decrease from 25% at 5% image error
to 18% at 25% image error.
Interestingly, magnitude error actually decreases slightly as
image noise is increased, which is the opposite behavior from
what one might expect. However, as evidenced by the MAG
results in Figs. 4(b) and 5(b), the distributed localizations consistently underestimate the overall magnitude of the cortical
activity map. In general, when the topography error increases,
the solution will be spread across a greater number of voxels.
To maintain the same total magnitude in the EEG data, the
signal at each active voxel must thus be reduced, which will
be reflected in an increase in MAG error. However, when the
confounding background noise is raised, the reconstructions account for this with both increased spatial spread and increased
signal magnitude. The increased spread increases RDM, but the

We now present a qualitative evaluation of a subset of the
simulated reconstructions. Images are shown for four patients,
with measurement SNR set to 10 dB, and image noise at 5%.
We select this level because it most closely matches our experimental data, which uses averaged signals with low measurement
noise and minimal confounding signal.
Because localization of the seizure focus is the primary goal,
rather than quantitative measurement of cortical activity, the
color maps used to display each of the reconstructions are scaled
to the maximum value in the image. Thus, the color in the images
represents the relative intensity of each localization. The transparency maps used for each image are identical unless otherwise
noted, and were set to make all values below 25% of maximum
intensity fully transparent, with transparency decreasing linearly
so that all values above 50% of maximum intensity have zero
transparency.
For display, each source localization is superimposed over a
slice from the T1 weighted structural scan of the patient associated with that bioelectric model. In each case, the specific slice
was selected such that it ran approximately through the center
of the true activity, for the simulated sets, or the reconstructed
activity for the experimental datasets.
1) One Active Region: Fig. 7 shows the results for four of
the seven bioelectric models, with a single cortical region active
in each image. This simulated activity within the right superior
parietal lobule.
In each patient, the maximum reconstructed intensity varies
between the constrained and unconstrained approaches. For
each of the four test cases, a similar pattern of activity can be
seen. While both the constrained and unconstrained approaches
successfully identify the general brain region responsible, neither perfectly delineates the active region. In all cases, the unconstrained approach results in a more spatially blurred and
distributed solution, and this is reflected in the increase in RDM
presented previously. As a result, the maximum intensity seen
with the unconstrained technique significantly underestimates
the true value. As the activity is spatially smoothed to incorporate a larger cortical region, the signal activity is spread across
a larger number of voxels, resulting in a lower signal intensity required to successfully match the scalp voltage data. This
difference in reconstructed magnitudes is most clearly seen in
Patients #1 and #3.
2) Two Active Regions: Reconstruction results from the second set of simulated data are shown in Fig. 8. These simulations
were for activity within the anterior supra marginal gyrus and
posterior middle temporal gyrus of the right hemisphere. Similar
results are seen as with the single target reconstructions. In each
case, the constrained dipole solutions have a reduced spatial
blurring as compared to the unconstrained solutions, although
this effect is less pronounced in Patient #3 than the others.
As with a single target region, the magnitudes reconstructed
using the constrained approach more accurately represent the

2036

Fig. 7. Simulation Results—One Active Region Reconstruction results for
activity simulated within the right superior parietal lobule. (a, d, g, j) show true
region of activity in Patients #1–4. (b, e, h, k) show reconstructions with unconstrained dipoles within each voxel. (c, f, i, l) are reconstructions with constrained
dipole orientations. Each reconstruction (in color) is overlaid on a slice from
the T1 MRI located approximately through the midpoint of the true activity
region. (a) Pt1:True. (b) Pt1:Unconstrained. (c) Pt1:Constrained. (d) Pt2:True.
(e) Pt2:Unconstrained. (f) Pt2:Constrained. (g) Pt3:True. (h) Pt3:Unconstrained.
(i) Pt3:Constrained. (j) Pt4:True. (k) Pt4:Unconstrained. (l) Pt4:Constrained.

true magnitude used for data generation. This is, again, more
pronounced in Patients #1 and #2, suggesting that variations in
patient anatomy will result in bioelectric models with differing
capacities to resolve activity in various regions of the brain.
While perhaps a trivial observation, this is important because it
underlines the importance of having patient-specific bioelectric
models.
3) Three Active Regions: Finally, the third set of simulated
data, shown in Fig. 9, had activity within the left angular gyrus,
the posterior aspect of the right inferior temporal gyrus, and
the right anterior supramarginal gyrus. Behavior is similar to
that seen in the previous two data sets, with the constrained
approach offering a lower degree of spatial smoothing, and more
accurate intensity reconstructions with the constrained dipole
orientations.
While the reconstructions with two sources showed both with
similar magnitudes, this is not the case with three sources. The
right anterior supra marginal gyrus has the best reconstruction in
all four test cases. However, in Patients #2 and #4, the right temporal activity is reconstructed at a significantly lower intensity.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

Fig. 8. Simulation Results—Two Active Regions Reconstruction results for
activity simulated within two regions: the right anterior supra marginal gyrus
and the right posterior middle temporal gyrus. (a, d, g, j) show true region of
activity in Patients #1–4. (b, e, h, k) show reconstructions with unconstrained
dipoles within each voxel. (c, f, i, l) are reconstructions with constrained dipole
orientations. Each reconstruction (in color) is overlaid on a slice from the
T1 MRI located approximately through the midpoint of the true activity region. (a) Pt1:True. (b) Pt1:Unconstrained. (c) Pt1:Constrained. (d) Pt2:True. (e)
Pt2:Unconstrained. (f) Pt2:Constrained. (g) Pt3:True. (h) Pt3:Unconstrained. (i)
Pt3:Constrained. (j) Pt4:True. (k) Pt4:Unconstrained. (l) Pt4:Constrained.

In the left hemisphere, the left angular gyrus activity is well
reconstructed in Patients #3 and #4, but underestimated for Patients #1 and #2. Fig. 9(e) and 9(f) have had the transparency
map adjusted, to better show the low level activity seen in the
left hemisphere.
This suggests that while cortical dipole constraints offer computational and resolution improvements over unconstrained approaches, they do not fully compensate for some of the difficulties found in distributed source imaging. Namely, that large numbers of dipoles, active regions incorporating canceling dipoles,
or active regions with differing magnitudes can be difficult to
accurately reconstruct. The difficulty of identifying the temporal activity in Patients #1 and #3, and the left angular gyrus
activity in #1 and #2, can likely be accounted for by the varying number of voxels involved in each region. In the patients
where these regions were well reconstructed, the number of voxels per active parcel were approximately similar. In those with
poor reconstructions, the total number of voxels involved was

HYDE et al.: VOXEL-BASED DIPOLE ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS FOR DISTRIBUTED CURRENT ESTIMATION

2037

Fig. 9. Simulation Results—Three Active Regions Reconstruction results for activity simulated within the left angular gyrus, posterior aspect of the right
inferior temporal gyrus, and the right anterior supra marginal gyrus. (a, g, m, s) show true region of right hemisphere activity in Patients #1–4. (b, h, n, t) show reconstructions in the right hemisphere with unconstrained dipoles within each voxel. (c, i, o, l) are right hemisphere reconstructions with constrained dipole orientations.
(d, j, p, v) show the true activity within the left hemisphere. (e, k, q, w) are left hemisphere reconstructions with unconstrained dipoles. (f, l, r, x) are right hemisphere
reconstructions with constrained dipole orientations. Each reconstruction (in color) is overlaid on a slice from the T1 MRI located approximately through the
midpoint of the true activity region. (a) Pt1:True. (b) Pt1:Unconstrained. (c) Pt1:Constrained. (d) Pt1:True. (e) Pt1:Unconstrained. (f) Pt1:Constrained. (g) Pt2:True.
(h) Pt2:Unconstrained. (i) Pt2:Constrained. (j) Pt2:True. (k) Pt2:Unconstrained. (l) Pt2:Constrained. (m) Pt3:True. (n) Pt3:Unconstrained. (o) Pt3:Constrained.
(p) Pt3:True. (q) Pt3:Unconstrained. (r) Pt3:Constrained. (s) Pt4:True. (t) Pt4:Unconstrained. (u) Pt4:Constrained. (v) Pt4:True (w) Pt4:Unconstrained.
(x) Pt4:Constrained.

significantly smaller in the poorly reconstructed regions. This
leads to a lower impact on the total measured signal, making it
more difficult to identify during the localization procedure.
E. Experimental Data
While simulated experiments are useful to evaluate algorithmic performance, they are an idealized approximation to what
is actually occurring within the brain of a patient. As precise
as a patient-specific bioelectric model may be, it is still only
an approximation of how electrical signals propagate from the
cortical surface to the scalp. Additionally, real cortical activity is
significantly more complex that can easily be simulated. It may
involve a single physical region with varying source intensity,
time-varying changes and correlations between multiple cortical regions, and variable background activity that may or may
not be spatially and temporally correlated. This makes identifying the primary signal generator from experimentally collected
EEG data a more challenging problem than reconstructing from
simulations.

Because the true source distribution is unknown when reconstructing patient data, quantitative evaluation is not possible. We
present here a qualitative evaluation of the reconstruction results
from four of the seven patients whose bioelectric models were
used for the simulation studies. Each was enrolled in a high lead
count EEG study, under a protocol approved by the Children’s
Hospital IRB. Each was fitted with a 128 lead EEG head cap
from Electrical Geodesics (Eugene, OR) and monitored for a
period of approximately two hours, to obtain a sufficient number of interictal spikes for data averaging. These spikes were
identified from the data by a Children’s Hospital epileptologist
(FHD), who then aligned and averaged them to reduce background noise. A time point approximately 75% of the way up
the rising slope of the spike was chosen for the reconstructions,
as this has been shown to offer the best localization of the spike
origin.
1) Patient #1: Patient #1 had previously received a surgical resection to remove a focal cortical dysplasia, but had a
recurrence of symptoms following surgery. Clinical evaluation
suggested that the source of the continued activity originated

2038

Fig. 10. Reconstructions of Interictal Spike Data Reconstruction images
with and without dipole orientation constraints for four patients. (a) Pt1: Unconstrained. (b) Pt1: Constrained. (c) Pt2: Unconstrained. (d) Pt2: Constrained.
(e) Pt3: Unconstrained. (f) Pt3: Constrained. (g) Pt4: Unconstrained. (h) Pt4:
Constrained.

from the anterior wall of the resection cavity. Reconstruction
with unconstrained dipole orientations, as shown in Fig. 10(a),
identified this region to be the primary signal generator, with a
second source at approximately 50% intensity located along the
midline between the left and right parietal lobes.
The localization with cortically constrained dipole orientations yields a similar picture. The primary source is seen to be
arising from the two gyri immediately posterior to the resection
cavity. The secondary source along the midline is still seen, although its intensity is significantly lower, and it does not have

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

the same spatial extent as in the unconstrained solution. As with
the simulated images, there is less spatial blurring in the constrained solution and the maximum image intensity is higher,
suggesting that a smaller region of cortex is accounting for a
larger fraction of the data fitting.
2) Patient #2: Patient #2 has a focal cortical dysplasia in the
vicinity of the temporal-parietal junction.
The solution obtained with the unconstrained solution is difficult to interpret. It shows high levels of activity throughout the
posterior portion of the left hemisphere. A peak in the region of
the cortical dysplasia is seen, however its boundaries are hard
to discern, and incorporate the temporal, occipital, and parietal lobes. The wide range of activity seen throughout the left
hemisphere makes it quite difficult to discern from the source
localization alone where the origin of the spikes is.
By contrast, the solution constrained dipole orientations offers a much clearer picture of the seizure focus. The activity
within the anterior temporal and superior parietal lobes is significantly reduced, leaving a focal region that corresponds well
with the cortical dysplasia and expected seizure onset zone.
While activity outside the focal area is still present, it no longer
obscures the presumed epileptic source, and may be the result
of confounding activity.
3) Patient #3: Patient #3 also suffers from intractable
epilepsy, with clinical findings indicating multiple epileptic
sources, expected to be in the left parietal and left anterior temporal regions. The patient also has highly abnormal anatomy,
with significantly enlarged ventricles. The increased amount of
CSF present will significantly alter the bioelectric propagation
model, making our use of a patient specific model effectively
mandatory for accurate reconstruction.
Unlike the other patients, there is not a clear visual benefit to
using the constrained solution over the unconstrained, beyond
the reduced computation necessary. While the spatial extent of
the localization within the expected activity regions is reduced,
there is also additional activity within the frontal lobe seen in
the solution with constrained dipole orientations. Whether this
activity is real or an imaging artifact is impossible to tell, given
that ground truth within the patient is unknown.
4) Patient #4: Patient #4 has a focal cortical dysplasia in
the right anterior parietal lobe. Both the constrained and unconstrained solutions successfully identify this region; however, the
unconstrained solution has several imaging artifacts elsewhere
in the right hemisphere. These are significantly reduced or eliminated through the use of the constrained solution approach.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented here an approach for applying cortical orientation constraints to a fully voxelated distributed EEG source
localization problem. Rather than using a tessellated cortical
surface as the solution space, this approach estimates the cortical surface orientation for each cortically labeled voxel. This
eliminates the need for structurally constrained cortical surface
extraction methods, and allows the use of highly accurate statistical segmentation techniques in their stead. This approach also

HYDE et al.: VOXEL-BASED DIPOLE ORIENTATION CONSTRAINTS FOR DISTRIBUTED CURRENT ESTIMATION

intrinsically accounts for variable cortical thickness, as a great
number of voxels will be present in thicker cortical regions.
The constraints applied to reduce the complexity of the localization problem are also highly supported by the underlying biology. The pyramidal neurons responsible for the scalpmeasureable EEG signal are oriented roughly orthogonal to the
cortical surface. When a large number are firing in synchrony,
they will result in an equivalent dipole within each voxel oriented orthogonal to the cortical surface.
Our simulation and experimental results suggest that using
cortical dipole orientation constraints reduces the spatial blurring associated with distributed dipole solutions and more accurately reconstructs the intensity of cortical activity. In all the simulation cases, the unconstrained solution underestimated both
the peak and overall magnitude of the signal by 50% or more,
owing to the additional spatial blurring that occurred.
In this paper, we have addressed only source localization solutions at a single time point. When spatiotemporal solutions
are desired, involving tens or hundreds of time samples, number of unknowns to be computed will increase significantly.
While the fractional reduction in degrees of freedom is fixed
regardless of the total size of the problem, it is likely to be of
greater benefit when solving larger problems using more complex algorithmic techniques. In these cases, the computational
complexity may not scale linearly with the size of the problem,
and using cortically constrained dipoles may be the difference
between a solution that is computationally feasible and one that
is unattainable with current computing technology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke or the National
Institutes of Health.

REFERENCES
[1] K. Kaiboriboon, H. O. Lüders, M. Hamaneh, J. Turnbull, and S. D. Lhatoo,
“EEG source imaging in epilepsy–practicalities and pitfalls,” Nature Rev.
Neurol., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 498–507, Sep. 2012.
[2] J. S. Ebersole, “EEG dipole modeling in complex partial epilepsy,” Brain
Topogr., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 113–123, 1991.
[3] J. S. Ebersole, “Non-invasive localization of the epileptogenic focus by
EEG dipole modeling,” Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. Supplementum,
vol. 152, pp. 20–28, 1994.
[4] S. Rose and J. S. Ebersole, “Advances in spike localization with EEG
dipole modeling,” Clin. EEG Neurosc.: Offic. J. EEG Clin. Neurosci.
Soc., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 281–287, Oct. 2009.
[5] L. Ding and B. He, “Spatio-temporal EEG source localization using a
three-dimensional subspace FINE approach in a realistic geometry inhomogeneous head model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 9,
pp. 1732–1739, Sep. 2006.
[6] R. Pascual-Marqui, “Review of methods for solving the EEG inverse
problem,” Int. J. Bioelectromagnet., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 75–86, 1999.
[7] O. Hauk, “Keep it simple: A case for using classical minimum norm
estimation in the analysis of EEG and MEG data,” NeuroImage, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 1612–1621, Apr. 2004.
[8] C. Phillips, J. Mattout, M. D. Rugg, P. Maquet, and K. J. Friston, “An
empirical Bayesian solution to the source reconstruction problem in EEG,”
NeuroImage, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 997–1011, Feb. 2005.

2039

[9] K. Uutela, M. Hämäläinen, and E. Somersalo, “Visualization of magnetoencephalographic data using minimum current estimates,” NeuroImage,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 173–180, Aug. 1999.
[10] R. Grech, T. Cassar, J. Muscat, K. P. Camilleri, S. G. Fabri, M. Zervakis,
P. Xanthopoulos, V. Sakkalis, and B. Vanrumste, “Review on solving the
inverse problem in EEG source analysis,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 5,
2008.
[11] S. Baillet, J. C. Mosher, and R. M. Leahy, “Electromagnetic brain mapping,” Signal Process. Mag., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 14–30, 2001.
[12] W. E. Kincses, C. Braun, S. Kaiser, W. Grodd, H. Ackermann, and
K. Mathiak, “Reconstruction of extended cortical sources for EEG and
MEG based on a Monte-Carlo-Markov-chain estimator,” Human Brain
Mapp., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 100–110, Feb. 2003.
[13] F.-H. Lin, J. W. Belliveau, A. M. Dale, and M. S. Hämäläinen, “Distributed
current estimates using cortical orientation constraints,” Human Brain
Mapp., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2006.
[14] T. Auranen, A. Nummenmaa, M. S. Hämäläinen, I. P. Jääskeläinen,
J. Lampinen, A. Vehtari, and M. Sams, “Bayesian inverse analysis of
neuromagnetic data using cortically constrained multiple dipoles,” Human brain Mapp., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 979–994, 2007.
[15] P. Olejniczak, “Neurophysiologic basis of EEG,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol.:
Offic. Publicat. Amer. Electroencephalogr. Soc., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 186–
189, Jun. 2006.
[16] H. Hallez, B. Vanrumste, R. Grech, J. Muscat, W. de Clercq, A. Vergult,
Y. D’Asseler, K. P. Camilleri, S. G. Fabri, S. van Huffel, and I. Lemahieu,
“Review on solving the forward problem in EEG source analysis,” J.
Neuroeng. Rehabilit., vol. 4, p. 46, 2007.
[17] I. Constant and N. Sabourdin, “The EEG signal: A window on the cortical
brain activity,” Paediatr. Anaesthesia, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 539–552, Jun.
2012.
[18] A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, and M. I. Sereno, “Cortical surface-based analysis.
I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction,” NeuroImage, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 179–194, Feb. 1999.
[19] P. L. Nunez and R. Srinivasan, Electric Fields of the Brain. London,
U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, Feb. 2006.
[20] Y. Lai, X. Zhang, W. van Drongelen, M. Korhman, K. Hecox, Y. Ni,
and B. He, “Noninvasive cortical imaging of epileptiform activities from
interictal spikes in pediatric patients,” NeuroImage, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 244–
252, Jan. 2011.
[21] C. Hutton, E. de Vita, J. Ashburner, R. Deichmann, and R. Turner, “Voxelbased cortical thickness measurements in MRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 40,
no. 4, pp. 1701–1710, 2008.
[22] A. J. Yezzi and J. L. Prince, “An Eulerian PDE approach for computing
tissue thickness,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1332–1339,
Oct. 2003.
[23] F.-H. Lin, T. Witzel, S. P. Ahlfors, S. M. Stufflebeam, J. W. Belliveau,
and M. S. Hämäläinen, “Assessing and improving the spatial accuracy in
MEG source localization by depth-weighted minimum-norm estimates,”
NeuroImage, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 160–171, May 2006.
[24] J. O. Berger, Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, 2nd ed.
New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
[25] J. P. Kaipio and E. Somersalo, Statistical and Computational Inverse Problems. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[26] P. Hansen, “Analysis of discrete ill-posed problems by means of the lcurve,” SIAM Rev., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 561–580, Dec. 1992.
[27] R. D. Pascual-Marqui and M. Esslen, “Functional imaging with lowresolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA): A review,” in
Methods Find. Experiment. Clin. Pharmacol., 2002.
[28] V. Grau, A. Mewes, M. Alcaniz, R. Kikinis, and S. K. Warfield, “Improved watershed transform for medical image segmentation using prior
information,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 447–458, Apr.
2004.
[29] N. I. Weisenfeld and S. K. Warfield, “Automatic segmentation of newborn
brain MRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 564–572, 2009.
[30] J. Ruiz-Alzola, C.-F. Westin, S. K. Warfield, C. Alberola, S. Maier, and
R. Kikinis, “Nonrigid registration of 3D tensor medical data,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 143–161, Jun. 2002.
[31] J. M. Peters, M. Sahin, V. K. Vogel-Farley, S. S. Jeste, C. A. Nelson,
M. C. Gregas, S. P. Prabhu, B. Scherrer, and S. K. Warfield, “Loss of white
matter microstructural integrity is associated with adverse neurological
outcome in tuberous sclerosis complex,” Academ. Radiol., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 17–25, Jan. 2012.
[32] P. Douek, R. Turner, J. Pekar, N. Patronas, and D. Lebihan, “Mr Color
Mapping of Myelin Fiber Orientation,” J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr., vol. 15,
no. 6, pp. 923–929, 1991.

2040

[33] M. Rullmann, A. Anwander, M. Dannhauer, S. K. Warfield, F. H. Duffy,
and C. H. Wolters, “EEG source analysis of epileptiform activity using
a 1 mm anisotropic hexahedra finite element head model,” NeuroImage,
vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 399–410, Jan. 2009.
[34] H. I. Saleheen and K. T. Ng, “New finite difference formulations for
general inhomogeneous anisotropic bioelectric problems,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 800–809, Sep. 1997.
[35] D. S. Tuch, V. J. Wedeen, A. M. Dale, J. S. George, and J. W. Belliveau,
“Conductivity tensor mapping of the human brain using diffusion tensor
MRI,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. United States Am., vol. 98, no. 20, pp. 11697–
11701, Sep. 2001.
[36] D. Weinstein, L. Zhukov, and C. Johnson, “Lead-field bases for electroencephalography source imaging,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 28, no. 9,
pp. 1059–1065, Sep. 2000.
[37] B. Fischl, M. I. Sereno, and A. M. Dale, “Cortical surface-based analysis.
II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system,” NeuroImage, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 195–207, Feb. 1999.
[38] A. Akhondi-Asl and S. K. Warfield, “Simultaneous truth and performance
level estimation through fusion of probabilistic segmentations,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1840–1852, Oct. 2013.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 7, JULY 2014

[39] C. Grova, J. Daunizeau, J. M. Lina, C. G. Bénar, H. Benali, and J. Gotman,
“Evaluation of EEG localization methods using realistic simulations of
interictal spikes,” NeuroImage, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 734–753, Feb. 2006.
[40] T. Bast, O. Oezkan, S. Rona, C. Stippich, A. Seitz, A. Rupp, S. Fauser,
J. Zentner, D. Rating, and M. Scherg, “EEG and MEG source analysis
of single and averaged interictal spikes reveals intrinsic epileptogenicity
in focal cortical dysplasia,” Epilepsia, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 621–631, Jun.
2004.
[41] J. Yao and J. P. A. Dewald, “Evaluation of different cortical source localization methods using simulated and experimental EEG data,” NeuroImage, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 369–382, Apr. 2005.
[42] J.W.H. Meijs, O.W. Weier, M.J. Peters, and A. van Oosterom, “On the
numerical accuracy of the boundary element method (EEG application),”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1038–1049, Oct. 1989.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

