70

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Light-Controlled Biphasic Current Stimulator IC
Using CMOS Image Sensors for High-Resolution
Retinal Prosthesis and In Vitro Experimental
Results With rd1 Mouse
Sungjin Oh, Jae-Hyun Ahn, Sangmin Lee, Hyoungho Ko, Jong Mo Seo, Yong-Sook Goo,
and Dong-il “Dan” Cho∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Retinal prosthetic devices stimulate retinal nerve cells
with electrical signals proportional to the incident light intensities.
For a high-resolution retinal prosthesis, it is necessary to reduce the
size of the stimulator pixels as much as possible, because the retinal nerve cells are concentrated in a small area of approximately
5 mm × 5 mm. In this paper, a miniaturized biphasic current stimulator integrated circuit is developed for subretinal stimulation
and tested in vitro. The stimulator pixel is miniaturized by using
a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) image sensor composed of three transistors. Compared to a pixel that uses
a four-transistor CMOS image sensor, this new design reduces the
pixel size by 8.3%. The pixel size is further reduced by simplifying the stimulation-current generating circuit, which provides
a 43.9% size reduction when compared to the design reported to
be the most advanced version to date for subretinal stimulation.
The proposed design is fabricated using a 0.35 μm bipolar-CMOSDMOS process. Each pixel is designed to fit in a 50 μ m × 55 μm
area, which theoretically allows implementing more than 5000 pixels in the 5 mm × 5 mm area. Experimental results show that a
biphasic current in the range of 0 to 300 μA at 12 V can be generated as a function of incident light intensities. Results from in vitro
Manuscript received December 28, 2013; revised April 19, 2014 and June 3,
2014; accepted July 2, 2014. Date of publication July 8, 2014; date of current
version December 18, 2014. This work was supported by the Public Welfare and
Safety Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
funded by Ministry of Science, ICT, and Future Planning (2012-0008611), and
by the IC Design Education Center. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. Oh and J.-H. Ahn are with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea, and with the
Interuniversity Semiconductor Research Center and Automation and Systems
Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail:
ohsjsungjin@snu.ac.kr; brise98@snu.ac.kr).
S. Lee was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea, when this work was done.
He is now with Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Yongin 446-712,
Korea (e-mail: sangm007.lee@samsung.com).
H. Ko is with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, 305-764, Korea (e-mail: hhko@cnu.ac.kr).
J. M. Seo is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea, and with the Department
of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul 110-744, Korea (e-mail: callme@snu.ac.kr).
Y. Goo is with the Department of Physiology, College of Medicine,
Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 361-763, Korea (e-mail:
ysgoo@chungbuk.ac.kr).
∗ D. Cho is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea, and with the Interuniversity Semiconductor Research Center and Automation and Systems Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail:
dicho@snu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2336799

experiments with rd1 mice indicate that the proposed method can
be effectively used for retinal prosthesis with a high resolution.
Index Terms—Biphasic current stimulator, CMOS image
sensor, high-resolution retinal prosthesis, light-controlled
stimulation generator, retina stimulator circuit.

I. INTRODUCTION
ETINITIS pigmentosa and age-related macular degeneration are diseases that cause vision loss in more than
15 million people worldwide and are considered medically incurable [1]–[3]. Although these diseases cause retinal remodeling due to degenerations of the photoreceptors in the retina,
some of the inner nuclear and retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) can
perform normal functions for vision for many ensuing years
[4]–[6]. Based on this phenomenon, a retinal prosthesis using
electrical stimulation has been researched as a visual prosthesis.
Other approaches including an intracortical prosthesis and optic
nerve prosthesis have also been proposed [7]–[10].
In the retinal prosthesis approach, a stimulator chip with
a stimulation pixel array is used. In each stimulator pixel, a
circuitry generates stimulation current proportional to incident
light intensities and injects it into the retinal nerve cells through
an electrode. A photosensing part is also necessary to generate
the stimulation current proportional to incident light intensities.
The photosensing part can be external (such as a glass mounted
camera) [11], but this paper and other recent studies [12]–[15]
consider integrating the photosensing part in the stimulator chip.
When the photosensing part is located in the external device, the
stimulator becomes too complex and data telemetry between the
external and internal implanted devices also becomes necessary
[16]. This, in turn, may result in a high power consumption
that can adversely affect the eye by raising the temperature in
the retina [17]–[19]. Therefore, it is desirable to integrate the
photosensing part in the implanted device. A complementary
metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) image sensor array can
be utilized as an integrated photosensing part because it can be
fabricated together with the stimulator pixel circuit.
The visual nerves are distributed mainly in a macular. Therefore, the size of a stimulator chip should be similar to that of a
macula, which is approximately 6 mm in diameter [20]. Furthermore, a small size is desirable because it is hard to surgically
manage an incision bigger than 5 mm in a sclera [21]. Generally,
a smaller implanting chip is less invasive to patients.

R

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

OH et al.: LIGHT-CONTROLLED BIPHASIC CURRENT STIMULATOR IC USING CMOS IMAGE SENSORS

It is well known that for a sufficient spatial resolution to read
sentences and to recognize a face, at least 1000 pixels are necessary [22], [23]. Ideally more pixels would be better for a more
detailed vision. Note that more than 100 million photoreceptors
perceive light in a normal retina [24]. To integrate 1024 pixels
in an area of 5 mm × 5 mm in a retina, each pixel needs to fit
in an area approximately 150 μm × 150 μm [21], [25].
In this paper, a miniaturized 50 μm × 55 μm biphasic current stimulator integrated circuit (IC) with an integrated CMOS
image sensor as the photosensing part, is developed for subretinal stimulation. The stimulator pixel is miniaturized by using
the CMOS image sensor composed of only three transistors. In
addition, the pixel size is further reduced substantially by employing a simplified stimulation-current generating circuit that
uses a single-transistor type voltage-controlled current source
(VCCS) and a biphasic current generator with programmable
switches. A 0.35-μm bipolar-CMOS-DMOS (BCDMOS) process of Dongbu Hi-Tek (Bucheon, Korea) is used to fabricate the
stimulator IC for effective stimulation at 12 V. The stimulator
IC generates the stimulation current in the range of 0 to 300 μA
as a function of incident light intensities. In addition, the amplitude of the stimulation current and the range of perceptible light
intensities are adjustable through a built-in signal amplification
circuit. Note that as the stimulation current is amplified more,
the range of perceptible light intensities decreases in this signal
amplification method.
In in vitro experiments with rd1 mice, the neural responses
evoked by the stimulation current generated in the stimulator
IC are observed. In the first experiment, the amplitude of the
stimulation current is adjusted by the light intensity illuminating
the stimulator IC. In the second experiment, the amplitude of
the stimulation current is controlled by using the built-in signal
amplification function. The results in two experiments show that
the number of evoked neural spikes increases as the amplitude
of the stimulation current is increased.
II. DESIGN
A. System Architecture
The system architecture of the proposed biphasic current stimulator IC using the CMOS image sensors composed of three
transistors is depicted in Fig. 1. The biphasic current stimulator
IC is composed of an array of the stimulator pixels. Each stimulator pixel consumes only 9.6 μW when 20 nC is injected at the
stimulation frequency of 20 Hz. It has been reported that a retinal implant device that consumes 49.6 mW can safely operate in
a human eye [17]. Thus, it can be postulated in our design more
than 5000 pixels can operate simultaneously without the thermal side effects, if less than 20 nC is injected at the stimulation
frequency of 20 Hz.
A total of five control signals are used for the operation of
the stimulator IC. The reset (RST) signal is used to discharge
all the capacitors in the stimulator IC. The RST also makes the
photodiodes to be reverse biased to prepare to perceive light information. The charge (CHRG) signal determines the length of
time the capacitors are to be charged. The duration of the CHRG
signal plays a role in the signal amplification by determining the

71

Fig. 1. System architecture of the proposed biphasic current stimulator IC
using the CMOS image sensors composed of three transistors.

Fig. 2. Schematic of the stimulator pixel. The pixel circuit consists of three
parts: The photosensing part using the CMOS image sensors composed of three
transistors, the VCCS, and the biphasic current generator.

level of the capacitor voltage which is proportional to the amplitude of the stimulation current. The stimulation (STI) signal
determines whether or not the stimulation current is generated.
The source (SRC) and sink (SNK) signals determine the directions of the biphasic current pulse as a source or a sink to the
retinal nerve cells.
B. Schematic
A schematic of the stimulator pixel is shown in Fig. 2.
The pixel circuit consists of a photosensing part, a VCCS,
and a biphasic current generator. The photosensing part consists of two metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor
switches, a readout P-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor fieldeffect transistor (PMOS), a photodiode, and a capacitor. The
capacitor is used to store the voltage converted from the light.
The VCCS has a structure of a common-source amplifier with
source degeneration. The biphasic current generator consists of
only four programmable switches. For the VCCS and the biphasic current generator, the designs from our previous research
[26] are used in this paper. The photosensing part is designed
to operate with a supply voltage of 5 V. On the other hand,
the VCCS and the biphasic current generator are designed to
operate with a relatively high supply voltage of 12 V.

72

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Timing diagram of the control signals and generated biphasic stimulation current.

C. Operation Principle
The operation of the stimulator IC starts after the RST signal.
The gate voltage of the readout PMOS, connected to the cathode
of the photodiode, is dropped as the junction capacitor of the
photodiode is discharged by a photo current proportional to
the outer light intensity (see Fig. 2). Therefore, the incident
light intensity determines when the readout PMOS is turned
on and the charging velocity of the capacitor. In addition, the
duration of the CHRG signal determines the length of time
the capacitor is charged. The VCCS generates a stimulation
current proportional to the capacitor voltage. The stimulation
current can be increased up to 300 μA with a supply voltage of
12 V applied to the VCCS and the biphasic current generator.
The maximum level of the stimulation current can be adjusted
as a function of the supply voltage applied to the VCCS and
the biphasic current generator. Thus, the maximum stimulation
current can be decreased lower than 300 μA if the supply voltage
lower than 12 V is applied to the VCCS and the biphasic current
generator. To inject the stimulation charges, a biphasic current
generator generates biphasic current pulses according to the
SRC/SNK signals with a stimulation voltage level as high as
12 V (see Fig. 2). When the stimulation current is applied, the
amplitudes of the source current and the sink current are fixed
at the same level by the VCCS. In addition, each stimulation
current flows the same path except for the directions to the
retinal nerve cells. Thus, the amount of injected charges can be
balanced if the durations of the SRC/SNK signals are equal. A
timing diagram of the control signals and generated stimulation
current pulses is shown in Fig. 3.
D. Selection of the Photodiode
The perceptible range of light intensities should be wide so
that the photosensing parts can react in various environments.
In addition, the maximum stimulation current should be high so
that a clearly distinguished current stimulation as a function of
the light intensity can be applied. The perceptible range of light
intensities and the maximum level of the stimulation current are
determined based on the structural characteristics of the photodiode integrated in the photosensing part. An experiment using
the test stimulator IC, which has diverse types of photodiodes,

Fig. 4. Layout of the test stimulator IC and the stimulator pixel for the experiment to determine the most appropriate structure of the photodiode. Four types
of photodiodes are used in the test stimulator pixel array.

was conducted to determine the most appropriate structure of
the photodiode.
The test stimulator IC consists of an 8 × 8 pixel array as
shown in Fig. 4. Four types of photodiodes are used in the test
stimulator pixel array (see Fig. 4 and Table I). In the experiment,
a white light source is used as the source of incident light. A
three-element circuit model of the electrodes and retinal tissues,
is depicted in Fig. 5. This circuit model is connected to the
electrode pads of the stimulator pixel through the pads located
in the bottom side of the test stimulator IC (see Fig. 4). A bipolar
stimulation method is used for this experiment. Variations of the
stimulation current as a function of the incident light intensities
are observed for each type of photodiodes.
Fig. 6 shows the result of the experiment. Based on this result,
the characteristics of the four types of photodiodes are analyzed
as summarized in Table I. From the summarized information,
we conclude that the first type of photodiode is the most appropriate for the proposed stimulator IC because it generates
the stimulation current in the widest range of light intensities.

OH et al.: LIGHT-CONTROLLED BIPHASIC CURRENT STIMULATOR IC USING CMOS IMAGE SENSORS

73

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FOUR TYPES OF PHOTODIODES

Fig. 5. Three-element circuit model connected to the electrode pads in the
stimulator pixel. The capacitance of 1 nF represents the double-layer capacitance. The resistances of 10 MΩ and 10 kΩ represents the Faradaic charge
transfer and the tissue resistances, respectively.

Fig. 6. Variations of the stimulation current as a function of the incident light
intensities. Of the four types of photodiodes, the first type, PD 1, has the widest
perceptible range of the light intensity and the highest maximum stimulation
current.

Furthermore, it has an advantage for miniaturization of the stimulator pixel due to its concise structure composed of only two
layers. Therefore, we design the stimulator IC using the first
type of photodiode. Please note that the pulse waveform can be
distorted, if the pulse duration is longer than 40 μs because of
the overcharging of the double layer capacitor.
E. Layout
The 0.35-μm 2-poly/4-metal BCDMOS process of Dongbu
Hi-Tek (Bucheon, Korea) is used for the design and fabrication
of the stimulator IC. The layouts of the stimulator IC and the

Fig. 7. Layout of the stimulator IC and the stimulator pixel. The stimulator
IC consists of a 16 × 8 pixel array in an area of 2.5 mm × 1.2 mm. Each
stimulator pixel occupies 50 μm × 55 μm. A MEA can be fabricated directly
on the stimulator IC using a post-CMOS micromachining technology, or can be
fabricated separately and bonded to the CMOS wafer.

stimulator pixel are depicted in Fig. 7. The stimulator IC has a
16 × 8 pixel array in an area of 2.5 mm × 1.2 mm. Each stimulator pixel is designed to fit in an area of 50 μm × 55 μm. The pixel
is miniaturized by using the CMOS image sensor composed of
three transistors. Compared to a stimulator pixel that uses a fourtransistor CMOS image sensor, this design reduces the pixel size
by 8.3%. In addition, the pixel size is further reduced by employing the simplified stimulation-current generating circuit, which
is composed of the single transistor type VCCS and the biphasic
current generator using the programmable switches. Thus, the
pixel size is reduced by 43.9% when compared to the design
reported to be the most advanced version to date for subretinal

74

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Results of the preexperiment on the test board to measure variations of the stimulation current as a function of the incident light intensities.

Fig. 10. Two-dimensional Au circle-shaped MEA is fabricated for the in vitro
experiment. (a) Picture of the fabricated MEA (two circled large electrodes are
for stimulation, and 57 other electrodes are for recording.). (b) Cross-sectional
view of the fabricated electrode.

Fig. 9. Results of the preexperiment on the test board to measure variations
of the stimulation current as a function of the signal amplification using the
duration of the CHRG signal.

stimulation, which uses a stimulation-current generating circuit
composed of a differential amplifier and current mirrors [14].
The electrode pads are exposed on the top of the stimulator
IC as contacts for outer electrodes. In this design, a microelectrode array (MEA) can be fabricated directly on the top using
a post-CMOS micromachining technology, or can be fabricated
separately and bonded to the CMOS wafer.
III. EXPERIMENT
In vitro experiments with rd1 mice were conducted to evaluate
the performance of the proposed stimulator IC. Before conducting the in vitro experiment, we also performed preexperiments
using the stimulator IC on a test board to measure the variations of amplitude of the stimulation current as a function of the
incident light intensity and the signal amplification using the
duration of the CHRG signal.
A. Preexperiment
In the preexperiments, we measured variations of the stimulation current as a function of the incident light intensity increasing
up to 20000 lux. In addition, variations of the stimulation current as a function of the signal amplification using the duration
of the CHRG signal were measured, at the fixed light intensity
of 1000 lux. The three-element circuit model shown in Fig. 5 is

used for the preexperiments, instead of real electrodes. Results
of the preexperiments are shown in Figs. 8 and 9. As shown
in Fig. 8, the perceptible range of the incident light intensity is
inversely proportional to the duration of the CHRG signal.
B. Preparation of Retinal Tissues
For the in vitro experiments, degenerated retinal tissues are
extracted from the eyes of rd1 mice. All animal use protocols are
approved by the Institutional Animal Care Committee of Chungbuk National University (permit number: CA-25). We utilize the
method described in [33] to extract the retinal tissues. First, retinas of the rd1 mice are separated after the eyeballs are extracted.
The retinal tissues are then cut into patches of 5 mm × 5 mm.
The retinal patches are immersed in an artificial cerebrospinal
fluid bubbled with O2 and CO2 to ensure preservation of the
extracted retinal cells.
C. Microelectrode Array (MEA)
A 2-D Au circle-shaped MEA is fabricated for the in vitro experiments. The MEA is fabricated utilizing the microelectromechanical systems technologies at the Interuniversity Semiconductor Research Center at Seoul National University.
The MEA is made from gold (Au) and titanium (Ti) on a glass
substrate. For passivation of the electrodes, SU-8 photoresist is
coated on the MEA excluding the opening sites. The covered
SU-8 layer also increases the adhesion between the electrodes
and living cells [34].

OH et al.: LIGHT-CONTROLLED BIPHASIC CURRENT STIMULATOR IC USING CMOS IMAGE SENSORS

Fig. 11. PSTHs of the RGCs that react strongly to the stimulation. (a) More
neural spikes are evoked as the brighter light illuminates the stimulator IC.
(b) More neural spikes are evoked as the longer CHRG signal is applied.

An image of the fabricated MEA is shown in Fig. 10. The
MEA consists of two channel electrodes and 57 recording electrodes. A diameter of the channel electrodes is 150 μm, and that
of the recording electrodes is 50 μm. The channel electrodes
are connected to the electrode pads of the stimulator pixel
through the pads located in the bottom side of the stimulator
IC (see Fig. 7).
D. Process
We performed two types of in vitro experiments. In the first
experiment, we observe electrically evoked responses from the
RGCs when the incident light intensity is changed. In this experiment, the light is generated from a white light source. The
light intensity is varied from 900 to 1300 lux. In the second
experiment, we observe electrically evoked responses from the
RGCs as a function of the signal amplification using the duration of the CHRG signal. The duration of the CHRG signal is
changed from 10 to 20 μs.
In each experiment, charge-balanced biphasic current pulses
of 1-ms duration are injected to the retinal nerve cells as
bipolar stimulation. To increase the efficiency of the stimulation, the injected stimulation current pulses have a cathodic–
anodic biphasic sequence [36]. An intraphase delay of 1 ms
exists between the cathodic and anodic current pulses in order to decrease the effects of the cathodic pulse when the
RGCs are stimulated with the anodic pulse [37]. Each current stimulation is repeated 50 times. In addition, each experiment is repeated three times using six retinal patches extracted from different rd1 mice. The evoked responses from
the RGCs are recorded through the recording electrodes in the
MEA. The MEA 60 recording system (Multi Channel Systems
GmbH, Germany) is used to record the evoked spikes. The
recorded data are analyzed using the spike sorting software,
Offline Sorter (Plexon Inc., USA).
E. Results
Fig. 11 shows the poststimulus time histograms (PSTHs) of
the RGCs that react strongly to the stimulation in the in vitro

75

experiments. As shown in the PSTHs, most of the neural spikes
are evoked immediately after the current stimulation generated
from the proposed stimulator IC.
Fig. 12 shows results of the two types of in vitro experiments.
The average numbers of evoked spikes per stimulation current
pulse are calculated using the method explained in [38]. First,
the reactive RGCs are selected according to the correlation coefficients between the number of evoked spikes and the intensities
of the current stimulation. The difference between the average
numbers of neural spikes per stimulation current pulse before
and after the current stimulation is then calculated.
Fig. 12(a) shows the results of the first in vitro experiment
when the incident light intensity is changed. In the graph, the
average number of evoked spikes is increased approximately
five times as the illuminating light intensity is increased from
900 to 1300 lux. Fig. 12(b) shows the results of the second in
vitro experiment as a function of the signal amplification using
the duration of the CHRG signal. The average number of evoked
spikes is increased approximately 1.5 times as the duration of
the CHRG signal is increased from 10 to 20 μs.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Operation and Performance
The operation and performance of the stimulator IC are evaluated through the experiments. In the preexperiments on the test
board, the stimulator IC generates biphasic stimulation current
in the range of 0 to 300 μA as a function of the incident light intensity increasing up to 20000 lux. In addition, the amplitude of
the stimulation current is adjustable through the built-in signal
amplification circuit.
In the preexperiments, a range of incident light intensities
is increased as a shorter CHRG signal is applied (see Fig. 8).
This means that the range of perceptible light intensities can
be controlled by the signal amplification using the duration of
the CHRG signal. Therefore, the stimulator IC can detect any
light intensity by adjusting the duration of the CHRG signal.
For instance, the stimulator IC should detect the light intensity
of approximately 40 lux for an indoor activity because a light
intensity in a general indoor environment is approximately 400
lux. Note that retina rods can absorb only 10% of photons that
reach a cornea [39]. The light intensity of approximately 40 lux
can be detected by applying the CHRG signal for the duration
of 250 μs because the stimulator IC percepts the light intensities
in a range of 30 to 70 lux at that duration of the CHRG signal.
In the proposed stimulator IC, the duration of the digital
signal (CHRG) is used for the signal amplification function. On
the other hand, the stimulation current is amplified as a function
of the voltage level of the analog input signal in the previously
developed stimulator IC [15]. In general, it is easier to adjust
the duration of a digital signal than to adjust the level of an
analog signal. Thus, the signal amplification is performed more
easily in the proposed stimulator IC, compared to the previously
developed stimulator IC where the voltage level of the analog
input signal is used to amplify the stimulation current [15].
The amplitudes of the source current and the sink current are
fixed at a same level by the VCCS, and flow the electrically

76

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 12. Average number of evoked spikes from the RGCs per biphasic current pulse as a function of the light intensity and the signal amplification using the
duration of the CHRG signal. (a) Average number of evoked spikes is increased as the brighter light illuminates the stimulator IC. (b) Average number of evoked
spikes is increased as the longer CHRG signal is applied.

Fig. 13. Relation between the average number of evoked spikes per stimulation current pulse and the estimated amplitude of the stimulation current. (a) Amplitude
of the stimulation current is estimated from the incident light intensities on the stimulator IC. (b) Amplitude of the stimulation current is estimated from the signal
amplification using the duration of the CHRG signal.

same path except for the directions to the retinal nerve cells.
Therefore, the charge balance can be ensured if the SRC/SNK
signals are applied for the same duration. In turn, a long-term
operation can be achieved with the stimulator IC because the
charge balanced current stimulation decreases damage to the
electrodes and surrounding tissues [40].
B. In Vitro Experiment With the rd1 Mice
The proposed stimulator IC stimulates the retinal nerve cells
successfully in the in vitro experiments with the rd1 mice. As
plotted in Fig. 12, more neural spikes are evoked as a brighter
light illuminates the stimulator IC, or as a longer CHRG signal
is applied. This is also shown in the PSTHs of the RGCs that
react strongly to the stimulation (see Fig. 11).
Fig. 13 shows the variations of the average numbers of evoked
neural spikes per stimulation current pulse as a function of the
amplitude of the stimulation current estimated from the incident

light intensities or duration of the CHRG signal in the in vitro
experiments. Increasingly more neural spikes are evoked as the
amplitude of the stimulation current is increased.
C. Potential for High-Resolution Retinal Stimulation
The proposed biphasic current stimulator IC has several advantages for a high-resolution retinal prosthesis. The stimulator
pixel is designed to fit in an area of only 50 μm × 55 μm including the photodiode (30 μm × 30 μm). Thus, the pixel pitch can
be as low as 65 μm, and more than 5000 pixels (71 × 71 pixel
array) can be integrated in an area of 5 mm × 5 mm which is the
target area in the retina [21], [25]. If the stimulator pixels are
integrated in a circular area that is conformal to an eyeball, 1024
pixels can be integrated in an area with a diameter of 2.4 mm.
The current stimulation with the high voltage level of 12 V
enables small electrodes to be used because the impedance of the
electrode is inversely proportional to its size [41], [42]. In order

OH et al.: LIGHT-CONTROLLED BIPHASIC CURRENT STIMULATOR IC USING CMOS IMAGE SENSORS

77

in the range of 0 to 300 μA as a function of incident light intensities. In addition, the amplitude of the stimulation current and
the range of perceptible light intensity can be adjusted by using
the built-in signal amplification circuit. The electrically evoked
responses from the RGCs are obtained and analyzed from the
in vitro experiments with the rd1 mice. The experimental results show that increasingly more neural spikes are evoked as
the stimulator IC injects the higher stimulation current to the
RGCs. The proposed stimulator IC can be used effectively for
high-resolution retinal prosthesis.
Fig. 14. Design to integrate the 1550-μm2 -sized 2-D TiN channel electrode
in the stimulator pixel, using a post-CMOS micromachining technology.

to inject a sufficient amount of stimulation charges through a
small-sized electrode, the design shown in Fig. 14 can be considered using a post-CMOS micromachining technology. A similar
process is also used in [15]. In this design, all of the right side
electrode pads in the stimulator pixels are tied and connected to
an outer reference electrode. Then, the top of the stimulator IC
can be passivated except for the photodiodes and via holes. A
1550-μm2 -sized 2-D TiN channel electrode can be connected
to the stimulator pixel through the via hole. The double-layer
capacitance of the commercialized 30-μm diameter 2-D TiN
electrode (which is used in the MEA 60 recording system used
to record the data in this paper) is known as 1 nF. Because the
capacitance of an electrode is proportional to its size, the double
layer capacitance of the 1550-μm2 -sized 2-D TiN channel electrode is estimated to be 2.2 nF. This electrode allows injecting
a stimulation charge of approximately 26 nC at 12 V. This analysis is also consistent with the previously developed stimulator
IC in [15], which can inject a stimulation charge of approximately 4 nC through a 2500-μm2 -sized 2-D TiN electrode at
2.3 V. Some numerical differences are attributed to the differences in the fabrication processes of the electrodes. However,
in order to implement this design, additional research needs to
be performed to integrate TiN electrodes to stimulator IC chips.
For example, a dc blocking capacitor should be integrated in
the stimulator pixel to prevent electrode corrosion. Note that
the water window of a TiN electrode, which is the range of the
voltage that does not cause the reduction and oxidation reaction
on the electrode surface, is approximately −1.5 to 1.5 V [43].
V. CONCLUSION
A light-controlled stimulator IC to achieve a high-resolution
retinal prosthesis using the CMOS image sensor composed of
three transistors is developed in this paper. The stimulator pixel
is miniaturized by using the CMOS image sensor composed of
three transistors. In addition, the pixel size is further reduced by
simplifying the stimulation-current generating circuit. As a result, the size of the stimulator pixel is fabricated to fit in an area
of only 50 μm × 55 μm in a 0.35 μm BCDMOS technology.
Attributed to the reduced pixel size, more than 5000 pixels can
be integrated in the target area of 5 mm × 5 mm in a retina. The
developed stimulator IC generates biphasic stimulation current

REFERENCES
[1] E. L. Berson, “Retinitis pigmentosa: Unfolding its mystery,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 93, pp. 4526–4528, May 1996.
[2] D. S. Friedman, B. J. O’Colmain, B. Munoz, S. C. Tomany, C. McCarthy,
P. T. de Jong, B. Nemesure, P. Mitchell, J. Kempen, and N. Congdon,
“Prevalence of age-related macular degeneration in the United States,”
Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 122, pp. 564–572, Apr. 2004.
[3] W. Mokwa, “Retinal implants to restore vision in blind people,” in Proc.
16th Int. Solid-State Sens., Actuators, Microsyst., Conf., 2011, pp. 2825–
2830.
[4] A. Santos, M. S. Humayun, E. de Juan, Jr., R. J. Greenburg, M. J. Marsh,
I. B. Klock, and A. H. Milam, “Preservation of the inner retina in retinitis pigmentosa: A morphometric analysis,” Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 115,
no. 4, pp. 511–515, Apr. 1997.
[5] B. W. Jones and R. E. Marc, “Retinal remodeling during retinal degeneration,” Exp. Eye Res., vol. 81, pp. 123–137, Aug. 2005.
[6] R. E. Marc, B. W. Jones, C. B. Watt, and E. Strettoi, “Neural remodeling
in retinal degeneration,” Prog. Retin. Eye. Res, vol. 22, pp. 607–655,
Sep. 2003.
[7] J. Seo, K. Kim, Y. Goo, K. Park, S. Kim, D. Cho, and H. Chung,
“Vision rehabilitation by electrical retinal stimulation: Review of microelectrode approaches,” Sensor. Mater., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 153–164,
Apr. 2012.
[8] D. D. Zhou and R. J. Greenberg, “Microelectronic visual prostheses,” in
Implantable Neural Prostheses 1: Devices and Applications, New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 1–42.
[9] M. Piedade, J. Gerald, L. A. Sousa, G. Tavares, and P. Tomas, “Visual neuroprosthesis: A non invasive system for stimulating the cortex,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2648–2662,
Dec. 2005.
[10] C. Veraart, F. Duret, M. Brelen, and J. Delbeke, “Vision rehabilitation with
the optic nerve visual prosthesis,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2004, pp. 4163–4164.
[11] K. Chen, Y. Lo, Z. Yang, J. D. Weiland, M. S. Humayun, and
W. Liu, “A system verification platform for high-density epiretinal prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 326–337,
Jun. 2013.
[12] D. C. Ng, T. Furumiya, K. Yasuoka, A. Uehara, K. Kagawa, T. Tokuda,
M. Nunoshita, and J. Ohta, “Pulse frequency modulation based CMOS
image sensor for subretinal stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol.
53, no. 6, pp. 487–491, Jun. 2006.
[13] T. Tokuda, K. Hiyama, S. Sawamura, K. Sasagawa, Y. Terasawa,
K. Nishida, Y. Kitaguchi, T. Fujikado, Y. Tano, and J. Ohta, “CMOSbased multichip networked flexible retinal stimulator designed for imagebased retinal prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 56, no. 11,
pp. 2577–2585, Nov. 2009.
[14] A. Rothermel, L. Liu, N. P. Aryan, M. Fischer, J. Wuenschmann, S. Kibbel,
and A. Harscher, “ A CMOS chip with active pixel array and specific test
features for subretinal implantation,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44,
no. 1, pp. 290–300, Jan. 2009.
[15] E. Zrenner, K. U. Bartz-Schmidt, H. Benav, D. Besch, A. Bruckmann,
V. P. Gabel, F. Gekeler, U. Greppmaier, A. Harscher, S. Kibbel, J. Koch,
A. Kusnyerik, T. Peters, K. Stingl, H. Sachs, A. Stett, P. Szurman, B.
Wilhelm, and R. Wilke, “Subretinal electronic chips allow blind patients
to read letters and combine them to words,” Proc. Roy. Soc. B Biol. Sci.,
vol. 278, pp. 1489–1497, May 2011.
[16] T. T. Kien, T. Maul, and A. Bargiela, “A review of retinal prosthesis
approaches,” in Proc. Int. J. Mod. Phys., Conf. Ser., 2012, pp. 209–231.

78

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[17] G. Lazzi, “Thermal effects of bioimplants,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.,
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 75–81, Sep. 2005.
[18] A. J. Welch and G. D. Polhamus, “Measurement and prediction of thermal
injury in the retina of the rhesus monkey,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 633–644, Oct. 1984.
[19] N. L. Opie, A. N. Burkitt, H. Meffin, and D. B. Grayden, “Heating of the
eye by a retinal prosthesis: Modeling, cadaver and In Vivo study,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 339–345, Feb. 2012.
[20] G. R. Jackson, C. A. Curcio, K. R. Sloan, and C. Owsley, “Photoreceptor
degeneration in aging and age-related maculopathy,” in Macular Degeneration. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005, pp. 45–62.
[21] J. D. Weiland, W. Liu, and M. S. Humayun, “Retinal prosthesis,” Annu.
Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 7, pp. 361–401, Aug. 2005.
[22] K. Cha, K. Horch, and R. A. Normann, “Simulation of a phosphene-based
visual field: Visual acuity in a pixelized vision system,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 20, pp. 439–449, Jul. 1992.
[23] K. Cha, K. Horch, and R. A. Normann, “Reading speed with a pixelized
vision system,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 673–677, May 1992.
[24] A. Hendrickson, “Organization of the adult primate fovea,” in Macular
Degeneration. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005, pp. 1–23.
[25] W. Liu and M. S. Humayun, “Retinal prosthesis,” in Proc. Dig. Tech.
Paper ISSCC, 2004, pp. 218–219.
[26] J. Ahn, S. Lee, S. Hong, H. Yoo, S. Jung, S. Park, H. Ko, and D. Cho,
“Multi-channel stimulator IC using a channel sharing method for retinal
prostheses,” J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., vol. 9, pp. 621–625, Nov. 2013.
[27] D. B. Shire, S. K. Kelly, J. Chen, P. Doyle, M. D. Gingerich, S. F. Cogan, W. A. Drohan, O. Mendoza, L. Theogarajan, J. L. Wyatt, and J. F.
Rizzo, “Development and implantation of a minimally invasive wireless
subretinal neurostimulator,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 10,
pp. 2502–2511, Oct. 2009.
[28] M. Mazza, P. Renaud, D. C. Bertrand, and A. M. Ionescu, “CMOS pixels for subretinal implantable prosthesis,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 32–37, Feb. 2005.
[29] T. Johansson, M. Abbasi, R. J. Huber, and R. A. Normann, “A threedimensional architecture for a parallel processing photosensing array (silicon retina application),” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 12,
pp. 1292–1297, Dec. 1992.
[30] S. K. Kelly, D. B. Shire, J. Chen, P. Doyle, M. D. Gingerich, S. F. Cogan,
W. A. Drohan, S. Behan, L. Theogarajan, J. L. Wyatt, and J. F. Rizzo, “A
hermetic wireless subretinal neurostimulator for vision prostheses,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3197–3205, Nov. 2011.
[31] T. Schanze, L. Hesse, C. Lau, N. Greve, W. Haberer, S. Kammer, T. Doerge, A. Rentzos, and T. Stieglitz, “An optically powered single-channel
stimulation implant as test system for chronic biocompatibility and biostability of miniaturized retinal vision prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 983–992, Jun. 2007.
[32] A. Stett, W. Barth, S. Weiss, H. Haemmerle, and E. Zrenner, “Electrical
multisite stimulation of the isolated chicken retina,” Vision Res., vol. 40,
pp. 1785–1795, Jun. 2000.
[33] K. Koo, S. Lee, J. Yee, S. Ryu, K. Kim, Y. Goo, and D. Cho, “A novel in
vitro sensing configuration for retinal physiology analysis of a sub-retinal
prosthesis,” Sensors, vol. 12, pp. 3131–3144, Mar. 2012.
[34] Y. Wang, M. Bachman, C. E. Sims, G. P. Li, and N. L. Allbritton, “Simple
photografting method to chemically modify and micropattern the surface
of SU-8 photoresist,” Langmuir, vol. 22, pp. 2719–2725, Feb. 2006.
[35] S. Cho, N. Xue, L. Cauller, W. Rosellini, and J. Lee, “A SU-8-based fully
integrated biocompatible inductively powered wireless neurostimulator,”
J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 22, pp. 170–176, Feb. 2013.
[36] S. Dokos, G. J. Suaning, and N. H. Lovell, “A bidomain model of epiretinal stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 137–146, Jun. 2005.
[37] M. S. Humayun, E. de Juan Jr., J. D. Weiland, G. Dagnelie, S. Katona,
R. Greenberg, and S. Suzuki, “Pattern electrical stimulation of the human
retina,” Vision Res., vol. 39, pp. 2569–2576, Jul. 1999.
[38] Y. Goo, J. Yee, S. Lee, Y. Nam, S. Ryu, and K. Kim, “Retinal ganglion cell
responses to voltage and current stimulation in wild-type and rd1 mouse
retinas,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, pp. 1–12, 2011.
[39] S. Hecht, S. Shlaer, and M. H. Pirenne, “Energy, quanta, and vision,”
J. Gen. Physiol., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 819–840, Jul. 1942.
[40] S. F. Cogan, “Neural stimulation and recording electrodes,” Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 10, pp. 275–309, Apr. 2008.
[41] S. Shah, A. Hines, D. Zhou, R. J. Greenburg, M. S. Humayun, and
J. D. Weiland, “Electrical properties of retinal–electrode interface,”
J. Neural Eng., vol. 4, pp. S24–S29, 2007.

[42] S. Lee, J. Ahn, H. Yoo, S. Jung, S. Oh, S. Park, and D. Cho, “Electrical
characteristics of 2D and 3D microelectrodes for high-resolution retinal
prostheses,” in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 3535–3538.
[43] D. M. Zhou and R. J. Greenberg, “Electrochemical characterization of
titanium nitride microelectrode arrays for charge-injection applications,”
in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2003, pp. 1964–1967.

Sungjin Oh received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and computer sciences (summa cum laude)
from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in
2012. He is currently working toward the M.S. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Seoul National University.
His research interests include CMOS biomedical circuit design and fabrication of microelectromechanical systems for biomedical application.

Jae-Hyun Ahn received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electrical engineering from Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA, in 2000 and 2002, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea.
He was also with Samsung System LSI from 2002
to 2008, where he was involved in the analog frontend design for optical disk products.

Sangmin Lee received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering and computer sciences from
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2005 and
2013, respectively.
He is currently with Samsung Advanced Institute
of Technology, Yongin, Korea.

Hyungho Ko received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering and computer science from
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2003 and
2008, respectively.
He was with Samsung Electronics as a Senior
Engineer from 2008 to 2010. Since 2010, he has
been with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea,
where he is currently an Assistant Professor.

Jong Mo Seo received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in ophthalmology from the College of
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea,
in 1996, 2002, and 2005, respectively.
Since 2005, he has been with the Department of
Ophthalmology, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul, where he is currently a Clinical Assistant Professor. Since 2008, he has been with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, where he is currently an Associate
Professor.

OH et al.: LIGHT-CONTROLLED BIPHASIC CURRENT STIMULATOR IC USING CMOS IMAGE SENSORS

Yong-Sook Goo received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in physiology from the College of Medicine,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1988,
1990, and 1993, respectively.
Since 1991, she has been with the Department
of Physiology at the College of Medicine, Chungbuk
National University, Cheongju, Korea, where she is
currently a Professor.

79

Dong-Il “Dan” Cho (M’88) received the B.S.M.E.
degree from Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburg,
PA, USA, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA.
From 1987 to 1993, he was an Assistant Professor
at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Since
1993, he has been with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, where he is currently a Professor.
He is the author or coauthor of more than 300 scientific articles in English. He is the holder/coholder of more than 100 patents.
His research interests include microfabrication, bioMEMS, microsensors, and
control. He has served on the Editorial Board of many international journals.
Dr. Cho is a Senior Editor of the IEEE/ASME JOURNAL OF MICROELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS and the Vice Chair of the International Federation
of Automatic Control Technical Board.

