IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

2869

Uncontrolled Manifold Analysis of Arm Joint Angle
Variability During Robotic Teleoperation and
Freehand Movement of Surgeons and Novices
Ilana Nisky∗ , Member, IEEE, Michael H. Hsieh, and Allison M. Okamura, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Teleoperated robot-assisted surgery (RAS) is used to
perform a wide variety of minimally invasive procedures. However, current understanding of the effect of robotic manipulation
on the motor coordination of surgeons is limited. Recent studies
in human motor control suggest that we optimize hand movement
stability and task performance while minimizing control effort and
improving robustness to unpredicted disturbances. To achieve this,
the variability of joint angles and muscle activations is structured to
reduce task-relevant variability and increase task-irrelevant variability. In this study, we determine whether teleoperation of a da
Vinci Si surgical system in a nonclinical task of simple planar movements changes this structure of variability in experienced surgeons
and novices. To answer this question, we employ the UnControlled
manifold analysis that partitions users’ joint angle variability into
task-irrelevant and task-relevant manifolds. We show that experienced surgeons coordinate their joint angles to stabilize hand
movements more than novices, and that the effect of teleoperation
depends on experience—experts increase teleoperated stabilization
relative to freehand whereas novices decrease it. We suggest that
examining users’ exploitation of the task-irrelevant manifold for
stabilization of hand movements may be applied to: (1) evaluation
and optimization of teleoperator design and control parameters,
and (2) skill assessment and optimization of training in RAS.
Index Terms—Redundancy exploitation, robot-assisted surgery
(RAS), surgical skill, teleoperation, uncontrolled manifold (UCM).

I. INTRODUCTION
OBOT-ASSISTED minimally invasive surgery (RAS) is
gaining popularity in many procedures [1]–[3] because of
its potential to improve patient outcomes in comparison to standard minimally invasive surgery (MIS). RAS offers surgeons
many advantages over standard MIS, including improved dexterity, an intuitive mapping from hand to instrument motion,
improved precision via motion scaling, tremor reduction, 3-D
visualization, and an ergonomically comfortable setup [4], [5].

R

Manuscript received January 7, 2014; revised May 30, 2014; accepted June 19,
2014. Date of publication June 23, 2014; date of current version November 18,
2014. This study was supported by an Intuitive Surgical Technology Research
Grant (to AMO and MHH). I Nisky was supported by the Marie Curie International Outgoing Fellowship (FP7-PEOPLE-2011-IOF project 300393) and the
Weizmann Institute National Postdoctoral Award Program for Advancement of
Women in Science. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
*I. Nisky is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305 USA (e-mail: nisky@stanford.edu).
M. H. Hsieh is with the Department of Urology, Stanford University and
the Pediatric Urology Service, Lucile Salter Packard Children’s Hospital at
Stanford, Stanford CA 94305 USA (e-mail: mhhsieh@stanford.edu).
A. M. Okamura is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford
University, Stanford CA 94305 USA (e-mail aokamura@stanford.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2332359

RAS also maintains the benefits of standard MIS to the patient, including reduced recovery time and loss of blood when
compared to open surgery [6].
However, many robotic procedures do not show a significant
improvement in patient outcomes over standard MIS [2], and
there are procedures for which robotics seem promising but have
not been broadly adopted. Understanding how surgeons control
the movement of a teleoperated robot can improve robot design,
skill evaluation, and training. Robot design may be improved as
a result of a quantitative analysis of the effect of different teleoperators on user movement, and skill evaluation and training
may be improved by studying skilled surgeons in comparison
to novices.
Inherent to its teleoperated nature, RAS facilitates recording information about the movements of surgeons’ hands and
patient-side instruments. Prior approaches to quantitative movement analysis in RAS focused on the surgical tools [7]. In an
effort to understand the “language of surgery,” Lin et al. broke
down the trajectories into gestures—surgemes—that were suggested by senior surgeons [8]. Other approaches used statistical
methods, and applied Hidden Markov Models to position and
force information for modeling surgery and skill evaluation [9]–
[11].
In this study, we focus on the movement of surgeons’ hands
and arms, and employ theories and methods from the study of
human motor control in our analysis. In a recent study [12],
[13], we analyzed the trajectories of the gripper tip of the master manipulator during performance of canonical motor tasks
with an RAS system during virtual cursor control. The dynamics of the master manipulator affected all users’ movements, but
the experienced surgeons previously adapted to these dynamics,
and performed better than novices. For example, experts movements were more accurate, faster, and smoother, especially in
teleoperation. Here, we focus on the trial-to-trial variability of
the movement of the entire arm of the surgeon during virtual
cursor control.
Motor variability is prominent in human motion [14], [15],
and is a sign of a healthy motor system [15]–[17]. One of the
origins of this variability is that many levels of the execution hierarchy of standard motor tasks are highly redundant. There is a
redundancy in neural control, muscle actuation, and mechanical
degrees of freedom of the arm [18]. This redundancy is beneficial because it allows for flexibility in movement in the face of
perturbations, obstacles, or fatigue. It is also a burden because it
creates an ill-posed control problem for the motor system [19],
[20]. Many recent studies suggest that the motor system exploits

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2870

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

redundancy to structure motor variability in order to maximize
performance while minimizing control effort [21]–[26].
Several frameworks quantify redundancy exploitation by examining the structure of variability in the control/execution variables (e.g., arm joint angles) with respect to task/result variables
(e.g., hand Cartesian coordinates). In redundant tasks, such as
goal-directed unconstrained arm movement, the dimension of
the control space is larger than that of the task space. Therefore,
a task-irrelevant manifold (TIM) exists in the control/execution
space. Variability in the TIM does not change task performance.
The UnControlled manifold framework (UCM) examines
whether the control variables are coordinated with respect to task
variables. If a particular task variable is stabilized, the variability
of the configurations of the control variables that are within its
TIM is larger than that of configurations that change task performance. In the UCM framework, the TIM is calculated with
respect to the average experimentally recorded trajectory [21],
[22], [27], [28]. The TIM is related to the self-motion manifold
[29], and for linear systems, it is the null space of the matrix that
relates control variables to task variables. The related minimum
intervention principle (MIP) suggests a stochastic optimal control theory model for such coordination [23], [30]. According to
this principle, task performance and control effort are included
in the optimization cost function, and as a result, task-irrelevant
variability is not restricted.
Other related frameworks are the tolerance noise covariation
(TNC) [24], [31], [32] and the goal-equivalent manifold [25],
[26] that also define a TIM, but with respect to the task goal.
This relaxes the assumption that the average trajectory represents the intended trajectory [26], but requires knowledge of the
dynamics of the task for the analysis. The TNC is evaluated
entirely in task space, and therefore, it is less sensitive to the
choice of control space coordinates [32]. Recently, a coordinate
independent extension of the UCM method was developed for
static pointing [33]. Here, we use the UCM analysis because
it was successfully used for the analysis of a variety of tasks,
including isometric finger force exertion [34], [35], reaching
movements [27], bimanual pointing [36], pistol aiming [37],
stone knapping [38], and standing up and sitting down [39]. In
addition, this analysis has the potential to be extended in the future to surgical maneuvers where the goal is not defined a priori,
and to be combined with the MIP for computational modeling.
In previous studies, significant differences in the movements
of the surgical tools [7] and the hands [12], [13] of experienced
RAS surgeons and novices were reported. At least part of these
differences are likely related to the familiarity of the surgeons
with teleoperating the RAS master manipulators [12], [13]. The
ability of a user to exploit redundancy and structure movement
variability was suggested to be related to skill [24], [31], [38].
Therefore, we hypothesized that there are differences in how
experienced surgeons and novice users exploit their arm redundancy to stabilize hand movements, with potential implications
for surgical skill assessment and training.
In addition to expertise, redundancy exploitation depends also
on task structure [26] and dynamics [27]. Therefore, we also hypothesized that teleoperating a RAS system may reduce redundancy exploitation compared to moving freehand. We analyzed

separately the exploitation of redundancy for stabilization of the
horizontal (x-y task) and the vertical (z task) hand trajectories
while participants did not receive visual feedback of their vertical movements. We expected to find that their motor system
stabilizes x-y hand trajectories but not z hand trajectories.
To test these hypotheses, we used the UCM method to analyze simple movements that were performed by novices and
experienced surgeons while teleoperating a da Vinci manipulator and while moving freehand. We chose to focus on nonclinical simple and well-studied movements: reach (movement
between two targets) [40] and reversal (out and back movement
toward a target without resting at the target itself) [41]. We chose
these simple movements because we are interested in the motor
capabilities of the participants rather than in their clinical competence. Specifically, we aim to determine the effect of users’
experience in physical interaction with the master manipulator
on redundancy exploitation for hand movement stabilization. In
addition, studying these movements is important because they
are the building blocks for many surgical maneuvers.
A preliminary demonstration of this analysis was presented
in a recent conference [42]. In the current study, we present
a comprehensive statistical analysis with more participants, an
analysis of within-trial variability, an analysis of the effects of
movement direction and experimental sessions order on trialto-trial variability, and an extensive discussion.
II. METHODS
A. Experimental Procedures
Fourteen volunteers participated in the experiment, approved
by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board, after giving informed consent. Ten were novices (engineering graduate
students) with no prior experience with surgery on a da Vinci manipulator, and four were experienced surgeons (three urologists,
nrob otic cases > 120, and one gynecologist, nrob otic cases > 80,
self-reported).
Participants sat at the master console of a da Vinci Si Surgical
System (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA, Fig. 1) at Lucile Salter Packard Children’s Hospital at Stanford. They held
a lightweight (50 g) custom-built grip fixture [see Fig. 2(a)]
equipped with a force sensor (Nano-17, ATI Industrial Automation, Apex, NC, USA) and magnetic pose tracker (TrakStar,
Ascension Technologies, Milton, VT, USA) in their right hand.
In addition, we attached magnetic pose trackers to the shoulder,
elbow, and wrist of their right arm. The wrist and shoulder sensors were aligned (as well as anatomical constraints allowed)
with the medial line of the forearm and the upper arm, respectively, as depicted in Fig. 1(b) and (c). To maximize the signal
quality of the magnetic pose trackers and to minimize magnetic interference from the metal parts of the da Vinci console,
the magnetic transmitter was placed on a bar in front of the user
[see Fig. 1(a)–(c)]. We ensured prior to the experiment that there
were no metal components between the trackers and the transmitter, and tested the integrity of the recorded signal using the
Ascension Technologies proprietary software. All the signals
except the elbow sensor signal had a quality number below ten,
which was deemed to be acceptable by Ascension Technologies.

NISKY et al.: UNCONTROLLED MANIFOLD ANALYSIS OF ARM JOINT ANGLE VARIABILITY DURING ROBOTIC TELEOPERATION

Fig. 1. Experimental setup. (a). A participant sits in front of a master console
of a da Vinci Si surgical system, and a monitor is placed on the surgical table.
(b–c). The dashed lines depict the directions of the shoulder and wrist trackers,
labeled “s” and “w,” and aligned as well as anatomical constraints allowed with
the medial line of the upper arm and the forearm, respectively. The magnetic
transmitter, labeled “mt,” was positioned in front of the user. (d). A monitor
presented the virtual reality scene to the user via the endoscopic camera, labeled “e.” The left and right patient-side manipulators, labeled “ml” and “mr,”
respectively, were outside of the camera field of view at all time.

Fig. 2. (a). A custom designed grip fixture with embedded force sensor, labeled “f,” and magnetic pose tracker, labeled “t.” (b). In the teleoperation condition, the fixture was attached to the master manipulator. (c). In the freehand
condition, participants held the fixture alone.

(A similar analysis of a different electromagnetic tracker is given
in [43].) Because the signal of the elbow tracker was significantly distorted due to magnetic interference from the da Vinci
armrest, we estimated the position of the elbow based on the
wrist and shoulder sensors, as described in detail in the Appendix.
Participants performed the experiment under two conditions,
in two consecutive sessions: (1) teleoperation, with the grip
fixture attached to the master manipulator [see Fig. 2(b)], and
(2) freehand, holding the grip fixture alone [see Fig. 2(c)]. The
order of the sessions was balanced within the experts and novices
groups. In both conditions, they were asked to make planar
movements from a central starting point to a target as accurately
and as quickly as possible while looking at a virtual cursor
displayed on a monitor. The movement of the cursor was mapped
one-to-one to the x-y movement of the grip fixture, regardless
of whether the fixture was attached to the master manipulator
or moved freehand. The movements were not restricted to a
plane, but the vertical position of the fixture did not affect the
movement of the cursor. The monitor was placed on the surgical
table such that users could see the cursor and targets via the

2871

endoscopic camera [see Fig. 1(d)]. The camera was placed at
a distance such that the apparent movement of the cursor was
mapped approximately one-to-one to the movement of the grip
fixture. In the teleoperation condition, the master manipulator
controlled the movement of the patient-side manipulator, but
the instrument was moved outside of the camera view, such
that the visual feedback was consistent between the conditions,
and the only difference was the effect of the dynamics of the
master manipulator. To ensure that the dynamics of the master
manipulator are identical to the clinical setting (except for the
addition of the grip fixture), we did not disable the movement
of the patient-side manipulator.
Each session consisted of 320 movements organized in ten
blocks consisting of 32 possible targets of two types (reach and
reversal), eight directions (−135◦ , −90◦ , −45◦ , 0◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ , or
180◦ , where 0◦ indicates a movement to the right), and two distances from center (30 and 60 mm). The movements within each
block were pseudorandomly interleaved, in an order identical
for all participants and for both sessions. Each trial started when
the participant placed his or her hand (represented by the cursor)
at start position; then a target was presented, with its color communicating the desired movement type (gray for a reach, and
magenta for a reversal). The movement was completed when
the participant’s hand stopped within 5 mm of the target center
in reaches, and when the hand returned to within 5 mm from
the start center in reversals. Error tolerance of 5 mm was chosen
such that the task was difficult enough to maintain participants’
enthusiasm, but not too difficult to avoid frustration. Such tolerance is too large for delicate surgical maneuvers, but it may be
acceptable in coarse surgical maneuvers such as grasping and
pulling or pushing on large tissues for retraction or exposure.
To encourage participants to perform fast and consistent
movements, after completion of the movement they received
a text feedback on the screen about their movement time. “Too
slow” was displayed if a reach took longer than 1 s, or if a
reversal took longer than 1.5 s; otherwise, “Good” was displayed. Fast movements are necessary to mitigate the effect of
online corrections due to visual feedback, and movements with
consistent velocity are important for the assumption underlying
the UCM analysis that at similar time points along the movement trajectories, a similar reference postural state is defined by
the nervous system [21]. In addition, such rapid movements are
occasionally needed in clinical scenarios. For example, fast teleoperated movements are typical to prompt instrument responses
to acute bleeding.

B. Data Processing
We sampled marker positions and orientations at 120 Hz. To
remove measurement noise, we filtered the data offline using
MATLAB filtfilt() function with a second-order lowpass Butterworth filter with a cutoff at 6 Hz. This function filters
the original signal twice: in its original and reversed order. This
results in an offline fourth-order filtering with a cutoff (−3-dB
frequency) at 4.82 Hz and without phase shifting the signal.
Then, we calculated joint angles as explained in Appendix A.

2872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

We calculated velocity by backward differentiation and filtered
the data again after differentiation.
Movement segmentation was performed based on the trajectories of the sensor that was attached to the grip fixture, representing the endpoint of the master manipulator. To obtain a
consistent set of standard movements, we discarded all reaches
longer than 2 s, and reversals longer than 3 s (8% of the movements, and without substantial change in the results with all
data included). We time normalized all trajectories between
movement onset (identified as in [44]) and end, and interpolated
them at equal normalized time intervals of 0.01. Movement
end was calculated differently for the two movement kinds. For
reaches, it was the end of the main movement, without subsequent corrections, and was identified as either the time of first
local minimum of speed trajectory after the time of peak speed,
or the time when the speed reduced to less than 5% of its peak
value for the particular trial. For reversals, it was the time of
path reversal—when the distance from start that was traveled in
the direction of the target was maximal. This ensured that we
analyzed a single movement from start to target. In general, the
trajectories of reach and reversal movements are different, but
we found no differences in the trial-to-trial variability of both
movement types, and therefore, we pooled them together in our
analysis.
Detailed analysis of movement kinematics is outside the
scope of the paper, and was described elsewhere [12]. However,
to determine whether the coordination of trial-to-trial variability
is related to performance, we used a metric that quantifies both
operating time and operating accuracy: endpoint error multiplied by movement time (Er · M t[mm·sec]). This metric takes
into account the speed-accuracy tradeoff [45], which is typical
of point-to-point movements, and corresponds with instructions
to the participants to make movements to the target as accurately and as quickly as possible. Endpoint error (Er[mm]) was
calculated as the distance between the position of the cursor at
movement end and the target, in the x-y plane. Movement time
(M t[sec]) is the temporal difference between movement end
and onset.
C. UCM Analysis of Variability Structure
We analyzed variability in the 3-DOF task space that
is defined by the Cartesian coordinates of the grasp fixture sensor xt = (xt yt zt )T , and in the 6-DOF control
space that is defined by the user’s arm joint angles θ =
(αs αe αw βs βe βw )T , where the “s,” “e,” and “w”
subscripts stand for “shoulder,” “elbow,” and “wrist,” respectively, αs , αe , αw are the horizontal absolute angles of the
joints, and βs , βe , βw are the vertical absolute angles of the
joints (see Fig. 3). This definition is equivalent to representing
the orientation of each joint using the first two ZYX Euler angles. We tested the structure of variability in joint space with
respect to two separate task components: the 2-DOF horizontal
movement (the x-y task) and the 1-DOF vertical movement (the
z task).
In the analysis of movement, there are two kinds of variability: within-trial variability, calculated with respect to time, and

Fig. 3. Definition of the horizontal α i and vertical βi joint angles in top and
side views (xy and yz plane projections, respectively).

trial-to-trial variability, calculated at similar normalized time
trajectory points. The within-trial variability is the extent of
change in the variable during movement. In the case of simple
ballistic movements, such as reaches and reversals, it can be estimated by calculating the range of the variable during the trial.
In contrast, the trial-to-trial variability measures the stability of
a variable around a time-varying reference point. The structure
of this variability is the main focus of our paper, and we refer to
this variability as variance.
We assume that at each moment during the time-normalized
trajectory, the same reference postural state is defined by the
nervous system [21]. Within the UCM framework, this reference
trajectory is estimated as the average trajectory across trials [22]
for each movement kind (a unique combination of movement
type i, distance j, and direction k) at each normalized time
sample t: x̄ij k [t] (in task space) and θ̄ij k [t] (in joint space).
The range of movement in each of the joint-space average
trajectories is an estimation of the within-trial variability
Mij k = max(θ̄ ij k [t]|t ∈ [0, 1]) − min(θ̄ij k [t]|t ∈ [0, 1]) (1)
where max() and min() operate separately on each of the elements of the joint space trajectory vector.
The task-space variance is calculated separately for each of
the task components as


Ni j k

Vx i j k [t] =

−1
xij k l [t] − x̄ij k [t]2 d−1
task Nij k

(2)

l=1

where x is a task-space vector, x is the Euclidean norm of the
vector x, dtask is the DOF of the task space (2 for the x-y task,
and 1 for the z task), corresponding to the number of elements
in x, and Nij k is the number of movements. Similarly, the total
joint-space variance is


Ni j k

Vθ i j k [t] =

−1
θ ij k l [t] − θ̄ij k [t]2 d−1
joints Nij k

(3)

l=1

where djoints is the joint-space DOF, 6 in this study.
For the analysis of joint-space variance structure, we write
the analytical relationship between the task and joint variables
(arm forward kinematics). For the x-y task, it is

  
Lse cαs cβs + Lew cαe cβe + Lwt cαw cβw
xt
=
(4)
yt
Lse sαs cβs + Lew sαe cβe + Lwt sαw cβw
and for the z task it is
zt = −Lse sβs − Lew sβe − Lwt sβw

(5)

NISKY et al.: UNCONTROLLED MANIFOLD ANALYSIS OF ARM JOINT ANGLE VARIABILITY DURING ROBOTIC TELEOPERATION

where c• and s• are short for cosine and sine of •, respectively,
and Lse , Lew , and Lwt are the lengths of the upper arm, forearm,
and hand, respectively, as described in Appendix A and Fig. 12.
The joint-space of the z task has 3 DOF, and hence, we use a
reduced joint angle vector θ = (βs βe βw )T in the analysis
of the z task. This is an important step because including in
the analysis variables that cannot influence the task variables
artificially inflates task-irrelevant variability [22].
The TIM of these forward kinematics equations is nonlinear,
but for small deviations around the average trajectories, we can
linearize the kinematics using the Jacobian matrix
x[t] − x̄ij k [t] = J(θ̄ ij k [t])(θ[t] − θ̄ ij k [t])

(6)

where the Jacobian matrices for the xy and z tasks are

−Lse sαs cβs −Lew sαe cβe −Lwt sαw cβw
Jxy (θ[t]) =
Lse cαs cβs Lew cαe cβe Lwt cαw cβw

−Lse cαs sβs −Lew cαe sβe −Lwt cαw sβw
···
[t]
(7)
−Lse sαs sβs −Lew sαe sβe −Lwt sαw sβw
and
Jz (θ[t]) = (−Lse cβs

− Lew cβe

− Lwt cβw )[t]

(8)

respectively. Note that the Jacobian depends on the average
configuration, and is different for each movement type, distance,
direction, and normalized time sample.
The null space of the Jacobian is a linear approximation of
the TIM, and its dimension is dTIM = djoints − dtask . The matrix of the dTIM basis vectors  was calculated for each mean
configuration using Matlab null() function such that
J(θ̄ ij k [t]) ·  = 0.

(9)

Next, the deviations from the mean trajectories in joint space
are projected onto the null space
θ TIM [t] = T (θ[t] − θ̄ ij k [t])

(10)

and onto the range space (orthogonal to the null space), which
is a linear approximation of the task-relevant manifold (TRM)
θ TRM [t] = (θ[t] − θ̄ ij k [t]) − θ TIM [t].

(11)

The variance per DOF of the projected deviations is


Ni j k

VTIM i j k [t] =

−1
θ TIM i j k l [t]2 d−1
TIM Nij k

(12)

−1
θ TRM i j k l [t]2 d−1
task Nij k .

(13)

l=1

and


Ni j k

VTRM i j k [t] =

l=1

The ratio between these two variances quantifies to what extent the joint variables are coordinated to stabilize the average
trajectory in task space. Because ratios of variance suffer from
mean-variance dependency leading to non-normal distribution,
we use a variance-stabilizing transformation and calculate the
logarithm of this ratio [46]


VTIM [t]
RV [t] = ln
.
(14)
VTRM [t]

2873

Importantly, this ratio is not necessarily related to the overall
joint-space variance, which can be large or small; instead, it
quantifies its structure with respect to the task space.
Finally, RV is used to test a hypothesis about the extent of
stabilization of the particular task variable in question. If RV is
larger than zero, joint space variables are coordinated such that
the task variable is stabilized. If RV is equal to or smaller than
zero, the coordination in joint space is indifferent to the particular task variable, or even destabilizes it, probably because
the motor system of the user is aiming at stabilizing a different
task variable. With skill acquisition, this ratio can be increased
by either reducing VTRM [t], or by increasing VTIM [t]. While
reducing VTRM [t] will have direct impact on task performance,
increasing VTIM [t] may lead to robustness to unexpected perturbations or improved performance of more complicated tasks
involving the same task space variables.
D. Statistical Analysis
To test the effects of teleoperation and expertise factors on
arm joint-angle variability, we used multifactor analysis of variance (ANOVA). For factors that included more than two levels,
or in cases of statistically significant interactions, we performed
planned comparisons using the Tukey’s honest significance criteria for multiple comparisons. The ANOVA models described
later were fit with all factors relevant for each analysis together.
However, for clarity of presentation in the graphical representation and in our report of the results, we first pooled the analysis
across different directions, distances, and movement types, and
focused on the effects of teleoperation and expertise. Then, we
described the effect of movement direction and session order.
Overall, for each participant, in each teleoperation condition,
there were 32 data points in the analysis (except for two participants who had 31 data points because they only made one
successful movement in one of the directions).
For the analysis of within-trial variability, we performed two
separate six-way ANOVAs, with the horizontal and vertical
joint angle movement ranges as dependent variables. The independent variables were: teleoperation condition (teleoperation, freehand), expertise (expert, novice), joint (wrist, elbow,
shoulder), movement type (reach, reversal), movement distance
(short, long), and direction (eight directions), first-order interactions between all factors, and a second-order interaction between
teleoperation, expertise, and joint.
For the analysis of the trial-to-trial variability, we calculated
the VXY , VΘ , VTIM , VTRM , and RV at the time of peak speed and
the end of movement. We log transformed all the variances prior
to statistical analysis to correct for their non-normal, skewed
distribution [46].
We performed four separate seven-way ANOVAs, with
ln(VXY ), ln(VΘ ), RV X Y , and RV Z as dependent variables.
The independent variables were teleoperation condition, expertise, movement type, distance, direction, time (peak speed,
movement end), and sessions order (freehand first, teleoperated
first), first-order interactions between all factors, and secondorder interactions between teleoperation, expertise, and time,
and between teleoperation, expertise, and order. In addition, we

2874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 4. Examples of experimental trajectories (recorded horizontal xt and
vertical zt tool position, and calculated horizontal α w and vertical β w wrist
angles) of one novice participant in reach (upper row) and reversal (lower row)
movements toward the 0 ◦ target. Thin blue traces are individual trial trajectories,
and the thick black solid and dashed traces are mean and ±1 standard error,
respectively.

performed an eight-way ANOVA with the projected variance
(ln(VTIM ) and ln(VTRM )) as a dependent variable. The design
of the model was the same as the other models in this paragraph,
with an additional factor of the manifold (TIM, TRM), and its
first-order interactions with the other independent variables as
well as a second-order interaction between teleoperation, expertise, and manifold.
To assess the correlation between variability coordination and
performance, we log transformed the Er · M t metric because
its distribution was non normal and skewed. Then, we fitted
a linear regression model with ln(Er · M t) as the dependent
variable and RV as the independent variable.
III. RESULTS

Fig. 5. Movement ranges of horizontal (α, left panels) and vertical (β, right
panel) joint angles. (a) Group analysis with respect to joint, teleoperation condition and expertise. Bars are the means averaged across movement kind, distance,
direction, and subjects. Error bars are ±1 mean absolute deviation. (b) Group
analysis as a function of movement direction. Symbols are means and shaded
areas are ±1 mean absolute deviation.

A. Within-Trial Variability
In Fig. 4, examples of the trajectories of movements of one
participant to a single target are depicted together with their
mean. All the trajectories are smooth and exhibit sufficient degree of similarity to justify an analysis of variability around an
average trajectory. In the x coordinate, which was relevant for
the task, the within-trial variability (the extent of variation of
the mean trajectory with respect to time) was large (approximately 60 mm). Compared to this within-trial variability, the
trial-to-trial variability around the mean was small (<20 mm).
The z-coordinate, which was irrelevant for task performance,
stayed nearly constant within a trial, but varied substantially
from trial-to-trial. The αw and βw trajectories showed intermediate behavior, and they are the main focus of the current
study.
The within-trial variability was evaluated using the movement range metric, (1), and the results of the analysis are
depicted in Fig. 5. In both horizontal α and vertical β angles, the elbow movement range was largest, followed by
wrist, and then by shoulder (joint factor in horizontal angles F2,2616 = 42, p < 0.001, and in vertical angles F2,2616 =
128, p < 0.001). The horizontal joint movement range was
smaller in experts than in novices (F1,2616 = 5, p = 0.02), but
the opposite trend was observed in the vertical angles (F1,2616 =

12, p < 0.001). Moreover, the trends depended on the particular
joint (experience-joint interaction F2,2616 = 13, p < 0.001 and
F2,2616 = 51, p < 0.001 for α and β, respectively). There were
no consistent effects of teleoperation—some movement ranges
were larger and some were smaller in teleoperated movements
when compared to freehand (teleoperation-joint first-order interactions F2,2616 = 5, p = 0.006 and F2,2616 = 6, p = 0.002
for the horizontal and vertical joints, respectively).
Consistent with biomechanics, the main effect of direction
on joint angle movement range was statistically significant in
both horizontal and vertical angles [see Fig. 5(b)], F7,2616 =
40, p < 0.001, and F7,2616 = 66, p < 0.001, respectively), and
had small, but statistically significant interaction with expertise
(F7,2616 = 3, p = 0.007, and F7,2616 = 4, p < 0.001) as seen
most clearly in the case of αs and βe .
Overall, we found variations of joint angle movement range
as a function of direction and statistically significant differences between the joints, but the effects of teleoperation and
expertise were small even when they did reach statistical significance. Therefore, we conclude that teleoperation and expertise have minimal effect on the within-trial variability of joint
angles.

NISKY et al.: UNCONTROLLED MANIFOLD ANALYSIS OF ARM JOINT ANGLE VARIABILITY DURING ROBOTIC TELEOPERATION

2875

Fig. 6. Trial-to-trial variability as a function of normalized movement time,
averaged across movement kinds, distances, directions, and participants. (a).
Task space variance (in the horizontal xy and vertical z planes). (b). Total joint
space variance. (c). Ratio between variance per DOF projected on the taskirrelevant and on the task-relevant manifolds for the x-y and z tasks. Lines are
means and shaded regions are ±1 standard error.

B. Trial-to-Trial Variability
1) Size of Task-Space and Joint-Space Variance: In
Fig. 6(a), the logarithms of task-space variances are depicted
as a function of time. Consistent with our prediction, VZ was
larger by at least two orders of magnitude than VXY . In addition, the x-y variability changed with normalized movement
time, peaking at mid movement and slightly decreasing toward
the end of movement. Therefore, we focused on the times of
peak speed and end of movement for the statistical analysis, as
summarized in Fig. 7(a).
The x-y space variance was larger at the time of peak speed
than at movement end (F1,1715 = 64, p < 0.001). This is consistent with the minimum intervention principle (MIP) [23]—the
error at the end of movement was more relevant for successful
task performance. The variance in teleoperated movements was
smaller than in freehand (F1,1715 = 49, p < 0.001), and this
difference was more pronounced at the time peak speed (timeteleoperation interaction, F1,1715 = 15, p < 0.001). Finally, the
variance of experienced surgeons was statistically significantly
smaller when compared to novices at the end of movement
but not at the time of peak speed (time-expertise interaction,
F1,1715 = 39, p < 0.001).
Interestingly, a very different picture is revealed when examining joint-space variability. The total variability in joints space
is depicted in Fig. 6(b) as a function of time. There was no statistically significant effect of time (F1,1715 = 0.27, p = 0.6), and
therefore, statistical analysis is summarized in Fig. 7(b) only at
the end of movement. The joint-space variance of experienced
surgeons was larger than of novices (F1,1715 = 64, p < 0.001),
and there was no statistically significant effect of teleoperation
condition (F1,1715 = 0.66, p = 0.4). In the freehand condition,
the variances of experienced surgeons and novices were sim-

Fig. 7. Trial-to-trial variability analysis at the time of peak speed and movement end. (a). Task space x-y variance. (b). Joint space—total variance. (c).
Joint space—the ratio between variance per DOF projected on the TIM and on
the TRM for the x-y and z hypotheses. Symbols are means and error bars are
±1 standard error.

ilar, but when teleoperating, their variances were shifted upward and downward, respectively (teleoperation-expertise interaction, F1,1715 = 112, p < 0.001).
2) Coordination of Joint-Space Variance to Stabilize Hand
Movement: The logarithm of ratio of TIM and TRM variances
RV is depicted for both x-y and z tasks in Fig. 6(c) as a function of time, and summarized in Fig. 7(c) for the times of peak
speed and end of movement. RV X Y was statistically significantly
larger than zero regardless of the experience of the participants,
teleoperation condition, or time [upper raw of Fig. 7(c)]. This
indicates that joint-space variance was coordinated such that the
horizontal (xy plane) movement was stabilized. This stabilization was achieved by limiting the TRM variance, but allowing
large TIM variance, as depicted in Fig. 8 and supported by
the statistically significant effect of the manifold on ln(VΘ )
(F1,3488 = 4437, p < 0.001).
Consistent with our prediction, RV X Y was much larger than
RV Z . Novices did not coordinate joint-space variability to

2876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 8. Joint-space variance projected on the TIM and TRM of the x-y task.
Lines are means and shaded regions are ±1 standard error.

Fig. 10. Trial-to-trial variability as a function of experimental session: taskspace variance (left), joint-space variance (middle), and R v (right) at the time
of peak speed. Symbols are means, and error bars are ±1 standard error. The
pink empty circles represent participants who performed the experiment first
freehand and then teleoperating (Free⇒Tele), and the purple solid squares
represent participants who performed the experiment first teleoperating and
then freehand (Tele⇒Free).
Fig. 9. Effect of movement direction on trial-to-trial variability: (a) R V , (b)
TIM variance, and (c) TRM variance. Lines and symbols are means, and shaded
areas are ±1 standard error.

stabilize the vertical movements of their hand, as indicated by
negative values of RV Z . Interestingly, RV Z of experienced surgeons was very small, but statistically significantly larger than
zero, indicating some (minimal) stabilization of vertical movement even in the absence of visual feedback in this dimension.
However, because it was very small, we did not further analyze
the stabilization of the z task.
RV X Y of experienced surgeons was 26% larger than of novices
(F1,1717 = 89, p < 0.001). There was no statistically significant effect of teleoperation because novices decreased their
RV in teleoperation, but experienced surgeons increased it
at the time of peak speed, and did not change it at the end
of movement (teleoperation-expertise interaction, F1,1717 =
6, p = 0.001). The variability in the TIM in freehand movements
was similar between novices and experienced surgeons, and did
not change with movement progress (see Fig. 8). In teleoperated movements, experienced surgeons increased variability
in both manifolds, whereas novices decreased it (teleoperationexpertise interaction F1,3488 = 123, p < 0.001). However, the
extent of these changes was larger in the TIM than TRM interaction F1,3488 = 120, p < 0.001), and resulted in the differences
in RV depicted in Fig. 6(c).
3) Effect of Movement Direction: The dependence on movement direction was statistically significant for all variances, including: VXY (F7,1715 = 4, p < 0.001), VΘ (F7,1715 = 20, p <
0.001), VTIM and VTRM (main effect of direction F7,3488 =
20, p < 0.001, and direction-manifold interaction F7,1715 =
3, p = 0.009), and RV (F7,1717 = 3, p = 0.001). In Fig. 9, RV ,
VTIM , and VTRM are depicted as a function of direction. The
depth of modulation of TIM and TRM variances was large, but
it was smaller for RV . In fact, the only statistically significant
contrasts between RV in different directions were between the
180◦ and the 0◦ and −45◦ targets. The stabilization was smallest
for the 180◦ target.
4) Changes in Trial-to-Trial Variability Between Experimental Sessions: Half of the participants performed the ex-

periment first freehand and then teleoperated, and the other
half performed first teleoperated followed by a freehand session. In Fig. 10, VXY , VΘ , and RV at time of peak speed
are presented as a function of session number. There was a
statistically significant interaction between teleoperation, expertise, and order in task-space (F1,1715 = 7, p = 0.01) and
joint-space (F1,1715 = 72, p < 0.001) variances, and in RV
(F1,1717 = 4, p = 0.03). However, the patterns of differences
were specific to each variance.
Horizontal task-space variance (xy plane) was smaller in teleoperated movements than in freehand regardless of the experience of the user and the order of sessions. However, the size
of the difference depended on order of sessions (teleoperationorder interaction F1,1715 = 22, p < 0.001): the difference was
smaller when the first session was teleoperated than when it was
freehand. There was no statistically significant main effect of
order of sessions on task-space variance (F1,1715 = 0.82, p =
0.36).
In contrast, joint-space variance was smaller when participants performed freehand movements first than when they
started with teleoperation (F1,1715 = 185, p < 0.001). The differences between experienced surgeons and novices were substantial. Pooled across sessions, the variance of experienced
surgeons who started freehand was smaller than those who
teleoperated first; this difference was in the opposite direction and much smaller in novices (experience-order interaction
F1,1715 = 562, p < 0.001). Novices decreased their joint-space
variance in the second session regardless of which teleoperation
condition they performed first. For experienced surgeons, the
direction of change depended on the order: they decreased the
variance after teleoperation, and increased it (but not statistically
significantly) after the freehand session.
We observed similar trends in RV —it was smaller in the second session in all expertise-order combinations except for the
experienced surgeons who started freehand. Experienced surgeons and novices who performed the freehand session first had
the same level of stabilization, but in the transition to teleoperation, experts had no reduction of RV , and novices had large

NISKY et al.: UNCONTROLLED MANIFOLD ANALYSIS OF ARM JOINT ANGLE VARIABILITY DURING ROBOTIC TELEOPERATION

Fig. 11. Correlation between task performance and R v . In the large panel,
each symbol represents one of 32 different types of movement for each participant and teleoperation condition. Inset depicts the mean values ±1 standard
error.

reduction. In the teleoperated-first group, the RV of experts
was statistically significantly larger than of novices, but the extent of reduction in the transition between sessions was similar
between experience groups. For experts, the stabilization of the
teleoperated movements was higher, and reduced to a level comparable to the freehand movements of the freehand-first group.
In contrast, the stabilization of the teleoperated movements of
novices was comparable to the teleoperated movements of the
freehand-first group, and decreased in the transition to freehand.
5) Correlation Between Rv and Performance: In Fig. 11,
ln(Er · M t) is presented as a function of RV . There was a
small but statistically significant negative correlation between
this performance metric and RV (Pearson’s ρ = −0.14, transformed t-test t893 = −4.5, p < 0.001), suggesting that large redundancy exploitation for hand trajectory stabilization is related
to improved performance. However, the linear regression trend
was very weak, and the R2 = 0.02 is extremely small, suggesting that other factors influence performance to a much greater
extent.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Factors Affecting Joint Angles Variability
Experienced surgeons exploitated arm redundancy and coordinated their arm joints for hand movement stabilization of
experienced surgeons more than novices, and teleoperation with
the da Vinci Si Surgical System master manipulator changed the
stabilization relative to freehand performance of the same task.
Interestingly, the effect of teleoperation depended on the expertise of the user: for experienced surgeons, the coordination
of arm joint angles when teleoperating was larger than when
moving freehand, but it was smaller for novices.
The participants coordinated the trial-to-trial variance of their
joint angles such that the horizontal but not vertical trajectories
of their hand were stabilized. Similar stabilization of movement by coordination of arm joints was previously reported in
various tasks [27], [36]–[38]. The lack of stabilization of the
vertical trajectory was not surprising because participants were
only provided with visual feedback about the horizontal movement of their hand-held grasper tip. Therefore, we expected the
horizontal trajectories to be more stabilized compared to the

2877

vertical. In the remainder of the discussion, we address only x-y
task stabilization.
Experienced surgeons stabilized task trajectory more than
novices. Their task variance was smaller at the end of movement than of novices, but their joint-space variance was larger,
especially in the teleoperated condition. The UCM analysis suggests that this is due to their superior exploitation of redundancy,
as evident by larger variance in TIM than TRM. This is consistent with many previous reports that task variability is reduced
by coordination rather than reduction of redundant effector variability [47]. The ability to exploit redundancy and structure the
variance of control variables to increase TIM without deteriorating performance was recently studied in expert stone knappers
[38], cello players [48], and golfers [49]. It may be related to the
external focus of attention (on the effects of actions rather than
body mechanics) of experts [50]. Our study is the first one to examine the structure of arm movement variability in the context
of surgical expertise.
The superior exploitation of redundancy by the experienced
surgeons in our study may have resulted from factors that are not
necessarily related to their RAS expertise. They may have better
motor skills than the general population, especially in manual
tool operation. This is particularly relevant in the current study,
because we used simple nonmedical movements that do not
reflect surgical competence. In future studies, it would be interesting to study participants without RAS experience who have
varying levels of surgical expertise, and determine whether early
trainees, such as residents or fellows, would exhibit redundancy
exploitation that is similar to experienced surgeons in our task.
Another interesting control population for such a study would
be participants without medical background who are skilled
in other forms of fine manual manipulation, like silversmiths,
watchmakers, opticians, or microassemblers [51], [52].
An additional factor that may have contributed to the increased exploitation of redundancy by experienced surgeons is
their familiarity with the surgeon console, regardless of teleoperation condition. It is possible that the experienced robotic
surgeons, unlike the novices who interacted with the system for
the first time, were able to increase their TIM variability because
of familiarity with the ergonomic settings of the da Vinci. Furthermore, novices may have attempted to limit the redundancy
in their movement if they experienced anxiety when using an
expensive robotic surgical system for the first time.
The task space variance in teleoperated movements was
smaller than in freehand. This might be related to the teleoperated movements being slower, as reported in details elsewhere
[12]. It was previously established that the noise in the motor
system is signal dependent [53], and therefore, faster movements that require stronger muscle activations are very likely to
be more variable.
The effect of teleoperation on the coordination of arm joints
angles for hand movement stabilization was different between
experts and novices. Novices, who were unfamiliar with the dynamics of the master manipulator, decreased the overall variability of their arm angles, but experienced surgeons increased the
joint-space variability without increasing its task-space counterpart. The RV of novices when teleoperating was smaller than

2878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

when moving freehand. This is consistent with previously reported effect of reducing the coordination of variance during
initial exposure to a force field [27]: novices were not familiar with the dynamics of the da Vinci master manipulator, and
therefore, had to adapt to these dynamics, resulting in reduction
of RV . However, the authors of [27] also reported that at late
exposure to the force field, variance coordination was restored.
This is consistent with our observation that experts showed similar RV in freehand and teleoperated movements at movement
end, and larger teleoperated RV compared to freehand at the
time of peak speed. While the effect of the dynamics of a handheld tool on redundancy exploitation in experienced and novice
users was not studied extensively, a recent study showed that
adding a back-carrying load leads to increase of stabilization of
body center of mass during walking [54]. Healthy adults are experienced in carrying loads during locomotion—this is another
example of experienced users increasing the ratio between TIM
and TRM in the presence of familiar but challenging dynamics.
The joint-space variance and RV depended on movement
direction, and the pattern of dependence was similar across
teleoperation conditions and expertise groups. This suggests
that it might be related to the control of arm movement rather
than being a specific effect of teleoperation that a user can learn
with sufficient practice, and that the ability to exploit redundancy
may depend on dextrous workspace limitations.
In the analysis of within-trial variability, consistently with
biomechanics, we found large variations of joint angle movement range as a function of direction, but the effects of teleoperation and expertise were minimal. In particular, the wrist
angle range of experienced surgeons was not larger than that
of novices, even though wrist articulation is part of the training
goals in robotic surgery, and one of the advantages of RAS over
standard MIS is improved dexterity due to the addition of wrist
articulation. One potential reason is that we analyzed absolute
angles of the arm, which do not describe the degree of the participation of a particular joint in the movement, but the degree of
the absolute change in the appropriate arm-link orientation. For
example, a movement in which the elbow is rotated while keeping the wrist locked would result in identical movement ranges
of the absolute wrist and elbow angles. Another viable explanation is related to the task, which did not require articulation of
the surgical tool for successful performance.
B. Limitations and Potential Remedies
The UCM framework is used extensively in the study of human motor control, but it has several limitations. The projection
of variance on linearized manifolds in joint space is dependent
on the choice of coordinates [32], [33]. In our study, we tried
to mitigate these potential limitations by means of the experimental design. We compared the x-y task stabilization to z task,
teleoperated movements to freehand, and experienced surgeons
to novices, rather than making absolute statements.
Evaluation of trial-to-trial variability requires many repetitions of similar movements. This limits the ability to study the
learning curves of novice surgeons, and generally hampers the
analysis when the dynamics of trial-to-trial adaptation are sub-

stantial. For static tasks, a single-trial method was developed
[35], but it is not appropriate for the case of surgical maneuvers
that are rarely static.
In our study, we identified joint angles as control variables,
and used the Jacobian to calculate a linear approximation of the
TIM. When a candidate set of control variable is not defined,
principal component analysis may be used to identify them
[22], and linear regression may be used to identify the mapping
between control and task variables [28], [35].
Finally, more complicated surgical scenarios may involve sequences of surgical maneuvers that have functional outcomes.
In these cases, there may be a hierarchy of redundancy coordination: joint angles may be coordinated to control hand or surgical
tool movement, but additional, higher level, task goals may affect movement coordination, such as minimizing tissue damage
or blood loss, and successful performance of the intended procedure. Future studies are needed to explore extensions of our
framework to explore such hierarchy.
C. Directions for Future Studies and Applications
We found statistically significant but weak correlation between RV and performance, suggesting that other factors influence performance to a greater extent. This is likely related to
the “floor effect” of our simple task, which did not require a full
exploitation of the TIM for improved performance. In previous
studies, it was suggested that exploitation of redundancy, as indicated by a large value of RV , induces robustness in face of
fatigue, unpredicted perturbations, obstacles, and provides the
user with a reacher repertoire of motor strategies [19], [55]. This
may allow performance of secondary tasks [19], [56]. For example, in surgical suturing such secondary tasks can be adjusting
the orientation of a needle in preparation for tissue penetration, or applying forces and torques that are necessary for the
needle to puncture the tissue. Hence, we expect the advantage
of redundancy exploitation to be revealed in more complicated
tasks.
In the current experimental design, we could not explore the
progress of evolution of RV as a function of repeated training
with a robotic manipulator due to experiment length limitation.
However, to gain a preliminary insight into how the coordination
of arm joint angles changes, we examined task and joint space
variances as well as RV as a function of session number. Interestingly, RV was reduced in the second session of all groups
except for the experienced surgeons who transitioned from freehand to teleoperated movements. This may be a result of fatigue
that caused reduction of TIM variance, consistent with a similar
tendency that was reported in a recent study of locomotion [54].
The participants might have attempted to mitigate these effects
by choosing trajectories that involved less used muscles, similarly to the model that was suggested in [57], and reduced the
TIM variance.
The effect of fatigue may be studied specifically by performing multiple repetitions of a few movements over prolonged experimental sessions. This may contribute to the understanding
of the effects of the length of a surgical case on the performance
of the surgeon and the ability of his motor system to respond

NISKY et al.: UNCONTROLLED MANIFOLD ANALYSIS OF ARM JOINT ANGLE VARIABILITY DURING ROBOTIC TELEOPERATION

to unpredicted situations, and may have important implications
on fatigue management in clinical settings. Previous studies
suggested that decreased mobility of the head and trunk [58]
alongside with awkward arm movements [59] are responsible
for increased fatigue in laparoscopic surgery when compared to
open surgery. Ergonomic considerations are gaining attention
also in RAS [60]. Future studies may reveal the importance of
redundancy exploitation for mitigating fatigue effects. In addition, we did not record the position of the head, neck, and
trunk of the participants, and therefore, we could not evaluate
the movement of the shoulder relative to the trunk, or the movement of the trunk in space during the performance of the task.
In future studies, the role of these movements in the coordination of arm joint angles variance may be explored. Studying
how they are affected by teleoperation and expertise may further
advance the understanding of movement coordination in RAS.
Large RV is not by itself a goal for optimization. In face of
perturbations, RV is expected to decrease in the attempt to minimize the deteriorating effect on task performance. However,
we suggest that telemanipulators and training strategies could
be designed to maximize the ability of the motor system of the
surgeon to exploit redundancy, and hence maximize RV for any
given situation. Further studies are needed to suggest general
principles or specific guidelines for manipulator physical structure, dynamics, or control that can maximize redundancy exploitation. Preliminary insights can be inferred from this study.
For example, in the design of the master manipulators, we suggest that spatial degrees of freedom should not be restricted even
if only a subspace is relevant to the performance of a particular
task. That is, dextrous workspace should be maximized such
that it allows the surgeons to exploit the natural redundancy of
their arms. This opens interesting questions for future studies,
such as what is the optimal degree of redundancy and whether
it might be beneficial to increase it by introducing additional
redundancy in the master manipulator, or how various forms
of force feedback and virtual fixtures may affect redundancy
exploitation. Answering these questions may advance RAS as
well as the understanding of human motor control.
Our finding of larger redundancy exploitation by experienced
surgeons when compared to novices in a nonclinical task opens a
promising avenue for exploring redundancy exploitation in surgically relevant procedures for surgical skill assessment. If our
current findings generalize to the performance of surgical procedures, this will mean that redundancy exploitation for movement
stabilization is an important motor skill that is characteristic of
experienced surgeons. This may allow for a development of a
novel metric for skill assessment. In addition, drills that induce
redundancy exploitation could be developed. If these drills are
found to improve surgical outcomes, they could be incorporated
in RAS training curricula.
V. CONCLUSION
In a study of simple nonclinical point-to-point movements,
we showed for the first time that there are differences between
experienced surgeons and novice users of a da Vinci Surgical System in their exploitation of arm joint angle redundancy.

2879

Experienced surgeons coordinate their arm joint angles to stabilize hand movements more than novices, and the effect of da
Vinci teleoperation depends on experience—experienced surgeons increase teleoperated stabilization relative to freehand,
whereas novices decrease it.
These results open a promising and exciting avenue for exploring how redundancy exploitation benefits clinical task performance, and its potential for skill assessment and surgical
training optimization. Enabling redundancy exploitation may
also serve as an optimization goal for the design and control of
surgical manipulators. Eventually, such improvement in system
design, skill assessment, and training may promote RAS by taking advantage of the flexibility of the motor control system of
surgeons.
APPENDIX: JOINT ANGLE MEASUREMENT
We placed magnetic pose trackers as close as possible to the
centers of the joints [xi and Ri , i = t, w, e, s in Fig. 12(a)].
Because the elbow sensor readouts were distorted due to magnetic interference from the da Vinci armrest, we estimated the
position of the elbow joint x̂e [t] as the spatial average of two
estimations
x̂se [t] = xs [t] + L̂se rxs [t]

(15)

x̂w
e [t]

(16)

= xw [t] + L̂ew rxw [t]

where x(s/w ) and rx(s/w ) are the position and the direction of
the longitudinal axes of the shoulder/wrist sensors that were
aligned with upper arm and forearm, respectively, and L̂se , and
L̂ew are the measured lengths of the upper arm, forearm, and
hand, respectively (see Fig. 12).
To assess the accuracy of our estimation algorithm, we
recorded one experimental session in a metal-free environment,
and calculated the average error between x̂e [t] and the reading
of the sensor located as close as anatomical constraints allowed
to the center of the elbow joint, xe [t], which was (mean ± std)
20 ± 5 mm. The bias is likely related to inaccuracy of sensor
placement, and the variance to their movement due to movement of the skin, which affects the orientation of the wrist and
shoulder sensors as well as the position of the elbow sensor.
Estimation of the orientation of a pose tracker is more sensitive to accurate marker placement and skin movement than estimation of its position. Therefore, we estimated the orientations
of the hand, forearm, and upper from the estimated positions of
adjacent joint centers in 3-D. We also estimated the limb segment lengths (Lwt , Lew , and Lse , respectively) by calculating
the median value of the distances between the appropriate joint
centers across all the trials of each participant, rather than using
the measured values.
To assess the effects of the different sources of estimation
errors on our analysis, we calculated the mean distance between
the measured master tool-tip path and its reconstruction based
on the forward kinematics from the extracted joint angles. The
gripper-tip path is estimated more accurately than the rest of
the magnetic pose trackers because its pose tracker was rigidly
attached to the grasp fixture, and because it was very close to
the magnetic transmitter leading to an improved signal quality

2880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 12. Extraction of joints positions and orientations: (a) Schematic representation: xi and Ri are the origins and rotations of the reference frames that
are attached to the joints, where i = s, e, w, t for the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and
gripper tip, respectively. (b–c) Example of an extraction that was performed in
a metal-free environment. Circles are recorded positions, and the green square
is an estimation of the elbow joint center. Black solid lines depict the estimated
links. Grid spacing is 100 mm.

compared to the other sensors. The forward kinematics reconstruction error was 8.5 ± 0.13 mm (mean ± std). This error
was statistically significantly smaller in the freehand condition
compared to teleoperated (16%, F1,1788 = 18, p < 0.001), and
in the expert group compared to novice group (9%, F1,1788 =
8, p = 0.005).
In addition, we used a Jacobian-based linearization of the forward kinematics. The mean reconstruction error of the linearized
approximation was 11.5 ± 0.16 mm. It was also statistically significantly smaller in the freehand condition compared to teleoperated (24%, F1,1788 = 49, p < 0.001), and in the expert group
compared to novice group (23%, F1,1788 = 76, p < 0.001).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank T. Roy and S. Patil for assistance with the experiment, and the participants of their experiments for their time.
REFERENCES
[1] W. R. J. Chitwood, L. W. Nifong, W. H. H. Chapman, J. E. Felger, B.
M. Bailey, T. Ballint, K. G. Mendleson, V. B. Kim, J. A. Young, and R.
A. Albrecht, “Robotic surgical training in an academic institution,” Ann.
Surg., vol. 234, no. 4, pp. 475–486, 2001.
[2] S. Maeso, M. Reza, J. A. Mayol, J. A. Blasco, M. Guerra, E. Andradas,
and M. N. Plana, “Efficacy of the da vinci surgical system in abdominal
surgery compared with that of laparoscopy: A systematic review and metaanalysis,” Ann. Surg., vol. 252, no. 2, pp. 254–262, 2010.
[3] F. Rodriguez, Y. Baena, and B. Davies, “Robotic surgery: From autonomous systems to intelligent tools,” Robotica, vol. 28, pp. 163–170,
2010.
[4] K. Moorthy, Y. Munz, S. K. Sarker, and A. Darzi, “Objective assessment
of technical skills in surgery,” BMJ, vol. 327, no. 7422, pp. 1032–1037,
2003.
[5] A. R. Lanfranco, A. E. Castellanos, J. P. Desai, and W. C. Meyers, “Robotic
surgery: A current perspective,” Ann. Surg., vol. 239, no. 1, pp. 14–21,
2004.
[6] J. Rassweiler, M. Hruza, D. Teber, and L.-M. Su, “Laparoscopic and
robotic assisted radical prostatectomy—Critical analysis of the results,”
Eur. Urol., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 612–624, 2006.

[7] T. J. Tausch, T. M. Kowalewski, L. W. White, P. S. McDonough, T. C.
Brand, and T. S. Lendvay, “Content and construct validation of a robotic
surgery curriculum using an electromagnetic instrument tracker,” J. Urol.,
vol. 188, no. 3, pp. 919–923, 2012.
[8] H. Lin, I. Shafran, D. Yuh, and G. Hager, “Towards automatic skill evaluation: Detection and segmentation of robot-assisted surgical motions,”
Comput. Aided Surg., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 220–230, 2006.
[9] J. Rosen, J. D. Brown, L. Chang, M. N. Sinanan, and B. Hannaford, “Generalized approach for modeling minimally invasive surgery as a stochastic
process using a discrete Markov model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol.
53, no. 3, pp. 399–413, Mar. 2006.
[10] G. Megali, S. Sinigaglia, O. Tonet, and P. Dario, “Modelling and evaluation of surgical performance using hidden Markov models,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1911–1919, Oct. 2006.
[11] F. Cavallo, S. Sinigaglia, G. Megali, A. Pietrabissa, P. Dario, F. Mosca,
and A. Cuschieri, “Biomechanics—Machine learning system for surgical
gesture analysis and development of technologies for minimal access
surgery,” Surgical Innovation, in press.
[12] I. Nisky, M. H. Hsieh, and A. M. Okamura, “The effect of a robot-assisted
surgical system on the kinematics of user movements,” in Proc. 35th Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 6257–6260.
[13] I. Nisky, A. M. Okamura, and M. H. Hsieh, “Effects of robotic manipulators on movements of novices and surgeons,” Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 28,
no. 7, pp. 2145–2158, 2014.
[14] A. A. Faisal, L. P. J. Selen, and D. M. Wolpert, “Noise in the nervous
system,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 9, pp. 292–303, 2008.
[15] N. Stergiou and L. M. Decker, “Human movement variability, nonlinear
dynamics, and pathology: Is there a connection?” Human Movement Sci.,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 869–888, 2011.
[16] B. C. Touwen, “How normal is variable, or how variable is normal?” Early
Human Develop., vol. 34, no. 1–2, pp. 1–12, 1993.
[17] J. P. Kaipust, J. M. Huisinga, M. Filipi, and N. Stergiou, “Gait variability measures reveal differences between multiple sclerosis patients
and healthy controls,” Motor Control, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 229–244,
2012.
[18] N. A. Bernstein, The Co-Ordination and Regulation of Movements. 1st
English ed. New York, NY, USA: Pergamon, 1967.
[19] M. L. Latash, “Stages in learning motor synergies: A view based on the
equilibrium-point hypothesis,” Human Movement Sci., vol. 29, no. 5, pp.
642–654, 2010.
[20] A. Karniel, R. Meir, and G. Inbar, “Exploiting the virtue of redundancy,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 1999, vol. 3, pp. 2204–2209.
[21] J. P. Scholz and G. Schoner, “The uncontrolled manifold concept: Identifying control variables for a functional task,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 126,
no. 3, pp. 289–306, 1999.
[22] M. L. Latash, J. P. Scholz, and G. Schöner, “Toward a new theory of motor
synergies,” Motor Control, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 276–308, 2007.
[23] E. Todorov and M. I. Jordan, “Optimal feedback control as a theory of
motor coordination,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1226–1235,
2002.
[24] H. Muller and D. Sternad, “Decomposition of variability in the execution
of goal-oriented tasks: Three components of skill improvement,” J. Exp.
Psychol.: Human Perception Performance, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 212–233,
2004.
[25] J. Cusumano and P. Cesari, “ Body-goal variability mapping in an aiming
task,” Biological Cybern., vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 367–379, 2006.
[26] J. B. Dingwell, R. F. Smallwood, and J. P. Cusumano, “Trial-to-trial dynamics and learning in a generalized, redundant reaching task,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 225–237, 2013.
[27] J.-F. Yang, J. Scholz, and M. Latash, “The role of kinematic redundancy
in adaptation of reaching,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 176, no. 1, pp. 54–69,
2007.
[28] S. M. S. F. Freitas, J. P. Scholz, and M. L. Latash, “Analyses of joint variance related to voluntary whole-body movements performed in standing,”
J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 188, no. 1, pp. 89–96, 2010.
[29] D. N. Nenchev, “Tracking manipulator trajectories with ordinary singularities: A null space-based approach,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 14, no. 4,
pp. 399–404, 1995.
[30] S. Scott, “Optimal feedback control and the neural basis of volitional
motor control,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 532–546, 2004.
[31] R. Cohen and D. Sternad, “Variability in motor learning: Relocating,
channeling and reducing noise,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 193, no. 1, pp.
69–83, 2009.
[32] D. Sternad, S.-W. Park, H. Muller, and N. Hogan, “Coordinate dependence
of variability analysis,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 6, no. 4, p. e1000751,
Apr. 2010.

NISKY et al.: UNCONTROLLED MANIFOLD ANALYSIS OF ARM JOINT ANGLE VARIABILITY DURING ROBOTIC TELEOPERATION

[33] D. Campolo, F. Widjaja, H. Xu, W. T. Ang, and E. Burdet, “Analysis
of accuracy in pointing with redundant hand-held tools: A geometric
approach to the uncontrolled manifold method,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol.
9, no. 4, p. e1002978, Apr. 2013.
[34] N. Kang, M. Shinohara, V. Zatsiorsky, and M. Latash, “ Learning multifinger synergies: An uncontrolled manifold analysis,” Exp. Brain Res.,
vol. 157, no. 3, pp. 336–350, 2004.
[35] F. J. Valero-Cuevas, M. Venkadesan, and E. Todorov, “Structured variability of muscle activations supports the minimal intervention principle
of motor control,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 59–68, 2009.
[36] D. Domkin, J. Laczko, S. Jaric, H. Johansson, and M. Latash, “ Structure
of joint variability in bimanual pointing tasks,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 143,
no. 1, pp. 11–23, 2002.
[37] J. P. Scholz, G. Schöner, and M. L. Latash, “ Identifying the control
structure of multijoint coordination during pistol shooting,” Exp. Brain
Res., vol. 135, no. 3, pp. 382–404, 2000.
[38] R. Rein, B. Bril, and T. Nonaka, “Coordination strategies used in stone
knapping,” Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol., vol. 150, no. 4, pp. 539–550, 2013.
[39] D. S. Reisman, J. P. Scholz, and G. Schöner, “Differential joint coordination in the tasks of standing up and sitting down,” J. Electromyography
Kinesiol., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 493–505, 2002.
[40] T. Flash and N. Hogan, “The coordination of arm movements: An experimentally confirmed mathematical model,” J. Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 7, pp.
1688–1703, 1985.
[41] R. A. Scheidt and C. Ghez, “Separate adaptive mechanisms for controlling
trajectory and final position in reaching,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 98, no. 6,
pp. 3600–3613, 2007.
[42] I. Nisky, M. H. Hsieh, and A. M. Okamura, “A framework for analysis of
surgeon arm posture variability in robot-assisted surgery,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013, pp. 245–251.
[43] C. Nafis, V. Jensen, L. Beauregard, and P. Anderson, “Method for estimating dynamic EM tracking accuracy of surgical navigation tools,” in Proc.
SPIE 6141, Med. Imaging 2006: Visualization, Image-Guided Procedures,
and Display, 61410K (Mar. 10, 2006); doi:10.1117/12.653448.
[44] L. Botzer, and A. Karniel, “A simple and accurate onset detection method
for a measured bell-shaped speed profile,” Frontiers Neurosci., vol. 3,
art. 61, pp. 1–8, 2009.
[45] P. Fitts, “The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement,” J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 47, no. 6, pp.
381–391, 1954.
[46] J. Verrel, “Distributional properties and variance-stabilizing transformations for measures of uncontrolled manifold effects,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 191, no. 2, pp. 166–170, 2010.
[47] K. M. Newell and E. G. James, “The amount and structure of human movement variability,” in Routledge Handbook of Biomechanics and Human
Movement Science. Evanston, IL, USA: Routledge, 2008, pp. 93–104.

2881

[48] J. Verrel, S. Pologe, W. Manselle, U. Lindenberger, and M. Woollacott, “
Coordination of degrees of freedom and stabilization of task variables in a
complex motor skill: expertise-related differences in cello bowing,” Exp.
Brain Res., vol. 224, no. 3, pp. 323–334, 2013.
[49] P. Glazier, “Movement variability in the golf swing,” Res. Quart. Exercise
Sport, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 157–161, 2011.
[50] K. R. Lohse, M. Jones, A. F. Healy, and D. E. Sherwood, “The role
of attention in motor control,” J. Exp. Psychol.: General, vol. 143, pp.
930–948, 2013.
[51] R. E. Riggio and Y. Sotoodeh, “Screening tests for use in hiring microassemblers,” Perceptual Motor Skills, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 167–172,
1987.
[52] S. Vieluf, J. Mahmoodi, B. Godde, E.-M. Reuter, and C. Voelcker-Rehage,
“The influence of age and work-related expertise on fine motor control,”
J. Gerontopsychol. Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 199–206, 2012.
[53] C. M. Harris and D. M. Wolpert, “Signal-dependent noise determines
motor planning,” Nature, vol. 394, no. 6695, pp. 780–784, 1998.
[54] X. Qu, “Uncontrolled manifold analysis of gait variability: Effects of load
carriage and fatigue,” Gait Posture, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 325–329, 2012.
[55] M. V. Butz, O. Herbort, and J. Hoffmann, “Exploiting redundancy for flexible behavior: Unsupervised learning in a modular sensorimotor control
architecture,” Psychological Rev., vol. 114, no. 4, pp. 1015–1046, 2007.
[56] O. Khatib, E. Demircan, V. D. Sapio, L. Sentis, T. Besier, and S. Delp,
“Robotics-based synthesis of human motion,” J. Physiol.-Paris, vol. 103,
no. 3–5, pp. 211–219, 2009.
[57] V. Potkonjak, V. M. Petrovic, K. Jovanovic, and D. Kostic, “Human-robot
analogy—How physiology shapes human and robot motion,” Adv. Artif.
Life, vol. 12, pp. 136–143, 2013.
[58] R. Berguer, G. Rab, H. Abu-Ghaida, A. Alarcon, and J. Chung, “A comparison of surgeons’ posture during laparoscopic and open surgical procedures,” Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 139–142, 1997.
[59] N. T. Nguyen, H. S. Ho, W. D. Smith, C. Philipps, C. Lewis, R. M. D. Vera,
and R. Berguer, “An ergonomic evaluation of surgeons’ axial skeletal and
upper extremity movements during laparoscopic and open surgery,” Amer.
J. Surg., vol. 182, no. 6, pp. 720–724, 2001.
[60] P. Rosenblatt, J. McKinney, and S. Adams, “Ergonomics in the operating
room: Protecting the surgeon,” J. Minimally Invasive Gynecol., vol. 20,
no. 6, pp. 744–744, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

