874

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Invariant Surface EMG Feature Against Varying
Contraction Level for Myoelectric Control Based
on Muscle Coordination
Jiayuan He, Student Member, IEEE, Dingguo Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, Xinjun Sheng, Member, IEEE,
Shunchong Li, Student Member, IEEE, and Xiangyang Zhu, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Variations in muscle contraction effort have a
substantial impact on performance of pattern recognition based
myoelectric control. Though incorporating changes into training
phase could decrease the effect, the training time would be increased and the clinical viability would be limited. The modulation
of force relies on the coordination of multiple muscles, which provides a possibility to classify motions with different forces without
adding extra training samples. This study explores the property of
muscle coordination in the frequency domain and found that the
orientation of muscle activation pattern vector of the frequency
band is similar for the same motion with different force levels. Two
novel features based on discrete Fourier transform and muscle coordination were proposed subsequently, and the classification accuracy was increased by around 11% compared to the traditional
time domain feature sets when classifying nine classes of motions
with three different force levels. Further analysis found that both
features decreased the difference among different forces of the
same motion p < 0.005) and maintained the distance among different motions p > 0.1). This study also provided a potential way
for simultaneous classification of hand motions and forces without
training at all force levels.
Index Terms—Electromyography, pattern recognition, force
variation, prosthetic hands, muscle coordination, discrete fourier
transform.

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROMYOGRAPHY (EMG) signals represent muscle activity and are usually used as an effective biological
source for powered prostheses control [1]. Many commercial
prostheses collect surface electromyography (sEMG) signals
from a pair of muscles and employ a simple scheme based on
the amplitude of sEMG to output activated functions. With this
method, only one degree of freedom (DOF) can be controlled
directly. If other DOF is expected, the user needs to switch the
mode by co-contracting the muscle group. It makes the scheme
nonintuitive and awkward to use in daily life [2].

E

Manuscript received January 26, 2014; revised June 3, 2014; accepted June
8, 2014. Date of publication June 30, 2014; date of current version May 7,
2015. This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program (973
Program) of China under Grant 2011CB013305, the Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality under Grant 13430721600, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 51375296.
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240 China
(e-mail: hejiayuan@sjtu.edu.cn; dgzhang@sjtu.edu.cn; xjsheng@sjtu.edu.cn;
evenfour@sjtu.edu.cn; mexyzhu@sjtu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2330356

To overcome these limitations, pattern recognition based
control scheme has been explored in the past decades. Pattern recognition learns muscle contraction patterns in the training phase and outputs the intended movements during testing.
It adopts more electrodes and provides intuitive control with
more active DOFs [3]. Many state-of-the-art methods have been
proposed and promising results have been achieved. Hudgins
and Englehart developed features extracting different aspects
of information from sEMG, including time-domain (TD) and
frequency-domain, and combined them with effective classifiers
[2], [4]–[6]. Other researchers also proposed many effective algorithms to achieve high classification accuracy [7]–[16].
However, one known disadvantage of this control scheme
is that it does not accommodate changes in the contraction patterns. Classification performance achieved in the laboratory cannot be repeated under the actual daily conditions. Changes of the
pattern may be caused by physical or physiological variations,
such as muscle fatigue, electrode shift, contraction intensity
change, arm position movement, and so on [17], [18]. Recently,
some researchers have made efforts towards this problem. Hargrove et al. studied the impact of electrode displacement and
minimized the influence by optimizing the electrode configuration and expanding the training dataset [19]. Fougher et al.
investigated the effect of arm position and proposed to solve the
problem by collecting training data from all the positions [20].
Efforts have also been made toward the solution for variations in muscle contraction. Al-Timemy et al. evaluated the
effect of force variation on the performance of amputee subjects
[21]. Tkach et al. analyzed the classification results of different
TD features and found that the performance of all the features
was affected by the changes of force [22]. Scheme et al. collected EMG signals of ten motions with different force levels
from 20% to 80% maximal voluntary contraction (MVC), and
recommended to use data of 20% and 80% MVC to train the
classifier to decrease the influence of force effect [23].
It is an effective method to incorporate each permutation of
changes to training phase, but at the same time, it will prolong
the training time and limit the clinical viability of the system
[17]. If we can extract the invariant feature against contraction
levels, it would be possible to maintain the performance without incorporating extra training samples. That will reduce the
training time, and at the same time, make the whole system
robust.
Muscle coordination addresses the question that how multiple
muscles are activated in coordination to perform tasks [24]–[27].

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HE et al.: INVARIANT SURFACE EMG FEATURE AGAINST VARYING CONTRACTION LEVEL FOR MYOELECTRIC CONTROL

Specially, the neural mechanisms underlying the coordination
of muscles for force production have been studied with some
significant results [26], [27]. Valero-Cuevas studied the singledigit force production task and revealed that the EMG activity
scaled linearly with force across multiple hand muscles [26].
Based on the work of Valero-Cuevas, Poston et al. studied the
three-digit grasp task and found that the finding also applied
to the multiple-digit situation, i.e., EMG amplitude of hand
muscles scaled uniformly as a function of grasp force for a
given motion [27]. It means the coordination of hand muscles is
invariant under a range of grasp forces. That makes it possible
to extract information of force variations in muscle contraction.
Based on this property of muscle coordination, we proposed
new features to classify motions with different force levels in this
study. The differences among different contraction levels were
decreased by a normalization step. Meanwhile, the variances
among different motions were kept. The proposed features were
robust to the changes of force levels, and as good as other classic
features without variations in muscle contraction.
In the following section, we first introduced the collection of
EMG signals with different force levels. Then the performance
of new proposed features were evaluated and compared with
other traditional features. The reason of performance improvement was investigated in the feature space. This study explored
the coordination of muscles during force production further and
its outcome would be beneficial to the design of robust control
scheme based on pattern recognition.

875

Fig. 1. Placement of wireless electrodes on the forearm: (a) anterior view,
(b) posterior view. Channel 1 and Channel 2 are attached on flexor pollicis
longus. Channel 3 and Channel 4 are placed on flexor digitorum superficialis
and flexor digitorum profundus, respectively. The other channels from 5 to 8 are
attached on abductor pollicis longus, extensor carpi radials, flexor carpi ulnaris
and extensor digitorum, respectively.

II. METHODS
A. Data Collection
Nine able-bodied subjects participated in this study, all males
with the age ranging from 20 to 30 years old. They were all
healthy and had no reported history of neurological disorders.
Informed consent was obtained from the subjects before the
experiment. The procedures were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The subjects were asked to sit in a height-adjustable chair.
The sEMG signals were collected by a commercial myoelectric
system (Trigno TM Wireless system, Delsys Inc., 20–450 Hz
band pass filter). The sampling frequency was set to 2000 Hz.
The skin was cleaned with alcohol to reduce impedance before data acquisition. Eight wireless electrodes were attached
on the forearm muscles. The locations of electrodes were
shown in Fig. 1.
The experiment contained eight classes of motions, tip prehension (TP), lateral prehension (LP), four-finger prehension
grip (FP) and power grasp (PG), wrist extension (WE), wrist
flexion (WF), wrist pronation (WP), wrist supination (WS),
which were the desirable movements for amputees in daily life
[28], [29], as shown in Fig 2. In addition, the rest state (RS)
was considered as one class. Thus, it was a nine-class problem
studied in this study.
The values of MVC of each motion needed to be obtained at
the beginning of the experiment. The first four contractions (TP,
LP, FP, PG) were measured by a set of commercial force sensors
(Biometrics Ltd., UK), with a sampling frequency of 50 Hz.

Fig. 2. Eight classes of motions studied in the experiment: (a) tip prehension,
(b) lateral prehension (c) four-finger prehension grip (d) power grasp, (e) wrist
flexion, (f) wrist extension, (g) wrist pronation, (h) wrist supination. The first
four motions are measured by the commercial dynamometer and pinchmeter.
The other four motions are measured by the custom-made equipment.

The other four contractions were measured by the custom-made
equipment for measuring the wrist torque, as shown in Fig 3.
The torque sensors were connected to the data acquisition device
(USB-6343, National Instruments Corporation, USA) to record
the signals. The sampling frequency was set to 1000 Hz. During
performing the hand functions, the subjects were asked to put
their arms on one box to keep their arms at the same height
when performing wrist functions, which was for the avoidance
of the limb position effect.
For each motion, subjects were instructed to increase the isometric force as big as possible and maintain the contraction for
3 s. The procedure was repeated three times for each motion and
the average value was used as the MVC of each class to which
subsequent submaximal contraction tasks were referenced. The
resting period between each MVC contraction was set to 3 min
to avoid fatigue.
Three contraction levels were studied in our experiment, 20%,
50%, and 80% MVC, which were defined as low, middle, and
high effort, respectively. The subjects were asked to perform

876

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

the feature is given by
⎡
⎤
ni

1
|X(fi,j )|⎦ ,
DFTi = F ⎣
ni j =1

i = 1, 2, · · · , L

(1)

where F [·] denotes a nonlinear transformation to ensure
smoothness of the value to get a better classification accuracy
[15], [30]. One of the common methods is the logarithm. The
root method is also favored for its good performance in noisy
circumstance [31], [32]. In this paper, we employ the root approach, where the root is 2/3, to avoid the effect of unit in logarithm transformation during the normalization operation, which
will be discussed later. In the current study, the whole frequency
span is divided into six equiwidth subbands because good performance on normal motion classification was reported using
this approach [33]. The subbands are 20–92, 92–163, 163–235,
235–307, 307–378, and 378–450 Hz. This feature set is denoted
as DFTR.
C. Muscle Coordination Representation

Fig. 3. Custom-made equipment for measuring the wrist torque: (a) the
mechanical structure, (b) the prototype. A and B are two bars to secure the
hand. S1 stands for sensor 1 for measuring torque during flexion and extension.
S2 stands for sensor 2 for measuring torque during pronation and supination. S1
and S2 are both connected to Cylinder A, directly or indirectly. Cylinder A is
partly embedded in Cylinder B. C and Cylinder B are both fixed on the ground.

each contraction by gradually increasing the exerted force to
reach the target level and maintain the target contraction level
for 5 s. One monitor was located in front of the subjects and
visual feedback on the exerted force was provided on the screen
throughout the experiment to help the subjects produce the corresponding force level.
The attempt would be considered invalid when the force value
exceeded ±10% of the target force within the 5-s hold time. In
this case, data would be removed and the contraction had to be
repeated after a period of rest.
One trial was defined as one repetition of nine classes. Subjects were required to perform eight trials for each force level.
There was a 10-s rest between contractions, and a 30-s rest
between trials to minimize fatigue. The sEMG signals were
segmented into 200-ms analysis windows with an overlap of
50 ms to extract features.

B. Frequency Domain Analysis
The spectrum of sEMG signals commonly changes regarding different movements. There are a lot of methods to extract
spectral information to discriminate motions. The direct way is
to calculate magnitude averages in different frequency bands
based on discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Suppose the whole
frequency span is divided into L segments. Let fi,1 and fi,n i denote the frequency value of two endpoints for segment i. Then,

DFTR feature was extracted from each analysis window. For
each subband, the values were averaged across all samples for
each combination of motion and force level. They were used to
create an eight-dimensional (8-D) vector, representing the EMG
pattern of all muscles for each frequency segment. The vector
was referred to as a muscle activation pattern (MAP) vector,
which represented the coordination pattern of muscles.
To quantify the degree of similarity in orientation between
force levels within each band, we calculated the cosine of the
angle between pairs of MAP vectors. Let MAPi,x,m denote the
muscle activation pattern vector for motion m, force level x,
and frequency band i. The similarity between force level x and
y of the same motion for band i is computed as
8
1 
cos < MAPi,x,m , MAPi,y ,m >
8 m =1

(2)

where cos <, > denotes the dot product of two vectors normalized by the product of vector modules. There are a total of three
pairs of force level (20% versus 50%, 20% versus 80%, and
50% versus 80%) to calculate.
The similarity between MAP vectors of different motions for
band i is computed as
8
3
3
7
1   
cos < MAPi,x,m , MAPi,y ,n > .
252 m =1 n =m +1 x=1 y =1
(3)
It calculates the average cosine value of MAP pairs for different motions and contraction levels. The results are shown in
Fig. 4.
For MAP vector pairs from the same motion, its cosine value
is close to 1 for each frequency band, ranging from 0.862 to
0.927. It indicates that there is a high degree of similarity in orientation between pairs of MAP vectors of different force levels.
Further comparisons reveal that MAP vectors associated with
neighboring levels (20% versus 50% and 50% versus 80%) have
a higher degree of similarity than that associated with forces

HE et al.: INVARIANT SURFACE EMG FEATURE AGAINST VARYING CONTRACTION LEVEL FOR MYOELECTRIC CONTROL

877

It only removes the module information and keeps the relation between different frequency bands within the channel. It is
denoted as global normalization (gnDFTR).
E. Feature Space Quantification

Fig. 4. Cosine value of the angle between MAP vector pairs for each frequency
band. The legend, Motion Different, represents the cosine values of MAP vectors
between different motions. The other three represents the cosine values of MAP
vectors for each pair of force level belonging to the same motion. Data are
averaged across all subjects.

We introduced two metrics based on [34] in order to quantify
the changes of feature space after the normalization process. The
distance within class (Din ) is defined to measure the distance
between classes of different force levels of the same motion. It
is given by
Din (i) =
	
×

which are further apart (20% versus 80%). This means cosine
values of the angle between MAP vector pairs decrease with
increasing differences between force levels. The trend holds for
all six frequency bands. On the other hand, the cosine value of
vector pairs between different motions is about 0.48, which is
significantly lower than that for the same motion.
Fig. 5 shows muscle activation pattern of eight motions for
frequency band 163–235. Evidently, although the absolute value
is different, the shapes of patterns for different contraction levels are similar in the radar chart. It demonstrated that forearm
muscles were activated uniformly as a function of force when
performing a certain task. The modulation of force only changes
the magnitude of the pattern of muscle coordination. Meanwhile, the coordination pattern of muscles was different when
performing different motions.
D. Feature Extraction
We have illustrated that it is similar in orientation of MAP
vectors among different contraction levels of the same motion
throughout all frequency bands. Based on this, we can modify
DFTR features to classify motions with different force levels.
The difference between vectors of different contraction levels
of the same motion is the module of the vector. Two normalization methods were developed to remove the information of
the module, and retain that of the angle. One is to normalize
features across channels within each band. It is computed as
DFTRc,i
,
cnDFTRc,i = 
8
2
DFTR
c,i
c=1

i = 1, 2, . . . , L (4)

where DFTRc,i is the DFTR feature for channel c, frequency
band i, and cnDFTRc,i is its normalization version. This process removes not only the module information, but also the
ratio information between different frequency bands within the
channel. It is denoted as channel normalization (cnDFTR).
The other method is computed as
DFTRc,i
,
L
2
c=1
j =1 DFTRc,j

gnDFTRc,i = 
8

i = 1, 2, . . . , L.
(5)

8
1
1 
max
8 m =1 j =1,2,3 2



(μm ,i − μm ,j )T

−1
1
(Σm ,i + Σm ,j )
(μm ,i − μm ,j )
2
(6)

where μm ,i is the centroid of motion m, force level i, and Σm ,i is
its covariance. A bigger Din indicates a larger distance between
classes of different forces for a given motion.
The distance between classes (Dout ) is defined to measure
the distance between classes of different motions. It is given by
Dout (i) =
	
×

8
1
1 
min
8 m =1 j =1,2,3;n =1,2,..,8;n = m 2



(μm ,i − μn ,j

)T

−1
1
(Σm ,i + Σn ,j )
(μm ,i − μn ,j ).
2
(7)

It calculates the averages of the Mahalanobis distance between different motions. A smaller Dout means a shorter distance between classes of different motions. It is difficult for
classification with the small value of Dout .
F. Feature Performance Evaluation
Classification error, defined as the percent of number of incorrect classified samples, was used to evaluate the feature performance. Linear discriminate analysis (LDA) was selected for
its low computation cost, as it has been shown that the choice
of classifier was not as crucial as the choice of feature set [6],
[15], [35]. The performance of the proposed feature sets were
compared to the traditional TD features and one feature combination (waveform length, slope sign changes, log-detector, and
nine-order AR coefficients), which was robust to contraction
variations proposed in [22] and denoted as Comb in this study.
The channel normalization method was also conducted on TD
feature to test if it had effects on other features. The new feature was denoted as cnTD. For each kind of features (cnDFTR,
gnDFTR, DFTR, TD, cnTD, Comb), the effects of training and
testing with different force levels were reported and the improvement of performance was analyzed in the feature space.
Two-way ANOVA tests were conducted on the classification
error to compare the performance of different features under
different training and testing levels. The two factors were subject

878

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 5. MAPs of frequency band 163–235 for subject 1: (a) tip prehension, (b) lateral prehension, (c) four-finger prehension grip, (d) power grasp, (e) wrist
flexion, (f) wrist extension, (g) wrist pronation, (h) wrist supination. The values of the pattern are normalized to the maximum for each motion.

and feature (cnDFTR, gnDFTR, DFTR, TD, cnTD, Comb).
Similarly, separate two-way ANOVA tests were applied on the
metrics, Din and Dout , to test the effect of normalization method
on DFTR and TD feature. The two factors were also subject and
feature (cnDFTR, gnDFTR, DFTR for the test of effect on DFTR
feature, cnTD, TD for that of TD feature). Tukey comparison
was performed when significance was detected for the main
factors. The significance level for all tests was set at 0.05.
III. RESULTS
A. Classification Results
Two-fold cross validation was used in this study. The results
of classification error were shown in Fig. 6. For all the features,
contraction variation increased classification errors. The classification error increased with increasing difference between
training and testing force levels. The classifier trained at 50%
force level achieved the best performance when it was tested
with all three force levels. The classification errors averaged
across all the conditions were 9.85%, 9.29%, 20.71%, 20.82%,
15.60%, and 18.34% for cnDFTR, gnDFTR, DFTR, TD, cnTD,
and Comb feature, respectively. It can be seen that after the
normalization process, the error rates of cnTD was decreased
compared to TD. However, the extent of decrease is much lower
than cnDFTR and gnDFTR (5% versus 11%).
When the force levels of training and testing data were different, the classification errors of cnDFTR and gnDFTR were lower
than other three features. The improvement was significant when
the difference between training and testing force levels is large.
For training at 20% and testing at 80%, the classification errors
were decreased by about 18%. For training at 80% and testing at 20%, the classification errors were decreased by about
30%. Two-way ANOVA revealed that there was no significant
interaction (p > 0.4) between two factors (subject and feature).
The effects of feature sets were significant (p < 0.01) for all the
conditions. Tukey comparisons showed that the performances
of both cnDFTR and gnDFTR were significantly higher than

Fig. 6. Classification errors of different features with different training and
testing force levels, (a) training at 20% force level, (b) training at 50% force
level, (c) training at 80% force level. The horizontal axis was the testing force
level. The last tag of the axis represents testing with all force levels. Data is
averaged across all subjects.

other four features, except for the condition that training at 50%
and testing at 80% compared to DFTR. There was significant
difference between the performance of cnTD and TD for the following four conditions (training level versus testing level), 20%

HE et al.: INVARIANT SURFACE EMG FEATURE AGAINST VARYING CONTRACTION LEVEL FOR MYOELECTRIC CONTROL

versus 80%, 50% versus 20%, 80% versus 20%, 80% versus
50%.
There was a little increase in the error rate (∼1.1% at 20%,
∼0.7% at 50%, and ∼0.4% at 80%) when training and testing
at the same level for the performance of cnDFTR and gnDFTR
compared to other four features. No significant interaction was
found between two factors (p > 0.7). The effects of feature sets
was not significant (p > 0.05). Pairwise comparisons between
cnDFTR or gnDFTR and other features showed that there was
no significant difference except for the comparisons with Comb
feature when training and testing at 20%.
There was no significant difference between the performance
of cnDFTR and gnDFTR for all the conditions.
B. Changes of Feature Space
In order to describe changes in feature space after normalization, the distance within class and between classes were calculated for DFTR, cnDFTR, gnDFTR, TD, and cnTD feature and
the results were displayed in Fig. 7.
The distance within class was decreased for gnDFTR and
cnDFTR, compared to DFTR at all force levels. For distance
between classes, the performance of gnDFTR and cnDFTR were
similar to DFTR. The effects of feature sets were only significant
for Din (p < 0.005) for all three force levels. Tukey comparisons
showed that Din of cnDFTR and gnDFTR was significantly
shorter than DFTR. However, there was no significant difference
for the comparison between Dout of cnDFTR or gnDFTR and
that of DFTR. No significant difference was found between the
performance of cnDFTR and gnDFTR on both metrics for all
the conditions. For cnTD and TD feature, both Din and Dout
of cnTD were increased compared to TD. Significant difference
was found in statistics (p < 0.001).
The results reveal that both normalization processes decrease
the within-class distance while retaining between-class distance
for DFTR feature. It indicates that normalization methods reduce the difference of different contraction levels for the same
motion, and at the same time, retain the discrimination information between different motions. However, as for TD feature,
the normalization methods increase both the distances within
class and between classes. That made the performance of cnTD
inferior to cnDFTR and gnDFTR.
Fig. 8 shows feature clusters and the LDA decision boundaries
in the two-dimension feature space. The features are projected
on the two most discriminatory dimension by linear discriminant
analysis. The classifier was trained using data of 80% force
level, and the boundaries represented the decision line between
motion PG and FP. For DFTR feature, samples are misclassified
at 20% force level between PG and FP. However, for cnDFTR
and gnDFTR feature, clusters of other force levels for PG can
be well separated from those for FP based on this boundary.
IV. DISCUSSION
Variations in muscle contraction cause a high degree of decrease on the performance of pattern-recognition based prostheses control. Though incorporating changes to training protocol
could improve the classification accuracy, it will prolong the

879

training time and increase the burden on users [17]. Our study
exploited the property of muscle coordination and proposed new
features to increase the overall classification performance from
about 80% to 91%, which would make the system possible to
be used in the real world [23].
The force production relies on the coordination of multiple
hand muscles. Because of the redundancy of human musculature, there are many muscle coordination patterns to choose for
central nervous system (CNS) to generate a given force. Previous
study found that EMG amplitude of active muscles would scale
uniformly as a function of force [27]. It revealed that muscle
coordination patterns were similar through different forces for a
given motion. Thus, it provided a possibility to classify motions
with different forces without training at all force levels. This
study explored the frequency information and found that the
orientation of MAP vectors for frequency band was highly correlated for comparisons of the same motion with different forces
throughout eight hand motions. The difference in MAP vectors
for force pairs further apart was larger than that for neighboring
force levels. The large difference in MAP vectors for low force
levels is likely due to the effect of the noise component that
includes background neural activity from the CNS [36]. The
degree of similarity in orientation for MAP vectors of different
frequency band was overall very high throughout all force comparisons of the same motion, which was much greater than that
of different motions. Thus, the information representing variations in contractions can be extracted, and enough information
was remained for motion classification. Our study was inspired
by the research in [26] and [27] and gained further insight into
the frequency domain for muscle coordination.
Two novel features were proposed based on the property of
muscle coordination to extract angle information and remove
amplitude information from MAP vectors. Performances of both
features were significantly better than that of the original feature,
DFTR, which has a higher error rate ∼11%. The improvement
was further investigated in the feature space, and it showed that
both features reduced the differences between different force
levels for the same motion, and maintained the effective variances between different motions. That confirmed the property
of muscle coordination in the frequency domain from another
aspect. For all the features, the classifier trained at 50% got
the best performance among all the training levels (see Fig. 6).
Therefore, median contraction should be an optimal choice for
robust training protocol.
When the same channel normalization technique was implemented on TD feature, there was a decrease in error rate of
∼5%, comparing to the original version. However, the extent of
decrease for cnTD was much smaller than that for cnDFTR and
gnDFTR (5% versus 11%). The classification error of cnTD
was also much higher than that of the proposed new features
(p < 0.05). It indicated that the normalization method was more
effective for the proposed features than TD feature sets in increasing robustness against changing force levels.
DFTR was essentially a subband power feature. Some other
features, such as wavelet coefficients, wavelet packet, were also
based on subband power and had been applied in myoelectric
control [5], [6]. Given the success of the present study, it was

880

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 7. Results of two quantification metrics at three force levels: (a) distance within class (D in ), (b) distance between classes (D o u t ). Two normalization
feature, cnDFTR, and gnDFTR, reduce the distance within class and keep the distance between classes. For cnTD, both distances are increased compared to TD
feature. The values are averaged across all the subjects.

Fig. 8. Projections of clusters on two dimension space for different features: (a) DFTR, (b) cnDFTR, (c) gnDFTR. Features were projected using linear
discriminant analysis, and the two most discriminatory dimensions are shown in the figure. TP, LP, FP, PG, WF, WE, WP, WS, RS represent tip prehension, lateral
prehension, four-finger prehension grip, power grasp, wrist flexion, wrist extension, wrist pronation, wrist supination, and rest state, respectively. The classifier is
trained at 80% force level and the black line is the decision boundary between PG and FP. Data is from subject 1.

expected that these features would also had similar advantage.
However, a full investigation on this aspect was beyond the
scope of this paper. The comparison between these features
would discussed in the future study. The performance of the
proposed feature sets were only tested on 200-ms window size.
Considering the signals were from the steady-state part, they
were essentially stationary [4]. As the new features were based
on FFT, different window sizes would have little impact on the
performance of the features.
When there were variations in muscle contraction effort, the
module information became the disturbance for motion classification. Global normalization removed the module information
of the entire vector compared to the original version. Channel
normalization removed not only module information, but also
the power ratio between different frequency bands for the same
channel. Though the information contained was different, there
was no significant difference (p > 0.05) between performance
of three features, DFTR, gnDFTR, and cnDFTR, with training
and testing at the same force level (see Fig. 6). It indicated
that the power ratio among different channels, i.e., the coordination pattern of hand muscles, played an important role in
motion classification. The module information and the power
ratio between different frequency bands had little impact on
classification errors.
It should be emphasized that all the results were obtained under the configuration where the EMG electrodes were attached

on the specified muscles. One limitation of this configuration is
that it may need time to detect the locations of muscles. If the
electrodes are spaced around the forearm equally, the signals
detected from the electrodes may not represent the activation
of the specified muscles due to the crosstalk between channels.
They represent the combination of signals from some neighboring muscles. The proposed method is not applicable in that
situation. Blind source separation algorithms, proposed by Farina and Jiang, may provide a solution to this problem [12],
[37].
Another potential application of this study is that it may provide a potential way to distinguish hand motions and levels of
force simultaneously without training at all force levels. Prostheses control based on pattern recognition has been extensively
investigated during the past 50 year [1]. However, most of the
studies are focused on the identification of movements. For normal people, they can control not only the type of motions, but
also the grade of force. Force control is also the requirement of
amputees and will increase the user acceptance of myoelectric
forearm prostheses [28]. Furthermore, it is also necessary for
games or rehabilitation exercises [38]. Our study found that the
force of prehension was related to the module of the MAP vector,
and the type of motion was related to the angle of the MAP vector. If three degrees of force was available and the classifier was
trained at the moderate force level, it might be possible to differentiate levels of contractions by comparing modules of MAP

HE et al.: INVARIANT SURFACE EMG FEATURE AGAINST VARYING CONTRACTION LEVEL FOR MYOELECTRIC CONTROL

vectors. Users would be able to control motions and strength
simultaneously without long training time. That would benefit
the individuals with motor deficits and promote development of
the human–machine interface.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented new features which were robust to variations in contraction effort for pattern recognition-based control
scheme. The features were based on the property of muscle coordination in frequency domain and shown to outperform other
four features. Two metrics were developed to describe changes
of feature space for different feature sets.
The pattern recognition-based control scheme usually regards
the musculoskeletal system as a black box. It does not utilize the
knowledge of neurophysiological mechanism of natural movements [39]. EMG signals are an expression of neuromuscular
activities which are controlled by CNS. So the changes of signals
are related to the neural inputs of CNS. This study incorporated
the mechanism of muscle coordination with the pattern recognition based framework and achieved promising results. The
integration between neural mechanism and pattern recognition
methods may provide a potential way to guarantee the robust
performance and make the system clinically viable. Future work
will focus on the incorporation of two parts and minimizing the
effects of other disturbances on EMG pattern classification.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Liu and L. Pan for their
constructive discussions and good advices. The authors would
also like to thank all the subjects for their participation of the
experiment.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Parker, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “Myoelectric signal processing
for control of powered limb prostheses.” J. Electromyography Kinesiology: Official J. Int. Soc. Electrophysiological Kinesiology, vol. 16, no. 6,
p. 541, 2006.
[2] B. Hudgins, P. Parker, and R. Scott, “A new strategy for multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 82–94, Jan. 1993.
[3] M. A. Oskoei and H. Hu, “Myoelectric control systemsa survey,” Biomed.
Signal Process. Control, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 275–294, 2007.
[4] K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A robust, real-time control scheme for
multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 7, pp. 848–854, Jul. 2003.
[5] K. Englehart, B. Hudgin, and P. A. Parker, “A wavelet-based continuous
classification scheme for multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 302–311, Mar. 2001.
[6] K. Englehart, B. Hudgins, P. A. Parker, and M. Stevenson, “Classification
of the myoelectric signal using time-frequency based representations,”
Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 431–438, 1999.
[7] A. B. Ajiboye, and R. F. Weir, “A heuristic fuzzy logic approach to EMG
pattern recognition for multifunctional prosthesis control,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 280–291, Sep. 2005.
[8] J.-U. Chu, I. Moon, and M.-S. Mun, “A real-time EMG pattern recognition system based on linear-nonlinear feature projection for a multifunction myoelectric hand,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 11,
pp. 2232–2239, Nov. 2006.
[9] G. Li, A. E. Schultz, and T. A. Kuiken, “Quantifying pattern recognition
based myoelectric control of multifunctional transradial prostheses,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 185–192, Apr. 2010.

881

[10] L. J. Hargrove, G. Li, K. B. Englehart, and B. S. Hudgins, “Principal
components analysis preprocessing for improved classification accuracies
in pattern-recognition-based myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1407–1414, May 2009.
[11] K. Nazarpour, A. R. Sharafat, and S. M. P. Firoozabadi, “Application of
higher order statistics to surface electromyogram signal classification,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1762–1769, Oct. 2007.
[12] D. Farina, C. Févotte, C. Doncarli, and R. Merletti, “Blind separation
of linear instantaneous mixtures of nonstationary surface myoelectric
signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1555–1567,
Sep. 2004.
[13] Z. Ju, G. Ouyang, M. Wilamowska-Korsak, and H. Liu, “Surface EMG
based hand manipulation identification via nonlinear feature extraction
and classification,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 3302–3311,
Sep. 2013.
[14] C. Cipriani, C. Antfolk, M. Controzzi, G. Lundborg, B. Rosen, M. C.
Carrozza, and F. Sebelius, “Online myoelectric control of a dexterous hand
prosthesis by transradial amputees,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 260–270, Jun. 2011.
[15] X. Chen, X. Zhu, and D. Zhang, “A discriminant bispectrum featured for
surface electromyogram signal classification,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 32,
no. 2, pp. 126–135, 2010.
[16] A. Al-Timemy, G. Bugmann, J. Escudero, and N. Outram, “Classification
of finger movements for the dexterous hand prosthesis control with surface
electromyography,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 608–618, May 2013.
[17] J. W. Sensinger, B. A. Lock, and T. A. Kuiken, “Adaptive pattern recognition of myoelectric signals: exploration of conceptual framework and
practical algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 270–278, Jun. 2009.
[18] N. Jiang, S. Dosen, K.-R. Müller, and D. Farina, “Myoelectric control of
artificial limbs— is there a need to change focus?,” IEEE Signal Process.
Mag., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 149–152, Sep. 2012.
[19] L. Hargrove, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A training strategy to reduce classification degradation due to electrode displacements in pattern
recognition based myoelectric control,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 175–180, 2008.
[20] A. Fougner, O. Stavdahl, P. Kyberd, Y. Losier, and P. Parker, “Control of upper limb prostheses: Terminology and proportional myoelectric control—a review,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20,
no. 5, pp. 663–677, Sep. 2012.
[21] A. H. Al-Timemy, G. Bugmann, J. Escudero, and N. Outram, “A preliminary investigation of the effect of force variation for myoelectric control
of hand prosthesis,” in Proc. 35th Annu. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2013, pp. 5758–5761.
[22] D. Tkach, H. Huang, and T. A. Kuiken, “Study of stability of time-domain
features for electromyographic pattern recognition,” J. NeuroEngineering
Rehabil., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 21, 2010.
[23] E. Scheme and K. Englehart, “Training strategies for mitigating the effect
of proportional control on classification in pattern recognition–based myoelectric control,” JPO: J. Prosthetics Orthotics, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 76–83,
2013.
[24] M. Maier and M. Hepp-Reymond, “Emg activation patterns during force
production in precision grip. ii. muscular synergies in the spatial and
temporal domain,” Exp. Brain Res. Experimentelle Hirnforschung. Experimentation Cerebrale, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 123–136, 1994.
[25] M. A. Maier and M.-C. Hepp-Reymond, “EMG activation patterns during
force production in precision grip,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 103, no. 1,
pp. 108–122, 1995.
[26] F. J. Valero-Cuevas, “Predictive modulation of muscle coordination pattern
magnitude scales fingertip force magnitude over the voluntary range,”
J. Neurophysiology, vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 1469–1479, 2000.
[27] B. Poston, A. D.-D. Santos, M. Jesunathadas, T. M. Hamm, and M. Santello, “Force-independent distribution of correlated neural inputs to hand
muscles during three-digit grasping,” J. Neurophysiology, vol. 104, no. 2,
pp. 1141–1154, 2010.
[28] B. Peerdeman, D. Boere, H. Witteveen, R. H. in’t Veld, H. Hermens,
S. Stramigioli, J. Rietman, P. Veltink, and S. Misra, “Myoelectric forearm
prostheses: State of the art from a user-centered perspective,” J. Rehabil.
Res. Dev., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 719–738, 2011.
[29] D. J. Atkins, D. C. Heard, and W. H. Donovan, “Epidemiologic overview
of individuals with upper-limb loss and their reported research priorities,”
JPO: J. Prosthetics Orthotics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 2–11, 1996.
[30] X. Chen, X. Zhu, and D. Zhang, “Use of the discriminant fourierderived cepstrum with feature-level post-processing for surface elec-

882

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]

[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

tromyographic signal classification,” Physiological Meas., vol. 30, no. 12,
p. 1399, 2009.
P. Alexandre and P. Lockwood, “Root cepstral analysis: A unified view.
application to speech processing in car noise environments,” Speech Commun., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 277–288, 1993.
R. Sarikaya, and J. H. Hansen, “Analysis of the root-cepstrum for acoustic modeling and fast decoding in speech recognition,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH, 2001, pp. 687–690.
J. He, D. Zhang, X. Sheng, J. Meng, and X. Zhu, “Improved discrete
fourier transform based spectral feature for surface electromyogram signal
classification,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 6897–6900.
N. Bunderson, and T. Kuiken, “Quantification of feature space changes
with experience during electromyogram pattern recognition control,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 239–246,
May 2012.
L. Hargrove, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A comparison of surface
and intramuscular myoelectric signal classification,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 847–853, May 2007.
C. J. De Luca and Z. Erim, “Common drive of motor units in regulation of
muscle force,” Trends Neurosciences, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 299–305, 1994.
N. Jiang, and D. Farina, “Covariance and time-scale methods for blind
separation of delayed sources,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3,
pp. 550–556, Mar. 2011.
M. Rojas-Martı́nez, M. Mañanas, J. Alonso, and R. Merletti, “Identification of isometric contractions based on high density EMG maps,”
J. Electromyography Kinesiology, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 33–42, 2013.
N. Jiang, K. B. Englehart, and P. A. Parker, “Extracting simultaneous and
proportional neural control information for multiple-dof prostheses from
the surface electromyographic signal,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56,
no. 4, pp. 1070–1080, Apr. 2009.

Xinjun Sheng (M’10) received the B.Sc., M.Sc.,
and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in
2000, 2003, and 2014, respectively.
In 2012, he was a Visiting Scientist in Concordia
University, Montreal, QC, Canada. He is currently a
Lecturer in the School of Mechanical Engineering at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His current research
interests include robotics, and biomechatronics.
Dr. Sheng is a Member of the Robotics and Automation Society, the Engineering in Medicine and
Biological Society, and the Industrial Electronics Society.

Shunchong Li (S’12) received the Bachelor’s degree
in mechanical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 2007. He is currently
working toward the Master’s and Ph.D. degrees in the
School of Mechanical Engineering at Shanghai Jiao
Tong University.
His research interests include myoelectric prosthetic hand and EMG signal processing.

Jiayuan He (S’12) received the Bachelor’s degree
from the School of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 2010. He is currently
working toward the Master’s and Ph.D. degrees in the
School of Mechanical Engineering at Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include myoelectric signal
processing and adaptive prosthesis control strategies.

Dingguo Zhang (SM’14) received the Bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Jilin University,
Changchun, China, in 2000, the Master’s degree in
control engineering from Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree
from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
in 2007.
From 2006 to 2007, he was a Research Fellow at
Nanyang Technological University. In 2008, he was
a Postdoctoral Fellow at LIRMM of CNRS, France.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the Institute of Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His research
interests include human–machine interface, rehabilitation technique, biological
cybernetics, and biomechatronics.
Dr. Zhang is a Member of the Robotics and Automation Society, the Engineering in Medicine and Biological Society, and the International Functional
Electrical Stimulation Society. He is the recipient of the Delsys Prize 2011,
USA.

Xiangyang Zhu (M’11) received the B.S. degree
from the Department of Automatic Control Engineering, Nanjing Institute of Technology, Nanjing,
China, in 1985, the M.Phil. degree in instrumentation engineering and the Ph.D. degree in automatic
control engineering, both from Southeast University,
Nanjing, China, in 1989 and 1992, respectively.
From 1993 to 1994, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China. He joined the Department of Mechanical Engineering as an Associate
Professor, Southeast University, in 1995. Since June 2002, he has been with the
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China, where he is currently a Changjiang Chair Professor and the Director of
the Robotics Institute. His current research interests include robotic manipulation planning, human–machine interfacing, and biomechatronics.
Dr. Zhu received the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2005.

