1796

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

A Distributed Approach to Alarm Management
in Chronic Kidney Disease
Miguel A. Estudillo-Valderrama, Alejandro Talaminos-Barroso, Laura M. Roa, Fellow, IEEE,
David Naranjo-Hernández, Student Member, IEEE, Javier Reina-Tosina, Senior Member, IEEE,
Nuria Aresté-Fosalba, and José A. Milán-Martı́n

Abstract—This paper presents the feasibility study of using a distributed approach for the management of alarms from chronic kidney disease patients. In a first place, the key issues regarding alarm
definition, classification, and prioritization according to available
normalization efforts are analyzed for the main scenarios addressed in hemodialysis. Then, the middleware proposed for alarm
management is described, which follows the publish/subscribe pattern, and supports the Object Management Group data distribution service (DDS) standard. This standard facilitates the real-time
monitoring of the exchanged information, as well as the scalability and interoperability of the solution developed regarding the
different stakeholders and resources involved. Finally, the results
section shows, through the proof of concept studied, the viability
of DDS for the activation of emergency protocols in terms of alarm
prioritization and personalization, as well as some remarks about
security, privacy, and real-time communication performance.
Index Terms—Alarm system, chronic kidney disease (CKD),
middleware, publish/subscribe pattern, real-time.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE application of information and communication technologies (ICT) has revolutionized the domain of healthcare in many of its areas of practice. Moreover, the increased
use of ubiquitous computing, embedded systems, and smart environments present at the point of care (PoC) [1] are creating
new business opportunities in a variety of e-Health areas. For
instance, regarding the chronic kidney disease (CKD) pathology, ICT can provide advanced capabilities for remote control

T

Manuscript received November 27, 2013; revised March 24, 2014 and May
29, 2014; accepted June 20, 2014. Date of publication June 30, 2014; date
of current version November 3, 2014. This work was supported in part by
the CIBER de Bioingenierı́a, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN)
and the intramural Grant PERSONA, in part by the Instituto de Salud Carlos
III under PI11/00111, and in part by the Dirección General de Investigación,
Tecnologı́a y Empresa, Government of Andalucı́a, under Grants P08-TIC-04069
and TIC6214. CIBER-BBN is an initiative funded by the 6th National R&D&i
Plan 2008–2011, Iniciativa Ingenio 2010, Consolider Program, CIBER Actions
and financed by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III with assistance from the
European Regional Development Fund.
M. A. Estudillo-Valderrama, A. Talaminos-Barroso, L. M. Roa, and D.
Naranjo-Hernández are with the Biomedical Engineering Group, University
of Seville, Seville 41092, Spain, and also with the CIBER-BBN, Zaragoza
50018, Spain (e-mail: mestudillo@us.es; atalaminos@us.es; lroa@us.es; davidazuaga@gmail.com).
J. Reina-Tosina is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, University of Seville, Seville 41092, Spain, and also the CIBER-BBN,
Zaragoza 50018, Spain (e-mail: jreina@us.es).
N. Aresté-Fosalba and J. A. Milán-Martı́n are with the Service of Nephrology, Virgen Macarena University Hospital, Seville 41071, Spain (e-mail:
narestef@senefro.org; jmilan@senefro.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2333880

sessions of hemodialysis (HD), allowing data and alarms to be
transmitted from the patient location to the health organizations
[2]. However, the implementation of these developments is not
widespread in the daily practice because there are several obstacles that hinder an effective implementation of ICT. Among
them, it stands out the diversity of procedures, actors, and scenarios involved in the real-time exchange of information: patients, doctors, carers, nephrology services, service providers,
among others [3]. To this issue, it is added the heterogeneity
and distribution of the agents and the different ICT infrastructures deployed, whose services and systems may be distant and
noninteroperable. Finally, but not less important, low-cost and
sustainable solutions [4] able to be affordable under the current economic situation are needed. In fact, CKD gathers the
challenges described. HD is usually performed in the multiuser
setting of a dialysis center, which could be placed in a rural
environment that ought to be connected to the next-level clinical center, as the nephrology service in a hospital. However,
patients may choose to perform their dialysis at home, what
demands a single-user solution at the PoC, also able to be connected with the medical staff or the HD supplier at any time, for
the sake of patient’s empowerment and tranquility [5]. At this
point, the study in [6] defines a differentiation between patient
and technical complications that may appear at the HD site.
For this purpose, the participation of specialized personnel is
essential, like nurses [7], who can attend critical issues such as
the troubleshooting of local alarms related to renal replacement
therapy.
Alarm management systems (AMSs) are a key issue in several chronic pathologies like CKD [8], and follow two different
notification models [9]: local or on-floor monitoring, and remote
monitoring. The first is mainly contained within the care unit
environment, and alerts directly the nursing staff, whereas the
latter controls all alarms in a remote location by means of technical staff that observes all alarms from a number of care units.
Local monitoring demands a higher responsibility from nurses
so as to take care of alarms in addition to meet their own duties.
This way, additional training is needed for nurse staff in order
to deal with the inner complexity of medical devices and AMS.
By contrast, remote monitoring may be suitable for healthcare
scenarios that prefer to place monitoring tasks in a separate location and assign experienced watchers to control alarms. This
way, it is pursued the reduction of alarm noise in care units, and
consequently the reduction of alarm fatigue, and the definition
of a single responsible. However, the main disadvantage of remote monitoring is the increase of communication links, thus

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ESTUDILLO-VALDERRAMA et al.: DISTRIBUTED APPROACH TO ALARM MANAGEMENT IN CKD

requiring reliable and effective communication mechanisms to
ensure that a proper alarm management is being addressed. Nevertheless, neither models are perfect, and their cost-effectiveness
depends heavily on the application, through the assessment of
particular needs based on factors such as monitoring utilization and staff recruitment. In particular, remote monitoring is
optimal in care units with a low nurse-to-patient ratio and a
large, dispersed layout, like CKD. In addition, the study in [10]
claimed the importance of including alarms from patient vital signs to provide a scalable and comprehensive AMS. More
modern references remark the importance of distributed AMS
able to “transmit the right notifications to the right caregivers in
the right way” [11]. Besides, it is critical that the alarm system
helps, but does not overwhelm [12], the medical staff with useful
information about patient health status by means of a customizable filtering that reduces false or nuisance alarms, minimizing
the fatigue of medical staff. This way, AMS must be developed
as an added value tool in order to ease staff work but not the
opposite.
From a technology perspective, distributed architectures demand a sufficiently robust paradigm that allows the maximum
utilization of the potential of generating and integrating heterogeneous data. Current state-of-the-art of communication technologies is paving the way to address distributed alarm system requirements. In particular, the publish/subscribe model
is undergoing a boom due to the significant advantages it offers when the number of nodes is high, in terms of maintenance and cost-efficiency [13]. In particular, the Object Management Group (OMG) data distribution service (DDS) specification [14] provides real-time publish/subscribe middleware
with rich support of quality-of-service (QoS) policies to enforce the desired end-to-end communication requirements [15].
The decentralized DDS architecture has been successfully applied in critical civil and military applications [16] and brings
important advantages to the health domain, like fault tolerance, high performance, scalability, low latency [17] and vendor
neutrality [18].
The advantages of a distributed AMS are clear in terms of an
optimal reaction of all stakeholders (clinical and technical) involved. Nevertheless, current commercial solutions are based on
closed and expensive technologies that may lack from security
and scalability mechanisms. The present landscape motivates
the solution proposed in this paper, which is quasi-decentralized,
based on standards and open technologies. In particular, the main
objective is the viability study of the application of the DDS
specification for real-time clinical settings, through a proof of
concept: the management of HD alarms. The study is developed
in the context of the eNefro project [19], in which some preliminary results have already been addressed [20]. However, this
paper goes beyond by analyzing the features of DDS in a richer
setting: the monitoring of HD sessions from CKD. The next section briefly describes the distributed system required for the eNefro project, as a prelude to the HD scenarios analyzed. Section II
also includes a basis for common definitions provided by
the standardization perspective, as well as the main features
of the DDS specification. Afterward, results are presented in
Section III in terms of how the DDS framework meets the

1797

Fig. 1. eNefro distributed scenario. HD machines at the bottom correspond to
a picture of an AK Ultra 200S (Gambro). WAN stands for wide area network,
and LAN for local area network.
TABLE I
ACTORS AND ROLES IN ENEFRO
Actor
Assisted
user

Specialized
user
Professional
user

Service
provider

Characteristics

Responsibilities

Relations

Receives the HD
session

Patient with
CKD

Assists the
patients
(nurse/carer)
Medical
specialist
(Nephrologist)

Helps the patient
in the HD
session
Clinical
supervision of
HD sessions of
the patients
Supervision of
HD machine
failure

Under the care
of specialized
and professional
users
Helps assisted
users

Company
supplier of
resources
(suppliers)

Attends assisted
users

Assists
specialized user
and professional
user

defined requirements for the scenarios under study. Finally,
Section IV draws conclusions and some discussion remarks.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Actors and Materials Used in eNefro
The Nephrology Services of the hospital partners in eNefro,
and consequently the patients being monitored (40 in a first
phase), are geographically dispersed along different Spanish
regions (Andalusia, Madrid, and Canary Islands). Thus, the aim
is to provide these services within a distributed architecture,
as shown in Fig. 1, able to assess differences and improve the
procedures that might arise when dealing with patient data at
different locations. To this, it is added the need of developing a
tool that could ease the real-time communication between the
different stakeholders involved.
In particular, this paper studies the issues related with the
management of different alarms coming from HD patients, and
how they can be optimally addressed taking into account the
available resources. For this purpose, up to four different actor roles that have access to the real-time data are identified,
in an effort to cover the most common CKD stakeholders (see
Table I). Thus, the mission of eNefro system is twofold: First, to

1798

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

support the real-time delivery of information between these actors; second, to personalize and prioritize the management of
alarms derived from the HD sessions, so as to allow the custom
filtering of alarm-related information. Other system requirements are to ensure confidentiality and security of the data exchanged. A wide area network (WAN) network (e.g., Internet) is
only needed for the operation of eNefro to gather the data from
the electromedical devices that allow the remote monitoring of
HD. These are summarized as follows.
1) HD machines: For the sake of simplicity, it is assumed
that they are able to connect to eNefro.
2) Sensing devices: They acquire the most important vital
signs of CKD patients, which are weight scale, blood
pressure, thermometer, and glucometer.
3) ICT equipment: They display the graphical user interfaces
(GUIs) of eNefro for the introduction of data into the
system, as well as to monitor triggered alarms.
There is past and present evidence that demonstrates that
remote home monitoring reduces hospital admissions and associated healthcare costs [21], and in particular for CKD [10]. In
eNefro, the quasi-decentralization of the platform makes unnecessary the use of costly servers and specialized staff. Moreover,
eNefro platform and servers can be run on low-performance
hardware, taking advantage of available ICT hospital facilities.
Regarding human resources employed, due to the relatively low
incidence of HD alarms [22] and the small number of patients,
the staff required for patient supervision is moderate: 1 nurse
per 4/5 patients. However, it is expected that the deployment of
the eNefro platform during the validation stage may reduce the
staff size through specific educational training plans for each
patient, always taking into account that some contingencies that
may arise cannot be addressed by them [5].
B. eNefro Scenarios
Fig. 1 shows the three most common scenarios in which the
HD is carried out, as detailed next.
1) Hospital HD: HD sessions of assisted users (hereinafter
patients) are performed in the Nephrology Service of the
Hospital, with the help of the specialized users (henceforth nurses). The introduction of data in the system (DDS
publication) is performed by the nurse through a specific
GUI, and is processed by eNefro for alarm generation.
Moreover, the professional user (nephrologist) and service
provider (supplier) serve as operators, defining alarms and
monitoring HD sessions (DDS subscribers).
2) Day Hospital for HD: Equivalent to the Hospital HD except the HD sessions are conducted in a specialized center
for HD. The main difference from the Hospital HD is that
the alarms may require moving the patient to a hospital.
3) Domiciliary HD: HD sessions are developed at the patient’s home. Unlike the previous scenarios, data publication within the system is performed by a carer at home.
Again, in case of an alarm event, the patient may require
to be moved to the hospital.
eNefro operation could be enhanced by considering that communication interfaces of medical equipment are open and com-

ply with available standards. This way, the AMS could gather
data without the intervention of end users, paving the way for a
completely automated alarm system.
C. Alarms and Prioritization
Alarms are the abnormal events managed in real time by
the eNefro system. The ISO IEC/CD 60601-1-8 [23] standard
specifies the requirements for systems and alarm signals in the
electromedical equipment used for patient care, and determines
the status of an “Alarm System.” The standard also provides the
guidance for the application of these alarm systems, through
the definition of: alarm categories, priorities, urgency, and control states. A parameter strongly emphasized by the standard is
the delay that data, in a distributed alarm system, could suffer
from their transmission until they are processed and how the
AMS should provide mechanisms to alert of a failure in their
communication, in order to ensure patient safety. Also, the standard emphasizes the importance of minimizing false alarms to
reduce staff fatigue, through the improvement of the accuracy
of the algorithms employed in the alarm systems, as well as by
double-checking the condition of an alarm before triggering any
action and the AMS itself in a regular basis. To this end, there
should be a record of the occurrence of the alarm conditions taking into account the following parameters: time of occurrence,
associated alarm limits, deactivation states of the alarm, clinical
alarm conditions, and technical alarm conditions.
Furthermore, it is interesting to remark the separation that
the ISO IEC/CD 60601-1-8 establishes between clinical and
technical alarms, depending on their nature.
1) Clinical alarm: They warn about events related to
patient’s vital signs during the HD session. In particular, the most relevant alarms generated by the Sensing
Devices previously defined will be studied.
2) Technical alarm: They warn about events related to the
improper operation of the material resources used during the HD session. In special, the most relevant alarms
generated by the HD machine are studied.
Finally, the standard specifies the criteria to prioritize alarms
for their correct response, based on a set of preferences (high,
medium, and low) depending on the potential damage that a
wrong response could cause to the patient.
D. DDS Publish/Subscriber Pattern
The DDS specification is an open international standard
adopted by the OMG to share data in real time, following
the publisher/subscriber pattern. Publishers and subscribers exchange data in DDS within the global data space (also called
domain). This data-space is accessed by DataWriters created by
the publisher and DataReaders created by the subscriber. The
nexus of these two entities is the topic, which is the information
container and is defined by a data structure. The flexibility of
DDS allows the creation of multitopics, which group several
topics while allowing a more advanced and personalized
publish/subscribe experience. Content filtering is also possible
in DDS through a ContentFilteredTopic, which imposes restrictions on one or more topic fields.

ESTUDILLO-VALDERRAMA et al.: DISTRIBUTED APPROACH TO ALARM MANAGEMENT IN CKD

1799

TABLE II
ALARMS

ENEFRO

Alarm
Clinical

Technical

Type

Threshold

Priority

Venous pressure
Arterial pressure

> 15 cm H2 O
A P > 160/85 and
A P < 80/40
T > 38 or T < 35
Weight gain > 2
Glyc. > 200 or
Glyc. < 60
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

High
High

Body temp.
Weight gain
Glycemia (if
Diabetes Mellitus)
Blood leakage
Air detection
Blood flow
Water supply level
Dialysis fluid temp.
Ultrafiltration
volume
Ultrafiltration rate
End of Heparin
infusion
Conductivity
HD machine failure

High
Medium
Medium
High
High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium

Yes
No

Medium
Medium

Yes
No

Low
Low

In addition to DDS, other messaging-oriented middlewares
based on the publisher/subscriber pattern have been designed
and implemented according to different standards. In this sense,
a middleware closely linked with DDS is the message queue
telemetry transport (MQTT) [24], a lightweight protocol developed for machine-to-machine-embedded system communications. Also, some vendors are focusing on new solutions that
implement DDS with light-code libraries that provide a complete interoperability with other manufacturers. In any case,
MQTT and DDS have different goals and uses. While MQTT
is based on a centralized structure oriented to communication between devices and a server, DDS is more focused on
intelligent systems with the ability to communicate without
brokers [25].
Regarding communications performance and efficiency issues, DDS has shown better results in terms of latency and jitter
[26] compared with other technologies such as the common object request broker architecture (CORBA) or the java message
service (JMS), and also being the most efficient solution for
information delivery to subscribers, being ahead of JMS and
advanced message queuing protocol (AMQP). Finally, among
the different DDS software in the market, the study has been
conducted using RTI Connext DDS. In particular, the communication with the DDS middleware has been developed through
the C++ API provided by RTI Connext 5.0. Moreover, the
whole eNefro GUI has been developed in C++ programming
language using the QT 5.1.1 multiplatform library, thereby ensuring portability with different operating systems.
III. RESULTS
A. eNefro Data Model
Table II defines the main alarms of the eNefro system considering the classification described in Section II-C, and according
to the clinical advice of the nephrologists enrolled in the project.
The “threshold” column sets out the specific conditions that lead

Fig. 2.

Types of topics proposed for the case of use.

to the generation of the corresponding alarms by the system,
which can be customized in real time.
The format of the proposed alarm message is ID Code, priority associated with alarm nature, priority, alarm state (active/
inactive, pending/attended), user ID, and date. This message
format is modeled by DDS IDL (interface definition language),
which defines the structure of the topic that will interface to both
publishers and subscribers. In particular, up to three topics have
being defined for eNefro (see Fig. 2).
1) Topics of variables: They are defined for each clinical or
technical variable to be monitored. This way, each topic
includes an identification code, the value of the variable,
and its date. In the cases of use described in the next section, up to 15 topics of variables were created, considering
Table II.
2) Topics of monitoring: They are multitopics that include
several topics of variables. Initially, two topics were
created: one for the clinical variables and another for the
technical ones, which are mostly related to HD machines.
3) Topics of alarms: They are content-filtered topics that
impose a series of restrictions defined in structured query
language (SQL), about topics of monitoring or topics of
variables. Initially, 15 topics were created, for each one of
the topics of variables. Alarms are clearly fixed by upper
and lower thresholds, so that there is no possibility of
ambiguity in order to avoid extra false alarms.
B. Cases of Use
Given the diversity of scenarios, this paper focuses on the
most critical case of use: Domiciliary HD, describing the following interaction of the actors with the eNefro system: carer (introduce/send data); neprologist/supplier (see/add/modify/remove
filter/priority/alarm, set action). This way, stabilized patients are
monitored at home in real time by at least one health professional
and one technical service provider. The former is responsible for
monitoring potential clinical alarms, while the provider does
the same with the technical alarms. These alarms are triggered

1800

Fig. 3.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Snapshot of the eNefro GUI for the nephrologist.

immediately once new data have been entered in eNefro, only if
they exceed the thresholds defined by the medical and technical
professionals through their GUIs. The other two scenarios (hospital and day hospital) are analogous from a functional point
of view. Three applications have been developed for each of
the users considered. Nephrologist and supplier GUIs have the
same structure, and the main differences lay in the variables and
types of alarms to be managed.
The design of the GUI has followed as close as possible the
criteria defined in the ISO IEC/CD 60601-1-6:2010 and IEC
62366:2007 standards for the application of usability concepts
to MD software. The standards define a participative and iterative design cycle (user research, conceptual design, requirement,
detail design and specification, evaluation, development) in order to assess and validate the GUI with the collaboration of end
users. The results obtained of this design cycle are shown in
Fig. 3 for a beta design of the GUI for the nephrologists, which
was validated through a set of surveys and interviews to gather
requirements from the authors working at the service of nephrology, in order to improve their user experience. Besides, a set of
short explanatory videos has been developed to increase user
confidence toward eNefro platform, in an effort to cope with
the lack of a formal training to support patient self-management
of many telemonitoring systems [27]. Nevertheless, this design
represents a first step toward a comprehensive GUI able to gather
requirements from all the users involved. As it can be appreciated, the GUI shows a number of alarms selected by the user
for a short period of time (20 s). Besides, the nephrologist can
create new alarms by defining different thresholds on any of

the clinical variables of the patient being monitored. These new
alarms are disabled by default, and can be assigned with none,
one or more actions that will be triggered when the alarm is
activated. This way, the impact of alarm fatigue on medical staff
can be easily minimized.
Any of the alarms contained in the Table View of disabled
alarms can be transferred to the list of enabled alarms through
the keypad arrows located between them. This way, an alarm
is triggered when the clinical variables of any patient being
monitored exceed the thresholds defined in the alarm settings.
When this happens, new information is displayed in the table
of alarms, located in the central area of the window. Besides, it
is possible to filter the fields of the table of alarms displayed,
depending on the needs of the user. For instance, the nephrologist can see a full historic of alarms by selecting “all” in the
GUI options. Thus, eNefro has two levels of alarm filtering: the
first is performed seamlessly to the user, at middleware level,
when creating the alarm through content restriction using SQL
expressions defined in the DDS specification [14]. The second is
performed at user level, by means of visualization filter options
to display the selected alarms, as shown in Fig. 3. Finally, all
the configuration of alarms and filters can be stored in a user
profile and subsequently be retrieved for further work, in order
to personalizate alarm management.
C. Description of the Communications Architecture
The components of the eNefro system are geographically distributed along the dispersed and separate scenarios (see Fig. 1).
Within each scenario considered, the communication elements

ESTUDILLO-VALDERRAMA et al.: DISTRIBUTED APPROACH TO ALARM MANAGEMENT IN CKD

Fig. 4.

1801

Acknowledgment of alarms at the publisher/subscriber.

are interconnected through a local area network (LAN) with
broadcast traffic allowed. These isolated scenarios have to be
connected by a WAN, which DDS has to deal with, because it
was originally conceived for the LAN [28]. To solve this issue,
each of the communication elements from every scenario is connected to a virtual private network (VPN) that encrypts all traffic
through the WAN, allowing the connection among devices from
any scenario.
The VPN is created through free OpenVPN software, which
allows to link communication nodes securely through untrusted
networks. OpenVPN supports a wide range of configuration
options, including load balancing to handle requests from a
large number of users. Initial tests for eNefro were performed
by using only one OpenVPN server, given the small number of
clients (up to 40 patients) and little bandwidth required for the
communications. However, the scalability issues of the system
have been considered through the future implementation of the
DNS round robin technique so as to distribute the load using
multiple OpenVPN servers.
On the other hand, eNefro applications incorporate protection
mechanisms to ensure patient safety in case of communication
failure. For the sending and reception of alarms, an acknowledgment mechanism has been added at the application level,
considering the ReliabilityQoSPolicy, defined afterward, at both
ends of the communication. Fig. 4 presents the sequence diagram for the acknowledgment of alarms in the eNefro system.
The publisher end includes the user (i.e., patient), the publisher
application object (application layer), and the publisher DDS
object (DDS level), while the subscriber end includes the user
(i.e., nephrologists), the subscriber application object (application level), and the subscriber DDS object (DDS level).
When the subscriber makes no manual ACK, the
wait_for_acknowledgments function [14] is blocked at the publisher end. After the max_wait waiting period, the publisher
application object receives the DDS_RETCODE_TIMEOUT
code, then notifying the user (see Fig. 4). Moreover, the function
wait_for_acknowledgments at the publisher end has no blocking effect after a publication when there is a communication
failure or in case of absence of subscribers. Thus, before publication, the publisher ensures that there is at least one subscriber
available to listen (on_publication). This way, the publisher application is able to detect the number of matching subscribers
and can alert the user when an alarm is activated but there is no
subscriber to listen.

Fig. 5. Performance tests in terms of (a) latency and (b) jitter between DDS
+ VPN (green dotted line for best effort, purple for reliable) and MQTT (blue
dotted line for QoS =0, red for QoS = 2).

In order to evaluate DDS communication performance, a
comparison similar to [26] was made in terms of latency and
jitter between MQTT and the proposed solution (DDS + VPN).
MQTT was configured for two different levels of message delivery (QoS = 0 and QoS = 2). The first level considers that
the publisher just sends the sample to the subscriber, while in
the second the publisher ensures that the sample reaches its destination and only does it once. On the other hand, for DDS a
similar behavior is simulated by the ReliabilityQoSPolicy. The
results shown in Fig. 5 evidence a significant better performance
of DDS for data rate transfers over 1000 samples, even defining
a VPN network where traffic is encrypted and there is a greater
computational burden.
The wide range of functions and DDS events allows a greater
control of communications on both ends. This results in an increase in the robustness of the platform and provides greater
security and confidence to the patient. Similarly, the decentralized parameterization in the publisher and subscriber ends,
avoiding an intermediary broker, provides considerable advantages in terms of system scalability. The authors consider these
factors as decisive for the choice of DDS as a communication middleware platform in eNefro in detriment of MQTT.
This result strengthens the consideration of DDS over MQTT
not only as an AMS, but for incoming paradigms of personalized e-Health that may demand progressively more data to
be exchanged for an enhanced patient monitoring experience.
Besides, DDS incorporates mechanisms for the easy storage in
secondary memory through the policy DurabilityQoSPolicy and

1802

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

its value PERSISTENT_DURABILITY_QOS, which stores the
published samples in XML files. Finally, given the flexible nature of the topics in DDS [29] and its ability to add or delete
new fields, it is allowed a good integration of data in NoSQL
databases, where the schema is not static, thus easing further
analysis through techniques like data mining.
Two nodes were used for the test: a client workstation serving as a publisher and a server taking the role of subscriber.
The client station was based on an Intel it Core 2 Duo processor
2.26 GHz CPU with 3 GB of RAM and Windows XP operating system, while the server was a PowerEdge 2900 with Intel
Xeon CPU 2.66 GHz processor and GNU/Linux Ubuntu 13.10amd64 operating system. Both computers were connected to a
LAN with a bit rate of 100 Mb/s. Latency results were obtained
by considering the time measured at the subscriber application,
taking the delivery of the first sample sent by the publisher as
start time. Jitter outcomes were obtained through the analysis of
sample latencies independently, and then processing the variation in delays for each sample.
Below it is analyzed how the different values of QoS policies
have been parameterized for the monitoring (MM) and alarm
modes (AM) considered. The policy configuration is the same
in the DataReader and the DataWriter.
1) Reliability: The loss of a published sample is acceptable
in the MM (BEST_EFFORT). Instead, for the AM, the
loss of a sample is not tolerable and therefore the data
should be sent back (RELIABLE).
2) History and Durability: In the MM only the last stored
sample (KEEP_LAST) remains for active subscribers
(VOLATILE), while for the AM all published samples
(KEEP_ALL) are stored for active subscribers and late
joiners subscribers (PERSISTENT)
3) Deadline: This policy is not set in the AM (value is set
to zero). For the MM, it is considered a value higher than
zero, regarding the monitoring type.
4) TimeBasedFilter: This policy is set, for the MM, according
to the needs of the subscriber, while for the AM, the policy
is omitted since it is expected to receive all samples.
5) TransportPriority: For the MM, zero is set to the lowest
priority level, while for the AM the value is higher than
zero, taking into account the priority of the alarm type.
6) Lifespan: For the MM, the value of lifespan is zero since
it is considered that samples do not expire and they only
disappear when new published samples appear. Regarding
the AM, the lifespan is configured according to the type
of alarm.
D. Security and Privacy
Security of information and communication in DDS is
currently being standardized by the OMG [30]. Some DDS
providers have taken advantage to propose privative solutions
in the meantime, which add security and privacy mechanisms.
Alternatively, the eNefro system provides encryption communications at the network layer using OpenVPN, which provides the
SSL/TLS (secure sockets layer/transport layer security) cryptographic protocols using certificates and RSA (Rivest, Shamir

y Adleman) keys. Moreover, the communication between the
different scenarios considered is restricted by the firewall settings on the server. Thus, the security policy is centralized, the
same way as the net-centric security model that is supported by
DDS [31].
Risks of eNefro platform are mainly due to network connection failure of any of the elements involved. However, the
disconnection of patient or professional applications is immediately noticed by the VPN server, acting accordingly. On the
other hand, the risk of crash of a VPN server is uncommon,
and it has been addressed by adding new server redundancy,
which only requires a quick configuration independent of technology and potential future changes of eNefro. Besides, the
recommendations of current standards, like IEC 62304, have
been followed to address safety and risks that may appear when
developing medical software. Finally, in any case, patient safety
is assured by a medical staff on call who can maintain a direct
phone contact with the patient at any time.
Regarding privacy of the data exchanged, at middleware level,
two different DDS domains have been established in order to
add greater granularity of access to data among the different
actors involved. The first domain, comprising nephrologists and
patients, considers only the DDS topics related to clinical variables, while the second domain, which includes suppliers, encompasses topics of technical variables. Thus, it is achieved an
increased isolation of information that can be accessed by different actors. Besides, for point-to-point communications, DDS
proposes the use of partitions, which are defined by a simple
string text, so that publishers and subscribers can communicate
with each other only when they establish the same partition on
their QoS policy. For instance, these partitions are used when
a patient needs to communicate directly and exclusively with
his/her particular nephrologist, or vice versa. For this purpose,
each actor in eNefro is uniquely identified by an ID, whose value
is used for the establishment of the partition by the publisher
application.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper studies the feasibility of a distributed approach
for the management of alarms related to the monitoring of CKD
patients within the eNefro project. For this purpose and from the
methodological point of view, alarms and prioritization issues
are addressed methodologically according to the definitions provided by the ISO IEC/CD 60601. Besides, from a technological
perspective, the approach is based on the publisher/subscriber
model and developed according to the DDS specification. This
double perspective paves the way for a proper management of
the HD alarms described in eNefro.
The proof of concept proposed defines the most common
actors (carer/nurse, nephrologist, and supplier) and scenarios
(home, hospital, and day hospital) for HD, which pertain to
the so-called DDS domain. This way, the analysis demonstrates
the potential of DDS as a communication infrastructure for the
personalization and prioritization of alarms and the optimal delivery of information, regarding decoupled distributed systems,
like eNefro. These requirements are met thanks to the features

ESTUDILLO-VALDERRAMA et al.: DISTRIBUTED APPROACH TO ALARM MANAGEMENT IN CKD

of DDS in terms of: automatic discovery of information, information filtering, real-time support, and a rich set of QoS
policies that enhance the predictability of information delivery.
To this end, the paper has analyzed the advantages of DDS for
a representative case of use: domiciliary HD.
The next steps of the eNefro project will consider more complex scenarios that include not only the variables shown for the
detection of HD alarms, but any other information relevant to
improve patients quality of life. To this, it is added the potential of the information to be exported to the electronic health
record, thus ensuring interoperability and integration of data
within healthcare infrastructures. At this point, it is also intended to study the storage of eNefro data in NoSQL databases.
Therefore, the work presented here is the first step toward the
development of a comprehensive architecture. Thus, the benefits
of DDS in terms of real-time performance, as well as its independence of the platform or the programming language used,
granted by the DDS standard, will lead to future developments
likely to be published. Another line of future research of this
paper aims to address the security of eNefro, once OMG efforts have been materialized, as a prior step for the clinical and
technical validation of the platform, and the assessment of its
cost-effectiveness. Finally, the authors plan to free the code of
eNefro applications for the scientific community after the finalization of the validation stage of the project, during the next
year and under the Lesser General Public License due to the use
of both free and privative software. Meanwhile, they encourage
following the official link of the project at [32].
REFERENCES
[1] T. E. Foko, N. Dlodlo, and L. Montsi, “An integrated smart system for
ambient-assisted living,” in Proc. 6th Conf. Internet Things Smart Spaces,
St. Petersburg, Russia, vol. 8121, 2013.
[2] C. Musso, J. Aguilera, C. Otero, M. Vilas, D. Luna, and F. G. B. de
Quirós, “Informatic nephrology,” Int. Urol. Nephrol., vol. 45, no. 4,
pp. 1033–1038, 2013.
[3] J. Yee, M. D. Faber, and S. S. Soman, “Chronic kidney disease: Changing the mean by changing the mien,” in Great Health Care, J. T.
Harrington and E. D. Newman, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012,
pp. 143–157.
[4] V. Saliba, H. Legido-Quigley, R. Hallik, A. Aaviksoo, J. Car, and
M. McKee, “Telemedicine across borders: A systematic review of factors that hinder or support implementation,” Int. J. Med. Inf., vol. 81, no.
12, pp. 793–809, 2012.
[5] J. Mirkovic, “Utilizing emerging technologies to promote more efficient
face-to-face patient–clinician communication,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput., 2013, pp. 1393–1396.
[6] (2014, Mar. 3). “Microsoft powerpoint—Complications of dialysis.ppt [compatibility mode] - Complications_dialysis-12–09-(1).aspx”
[Online]. Available: http://www.esrdnet5.org/Files/Education/MeetingsPresentations/Complications_Dialysis-12-09-(1).aspx
[7] T. Mottes, T. Owens, M. Niedner, J. Juno, T. P. Shanley, and M. Heung,
“Improving delivery of continuous renal replacement therapy: Impact of
a simulation-based educational intervention,” Pediatric Crit. Care Med.,
vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 747–754, Oct. 2013.
[8] C. Ronco and M. H. Rosner, Hemodialysis: New Methods and Future
Technology. Basel, Switzerland: Karger Med. Sci. Publishers, 2011.
[9] (2014, May 27). 2014 Alarm notification models—alarm_
notification_models.pdf [Online]. Available:https://www.ecri.org/Forms/
Documents/Alarm_Safety_Resources/Alarm_Notification_Models.pdf
[10] (2014, May 28). 2014 Pulse+IT magazine - February 2014 [Online]. Available: http://issuu.com/pulseitmagazine/docs/pulseit_february
2014/56
[11] “Alarms pose challenges to healthcare facilities,” Biomed. Instrum.
Technol., no. Suppl 5, 2011. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21599472

1803

[12] M. Cvach, “Monitor alarm fatigue: An integrative review,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 268–277, 2012.
[13] S. Oh, J.-H. Kim, and G. Fox, “Real-time performance analysis for publish/subscribe systems,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 318–323, Mar. 2010.
[14] OMG (2007). “OMG data-distribution service Ffor real-time systems
(DDS). v1.2” technical report [Online]. Available: http://www.omg.org/
spec/DDS/1.2/
[15] A. Hakiri, P. Berthou, A. Gokhale, D. C. Schmidt, and T. Gayraud, “Supporting end-to-end quality of service properties in OMG data distribution
service publish/subscribe middleware over wide area networks,” J. Syst.
Softw., vol. 86, no. 10, pp. 2574–2593, 2013.
[16] W. R. Otte, A. Gokhale, D. C. Schmidt, and J. Willemsen, “Infrastructure
for component-based DDS application development,” SIGPLAN Notices,
vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 53–62, Oct. 2011.
[17] R. Haoli and G. Yongming, “A study on the distributed real-time system
middleware based on the DDS,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Modern Comput. Sci.
Appl., Berlin, Germany, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[18] OMG (2008). “Real-time publish-subscribe (RTPS) wire protocol DDS
interoperability wire protocol specification.v2.1” technical. rep.ort [Online]. Available: http://www.omg.org/spec/DDSI/2.1/
[19] PI11/00111—Adaptive Modular Architecture for the Comprehensive
Telecare of the Kidney Patient. FIS, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
2012–2014.
[20] M. A. Estudillo-Valderrama, A. Talaminos-Barroso, L. M. Roa, D.
Naranjo-Hernández, and L. J. Reina-Tosina, “A distributed middleware
for the assistance on the prevention of peritonitis in CKD,” in Proc. 13th
Mediterranean Conf. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 41, 2013, pp. 1813–
1816.
[21] P. de Toledo, S. Jiménez, F. del Pozo, J. Roca, A. Alonso, and C. Hernandez, “Telemedicine experience for chronic care in COPD,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 567–573, Jul. 2006.
[22] (2014, May 27). “Incidents and risks in renal units results from the
renal association patient safety project - RA-patient-safety.pdf” [Online]. Available: http://www.jbenj.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/RApatient-safety.pdf
[23] (2014, Mar. 11). ISO: IEC/CD 60601-1-8. [Online]. Available:
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?
csnumber = 61754
[24] (2013, Nov. 27). “MQ telemetry transport (MQTT) V3.1 protocol
specification” [Online]. Available: http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/
webservices/library/ws-mqtt/index.html
[25] (2013, Nov. 27) “Comparison of MQTT and DDS as M2M
protocols for the internet of things” [Online]. Available:
http://www.slideshare.net/RealTimeInnovations/comparison-of-mqttand-dds-as-m2m-protocols-for-the-internet-of-things
[26] (2013, Nov. 27). “Messaging technologies—A comparison between
DDS, AMQT, MQTT, JMS and REST. prismtech” [Online]. Available: http://www.prismtech.com/sites/default/files/documents/Messaging
Comparsion_190913.pdf
[27] P. Fairbrother, J. Ure, J. Hanley, L. McCloughan, M. Denvir, A.
Sheikh, B. McKinstry, and Telescot programme team, “Telemonitoring for chronic heart failure: The views of patients and healthcare
professionals—A qualitative study,” J. Clin. Nursing, vol. 23, nos. 1/2,
pp. 132–144, 2014.
[28] J. M. Lopez-Vega, J. Povedano-Molina, G. Pardo-Castellote, and
J. M. Lopez-Soler, “A content-aware bridging service for publish/subscribe environments,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 108–124,
2013.
[29] (2014, 27 May) “Extensible and dynamic topic types for DDS
- x-types_ptc_11-03-11.pdf” [Online]. Available: http://portals.omg.
org/dds/sites/default/files/x-types_ptc_11-03-11.pdf
[30] J. F. Goncalves, F. J. da Silva e Silva, R. O. Vasconcelos, G. L. B. Baptista,
and M. Endler, “A security infrastructure for massive mobile data distribution,” in Proc. 11th ACM Int. Symp. Mobility Manage. Wireless Access,
New York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 41–50.
[31] M. B. Amin, W. A. Khan, A. A. Awan, and S. Lee, “Intercloud message
exchange middleware,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Inf. Manage.
Commun., New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 79:1–79:7.
[32] (2014, May 27). “ENEFRO tutorials” [Online]. Available:
http://gibserv.us.es/enefrotutoriales/

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

