2930

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

High-Resolution 3-D T1∗-Mapping and Quantitative
Image Analysis of GRAY ZONE in Chronic Fibrosis
Mihaela Pop ∗ , Venkat Ramanan, Franklin Yang, Li Zhang, Susan Newbigging, Nilesh R. Ghugre,
and Graham A. Wright

Abstract—The substrate of potentially lethal cardiac arrhythmias often resides in the gray zone (GZ), a mixture of viable myocytes and collagen strands found between healthy myocardium
and infarct core (IC). The specific aims of this paper are to demonstrate correspondence between regions delineated in T1∗ (apparent
T1 ) maps and tissue characteristics seen in histopathology and
to determine the MR imaging resolution needed to adequately
identify GZ-associated substrate in chronic infarct. For this, a
novel 3-D multicontrast late enhancement (MCLE) MR method
was used to image ex vivo swine hearts with chronic infarction,
at high resolution (0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 mm). Pixel-wise classified
tissue maps were calculated using steady-state and T1 ∗ images as
input to a fuzzy-clustering algorithm. Quantitative histology based
on collagen stains was performed in n = 10 selected slabs and
showed very good correlations between histologically-determined
areas of heterogeneous and dense fibrosis, and the corresponding GZ (R2 = 0.96) and IC (R2 = 0.97) in tissue classified
maps. Furthermore, in n = 24 slabs, we performed volumetric
measurements of GZ and IC, at the original and decreased image resolutions. Our results demonstrated that the IC volume remained relatively unchanged across all resolutions, whereas the
GZ volume progressively increased with diminished image resolution, with changes reaching significance at 1 × 1 × 5 mm resolution (p < 0.05) but not at 1 × 1 × 2.5 mm, suggesting that this
resolution may be sufficient to adequately identify the GZ from
MCLE images, enabling an effective MR probing of remodeled
myocardium in late infarct. Future work will focus on translating
these findings to optimizing the current in vivo MCLE imaging of
the GZ.
Index Terms—Cardiac MRI, fibrosis, gray zone (GZ), image
analysis, quantitative T1 maps.

Manuscript received April 14, 2014; revised June 12, 2014; accepted June 27,
2014. Date of publication July 8, 2014; date of current version November 18,
2014. This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
under Grant MOP93531 and a combined Sunnybrook Research Institute and
Medical Biophysics summer student award. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ M. Pop is with the Physical Sciences Platform, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON
M4N 3M5 Canada (e-mail: mpop@sri.utoronto.ca).
V. Ramanan is with the Physical Sciences Platform, Sunnybrook Research
Institute, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5 Canada (e-mail: venkat@sri.utoronto.ca).
F. Yang was with the Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5 Canada (e-mail: franklin.yang@hotmail.ca).
N. R. Ghugre, L. Zhang, and G. A. Wright are with the Sunnybrook Research Institute, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5 Canada (e-mail: nghugre@sri.utoronto.ca;
lizhang@sri.utoronto.ca; gawright@sri.utoronto.ca).
S. Newbigging is with the Centre for Modelling of Human Disease—
Pathology Core, Toronto Centre for Phenogenomics, Toronto, ON M5T 3H7
Canada (e-mail: newbigging@lunenfeld.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2336593

I. INTRODUCTION
RI is a powerful noninvasive imaging tool used to assess,
with exquisite resolution, the structure and function of
the myocardium with structural disease [1], which is the main
cause of sudden cardiac death [2]. The gold standard clinical
method to identify the myocardial viability in ischemic hearts
with structural disease (e.g., chronic infarct), is late gadoliniumenhanced (LGE) MR imaging, which is based on inversionrecovery gradient echo (IR-GRE) sequences [3]. However, the
main challenges are: 1) the limited spatial resolution of such
images (e.g., 8–10 mm MR slice thickness); and 2) accurate
discrimination between the healthy myocardium, infarct core
(IC) (i.e., the scar area where dense collagen has replaced dead
myocytes) and ischemic peri-infarct (i.e., a mixture of viable
myocytes and collagen strands) [4]. The latter is located at the
interface between healthy tissue and IC, forming channels (anywhere between 1 mm and a few cm in diameter [5]), through
which abnormal electrical waves can propagate and trigger arrhythmias [6], [7]. Recent ex vivo MR studies performed in
infarcted rat and porcine hearts showed that LGE imaging is
able to identify collagenous fibrosis. Qualitatively, these studies
confirmed against histology that the mixed composition of the
peri-infarct gives a gray appearance in the contrast-enhanced
MR images, and is therefore referred to as the gray zone (GZ).
These studies also showed that as the MR voxel size increases
substantially, the partial volume effect impacts significantly the
accurate assessment of GZ [8], [9] and that the GZ volume
changes over time postinfarction [10].
Several quantitative imaging methods based on probing the
intrinsic MR properties of myocardium, such as the T1 relaxation time constant, have addressed some limitations of the conventional LGE imaging of fibrosis and demonstrated superiority
in detection of subtle lesions [11], [12]. Most of these 2-D and
3-D T1 -based methods employ the acquisition of a sequence of
T1 -weighted images, followed by the calculation of pixel-bypixel parametric T1 maps from the MR signal recovery in each
pixel [11], [13]. In such maps, the focal fibrosis (or even subtle
diffuse fibrosis), healthy tissue, and blood areas can be differentiated based on the T1 values [14]. Moreover, a recent feasibility study in patients with prior infarction suggested that the
GZ could be identified in pre/post contrast T1 maps; however,
these MR images were acquired at 1.8 × 1.8 × 8 mm resolution and were categorized using cut-off thresholding methods,
which vary with the SNR of manually selected ROIs in the
remote myocardium [15].
Meanwhile, efforts in our group have resulted in the development of a 2-D multicontrast late enhancement (MCLE) pulse

M

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

POP et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION 3-D T1 ∗ -MAPPING AND QUANTITATIVE IMAGE ANALYSIS OF GRAY ZONE IN CHRONIC FIBROSIS

sequence with a balanced steady-state free precession (b-SSFP)
readout [16] which allows the acquisition of images of higher
quality than the IR-GRE methods, and the extraction of pixelby-pixel T1 ∗ maps. Note that the observed T1 ∗ is usually shorter
than the intrinsic T1 relaxation time due to the nature of the bSSFP measurement in which the magnetization recovers to a
steady-state (SS) value. Here, T1 ∗ depends on the longitudinal
relaxation T1 , the transverse relaxation T2 , and the flip angle α
(i.e., the angle to which the net magnetization is tipped relative
to the direction of main magnetic field after the application of an
RF excitation pulse at Larmor frequency), as per the following
(1) [17]:

−1
1
1
2 α
2 α
∗
+
cos
sin
.
(1)
T1 =
T1
2
T2
2
Moreover, using a robust fuzzy-logic clustering scheme based
on the steady state (SS) and T1 ∗ pixel-wise maps (calculated
from MCLE images), we demonstrated that the identification
of IC and ischemic GZ is superior to the simpler classification
schemes based on thresholding algorithms [such as those employing FWHM and standard deviation (SD) criteria applied to
IR-GRE images] [18]. Notably, those clinical 2-D MCLE images were acquired at a spatial resolution of 1.6 × 1.6 × 8 mm,
which could have overestimated the real volumes of GZ and IC.
Furthermore, we recently demonstrated in a preclinical swine
model of chronic infarction that we can obtain 2-D MCLE images of 5 mm slices thickness and that the ischemic GZ has
abnormal bipolar voltages [19]. However, a quantitative validation of the classification of tissue heterogeneities (i.e., GZ and
IC) determined by SS-T1 ∗ maps has yet to be performed against
histopathology. Furthermore, consideration must be given to the
adequate spatial imaging resolution needed to delineate heterogeneous infarct areas.
The current study addressed these issues by investigating: 1)
the correspondence between areas of GZ and IC calculated in
SS-T1 ∗ maps and those delineated by histopathology; and 2) the
effect of partial volume averaging on the identification of GZ
and IC. For this, we developed a 3-D MCLE sequence and performed high-resolution MR imaging in explanted swine hearts
with chronic infarction. We first validated the extent of GZ and
IC determined from these MCLE images against their corresponding areas determined from collagen-specific histological
stains. We then progressively decreased the image resolution
from the original 0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 to 1 × 1 × 5 mm (which we
have shown is achievable in vivo, [19]), and studied the impact
of voxel size on the GZ and IC volumes calculated from the classified tissue maps at four. Such a study has not been performed
to the best of our knowledge, and represents a key to validating
the classification of heterogeneous fibrosis in SS-T1 ∗ maps and
to refining the current in vivo MCLE imaging strategies that
will improve the clinical diagnostic value of MR investigations
in patients with prior infarction.
II. METHODS
A. Infarct Generation, MR Imaging, and Histopathology
Myocardial infarction was created in five juvenile swine (20–
25 kg) by a 90-min balloon occlusion of either the left anterior

2931

Fig. 1. Description of the ex vivo MCLE imaging and MR signal analysis:
(a) simplified diagram of the segmented 3-D MCLE pulse sequence (Inv =
inversionpulse); (b) exemplary MCLE images acquired at four inversion times,
TI (see text for more details), where the infarcted area has an elevated SI, as
indicated by the arrow; and (c) MR signal recovery curves for infarct and healthy
areas (up), along with the calculated T1∗ map over the entire LV (bottom).

descending (LAD) artery (n = 3 swine) or of the left circumflex
(LCX) artery (n = 2 swine), followed by reper-fusion as confirmed by angiography using an iodinated contrast agent. For Xray fluoroscopy, we used an OEC 9800 system, GE Healthcare,
Milwaukee, WI). This procedure allowed us to create heterogeneous infarcts with ischemic GZ, as we reported in our other
studies [19], [20]. All surgical procedures were approved by
the Animal Care Committee of Sunnybrook Research Institute
(Toronto, ON, Canada). The animals were allowed to heal for
5–6 weeks.
In each animal, a bolus of Gd-DTPA contrast agent was injected i.v. 15 min prior to sacrifice. Each heart was quickly
explanted after euthanasia and placed in a Plexiglas box filled
with Fluorinert to avoid susceptibility artifacts at the air–heart
interface during imaging. The phantom was placed in an eightchannel head coil and a GE 1.5T Signa Excite scanner was used
for imaging, as in a previous MR study [20].
For high-resolution late enhancement imaging, we developed
a 3-D MCLE sequence with a b-SSFP readout played out in a
segmented fashion, each segment acquiring an entire 3-D volume. A total of n = 12–16 segments (with eight views per segment) were acquired after an inversion pulse (Inv) [see Fig. 1(a)].
A recovery time followed the segments, where the b-SSFP RF
pulses were played out to allow the recovery of magnetization to a SS. The MR parameters included: TR = 4.26 ms,
ﬂip angle = 45◦ , and variable inversion times, TI (from 0 to
500 ms). Other acquisition parameters were: FOV = 16 cm, a
256 × 256 matrix (yielding an approximate 0.62 × 0.62 mm inplane resolution), and a slice thickness of 1.25 mm. This high
spatial resolution was selected to be slightly smaller than the
minimum size of slow-conduction channels known to produce
reentrant waves associated with clinically relevant ventricular
arrhythmias [5]. Approximately 170 slices per heart were obtained (depending on the heart size), which resulted in an average scan time of 40 min, given the 12–16 images (note that
about 20–25 min were needed to cover the infarct volume).
At the completion of the MR imaging study, each heart was
gently placed in a formalin jar and preserved for 3–4 days. A
total of n = 10 tissue slabs were cut to coincide with the shortaxis MR imaging views and prepared for histological stains that

2932

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

indicate the presence of fibrosis, such as Masson Trichrome
(MT) and Picrosirius Red (PR). All stained slides (4-μm thickness) were scanned with a TISSUEscopeTM 4000 confocal
system (Huron Technologies International Inc.) and saved as
multiresolution digital images. The MT stain was used to qualitatively evaluate the extent of collagen. The PR stain was used
to delineate the healthy myocardium and fibrosis (GZ and IC)
based on the collagen content within a sliding box of 0.6 ×
0.6 mm size (to match the MRI spatial resolution), using the
grading system proposed in [20]. Briefly, we defined three
grades of fibrosis corresponding to the three tissue categories:
F0 for healthy tissue (<20% fibrosis, no or mild), F1 for GZ
(20–70% fibrosis, moderate), and F2 for IC (70% fibrosis,
severe). The chronic lesions were manually delineated by an
expert, who categorized them into two zones: GZ and IC, based
on scoring fibrosis severity. All digital PR images were analyzed
with the Aperio ImageScope software (Vista, CA) at a 10–15X
magnification (of original scans). For each PR slide, the GZ and
IC areas were then calculated and reported relative to the total
area of the left ventricle (LV).
B. MCLE Image Analysis and Tissue Classification
Similar to our in vivo clinical and animal studies [16], [19], the
acquired MCLE images were used to extract the signal intensity
(SI) recovery curve as a function of time for each pixel within
the LV, as per the equation:
SI(t) = SS · [1 − 2exp( − t/T1 ∗ )]

(2)

where SS denotes the steady-state of the signal recovery.
Then, the calculated T1 ∗ maps along with the pixel-wise SS
maps were further used to classify tissue into three categories:
healthy, GZ, and IC areas. For this, we adapted a previously
developed fuzzy c-means (FCM) clustering scheme [18] and
we initialized the tissue categorization into two clusters: infarct
and healthy tissue (since the cavity of LV was not filled with
blood as in the in vivo cases).
The FCM algorithm was based on the Gustafson–Kessel (GK)
clustering method [21], [22], a powerful tool used in system
identification and in particular classification problems where
a local adjustment of the distance metric to the geometrical
shape of the cluster(s) is desired. The main feature of the GK
scheme was the estimation of the cluster covariance matrix and
the distance-inducing matrix, which was done by iteratively
optimizing an objective FCM-type of function:
J (Z; U, V, {Ai }) =

K 
N


2
(uik )m Dik
Ai

(3)

i=1 k =1

where: Ai defines the metric of each fuzzy cluster and is a local
norm-inducing positive matrix used as an optimization variable
in the function described previously; U = [uik ] ∈ [0, 1]K xN is a
partition matrix of the dataset Z ∈ n xN , V = [v1 , v2 , . . . , vK ],
vi ∈ n is a K-tuple of the cluster prototypes [23], [24]. Here,
uik is the probability of the k-th data vector belonging to the i-th
prototype (i.e., cluster); K is the number of clusters (K = 3 in
our case); N is the number of pixels in each segmented mask, that
is the sum of all healthy, GZ and IC pixels [e.g., N = 125674

for the LV mask in Fig. 2(b)], and k  [1, N]. The dimension of
each data vector is given by n, the number of the images used
for T1 ∗ fitting; here, n = 10 − 14, as we discarded the first two
MCLE images (segments) due to pulse preparation artifacts.
The weighting exponent m  [1, ∞) is a scalar parameter that
tunes the ‘fuzziness’ of (here, m = 2).
For our purposes, we preferred the GK algorithm to the regular FCM, because of its capability to deal with clusters of
different geometrical shape and point prototypes (i.e., centers)
of the same dataset, through the distance norm Dik A i :
2
T
Dik
A i = (zk − vi ) Ai (zk − vi ).

(4)

The GK scheme was implemented using the Fuzzy-logic
MATLAB toolbox. For tissue classification, we first determined
the probability of each pixel belonging to each cluster based
on the distance metric derived from an input SS-T1∗ scatter
plot. Pixels with probabilities greater than 75% of belonging to
infarct or healthy myocardium were classified either as IC or
as healthy myocardium, respectively. GZ pixels had a heterogeneous mixture of viable and dead myocytes, and thus had a
significant probability for belonging to both infarct and healthy
myocardium clusters. Therefore, the pixels with less than a 75%
probability of belonging to one of the IC or healthy tissue clusters but greater than 25% probability for belonging to the other
cluster, were categorized as GZ pixels.
The location and extent of GZ and IC obtained in the tissue
classification SS-T1∗ maps at this original image resolution,
were compared qualitatively against the Masson Trichrome stain
and quantitatively using area measured in Picrosirius Red stains,
as described in Section II-A.
Furthermore, to evaluate the impact of partial volume averaging on the GZ and IC volumes, we resampled the high resolution images (i.e., 0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 mm) using an in-house
script written in MATLAB. For this, we selected a total of
24 slabs (4–6 slabs per heart, but not all slabs were consecutive). Each slab contained four consecutive high resolution 3-D
MCLE images which were further resampled to obtain images
of progressively decreased spatial image resolution (i.e., we first
decreased the in-plane spatial resolution to 1 × 1 mm, and then
increased the slice thickness to 2.5 and 5 mm, respectively). We
then derived parametric SS-T1 ∗ maps and performed tissue categorization for all resampled slabs. A total of 264 SS-T1 ∗ maps
were analyzed using the fuzzy-logic scheme (i.e., 24 × 4 images at highest resolution, 24 × 4 images at 1 × 1 × 1.25-mm
resolution, 24 × 2 images at 1 × 1 × 1.5-mm resolution and
24 images at 1 × 1 × 5-mm resolution). Subsequently, the GZ
and IC volumes (mm3 ) were calculated for each slab, enabling
a quantitative comparison between the GZ and IC volumes calculated at different spatial resolutions relative to the original
highest resolution image.
C. Statistical Analysis
For statistical analysis, all data were presented as mean ±
standard deviation (SD). Significance tests were performed
using a paired two-tail Student’s t-test and the results were
considered statistically significant for values with P < 0.05

POP et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION 3-D T1 ∗ -MAPPING AND QUANTITATIVE IMAGE ANALYSIS OF GRAY ZONE IN CHRONIC FIBROSIS

2933

Fig. 2. Representative results obtained in a swine heart with an LCX-infarct: (a) SS map (up) and T1 ∗ map (bottom) at the highest spatial resolution; (b) 2-D
scatter plot from fuzzy-logic clustering of pixels (up) and resulting SS-T1 ∗ tissue classification map (bottom) with IC and healthy areas color-matched to the
histology stain and GZ highlighted in yellow; (c) histopathology slide (Masson Trichrome stain) with the viable myocardial tissue staining magenta and collagenous
fibrosis in cyan-green (bottom), along with a magnified area (up) corresponding to the white square indicated in the classified SS-T1 ∗ map; and (d) Picrosirius Red
slide with fibrosis staining red, and the magnified area as in (c), with cyan contours delineating the IC and yellow contours delineating the GZ.

(http://www.vassarstats.net/). The calculation of correlation coefficients and associated linear fittings were performed in Excel.
The bias in the measurements was determined by the Bland–
Altman analysis [25] using MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA,
USA).
III. RESULTS
Example of short-axis MCLE images and associated MR signal analysis obtained in one heart are included in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(b)
shows four MCLE images (out of twelve) obtained at different
inversion times, TI (ms), in one pig. Notably, the first MCLE image shown has an MR null signal in the healthy myocardium and
is followed by images with varying contrast obtained at early
inversion times and the last one at SS. The chronic infarct can
be visualized as the bright area, which has an elevated SI due to
the fast T1 ∗ signal recovery (i.e., a higher relaxation rate caused
by the Gd molecules accumulated within extracellular space of
fibrotic tissue). Fig. 1(c) shows the recovery curves of the MR
signal from regions of interest selected from the infarcted area
and healthy tissue (top), along with the corresponding pixelby-pixel parametric T1 ∗ map calculated over the LV (bottom),
using (2). Notably, in the fitting obtained in Fig. 1(c), the first TI
appears to be 50 ms (instead of 0 ms), this was due to the b-SSFP
pulse preparation prior to the first segment. The pulse polarity
was not inverted and we reconstructed the images using only
the magnitude of the dicom images, also, our MCLE sequence
is not phase-sensitive.
Fig. 2 illustrates a qualitative comparison between the GZ and
IC areas identified in the high resolution MCLE MR images and
the areas fibrosis in the histopathology image in a heart with the
infarction created in the LCX territory (note: only a cropped LV
segment is shown). Fig. 2(a) shows the SS image (top) and the
corresponding T1 ∗ map (bottom). The SS-T1 ∗ scatter plot of the
resulting three clusters (top), along with the calculated parametric pixel-wise tissue map (bottom) are presented in Fig. 2(b),

color-coded to match the tissue staining colors in the histological MT stain. Fig. 2(c) (bottom) demonstrates the extent of the
focal fibrosis, a hallmark of the chronic infarction where dead
myocytes were replaced by collagen as indicated by the cyangreen color in the MT stain, and the healthy myocytes staining
dark magenta in Fig. 2(b) and (c). Alongside, we also included a
magnified area from the MT stain (see Fig. 2(c), top) with similar topographical location in the SS and T1 ∗ maps, indicated by
the white rectangles in Fig. 2(b). Qualitatively, we observed a
very good match between the location and extent of the tissue
categorized into healthy myocardium, GZ and IC in the SS-T1 ∗
maps and in the corresponding PR images. Correspondingly,
Fig. 2(d) shows the GZ (in yellow) and IC (cyan) contours, delineated based on collagen content in the PR slide (note: fibrosis
stains red).
Figs. 3 and 4 show results from the quantitative comparison
between the areas of GZ and IC (calculated relative to the total
LV area) obtained from the high-resolution MCLE images versus those delineated in the histopathology PR stains. Regression
analysis and linear fitting [see Figs. 3(a) and 4(a)] yielded very
good correlations, with R2 = 0.96 (goodness of fit) for GZ areas and R2 = 0.97 for IC areas, respectively, calculated from
classified SS-T1 ∗ maps versus histologically determined areas
of fibrosis. Moreover, small absolute differences and no bias
were detected between these measurements as demonstrated by
the plot of residual errors [see Figs. 3(b) and 4(b)] and the
Bland–Atman plot [see Figs. 3(c) and 4(c)], respectively.
A schematic diagram of the image resampling algorithm is
shown in Fig. 5(a), whereas Fig. 5(b) shows examples from
tissue classification at four spatial resolutions (all from the same
cropped area highlighted by the blue square in the T1 ∗ map, in
Fig. 1(c), bottom). Overall, we qualitatively observed that as
the spatial resolution decreased the amount of GZ increased,
whereas the IC remained relatively unchanged.
The quantitative comparison between the GZ and IC volumes calculated from the SS-T1 ∗ maps at different spatial

2934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 3. Quantitative comparison between% GZ areas (relative to LV areas)
determined from MCLE and histopathology images: (a) regression analysis
and linear fit yielding (goodness of fit: R 2 = 0.96); (b) corresponding residual
errors; and (c) Bland–Altman plot (difference versus average) demonstrating no
bias between the GZ areas determined from MCLE images and PR stains.

resolutions, demonstrated the effect of partial volume averaging. Fig. 6 shows a bar plot of these volumes (mm3 ) expressed
as the mean ± SD (over the 24 tissue slabs) at each of the four
different spatial resolutions investigated.
Statistical analysis revealed that: 1) the IC volume did not
vary significantly for different voxel sizes, and 2) the GZ volume progressively increased by decreasing the MR image resolution (e.g., by 25% when comparing the mean GZ volume
at 0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 mm with that at 1 × 1 × 5 mm). Also, this
analysis demonstrated that the GZ volume determined from the
SS-T1 ∗ maps was significantly overestimated at the lowest spatial resolution (P < 0.05), but not at the 1 × 1 × 2.5 mm resolution (P = 0.22, NS) or at the 1 × 1 × 1.25 mm resolution
(P = 0.48, NS).
Fig. 7(a) demonstrates that for the IC volumes, the regression
lines fitted to the 24 data points were very close at all four
resolutions. However, for GZ volumes [see Fig. 7(b)], there was
a significant difference between the linear regression for the
MCLE data resampled at the lowest resolution (i.e., 1 × 1 × 5
mm) and the other fits (P < 0.001). The R2 coefficients for all
these linear fits are given in Table I.
Furthermore, when comparing the volumes calculated at the
lowest and the original resolutions using the mean and the 95%
confidence interval limits of agreement from the Bland–Altman
plots, we observed a negligible bias (25 mm3 ) for the difference in IC volumes [see Fig. 8(a)] and an larger bias (50 mm3 )
for the difference in GZ volumes [see Fig. 8(b)].
∗
Finally, mean T1 values were found to be statistically significant (P < 0.05) between tissue categories: healthy, GZ, and IC.
The results of this statistical analysis (P-values) for the highest
and the lowest resolutions are included in Table II; notably, the
difference between mean T1 ∗ value for a certain tissue category
calculated from the original images and the resampled images,
was not statistically significant (NS).
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 4. Quantitative comparison between% IC areas (relative to LV areas)
determined from MCLE and histopathology images: (a) regression analysis
and linear fit yielding (goodness of fit: R 2 = 0.97); (b) corresponding residual
errors; and (c) Bland–Altman plot (difference versus average) demonstrating no
bias between the IC areas determined from MCLE images and PR stains.

Noninvasive MRI can be used to assess the volume of GZ,
an important diagnostic index that is highly correlated with the
frequency of shocks from ICDs [26], VT inducibility [27], and
mortality [28] in patients with structural heart disease. In this
respect, validating novel MR methods and improving the imaging resolution are two important key challenges in the accurate
identification of heterogeneous fibrosis (i.e., GZ), where the arrhythmia substrate resides. Our study addressed these issues and
the main findings along with the study limitations are discussed
below.
First, this quantitative MR imaging study is the first to demonstrate the correspondence between the extent and severity of fibrosis determined by high resolution T1 -mapping methods and
collagen-sensitive stains, using a large animal model of chronic
infarction that mimicked structural heart disease in postinfarction patients. In the histology stains, we observed peri-infarct
regions with sharp borders between the healthy myocardium
(<20% fibrotic material, predominantly of reactive type) and
IC (>70% fibrotic collagen), as well as areas defined as heterogeneous fibrosis (i.e., with 20–70% collagenous material that

POP et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION 3-D T1 ∗ -MAPPING AND QUANTITATIVE IMAGE ANALYSIS OF GRAY ZONE IN CHRONIC FIBROSIS

2935

Fig. 5. Resampling of 3-D MCLE images and its impact on myocardial tissue classification: (a) flowchart of the resampling of the original 3-D MCLE images
(where each 0.6 × 0.6 × 5-mm slab contained four MCLE images) into lower spatial resolution images (i.e., 1 × 1 mm in-plane resolution and slice thicknesses
of 1.25, 2.5, and 5 mm, respectively); and (b) example of classified SS-T1 ∗ maps at the original and resampled (lower) image resolutions, indicating the three
tissue clusters: GZ (yellow), IC (cyan-green), and healthy myocardium (magenta).

TABLE I
R 2 VALUES (GOODNESS-OF-FIT) FOR THE LINEAR REGRESSIONS BETWEEN
THE IC AND GZ VOLUMES OBTAINED AT RESAMPLED RESOLUTIONS VERSUS
THOSE AT 0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 MM
Image resolution

1 × 1 × 1.25 mm
1 × 1 × 2.5 mm
1 × 1 × 5 mm

Fig. 6. Effect of spatial image resolution on GZ and IC volumes: bar plot of
calculated GZ (grey) and IC (black) volumes (mm3 ) across 24 slabs selected
from all animals, for the original and resampled image resolutions (error bars
represent SD). Notably, the GZ volume was significantly increased only for the
lowest spatial resolution (∗ , P < 0.05).

Fig. 7. Linear fits resulted from the quantitative comparison between areas
(% relative to the LV area) of: (a) IC and (b) GZ, calculated from SS-T1∗ maps
versus those from histopathology images.

R 2 values
IC
0.96
0.93
0.86

GZ
0.86
0.83
0.75

contained reactive and replacement fibrosis, along with islands
of viable bundles). Overall, the location and geometrical pattern
of the tissue classified as GZ and IC in the MR images corresponded very well to the manually delineated areas of fibrosis
(GZ and IC) in the histology stains. In order to achieve the best
match between the location and the GZ/IC areas determined by
histology versus those from MR images, the FCM algorithm did
not eliminate isolated single GZ pixels, which were mostly identified in the peri-infarct areas, in the classified SS-T1 ∗ maps. In
addition, a few patches of GZ pixels encased within the IC were
identified and confirmed by histopathology to being located in
the proximity of surviving blood vessels. Our quantitative analysis showed very good correlations between the areas of GZ
and IC (relative to the total LV area) calculated from the MCLE
images obtained at a 0.6. × 0.6 × 1.2-mm resolution, and the
areas of moderate (F1) and severe (F2) fibrosis defined in the
PR stain and considered as ‘ground truth’. Notably, this image
resolution matches the size of small channels adjacent to or encased into IC, that can form anatomic reentry circuits [5], [29].
The R2 fitting values obtained here (i.e., 0.96 for GZ and 0.97
for IC, respectively) demonstrated the robustness of the MCLE
imaging method in differentiating moderate fibrosis (F1) versus
severe fibrosis (F2). These correlation coefficients were close to
those reported in a similar high-resolution LGE-histology study
(i.e., 0.95 for GZ and 0.96 for IC, respectively), performed ex
vivo in swine hearts with chronic infarction [20]. We acknowledge that a common limitation in both our imaging-histology
studies was that the MR slices were 1.25 mm thick, whereas the
histology slides were 10 μm thick; however, variations in the

2936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON BETWEEN THE T1∗ VALUES (MEAN ± SD, OVER
N = 25 SLABS): 1) FOR EACH TISSUE CATEGORY AT THE ORIGINAL VERSUS
THE LOWEST RESOLUTION (P = NS); AND 2) BETWEEN THE THREE TISSUE
CATEGORIES (P < 0.05)
T1 ∗ values (ms)

Image resolution

0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 mm
1 × 1 × 5 mm

Fig. 8. Bland–Altman analysis: (a) comparison between IC volumes calculated from the SS-T1∗ maps at the highest resolution (0.6 × 0.6 × 1.25 mm)
and the lowest resolution (1 × 1 × 5 mm), and (b) same type of comparison but
for GZ volumes (note that Differences and Averages are in mm3 ).

infarct geometry within 1.25 mm were likely minimal. Notably,
the relatively low SNR at this resolution potentially led to misclassifying the GZ pixels. Moreover, from the sequence point
of view, the MCLE sequence we used in this paper is different
from the IR-SSFP sequence and fitting performed by Schmitt
et al. in [17]. The IR-SSFP method in the referenced paper starts
with an inversion pulse and acquires the recovery using an SSFP
acquisition until the signal reaches the SSFP SS value, then a
delay of about 5 s is introduced to allow the signal to recover
to equilibrium magnetization. MCLE, on the other hand, eliminates this delay. Also, in MCLE, the Inv pulse is applied while
the recovery signal is at the SS SSFP value. Though eliminating
the delay has allowed us to shorten the time for acquiring the
whole 3-D volume, it has meant that the three-paramter fitting
and the analysis method for T1 and T2 quantification used in
[17] cannot be applied directly to MCLE. As a consequence,
we could not calculate T1 and T2 values. Furthermore, since
the inversion pulse is applied when the recovery signal at the
SS value, a two-parameter fit itself is sufficient to describe the
signal evolution and fits the data very well. A three-parameter
fit might yield similar results at the expense of introducing an
extra parameter in the model, but could also affect the GZ/IC
classification.
Second, our parametric pixel-by-pixel SS-T1 ∗ maps were obtained using a fuzzy clustering method, which employed a more
robust classification algorithm compared to the cut-off thresholding methods used to identify GZ by conventional LGE, as
demonstrated in [18]. The lowest T1 ∗ values corresponding to
severe fibrosis in the IC were caused by an increased extracellular space and volume of distribution for the contrast agent.

Healthy

GZ

IC

150.8 ± 51.9
152.2 ± 52.4

119.0 ± 31.9
116.4 ± 32.0

96.4 ± 16.8
97.1 ± 17.6

The intermediate T1 ∗ values in the GZ voxels were due to the
heterogeneous tissue composition in these voxels, where viable
bundles of myocytes were intermingled with collagen strands,
as demonstrated by histopathology. Such structural alterations
caused a higher concentration of Gd molecules in the GZ compared to the healthy areas, shortening the T1 relaxation time,
and consequently, the T1 ∗ values. Overall, the measured T1 ∗
values were within expected ranges, but were smaller than the
T1 ∗ and the postcontrast T1 values measured in vivo using conventional IR-GRE sequences in patients with prior infarction
[16], [30]. This was due to: 1) the nature of the T1 ∗ measurement in the b-SSFP experiment, which includes both T1 and T2
effects, and 2) a higher concentration of the Gd molecules in
the ex vivo case (i.e., resulting in shorter T1 values which can
be maintained for a few hours in the explanted hearts), compared to the in vivo cases where the Gd molecules entrapped
in the infarct area start a slow clearance process (after reaching
the peak at 15–20 min postinjection). It should be noted that
the effective T1 ∗ cut-off thresholds in the GK algorithm were
set to 50 and 220 ms, respectively; pixels with T1 ∗ values out
of this range were eliminated prior to the classification step.
Although we found significant (P < 0.05) differences between
the mean values of T1 ∗ for tissue categories, it should be noted
that the fuzzy clustering algorithm and resulting tissue classification also depended on the SS values of the MR signal. We do
acknowledge that the error in mean T1 ∗ values derived in the
healthy myocardium was relatively high. We attributed this to
the interanimal variability in MR physical parameters, as well
as to the loss of some blood from the heart tissue during the ex
vivo explantation procedure and phantom preparation. Also, the
three LAD-infarcted hearts appeared hypertrophic and to have
a higher collagen content in healthy myocardium.
Third, our results suggested that the amount of GZ was affected by increasing the voxel size, in general agreement with
other previous ex vivo LGE studies [8], [9] which used an intensity threshold-based algorithm (i.e., FWHM) to delineate GZ
but provided no quantitative histological validation. However,
in contra-distinction to our results, these LGE studies found
significant differences between GZ volumes at much smaller
voxel size. This was probably due to the dependence of the
segmentation result on the selection of ROI in the healthy myocardium and a poor SNR obtained in voxels of tens of microns
size [8]. On the other hand, larger voxels have increased SNR
but suffer from partial volume effects. This is particularly evident for tissue zones having sharp boundaries between healthy

POP et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION 3-D T1 ∗ -MAPPING AND QUANTITATIVE IMAGE ANALYSIS OF GRAY ZONE IN CHRONIC FIBROSIS

myocardium and IC, which at higher resolution can be clearly
separated but at lower resolution will have a ‘GZ appearance’
and might be erroneously classified as heterogeneous fibrosis.
The effect of blur on edge localization may be mitigated by
the use of parameter mapping rather than intensity thresholding since parameter thresholds are more likely to correspond
to underlying physical properties (i.e., fraction of collagenous
fibrosis within the volume) uncorrupted by image shading, etc.
Importantly, our results suggested that a 1 × 1 × 2.5 mm resolution might be sufficient to obtain accurate results from SS-T1 ∗
maps, which also means that the 1 × 1 × 5-mm MCLE resolution, previously achieved by us in vivo [19], likely overestimated
the GZ. A slice thickness that is five times larger than the inplane spatial resolution will also likely result in small islands
of viable bundles found entirely within a IC voxel to go undetected. On the other hand, at higher resolutions, there would
be more single/isolated voxels of GZ due to poorer SNR, leading to a larger variability in the parameter maps derived from
the data fitting procedure. However, this effect may be smaller
compared to the partial volume averaging at the interface between IC and healthy tissue. Finally, for all tissue types (i.e.,
healthy, GZ, and IC), the mean T1 ∗ values were not found to be
sensitive to the imaging spatial resolution (P = NS). Similarly,
for a given slice, mean SS values for different tissue types did
not change with resolution. Again, this supports the belief that
parameter maps more specifically reflect underlying physical
tissue attributes. However, the sensitivity to detect thin channels
of GZ (e.g. 1–1.4 mm) will depend on SNR, and thus on spatial
resolution. T1 ∗ in such narrow channels surrounded by IC will
decrease with voxel size until the voxel is classified as IC. Pixel
classification in heterogeneous areas located at the border with
healthy tissue or IC scar, might shift between the two categories
depending on relative volume of each tissue in the pixel. Pixels at sharp boundaries between healthy tissue and dense scar
could be reclassified as GZ as resolution is reduced. The latter is
the most likely cause of increased GZ volume with decreasing
resolution.
Our experimental design advantageously allowed us to investigate the effect of partial volume averaging of GZ and IC of
infarcted tissue under idealized conditions (i.e., isolating the potential artifacts from motion as well as the contribution of blood
in the subendocardial voxels). However, care should be taken
when comparing directly the results from this 3-D ex vivo study
and our previous 2-D in vivo MCLE studies (at 1 × 1 × 5-mm
resolution), because of the differences between the SNR obtained with the eight-channel head coil (here) versus the surface
coil in [19], as well as the differences in image quality between
3-D and 2-D acquisitions. Still, the current results are relevant
to further refining the in vivo MCLE method. Our future efforts
will focus on extending the current 2-D in vivo MCLE acquisition to a 3-D acquisition and on aiming for voxel volumes
of 2.5 mm3 or less. Such spatial resolution [31] was recently
achieved in a 3-D in vivo LGE study in patients with various
structural heart diseases, in whom the potential arrhythmia substrate (identified as GZ in the MR images) was correlated with
abnormal electrical signals. Thus, we will aim to develop MCLE
imaging with an isotropic voxel of 1.35 × 1.35 × 1.35 mm in

2937

size as in [31] (or less), to target a 2.5 mm3 volume, while considering the impact of any associated SNR tradeoffs. However,
we acknowledge that the 3-D MCLE sequence as presented in
the paper, cannot be directly applied to an in vivo setting primarily due to cardiac and respiratory motion. Ongoing efforts
from our group are being focused on modifying this sequence
for in vivo imaging purposes by adding gating and motion compensation as an extension of the current study, which will be
improved by faster reconstruction methods that we are developing using compressed-sensing algorithms [32]. We hypothesize
the in vivo MCLE method will improve the identification of
patients likely to experience appropriate ICD therapy and identification of ablation targets to mitigate VT, and complement
other rapid arrhythmia-insensitive T1-based MR methods [33].
Furthermore, our MCLE maps will be used to build image-based
computer models to predict VT, similar to those we built from
ex vivo diffusion-weighted images [34].
To conclude, this study is the first to demonstrate that
the extent and location of GZ and IC calculated from highresolution 3-D MCLE images, correspond very well with the
histologically-determined heterogeneous and dense fibrosis.
Furthermore, we suggest that a voxel size of 2.5 mm3 is
sufficient to adequately identify GZ in such SS-T1 ∗ maps, enabling an effective MR probing of remodeled peri-infarct areas
where the substrate of arrhythmia resides. Future work will
focus on translating these findings to optimizing the current
in vivo MCLE imaging of the GZ.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Axel, “Physics and technology of cardiovascular MR imaging,” Cardiol.
Clin., vol. 16, pp. 125–133, 1998.
[2] D. P. Zipes, “Epidemiology and mechanisms of sudden cardiac death,”
Can. J. Cardiology, vol. 21, pp. 37A–40A, 2005.
[3] H. Mahrholdt, A. Wagner, and T. A. Holly, “Reproducibility of chronic
infarct size measurement by contrast-enhanced MR imaging,” Circulation,
vol. 106, pp. 2322–2327, 2002.
[4] D. Bello, D. S. Fieno, R. J. Kim, F. S. Pereles, R. Passman, G. Song, A. H.
Kadish, and J. J. Goldberger, “Infarct morphology identifies patients with
substrate for sustained ventricular tachycardia,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol.
45, pp. 1104–1108, 2005.
[5] P. C. Ursell, P. I. Gardner, A. Albala, J. J. Fenoglio, and A. L. Wit,
“Structural and electrophysiological changes in the epicardial zone of
canine myocardial infarcts during infarcts healing,” Circulation Res., vol.
56, pp. 436–451, 1985.
[6] H. L. Estner, M. M. Zviman, D. Herzka, F. Miller, V. Castro, S. Nazarian,
H. Ashikaga, Y. Dori, R. D. Berger, H. Calkins, A. C. Lardo, and H. R.
Halperin, “The critical isthmus sites of ischemic ventricular tachycardia
are in zones of tissue heterogeneity, visualized by MRI,” Heart Rhythm,
vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1942–1949, 2011.
[7] A. Codreanu, F. Odille, E. Aliot, P. Y. Marie, Magnin-I Poull, M. Andronache, D. Mandry, W. Djaballah, D. Régent, J. Felblinger, and C. de
Chillou, “Electroanatomic characterization of post-infarct scars comparison with 3-dimensional myocardial scar reconstruction based on magnetic
resonance imaging,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 52, pp. 839–842, 2008.
[8] E. B. Schelbert, L. Y. Hsu, S. A. Anderson, B. D. Mohanty, S. M. Karim,
P. Kellman, A. H. Aletras, and A. E. Arai, “Late gadolinium-enhancement
cardiac MR identifies post-infarction myocardial fibrosis and the border
zone at the near cellular level in ex vivo rat heart,” Circ. Cardiovasc Imag.,
vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 743–752, 2010.
[9] K. H. Schuleri, M. Centola, R. T. George, L. C. Amado, K. S. Evers, K.
Kitagawa, A. L. Vavere, R. Evers, J. M. Hare, C. Cox, E. R. McVeigh,
J. A. Lima, and A. C. Lardo, “Characterization of peri-infarct zone heterogeneity by contrast-enhanced multidetector computed tomography: a
comparison with MR imaging,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 53, no. 18, pp.
1699–1707, 2009.

2938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

[10] K. H. Schuleri, M. Centola, S. Kristine, K. Evers, A. Zvimam, R. Evers,
J. A. C. Lima, and A. C. Lardo, “Cardiovascular MR characterization of
peri-infarct zone following infarction,” J. Cardiovasc Magn. Res., vol. 14,
2012.
[11] D. R. Messroghli, K. Walters, S. Plein, P. Sparrow, M. G. Friedrich, J. P.
Ridgway, and M. U. Sivananthan, “Myocardial T1 mapping: application
to patients with acute and chronic myocardial infarction,” Magn Reson.
Med., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 34–40, 2007.
[12] K. Chow, J. A. Flewitt, J. Green, J. Pagano, and M. G. Friedrich, “Saturation recovery single-shot acquisition (SASHA) for myocardial T1 mapping,” Magn. Reson Med., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 2082–2095, Jun. 2014.
[13] Y. Amano, M. Tachi, and S. Kumita, “Three-dimensional look-locker MRI
for evaluation of postcontrast myocardial and blood T1 values: comparison with 2D Look-Locker and late gadolinium enhancement MRI,” Acta
Radiol., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 8–13, 2013.
[14] M. Salerno, R. Janardhanan, R. S. Jiji, J. Brooks, N. Adenaw, B. Mehta,
Y. Yang, P. Antkowiak, C. M. Kramer, and F. H. Epstein, “Comparison
of methods for determining the partition coefficient of gadolinium in the
myocardium using T1 mapping,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 38, no. 1,
pp. 217–224, 2013.
[15] Z. Chen, T. Voigt, A. Wiethoff, S. Crichton, D. Murday, A. Shetty, A.
Rinaldi, E. Nagel, V. O. Puntmann, T. Schaeffter, and R. Razavi, “Infarct
myocardium tissue heterogeneity assessment using pre-contrast and postcontrast T1 maps acquired with Modified Look-locker inversion recovery
(MOLLI) imaging,” J. Cardiovascular Magn. Resonance, vol. 14, p. 263,
2012.
[16] J. S. Detsky, J. A. Stainsby, R. Vijayaraghavan, J. J. Graham, A. J. Dick,
and G. A. Wright, “Inversion-recovery-prepared SSFP for cardiac-phaseresolved delayed-enhancement MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med. vol. 58, no. 2,
pp. 365–372, 2007.
[17] P. Schmitt, M. A. Griswold, P. M. Jakob, M. Kotas, V. Gulani, M. Flentje,
and A. Haase, “Inversion recovery TrueFISP: quantification of T(1), T(2),
and spin density,” Magn. Reson. Med. vol. 51, pp. 661–667, 2004.
[18] J. S. Detsky, G. Paul, A. Dick, and G. A. Wright, “Reproducible classification of infarct heterogeneity using fuzzy clustering on multi-contrast
delayed enhancement magnetic resonance images,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imag., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 1606–1614, Oct. 2009.
[19] S. Oduneye, M. Pop, L. Biswas, R. Flor, S. Ghate, V. Ramanan, J. Barry, H.
Celik, E. Crystal, and G. A. Wright, “Post-infarction ventricular tachycardia Substrate characterization: A comparison between late enhancement
MR imaging and voltage mapping using a MR-guided electrophysiology
system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2442–2449, Sep.
2013.
[20] M. Pop, N. R. Ghugre, V. Ramanan, L. Morikawa, G. Stanisz, A. J.
Dick, and G. A. Wright, “Quantification of fibrosis in infarcted swine
hearts by ex vivo late gadolinium enhancement and diffusion-weighted
MRI methods,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, no. 15, pp. 5009–5028,
2013.
[21] F. Höppner, F. Klawonn, R. Kruse, and T. Runkler, Fuzzy Cluster Analysis:
Methods For Classification, Data Analysis And Image Recognition. New
York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1999.
[22] D. Gustafson and W. Kessel, “Fuzzy clustering with a fuzzy covariance
matrix,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision Control, San Diego, CA, USA, pp.
761–766, 1979.

[23] J. C. Bezdek, Pattern Recognition With Fuzzy Objective Function. New
York, NY, USA: Plenum Press, 1981.
[24] J. C. Bezdek, R. Ehrlich, and W. Full, “FCM: the fuzzy c-means clustering
algorithm,” Comput. Geosci., vol. 10, no. 2–3, pp. 191–203, 1984.
[25] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing
agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet,
vol. I (8476), pp. 307–310, 1986.
[26] S. D. Roes, C. J. Borleffs, and R. J. van der Geest, “Infarct tissue heterogeneity assessed with contrast-enhanced MRI predicts spontaneous
ventricular arrhythmia in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator,” Circ. Cardiovasc. Imag., vol. 2, pp.
183–190, 2009.
[27] A. Schmidt, C. F. Azevedo, A. Cheng, S. N. Gupta, D. A. Bluemke, T. K.
Foo, G. Gerstenblith, R. G. Weiss, E. Marbán, G. F. Tomaselli, J. A. Lima,
and K. C. Wu, “Infarct tissue heterogeneity by MRI identifies arrhythmia
susceptibility in patients with LV dysfunction,” Circulation, vol. 115, no.
15, pp. 2006–2014, 2007.
[28] A. T. Yan, A. J. Shayne, K. A. Brown, S. N. Gupta, C. W. Chan, T. M.
Luu, M. F. Di Carli, H. G. Reynolds, W. G. Stevenson, and R. Y. Kwong,
“Characterization of the peri-infarct zone by contrast-enhanced cardiac
MRI is a powerful predictor of post-myocardial infarction mortality,”
Circulation, vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 32–39, 2006.
[29] C. De Chillou, D. Lacroix, D. Klug, Magnin-Poull I, C. Marquié, M.
Messier, M. Andronache, C. Kouakam, N. Sadoul, J. Chen, E. Aliot,
and S. Kacet, “Isthmus characteristics of reentrant VT after myocardial
infarction,” Circulation, vol. 105, pp. 726–731, 2002.
[30] P. Sharma, M. Syed, S. Lerakis, and J. N. Oshinski, “Post-contrast T1
measurements of blood, infarct and normal myocardium,” in Proc. 13th
Sci. Conf., Miami, FL, USA, 2005, p. 236.
[31] J. Fernandez-Armenta, A. Berruezo, D. Andreu, O. Camara, E. Silva, L.
Serra, V. Barbarito, L. Carotenutto, R. Evertz, J. T. Ortiz-Pérez, T. M.
De Caralt, R. J. Perea, M. Sitges, L. Mont, A. Frangi, and J. Brugada,
“Three-dimensional architecture of scar and conducting channels based
on high resolution ce-CMR: Insights for VT ablation,” Circ. Arrhythmia
Electrophysiol., vol. 6, pp. 528–537, 2013.
[32] J. Stainbsy, L. Zhang, and G. A. Wright, “Accelerated myocardial T1
mapping using SMARTT1Map, SASHA and MOLLI,” presented at the
Abstracts 17th J. Cardiovasc. Magn. Res. Sci. Session, San Francisco, CA,
USA, vol. 16, 2014.
[33] M. Fitts, E. Breton, E. G. Kholmovski, D. J. Dosdall, S. Vijayakumar, K. P.
Hong, R. Ranjan, N. F. Marrouche, and L. Axel, “Arrhythmia insensitive
rapid cardiac T1 mapping pulse sequence,” Magn. Reson. Med. vol. 70,
no. 5, pp. 1274–1282, 2013.
[34] M. Pop, M. Sermesant, M. Mansi, E. Crystal, S. Ghate, J.-M. Peyrat, I.
Lashevsky, B. Qiang, N. Ayache, and G. A. Wright, “Correspondence
between simple 3D MRI-based computer models and in vivo electrophysiology measures in swine with chronic infarctions,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3483–3486, Dec. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

