IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

2921

Using Ultrasound Backscattering Signals
and Nakagami Statistical Distribution
to Assess Regional Cataract Hardness
Miguel Caixinha∗ , Danilo A. Jesus, Elena Velte, Mário J. Santos, and Jaime B. Santos

Abstract—This study aims to analyze the protein aggregates spatial distribution for different cataract degrees, and correlate this
information with the lens acoustical parameters and by this way,
assess the cataract regional hardness. Different cataract degrees
were induced ex vivo in porcine lenses. A 25 MHz ultrasonic transducer was used to obtain the acoustical parameters (velocity, attenuation, and backscattering signals). B-scan and Nakagami images
were constructed. Also, lenses with different cataract degrees were
sliced in two regions (nucleus and cortex), for fibers and collagen
detection. A significant increase with cataract formation was found
for the velocity, attenuation, and brightness intensity of the B-scan
images and Nakagami m parameter (p < 0.01). The acoustical
parameters showed a good to moderate correlation with the m parameter for the different stages of cataract formation. A strong correlation was found between the protein aggregates in the cortex and
the m parameter. Lenses without cataract are characterized using
a classification and regression tree, by a mean brightness intensity
ࣘ0.351, a variance of the B-scan brightness intensity ࣘ0.070, a
velocity ࣘ1625 m/s, and an attenuation ࣘ0.415 dB/mm·MHz (sensitivity: 100% and specificity: 72.6%). To characterize different
cataract degrees, the m parameter should be considered. Initial
stages of cataract are characterized by a mean brightness intensity >0.351 and a variance of the m parameter >0.110. Advanced
stages of cataract are characterized by a mean brightness intensity >0.351, a variance of the m parameter ࣘ0.110, and a mean m
parameter >0.374. For initial and advanced stages of cataract, a
sensitivity of 78.4% and a specificity of 86.5% are obtained.
Index Terms—Backscattering, cataract hardness, Nakagami
distribution, ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATARACT is an opacity in the lens eye as a result of
the crystalline proteins precipitation and aggregation, affecting more than 20 million people worldwide. Age-related

C

Manuscript received January 4, 2014; revised March 22, 2014 and May 30,
2014; accepted June 25, 2014. Date of publication July 8, 2014; date of current
version November 18, 2014. This work was supported by Center of Mechanical
Engineering (CEMUC), University of Coimbra, FEDER funds through the program COMPETE—Operational Program for Competitiveness Factors—and by
national funds through Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT), under
Project PTDC/DTP-PIC/0419/2012. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Caixinha is with the Department of Electrical and Computers Engineering, University of Coimbra, Coimbra 3030-790, Portugal (e-mail:
miguel.caixinha@gmail.com).
D. A. Jesus, M. J. Santos, and J. B. Santos are with the Department
of Electrical and Computers Engineering, University of Coimbra, Coimbra
3030-790, Portugal (e-mail: daniloajesus@gmail.com; marioj@deec.uc.pt;
jaime@deec.uc.pt).
E. Velte is with the Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra
3030-790, Portugal (e-mail: elena_velte@hotmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2335739

cataract is the most frequent cause of blindness in the world
being responsible for 48% of blindness, and affecting more than
10% of the working population [1]. With the increase of the elderly population, the number of persons with reduced vision or
blindness secondary to cataract may reach 40 million people by
the year 2020 [1]. The cataract formation seems to be the result
of biochemical changes in the lens associated with aging, eye
injuries, medications, and diseases, but the nature and mechanisms of these changes are still under investigation [2]. The lens
transparency is highly dependent on the well-ordered arrangement of the crystalline proteins and fibers, which are present in
high concentration and make up almost the entire composition
of the lens. Disruption of the crystalline proteins arrangement
due to the proteins aggregation leads to the impairment of light
propagation in lens giving rise to cataract formation [3]. Currently, surgical cataract removal is the only effective therapy for
vision recovery since there is no cataract prevention or pharmacological treatment.
The phacoemulsification is the most common surgical procedure for cataract extraction. This procedure uses a hand-held
ultrasonic device to fragment the cataractous lens into small
pieces that are afterward aspirated [4], [5]. The posterior lens
capsule remains in the eye to sustain the lens to be implanted.
Integrity of the capsule is essential for reducing the risk of surgical complications and subsequent vision loss, but the choose
of an inappropriate phacoemulsification energy level can disrupt the posterior capsule. Therefore, it is crucial to determine
the optimal energy for the phacoemulsification probe, which
value depends on the hardness of the cataract. Thus, the correct
estimation of cataract hardness can minimize surgical complications. In particular, the selection of the optimal energy level
for the cataract emulsification is crucial for the improvement of
safety in this type of surgery. The major complications associated with this surgery, and representing approximately 5–10%
of the postoperative complications are endothelial cells damage,
and posterior capsule rupture (both related with and inadequate
energy level selection, among other factors) [5]–[7]. Since every year thousands of patients are submitted to this surgery, its
optimization by minimizing the complication risks and surgery
time will have a significant socioeconomic impact.
For the clinical prognosis and therapeutic purposes, it is very
important to identify the cataract type and severity, especially in
its early stages [8]. Postsurgical complications can be avoided
if the hardness of the cataractous lens is correctly estimated. In
this context, the ultrasounds are a powerful, noninvasive, and
less expensive technique for biological tissue characterization

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2922

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

[9]. The applicability of ultrasound methods for characterizing
cataractous lenses has been studied in the last years [10]–[12]. In
cataractous lenses, regions of higher opacity are associated with
strong echoes corresponding to reflections caused by impedance
variations in tissue. So, the intensity of the echo signal from a
lens with cataract differs from the echo intensity obtained in a
lens without cataract [11], [13], [14]. By using the amplitude of
the signals, it is then possible to construct a brightness image
(B-scan image) of the lens, allowing for a qualitative characterization of its structure. However, this conventional brightness
image cannot be used as an indicator of lens hardness, since the
amplitude of the signals are dependent on the system settings
(such as the gain or the dynamic range), the acquisition mode
(angle of incidence of the ultrasound), and the user experience
[13], [15]. To evaluate the hardness of the cataractous lens,
two important ultrasound parameters have been used: the velocity and the attenuation [4], [8], [10], [14], [16], [17]. Huang
et al. demonstrated that the increase of the attenuation indicates an increase of the cataract hardness, and by measuring the
Young modulus, established a correlation between these two
parameters [10], [12].
Although some of the developed studies allow quantifying
the hardness of lens based on the aforementioned ultrasound
parameters, namely the frequency-dependent attenuation, they
have some limitations. The most important one is related to the
fact that the results only provide information about the cataract
presence and respective hardness globally [10]. Thus, important information as the exact regional cataract hardness is not
achieved with this methodology. Also, there is no adequate noninvasive characterization of the regional cataract hardness. In
general, the methods presented in the literature used to assess
local cataract hardness are invasive [4], [11], [12]. By this way,
it is particularly important, for cataract surgery, the correct estimation of cataract hardness in whole extension of the lens.
The ultrasound parameters used in a noninvasive way appear as the most realistic approach to assess the cataract
hardness and provide information about its severity and
type [4], [10]–[12]. Velocity and attenuation have been calculated using human and porcine eye lens [18]. As mentioned
earlier, an approach for visualizing cataract is based on the
B-scan image; however, B-scan describes echogenicity changes
allowing only to infer about the presence or not of cataract [13].
Thus, new techniques are demanded to improve the information provided by the B-scan imaging and to allow quantitative
characterization of hardness in the human lens. For that goal,
the Nakagami statistical distribution has received considerable
attention because the associated Nakagami m parameter can
be applied to the backscattered signals, making it possible to
identify scatterers in tissue [13], [14], [19]–[22]. Concerning to
cataract, the ultrasound backscattering is essentially a random
process, and then the statistical analysis of the backscattered
signals may provide useful information about the lens scatterers
concentration and spatial distribution.
In this study, the feasibility of the Nakagami statistical distribution to assess regional cataract hardness was evaluated. It
is well established that the Nakagami distribution is a robust
imaging method less sensitive to user variability and system

settings. This is mainly due to the fact that the Nakagami images are based on the local statistical variation of the backscattering signals, and not only in their absolute values [13]. The
Nakagami distribution allows for the characterization of different concentrations and distributions of scatterers in tissue [9],
[14], [21], [23], [24], then providing the extraction of features
capable of characterizing the tissue properties, namely the scatterers density for subsequent correlation with the lens hardness.
The Nakagami image allows then for the local estimation of the
scatterers concentration in the lens and extraction of information from backscattering regions [25]. Several studies proposed
the Nakagami imaging as a complementary method to B-scan
in order to improve the information associated with the spatial
arrangement and concentration of the scatterers, being useful for
the identification of different degrees of the cataract hardness
[11], [13], [14], [19], [20], [25].
The feasibility of using Nakagami parametric images to quantify lens hardness was explored by Tsui et al. [14]. Their results
showed that Nakagami imaging can be used to distinguish both
global and local variations in lens hardness. Tsui concluded
that the scatterers concentration of the fiber compaction, which
is mainly responsible for the increase in lens hardness during
cataract formation, could be quantified using Nakagami images
to analyze the statistical distribution of ultrasonic backscattered
echoes.
In this study, Nakagami images were obtained from porcine
lenses with different degrees of cataract and then compared in
order to study the m parameter potential of detecting the local arrangements and scatterers concentration. The images were
constructed from A-scan lines collected by a single transducer,
noninvasively. In order to infer about the cataract hardness, the
mean Nakagami m parameter was correlated with the acoustical parameters. Additionally, stained slices from the lens (nucleus and cortex regions) were imaged and used as a confirming
method for scatterers distribution and concentration in different
regions of the lenses, and for different stages of the cataract
formation.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Lens Samples
Two hundred and two (202) lenses from porcine eyes were
collected in a slaughterhouse. Lens were carefully extracted and
prepared to clean iris remains and adhering vitreous, preserving
the lens capsule. Cataract was induced in 140 lenses immersed
over time in an ethanol:2-propanol:formalin solution at the ratio 3:3:4 [26]. To obtain different cataract degrees, the lenses
were immersed in the solution during 60, 120, and 180 min,
corresponding to lenses with initial (52), advanced (46), and
total (42) cataract, respectively. Sixty-two lenses were used as
control (without cataract).
B. Experimental Setup
The ultrasound parameters as velocity and frequencydependent attenuation, and the backscattering signals were obtained using the setup shown in Fig. 1.

CAIXINHA∗ et al.: USING ULTRASOUND BACKSCATTERING SIGNALS AND NAKAGAMI STATISTICAL DISTRIBUTION

2923

where v is the ultrasound velocity calculated by (1) and t is the
propagation time in the lens.
D. B-Scan Imaging

Fig. 1.

Experimental setup.

A 25 MHz transducer (model JAP-F25.3.1, Krautkramer,
NSW, Australia) with a 25 mm focus and 5 mm active diameter
with a pulse length of 0.13 μs at −6 dB was used. The lenses
were placed on a stainless steel holder having a machined hole
suited to the lens. All over the data collection, the solution temperature was kept constant at 28.0 ± 0.5◦ C. A pulse/receiver
with a 35 MHz bandwidth (model PR5800, Olympus NDT,
Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) was used in a pulse-echo configuration. The echo signals were recorded and digitized with a
14 bit, 200 MHz A/D card (model PCIe-9842, ADLINK Technology, Inc., Taipei, Taiwan). The transducer was moved using
a computer-controlled micropositioning system.
C. Ultrasound Velocity and Attenuation
The ultrasound propagation velocity (v) in the lens was calculated as the average value of ten A-scan lines collected over the
central portion of the lens, according to the following expression
[10], [14]:


ts − t c
+1
(1)
v=c
tb − ta
where c is the ultrasound velocity in the solution, tc and ts are
the propagation times for the path between the transducer and a
reflector with and without the lens inserted, respectively, and ta
and tb correspond to the propagation times of the waves from the
transducer to the front and back faces of the lens, respectively.
The ultrasound attenuation coefficient was calculated by evaluating the frequency dependent attenuation all over the crystalline tissue, for the central frequency of the transducer, considering also the average of ten A-scan lines, by using the following
expression [12]:


A1 (f )
20
log10
(T12 T21 )2 − αS
(2)
α(f ) =
2d
A2 (f )
where d is the lens thickness, A1 (f) and A2 (f) are the amplitude
spectra from the echoes received from the reflector without
and with the lens inserted, respectively, T12 and T21 are the
transmission coefficients in the lens boundaries, and αs is the
attenuation in the used solution for the path corresponding to
the lens thickness.
The lens thickness value was obtained by the following expression:
d=

vt
2

(3)

Although A-scan signals contain a large amount of information, they are difficult to interpret and therefore, the ultrasound
data are usually presented as brightness-modulated images (Bscan). The construction of these images encompasses the envelope detection of the signals, followed by a logarithmic compression. Then, the signals are converted to a scale of 256 grey
levels for posterior image reconstruction by using the multiple scan lines, collected from a given region of the tissue. The
envelope of the A-scan signals was obtained using the Hilbert
transform [27], [28].
For each lens, the B-scan images were constructed using
15 000 A-scan signals sampled at a 200 MHz rate, considering
the envelope amplitudes of the backscattering signals and a
dynamic range of 40 dB. The distance between each A-scan
line was 0.001 mm.
E. Nakagami Statistics
The probability density function of the backscattered signals
envelope, f(r, m, Ω), given by the Nakagami distribution is expressed by [23]
 m 
2mm r2m −1
(4)
exp
− r2 U (r)
f (r, m, Ω) =
Γ (m) Ωm
Ω
where Γ is the gamma function, U is the unit step function, and
m and Ω are the Nakagami parameters. The m parameter is the
shape parameter and Ω is the scale parameter. The m parameter
is expressed as
  2 	2
E R
m=
(5)
E [R2 − E (R2 )]2
where E(.) denotes the statistical mean.
As the statistics of the backscattered echoes vary with the
scatter concentration, the Nakagami image can be used to identify the scatter concentrations in the lens [21], [23]. Although
Nakagami images can be seen as a reliable tool to complement
B-scan images, some problems have to be solved to make it
effective, namely the artifacts generated by the noise in the anechoic areas of the lenses. In order to reduce noise and improve
the Nakagami m parameter performance, an adaptive threshold
filter was applied to the backscattered signals before the construction of the Nakagami parametric image [29]. Having a noise
level corresponding to a SNR of 17 dB, the adaptive threshold
filter was based on noise-assisted empirical mode decomposition. Its performance is similar to the conventional thresholding technique based on applying a cutoff value for rejecting
small echoes. The Nakagami m parameter, calculated after adaptive threshold filtering, is also called noise-assisted Nakagami
m parameter [20], [29]. Other two filtering techniques were
tested in this study: noise-assisted correlation algorithm [30]
and wavelet-based image denoising [31]. The results obtained
were very similar to the noise-assisted empirical mode decomposition technique.

2924

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

The Nakagami parametric image was constructed based on
the B-mode image, and corresponds to 2-D representation of the
m parameter values. The image construction process encompassed a sliding window selected to provide good resolution,
considering that a small window improves the resolution but,
on the other hand, gives rise to few envelope points, which can
lead to bad estimations of the m parameter [19]. In this study, it
was considered a window with three times the transducer pulse
length (0.39 μs) corresponding to 78 samples, taking into account the sampling frequency of 200 MHz and 99% of overlapping. A color scale was used for the Nakagami image to facilitate
the visualization and interpretation. The color scale ranges from
blue to red as the values of the m parameter increase from 0 to 1,
corresponding to backscattered signal envelopes changing from
a pre-Rayleigh to a Rayleigh statistical distributions.
F. Region of Interest (ROI)
To correlate B-scan brightness intensity and Nakagami m
parameter with the acoustical parameters, and with the information obtained from the slices, an ROI was defined in the images.
The ROI was chosen selecting an area on the B-scan and
Nakagami images that includes only regions containing protein
aggregates and collagen fibers. An ROI with 4.5 mm in width and
1.5 mm in depth was considered (see Fig. 2, left). Additionally,
to exclude any contribution of the external region of the lens, a
mask with the shape of the lens was used (see Fig. 2, right).
G. Nucleus and Cortex Slices and Imaging
Slices with 50 μm in thickness were obtained in different
regions of the lenses. The lenses were first frozen at −40 °C
in an embedding resin, Cryomatrix Shandon medium (Thermo
Scientific Shandon Ltd., WA, USA). Cuts were made transversally with a glass knife using a Leica Microsystems CM3350S
cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany).
To stain the lens proteins, connective tissue and collagen, the
Hematoxylin and Eosin staining protocol was used. The stained
slices from the nucleus and the cortex were imaged using an
inverted microscope with a digital image capture system. The
images were acquired with the same magnification (40× for the
slices in the cortex and the nucleus region, and 4× for the slices
of the nucleus–cortex region) and the same amounts of light
and exposure times. According to the protein staining protocol
and connective tissue, the mean brightness intensity of the slice
images was computed to estimate the quantity of proteins and
collagen fibers. The information provided by these images was
correlated with the mean Nakagami m parameter and with mean
brightness intensity of the B-scan images.
III. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistically significant differences between lens with and
without induced cataract (i.e., with different hardness) were
tested for the ultrasound velocity, the attenuation, the mean
brightness intensity on B-scan images, the mean Nakagami
m parameter, and for the mean brightness intensity of the slice
images obtained in the cortex and nucleus regions, using anal-

Fig. 2. ROI used to compute the mean brightness intensity and the mean m
parameter.

ysis of variance and student t-tests. Correlations between the
different parameters were tested using the Spearman correlation
coefficient.
To verify whether the different parameters can predict the
presence of cataract, a classification and regression tree (CRT)
with a tenfold cross validation was performed. CRTs are a supervised learning technique that creates rules to classify elements
according to predefined categories [32], [33]. CRTs are classifiers with a tree-like structure that splits recursively the input
dataset until each data subset consists completely (or predominantly) of elements from one category. The tree grows from
the parent (root) to the child nodes (leafs) and in each node a
testing is performed on one or more attributes to decide how the
data should be split. Data partitioning is completed when the
data subset at a node is either “pure” (i.e., all cases within the
node has the same target variable value) or sufficiently small
(as set a priori by the user). CRT uses an algorithm where data
partitioning is based on the maximization of the within-node
homogeneity, i.e., the minimization of the number of cases with
different membership in each node of the tree (minimization
of the node impurity) [32]. Furthermore, to reduce the risk of
overfitting, and to create a more accurate CRT, the initial tree
is pruned, that is the small and/or deep nodes of the tree are
removed.
The commercial statistical software IBM SPSS Statistics
version 20 was used (IBM Corp., NY, USA). Statistical values were considered significant for p-values lower than 0.05.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Acousical Parameters: Ultrasound Velocity and Attenuation
The results for the propagation velocity and attenuation for
the studied lenses are shown in Fig. 3. It is observed an increase
of the acoustical parameters values with the cataract formation. The ultrasound velocity ranged from 1585.0 × 31.7 m/s
in normal lenses to 1652.7 × 27.8 m/s in lenses with total
cataract (after 180 min of immersion time). The attenuation
increased from 0.406 × 0.028 dB/mmMHz in normal lenses
to 0.444 × 0.037 dB/mmMHz in lenses with total cataract. For
both acoustical parameters, a statistically significant increase
was found with the cataract formation (p < 0.001), being not
statistically significant between 120 and 180 min of immersion
time (p > 0.834).
B. B-Scan Images
The constructed B-scan images illustrate an increase of the
backscattering signals amplitude over the cataract formation

CAIXINHA∗ et al.: USING ULTRASOUND BACKSCATTERING SIGNALS AND NAKAGAMI STATISTICAL DISTRIBUTION

2925

Fig. 3. Acoustical parameters versus cataract formation, i.e., lens immersion
times: (a) velocity and (b) attenuation.
Fig. 4. B-scan images for lenses: (a) without cataract, (b) 60 min, (c) 120 min,
and (d) 180 min of immersion time.

(see Fig. 4), characterized by an increased region with high
scatterers concentration, from the cortex to the nucleus, which
are responsible for opacity in the lens [34], as observed in the
Nakagami images (see Fig. 7). The cataract formation pattern,
observed in the referred B-scan and Nakagami images, is a result of the method used for cataract induction. After 60 min of
lens immersion, a separation between the cortex and the nucleus becomes visible [see Fig. 4(b)] as a result of the different
fiber compactions, originating different acoustical impedances
between these two regions. The mean brightness intensity (normalized values) in the ROI, increased from 0.2390.094 for a
lens without cataract [see Figs. 4(a) and 5] to 0.753 × 0.222
for a lens with total cataract [see Figs. 4(d) and 5]. A statistically significant increase was found with cataract formation,
i.e., over and between the different immersion times (p < 0.01).
Moreover, the mean brightness intensity showed a good correlation with the velocity (r = 0.605, p < 0.001) and a moderate
correlation with the attenuation (r = 0.529, p < 0.001).
C. Nakagami Images
The Nakagami images showed also consistent results, i.e.,
the m parameter increases with cataract formation from the
cortex to the nucleus. The mean value of the m parameter, obtained in the ROI changed from 0.272 ± 0.076 for lenses without
cataract [see Figs. 6 and 7(a)] to 0.554 ± 0.166 for lenses with
total cataract [see Figs. 6 and 7(d)]. A statistically significant
increase was found with cataract formation, i.e., over and between the different immersion times (p < 0.01). Moreover, the
mean Nakagami m parameter showed a good correlation with
the velocity (r = 0.657, p < 0.001) and a moderate correlation
with the attenuation (r = 0.471, p < 0.001).
In normal lenses, the m parameter values are close to 0 [see
Fig. 7(a)], while for lenses with total cataract values are close to 1
[see Fig. 7(d)]. The m parameter behavior indicates that the scatterers distribution evolves from a pre-Rayleigh to a Rayleigh distribution as the cataract progresses from initial to total cataract
[19], [23]. Also, with cataract formation, the m parameter increases deeper in the cortex region (see Fig. 7), revealing the
presence of a larger number of scatterers from the cortex to the
nucleus. These results are in agreement with the work carried
out by Tsui et al. [14], where a 35 MHz ultrasonic transducer
was used to characterize cataract in porcine lens. That higher
frequency transducer limited the depth analysis in lenses. In this
study, using a 25 MHz transducer in a noninvasive way, it is

Fig. 5. Mean B-scan brightness intensity versus cataract formation, i.e., lens
immersion times.

possible to obtain scatterers distribution for deeper regions in
lenses, as shown in Fig. 7.
Tsui et al. [11] also performed an ex vivo study in porcine
lens using a high frequency needle transducer of 47 MHz. They
calculated the acoustical parameters for normal and cataractous
lenses invasively, making possible to locally estimate cataract
hardness using backscattering signals and the Nakagami distribution. However, it is important to refer that Nakagami parameter estimation could be affected by the cataract hardness. This
hypothesis was raised by Tsui et al. in a recent work [25], where
they explore the relation between the features of the Nakagami
images and the mechanical properties of a medium with scatterers. The study was performed in phantoms with different
hardness and scatterers concentration in order to confirm which
of these parameters have a higher impact on the m parameter estimation. Although no definitive conclusion was obtained,
they found that the m parameter measured in a medium with a
low scatterers concentration correlated strongly with the hardness. In our work, tissues with different degrees of hardness
and consequently with different scatterers concentration and
fibers compaction (as evidenced by the histological images,
Section IV-D) were analyzed, and therefore, a different estimation of the m parameter for the groups of lenses considered in
this study can occur. However, in the cataract formation, where
the increase of the hardness is related to the increase of the
fibers compaction and scatterers concentration, it is difficult to
separate the contribution of these two parameters. In particular,
for the type of cataract induced in this study (total cataract), it
is impossible to separate hardness and scatterers concentration
contributions for m parameter estimation.

2926

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Mean Nakagami m parameter versus cataract formation, i.e., lens
immersion times.

Fig. 7. Nakagami images representing the scatterers distribution for different
degrees of cataract, for (a) lenses without cataract, (b) 60 min of immersion
time, (c) 120 min, and (d) with total cataract.
Fig. 9. Microscopy images. Left side: cortex [(a) 0 min, (c) 60 min,
(e) 120 min, and (g) 180 min]. Right side: nucleus [(b) 0 min, (d) 60 min,
(f) 120 min, and (h) 180 min].

Fig. 8.

Microscopy image of a transversal slice of the nucleus–cortex region.

D. Nucleus and Cortex Protein Aggregates
The difference in protein aggregate’s concentration between
the nucleus and cortex in a cataractous lens is shown in the
microscopy image of a transversal slice of the nucleus–cortex
region (see Fig. 8). The slice, with 50 μm, contains several layers
of proteins in agglomerates, connective tissue, and collagen
fibers. Since these structures alone represent some nanometers,
in accordance with the conditions of image acquisition and with
the protein and connective tissue staining protocol, the darker
areas in the microscopy images represent areas of higher protein
aggregates concentration.
For the nucleus and the cortex regions (see Fig. 9), more
pronounced dyeings are visible along the different immersion
times denoting a clear increase in protein aggregates during
the process of cataract formation. This is in agreement with
the decrease of the brightness intensity (normalized values) of
the slice images observed for the different immersion times for

Fig. 10. Mean brightness intensity for the slice images obtained in the cortex
and the nucleus for different immersion times.

Fig. 11. Mean Nakagami m parameter versus mean brightness intensity of the
slice images for the four immersion times.

CAIXINHA∗ et al.: USING ULTRASOUND BACKSCATTERING SIGNALS AND NAKAGAMI STATISTICAL DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 12.

2927

Principal nodes of the CRT.

TABLE I
CLASSIFICATION OF CATARACT VERSUS NO CATARACT

Lenses with 60, 120 or 180 min of immersion times
Lenses without cataract (0 min)
Total

Cataract

No cataract

Total

140
17
157

0
45
45

140
62
202

TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION OF ADVANCED VERSUS INITIAL STAGES OF CATARACT
FORMATION

Lenses with immersion times of 120
and 180 min (Advanced Cataract)
Lenses with 60 min of immersion time
(Initial Cataract)
Total

Severe cataract

Initial cataract

Total

69

19

88

7

45

52

64

76

140

both cortex and nucleus regions (see Fig. 10). Moreover, for all
immersion times, the nucleus region showed a higher dyeing
than the cortex region indicating the presence of more protein
aggregates in that region of the lens. The microscopy images
are in agreement with the results obtained in the Nakagami images for different degrees of cataract. A strong correlation was
found between the mean brightness intensity of the slice images
obtained in the cortex region and the mean Nakagami m parameter (r = −0.943; p = 0.029) (see Fig. 11). No correlation
was made for the nucleus due to the absence of backscattering
signals for the whole extension of that region of the lens. Regarding the mean brightness intensity in the B-scan images, a
statistically significant correlation was also found (r = −0.922;
p = 0.039).

E. Predictive Parameters for Cataract Formation
A CRT was performed considering the two acoustical parameters (velocity and attenuation): the B-scan mean brightness
intensity and the mean Nakagami m parameter. Additionally, to
account for the dispersion of the brightness intensity values in
the B-scan image and the spreading of the m parameter values
in the Nakagami image, the variance of the brightness intensity
and the variance of the m parameter for the same ROI were
considered.
Eighty-seven percent (87.1%) of the lenses were correctly
predicted by the CRT, with a risk estimate factor of 25.2%
(see Fig. 12). A good discrimination was found between lenses
without cataract and lenses with cataract. Seventy-three percent
(72.6%) of the lenses without cataract are characterized by a
mean B-scan brightness intensity ࣘ 0.351, a variance of the
B-scan brightness intensity ࣘ 0.070, a velocity ࣘ 1625 m/s,
and an attenuation ࣘ 0.415 dB/mm·MHz. Lenses with cataract
are characterized by a mean brightness B-scan intensity > 0.351,
being the remaining discriminating factors the variance and the
mean value of the Nakagami m parameter. Lenses with initial
cataract are characterized by a variance of the m parameter in
the Nakagami image > 0.110, or when the variance is lower
by a mean value of the m parameter ࣘ0.374, while lenses with
advanced cataract are characterized by a lower value of the
variance of the Nakagami m parameter and a higher value of the
mean value of the m parameter.
The cutoff values characterizing lenses without cataract classify 157 lenses with cataract and 45 lenses without cataract (see
Table I). The mean and variance of the B-scan brightness intensity, and the velocity and/or the attenuation values allow for a
sensitivity of 100% for the presence of cataract (all the lenses
with cataract are correctly identified) and a specificity of 72.6%
(i.e., for the classification of lenses without cataract). The absence of scatters in lenses without cataract results in a low mean
value and in a smaller variance of the m parameter, and therefore

2928

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

the m parameter does not appear as a discriminating factor for
lenses without cataract.
For lenses with cataract, a variance of the m parameter in the
Nakagami image (> 0.110) and a mean value of the m parameter
(> 0.374) allowed for a sensitivity of 78.4% for the advanced
stages of cataract formation and a specificity of 86.5% for the
initial stages (see Table II).

V. CONCLUSION
In this study, the cataract hardness was characterized noninvasively by assessing the acoustical parameters: the brightness
intensity of the B-scan images and the Nakagami m parameter.
It was shown that the velocity and attenuation increase with
cataract formation and this increase correlates with the increase
of the mean Nakagami m parameter, i.e., with the increase of the
protein aggregates, confirmed by the slice images obtained for
different immersion times. For lenses with advanced stages of
cataract, it was shown that none of the global parameters, velocity and attenuation, showed statistically significant differences.
Using machine learning techniques (CRT), it was demonstrated
that the acoustical parameters and the mean brightness intensity
of the B-scan images have a good sensitivity to discriminate
lenses without cataract. When cataract is present, the acoustical parameters do not allow for a good discrimination of the
different stages of cataract. Here, the Nakagami m parameter,
combined with the B-scan images brightness intensity, should
be used to characterize the different degrees of cataract. The
obtained results showed that the Nakagami image complements
the information provided by the B-scan image and the acoustical
parameters for cataract characterization.
Our results show that the ultrasound scanning of eye lenses
through Nakagami image is a potential imaging tool to noninvasively assess cataract hardness. The methodology developed in
this study represents a technological basis for the development
of a medical device for patient-oriented cataract surgery.

REFERENCES
[1] Vision 2020: The Right to Sight—Global Initiative for the Elimination of
Avoidable Blindness: Action Plan 2006–2011, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
[2] J. Kanski, Clinical Diagnosis in Ophthalmology, 1st ed. Philadelphia, PA,
USA: Elsevier Mosby, 2007.
[3] H. Ecroyd and J. Carver, “Crystallin proteins and amyloid fibrils,” Cellular
Mol. Life Sci., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 62–81, Jan. 2009.
[4] C. Huang, Q. Zhou, H. Ameri, W. Wu, L. Sun, S. Wang, M. Humayun,
and K. Shung, “Determining the acoustic properties of the lens using
a high-frequency ultrasonic needle transducer,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 1971–1977, Dec. 2007.
[5] S. Wilson and R. Trivedi, Eds., Pediatric Cataract Surgery: Techniques,
Complications, and Management. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2005, p. 320.
[6] M. Muhtaseb, A. Kalhoro, and A. Ionides, “A system for preoperative
stratification of cataract patients according to risk of intraoperative complications: A prospective analysis of 1441 cases,” Br. J. Ophthalmol.,
vol. 88, no. 10, pp. 1242–1246, Oct. 2004.
[7] P. Carricondo and A. Fortes, “Senior resident phacoemulsification learning
cure,” Arquivos Brasileiros Oftalmologia, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 7–10, 2010.
[8] A. Paunksnis, S. Kurapkienė, and A. Mačiulis, “Ultrasound quantitative evaluation of human eye cataract,” Informatica, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 267–278, 2007.

[9] M. Ho, J. Lin, Y. Shu, C. Chen, K. Chang, C. Chang, and P. Tsui, “Using
ultrasound Nakagami imaging to assess liver fibrosis in rats,” Ultrasonics,
vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 215–222, Feb. 2012.
[10] C. Huang, H. Ameri, C. Deboer, A. Rowley, X. Xu, L. Sun, S. Wang,
M. Humayun, and K. Shung, “Evaluation of lens hardness in cataract
surgery using high-frequency ultrasonic parameters in vitro,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 1609–1616, Oct. 2007.
[11] P. Tsui, C. Huang, Q. Zhou, and K. Shung, “Cataract measurement by
estimating the ultrasonic statistical parameter using an ultrasound needle
transducer: An in vitro study,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 513–522,
May 2011.
[12] C. Huang, R. Chen, and P. Tsui, “Measurements of attenuation coefficient
for evaluating the hardness of a cataract lens by a high-frequency ultrasonic
needle transducer,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, no. 19, pp. 5981–5994, 2009.
[13] P. Tsui and C. Chang, “Imaging local scatterer concentrations by the
Nakagami statistical model,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 608–619, Apr. 2007.
[14] P. Tsui, C. Huang, C. Chang, S. Wang, and K. Shung, “Feasibility study of
using high-frequency ultrasonic Nakagami imaging for characterizing the
cataract lens in vitro,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, no. 21, pp. 6413–6425,
Nov. 2007.
[15] P. Tsui, C. Yeh, and C. Chang, “Noise effect on the performance of
Nakagami image in ultrasound tissue characterization,” J. Med. Biol. Eng,
vol. 28, pp. 3–8, 2008.
[16] H. Tabandeh, M. Wilkins, G. Thompson, D. Nassiri, and A. Karim,
“Hardness and ultrasonic characteristics of the human crystalline lens,”
J. Cataract Refractive Surg., vol. 26, pp. 838–841, 2000.
[17] R. Raitelaitienė and A. Paunksnis, “Ultrasonic and biochemical evaluation
of human diabetic lens,” Medicina, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 641–648, 2005.
[18] C. de Korte, A. van der Steen, J. Thijssen, J. Duindam, C. Otto, and
G. Puppels, “Relation between local acoustic parameters and
protein distribution in human and porcine eye lenses,” Exp. Eye Res.,
vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 617–627, Nov. 1994.
[19] P. Tsui, C. Huang, and S. Wang, “Use of Nakagami distribution and
logarithmic compression in ultrasonic tissue characterization,” J. Med.
Biol. Eng., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 69–73, 2006.
[20] P. Tsui, C. Chang, M. Ho, Y. Lee, Y. Chen, N. Huang, Z. Wu, and
K. Chang, “Use of Nakagami statistics and empirical mode decomposition for ultrasound tissue characterization by a nonfocused transducer,”
Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 2055–2068, Dec. 2009.
[21] P. Tsui, C. Yeh, Y. Liao, C. Chang, W. Kuo, K. Chang, and C. Chen,
“Ultrasonic Nakagami imaging: A strategy to visualize the scatterer properties of benign and malignant breast tumors,” Ultrasound Med. Biol.,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 209–217, Feb. 2010.
[22] G. Pinton, J. Aubry, E. Bossy, M. Muller, M. Pernot, and M. Tanter,
“Attenuation, scattering, and absorption of ultrasound in the skull bone,”
Med. Phys., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 299–307, Jan. 2012.
[23] P. Shankar, “A general statistical model for ultrasonic backscattering
from tissues,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 47,
no. 3, pp. 727–736, Jan. 2000.
[24] P. Shankar, “Ultrasonic tissue characterization using a generalized Nakagami model,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control., vol.
48, no. 6, pp. 1716–1720, Nov. 2001.
[25] P. Tsui, Y. Wan, and Y. Chien, “Dependency of ultrasonic Nakagami image
on the mechanical properties of scattering medium,” J. Med. Biol. Eng.,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 95–102, 2013.
[26] T. Sugiura, D. Kurosaka, and Y. Uezuki, “Creating cataract in a pig eye,”
J. Cataract Refractive Surg., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 615–621, May 1999.
[27] J. Noble and P. Wells, “Ultrasound image segmentation and tissue characterization,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., vol. 224, no. 2, pp. 307–316,
Jan. 2010.
[28] F. Lizzi, E. Feleppa, A. Kaisar, and C. Deng, “Ultrasonic spectrum analysis
for tissue evaluation,” Pattern Recog. Lett., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 637–658,
2003.
[29] P. Tsui, Y. Wan, C. Huang, and M. Wang, “Effect of adaptive threshold
filtering on ultrasonic Nakagami parameter to detect variation in scatterer
concentration,” Ultrason. Imag., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 229–242, Oct. 2010.
[30] P. Tsui, C. Yeh, and C. Huang, “Noise-assisted correlation algorithm for
suppressing noise-induced artifacts in ultrasonic Nakagami images,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 314–322, May 2012.
[31] A. Thakur and R. Anand, “Image quality based comparative evaluation
of wavelet filters in ultrasound speckle reduction,” Digit. Signal Process.,
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 455–465, Sep. 2005.
[32] L. Rokach and O. Maimon, “Top-down induction of decision trees
classifiers—A survey,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev.,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 476–487, Nov. 2005.

CAIXINHA∗ et al.: USING ULTRASOUND BACKSCATTERING SIGNALS AND NAKAGAMI STATISTICAL DISTRIBUTION

[33] J. Quinlan, “Learning decision tree classifiers,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 71–72, 1996.
[34] K. Sharma and P. Santhoshkumar, “Lens aging: Effects of crystallins,”
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1790, no. 10, pp. 1095–1108, 2009.

Miguel Caixinha received the B.Sc. degree in applied physics and optics, specialization in optometry,
from the University of Beira Interior, Portugal, in
2000, and the M.Sc. degree in vision sciences from
the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Coimbra, Portugal, in 2006, where he also received the
Diploma of Advanced Studies in Biomedical Engineering in 2012. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering at the University of Coimbra.
He is a Researcher in the CEMUC Research Group
at the University of Coimbra. His research interests are in the field of optometry
and vision sciences namely in the anterior segment of the eye.

Danilo A. Jesus received the Integrated Master degree in biomedical engineering, biomedical instrumentation and biomaterials from the University of
Coimbra, Portugal, in 2012, and is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree at the Wroclaw University
of Technology, Poland, through the project AGEYE
(Ageing Eye), a Marie Curie Initial Training Network
action, funded by the 7th EU framework program, to
foster research training in vision sciences.
From August of 2013 to January of 2014, he was a
Research Fellow in the Centre for Mechanical Engineering, University of Coimbra. In February of 2014, he joined BioMediTech, a
joint institute of Tampere University of Technology and University of Tampere,
Finland.

2929

Elena Velte received the Integrated Master degree in
biomedical engineering from the University of Coimbra, Portugal. Her thesis was focused on the study of
new methods for objective assessment of cataracts.
Specialized in image processing and analysis, she is
currently working in the field of biometric recognition.

Mário J. Santos received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Coimbra, Portugal, in 1990, 1997, and 2004, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Coimbra University. His research interests are related
with ultrasonic nondestructive testing. Actually, he is
investigating applications of ultrasonic guided waves
in the inspection of plate and plate-like structures and
biologic tissue characterization using conventional ultrasonic bulk waves.

Jaime B. Santos received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Coimbra, Portugal, in
1985 and 1994, respectively, both in electrical engineering.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Coimbra. His research interests include ultrasounds namely
NDT&E and image processing.

