1804

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

The Manumeter: A Wearable Device for Monitoring
Daily Use of the Wrist and Fingers
Nizan Friedman, Justin B. Rowe, David J. Reinkensmeyer, Member, IEEE,
and Mark Bachman, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Nonobtrusive options for monitoring the wrist and
hand movement are needed for stroke rehabilitation and other applications. This paper describes the “manumeter,” a device that
logs total angular distance travelled by wrist and finger joints
using a magnetic ring worn on the index finger and two triaxial magnetometers mounted in a watch-like unit. We describe an
approach to estimate the wrist and finger joint angles using a radial basis function network that maps differential magnetometer
readings to joint angles. We tested this approach by comparing
manumeter estimates of total angular excursion with those from
a passive goniometric exoskeleton worn simultaneously as seven
participants completed a set of 12 manual tasks at low-, medium-,
and high-intensity conditions on a first testing day, 1–2 days later,
and 6–8 days later, using only the original calibration from the
first testing day. Manumeter estimates scaled proportionally to the
intensity of hand activity. Estimates of angular excursion made
with the manumeter were 92.5% ± 28.4 (SD), 98.3% ± 23.3, and
94.7% ± 19.3 of the goniometric exoskeleton across the three testing days, respectively. Magnetic sensing of wrist and finger movement is nonobtrusive and can quantify the amount of use of the
hand across days.
Index Terms—Accelerometers, arm monitoring, biomedical
monitoring, hand monitoring, magnetic field measurement, magnetometers, patient monitoring, patient rehabilitation, sensors,
wearable.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT advancements in the miniaturization of sensors, microelectronics, and telecommunication technologies have enabled the development of wearable systems for
monitoring human movement in the home or community
[1]–[3]. Such wearable systems will enable rehabilitation clinicians to gather objective information about a patient’s daily
movement habits and level of functional ability, allowing more

R

Manuscript received June 6, 2013; revised May 1, 2014, March 6, 2014, and
November 15, 2013; accepted September 19, 2013. Date of publication June
30, 2014; date of current version November 3, 2014. This work was supported
in part by R01 (NIH-R01HD062744-01) from the National Center for Medical
Rehabilitation Research, part of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, and in part by the National Center
for Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, through Grant UL1 TR000153. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the NIH.
N. Friedman and Justin B. Rowe are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697 USA (e-mail:
friedman@uci.edu).
D. J. Reinkensmeyer is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697 USA (e-mail:
dreinken@uci.edu).
M. Bachman is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697 USA (e-mail: mbachman@uci.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2329841

accurate assessment and diagnosis, greater personalization of
therapy, improved feedback that may enhance motivation [4],
and determination of the effects of experimental treatments on
daily activities.
Currently, questionnaires such as the Motor Activity Log
(MAL) are used to assess daily use of the upper and lower
extremity after neurologic injuries such as stroke. The MAL
is an interview that asks subjects to rate on an ordinal scale
how much and how well they use their impaired arms to accomplish activities of daily living [5]. This test relies on subjective interpretation that can lead to inconsistent assessment
results [6]–[8].
Recognizing the limitations of subjective assessments such
as the MAL, researchers are developing accelerometer-based
systems as a more objective way of measuring spontaneous
use of the lower [9]–[17] and upper extremity [14], [18]–[22].
However, accelerometers worn near the hand respond to the
net acceleration of the hand, arm, trunk, and lower extremity rather than isolated movements of the wrist or fingers. In
the laboratory, datagloves, goniometers, and motion capture
systems can be used to quantify use of the wrist and hand
[23]–[30] but are difficult to don, uncomfortable to wear, and
socially unacceptable.
To address these limitations, we developed a nonobtrusive
device to monitor daily use of the hand and wrist in an uncontrolled environment. Here, we use the new term “manumeter” to
refer to a device used to measure the (angular) distance traveled
by joints of the hand (Latin: “manus”), mimicing the existing
term “pedometer,” which refers to a device that measures the
distance travelled by foot (Latin: “pedites”). The manumeter
described here uses a magnetic sensing system that is packaged
in a socially acceptable ring and watch-like unit (see Fig. 1). In
this paper, we first discuss the design of the manumeter and how
we use it to infer wrist and finger joint angles. We then present
results from an experiment that tested its accuracy and repeatability in monitoring amount of wrist and finger movements.
II. METHODS
A. Device Description
1) Working Principle: The manumeter consists of a sensing
and data-logging unit located in a watch-like enclosure worn
on the wrist and a small neodymium ring worn on the index
finger (see Fig. 1, left). The battery powered device logs data
from two triaxial magnetometers (Honeywell HMC5843) located in the watch-like enclosure, and stores that data on a microSD card. The magnetometers are located on the proximal and

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

FRIEDMAN et al.: MANUMETER: A WEARABLE DEVICE FOR MONITORING DAILY USE OF THE WRIST AND FINGERS

1805

Fig. 1. Left: Manumeter consists of a sensing and data-logging board located in a watch-like enclosure and a magnetic ring worn on the index finger. Middle: At
the end of a recording session, users slide the manumeter into a docking station that recharges the on-board battery and transmits logged data to a tablet computer.
Right: Tablet displays amount of use to patient and saves data for further analysis.

Fig. 2. Manumeter electrical board contains a microcontroller, voltage regulator circuit, sensors circuit, and battery recharge circuit on the front (left) and
a microSD socket, switch, and microUSB connector on the back (right).

distal sides of the data-logger board (see Fig. 2) and measure
the magnetic field produced by a N50 neodymium magnetic
ring with a field strength of 0.3 G at 15 cm (roughly the distance
from the metacarpal-phalangeal (MCP) joint of the ring finger
to the wrist). The device also contains an accelerometer, but for
the experiments reported here the accelerometer was not used.
The manumeter can be slid into a docking station (see Fig. 1,
middle) that recharges the battery, transfers the logged data to
an Android tablet, and estimates and displays the amount of
wrist flexion/extension, radial/ulnar deviation, and finger flexion/extension achieved while the device was worn (see Fig. 1,
right).
2) Firmware Design: Firmware was programmed on a
PIC24FJ64GB002 Microchip microcontroller. When powered,
the firmware first checks whether the USB is connected to a
computer. If there is no USB connection, the manumeter enters
the data-logger mode. The microSD mass storage is enabled and
a new text file is created. Data are then read from the two triaxial
magnetometers and a triaxial accelerometer. The magnetometers are programmed to sense magnetic field strength at a range
of +/− 3.2 G with 12 bits of resolution. The sensor array and a
time stamp are then written to the microSD card.
3) Electrical Design: The custom designed printed circuit board (PCB) of the manumeter (see Fig. 2) measures

39.4 mm (height) × 22.6 mm (width) × 1.55 mm (thickness)
and has a maximum thickness of 5.1 mm with components (see
Fig. 2). There are two main states to the power and recharge
circuit.
In the condition that the manumeter is not connected to the
computer through a USB cable, the microcontroller is powered
by a 3.7-V, 450-mAh lithium polymer battery. Once connected
through the micro-USB connector, an autoswitching power multiplexer disconnects the battery and switches to the power supplied by the USB host. At a sample rate of 25 Hz per channel (a
rate fast enough to capture human movement [26], [31], [32]),
the manumeter draws on average 20.5 mA at 3.3 V from the
lithium polymer battery and can be powered for a maximum
of 21.5 h between charges. The battery recharges at 1 C and
reaches full capacity after a two and a half hour charge.
The manumeter writes to an on-board 4-GB microSD card
(maximum card size is 64 GB). At a sampling frequency of
25 Hz, the manumeter writes 1.8 MB of data per hour and can
log data for over 90 days before filling the card.
B. Device Calibration
1) Magnetometer Calibration: Removing Sources of Signal
Artifact: Changes in the magnetometer readings due to moving
the manumeter within the earth’s magnetic field are on the same
order as changes caused by moving the magnetic ring with the
wrist of fingers. However, the magnitude of the earth’s magnetic field does not change appreciably over short distances,
whereas that of the ring does. We thus use a differential signal
obtained by subtracting the reading from the two magnetometers to reject the unwanted movement artifacts introduced by the
earth’s magnetic field. Before taking the differential signal, the
magnetometers are first calibrated to respond uniformly. A perfectly calibrated magnetometer would measure the same vector
magnitude for earth’s magnetic field regardless of the magnetometer’s orientation. However, magnetic distortions caused by
ferromagnetic and EMF-producing components located close to
the sensors on the manumeter board cause them to respond more
strongly in some directions than in others. As demonstrated by
Renaudin et al. [33], these distortions can be modeled by fitting
an ellipsoid to the magnetic field measurements collected by
the sensor and using the ellipsoid parameters to translate, scale,

1806

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 3. Left: Magnetic field measurements of the triaxial magnetometer as
the manumeter was rotated in random orientations for 30 s away from ferrous
or magnetic materials. The nonsymmetrical ellipse about the x, y, and z axes
is a product of magnetic field distortions from ferrous and EMF producing
components on the manumeter PCB. Right: after calibration, signal artifacts are
removed and the magnetometer measures the same magnitude regardless of its
orientation when mapped in 3-D space.

and rotate the data such that each sensor’s response becomes
uniform across all orientations (see Fig. 3) [33], [34].
2) Effect of Ferrous Metal on Manumeter: Given the likelihood that manumeter users will encounter ferrous objects in
their daily routines, we measured how these interactions affect
the manumeter. A volunteer attached the ring and watch unit to a
rigid plastic frame mimicking a fixed hand orientation. We then
slowly moved the plastic frame toward a cast-iron dumbbell
(radius = 15 cm, height = 2.5 cm), measuring the position of
the dumbbell and manumeter using an optical motion capture
system (PhaseSpace Impulse X2) that had been calibrated to a
resolution of 1 mm. We repeated this step 15 times over the
course of one and a half minute. We defined the threshold for interference as occurring when the manumeter reading exceeded
four standard deviations of the normal variance of the readings,
which corresponds to a sensor reading outside of 99.99% of
normal readings.

Fig. 4. This wrist and hand goniometer exoskeleton was used to measure wrist
and index finger joint angles using four potentiometers, in order to calibrate the
manumeter and provide a “gold standard” for comparison.

Fig. 5. Three input, three output RBFN is used to map magnetometer values
to joint angles. X, Y, and Z components of the magnetometer differential signal
are inputs to the network. These inputs are sent through a bank of 25 radial basis
functions, and then, weighted and summed to produce estimates of radial/ulnar
deviation, wrist flexion/extension, and finger flexion/extension as outputs.

C. Algorithm Used for Joint Angle and Distance Estimation
1) Estimating Joint Angles With the Goniometric Exoskeleton: To create an algorithm to estimate joint angles with manumeter, we needed a “gold standard” measurement of the joint
angles. We used a custom-developed goniometric exoskeleton
for this purpose (see Fig. 4), which consisted of a gimbal placed
above the wrist, a two bar linkage connecting the wrist to the
hand, and a third joint aligned with the first MCP joint of the
index finger. A rotary position sensor (Murata SV03A) was
connected to each joint. Radial ulnar deviation was estimated
directly from the sensor located above the wrist joint. Wrist flexion/extension was estimated by first solving for the end point
of the two bar linkage, and then, calculating the angle between
the line from the wrist to the end point and the horizontal plane.
Finger flexion/extension was estimated directly from the potentiometer aligned with the first MCP of the index finger. All
rotary position sensors were calibrated prior to use and were
linear to within 2%.
2) RBF Network Algorithm for Joint Angle Estimation: After magnetometer calibration, we map the three differential
measurements from the magnetometers to wrist flexion/extension joint angle, wrist radial/ulnar deviation joint an-

gle, and finger flexion angle about the MCP joint for each subject. We wrote software to analyze the model using the Python
programming language. Instead of modeling this relationship
analytically, we use a three input, three output radial basis function network (RBFN) (see Fig. 5) that is trained from actual
data samples because it can incorporate subtle variations in detected field strength caused by ferromagnetic components in the
manumeter board that are difficult to model. The network consists of an input layer, a single hidden layer holding a bank of 25
nonlinear neurons, and an output layer consisting of three linear
output neurons. Each of the 25 neurons in the hidden layer is
represented by the Gaussian function


− (x − μx )2 − (y − μy )2 − (z − μz )2
rbf (x, y, z) = exp
σ2
(1)
where x, y, and z are the components of our differential measurements, μ(x, y, z) is the center position of the RBF, and σ
is its width. The output neurons are represented by a weighted
linear combination of the output of each RBF.

FRIEDMAN et al.: MANUMETER: A WEARABLE DEVICE FOR MONITORING DAILY USE OF THE WRIST AND FINGERS

We use a combination of supervised and unsupervised learning processes to find values for the widths, center positions,
and weights necessary to accurately map magnetometer inputs
to their corresponding joint angles. During this training process, we attach the goniometric exoskeleton to the manumeter
to obtain a “true” measure of joint angles of the finger and
wrist (see Fig. 5). Note that the goniometric exoskeleton has
no effect on the magnetometer readings because it contains no
ferrous elements. We locate center positions for the 25 RBFs
using a k-means algorithm to identify cluster centers within
our differential measurement data [35]. Similarly, we identify
the width of each RBF by measuring its average distance from
its ten nearest neighbors. We then identify output weights for
the RBFs using a variation of linear-least-squares optimization
known as ridge-regression. Ridge-regression seeks to minimize
the least squared error between the model output and the measured data while keeping the weights themselves as small as
possible. Penalizing large weights in a controlled way allows
us to reduce the overfitting effects in our model [36], [37]. The
extent to which, large weights are penalized is controlled by a
regularization parameter λ. To find the value for λ that minimizes the generalized cross validation score of the model, we
use the reestimation formula introduced by Mark [37].
3) Estimating Hand Use: Angular Distance Traveled: Unlike walking, in which a step is a relatively well defined, measurable action, there is no standardized action unit of hand use.
We, therefore, hypothesized that the total angular distance traveled in wrist flexion/extension, radial/ulnar deviation, and finger
flexion extension would reflect the amount of use of the hand.
To compute the angular distance traveled in each degree of freedom (DOF) over the course of a manumeter usage session, we
take the integral of the absolute value of the angular velocity of
the data. This metric of the hand use is similar to that employed
by Simone et al. [38]. All accuracy values reported below are
based on this distance travelled measure.
D. Accuracy and Repeatability Experiment
The aim of this experiment was to determine: 1) the accuracy of the manumeter in monitoring finger flexion/extension,
wrist flexion/extension, and wrist ulnar/radial deviation during a
series of range of motion and functional upper-extremity tasks;
2) the accuracy in estimating different levels of movement activity; and 3) the test-retest reliability of these measurements over
three separate sessions separated by days using only the initial
calibration from the first session. Seven healthy individuals, all
males, with an average age of 23.3 ± 3.4 SD years with no
upper-extremity movement disorders participated in the study.
The manumeter system was tested on the right hand for all subjects; one of the subjects was left-hand dominant. All subjects
provided written consent, and all procedures were approved by
the Institutional Review Board of UC Irvine.
1) Experimental Protocol: At the beginning of each session,
we calibrated the magnetometers for each participant as described previously. The participants then donned the magnetic
ring and exoskeleton and were instructed to move their fingers
and wrist randomly through their full range of motion for 2 min.

1807

We used this data to train the RBFN to map magnetometer values to the joint angles measured by the exoskeleton. Participants
were then instructed to complete a set of 12 tasks three times,
at either a low, medium, or high intensity. Subjects were randomly assigned to experience the three intensity conditions in
random order. The set of tasks that we instructed participants to
complete at the low-intensity condition were:
1) simulate eating ten Goldfish crackers one at a time;
2) flex and extend your fingers through your maximum
range of motion 10 times;
3) move 30 standard index playing cards one at a time;
4) take five bills and ten coins out of the provided wallet
and put the money back in the wallet one at a time;
5) open and close a door eight times;
6) pour 6oz of water from one 16oz cup into an identical
16oz cup spaced 12 in apart eight times;
7) perform a radial and ulnar deviation through your maximum range of motion ten times;
8) tie/untie the shoelaces from the provided shoe three
times;
9) type the phrase “The quick brown fox jumped over the
lazy dogs” six times;
10) lay your hand and arm flat on the table and remain still;
11) flex and extend your wrist through your maximum range
of motion ten times;
12) write the phrase “The quick brown fox jumped over the
lazy dogs” three times.
For the medium-intensity condition, participants were instructed to make twice as many repetitions as in the low-intensity
condition, and for the high-intensity condition, they performed
three times as many repetitions. For example, participants simulated eating 20 goldfish crackers in the medium-intensity condition, and 30 goldfish crackers in the high-intensity condition.
Subjects completed the same tasks in the same order for all intensity conditions varying only the quantity of movement. They
completed a total of three sessions spaced 1–2 days apart between session 1 and 2, and 6–8 days apart between sessions 2
and 3.
In order to match for the duration of each task for the three
conditions, subjects were allotted one and a half minutes to
complete each task. This duration was selected to give subjects
enough time to complete the specified number of repetitions in
the high-intensity condition. In the common event that a task
was completed before time expired, subjects were asked to lay
their hand and arm flat on the table and remain still. In the rare
event that the task was not completed before the allotted time,
subjects were instructed to finish the task. A computer program
guided the participants through each task by displaying how to
complete the task and the amount of time remaining for the given
task. A trained individual provided supplementary guidance and
helped to count the number of repetitions remaining in each task.
2) Analysis: Joint angle estimates from the manumeter and
goniometer were first low-pass filtered using a sixth-order Butterworth filter with a cutoff frequency of 2 Hz. We then calculated joint angular velocities by taking the derivative of
the joint angle estimates. We estimated the distance traveled
in wrist flexion/extension, radial/ulnar deviation, and finger

1808

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

We, therefore, calculated the offset from the first 12 tasks on
Day 1 of the experiment and applied that offset to all intensity
conditions on all days. With the offset correction applied to the
manumeter estimates, the accuracy of the total distance traveled
summed across all tasks, all conditions, and at all joint angles,
was on average 92.5% ± 28.4, 98.3% ± 23.3, and 94.7% ±
19.3 for Day 1, Day 2, and Day 3, respectively. Accuracy was
measured as the total angular distance traveled measured by
the manumeter divided by the total angular distance traveled
by the exoskeleton goniometer. The accuracy of total angular
distance travelled estimates of the manumeter compared to the
exoskeleton values with offset correction for each intensity level,
movement DOF, and testing day are shown in Table I.
Fig. 6. Angle estimates are shown from the shoe tying task at the mediumintensity condition for radial/ulnar deviation (top), wrist flexion/extension (middle), and finger flexion/extension (bottom) on Day 1. In the task, the participant
was asked to tie and untie his shoelaces six times in 90 s. The solid line represents calculated manumeter joint angle estimates and the dashed line represents
angle estimates from the goniometer exoskeleton.

flexion/extension by integrating the absolute value of the estimated joint angular velocities. We used MATLAB (Mathworks,
Natick, MA, USA) for all statistical tests.
III. RESULTS
A. Accuracy and Repeatability Experiment
A total of seven participants completed the series of tasks
wearing both the manumeter and exoskeleton at the low-,
medium-, and high-intensity conditions on “Day 1”, then 1–
2 days later (“Day 2”), and 6–8 days later (“Day 3”). All analysis
presented here used only the calibrations from Day 1.
The manumeter estimates correlated with the exoskeleton
estimates of the joint angles (see Fig. 6). Linearly regressing the
manumeter and exoskeleton angular distance traveled estimates
resulted in R2 values of 0.86–0.91 for wrist flexion/extension
and wrist radial/ulnar deviation, across all three training days
with all regressions being highly significant (P < 0.0001) (see
Fig. 7). The regressions were still significant for finger flexion,
but the R2 values were 0.39–0.61.
To determine whether the manumeter could detect the amount
of hand use in a fixed period, we summed the total angular distance traveled for all tasks completed for all joints at
each intensity condition. Since the design of the experiment
mandated that the amount of movement in the low-intensity
condition should double and triple in the medium- and highintensity conditions, we defined predicted values for the manumeter and exoskeleton goniometer by doubling and tripling their
distance traveled estimates at the low-intensity condition. The
manumeter estimates were on average 83%–94% of their predicted values including at the 6–8 day post follow up session,
while the exoskeleton goniometer estimates were 89%–99%
of the predicted values (see Fig. 8).
There was an offset in the estimate of the manumeter with
respect to that of the exoskeleton. In practice, this offset could
be measured during the initial calibration of the device on Day
1 for each subject, and then, subtracted for the following days.

B. Effect of Ferrous Metal on Manumeter
We tested the effects of a ferrous metal object on the data
collected by the manumeter by slowly moving the manumeter
and magnetic ring in a fixed configuration with respect to each
other, near a large cast-iron plate. The sensor readings exceeded
four standard deviations of the quiescent noise of the sensors
when the Manumeter moved within 9.5 cm of the plate.
IV. DISCUSSION
We tested the concept that magnetometers mounted at the
wrist can detect the magnetic field produced by a ring worn on
the finger, and then, be used to infer the angles of the wrist and
finger joints. The angle estimates calculated from this approach
correlated strongly with those calculated from a goniometric exoskeleton, although the finger flexion/extension estimates were
least accurate. Accuracy levels were maintained a week after
the initial calibration without recalibration.
We also tested the concept that the total distance traveled
by the joints, as measured by the manumeter, would reflect the
amount of a person’s manual activity in a fixed time period. We
controlled the amount of manual activity by varying the number
of repetitions performed in a set of manual tasks in the fixed
period. The estimate of total hand use scaled with the actual
amount of hand use, a unique finding to our knowledge. Such a
metric has been proposed before and used descriptively for one
subject [38], but here, we present a systematic experiment that
shows that this measure scaled to the amount of functional hand
activity individuals performed in each testing session.
In discussing these results, we compare the manumeter with
previous magnetic sensing approaches, and discuss its accuracy
and directions for future research.
A. Comparison With Previous Magnetic Sensing Systems
The use of magnetic sensing to measure manual activity has
been proposed before. Active systems such as the Polhemus system use electromagnetic coils to generate oscillating magnetic
fields at a specific frequency [39], [40]; wearable field generators
have been designed as well [41]. There are also systems that use
measurements of the earth’s magnetic field to identify the relative and absolute orientation of body segments [42]. There are
also previous systems that, like the manumeter, detect changes
in the position and orientation of a permanent magnet. In one

FRIEDMAN et al.: MANUMETER: A WEARABLE DEVICE FOR MONITORING DAILY USE OF THE WRIST AND FINGERS

1809

Fig. 7. Estimates of total angular distance traveled with the manumeter are plotted against estimates from the exoskeleton goniometer for wrist flexion/extension
(Wrist FE, left), radial/ulnar deviation (Wrist Dev., middle) and finger flexion/extension (Finger FE, right).

Fig. 8. Total angular distance summed across all 12 tasks and all three joint angles are shown at each intensity condition for Day 1 (left), Day 2 (middle, 2–3 days
later), and Day 3 (right, 6–8 days later). Data from the Manumeter and calibrator exoskeleton goniometer are shown by the solid gray and black lines, respectively.
Dashed lines show predictions calculated by doubling and tripling the values measured at the low-intensity condition. Error bars show 1 SD.

TABLE I
ACCURACY OF MANUMETER COMPARED TO GONIOMETER
Intensity

Day 1

Day 2

Day 3

Low
Movement
Wfe
Wru
Ffe
Average
Wfe
Wru
Ffe
Average
Wfe
Wru
Ffe
Average

%
74.6
137.5
71.2
84.1
66.1
154.4
72.9
82.2
83.5
132.7
47.0
82.6

Medium
SD
17.9
34.1
53.7
27.7
30.1
36.5
88.3
28.8
25.1
41.5
80.4
28.4

%
96.8
110.3
84.1
94.3
93.7
128.7
102.3
99.99
96.7
122.4
79.6
96.9

SD
12.9
17.3
35.3
9.4
26.2
27.2
88.8
22.4
15.2
34.9
55.3
23.0

High
%
100.6
101.8
96.7
99.1
97.1
124.6
152.4
112.8
104.9
109.7
99.9
104.6

SD
8.6
5.7
31.4
6.3
29.6
26.3
102.7
19.0
12.6
29.4
50.3
19.3

% is defined as the total angular distance estimates summed across all 12 tasks
for manumeter divided by total angular distance estimate of the exoskeleton goniometer. Values above 100% indicate an overestimate of distance traveled by the
manumeter while values below 100% indicate an underestimate. SD is standard deviation across subjects. W fe = Wrist ﬂexion/extension, Wru =
Wrist radial ulnar deviation, Ffe = Finger ﬂexion/extension.

such system, a permanent magnet attached to the fingernail and
a hall effect sensor embedded in a cast were used to monitor the
finger’s range of motion after tendon repair [43]. Other systems
have used implanted magnets and Hall effect sensors to obtain
joint angle feedback for prostheses [44] and functional electrical
stimulation [45]. Another system sensed sliding or rotation of a
magnetic ring to trigger computer input commands [46].
The system presented here is unique in several ways. The signal processing algorithm developed can convert low magnetic

field strength signals (0.3–0.6 G) into hand and wrist joint estimates, while other systems have relied on high magnetic field
strength signals (up to 33 G) [44], [47]. For this reason, we
need only a small magnetic ring to generate the magnetic field.
This is also apparently the first proposed system that can log
finger and wrist angles in an unrestricted environment without
the use of electronics on the fingers. The permanent magnetic
ring provides a reliable wireless signal that does not require a
power source, thus, obviating the need for bulky wiring or a battery. Because of these features, the manumeter described here
packages a hand and wrist data-logging device in a ring and a
watch—items that are socially acceptable, can be worn for long
durations, and are nonobtrusive.
B. Accuracy of the Manumeter
We analyzed the accuracy of the manumeter in two ways.
First, we compared its estimate of total joint distance traveled to
that of the “gold standard” goniometric exoskeleton, and found
it was 92%–98% accurate on average across subjects, with a
19%–28% standard deviation. Another way we asked the accuracy question was: if one measures a baseline level of activity
for a user, and then, the user doubles or triples their activity, how
accurately does the manumeter estimate the new level of activity
with respect to this doubling or tripling? Using this measure, the
manumeter estimates were 83%–94% of the predicted doubling
and tripling. Note that, subjects may have become more parsimonious in their hand movement when required to do more
task repetitions in the medium- and high-intensity conditions.
This would contribute to the underestimate also obtained with
the goniometric exoskeleton.

1810

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Modern electronic pedometers have been shown to be roughly
80% accurate on average at measuring distance traveled in free
living conditions with a variable error of 10%–30% depending
on the device [48]; therefore, utility of a wearable device is
possible with an accuracy level lower than that of the manumeter. One might also ask how the variability of the manumeter
compares to the variability of accelerometer-based devices for
measuring upper extremity use. In one influential study, accelerometry was used to measure the duration of arm movement
for five standardized activities of daily living performed for 30,
60, and 90 s conditions in the laboratory [20]. The accuracy of
the accelerometer was evaluated by expressing the SD of the
duration estimates as a percentage of the mean estimated duration. Raw counts produced variability of 39%, while thresholdfiltered counts produced variability of 3%, showing the value
of the now widely used threshold approach for accelerometry.
In comparison, the manumeter variability expressed as a percentage in this way for the low-, medium-, and high-intensity
conditions was 6%–17%. Thus, the manumeter is more variable than thresholded accelerometry. However, the manumeter
gives information about the actual excursions of the wrist and
finger during use, while accelerometry typically provides only
duration of arm use and a threshold-based count of arm use.
A key question is whether the level of variability of the manumeter is acceptable for a clinical study. To answer this question,
we used a power analysis to estimate the sample size needed
to detect a doubling of hand movement after stroke with this
device. We assumed a first group of control subjects with levels
of activity and variability equal to the low-intensity condition in
our experiment, and a second group of intervention subjects with
levels of activity and variability equal to the medium-intensity
condition (i.e., with double the activity of the control group
after the intervention), and used the Day 3 across-subject variability values for the manumeter (one week after calibration).
This power analysis predicted a sample size of 14 (7 in each
group) to detect such an increase in amount of hand use with
90% power at the 0.05 significance level using a two-sided t-test.
This is a reasonable sample size for a clinical study.
C. What Were the Sources of Error and Can They be Reduced?
First, some of the error we attributed to the manumeter may
actually be due to errors caused by the goniometric exoskeleton
shifting at its attachment points because of relative skin movement or simple sliding. Second, there may be some error due
to movement of the sensorized watch. This can be addressed
with proper instruction and fitting. Third, users of the manumeter will likely come in contact with ferrous items such as metal
railing. Indeed, two of the tasks in the experiment described
here required the subjects to interact directly with ferromagnetic objects (pesos, euros, and a doorknob), and this may have
contributed to error. We found here that large sources of ferrous
metal begin to have an effect (defined as exceeding four standard
deviations of the quiescent noise of the magnetometer sensors)
when the manumeter moves closer than 9.5 cm to a large metal
source. Thus, users will likely have to directly interact with a
ferromagnetic object to affect the magnetometer readings. Since

the distortions increase abruptly during close interaction with
ferromagnetic objects, it may be possible to identify and reject
data points that are collected outside of the normal input space.
Fourth, we note that finger flexion/extension joint angle measurement was least accurate, and this represents a weakness of
the proposed device. The finger range of motion is only 90°,
compared to about 180° for wrist flexion and extension, and this
decreased range may contribute to the decreased accuracy. This
outcome was also influenced from data from two of the participants whose manumeter total distance traveled estimates were
up to three times that of the exoskeleton goniometer estimates.
This large disparity between the two devices was likely due to
incomplete spanning of the movement space during calibration.
This problem may be avoidable by ensuring participants move
through their full range of motion during the calibration phase.
In other words, to be used effectively, accurate calibrations will
need to be obtained for each user, although once obtained, the
calibration is valid for at least a week, as we showed here.
Finally, the magnetometers of the manumeter used for this experiment were placed close to other ferromagnetic components
on the PCB. The magnetization of these components likely varied over the course of the data collection process as they interacted with the magnetic ring field, thereby changing the behavior
of the manumeter. This source of error can be addressed by separating the magnetometers from ferromagnetic components on
the PCB in future revisions.
Note that, because the system relies on a differential measurement, the performance of the manumeter is not significantly
affected by its location or orientation in space, and thus, the
calibration does not change if the user moves into a different
environment.
D. Directions for Future Research and Other Applications
Future studies are required to fully validate the use of the
manumeter to monitor the hand and wrist motion out of the laboratory. An important direction for future research is to compare
accelerometry techniques for estimating upper extremity use to
wrist and finger joint estimates obtained with the manumeter.
Combining accelerometry along with differential magnetometer readings may provide the most accurate estimates of upper
extremity use [49].
Other manumeter-based measures of hand use besides cumulative distance travelled by the wrist and finger joints are
possible. For example, joint angle information might also be
useful for identifying specific tasks that people engage in while
wearing the manumeter. The statistics of joint angles achieved
during daily life, such as the mean, standard deviation, or maximum range likely also contain important information about
hand use [38]. Also, by measuring the relationships and extents
of different wrist and joint angles, the manumeter could give
insight into the way the hand is used during the movement, such
as whether the kinematics of the hand movement are normal.
Along these lines, another possible application for the manumeter is to use it as a tool to identify nonergonomic behaviors
of the wrist and hand that could lead to repetitive stress injuries.
Using a nonneutral wrist posture while typing or using a mouse

FRIEDMAN et al.: MANUMETER: A WEARABLE DEVICE FOR MONITORING DAILY USE OF THE WRIST AND FINGERS

is a risk factor for musculoskeletal disorders [50]–[52]. Given
its ability to monitor both the orientation of the wrist and the
movement of the finger, the manumeter is well suited for such
an application [53].
The manumeter may also be useful as a therapeutic or exercise tool, as it could report daily use of the hand and arm and
inform the user whether he is meeting daily movement goals.
The manumeter could also be used as a real-time input device
for therapeutic video games to provide supplementary movement practice. It is also possible to use the manumeter as a
wearable three degrees-of-freedom computer-input device (like
a mouse), which may have applications for mobile computing
for both impaired and nonimpaired users.
Our initial target application, however, is to use the manumeter with people with stroke to determine how the amount they
use their stroke-affected hand affects their motor recovery and
rehabilitation outcomes. Use of the hand, in both rehabilitation
therapy sessions and daily life, exerts a training function on
the damaged sensory motor circuits that must be reshaped to
improve the hand function. Therefore, the total amount of the
movement a person with stroke achieves with the hand should
alter hand movement recovery, a hypothesis that has never been
precisely tested, although analysis of subjective clinical outcomes support this idea (e.g., [54]). The manumeter provides a
more precise tool than currently available to test this hypothesis
since it can be worn in daily life to directly detect finger and
wrist movement.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank E. Tazbaz for his original
design of the manumeter enclosure, and Greg Tyler for his contribution to the manumeter display unit.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Patel, H. Park, P. Bonato, L. Chan, and M. Rodgers, “A review of wearable sensors and systems with application in rehabilitation,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 21–38, Jan. 2012.
[2] P. Bonato, “Advances in wearable technology and applications in physical
medicine and rehabilitation,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 2–6,
Feb. 2005.
[3] B. O. Brand, “Microsensor integration into systems-on-chip,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 94, no. 6, pp. 1160–1176, Jun. 2006.
[4] B. H. Dobkin, P. Plummer-D’Amato, R. Elashoff, and J. Lee, “International randomized clinical trial, stroke inpatient rehabilitation with reinforcement of walking speed (SIRROWS), improves outcomes,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 235–242, 2010.
[5] G. Uswatte, E. Taub, D. Morris, K. Light, and P. A. Thompson, “The
motor activity log-28: Assessing daily use of the hemiparetic arm after
stroke,” Neurology, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 1189–1194, Oct. 2006.
[6] G. Uswatte, E. Taub, D. Morris, M. Vignolo, and K. McCulloch, “Reliability and validity of the upper-extremity motor activity log-14 for measuring
real-world arm use,” Stroke, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 2493–2496, Nov. 2005.
[7] E. Jaraczewska and C. Long, “Kinesio taping in stroke: Improving functional use of the upper extremity in hemiplegia,” Topics Stroke Rehabil.,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 31–42, 2006.
[8] C. E. Lang and M. O. Saint Louis, “Assessment of upper extremity impairment, function, and activity following stroke: Foundations for clinical
decision making,” J. Hand Surg. Brit. Eur., vol. 26, pp. 1–21, 2013.
[9] S. J. Morris and J. A. Paradiso, “Shoe-integrated sensor system for wireless
gait analysis and real-time feedback,” in Proc. 2nd Joint 24th Annu. Conf.

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

1811

Annu. Fall Meeting Biomed. Eng. Soc. Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 3, 2002,
pp. 2468–2469.
E. F. Shepherd, E. Toloza, C. D. McClung, and T. P. Schmalzried, “Step
activity monitor: Increased accuracy in quantifying ambulatory activity,”
J. Orthopaedic Res., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 703–708, 1999.
K. L. Coleman, D. G. Smith, D. A. Boone, A. W. Joseph, and
M. A. Del Aguila, “Step activity monitor: Long-term, continuous recording of ambulatory function,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 36, no. 1.
pp. 8–18, 1999.
J. F. Nichols, P. Patterson, and T. Early, “A validation of a physical activity
monitor for young and older adults,” Can. J. Sport Sci., vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 299–303, 1992.
D. Hendelman, K. Miller, C. Baggett, E. Debold, and P. Freedson, “Validity
of accelerometry for the assessment of moderate intensity physical activity
in the field,” Med. Sci. Sport. Exercise, vol. 32, pp. S442–S449, 2000.
A. Godfrey, R. Conway, D. Meagher, and G. OLaighin, “Direct measurement of human movement by accelerometry,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30,
no. 10, pp. 1364–1386, 2008.
P. Paulick, H. Djalilian, and M. Bachman, “Stabilitysole : Embedded sensor insole for balance and gait monitoring,” in Digital Human Modeling.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2011, pp. 171–177.
S. C. van der Pas, J. A. Verbunt, D. E. Breukelaar, R. van Woerden, and
H. A. Seelen, “Assessment of arm activity using triaxial accelerometry
in patients with a stroke,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 92, no. 9,
pp. 1437–1442, Sep. 2011.
G. Uswatte, C. Giuliani, C. Winstein, A. Zeringue, L. Hobbs, and
S. L. Wolf, “Validity of accelerometry for monitoring real-world arm
activity in patients with subacute stroke: Evidence from the extremity
constraint-induced therapy evaluation trial,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.,
vol. 87, no. 10, pp. 1340–1345, Oct. 2006.
B. Knorr, R. Hughes, D. Sherrill, J. Stein, M. Akay, and P. Bonato,
“Quantitative measures of functional upper limb movement in persons
after stroke,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. EMBS Conf. Neural Eng., 2005,
pp. 252–255.
E. Haeuber, M. Shaughnessy, L. W. Forrester, K. L. Coleman, and R.
F. Macko, “Accelerometer monitoring of home- and community-based
ambulatory activity after stroke,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 85,
no. 12, pp. 1997–2001, 2004.
G. Uswatte, W. H. Miltner, B. Foo, M. Varma, S. Moran, and E. Taub,
“Objective measurement of functional upper-extremity movement using
accelerometer recordings transformed with a threshold filter,” Stroke,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 662–667, Mar. 2000.
S. Patel, R. Hughes, T. Hester, J. Stein, M. Akay, J. G. Dy, and P. Bonato,
“A novel approach to monitor rehabilitation outcomes in stroke survivors
using wearable technology,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 98, no. 3, pp. 450–461,
Mar. 2010.
D. M. Karantonis, M. R. Narayanan, M. Mathie, N. H. Lovell, and
B. G. Celler, “Implementation of a real-time human movement classifier
using a triaxial accelerometer for ambulatory monitoring,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 156–167, Jan. 2006.
F. Lorussi, E. P. Scilingo, M. Tesconi, A. Tognetti, and D. De Rossi, “Strain
sensing fabric for hand posture and gesture monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 372–381, Oct. 2005.
T. G. Zimmerman, J. Lanier, C. Blanchard, S. Bryson, and Y. Harvill, “A
hand gesture interface device,” ACM SIGCHI Bull., vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
189–192, 1987.
D. Sturman and D. Zeltzer, “A survey of glove-based input,” IEEE Comput.
Graph. Appl., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 30–39, Jan. 1994.
L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, X. Luo, Y. Jia, and D. G. Kamper, “A
low cost instrumented glove for extended monitoring and functional hand
assessment,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 160, no. 2, pp. 335–348, 2007.
N. W. WilliamS, J. M. T. Penrose, C. M. Caddy, E. Barry, D. R. Hose, and
P. Hareley, “A goniometric glove for clinical hand assessment,” J. Hand
Surg. Brit. Eur. Vol., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 200–207, 2000.
L. Dipietro, A. M. Sabatini, and P. Dario, “Evaluation of an instrumented
glove for hand-movement acquisition,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 40,
no. 2, pp. 179–189, 2003.
S. V Adamovich, A. S. Merians, R. Boian, J. A. Lewis, M. Tremaine,
G. S. Burdea, M. Recce, and H. Poizner, “A virtual reality-based system
for hand diagnosis and rehabilitation,” Presence Teleoperators Virtual
Environ., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 229–240, 2005.
H. Zheng, N. D. Black, and N. D. Harris, “Position-sensing technologies
for movement analysis in stroke rehabilitation,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 413–420, Jul. 2005.

1812

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

[31] G. P. Van Galen, R. R. Van Doorn, and L. R. Schomaker, “Effects of motor
programming on the power spectral density function of finger and wrist
movements,” J. Exp. Psychol. Human Percept. Perform., vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 755–765, 1990.
[32] C. R. Mason, J. E. Gomez, and T. J. Ebner, “Hand synergies during reachto-grasp,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 2896–2910, 2001.
[33] V. Renaudin, M. H. Afzal, and G. Lachapelle, “Complete triaxis magnetometer calibration in the magnetic domain,” J. Sens., vol. 2010, pp. 1–10,
2010.
[34] I. Markovsky, A. Kukush, and S. Van Huffel, “Consistent least squares
fitting of ellipsoids,” Numer. Math., vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 177–194, Apr. 2004.
[35] T. Kanungo, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Piatko, R. Silverman,
and A. Y. Wu, “An efficient k-means clustering algorithm: Analysis and
implementation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 24, no. 7,
pp. 881–892, Jul. 2002.
[36] B. Place, “Introduction to radial basis function networks,” Time, vol. 2,
pp. 1–67, 1996.
[37] J. L. O. Mark, “Regularization in the selection of radial basis function
centers,” Neural Comput., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 606–623, 1995.
[38] L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, E. P. Elovic, X. Luo, Y. Jia, and D. G.
Kamper, “Measuring finger flexion and activity trends over a 25 hour
period using a low cost wireless device,” in Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Jan. 2006, vol. 1, pp. 6281–6284.
[39] F. Raab and E. Blood, “Magnetic position and orientation tracking system,”
IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag., vol. AES-15, no. 5, pp. 709–718,
Sep. 1979.
[40] K. Mitobe, T. Kaiga, T. Yukawa, T. Miura, H. Tamamoto, A. Rodgers, and
N. Yoshimura, “Development of a motion capture system for a hand using
a magnetic three dimensional position sensor,” presented at the ACM
SIGGRAPH, Boston, MA, USA, 2006, pp. 102–103.
[41] C.-S. Fahn and H. Sun, “Development of a fingertip glove equipped with
magnetic tracking sensors,” Sensors (Basel), vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1119–1140,
Jan. 2010.
[42] S. Micera, E. Cavallaro, R. Belli, F. Zaccone, E. Gulielmelli, P. Dario,
D. Collarini, B. Martinelli, C. Santin, and R. Marcovich, “Functional
assessment of hand orthopedic disorders using a sensorised glove: Preliminary results,” Robotics, vol. 2, pp. 2212–2217, 2003.
[43] G. F. Phillips, D. A. McGrouther, and B. J. Andrews, “Finger mobility
following flexor tendon repair,” J. Hand Surg., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 337–339,
Oct. 1985.
[44] E. J. Rouse, D. C. Nahlik, M. A. Peshkin, and T.A. Kuiken, “Development
of a model osseo-magnetic link for intuitive rotational control of upperlimb prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 213–220, Apr. 2011.

[45] M. W. Johnson, P. H. Peckham, N. Bhadra, K. L. Kilgore, M. M. Gazdik,
M. W. Keith, and P. Strojnik, “Implantable transducer for two-degree of
freedom joint angle sensing,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 349–359, Sep. 1999.
[46] D. Ashbrook, P. Baudisch, and S. White, “Nenya: Subtle and eyes-free
mobile input with a magnetically-tracked finger ring,” in Proc. Annu. Conf.
Human Factors Comput. Syst., 2011, pp. 2043–2046.
[47] G. Li and T. A. Kuiken, “Modeling of prosthetic limb rotation control
by sensing rotation of residual arm bone,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2134–2142, Sep. 2008.
[48] Y. Feito, D. R. Bassett, and D. L. Thompson, “Evaluation of activity
monitors in controlled and free-living environments,” Med. Sci. Sports
Exercise, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 733–741, Apr. 2012.
[49] J. Rowe, N. Friedman, V. Chan, S. C. Cramer, M. Bachman, and
D. J. Reinkensmeyer, “Is accelerometry good enough?: Relationship between arm use detected with accelerometry and hand use detected with
magnetometry,” presented at the IEEE 36th Annu. Int. Conf. Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Chicago, IL, USA, 2014.
[50] J. Qin, H. Chen, and J. T. Dennerlein, “Wrist posture affects hand and
forearm muscle stress during tapping,” Appl. Ergonom., vol. 44, pp. 1–8,
Apr. 2013.
[51] J. T. Dennerlein and P. W. Johnson, “Different computer tasks affect the exposure of the upper extremity to biomechanical risk factors,” Ergonomics,
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 45–61, Jan. 2006.
[52] J. Wahlström, “Ergonomics, musculoskeletal disorders and computer
work,” Occup. Med. (Lond)., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 168–176, May 2005.
[53] M. Brown, J. J. Rowe, K. Sharp, D. J. Reinkensmeyer, and N. Friedman,
“The manumeter: An innovative tool for hand and wrist measurement
in occupational health,” Amer. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 93, no. 3,
pp. 17–21, 2014.
[54] N. Schweighofer, C. E. Han, S. L. Wolf, M. A. Arbib, and C. J. Winstein,
“A functional threshold for long-term use of hand and arm function can
be determined: Predictions from a computational model and supporting
data from the extremity constraint-induced therapy evaluation (EXCITE)
trial,” Phys. Therapy, vol. 89, no. 12, pp. 1327–1336, 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

