1042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

A Powered Prosthetic Intervention for Bilateral
Transfemoral Amputees
Brian E. Lawson, Student Member, IEEE, Brian Ruhe, Amanda Shultz, Student Member, IEEE,
and Michael Goldfarb∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents the design and validation of a
control system for a pair of powered knee and ankle prostheses
to be used as a prosthetic intervention for bilateral transfemoral
amputees. The control system leverages communication between
the prostheses for enhanced awareness and stability, along with
power generation at the knee and ankle joints to better restore
biomechanical functionality in level ground walking. The control
methodology employed is a combination of an impedance-based
framework for weight-bearing portions of gait and a trajectorybased approach for the nonweight-bearing portions. The control
system was implemented on a pair of self-contained powered knee
and ankle prostheses, and the ability of the prostheses and control
approach to provide walking functionality was assessed in a set of
experimental trials with a bilateral transfemoral amputee subject.
Specifically, experimental data from these trials indicate that the
powered prostheses and bilateral control architecture provide gait
kinematics that reproduce healthy gait kinematics to a greater
extent than the subject’s daily-use passive prostheses.
Index Terms—Powered prosthesis, robotics, transfemoral.

I. INTRODUCTION
T is difficult to estimate the number of bilateral lower limb
amputees living in the United States. In the largest amputee
demographic study known to the authors, persons suffering multiple amputations were not distinguished, although the total
number of amputees was shown to be both large (with over
600 000 being either above the knee, below the knee, or the
foot) and rapidly growing (projected to double over the next
50 years) [1]. The absence of an explicit report of the number of
bilateral transfemoral amputees in the preceding study suggests
that the population may be relatively small compared to the total
number of persons living with a lower limb amputation.

I

Manuscript received February 18, 2014; revised April 22, 2014; accepted
June 18, 2014. Date of publication July 2, 2014; date of current version March
17, 2015. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health, Grant
no. R21 HD076124. B. E. Lawson, A. Shultz, and M. Goldfarb hold patent
applications through Vanderbilt University that have been licensed to Freedom
Innovations, a United States-based prosthetics manufacturer. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
B. E. Lawson and A. Shultz are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37212 USA
(e-mail: brian.e.lawson@vanderbilt.edu; amanda.shultz@vanderbilt.edu).
B. Ruhe is with the College of Orthotics and Prosthetics, California
State University, Dominguez Hills, Long Beach, CA 90822 USA
(e-mail: blr@u.northwestern.edu).
∗ M. Goldfarb is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37212 USA (e-mail: michael.
goldfarb@vanderbilt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2334616

Several studies do distinguish multiple amputations, however.
For the period of April 1, 2006 through March 31, 2007, 4%
of the 4574 referrals to the 43 prosthetics service centers in the
U.K. were bilateral lower limb amputees [2]. In a review of
1846 lower limb amputees admitted to the Dundee Limb Fitting
Centre in Scotland between 1965 and 1989, 18% were bilateral,
with 3.6% being bilateral, transfemoral [3]. If these numbers are
comparable for the U.S. population, then the number of persons
living with bilateral, transfemoral amputations is likely to be
quite small.
The size of the population could be a major contributing
factor in the lack of dedicated research concerning prosthetic
interventions for bilateral, transfemoral amputees. Such a small
population does not draw a strong commercial interest in a free
market society, and as such, bilateral amputees that choose to
utilize prostheses are forced to select from a family of prostheses developed almost exclusively for the needs of the unilateral
amputee. A review that included 11 bilateral, transfemoral amputees from a particular regional amputee rehabilitation center
over the period between July 1988 and December 1989 evaluated functional status at discharge from the center and three
months later [4]. Of the 11 patients, none at any point were
able to achieve either “limited community” or “community”
ambulation classifications, and six of the 11 at the three-month
follow-up were classified as “wheelchair bound.” The “limited
community” classification was defined as “a patient who can
walk 152 m (500 ft), can participate in some avocational activity, but is not gainfully employed.”
A separate study investigating the mobility of wounded veterans included 50 bilateral lower limb amputees from both the
Vietnam War and Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation Enduring
Freedom (OIF/OEF) [5]. Thirty-three percent of the members
of the Vietnam group abandoned their prostheses in favor of
a wheelchair, while only 5% of the members of the OIF/OEF
group did so. The vast majority of the abandoned prostheses
in the Vietnam group were purely mechanical (as opposed
to microprocessor-controlled passive devices), with a similar
trend in abandonment for mechanical prostheses amongst the
OIF/OEF veterans. This result suggests that increasing the functionality of the prosthesis may reduce the likelihood of abandonment, which has been shown to be quite high in bilateral,
transfemoral amputees [6].
A. Bilateral Transfemoral Gait
Unilateral lower limb amputees typically exhibit significant
compensatory behaviors in their intact limb (sound side) in order
to accommodate the deficiencies of a typical passive prosthesis.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LAWSON et al.: POWERED PROSTHETIC INTERVENTION FOR BILATERAL TRANSFEMORAL AMPUTEES

1043

Such compensatory actions include a longer stance phase on the
sound side (presumably for stability) [7], increased hip extensor
and ankle plantarflexor work on the sound side [8], and vaulting
(which is a midstance plantarflexion of the sound ankle in stance
to provide extra ground clearance during swing of the prosthetic
limb). These compensatory actions may be partially responsible
for the increase in metabolic energy experienced by unilateral
amputees during level walking [9]–[11].
Bilateral amputees have no intact limb to provide these compensatory behaviors, and they are significantly more limited in
their ability to ambulate with prostheses. All control of and
compensation for the prostheses must come solely from the
hips. Since most prostheses are passive devices, the hips are
overtaxed in terms of power generation, leading to excessive
hip torques and a substantially increased in metabolic cost of
transport [12]–[15].
B. Emergence of Powered Prostheses
Traditionally, lower limb prostheses were passive by necessity; the technology required to construct a powered device
comparable in size and weight to the anatomical limb has only
emerged over the last five to ten years. Now that the supporting
technology has arrived (power-dense motors/batteries and efficient microprocessors), the field of prosthetics is beginning to
incorporate active elements. A number of research groups have
published preliminary results on a variety of powered lower limb
devices.
The prosthetics and orthotics company Ossur has released two
versions of a powered knee joint called the power knee. This
knee prosthesis is designed to be used in conjunction with an
off-the-shelf passive prosthetic ankle/foot. Because the power
knee has only existed as a commercial product, no literature is
known to the authors regarding its design or control.
Herr et al. have developed a powered ankle for transtibial
amputees, which leverages both series- and parallel-elastic actuation [16]–[20]. By measuring the deflection of a series spring
(with known spring constant Ks ), an estimate of the ankle torque
can be determined. An added benefit of series elasticity is that the
introduction of compliance in between the prosthetic foot and
the actuator softens the transfer of impulses from shock loading
(i.e., heel strike), which may reduce wear on the mechanical
transmission. The parallel spring reduces the peak torque required from the actuator at the high-power push-off event in the
late stance phase of level walking. In a study on three transtibial
amputees comparing the use of a passive ankle with the powered
prototype, it was shown that the powered ankle was able to reduce the energetic cost of transport by 7–20% [16]. In addition,
the control approach demonstrated in [20] incorporates intrinsic
speed adaptation, allowing an efficient gait across a range of
walking speeds.
A separate effort in powered ankle design conducted by Sugar
et al. has produced a two degree of freedom ankle, named
SPARKy 3, which stands for spring ankle with regenerative
kinetics [21], [22]. An important goal in this effort was to enhance the agility of active users by providing the power necessary for running and jumping, along with providing actuation

Fig. 1.

Pair of powered prostheses used in the experiments.

in the coronal plane. As a result, the designers opted to use two
Maxon EC30 Powermax motors operating in parallel to provide
400 W of continuous power, with estimated peaks of up to
1500 W.
Lefeber et al. have just reported on another powered ankle
that uses an electric motor to store energy in a spring during
stance [23]. This design reduces the power requirements of the
motor by spreading the energy delivery over a longer period of
time (all of stance instead of the brief moment of powered pushoff). Testing of the design shows energy delivery that matches
or exceeds healthy subject data.
Other research efforts are using electromyography, inertial
measurement, and other techniques to enhance control systems
for powered knees or ankles [24]–[37]. To date, however, this is
the first work known to the authors concerning the application
of integrated powered knee and ankle prostheses for bilateral
amputees.
II. METHODS
A. Powered Prosthesis
The authors have previously developed and reported on a
powered transfemoral prosthesis prototype. The device has been
shown to perform level walking [38], real-time intent recognition [39], upslope walking [40], ground adaptive standing [41],
and stair ascent and descent [42]. Although the prototype (see
Fig. 1) has undergone a series of revisions, the fundamental design has remained consistent. The joints are actuated by brushless DC motors rated nominally for 200 W continuous power
(Maxon EC-4pole 30). They drive the joints through enclosed
three stage transmissions consisting of a primary multi-V belt
stage, a secondary roller chain stage, and a tertiary double-roller
chain stage. The prototype can achieve approximately 100 N·m

1044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

of torque at the ankle joint and 90 N·m of torque at the knee
joint. A custom aluminum bridge connects the knee unit to the
ankle unit and can achieve a minimum build height of 50 cm,
as measured from the bottom of the prosthetic foot shell to the
top of the pyramid connector. The structural components have
been designed to accommodate an 85-kg user with a minimum
safety factor of 2.
In the current design, the number of sensors on the prosthesis
has been reduced by replacing the heel and toe load sensors
with a single axial load cell in the shank as a measure of weight
bearing, and by removing the optical encoders on the motors
in favor of the integrated hall effect sensors as a measure of
motor position and velocity. The joint angles are now directly
measured with absolute magnetic encoders, which means that
all control signals are derived from noncontact sensors, which
is intended to substantially improve lifetime and reliability.
The prosthesis is controlled by an embedded system that consists of two microcontrollers: a 32-bit general purpose microcontroller for high-level control and a 16-bit digital signal processor
(DSP) for low-level control. The 32-bit microcontroller runs the
control system as described in this paper and performs overhead
functions such as data logging and interprosthesis communications. The DSP implements closed-loop current control on the
knee and ankle motors and receives a current reference from
the 32-bit microcontroller over a serial peripheral interface. The
impedance control loop and state machines are updated at a
sampling rate of 500 Hz, while the current control loop runs at
approximately 5 kHz.
B. Walking Controller
The original control system for the unilateral transfemoral
prosthesis consisted of a finite-state-based impedance control
framework, as described in [38]. For level walking, the gait
sequence was parsed into discrete states accessed sequentially
through biomechanical cues measured by sensors in the prosthesis. Within each state, a simple impedance control law was
implemented to approximate the impedance seen in healthy gait.
The following linear control law was utilized in each state:
τ = k(θ − θeq ) + bθ̇

(1)

where τ represents the commanded joint torque (for either the
knee or ankle joint), θ represents the joint angular position, and
θ̇ represents the joint angular velocity. k, b, and θeq are tunable
parameters that define a virtual spring and damper, where k is
the spring stiffness, θeq is the spring equilibrium position, and
b is the damping coefficient.
In this paper, the control system includes provisions specific
to bilateral applications. In particular, a data tether using the
controller area network (CAN) protocol has been implemented
to share information between the two prostheses. At a rate of
500 Hz, the prostheses exchange the following signals:
1) run_time—counter that increments every sample;
2) control_modes—state information for the control system;
3) knee_position—angle of the knee joint;
4) knee_velocity—velocity of the knee joint;
5) ankle_position—angle of the ankle joint;

Fig. 2. Finite state machines executed by the prostheses. θa is the ankle joint
angle, which is compared to a predetermined threshold, θt h , to trigger the transition into the ankle push-off state. Fs is the axial load in the prosthetic shank,
which is compared to a predetermined threshold, Ft h , to trigger the transition
into swing. The swing state executes a trajectory and automatically reverts to
the stance state when the trajectory ends, which corresponds to the percentage
of stride, ρs , reaching 100%. The red conditions on the transition from State 0
to State 1 are safety conditions that are dependent upon the contralateral signals
c ρ and c S, which are the contralateral percentage of stride and contralateral
s
state, respectively.

6) ankle_velocity—velocity of the ankle joint;
7) shank_load—axial load in the shank;
8) prc_stride—percentage of stride for the current stride.
The number of states and state behavior has also been modified from the original finite-state-based impedance control
framework. The bilateral controller has three distinct states for
the level walking gait cycle (see Fig. 2). In each state, (1) is
implemented for both the knee and ankle joints. In the stance
state, the impedance parameters are constant, thereby producing a locally passive system that will always come to rest in
the absence of disturbances or input from the user. In this state,
both joints are tuned to behave as stiff, overdamped systems
when supporting the user’s body weight. Neither joint should
be overly stiff, however, to allow for stance knee flexion and
ankle plantarflexion for shock absorption after heel strike.
In the push-off state, the ankle impedance parameters are also
constant, though the equilibrium position of the ankle is moved
from a neutral value (tuned specifically for the user) to an appropriate plantarflexed value to generate the energy and motion
for powered push off. By arbitrarily changing this equilibrium
value, a finite amount of energy is introduced to the system,
creating a transient response, but then, immediately reverting to
a passive system within this state. Push off cannot be repeatedly
excited due to constraints on allowed state transitions such as
the requirement for alternating strides described subsequently.

LAWSON et al.: POWERED PROSTHETIC INTERVENTION FOR BILATERAL TRANSFEMORAL AMPUTEES

Fig. 3.

Healthy subject joint behavior reprinted from [43].

1045

speed at which the device moves), and that the forces produced
by the prosthesis are specifically tuned to interact safely with the
environment. These features are in direct opposition to the nature of high-gain trajectory control, which specifies precisely the
time dependence of the motion at a high-disturbance-rejecting
impedance. If the walking speed is known, however, the timedependent nature of trajectory execution in the prosthesis simplifies to a problem of proper initiation of the trajectory. This is
the same problem seen in the pure finite-state-based framework,
as the thresholds for state transitions must be timed accordingly
for each user. Additionally, the high impedance used in trajectory tracking will not accommodate unknown interactions in the
environment, such as the varying load placed upon the prosthesis by the user. In a nonweight bearing phase of gait such as
swing, however, external loads are minimal. Since the authors
have previously demonstrated an algorithm to detect and classify
stumbles [45], a robotic prosthesis could easily be programmed
to change its behavior in the event of a stumble, meanwhile
retaining high-gain trajectory control during the swing phase.
For these reasons, the swing phase of the walking controller
has been reduced to a single state that executes appropriate
trajectories at the knee and ankle joints. Upon completion of
the trajectories, the controller reverts to the initial state (stance),
previously described. The trajectories are produced by a spline
interpolation generated upon entry into the state. Both the shape
and duration of the trajectories are determined by an estimate
of the cadence, as subsequently described.
C. Interprosthesis Communication

Fig. 4. Approximately linear relationship between knee angle and ankle angle
during level walking in healthy subjects between 45% and 60% of stride.

In order to simplify the tuning process, however, the knee behavior is modified in the push-off state. While the stiffness and
damping coefficient of the knee joint remain fixed during push
off, the equilibrium position becomes a function of the ankle angle. During push off, which takes place between approximately
45% and 60% of stride (see Fig. 3), the knee angle and ankle
angle have an approximately linear correlation. This observation has been noted previously in the literature and leveraged
for the design of a passive prosthesis [44]. A linear least squares
relationship was determined from the healthy data presented in
[43] and is depicted in Fig. 4. This relationship is used to continuously calculate the knee equilibrium position in the push-off
state. As a result, the knee and ankle angles are kinematically
linked in this state. As the user unloads the ankle, the knee begins to yield in a synchronous manner, giving the user direct
control over the duration of this state through the modulation of
load on the prosthesis.
The third and final state consists of the swing phase of gait.
Because the prosthesis is nonload bearing in this state, the classical advantages of pure impedance-based control would not be
fully realized. The two primary advantages of the finite-statebased impedance control framework presented in [38] are that
the behavior of the prosthesis is not explicitly time dependent
(i.e., the user, as opposed to the device, has control over the

Using the control signals exchanged between the prostheses,
each prosthesis implements several safety features to avoid inappropriate mode transitions, which could potentially destabilize
or injure the user. First, the prostheses are constrained to only
allow alternating steps. Neither prosthesis can enter the push-off
state a second time before the contralateral prosthesis has done
so. There is a 2-s time-out on this feature, such that standing
for a moment will reenable push off on both prostheses. Additionally, once one prosthesis has entered the push-off state,
the contralateral prosthesis is locked out from also entering the
push-off state until the ipsilateral prosthesis has reached the last
10% of the stride. It is important to allow the triggering of a
contralateral push off before ipsilateral heel strike in order to
achieve dynamic walking similar to healthy biomechanics. An
earlier push off, however, could result in premature destabilization on the ipsilateral (stance) leg and might produce a fall and,
as such, must be avoided.
D. Variable Cadence
The stance- and push-off states of the controller inherently
accommodate a variable cadence, since there is no explicit time
dependence in the control law. In these phases, therefore, the
user can control cadence simply by modulating the speed at
which he or she moves the hip. At faster cadences, the ankle
transition (State 0 to State 1) and the load transition (State 1
to State 2) occur sooner. For the swing state, which executes
trajectories for the knee and ankle joints, the duration and shape

1046

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Three reference trajectories and an estimated trajectory for the swing phase of walking at the knee and ankle joints.

of the trajectories are altered for each stride. Holgate et al.
have presented a similar approach for a powered ankle in [46].
A timer is initialized at the beginning of the push-off phase
(Phase 1) and its value at the end of this phase determines
the speed and shape of the trajectory executed in the swing phase
(Phase 2). At this point in the stride, the speed of the stride is
determined until the subsequent heel strike, at which point the
control behavior reverts to the nontime-varying impedance control law of (1). Although the duration of the push-off state is only
a portion of the stance timing available for cadence estimation,
allowing the beginning portion of stance to be independent of
cadence provides an important safety and control mechanism
for bilateral amputees. During the stance phase (early and middle stance, specifically), a bilateral amputee may take more time
than a healthy subject to stabilize at the hip and achieve an appropriate balance. This time may not be a function of the user’s
desired cadence, and consequently, it is not used in the cadence
estimation.
The duration of the trajectories executed in the swing phase
are directly proportional to the duration of the previous push-off
phase. The shape of the trajectories, however, is also adjusted
according to this measure of cadence. Three reference trajectories are specified at nominal, slow, and fast cadences via seven
points. The duration of time spent in the push-off phase is used to
interpolate between the closest two of these three sets of points,
creating a new spline that corresponds to the cadence. Although
the differences between the reference splines are adjustable at
each control point, in this study, the only control points that were
modified were the ones that affected the maximum knee flexion,
as can be seen in Fig. 5. Effectively, the maximum knee flexion
is reduced at slower cadences and increased at faster cadences.
E. Experimental Validation
The control system was implemented on a pair of prostheses
and vetted through the use of able body adapters on healthy
subjects [47]. The system was then implemented on a bilateral
transfemoral amputee subject (one of the authors). The subject
was 38 years of age, and his bilateral amputations were the
result of a traumatic injury at the age of 18. He wore Ossur
Rheo knees (microprocessor controlled knees, or MPCs) and
College Park Soleus ankles (dynamic-elastic response ankles,

or DERs) for daily use and for comparison in this study. He
weighed approximately 70 kg at the time of the testing. After
several testing and development sessions, a kinematic assessment was performed on both daily-use (passive) prostheses and
the powered prostheses. Approval for this study was given by the
Vanderbilt University Institutional Review Board and informed
consent was obtained before the assessment.
For each pair of prostheses, the subject walked at two comfortable walking speeds of his choosing overground in a motion
capture laboratory. He was fitted with a full skeletal marker set
for motion capture with a NaturalPoint Optitrack motion capture system. Data were collected for ten trials using both the
powered prostheses and the subject’s daily-use passive prostheses. Because of the limited capture volume (approximately
36 square meters), the middle two strides were selected from
each trial for analysis. The motion capture data were exported
in the Biovision Hierachy (BVH) file format and imported into
Matlab for postprocessing. Heel strikes were manually selected
in MATLAB and the cardan angles specified in the BVH file
were converted to homogeneous transformation matrices. From
these matrices, sagittal joint angles were extracted for the hip,
knee, and ankle joints for each limb. Each stride was then normalized in terms of percentage of stride using the heel strikes
selected previously.

III. RESULTS
The joint angles for the right side hip, knee, and ankle are
plotted in Fig. 6 for able bodied subjects (reprinted from [43]),
the amputee subject using the powered prostheses, and the amputee subject using his daily-use passive prostheses. A video is
included in the supplementary that shows the subject walking
on both pairs of prostheses outside of the motion capture laboratory. The healthy subject data did not explicitly state walking
speeds or cadences, but the data reprinted here are specified as
a slow cadence, which most closely represents the subject’s selected cadences. On the powered prostheses, the subject walked
with an average cadence of 66 steps/min (step length of 1.23 m
and speed of 0.68 m/s) at a self-selected slow speed and
83 steps/min (step length of 1.44 m and speed of 0.99 m/s)
at a self-selected normal cadence. On his daily-use prostheses,
the subject walking with an average cadence of 70 steps/min

LAWSON et al.: POWERED PROSTHETIC INTERVENTION FOR BILATERAL TRANSFEMORAL AMPUTEES

1047

Fig. 6. Joint angles for the right side hip, knee, and ankle for able bodied subjects (reprinted from [43]), the amputee subject using the powered prostheses, and
the amputee subject using his daily-use passive prostheses. The knee and ankle joint plots for the powered prostheses include the internally measured joint angles
from the powered prosthesis in lighter blue.

demonstrated stability with Coulomb friction no higher than
5 N·m and a damping coefficient no higher than 0.01 N·m·s/deg.
Fig. 8 depicts the powered ankle behavior for a characteristic stride (at the normal self-selected cadence), including the
torque and power estimates. An integration of the power in the
stance and push-off phases yields −7.67 and 11.47 J, respectively, demonstrating that this behavior would not be possible
in a passive system and confirming that the powered prostheses
delivered powered push off.
Fig. 7.

Subject walking with the powered prostheses.

(step length of 1.05 m and speed of 0.61 m/s) at a self-selected
slow speed and 97 steps/min (step length of 1.31 m and speed
of 1.06 m/s) at a self-selected normal cadence. The subject used
a stability aid in his right hand for all trials (a forearm crutch for
the powered trials and his daily-use cane for the passive trials).
Several representative photographs of the subject walking with
the powered prostheses are shown in Fig. 7.
In addition to the motion capture data, the powered prostheses log internal data at a rate of 250 Hz, providing an estimate
of joint torques through the measurement of the motor currents.
An approximation of the amount of mechanical energy delivered can be made using the motor current, motor torque constant
(0.0276 Nm/A), the drive train’s transmission ratio (196:1), and
the ankle velocity. This approximation can be refined with an
empirical measure of the transmission’s frictional characteristics. In this case, the friction in the transmission was modeled
as a combination of Coulomb friction and viscous damping.
The model parameters were estimated by iteratively increasing
their values from zero until the system no longer remained stable with otherwise zero input. With this approach, the system

IV. DISCUSSION
The powered joint data show several kinematic features of
healthy gait that are absent in the passive data. Most notable,
perhaps, is the evidence of powered push off from the ankle
joint. The powered ankle exhibits evidence of an active push off
with a strong plantarflexion of the joint just after 60% of stride.
This phenomenon can be verified by consulting the power plot
in Fig. 8. During the push-off phase, the powered ankle delivers
almost 50% more energy than all of the energy, both dissipated
during heel strike or (virtually) stored during middle stance.
Contrarily, the passive ankle returns to its nominal position (zero
degrees) once unloaded, and although its energy contribution is
not explicitly measured, it is fundamentally constrained to return
only an amount of energy equal to or less than what was stored
through dorsiflexion in middle stance.
For the prosthetic knee joint, a period of stance knee flexion
is observed in the powered trials. Stance knee flexion aids in
shock absorption from heel strike and helps to lower the body’s
center of mass through segments of the stride. The MPC knees
cannot provide an extensive torque greater than the externally
applied torque since they only exhibit passive behavior. As a
result, stance knee flexion cannot be achieved with such a device

1048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 8. Powered ankle behavior for a characteristic stride. The top plot shows
the axial load in the shank as measured by the onboard magnetic load cell.
This signal is roughly proportional to the vertical component of the ground
reaction force. The next two plots show the ankle angle and angular velocity,
respectively. In the fourth plot, the black line represents the output torque of
the ankle given 100% transmission efficiency, and the blue line represents the
output torque assuming the transmission friction model described. The final
plot shows the estimated power output of the ankle without (black line) and
with (blue line) the transmission friction model. The three colored regions of
the plots denote the three phases of the controller: stance, push off, and swing.
With the transmission friction model, the net energy contribution in the stance
phase was −7.67 J, while the net energy contribution in the push-off phase was
11.47 J.

unless the user supplies a torque from the hip to extend the knee
once it flexes. Such an action is not biomimetic, and it also
gives the user a sense of instability in stance. As such, the
passive data show a strongly hyperextended knee in stance that
breaks (moves past zero into flexion) only at the initiation of
swing. The ability of the powered prostheses to provide full
support with flexed knees is a feature that could also enhance
safety for bilateral amputees, as it is safe for the user to load
the prosthesis regardless of the knee configuration. Specifically,
the powered prostheses will provide supportive torque at all
times in this controller, therefore eliminating the stance phase
yielding that would occur in an MPC knee that was loaded while
not in hyperextension. Furthermore, the active swing from the
powered prosthesis is guaranteed (within the torque limits of
the device) to extend and provide support, even in the event that
it experiences a disturbance such as a stumble or scuff. Finally,
landing prematurely on the device will not sacrifice its ability to
support the user, as the active swing extension will still extend
the knee.
Although the subject’s cadences were slightly slower with
the powered prostheses at both speeds, the step lengths were
increased. As a result, the overground walking speeds were

comparable for both cases. The increased step length is partially
due to the fact that the minimum build height of the powered
prosthesis prototypes was slightly too tall to match the build
height of the passive prostheses. The subject’s overall leg length
was increased by approximately 7 cm (6.7%) when using the
powered prostheses. The step lengths increased by 17% and 10%
for slow and normal cadences, respectively, so it is possible that
the powered prostheses compelled the subject to further increase
the step length independent of their longer length.
For both the powered trials and the passive trials, the intact
hip joints exhibited comparable ranges of motion, which were
significantly larger than that seen in healthy subjects. Overactive hip motion is consistent with the literature that points to
increased hip torques and metabolic costs for bilateral transfemoral amputee gait [12]–[15]. It is anticipated by the authors,
however, that the restoration of active behavior at the ankle will
serve to alleviate this overtaxing of the hips in the long term.
However, this particular subject has approximately 20 years of
training on passive devices and only several hours of development and testing on the powered prosthesis prototypes. As such,
it is not surprising that learned kinematic compensations at the
hip were not readily modified by the restoration of powered
ankle push off. Despite this fact, these data show that a pair of
powered knee and ankle prostheses can be designed and controlled, such that a bilateral transfemoral amputee can achieve a
gait that better reflects healthy kinematics at the knee and angle
joints.
V. CONCLUSION
The design and control of a powered prosthetic intervention for bilateral transfemoral amputees have been presented
and demonstrated on an amputee subject. The control system
can achieve variable cadence walking with a reduced number
of user-dependent parameters relative to previously reported
controllers for powered transfemoral prostheses. The prosthesis prototypes and control system described in this study have
been shown to provide improved kinematics for level walking at
the prosthetic knee and ankle joints over the subject’s daily-use
prostheses, relative to healthy data. The authors plan to extend
this controller to other lower limb activities, as well as investigate lower limb kinetics in bilateral transfemoral amputees in
future work.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Ziegler-Graham, E. J. MacKenzie, P. L. Ephraim, T. G. Travison, and
R. Brookmeyer, “Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United
States: 2005 to 2050,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 89, no. 3,
pp. 422–429, 2008.
[2] “The amputee statistical database for the United Kingdom: 2006/07 Report.” Information Services Division, NHS Scotland, Edinburgh, U.K.,
2009.
[3] C. P. U. Stewart and A. S. Jain, “Dundee revisited: 25 years of a total
amputee service,” Prosthetics Orthotics Int., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 14–20,
1993.
[4] M. M. Torres and A. Esquenazi, “Bilateral lower limb amputee rehabilitation: A retrospective review,” Western J. Med., vol. 154, no. 5,
pp. 583–586, 1991.
[5] J. Z. Laferrier, L. V. McFarland, M. L. Boninger, R. A. Cooper, and
G. E. Reiber, “Wheeled mobility: Factors influencing mobility and assistive technology in veterans and servicemembers with major traumatic

LAWSON et al.: POWERED PROSTHETIC INTERVENTION FOR BILATERAL TRANSFEMORAL AMPUTEES

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

limb loss from Vietnam war and OIF/OEF conflicts,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev.,
vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 349–360, 2010.
D. Datta, P. N. Nair, and J. Payne, “Outcome of prosthetic management
of bilateral lower-limb amputees,” Disability Rehabil., vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 98–102, 1992.
S. M. Jaegers, J. H. Arendzen, and H. J. de Jongh, “Prosthetic gait of
unilateral transfemoral amputees: A kinematic study,” Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil., vol. 76, no. 8, pp. 736–743, 1995.
R. E. Seroussi, A. Gitter, J. M. Czerniecki, and K. Weaver, “Mechanical
work adaptations of above-knee amputee ambulation,” Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil., vol. 77, no. 11, pp. 1209–1214, 1996.
M. B. Taylor, E. Clark, E. A. Offord, and C. Baxter, “A comparison of
energy expenditure by a high level trans-femoral amputee using the intelligent prosthesis and conventionally damped prosthetic limbs,” Prosthetics
Orthotics Int., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 116–121, 1996.
R. L. Waters, J. Perry, D. Antonelli, and H. Hislop, “Energy cost of walking
of amputees: The influence of level of amputation,” J. Bone Joint Surg.
Amer, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 42–46, 1976.
R. S. Gailey, M. A. Wenger, M. Raya, N. Kirk, K. Erbs, P. Spyropoulos,
and M. S. Nash, “Energy expenditure of trans-tibial amputees during
ambulation at self-selected pace,” Prosthetics Orthotics Int., vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 84–91, 1994.
G. H. Traugh, P. J. Corcoran, and R. L. Reyes, “Energy expenditure of
ambulation in patients with above-knee amputations,” Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 67–71, 1975.
C. T. Huang, J. R. Jackson, N. B. Moore, P. R. Fine, K. V. Kuhlemeier,
G. H. Traugh, and P. T. Saunders, “Amputation: Energy cost of ambulation,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 18–24, 1979.
S. F. Crouse, C. S. Lessard, J. Rhodes, and R. C. Lowe, “Oxygen consumption and cardiac response of short-leg and long-leg prosthetic ambulation in a patient with bilateral above-knee amputation: Comparisons with
able-bodied men,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 313–317,
1990.
L. L. McNealy and S. A. Gard, “Effect of prosthetic ankle units on the gait
of persons with bilateral trans-femoral amputations,” Prosthetics Orthotics
Int., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 111–126, 2008.
S. K. Au, J. Weber, and H. Herr, “Powered ankle-foot prosthesis improves walking metabolic economy,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 25, no. 1,
pp. 51–66, Feb. 2009.
S. K. Au, H. Herr, J. Weber, and E. C. Martinez-Villalpando, “Powered ankle-foot prosthesis for the improvement of amputee ambulation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, vol. 2007,
pp. 3020–3026.
S. Au, M. Berniker, and H. Herr, “Powered ankle-foot prosthesis to assist
level-ground and stair-descent gaits,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 654–666, May 2008.
S. Au and H. Herr, “Powered ankle-foot prosthesis,” IEEE Robot. Autom.
Mag., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 52–59, Sep. 2008.
E. C. Martinez-Villalpando, H. Herr, and M. Farrell, “Estimation of ground
reaction force and zero moment point on a powered ankle-foot prosthesis,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, vol. 2007, pp. 4687–4692.
M. A. Holgate, J. K. Hitt, R. D. Bellman, T. G. Sugar, and K. W.
Hollander, “The SPARKy (Spring Ankle with Regenerative Kinetics)
project: Choosing a DC motor based actuation method,” in Proc.
IEEE/RAS-EMBS Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatron., 2008, pp. 163–
168.
R. D. Bellman, M. A. Holgate, and T. G. Sugar, “Sparky 3: Design of
an active robotic ankle prosthesis with two actuated degrees of freedom
using regenerative kinetics,” in Proc. IEEE/RAS-EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed.
Robot. Biomechatron., 2008, pp. 511–516.
P. Cherelle, V. Grosu, A. Matthys, B. Vanderborght, and D. Lefeber,
“Design and validation of the ankle mimicking prosthetic (AMP-) foot
2.0,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 138–148,
Jan. 2014.
L. Hargrove, A. Simon, R. Lipschutz, S. Finucane, and T. Kuiken, “Nonweight-bearing neural control of a powered transfemoral prosthesis,”
J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 10, no. 1, p. 62, 2013.
L. J. Hargrove, A. M. Simon, A. J. Young, R. D. Lipschutz, S. B. Finucane,
D. G. Smith, and T. A. Kuiken, “Robotic leg control with EMG decoding
in an amputee with nerve transfers,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 369, no. 13,
pp. 1237–1242, 2013.
J. A. Dawley, K. B. Fite, and G. D. Fulk, “EMG control of a bionic knee
prosthesis: Exploiting muscle co-contractions for improved locomotor
function,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2013, pp. 1–6.

1049

[27] C. D. Hoover, G. D. Fulk, and K. B. Fite, “Stair ascent with a powered
transfemoral prosthesis under direct myoelectric control,” IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1191–1200, Jun. 2013.
[28] C. D. Hoover and K. B. Fite, “A configuration dependent muscle model
for the myoelectric control of a transfemoral prosthesis,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2011, pp. 1–6.
[29] M. R. Tucker and K. B. Fite, “Mechanical damping with electrical regeneration for a powered transfemoral prosthesis,” in Proc. IEEE/ASME Int.
Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron., 2010, pp. 13–18.
[30] S.-K. Wu, G. Waycaster, and X. Shen, “Active knee prosthesis control
with electromyography,” in Proc. ASME Int. Conf. Dyn. Syst. Control,
2010, pp. 785–791.
[31] O. T. Altinoz and A. Yilmaz, “Prediction of knee angle from accelerometer
data for microcontroller implementation of semi-active knee prosthesis,”
in Proc. 15th Nat. Biomed. Eng. Meet., 2010, pp. 1–4.
[32] B. J. Bergelin, J. O. Mattos, J. G. Wells Jr, and P. A. Voglewede, “Concept through preliminary bench testing of a powered lower limb prosthetic device,” ASME J. Mech. Robot., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 41005–41013,
2010.
[33] B. J. Bergelin and P. A. Voglewede, “Design of an active ankle-foot
prosthesis utilizing a four-bar mechanism,” J. Mech. Design, vol. 134,
no. 6, p. 061004, 2012.
[34] B. G. A. Lambrecht and H. Kazerooni, “Design of a semi-active
knee prosthesis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2009,
pp. 639–645.
[35] R. Suzuki, T. Sawada, N. Kobayashi, and E. P. Hofer, “Control method
for powered ankle prosthesis via internal model control design,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Mechatron. Autom., 2011, pp. 237–242.
[36] R. Versluys, A. Desomer, G. Lenaerts, M. Van Damme, P. Beyl, G. Van der
Perre, L. Peeraer, and D. Lefeber, “A pneumatically powered below-knee
prosthesis: Design specifications and first experiments with an amputee,”
in Proc. IEEE/RAS-EMBS Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatron., 2008,
pp. 372–377.
[37] M. Gorsic, R. Kamnik, L. Ambrozic, N. Vitiello, D. Lefeber, G. Pasquini,
and M. Munih, “Online phase detection using wearable sensors for walking with a robotic prosthesis,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 2776–2794,
2014.
[38] F. Sup, H. A. Varol, J. Mitchell, T. J. Withrow, and M. Goldfarb, “Preliminary evaluations of a self-contained anthropomorphic transfemoral
prosthesis,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 667–
676, Dec. 2009.
[39] H. A. Varol, F. Sup, and M. Goldfarb, “Multiclass real-time intent recognition of a powered lower limb prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 542–551, Mar. 2010.
[40] F. Sup, H. A. Varol, and M. Goldfarb, “Upslope walking with a powered knee and ankle prosthesis: Initial results with an amputee subject,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 71–78,
Feb. 2011.
[41] B. E. Lawson, H. A. Varol, and M. Goldfarb, “Standing stability enhancement with an intelligent powered transfemoral prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9,
pp. 2617–2624, Sep. 2011.
[42] B. Lawson, H. A. Varol, A. Huff, E. Erdemir, and M. Goldfarb, “Control of stair ascent and descent with a powered transfemoral prosthesis,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 466–473,
May 2013.
[43] D. A. Winter, The Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Gait:
Normal, Elderly and Pathological. Waterloo, ON, Canada: Waterloo Univ.
Press, 1991.
[44] R. Unal, R. Carloni, S. M. Behrens, E. E. G. Hekman, S. Stramigioli, and
H. F. J. M. Koopman, “Towards a fully passive transfemoral prosthesis
for normal walking,” in Proc. IEEE/RAS-EMBS Conf. Biomed. Robot.
Biomechatron., 2012, pp. 1949–1954.
[45] B. E. Lawson, H. Atakan Varol, F. Sup, and M. Goldfarb, “Stumble detection and classification for an intelligent transfemoral prosthesis,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, vol. 2010, pp. 511–514.
[46] M. A. Holgate, A. W. Bohler, and T. G. Sugar, “Control algorithms for ankle robots: A reflection on the state-of-the-art and presentation of two novel
algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE/RAS-EMBS Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatron., 2008, pp. 97–102.
[47] B. E. Lawson, A. Huff, and M. Goldfarb, “A preliminary investigation
of powered prostheses for improved walking biomechanics in bilateral
transfemoral amputees,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
vol. 2012, pp. 4164–4167.

1050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Brian E. Lawson (S’09) received the B.A. degree in
physics from Grinnell College, Grinnell, IA, USA,
in 2006, the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering
from the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and
Applied Science, Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA, in 2007, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
mechanical engineering from Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA, in 2011 and 2014, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Scholar at Vanderbilt University. His research interests include
robotics, mechatronics, and applied controls.

Brian Ruhe received the B.S. degree in biomedical
engineering from Wright State University, Dayton,
OH, USA, in 1998, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in biomedical engineering from Northwestern University, St, Evanston, IL, USA, in 2004 and 2009, respectively. In 2012, he received the American Board
of Certification’s certification of prosthetics.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at California
State University, Dominguez Hills, Long Beach, CA,
USA. His current research interests include rehabilitation robotics and human–prosthesis interface
technology.

Amanda Shultz (S’11) received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from the Ogden College of
Science and Engineering, Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, KY, USA, in 2011.
She is currently a Graduate Research Assistant
at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. Her
research interests include design and control of electromechanical systems.

Michael Goldfarb (S’93–M’95) received the B.S.
degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, in 1988, and
the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, in 1992 and 1994,
respectively.
Since 1994, he has been with the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA, where he is currently the
H. Fort Flowers Professor of mechanical engineering. His current research interests include the design and control of advanced
upper and lower extremity prostheses, and gait restoration for spinal cord
injured persons.

