IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

2787

Impedance Changes Indicate Proximal
Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt Obstruction In Vitro
Sukhraaj Basati, Kevin Tangen, Ying Hsu, Hanna Lin, David Frim, and Andreas Linninger∗

Abstract—Extracranial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunt obstruction is one of the most important problems in hydrocephalus patient
management. Despite ongoing research into better shunt design,
robust and reliable detection of shunt malfunction remains elusive. The authors present a novel method of correlating degree of
tissue ingrowth into ventricular CSF drainage catheters with internal electrical impedance. The impedance based sensor is able to
continuously monitor shunt patency using intraluminal electrodes.
Prototype obstruction sensors were fabricated for in-vitro analysis
of cellular ingrowth into a shunt under static and dynamic flow
conditions. Primary astrocyte cell lines and C6 glioma cells were
allowed to proliferate up to 7 days within a shunt catheter and the
impedance waveform was observed. During cell ingrowth a significant change in the peak-to-peak voltage signal as well as the rootmean-square voltage level was observed, allowing the impedance
sensor to potentially anticipate shunt malfunction long before it
affects fluid drainage. Finite element modeling was employed to
demonstrate that the electrical signal used to monitor tissue ingrowth is contained inside the catheter lumen and does not endanger tissue surrounding the shunt. These results may herald the
development of “next generation” shunt technology that allows
prediction of malfunction before it affects patient outcome.
Index Terms—Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), hydrocephalus,
impedance sensor, shunt failure, shunt obstruction, ventriculoperitoneal shunt.

I. INTRODUCTION
EREBROSPINAL fluid (CSF) shunts and shunting procedures are the most effective management strategy for
many types of hydrocephalus. However, ventriculoperitoneal
shunt failure is still common. Following initial shunt insertion,
the failure rate by one year postimplantation is still between 25%
and 40% [1]. The primary reason for shunt failure is obstruction followed by underdrainage. In a randomized evaluation of

C

Manuscript received January 10, 2014; revised May 21, 2014; accepted June
19, 2014. Date of publication July 8, 2014; date of current version November 20,
2015. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Institutes of Health
under Grant R43-NS076056 and by a research subcontract between System
Science and the University of Illinois at Chicago with funding from NIH-R43
NS076056. The work of H. Lin (contributor) was supported by funding from
NSF REU under Grant EEC 0754590. The work of M. Tran (sensor fabrication)
was supported by funding from an REU supplement to NSF EAGER 1301198.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. Basati is with the System Science Corporation, Chicago, IL 60607 USA
(e-mail: sbasati@gmail.com).
K. Tangen, Y. Hsu, and H. Lin are with the Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA (e-mail:
ktange2@uic.edu; ying.hsu.bioengr@gmail.com; hl577@cornell.edu).
D. Frim is with the Department of Neurosurgery, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637 USA (e-mail: dfrim@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu).
∗ A. Linninger is with the Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois
at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA (e-mail: alinninge@uic.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2335171

treatment efficacy, shunt obstruction was found to be the main
reason for shunt revision, accounting for 31% of total surgeries [2]. These observations imply that improved monitoring
for shunt obstruction will improve patient outcome. In addition,
such monitoring will likely enhance our understanding of the
progression of cell invasion into shunting catheters.
Extracranial ventricular shunt systems consist of a ventricular
catheter that is connected to a valve that regulates CSF flow
into a distal catheter that diverts the CSF to an extracranial
resorption site. Shunt obstruction can occur anywhere in the
system but most often occurs at the proximal inlet ports of the
ventricular catheter. These inlets become invaded by choroid
plexus, free floating endothelial cells, or are encapsulated by
glial scar [3], [4]. Protein aggregation and buildup has also
been implicated in impaired shunt function. Investigations to
understand the relationship between port hole size and cellular
ingrowth have found ingrowth of astrocytes and macrophages
occurs through small diameter holes [5]. These observations
have increased our understanding of catheter port occlusion
but have not produced a system for monitoring shunt status or
determination of the location of a shunt obstruction.
In this study, we describe a promising method to monitor
proximal shunt obstruction by detecting intraluminal impedance
changes caused by cellular ingrowth or other obstruction. We
are concerned with the proximal shunt area because proximal
ingrowth, as measured near the shunt ports, may be the primary reason for distal obstruction [6]. Over time, migration of
cells, proteins, and tissue to distal sites may prevent proper fluid
drainage, causing distal obstruction typically seen in older patients. The proximal obstruction technique in this paper observes
dynamic alterations to the spatial extent of an induced electric
field caused by cells invading the shunt ports. The electrical
impedance ratio of CSF and brain tissue is a factor of 12; therefore, the large impedance difference allows for the distinction of
spaces occupied by CSF and brain cells [7]. We have previously
developed an impedance-based volume sensor [8], [9], and here
we demonstrate the impedance principle for detecting whether
the proximal shunt region is clear or obstructed.
Previous studies on electrical cell–substrate impedance sensing (ECIS) show impedance changes due to cell growth of
Escherichia coli in suspensions of equal concentration [10],
[11]. Other works have demonstrated the effectiveness of
impedance measurements to detect the locomotion and growth
of live cells in solution [12]–[14]. The electrode–solution interface impedance was found to be inversely proportional to the
electrode area and its magnitude is frequency dependent. Therefore, the impedance waveform change correlates with the degree
of density at the interface. This study investigates whether the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of obstruction sensor embedded with existing shunt devices. (b) Fabricated sensor prototype with open ports and the placement of shunt
obstruction electrodes inside the catheter. (c) Basic instrumentation design of impedance-based shunt obstruction detection.

principle governing ECIS is also effective for detecting shunt
invasion by live cells, long before fluid drainage through the
shunt is diminished.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Shunt Fabrication
Catheters with novel obstruction sensors were microfabricated with biocompatible materials. Fig. 1(a) illustrates a
schematic of the sensor integrated with a ventriculoperitoneal
shunt. Sensor electrodes were made using platinum–iridium ring
cylinders (0.7 mm OD) welded with a resistive spot welder to
platinum–iridium wire. Electrodes were concentrically placed
within a silicone tube for CSF drainage shown in Fig. 1(b).
The wire/ring electrodes were bonded to the inner lumen of a
silicone catheter using silicone adhesive. Once the silicone adhesive has cured, the polyimide shunt was removed from the
sensor. The leads were soldered to a nanoconnector (Omnetics,
MN) for connection with the instrumentation. An instrumentation diagram of the shunt obstruction sensor system is shown in
Fig. 1(c).
B. Sensor Instrumentation
The instrumentation to provide the sinusoidal signal and
power the sensor is constructed as follows: a Howland current
source driven by a low frequency (4 kHz) sine wave voltage
applies an excitatory signal of 10 μA to the electrodes. The signal across the electrodes passes to an instrumentation amplifier
with high input impedance (AD620, Analog Devices) and is
recorded using an oscilloscope for analysis.
C. Ingrowth in Cell Culture
A catheter with prototype sensors was placed inside
100 × 15 mm polystyrene petri dishes (Fisher Scientific) shown
schematically in Fig. 2. To test the robust nature of the fabrication process, eight prototype sensors were developed to compare
measurement accuracy. Sensor measurements were taken in fluids with high (artificial CSF and 5 M NaCl aq) and low (air)

Fig. 2. Experimental setup for static flow in vitro experiments. Sensor prototypes are placed in a dish, two different cell lines are allowed to grow within the
shunt lumen, and impedance measurements are obtained.

electrical conductivities to assess performance under varying
environments.
Different types of mechanical obstruction, such as lumen
blockage from paraffin wax, bovine species coagulated blood,
and collagen protein aggregates were used to test the null hypothesis that mechanical blockage will not induce an impedance
change relative to aCSF. Four repetitions were performed to assess the reliability of each prototype sensor.
To test sensor measurements with various concentrations of
cell suspension (n = 6), the catheter lumen was filled with L929
mouse fibroblast cells suspended in growth medium ranging
from 50 000 to 106 cells/0.1 cm3 . Analysis of measured values
tested the null hypothesis that manually loaded cell densities
do not change impedance measurements compared to aCSF.
Our alternate hypothesis was that a significant difference in
impedance between different manually loaded cell densities and
aCSF was observable.
A time-dependent experiment for simulated cellular ingrowth
into a shunt was also conducted. Two different cell types were
used to emulate cellular obstruction and choroid ingrowth. Primary rat astrocytes, embryonic day 19 (E19), and C6 glioma
cell lines were cultured separately in an incubator with 5% CO2
at 37 °C. When cells reached confluency, they were passaged

BASATI et al.: IMPEDANCE CHANGES INDICATE PROXIMAL VENTRICULOPERITONEAL SHUNT OBSTRUCTION IN VITRO

2789

Fig. 3. Dynamic flow experimental setup for obstruction sensor validation.
Glioma cells housed in a cell reservoir (4) were passed under a closed system
through the sensor (1 and 2) using a peristaltic pump (3) and allowed to grow.

and seeded directly into the catheter surrounded by media to
emulate a fluid-filled environment and promote ingrowth.
Prototype sensor measurements (n = 6) were taken before
seeding and 1, 2, 3, and 4 days after seeding. Impedance measurements were taken before and after each medium change to
ensure that observed impedance changes were not caused by
variations in growth media properties and that there will be a
change in impedance for cellular ingrowth in static culture. Media temperature was tightly controlled by thermostat at 37 °C to
eliminate temperature-dependent impedance changes.

D. Cellular Imaging
To confirm the presence and extent of cellular ingrowth, imaging was performed on the lumen of each tested sensor. Live
confocal microscopy at the University of Illinois at Chicago Research Resources Center, visualized the invasion of the catheter
lumen by cells. The catheter was imaged with a laser scanning
confocal microscope (Zeiss model 710) daily after the initial
seeding of cells. Dye (Hoechst 33342, Fisher Scientific) compatible with live cell imaging was used to label cellular nuclei
for absolute cell count and quantification.

E. Ingrowth Under Dynamic Flow Conditions
Prototype impedance sensors (n = 5) were tested under dynamic flow conditions to simulate the pulsatile physiological
environment that implanted shunts experience. A closed recirculating fluid system was constructed similar to the shunt
catheter bioreactor previously proposed by McAllister [14].
Our system is composed of a programmable peristaltic pump
(Instech Solomon, PA), a growth media cell suspension reservoir of 50 mL, a cylinder housing for the prototype sensor, and
medical grade tubing as connectors. The device is schematically shown in Fig. 3. The sensor was anchored within the
3 mL cylinder ensuring fluid passage through the catheter. A
C6 glioma cell suspension was recirculated with a flow rate of
0.3 mL/min to represent CSF motion through the ventricles and
temperature was maintained at 37°C. Tubing connections used
Luer Lock fittings for efficient interchanging of components and
sensors. The experiment was allowed to run continuously over
with measurements taken daily for 5 days.

Fig. 4.

Dynamic flow experimental setup for obstruction sensor validation.

III. RESULTS
A. Sensor and Instrumentation
Instrumentation was tested using known impedance values.
Device sensitivity is presented in Fig. 4(a) for resistor values
in the range of R = 0 − 10 000 Ω and plotted to a calibration
curve. Additionally, Fig. 4(b) shows device sensitivity evaluated
for temperature in the range of 6–42 °C. A previous study by
Solly et al. [16] demonstrated that the application of AC voltage
at 200 mV and 10 kHz frequency for a period of 30 min did
not produce a change in cell proliferation and viability. Our
small amplitude signals similarly did not produce a change in
cell proliferation or viability that would affect our measurement
technique. Moreover, the generated field did not extend beyond
the silicone shunt material.
B. Static Cell Culture Impedance Measurement
Changes in the impedance waveform were detected as early
as two days after cell seeding in sensor prototypes (n = 6) with
E19 primary rat astrocytes and C6 glioma cell lines. The signal magnitude across the electrodes were recorded during each
trial and compared to baseline values. The peak-to-peak voltage
(Vpp ) recordings in Fig. 5(a) show a significant change after
astrocyte cell seeding (day 1). The Vpp mean change for astrocytes from day 0 to day 3 was 29.1% ± 1.29, and dropped to

2790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

450 K and 1 M. Cells had a Vpp increase of 5.9%, 17.5%, 34.2%,
86.8%, and 138%, respectively, compared to a baseline with artificial CSF without cells inside the catheter lumen. Measurement
variation of the sensors was within 2% as determined by four
repetitions for each cell suspension density, except at 1 M cells
(11% variation). All cell density measurements predicted a significant increase in impedance compared to aCSF (p << 0.005)
and the null hypothesis is rejected.
C. Mechanical Obstruction
Blockage of the catheter lumen by paraffin wax, collagen protein, or coagulated blood obtained from bovine were robustly
detected against baseline impedance values for eight prototype
sensors shown in Fig. 5(c). All impedance measurements for
mechanical obstruction significantly increased (p < .001) compared to a CSF. Distilled water exhibited the highest voltage
reading as expected. We adjusted the excitatory signal to determine the effect of altering the source waveform frequency and its
effect on obstruction selectivity. A suspension of 0.1 cm3 blood
obtained from a bovine species was pipetted into the catheter
lumen under aseptic conditions. We found that the sensitivity of
the sensor could be magnified substantially by tuning to a higher
frequency. The solid box in Fig. 5(c) depicts that at 15 kHz, the
sensor sensitivity for blood clot was doubled, as assessed by two
separate impedance measurements, when compared to artificial
CSF.
D. Static Cell Culture Live Cell Imaging

Fig. 5. Results for static flow impedance measurements. (a) Magnitude change
was tracked over time, (b) the cell density was measured, and (c) mechanical obstruction was performed. Two separate impedance measurements were
made with the sinusoidal frequency increased to 15 kHz, resulting in a higher
sensitivity to detecting blood coagulation, indicated by (∗) in the black box
of (c).

27.9% ± 1.57 after 4 days. In C6 glioma cells, the Vpp change
was 21.9% ± 4.97 from day 0 to day 3; from day 0 to day 4,
the Vpp mean change was 29.8% ± 5.99 compared to respective baseline values. A similar trend for the root-mean-square
voltage (Vrm s ) of the impedance waveform was also detected.
An 18.7% ± 0.77 (astrocyte) and 24.9% ± 3.24 (C6 glioma)
change in Vrm s recorded at day 3 and a 13.6% ± 2.35 (astrocyte)
and 31.9% ± 3.89 (C6 glioma) change at day 4 is recorded.
Based on our findings between days 1 and 3 (p < 0.001) and
between days 1 and 4 (p < 0.005), we reject the null hypothesis and consider cellular ingrowth as the cause of increased
impedance. However, the measurements between days three
and four were unexpected (p > 0.2). We suspect that the astroglia cells experienced continued growth and proliferation,
whereas conditions to support astrocyte cell line growth were not
optimal.
Additionally, the effect of cell density on Vpp was measured
with L929 fibroblasts manually loaded into prototype sensors
(n = 8). Fig. 5(b) shows cell suspensions of 50, 100, 200, and

Cell growth over time was quantified with confocal microscopy and the C6 glioma cell line was observed to grow
more rapidly than the E19 primary rat astrocyte cell line as
expected. The rapid growth rate of glioma cells makes them
suitable for preliminary studies. Hoechst 33342 (Fisher Scientific) nuclei stain was used in conjunction with the acquisition of
three-dimensional (3-D) image stacks covering the entire sensor to count the total number of cells attached on the inner and
outer walls. Images were processed using ImageJ [17]. The region with the highest density of C6 glioma cells in the inner
wall contained 1875 cells per mm2 as shown in Fig. 6(a). The
highest density of astrocyte cells contained only 35 cells/mm2 .
The catheter is clearly visualized in Fig. 6(b) with C6 glioma
cells populating the lumen. The catheter was sectioned longitudinally for electron microscopy and an image of cell debris
inside the catheter lumen is shown in Fig. 6(c). These results
confirm cell adhesion to the inner lumen of the catheter.
E. Dynamic Flow Impedance Measurements
Prototype sensors (n = 4) were placed in the dynamic flow
chamber through which C6 glioma cells were circulated for a
period of 5 days, with measurements recorded daily, as depicted in Fig. 3. The media temperature was maintained at
37 °C. Measured Vpp increased 19% by day 2 compared to
baseline and 17%, 28%, and 34% on days 3, 4, and 5, respectively. A t-test was calculated for all days compared to baseline
and measurements were found to be significant (p < 0.005).

BASATI et al.: IMPEDANCE CHANGES INDICATE PROXIMAL VENTRICULOPERITONEAL SHUNT OBSTRUCTION IN VITRO

2791

F. Validation of Shunt Obstruction
Electrodynamic simulations with COMSOL Multiphysics
(Burlington, MA, USA) were performed to predict the
impedance change caused by mechanical obstructions as shown
in Fig. 8. We also wished to stay within the field strength that
brain cells would be exposed to outside the catheter. Typical
simulation parameters deployed a 200 mV sinusoidal excitatory
signal with frequencies in the range of 1–50 kHz. The maximum charge density outside the catheter lumen was found to
be 25 μC/cm2 , which is below the FDA approved threshold
for deep brain stimulation of 30 μC/cm2 [18]. Therefore, our
impedance sensor can operate safely within the human brain.
IV. DISCUSSION
Fig. 6. (a and b) Imaging of catheter lumen after 5 days of cell growth. The
highest density of 1875 cells/mm2 was found using a C6 glioma cell line. An
electron microscope image visualizes cell debris in (c.).

Fig. 7. Impedance measurements under dynamic flow conditions over time.
A 31% Vp p and 34% Vrm s increase was observed between day 1 and day 5.

Measured Vrm s increased 16%, 18%, 27%, and 39% for days 2–
5. Measured Vrm s on days after cell seeding are significantly different from baseline (p < 0.01). Fig. 7 plots the percent change
of impedance measurements (Vpp , Vrm s ) over time for prototype sensors in the dynamic flow system compared to baseline
measurements. Impedance measurements of media without cells
were taken for 5 days as a system control with a Vrm s change of
0%.
The measurement principle was confirmed under circulating
flow conditions. Cellular ingrowth into the catheter was verified
by live cell staining with confocal microscopy and cells/cellular
debris aggregates were observed within the catheter lumen after
five days of cell ingrowth under dynamic flow conditions.
C6 glioma cells did not significantly attach to the inner lumen
of the catheter however we found cell adhesion occurred around
the shunt port holes (presumably due to surface irregularities
from the manufacturing process).

We have previously demonstrated impedance as a method
to measure ventricular volume [19]. In this report, we present a
method to monitor proximal cell ingrowth and debris long before
it affects shunt drainage capacity. Shunts with internal electrodes
were fabricated and tested on the bench-top and in vitro. In vitro
experiments consisted of static flow and dynamic flow models
with astrocyte and C6 glioma cell lines. The purpose of our static
and dynamic experiments was to emulate cell ingrowth conditions occurring in vivo. We found that a dynamic flow chamber
is a practical test station for new shunt design evaluation, and
we did observe and measure different cell growth rates. Internal
impedance measurements indicated clearly whether proximal
shunt obstruction had initiated; this change indicated whether
the shunt was clear long before it would affect CSF flow through
the shunt. Our system acquired subtle changes to the measured
voltages (Vpp ) in different excitatory frequencies; this sensitivity may be exploited to characterize the type and degree of shunt
obstruction that would present before shunt failure.
A glioma cell line was used due to its accelerated growth
compared to an E19 primary rat astrocyte cell line. Voltage
drops across the electrodes in response to cell ingrowth were
sensed as early as two days after astrocyte cell seeding, and
with as few as 35 cells per linear millimeter of the catheter.
Voltage drops in response to C6 glioma cell growth was also
detectable within two days after cell seeding but with a much
higher cell density. We suspect that the shape and morphology
of the cell type has a role in the sensitivity of the sensor. We
also established selectivity in the signal to distinguish between
blood, astrocyte, protein, and distilled water. Utilization of two
different excitatory frequencies doubled sensor sensitivity to
blood clots and further optimization of sensor sensitivity and
specificity is expected for future investigations.
Clinicians use a variety of testing, including radiography
CT and MRI scanning and radioisotope injections to determine shunt patency. However, these methods do not specifically
diagnose shunt status or obstruction. They also do not allow
for real-time determination of immediate shunt failure. Devices
that can determine presence or absence of CSF flow in a shunt
have been developed (Transonic Systems, NY), (NeuroDx, PA,
USA); however, the range of normal CSF shunt flow rates is
wide and lack of CSF flow through a shunting device does not
always indicate malfunction. In a study with a thermal flow

2792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Computational model of obstruction sensor. (a) Sensor placed in a ventricle model. (b) Current density internal and external to the catheter with a maximal
current density of 0.10 A/mm2 ; (c) potential in two scenarios—no obstruction or completely obstructed with a maximum potential of 1.14 V.

system, absence of continuous CSF flow in the shunting device
was found in working shunts resulting in false-positive determinations of malfunction [19]. CSF flow was also not found to be
a reliable indicator of shunt function in the pediatric population
confirming that the correlation between lack of CSF flow and
shunt obstruction is ambiguous [20].

A. Future Studies and Limitations
Investigations into the obstruction of PDMS catheters have
shown decreased protein adsorption through surface modification [22]. Our catheter systems consisted of silicone tubing
simulating barium-doped catheters. In future studies, bariumimpregnated catheters will also be used to investigate differences in cell adherence. Different shunt materials will be tested
with internal impedance measurements and microscopy validation. The surface properties of our catheter are also under
modification for the study of impedance detection and cell
adhesion.
A limitation of our study concerns the induction of complete obstruction as it occurs when choroid tissue occludes
shunt ports. In vitro, such choroid-type invasion could be emulated by insertion of choroid-type vascularized tissues into the
shunt and then to measure impedance changes. Moreover, in
vivo study would consist of shunt implantation near the choroid
plexus to provoke intentional obstruction. Sensor measurements
before, during, and after implantation, along with shunt flow
measurements, will provide new avenues for pursuing shunt
technology.
Another limitation concerns the relations between degree of
cell obstruction and reduced CSF drainage through the catheter.
Clearly, different types of obstructions may impair the fluid
flow to different degrees. We plan to investigate the impact of
degree of cell induced impedance change on flow reduction

through systematic experiments in the dynamic flow system,
but with observation windows in the order of months, as opposed to days used in this preliminary study of cell obstructions.
Nevertheless, the feasibility of early detection of cell ingrowth
has been demonstrated.
Our studies suggest that internal impedance measurements
are a promising avenue from which to acquire information regarding the patency of CSF flow ports long before CSF flow is
affected. We envision an implantable system that would monitor
patency of an implanted catheter by measurements of internal
impedance. The construction of new shunt systems coupled to
telemetric obstruction monitoring should lead to improved patient outcomes. Such a “smart shunt” has been touted as the
“next generation” of shunt technology [23].
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we present a method to monitor shunt obstruction by cell invasion or debris obstruction using internal
impedance. Prototype sensors were fabricated with biocompatible materials and baseline experiments were performed to confirm functionality. In vitro experiments with E19 primary rat
astrocyte and C6 glioma cell lines were performed over a period
of four days. Daily impedance changes were observed and indicated that cell growth significantly increased impedance values
and could reliably be detected long before cells could influence shunt drainage. In order to emulate realistic conditions, we
tested the sensors under dynamic flow conditions in a bioreactor
for shunt flow. A minimum of 21.9% change in the peak-to-peak
magnitude of the impedance waveform two days after C6 glioma
cell seeding was observed. Changes in magnitude coupled with
imaging validation confirm that the principle governing ECIS
is effective for shunt obstruction detection. These results are
promising for the development of next generation shunt technology to improve patient outcome.

BASATI et al.: IMPEDANCE CHANGES INDICATE PROXIMAL VENTRICULOPERITONEAL SHUNT OBSTRUCTION IN VITRO

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
H. Lin is acknowledged as a contributor to the initial work of
the study and M. Tran is acknowledged for sensor fabrication
work.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Tuli, J. Drake, J. Lawless, M. Wigg, and M. Lamberti-Pasculli, “Risk
factors for repeated cerebrospinal shunt failures in pediatric patients with
hydrocephalus,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 92, pp. 31–38, 2000.
[2] J. M. Drake, J. R. M. Kestle, R. Milner, G. Cinalli, F. Boop, J. Piatt Jr.,
S. Haines, S. J. Schiff, D. D. Cochrane, P. Steinbok, and N. MacNeil,
“Randomized trial of cerebrospinal fluid shunt valve design in pediatric
hydrocephalus,” Neurosurgery, vol. 43, pp. 294–303, 1998.
[3] C. Harris and J. P. McAllister, “What we should know about the cellular and tissue response causing catheter obstruction in the treatment of
hydrocephalus,” Neurosurgery, vol. 70, pp. 1589–1599, 2012.
[4] C. A. Harris, J. H. Resau, E. A. Hudson, R. A. West, C. Moon, A. D.
Black, and J. P. McAllister, “Effects of surface wettability, flow, and
protein concentration on macrophage and astrocyte adhesion in an in vitro
model of central nervous system catheter obstruction,” J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. A, vol. 97, pp. 433–440, Jun. 15, 2011.
[5] C. A. Harris and J. P. McAllister, “Does drainage hole size influence adhesion on ventricular catheters?” Childs Nervous Syst., vol. 27,
pp. 1221–1232, Aug. 2011.
[6] G. R. Fleisher and S. Ludwig, Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine,
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: LWW, 2010.
[7] O. Gilad, L. Horesh, and D. S. Holder, “Design of electrodes and current
limits for low frequency electrical impedance tomography of the brain,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 45, pp. 621–33, 2007.
[8] A. Linninger, S. Basati, R. Dawe, and R. Penn, “A novel impedance sensor
to monitor and control ventricular size,” Clinical Neurol. Neurosurgery,
vol. 110, pp. S25–S26, 2008.
[9] S. Basati, B. Desai, A. Alaraj, F. Charbel, and A. Linninger, “Cerebrospinal
fluid volume measurements in hydrocephalic rats laboratory investigation,” J. Neurosurgery Pediatrics, vol. 10, pp. 347–354, Oct. 2012.
[10] C. T. Bot and C. Prodan, “Quantifying the membrane potential duing E.
coli growth stages,” Biophys. Chem., vol. 146, pp 133–137, 2010.
[11] L. Yang, Y. Li, and G. F. Erf, “Interdigitated array microelectrode-based
electrochemical impedance immunosensor for detection of Escherichia
coli,” Anal. Chem., vol. 76, no. 4, pp. 1107–1113, 2004.

2793

[12] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “Micromotion of mammalian cells measured
electrically,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 88, pp. 7896–7900, 1991.
[13] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “Use of electric fields to monitor the dynamical
aspect of cell behavior in tissue culture,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol.
BME-33, no. 2, pp. 242–247, Feb. 1986.
[14] X. Huang, D. W. Greve, D. D. Nguyen, and M. M. Domach, “Impedance
based biosensor array for monitoring mammalian cell behavior,” in Proc.
IEEE Sens., 2003, pp. 304–309.
[15] C. A. Harris, J. H. Resau, E. A. Hudson, R. A. West, C. Moon, and
J. P. McAllister, “Mechanical contributions to astrocyte adhesion using
a novel in vitro model of catheter obstruction,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 222,
pp. 204–210, 2010.
[16] K. Solly, X. Wang, X. Xu, B. Strulovici, and W. Zheng, “Application
of real-time cell electronic sensing (RT-CES) technology to cell-based
assays,” Assay Drug Develop. Technol., vol. 2, pp. 363–372, 2004.
[17] W. S. Rasband. ImageJ U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. Available: http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/, 1997–2002.
[18] R. Coffey, “Deep brain stimulation devices: A brief technical history and
review,” Artif. Organs, vol. 33, pp. 208–220, 2008.
[19] S. Basati, T. Harris, and A. Linninger, “Dynamic brain phantom for intracranial volume measurements,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no.
5, pp. 1450–1455, May 2011.
[20] J. Madsen, G. S. Abazi, L. Fleming, M. Proctor, R. Grondin, S. Magge,
P. Casey, and T. Anor, “Evaluation of shuntcheck noninvasive thermal
technique for shunt flow detection in hydrocephalic patients,” Neurosurgery, vol. 68, no. 99, pp. 198–205, 2011.
[21] A. Marlin and S. Gaskill, “The use of transcutaneous thermal convection
analysis to assess shunt function in the pediatric population,” J. Neurosurg.,
vol. 70, pp. 181–183, 2012.
[22] C. Harris, J. H. Resau, E. A. Hudson, R. A. West, C. Moon, A. D. Black,
and J. P. McAllister, “Reduction of protein adsorption and macrophage
and astrocyte adhesion on ventricular catheters by polyethylene glycol
and N-acetyl-L-cysteine,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res., vol. 98A, pp. 425–433,
2011.
[23] B. R. Lutz, P. Venkataraman, and S. R. Browd, “New and improved ways
to treat hydrocephalus: Pursuit of a smart shunt,” Surgical Neurol. Int.,
vol. 4, p. 38, 2013.

Authors, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

