2488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Comparison of Cephalic and Extracephalic
Montages for Transcranial Direct Current
Stimulation—A Numerical Study
Gregory M. Noetscher∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Janakinadh Yanamadala,
Sergey N. Makarov, Senior Member, IEEE, and Alvaro Pascual-Leone

Abstract—While studies have shown that the application of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has been beneficial in
the stimulation of cortical activity and treatment of neurological
disorders in humans, open questions remain regarding the placement of electrodes for optimal targeting of currents for a given
functional area. Given the difficulty of obtaining in vivo measurements of current density, modeling of conventional and alternative
electrode montages via the finite element method has been utilized to provide insight into tDCS montage performance. It has
been shown that extracephalic montages might create larger total
current densities in deeper brain regions, specifically in white matter as compared to an equivalent cephalic montage. Extracephalic
montages might also create larger average vertical current densities in the primary motor cortex and in the somatosensory cortex.
At the same time, the horizontal current density either remains
approximately the same or decreases. The metrics used in this paper include either the total local current density through the entire
brain volume or the average vertical current density as well as the
average horizontal current density for every individual lobe/cortex.
Index Terms—In vivo current density, transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS).

I. INTRODUCTION
RANSCRANIAL direct current stimulation (tDCS) has
been used for the treatment of various neurological
and psychiatric disorders, including depression, anxiety, and
Parkinson’s disease [1], [2]. Studies have shown that patients
undergoing the procedure experience positive behavioral modifications with minimal negative effects that may include skin irritation, mild redness and itching under the electrode, headache,
nausea, dizziness or a slight tingling sensation. Additionally,
generation of toxins induced by an electrochemical reaction at
the electrode–tissue interface are possible and application of
tDCS above skull defects or inadequate electrode contact may

T

Manuscript received August 22, 2013; revised April 21, 2014, March 21,
2014, and December 27, 2013; accepted December 9, 2013. Date of publication July 1, 2014; date of current version August 18, 2014. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ G. M. Noetscher is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609 USA (e-mail:
gregn@wpi.edu).
J. Yanamadala and S. N. Makarov are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609
USA (e-mail: jyanamadala@wpi.edu; makarov@wpi.edu).
A. Pascual-Leone is with the Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain
Stimulation, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston, MA 02215 USA
(e-mail: apleone@bidmc.harvard.edu).
Color versions of one more of the figures in this paper are available online at
http://ieeexplore.ieeexplore.ieee.org
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2322774

produce focused current flow that has the potential to cause
damage to skin and nerve tissue. Use of tDCS remains a very
active area of research with the potential to noninvasively treat
many of humanity’s long standing disorders.
A number of electrode configurations, known as montages,
are in use to control the application of current and concentrate
the current density onto a particular area of the brain. These montages have been traditionally constructed based on knowledge
of human anatomy and physiology. For example, if stimulation
of the visual cortex is desired, an anode and cathode would be
placed at the rear center and top center of the head, respectively.
In this way, a particular area of the brain is identified for stimulation via tDCS and a montage that activates that area in a targeted
manner is selected. One would assume that a large portion of the
current leaving the anode would pass through the visual cortex
while traveling to the cathode. In-vivo measurements have been
reported [3] in the brain of a monkey and were used as the basis
of constructing a model of the head that may be used to predict current flow in the brain from surface electrodes. However,
real-time measurements and evaluation of individual anatomy
remain challenges. To this end, extensive application of modeling and simulation techniques, including the finite element
method (FEM) have been used to characterize and understand
the impacts of electrode arrangements on the human form, along
with other factors including electrode size, the number of anode
and cathode locations and current density [4]–[8]. The FEM
has become such an important tool in the realm of tDCS that
proposed general and customized, patient specific, and experimental tDCS protocols are examined and optimized using computational tools [9]. The models themselves have even acquired
specific terminology and are known as ‘‘forward models” with
particular procedures on construction and usage [10]. Clearly,
the level of effort demonstrated in model construction and the
prevalence of research based on modeling and simulation techniques indicates that conscientious use of the FEM and other
numerical method-based solvers coupled together with anatomically accurate and predictive forward models [11] represents a
realistic and efficient means that provides scientists, engineers,
and medical personnel detailed information on the performance
of tDCS hardware in the very complex and multivariant human
body environment. Studies that take into account the effects of
anisotropic conductivity in human tissues, including the skull
and white matter, have demonstrated the importance of considering this physical condition when using forward models
[12], [13].

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

NOETSCHER et al.: COMPARISON OF CEPHALIC AND EXTRACEPHALIC MONTAGES FOR TDCS-A NUMERICAL STUDY

2489

Fig. 1. Estimate for separate and distinct components of computational model
employed for all tDCS simulations, each with individual material properties,
including: (i) artificial skin shell (2 mm thick); (ii) fat layer shell; (iii) muscle
volume; (iv) bones (left and right acromion, left and right humerus, jaw, ribs,
left and right scapula, skull, spine); (v) closed CSF shell; (vi) cerebral cortex (gray matter); (vii) white matter; (viii) cerebellum; (ix) ventricles system;
(x) eyes and tongue (separate tissues); (xi) sinus cavity, lungs, and trachea; and
(xii) aorta and cava superior.

Despite existing studies and techniques that seek to manipulate the locality and depth of the stimulated area [14]–[17], open
questions remain on the role of the cathode in terms of placement
on the body. Field localization is strongly desired to provide
tDCS practitioners the ability to treat certain disorders through
precise targeting of specific areas or structures of the brain.
Extracephalic locations (e.g., neck) of the cathode have been
examined [18], along with the efficacy of a fronto-extracephalic
montage in treatment of depression [19]. The impact of extracephalic montages on the brain stem and associated organs and
tissues remains a concern [20], though the influence of these
montages on cardiovascular and autonomous functionality has
been discussed in [21].
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND PAPER ORGANIZATION
The focus of this study is the simulation of the volumetric current density in the brain with electrodes configured in a
cephalic (C3-Fp2) versus extracephalic manner with evaluations
of cathode placement on both ipsi- and contralateral shoulder
locations.
The FEM phantom used for this purpose is shown in Fig. 1
and thoroughly described in Section III. The anatomical brain
segmentation included gray matter, white matter, ventricles, and
cerebellum (see Fig. 1). The numerical simulation setup is described in Section IV. Electrode constitution and assembly is
reported in Section V.

Fig. 2. Separation of the cerebral cortex into computational subregions including the frontal lobe, the occipital lobe, the parietal lobe, the primary motor
cortex, the somatosensory cortex, and the temporal lobe.

The cerebral cortex has been numerically defined as the
Boolean difference between the gray matter and the white matter
meshes. The cerebral cortex has further been artificially subdivided into individual lobes and cortexes as shown in Fig. 2.
Section VI provides qualitative and quantitative results for
the local current density magnitude within the brain volume.
We visualize the total current density by plotting current on the
surfaces of both the cerebral cortex and white matter. Alternatively, we visualize the total current density using a series of
cut planes, each of which is accompanied by the corresponding cut plane atlas. Section VI also discusses the invariance of
the relative current density magnitudes to significant changes
in skin properties. We considered two extreme cases of wet and
dry skin, respectively. Along with its primary goal, this study
indirectly addresses the effect of changes in the contact between

2490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

electrode and skin throughout the course of an extended tDCS
treatment.
Section VII reports quantitative results for both the average
vertical current density magnitude and the average horizontal
current density magnitude in every individual lobe and/or cortex shown in Fig. 2 along with the global coordinate system
employed. The corresponding current densities are defined by
Jzavg =

1
V

avg
=
Jxy

1
V



V |Jz (r)| dr,
 
Jx2 (r) + Jy2 (r)dr
V

(1)

where V is the volume of the tissue under study and J(r) is the
spatial vector current density in this volume.
Section VIII estimates the expected electrode voltages and
quantifies voltage responses due changes in properties of individual anatomical tissues.
Section IX also compares the results of the present paper with
the previous numerical simulations.
Finally, Section X concludes the paper.
III. VHP-F MODEL AND SIMULATION DESCRIPTION
Construction of the forward model used in this study was
enabled by the processes of medical image data acquisition,
manual segmentation, mesh conditioning, and model registration. All surfaces describing a particular geometry must be 2-D
manifold and possess a sufficiently high triangle quality, as element quality has been proven to be vital to the accuracy of the
simulation [22].
A. Data Acquisition
The model utilized in this study was constructed using
anatomical cryosection images of the axial plane provided by
the Visible Human Project (VHP) established in 1989 by the
U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) [23]. Male and female datasets became available in November of 1994 and 1995,
respectively. Each consisted of MRI, CT, and cryosection images taken predominantly in the axial plane of the bodies of
various resolutions. Anatomical cryosection image data from
the female patient, consisting of 2048 × 1216 pixels with each
pixel measuring 0.33 mm per side, was used exclusively in the
construction of the model for the present study, producing the
VHP-F nomenclature [24]. The original VHP–NLM model resolution in the axial plane is limited by image pixel density, and
if we assume the segmentation is legitimate and accurate, produces a resolution value of 0.33 mm × 0.33 mm. Since every
third image in the dataset was utilized, resolution along the vertical axis of the body is limited to 0.99 mm. A voxel produced by
images used in this manner would have x-, y-, and z-dimensions
of 0.33 mm × 0.33 mm × 0.99 mm.
B. Segmentation
Image segmentation is an area of active research with many
dynamic and varying methodologies [25]–[34]. Despite this diversity in implementation, no one singular technique has proven
to be suitable in all applications or as accurate as manual seg-

mentation by a human operator. Though extremely time consuming, it is for this reason that manual segmentation was employed almost exclusively for the development of the models
used in this study.
One of the major tools included in the development of the
VHP was the open-source program Insight Toolkit (ITK), which
enables the analysis of 3-D image stacks and simultaneous segmentation of images in the axial, coronal, and sagittal body
planes via manual and automatic methods [35]. Image stacks
are read into ITK for segmentation and the user may manually
trace organs, tissues and other structures, thus isolating these
regions from other image areas. The end result is a stereolithography file describing the surface of the segmented region as a
series of dense triangular elements (surface Delaunay triangulation) defined by a node point cloud.
C. Mesh Conditioning and Registration
The results of the segmentation process are very fine and
dense meshes that contain a large number of nodes. Typical
numbers of nodes are on the order of between 106 and 1010 .
These meshes, while accurate with respect to the image dataset,
would be too unwieldy to be used in an FEM simulation. Mesh
conditioning is required to reduce the number of nodes to a computationally reasonable number and ‘‘clean” the mesh, eliminating defects and discrepancies that could reduce the accuracy and
utility of the model.
Much of the mesh conditioning process has been accomplished via MeshLab [36]. Example operations include selective
reduction of the number of nodes via Quadric Edge Collapse
Decimation [37] which was accomplished to remove elements
in areas of relatively coarse features (e.g., top of the chest) while
retaining elements in regions that require finer detail. Relative
triangle sizes in those areas may vary by as much as 1:5 while
keeping a reasonably high triangle quality everywhere. Smoothing functions were achieved using HC Laplacian smoothing [38]
in order to retain the original shape volume. Additional defects,
including redundant nodes and edges, nonmanifold edges, and
intersecting faces can be eliminated via Delaunay triangulation
[39]. In certain cases, rebuilding the mesh by Poisson surface
reconstruction [40] has proven to eliminate element folding and
produce smooth and contiguous surfaces suitable for simulation
purposes.
Following the segmentation and conditioning processes, all
individual components of the VHP-F model were registered
to ensure proper position, size, and shape. Registration was
accomplished by overlaying the digitized structures over the
original cryosection images and any required adjustments were
made on a node by node or element by element basis. In this
way, any distortions, rotations, or imperfections created by the
operations mentioned earlier were addressed.
IV. SIMULATION SETUP
The results of the mesh generation process described earlier
can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2. Each structure was converted to
the NASTRAN file format to facilitate importation into commercial numerical solvers. Final assembly of all components

NOETSCHER et al.: COMPARISON OF CEPHALIC AND EXTRACEPHALIC MONTAGES FOR TDCS-A NUMERICAL STUDY

TABLE I
ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES EMPLOYED DURING SIMULATION [46]

Structure
Sinus Cavity
Aorta
Superior Vena Cava
Acromion Humerus Jaw Ribs
Scapula Skull Spine
Gray matter
White Matter
Cerebellum
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF)
Ventricle system
Eye
Fat Layer
Lung Trachea
Muscle Layer
Skin Layer
Tongue

TABLE II
CONVERGENCE OF A TYPICAL CASE BASED ON TETRAHEDRAL MESH SIZE

FEM Material

Conductivity
(S/m)

Air
Blood

0
0.7

Homogeneous Bone (a
combination of
cancellous/cortical types)
Brain
Brain
Cerebellum
CSF
Vitreous Humor
Fat
Inflated Lungs
Muscle
Dry Skin
Tongue

2491

0.0756/0.02

0.0275
0.0277
0.0475
2
1.5
0.0377
0.0389
0.202
0.0002
0.8

that make up the model required verification that no structures
were overlapping or intersecting. Additionally, each structure
required assignment of appropriate material properties.
A. Material Properties
Electromagnetic modeling of the human body requires meticulous and cautious definition of the associated material properties resident within the simulation. A wealth of research on the
subject is available [41]–[46] demonstrating the variability of
values across multiple types of tissues and a high dependence on
frequency. For low frequency and static simulations such as the
ones described in this study, material conductivity is paramount.
A summary of tissue types and conductivity values is given in
Table I [46].
B. FEM Software and Numerical Accuracy
Static electromagnetic simulations were conducted using ANSYS’ Maxwell 3-D version 16 product. This software numerically obtains a unique solution to Maxwell’s equations at dc via
the FEM and user specified boundary conditions. The Maxwell
product has extensive mesh analysis and healing capabilities.
Most important, solution convergence and the ultimate accuracy is controlled through a rigorous adaptive mesh refinement
procedure. For the results presented below, five iterations of
adaptive mesh refinement were employed, each with a refinement level of 30% per pass. This process grew the total number
of tetrahedral elements from approximately 200 000 to over
600 000 with total runtimes on the order of about 6 h on a server
with 192 Gbytes of RAM. When solving a dc current conduction
problem, the degrees of freedom are the electric scalar potentials at each node of the tetrahedral mesh. Typical values of
mesh size per iteration and energy loss are given in Table II and
demonstrate a reduction of the residual error through successive
refinement steps, increasing the accuracy of the calculation as it
converges.

Adaptive
Pass
1
2
3
4
5

Number of
Tetrahedra

Total Loss
(mW)

Loss Error
(%)

Delta Loss
(%)

183 113
248 020
335 946
455 431
616 856

0.6
0.607
0.60915
0.61047
0.61137

1.10
0.33
0.19
0.13
0.09

N/A
1.17
0.35
0.22
0.15

C. Boundary Conditions and Excitations
The default boundary conditions used by ANSYS
MAXWELL 3-D during dc conduction type simulations are
as follows. Standard (or “natural”) boundaries are enforced at
inner object interfaces and ensure the continuity of the normal
component of the direct electric current density through the interfaces. Homogeneous Neumann boundaries imposed on all
outer boundaries do not allow the normal electric current to
pass. The electric field within the conductor is indeed tangential
on this outer boundary. We have found that MAXWELL 3-D
does not implement an ideal hypothetical current source with
a fixed current density and a variable voltage across the electrode surface. Instead, a more realistic voltage source model
with Dirichlet boundary conditions of a fixed surface electrode
voltage is internally used for both voltage and current excitations. After completing the simulations, the required total current may be related to voltage. A user can define the total current a priori, which is the current source implementation. The
well-known current singularity at the voltage electrode edges is
eliminated via matching sponges—see the next Section.
V. ELECTRODES AND THEIR MONTAGES
A. Electrode Model
Electrodes were simulated using rectangular blocks of material (sponges) with the conductivity of saline solution (2 S/m).
Electrodes were sized consistent with existing procedures and
protocols [1] such that the rectangular surface in conformal contact with the skin was 5 cm on a size with a total surface area
of 25 cm2 . Each electrode was constructed in a virtual environment by subtracting larger geometric blocks that intersected the
surface of the VHP model with the skin of the model. In this
way, the contacting surface of the electrode was made conformal such that, even in areas of high curvature on the model, full
contact was maintained and no space existed between the electrode and the skin. A total electrode current of 2 mA (with the
equivalent uniform density of 0.08 mA/cm2 [1]) was employed
as the source in all cases described below.
B. Electrode Montages
Electrodes were arranged in three different configurations:
following the modified combinatorial nomenclature (MCN) of
the International EEG 10–20 system, we simulate the C3-Fp2
montage, which has been traditionally used to stimulate the primary motor cortex (M1) by placing the stimulation electrode

2492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

at the top-left portion of the head and the reference electrode
at the contralateral supraorbital position; an extracephalic contralateral shoulder montage which retains the original excitation
electrode position but shifts the reference electrode to the opposite side shoulder; and extracephalic ipsilateral shoulder montage which also retains the original excitation electrode position
but shifts the reference electrode to the shoulder on the same side
of the body as the excitation. Electrode positions and a cut plane
atlas may be viewed in the upper two rows of Figs. 4–8. The
cut plane atlases show that the layer of muscle around the head
is essentially nonexistent (see Figs. 4–6) and only contributes
to the model at regions midway and below the skull (see Figs.
7 and 8). Skin and fat layers mostly contribute to conduction
around the head.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS FOR TOTAL CURRENT DENSITY
A. Total Current Density for Surfaces of Cerebral Cortex
and White Matter
The total current density magnitude is plotted on the surfaces
of the cerebral cortex and white matter in rows 2 and 3 of Fig. 3,
respectively. The traditional cephalic montage in column 1
demonstrates a significant amount of current at the anterior
of the gray matter as it passes to the supraorbitally located
cathode. The surface plots of the extracephalic configurations
exhibit much lower current densities in this region of the brain
with higher concentrations toward the posterior.
When stimulated with an extracephalic configuration, the current on the surface of the white matter appears to be slightly more
concentrated directly below the anode, suggesting a relatively
deeper penetration with less current passing through the anterior
of the frontal lobe.

Fig. 3. Surface plots of the total current density on the cerebral cortex (row 2)
and white matter (row 3). Total current density normalized by the input current
density at the electrodes is shown. Column 1 provides results for the cephalic
configuration while columns 2 and 3 display the contralateral and ipsi-lateral
extracephalic results, respectively, using a logarithmic scale.

B. Total Current Density for Sagittal Cut Planes
A series of plots portraying the current densities experienced
with each montage are presented in Figs. 4–8 and all figures
are displayed with the same scale for comparison purposes.
Figs. 4–6 (similar to Fig. 3) are divided into columns (i)–(iii)
which depict current density results from the traditional, contralateral, and ipsilateral shoulder montages projected onto a
sequence of sagittal dissecting planes that progressively shift
from the anode through the head and toward the right side of the
model. In all cases, the shunting nature of the high conductivity
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is quite apparent as high proportions
of the total current are seen passing through this layer surrounding the brain. This characteristic is plainly seen on the third rows
of Figs. 4–6, which provide images of the brain that include the
surrounding structures. The high amount of current shown in
the third row of Fig. 5 is due to the presence of the ventricle
system at the center of the head.
A sagittal plane passing through the anode is depicted in
Fig. 4. Relatively higher proportions of the current are observed
in the primary motor cortex of the extracephalic cases. Additionally, the depth of stimulation appears relatively greater in
both extracephalic configurations.

A second sagittal plane located at the approximate midpoint
between the anode and the contralateral supraorbital cathode
position is shown in Fig. 5. The current levels within the brain
depicted in this plane provide evidence that the higher levels of
current are present in the frontal lobe in the cephalic arrangement. Both extracephalic arrangements again indicate a slightly
deeper level of stimulation. Current density values in Fig. 5 indicate that there is some minor stimulation of the brain stem
when using extracephalic anode locations versus essentially no
stimulation when using the traditional montage with the ipsilateral shoulder arrangement performing marginally better than
the contralateral design. While current is present in the brain
stem, the values are low and approximately five times less than
current values in the area of desired stimulation.
A final sagittal plane passing through the contralateral
supraorbital cathode position is presented in Fig. 6. Again,
the cephalic configuration depicts a relatively larger percentage
of the current passing through the prefrontal lobe as it moves
toward the cathode. This would suggest stimulation of this re-

NOETSCHER et al.: COMPARISON OF CEPHALIC AND EXTRACEPHALIC MONTAGES FOR TDCS-A NUMERICAL STUDY

Fig. 4. (i) Depictions of the contralateral supraorbital, (ii) extracephalic contralateral shoulder, and (iii) extracephalic ipsilateral shoulder cathode montages.
Total current density normalized by the input current density at the electrodes
is shown projected onto three sagittal planes that progressively travel from left
to right on the model using a logarithmic scale.

2493

Fig. 5. (i) Contralateral supraorbital, (ii) extracephalic contralateral shoulder,
and (iii) extracephalic ipsilateral shoulder cathode montages. Total current density normalized by the input current density at the electrodes is shown with
surrounding body structures using a logarithmic scale.
TABLE III
ELECTRODE VOLTAGES AND DIMENSIONLESS VOLTAGE RESPONSES

gion of the brain, which has been associated with planning and
consciousness rather than body movement and coordination.
Special consideration should be given to the extracephalic
configurations shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The depth of stimulation
when using extracephalic cathode locations is visibly greater
than that of the traditional cephalic arrangement. This would
indicate that a greater percentage of the brain volume would be
covered through extracephalic means.
This last observation about stimulation depth raises an interesting question of why electrodes placed in close proximity to
what is essentially a highly conductive sphere of CSF encompassing the brain perform less efficiently than electrodes placed
at farther locations.
C. Total Current Density for Axial Cut Planes
Fig. 7 depicts an axial plane located approximately midway
through the brain and intersects with the supraorbital cathode location. Results displayed in this plane indicate relatively
deep stimulation regions for both extracephalic designs as compared with the traditional montage. Conversely, the traditional

Parameter

Skin

Fat

Muscle

Tissue
Skull

CSF

Conductivity

0.0002

0.038

0.2

0.076

2.00

0.028
0.028
0.048

16.19

C3-Fp2 Montage
19.334
19.29
19.33
19.32

19.32

19.33

V 0 , mV
V for 20%
cond. change,
mV
S × 10 3
V 0 , mV
V for 20%
cond. change,
mV
S × 10 3
V 0 , mV
V for 20%
cond. change,
mV
S × 10 3

813
11
0
5
3
C3-Extracephalic Ipsilateral Shoulder Montage
21.99
18.46
21.91
21.94
21.98
21.98

802
17
10
2
3
C3-Extracephalic Contralateral Shoulder Montage
21.84
18.41
21.84
21.88
21.91
21.91

801

18

9

2

2

Brain
(GM, WM, Cer)

1

21.98

0

21.92

0

All dimensional voltage data are related to a current source with the electrode normal current
density of J i n = 0.08 m A/cm 2 and the total source current of I i n = 25 cm 2 × J i n =
2 mA

2494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. (i) Contralateral supraorbital, (ii) extracephalic contralateral shoulder,
and (iii) extracephalic ipsilateral shoulder cathode montages. Total current density normalized by the input current density at the electrodes is shown with
surrounding body structures using a logarithmic scale.

electrode configuration shows a much higher level of current
flowing into the cathode.
D. Total Current Density for 45° Cut Planes
A diagonal cut-plane traversing the space between the anode
at the top of the head and the traditional location for the cathode
is shown in Fig. 8. A cephalic cathode configuration seems to
show a relative shift in current density from the motor cortex
to the frontal lobe. Virtually no stimulation beyond the parietal
lobe is seen and while extracephalic configurations seem to
somewhat better target the motor cortex, some stimulation of
the rear of the brain is evident. This behavior is consistent in
previous figures.
E. Invariance of Relative Current Densities to Changes
in Skin Properties
Relatively higher total current densities in the brain for extracephalic montages may be observed in Figs. 3–8. And yet,
one potentially critical configuration would correspond to a very
highly conducting skin layer so that the bulk of current might
be expected to flow closer to the surface, irrespective of the
particular electrode montage (cephalic or extracephalic). As a
test case, we consider here a hypothetic isotropic skin layer with
the extreme conductivity of 0.25 S/m (wet epidermis) compared

Fig. 7. Current densities projected onto an axial plane located halfway down
the brain for (i) the contralateral supraorbital, (ii) extracephalic contralateral
shoulder, and (iii) extracephalic ipsilateral shoulder montages. Total current
density normalized by the input current density at the electrodes is shown using
a logarithmic scale.

with dry skin from Table I in Fig. 9, which would model the
electrode/skin interface as the electrode dries during an extended
tDCS treatment session. Despite the expected overall decrease
of the absolute current density in the brain, the relative patterns
of current density distribution remain approximately the same
for all three tested montages shown in Fig. 9. We think that these
results may be directly extrapolated to the anisotropic case. Another justification of this result will be discussed further with
reference to Fig. 10.
VII. QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF VERTICAL
HORIZONTAL AVERAGE CURRENT DENSITIES

AND

Results presented thus far rely upon a visual inspection of
the total current density distribution in the different observation
planes or on surfaces. It may be useful to separate the total
current density into two partial components (vertical and horizontal), and then find the average values of these components,
avg
for every lobe/cortex following (1). Fig. 10 reports
Jzavg , Jxy
numerically found average vertical and horizontal components

NOETSCHER et al.: COMPARISON OF CEPHALIC AND EXTRACEPHALIC MONTAGES FOR TDCS-A NUMERICAL STUDY

Fig. 8. Diagonal cut-plane between the anode and supraorbital cathode displaying normalized total current densities for (i) the contralateral supraorbital,
(ii) extracephalic contralateral shoulder, and (iii) extracephalic ipsilateral montages using a logarithmic scale.

of current densities in the brain including its individual subregions defined in Fig. 2. It can be seen from Fig. 10(a) that
the vertical component of current density in every subregion
increases when extracephalic montages (the results for both of
them are nearly identical and cannot be distinguished in the
figure) are used. However, the horizontal component of current
density in Fig. 10(b) either decreases or remains nearly the same
compared to the cephalic case. This may be instrumental when
stimulating brain regions with cell structures that are biased in
either the vertical or horizontal directions. The results for extremely wet skin shown in Fig. 10(c) and (d), respectively, follow
a similar tendency although the vertical current components in
the primary motor cortex and in the somatosensory cortex become close to each other for both competing montages. Note
that the cephalic montage is much less sensitive to variations in
skin properties.
VIII. EXPECTED ELECTRODE VOLTAGES
AND THEIR VARIATIONS
Cephalic and extracephalic configurations require different
electrode voltages for the same amount of current. This section
provides the corresponding estimates including voltage varia-

2495

Fig. 9. Comparison of tDCS simulation results from Fig. 5 as a function of
skin conductivity. Total current densities projected onto an axial plane located
halfway down the brain for (i) the contralateral supraorbital, (ii) extracephalic
contralateral shoulder, and (iii) extracephalic ipsilateral shoulder montages.
Note that the images are employing a logarithmic scale.

tion margins. To investigate this and related problems we introduce the voltage response of a tissue/organ to small changes
in tissue conductivity. Given the independent current source Iin
as an excitation, the dimensionless (dynamic or small-signal)
voltage response may be defined as
S=−

dV /V0
>0
dσ/σ0

(2)

where dσ is the tissue conductivity variation and dV is the corresponding electrode voltage variation about the unperturbed
state V0 , σ0 . If a particular tissue carries a significant current,
its corresponding voltage response should be large. This fact
follows from the local form of Ohm’s law. Table III summarizes
unperturbed electrode voltages and voltage responses of individual tissues for the three electrode configurations. The C3-Fp2
montage possesses a very small voltage response for the muscle
tissue since there is virtually no such tissue within the main
current path (only the skin, and the fat are two layers around
the skull). In this analysis, we consider the brain as one entity.

2496

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 10. Averaged values of the vertical and horizontal current density components for the brain substructures shown in Fig. 2 and total white and gray matter.
Rows 1 and 2 depict results for dry and wet skin, respectively. Ipsi- and contralateral results were identical except in the lower right of (d).

Based on the results of Table III for individual voltage responses,
we estimate the electrode voltages and their extremes given
maximum ±20% conductivity variations for various montages
as: 1) cephalic: 300 mV ± 60 mV; 2) extracephalic ipsilateral: 720 mV ± 120 mV; and 3) extracephalic contralateral:
710 mV ± 120 mV.

IX. DISCUSSION
A. General Observations
Given the results described in the previous sections, the following observations can be made.
1) Extracephalic montages might create larger total current
densities in deeper brain regions, specifically in white
matter as compared to an otherwise equivalent cephalic
montage.
2) Extracephalic montages might create larger average vertical current densities in the primary motor cortex and in
the somatosensory cortex. At the same time, the horizontal current density either remains approximately the same
or decreases.

3) The previous observation becomes significantly less apparent for a very wet skin.
4) The extracephalic montages may reduce the large percentage of the applied current passing through the frontal
cortex when the cathode is located at the contralateral
supraorbital location.
Indeed, the data presented in Figs. 3 through 10 are related
to only one particular cephalic electrode configuration studied
in this paper. Furthermore, it is clearly dependent on both the
model construction and tissue conductivity values.
To address the last concern, we have compared our findings
with simulation data from a similar problem (cephalic versus
extracephalic configurations) solved numerically in [47]. The
FEM model used in this study did not include any layer of fat
(which has a significantly lower conductivity value [46]) around
the skull. Instead, a homogeneous thick skin layer with a high
conductivity value of 0.43 S/m has been used. The authors stated
that “the use of extracephalic montage does not significantly
increase the amount of current penetration through the skull.”
The figure of merit was apparently the current density map at
the surface of the cerebral cortex. Such a result is in agreement
with our data presented in Fig. 10(c) and (d) where we see that

NOETSCHER et al.: COMPARISON OF CEPHALIC AND EXTRACEPHALIC MONTAGES FOR TDCS-A NUMERICAL STUDY

some potential advantages of the extracephalic configuration
may rapidly disappear when the skin conductivity becomes very
high.
B. Invariance of Extracephalic Montages
The density of current flow within the body during extracephalic stimulation is weakly dependent on the choice of the
shoulder location. In both ipsi- and contralateral cathode montages, current densities in the human head are nearly identical.
This makes intuitive sense, as current needs to flow toward the
cathode through the neck. Above the neck, the current distribution is insensitive to shoulder electrode positions. This is similar
to water flow in a closed container in the form of a human body
where the anode is a source, the cathode is a sink, and the neck is
acting as a choke point. Thus, there is freedom in choosing the
extracephalic electrode location. This may alleviate concerns
regarding extraneous stimulation of other body areas (i.e., disrupting the autonomic nature of heart muscle regulation by the
sinoatrial node, etc.).
C. Validation of Results Across Configurations
Along with the previously reported extreme case, the current
density distribution behavior observed in Figs. 3–10 has been
confirmed for:
1) different tissue conductivities (every value was separately
varied by ±20%);
2) different body mass values (scaling the entire structure
by 5% × 5% × 5% while keeping the electrode size the
same); and
3) homogeneous versus nonhomogeneous brain structures
(assigning average conductivity values to white/gray matter/cerebellum).
D. VHP-F Model Limitations and Extensions
While the present VHP-F model has proven to be useful for
numerical studies such as the one described in this paper, it
does have its limitations. In particular, the CSF flow present in
the subarachnoid space is greatly simplified: only the thin yet
nonuniform closed CSF shell and the ventricles are considered,
as shown in Figs. 4–9. The minimum thickness of this shell was
artificially set to 1 mm in order to avoid numerically inaccurate
results. The skull is modeled by a homogeneous bone structure.
All present calculations use lower definition meshes with the
typical resolution (surface deviation) ranging from 1 to 3 mm,
which significantly suppresses the fine sulci and gyri structures.
Also, the brain membranes, including the pia mater, arachnoid,
and dura mater, are not explicitly included in the VHP-F model.
These membranes present a direct layer between the brain and
stimulating electrodes and likely should be characterized for
enhanced tDCS simulation accuracy. The balloon representation of the skin with the fixed uniform skin shell thickness of
2 mm is indeed another simplifying approximation. However,
the variable (and typically much thicker) fat layer of a greater
conductivity just beneath the skin is anatomically correct to
within 1 mm segmentation accuracy, everywhere in the phan-

2497

tom. Together, the skin and fat layers may still form a reasonable
modeling approximation for the surface current flow. The impact of anisotropic materials on the performance of the VHP-F
model is another item we wish to consider in a future work. Our
host FEM software (MAXWELL 3-D of ANSYS) allows for
a diagonal Cartesian conductivity tensor σxx , σy y , σz z though
every tissue.
X. CONCLUSION
It has been shown that extracephalic montages might create
larger total current densities in deeper brain regions, specifically
in white matter as compared to an equivalent cephalic montage.
Extracephalic montages might also create larger average vertical current densities in the primary motor cortex and in the
somatosensory cortex. At the same time, the horizontal current
density either remains approximately the same or decreases. The
metrics used in this paper include either the total local current
density through the entire brain volume or the average vertical
and horizontal current densities for each individual lobe/cortex.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Dr. M. Kozlov of the Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Dresden,
Germany for his feedback regarding human anatomy and model
applicability and for his testing of the model when simulating Magnetic Resonance Imaging hardware. They are also very
thankful to Dr. S. Louie of ANSYS and Dr. A. Prokop of Computer Simulation Technology for their comprehensive testing of
the VHP model and feedback regarding the model utility. Ms. S.
Maliye of Worcester Polytechnic Institute has also been instrumental in providing valuable contributions. We are very thankful
to two anonymous reviewers for useful, very comprehensive,
and inspiring comments and suggestions, which significantly
improved the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] M. A. Nitsche, L. G. Cohen, E. M. Wassermann, A. Priori, N. Lang, A.
Antal, W. Paulus, F. Hummel, P. S. Boggio, F. Fregni, and A. PascualLeone, “Transcranial direct current stimulation: State of the art,” Brain
Stimul., vol. 1, pp. 206–223, 2008.
[2] A. R. Brunoni, M. A. Nitsche, N. Bolognini, M. Bikson, T. Wagner,
L. Merabet, D. J. Edwards, A. Valero-Cabre, A. Rotenberg, A. PascualLeone, R. Ferrucci, A. Priori, P. S. Boggio, and F. Fregni, “Clinical research
with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): Challenges and future
directions,” Brain Stimul., vol. 5, pp. 175–195, 2012.
[3] S. Rush and D. A. Driscoll, “Current distribution in the brain from surface
electrodes,” Anesth. Analg. Curr. Res., vol. 47, pp. 717–723, 1968.
[4] M. Bikson, A. Rahman, and A. Datta, “Computational models of transcranial direct current stimulation,” Clin. EEG Neurosci., vol. 43, pp. 176–183,
2012.
[5] T. Wagner, F. Fregni, S. Fecteau, A. Grodzinsky, M. Zahn, and A. PascualLeone, “Transcranial direct current stimulation: A computer-based human
model study,” NeuroImage, vol. 35, pp. 1113–1124, 2007.
[6] A. Datta, M. Elwassif, F. Battaglia, and M. Bikson, “Transcranial current
stimulation focality using disc and ring electrode configurations: FEM
analysis,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 5, pp. 163–174, 2008.
[7] P. C. Miranda, M. Lomarev, and M. Hallett, “Modeling the current distribution during transcranial direct current stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 117, pp. 1623–1629, 2006.
[8] P. C. Miranda, A. Mekonnen, R. Salvador, and G. Ruffini, “The electric
field in the cortex during transcranial current stimulation,” NeuroImage,
vol. 70, pp. 48–58, 2013.

2498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014

[9] M. Bikson, A. Rahman, A. Datta, F. Fregni, and L. Merabet, “Highresolution modeling assisted design of customized and individualized transcranial direct current stimulation protocols,” Neuromodulation: Technol.
Neural Interface, vol. 15, pp. 306–315, 2012.
[10] M. Bikson and A. Datta, “Guidelines for precise and accurate computational models of tDCS,” Brain Stimul., vol. 5, pp. 430–434, 2012
[11] A. Datta, X. Zhou, Y. Su, L.C. Parra, and M. Bikson, “Validation of finite
element model of transcranial electrical stimulation using scalp potentials:
Implications for clinical dose,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[12] S. Shahid, P. Wen, and T. Ahfock, “Assessment of electric field distribution in anisotropic cortical and subcortical regions under the influence of
tDCS,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 35, pp. 41–57, 2014.
[13] H.S. Suh, W.H. Lee, and T.-S. Kim, “Influence of anisotropic conductivity
in the skull and white matter on transcranial direct current stimulation via
an anatomically realistic finite element head model,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 57, pp. 6961–80, 2012.
[14] A. Priori, “Brain polarization in humans: A reappraisal of an old tool
for prolonged non-invasive modulation of brain excitability,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 114, pp. 589–595, 2003.
[15] M. A. Nitsche, S. Doemkes, T. Karakose, A. Antal, D. Liebetanz,
N. Lang, F. Tergau, and W. Paulus, “Shaping the effects of transcranial
direct current stimulation of the human motor cortex,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 97, pp. 3109–3117, 2007.
[16] M. Bikson, A. Datta, A. Rahman, and J. Scaturro, “Electrode montages
for tDCS and weak transcranial electrical stimulation: Role of ‘return’
electrode’s position and size,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121, pp. 1976–
1978, 2010.
[17] A. F. DaSilva, M. S. Volz, M. Bikson, and F. Fregni, “Electrode positioning and montage in transcranial direct current stimulation,” J. Vis. Exp.,
vol. 51, pp. 1–11, 2011.
[18] F. Cogiamanian, S. Marceglia, G. Ardolino, S. Barbieri, and A. Priori,
“Improved isometric force endurance after transcranial direct current stimulation over the human motor cortical areas,” Eur. J. Neurosci., vol. 26,
pp. 242–249, 2007.
[19] D. M. Martin, A. Alonzo, P. B. Mitchell, P. Sachdev, V. Galvez, and C.
K. Loo, “Fronto-extracephalic transcranial direct current stimulation as
a treatment for major depression: An open-label pilot study,” J. Affect.
Disord., vol. 134, pp. 459–463, 2011.
[20] U. Ziemann, W. Paulus, M. A. Nitsche, A. Pascual-Leone, W. D. Byblow,
A. Berardelli, H. R. Siebner, J. Classen, L. G. Cohen, and J. C. Rothwell, “Consensus: Motor cortex plasticity protocols,” Brain Stimul., vol. 1,
pp. 164–182, 2008.
[21] Y. Vandermeeren, J. Jamart, and M. Ossemann, “Effect of tDCS with
an extracephalic reference electrode on cardio-respiratory and autonomic
functions,” BMC Neurosci., vol. 38, pp. 11–38, 2010.
[22] I. Babuska and A. K. Aziz, “On the angle condition in the finite element
method,” SIAM J. Numerical Anal., vol. 13, pp. 214–226, 1976.
R
[23] U.S. National Library of Medicine. The Visible Human Project
[Online]. Available: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible/visible_human.
html
[24] J. Yanamadala, J. Elloian, G. M. Noetscher, A. T. Htet, S. N. Makarov, F.
Sciré-Scappuzzo, and A. Pascual-Leone, “FEM-compatible visible human
female segmentation model and its application to in-body and on-body
antenna studies,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Antenna Appl. Symp., Monticello,
IL, USA, 2013, Sep. 17–19, pp. 340–359.
[25] Y. Huang, J. P. Dmochowski, Y. Su, A. Datta, C. Rorden, and L. C. Parra,
“Automated MRI segmentation for individualized modeling of current
flow in the human head,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, pp. 1–13, 2013.
[26] J. S. Weszka, “A survey of threshold selection techniques,” Comput.
Graph. Image Process., vol. 7, pp. 259–265, 1978.
[27] K. S. Fu and J. K. Mui, “A survey on image segmentation,” Pattern Recog.,
vol. 13, pp. 3–16, 1981.

[28] R. M. Haralick and L. G. Shapiro, “Survey: Image segmentation techniques,” Comp Vis. Graph Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 100–132, 1985.
[29] A. Mitiche and J. K. Aggarwal, “Image segmentation by conventional
and information-integrating techniques: A synopsis,” Image Vis. Comput.,
vol. 3, pp. 50–62, 1985.
[30] N. R. Pal and S. K. Pal, “A review on image segmentation techniques,”
Pattern Recog., vol. 26, pp. 1227–1249, 1993.
[31] J. C. Bezdek, L. O. Hall, and L. P. Clarke, “Review of MR image segmentation techniques using pattern recognition,” Med. Phys., vol. 20,
pp. 1033–1048, 1993.
[32] D. L. Pham, C. Xu, and J. L. Prince, “Current methods in medical image
segmentation,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 2, pp. 315–337, 2000.
[33] J. A. Noble and D. Boukerroui, “Ultrasound image segmentation: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 987–1010, Aug. 2006.
[34] J. Rogowska, “Overview and fundamentals of medical image segmentation,” in Handbook of Medical Image Processing and Analysis, I. N.
Bankman, ed. Oxford, USA: Academic Press, 2009, pp. 73–90.
[35] P. A. Yushkevich, J. Piven, H. C. Hazlett, R. G. Smith, S. Ho, J. C. Gee,
and G. Gerig, “User-guided 3D active contour segmentation of anatomical
structures: Significantly improved efficiency and reliability,” NeuroImage,
vol. 31, pp. 1116–28, 2006.
[36] [Online]. Available: http://meshlab.sourceforge.net/
[37] M. Garland, Quadric-based polygonal surface simplification, Ph.D. thesis,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1999.
[38] J. Vollmer, R. Mencl, and H. Mueller, “Improved Laplacian smoothing of
noisy surface meshes,” Eurographics, vol. 18, pp. 1–8, 1999.
[39] B. Delaunay, Sur la sphère vide, Izvestia Akademii Nauk SSSR, Otdelenie
Matematicheskikh i Estestvennykh Nauk, vol. 7, pp. 793–800, 1934.
[40] M. Kazhdan, M. Bolitho, and H. Hoppe, “Poisson surface reconstruction,”
in Proc. Eurograph. Symp. Geom. Process., 2006, pp 61–70.
[41] C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, “The dielectric properties of
biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp.
2231–2249, 1996.
[42] S. Gabriel, R.W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[43] C. Gabriel, “Compilation of the dielectric properties of body tissues at
RF and microwave frequencies,” Tech. Rep. N.AL/OE-TR- 1996–0037,
Occupational and environmental health directorate, Radiofrequency Radiation Division, Brooks Air Force Base, TX, USA, 1996.
[44] D. Andreuccetti, R. Fossi, and C. Petrucci, “An Internet resource for the calculation of the dielectric properties of body tissues in the frequency range 10 Hz–100 GHz,” [Online]. Available:
http://niremf.ifac.cnr.it/tissprop./ IFAC-CNR, Florence (Italy), 1997.
Based on data published by C. Gabriel et al. in 1996
[45] D. Miklavcic, N. Pavselj, and F. X. Hart, “Electric properties of tissues,” in
Wiley Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering, M. Akay, ed., New York,
NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[46] IT’IS Material Property Database, Retrieved Oct. 2nd 2013 from
http://www.itis.ethz.ch/itis-for-health/tissue-properties/overview/.
[47] C. H. Im, J. H. Park, M. Shim, W. H. Chang, and Y. H. Kim, “Evaluation
of local electric fields generated by transcranial direct current stimulation with an extracephalic reference electrode based on realistic 3D body
modeling,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, pp. 2137–2150, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

