88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Biological Channel Modeling and Implantable UWB
Antenna Design for Neural Recording Systems
Hadi Bahrami∗ , Student Member, IEEE, S. Abdollah Mirbozorgi, Student Member, IEEE,
Leslie A. Rusch, Fellow, IEEE, and Benoit Gosselin, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Ultrawideband (UWB) short-range communication
systems have proved to be valuable in medical technology, particularly for implanted devices, due to their low-power consumption,
low cost, small size, and high data rates. Neural activity monitoring
in the brain requires high data rate (800 kb/s per neural sensor),
and we target a system supporting a large number of sensors, in
particular, aggregate transmission above 430 Mb/s (∼512 sensors).
Knowledge of channel behavior is required to determine the maximum allowable power to 1) respect ANSI guidelines for avoiding
tissue damage, and 2) respect FCC guidelines on unlicensed transmissions. We utilize a realistic model of the biological channel to
inform the design of antennas for the implanted transmitter and
the external receiver under these requirements. Antennas placement is examined under two scenarios having contrasting power
constraints. Performance of the system within the biological tissues is examined via simulation and experiment. Our miniaturized
antennas, 12 mm × 12 mm, need worst-case receiver sensitivities
of −38 and −30.5 dBm for the first and second scenarios, respectively. These sensitivities allow us to successfully detect signals
transmitted through tissues in the 3.1–10.6-GHz UWB band.
Index Terms—Average specific absorption rate (ASAR), biological tissues, channel modeling, implantable antenna, neural recording, telemetry, ultrawideband.

I. INTRODUCTION
HERE is growing interest for implantable transmitters to
extract the raw electrophysiological data gathered from
miniature monitoring implanted systems [1]–[6]. These emerging devices are crucial components in the development of new
medical applications targeted at diagnosis and treatment of neurological diseases and/or at control of prosthetic devices [3]–[8].
As shown in Fig. 1, such applications require a wireless link between an implanted device and an external controller.
Ultrawideband (UWB) signals are transmitted in the unlicensed Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approved
frequency range (3.1–10.6 GHz). UWB offers several advantages over narrowband systems such as higher bit rates and
highly integrated systems featuring smaller antenna size [7]–[9].

T

Manuscript received December 31, 2013; revised April 9, 2014; accepted July
10, 2014. Date of publication July 17, 2014; date of current version December
18, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, by the hSITE Strategic Network and by the
Microsystems Strategic Alliance of Québec. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author
* H. Bahrami is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Laval University, Québec, QC G1V 0A6, Canada (e-mail: hadi.bahrami.a@gmail.com)
S. A. Mirbozorgi, L. A. Rusch, and B. Gosselin are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Laval University, Québec, QC G1V
0A6, Canada (e-mail: sa.mirbozorgi@gmail.com; leslie.rusch@gel.ulaval.ca;
Benoit.Gosselin@gel.ulaval.ca)
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2339836

Fig. 1. An overview of an implanted neural recording system and its
applications.

The simple structure of a UWB transmitter leads to low-power
consumption [7]–[9].
While UWB design for small size, low power consumption,
and high data rate has been widely examined, most antennas
were designed for free space utilization [10], [11], not for use in
human tissue. Wireless implantable UWB transmitters specifically designed for data acquisition systems implanted into the
human head for neural recording have been examined in [7]–[9];
however, channel characteristics, average specific absorption
rate (ASAR), and FCC guidelines on transmitted UWB power
spectral density were not taken into account. The transmission
loss for the human head in the 100 MHz to 6 GHz band has
been investigated in [12] for a millimeter-size antenna without
considering of the bandwidth of TX and RX antennas or the
effect of biological tissues on system performance.
An antenna surrounded by biological tissues in its near-field
acts as a new effective antenna with new propagation behavior
and return loss different from the actual antenna. As a result, an
antenna designed for one part of the body (i.e., designed according to the dielectric properties of that part of the body) might
not operate as expected in another part of the body. Planar microstrip UWB antennas, implanted in human tissues, have been
designed and studied [13]–[18], however, not for human head
tissues. Many of the implanted antennas proposed in the literature are designed for gastro applications [16]–[18]. In these
applications, the antenna is moving in the body and experiences
an environment with changing dielectric properties, making the
antenna optimization problematic. Furthermore, these antennas
were for the most part designed for a single layer of homogenous material [17]. So antennas used for gastro applications will

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BAHRAMI et al.: BIOLOGICAL CHANNEL MODELING AND IMPLANTABLE UWB ANTENNA DESIGN FOR NEURAL RECORDING SYSTEMS

not necessarily work well when implanted in the brain. These
papers focused on a methodology for designing a reliable wireless link for neural recording system using tissue modeling and
designed antennas for this purpose. Head tissue is particularly
sensitive, and ASAR requirements will tend to limit achievable data rate. By examining ASAR, we can accurately predict
system performance [e.g., signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)] for our
antenna designs and target increased data rate.
In Section II, we present a model of biological tissues used
for channel modeling, and discuss the implications of requiring
a near-field analysis rather than far field for this application. In
Section III, we consider TX antenna design for two scenarios for
the location of the implant. We also design a receiver antenna
to be external to the body (one receiver antenna design covers
either location for the transmitter antenna). In Section IV, we
simulate the performance of antennas designed in Section III,
as well as the overall channel characteristics for the wireless
link. In Section V, we fabricate and characterize three antennas
(scenario 1 transmitter antenna (TX1), scenario 2 transmitter antenna (TX2), and a receiver antenna applicable to either scenario
(RX)). Characterization of the antenna with tissue present is accomplished by placing the antennas in fresh brain and bone
tissues of a sheep, as well as fat and skin from a chicken.
Measured results are in good agreement with simulation. In
Section VI, potential for high data rates is concluded for neural
recording which is based on our results. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section VII.
II. CHANNEL MODELING UNDER TWO SCENARIOS
A miniature antenna surrounded by biological tissues will
have a very different radiation pattern than one in free space;
hence, the gain and directivity of the antennas will be affected.
As the impedance of the biological tissues is very different from
that of free space, careful impedance matching is required; return loss must be calculated by considering the impact of biological tissues. Transmitting energy in body must always put patient
health concerns first. We evaluate safety (avoidance of tissue
damage) in terms of the 1-gram ASAR distribution guidelines
set by ANSI. Evaluation of signal impact on tissue is captured
with our HFSS simulator. We present a design methodology that
1) respects ANSI limits on ASAR, 2) maximizes system performance, and 3) respects FCC regulations limiting transmission
power to avoid interference with other devices.
A. Multilayer Model of Tissues
We evaluate antenna performance for ASAR and for data
transmission. Transmission is captured by H(ω), the frequency
response of the neural monitoring channel
j θ (ω )

H(ω) = A(ω)e

(1)

where A(ω) and θ(ω) are the amplitude and phase [19]. We use a
multilayer model of head tissue, see Fig. 2, to find the frequency
response and ASAR using HFSS, a commercial finite element
method solver. The antennas (TX and RX) are designed taking
into account the impact of surrounding tissues.

89

Fig. 2. Multilayer model of the tissues for the parietal lobe region of the
human head used for calculating channel behavior and their best- and worstcase thicknesses [21].

Unlike free space communications, the multiple biological
tissues in neural monitoring systems have varying conductivity and dielectric constants leading to complex RF interaction.
The thickness and electrical properties of each tissue layer impact the overall antenna performance [13]–[18], [20]. The head
as a communication media is modeled by several layers of biological tissues, where each biological tissue is defined as a
dispersive dielectric material using three electrical parameters:
relative permittivity, loss tangent, and mass density. The stacked
layers form an inhomogeneous media [23] which is simulated
in HFSS. The Hugo model was recently proposed for EM field
simulations. In an appendix, we contrast the stacked layer and
Hugo models, and explain our choice of the multilayer model.
The frequency-dependent relative permittivity and loss tangent are available in [22] for the entire UWB band. The loss
tangent quantifies inherent dielectric dissipation when interacting with an electromagnetic wave. The mass density, i.e., the
mass of each tissue per volume unit, is reported in [24] for different tissues; this parameter is needed for the calculation of
ASAR, not frequency response.
The multilayer model includes the brain matter, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), the dura, bone (skull), fat, and skin. The
thickness of each layer will affect its impact on the channel;
hence, we consider two extreme cases, minimum and maximal
adult tissue thicknesses that are indicated in the Table in Fig. 2.
The worst case (i.e., leading to greatest signal attenuation) occurs with the maximum thicknesses that can be encountered
and are listed in the column-labeled max. Minimal values are
listed in the column min. As the system must function for all
cases encountered, we design the antennas for the worst case.
We examine their performance for both best and worst case.
B. Near-Field Behavior
HFSS provides a 3-D numerical solution for the electrical field intensity across all tissues. A planar cross section
(Z–Y plane) of the intensity is plotted in Fig. 3(a); a color bar indicates that maximum intensity is in red, and minimal values in
blue. The arrows on the far right indicate sections corresponding
to tissues in the head, and the section for free space transmission outside the head. The presumed location of the TX antenna
is recognizable as the position of maximum intensity (a fine

90

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3. (a) E-field intensity at 3 GHz in the multilayer model. (b) E-field
intensity beyond the Z–Y plane.

box outlines antenna dimensions). This plot allows us to visualize three important aspects of the transmission: 1) the intensity
is surrounding tissue that will be used in ASAR calculations,
2) the border between near and far field effects, and 3) the optimal location for the RX antenna outside the head. We discuss
in this section the importance of near field effects.
The space surrounding an antenna is usually divided into three
regions: 1) reactive near-field, 2) radiating near-field (Fresnel),
and 3) far-field (Fraunhofer) [25]. In the Fresnel region, the
angular distribution of the electrical intensity is directive, but
it varies with distance, whereas in the far-field, the intensity
distribution of the radiated field is relatively constant with distance. As shown in Fig. 3(b), most of the EM field is confined in
the white-dashed circle that has a diameter of D = 67 mm. To
calculate the border between different radiation regions in free
space, we consider this dimension D of the effective antenna
(combination of the implanted antenna and biological layers
around it). The Fresnel region will be between reactive near field


D3
2D 2
) and far-field (R ≥ wavelength
) [25]. In
(R ≥ 0.62 wavelength
Fig. 3(a), the angular distribution of the electrical intensity begins to smooth out and forms lobes moving from near-field to
far-field in the free-space section of Fig. 3(a). The dashed curve
(at a radius of 34 mm from the TX antenna) indicates an approximate border between the reactive near-field and Fresnel
regions at 3 GHz. The red-dashed curve in Fig. 3(a) (at a radius
of 7 mm from the TX antenna) indicates the region where RX
placement will receive the strongest signal. Locating the RX antenna in this region will allow the RF signal to be small enough
to avoid tissue damage, but strong enough for reliable wireless
communications. Hence, our system will work in the near-field
rather than far-field for propagation. The close proximity of
transmitter and receiver antennas (the mutual coupling between
the antennas) makes it impossible to treat transmission loss as
independent of the antenna design (as is typically the case).
The channel cannot be investigated separately from the antennas [26], but encompasses transmitter and receiver antennas and
all adjacent tissues. S21 is the electromagnetic wave coupling
coefficient between the transmitter and receiver antennas and
it is the frequency response for this near field communications
system.
Antenna design should favor the broadside direction [red arrow in Fig. 3(a)]. RF signals below the TX antenna are not
useful for communications, and indeed must be attenuated as
much as possible to avoid tissue damage to highly sensitive
brain cells. When the RX and TX antenna have reflection coefficients below −10 dB, and the implanted TX antenna radiation
is directive to its broadside and the RX antenna is placed in
below the red border, we will achieve the maximum coupling
between antennas and reduce insertion loss of the channel. Finally, in Fig. 3(b), we plot a zoomed-out image of the E-field
intensity, including intensity beyond the Z–Y plane. An inset
shows the rough geometry of RX and TX antenna placement
whose “shadow” is superimposed on the E-field plots. We see
that within the white-dashed circle, we find the majority of the
E-field power. HFSS simulations for S-parameter calculations
need only cover this area to capture near field effects for communications performance and to calculate ASAR, thus reducing
simulation time.
The results in Fig. 3 are for Scenario 1 with the TX antenna
located between bone and dura. For Scenario 2, the TX antenna
would be located one layer higher between fat and bone. The tissue impact on antenna response will vary with position, hence,
antenna design and performance will differ across the two scenarios. But the general behavior of antenna propagation is same,
and we use the same design methodology for each scenario.
III. ANTENNA DESIGN
The implantable UWB antenna is subject to specific requirements that render its design difficult 1) it is restricted to small
dimensions, 2) it must be biocompatible, and 3) it needs to be
electrically insulated from the body [13]–[18], [20]. Antenna
size should be on the order of that of the implantable neural
recording system [7]–[9]. Planar monopole antennas have simple geometry, small size, and wide bandwidth [10], [11]. We

BAHRAMI et al.: BIOLOGICAL CHANNEL MODELING AND IMPLANTABLE UWB ANTENNA DESIGN FOR NEURAL RECORDING SYSTEMS

propose a monopole microstrip antenna combined with a truncated ground plane covered by a biocompatible material to
achieve wide bandwidth. Previous results show that employing
an insulating layer increases the performance of the antennas
[27]–[29].
The feed-line is a microstrip transmission line having 50-Ω
impedance over the UWB bandwidth. The dimensions of the
transmission line are a function of the electrical properties of
the substrate as well as the environment (tissues and biocompatible material) surrounding the substrate. In [28] and [29],
we examined various biocompatible materials and settled on
an Al2 O3 superstrate with a thickness of 1 mm and relative
permittivity 9.2 to yield the best compromise for small size.
As we are designing a single polarization antenna, current
induced on the antenna should follow a single axis of propagation. A rectangular propagator yields the highest linearity in
current. As the rectangular propagator is much wider than the
transmission line, the return loss will tend to be narrowband.
We therefore adopt a taper geometry to couple the propagator
to the transmission line at the widest bandwidth [30]. Simulations show that modifying the rectangular ground pad to adopt
a staircase shape (truncated ground) provides better return loss.
By optimizing the width and length of the staircase, we optimize return loss. In HFSS, we modify antenna dimensions and
gauge the impact of surrounding biological tissues using the
finite element method. We vary the length of the microstrip
transmission line, the length of a transversal, symmetric strip
to the transmission line, and the size of the ground plane, and
calculate S11 and directivity at broadside for the entire UWB
band. This numerical method is repeated for TX1 (under skull,
i.e., scenario 1), and TX2 (above skull and under skin and fat,
i.e., scenario 2) until optimal dimensions are found. The next
section describes antenna performance that was optimized. The
RX antenna outside the head is less constrained in size and our
design constraints can be relaxed. For the RX antenna, we adopt
the same geometry as TX antennas, but without insulating layers. We optimize S11 , but not directivity. Optimal dimensions of
the antennas are reported in [29]. We fabricated these designs,
and present results in Section V.
IV. SIMULATED PERFORMANCE
The performance of our three antenna designs is examined
via HFSS simulation. The antennas were designed for the worstcase (maximal signal attenuation) tissue thicknesses. The performance of these designs is examined when implanted in the
worst and best cases.
A. Radiation and Return Loss
Fig 4(a) shows the directivity and gain as a function of frequency for TX1 and TX2 for implantation in a worst-case and a
best-case head geometry. For all scenarios, the air gap between
the receiver antenna and the skin was set to 2 mm. Greater frequency resolution was simulated as compared to results reported
in [29]. In all cases directivity is above 0 dB, i.e., the antennas
are directive at broadside. Because the loss in biological tissues increases with frequency, the gain of the antenna decreases

91

Fig. 4. Simulated parameters for implanted antennas (a) directivity at broadside direction (b) gain at broadside direction.

roughly with frequency for implanted antennas [see Fig. 4(b)].
The radiation patterns of implanted antennas are directional due
to the presence of the dura, the CSF and the brain, as can be
seen in Fig. 3(a).
Simulation results for reflection coefficient (S11 ) are shown
in Fig. 5(a) and (b) for the worst and best cases. The reflection
coefficient is smaller than −10 dB within the UWB frequency
range from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz for each antenna. A properly designed pair of antennas for short-range UWB communications
has a TX antenna, where 1) S11 is less than −10 dB, and
2) directivity is more than 0 dB at the broadside. For the RX
antenna, S11 must be below −10 dB when located where the
TX antenna has highest radiation intensity [24]. The simulation
S21 (the channel frequency response) results for both scenarios
are plotted in Fig. 6(a) (magnitude) and (b) (phase). In general, it shows that channel insertion loss increases with tissue
thickness (the worst case having thicker tissues than the best
case) and frequency. At higher frequencies, the loss tangent of
tissues increases, which causes more loss when electromagnetic
waves propagate through the tissues. As absorption in tissues increases with frequency, system performance will increase when
exploiting lower frequencies. From Fig. 6(b), the channel phase
is almost linear. When the channel frequency response has nonlinear phase, signal distortion can result.
The group delay provides a measure of required guard time
to avoid intersymbol interference (ISI) due to signal distortion

92

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Simulated S 1 1 for the antennas (a) the worst case (b) the best case.

which is defined as
τ (ω) = −

dθ(ω)
.
dω

(2)

The computed group delay for this channel is shown in Fig. 6(c).
The maximum group delays are 130 and 160 ps for the worst case
of scenarios 1 and 2, respectively, and confined to frequencies
around 7.8 GHz. Discrete multitones could be used to avoid
data transmission in this frequency band. Pulse shaping could
be used to place more power between 3–7 GHz. Pulse shaping
could alternatively be used to create short UWB pulses, leaving
pulses separated by more than the worst-case maximal group
delay [31], [32]. In conclusion, at a bit rate of 430 Mb/s the effect
of ISI is negligible. Therefore, the only constraining parameter
to achieve this bit rate (with a certain BER performance) is
the transmitted power, which translates to the received SNR. In
Section VI, we discuss how our link can push data rate to our
targeted 430 Mb/s data rate.
B. Federal Communication Committee
UWB transmissions are limited by regulation. In far field
propagation of implanted antenna, we have a limitation on maximum transmitted power. The maximum power of the transmitter plus maximum antenna gain (Pt + Gt ) must be below
−41.3 dBm/MHz. We will see that this constraint is greater
than that imposed by limiting tissue damage (found in the next

Fig. 6. Simulated parameters for the antennas for two scenarios and best case
and worst case (a) amplitude of the channels, (b) phase of the channels, and
(c) group delay of the channels.

section). UWB bandwidth is around 7 GHz, thus the Pt + Gt
allowed is [33]
Pt + Gt = −41.3 [dBm/MHz]
+10 × log10 (7000) [dB · MHz]
= −2.84 [dBm] = 0.5mW.

(3)

The best case for the first scenario has a maximum gain
of around −8.8 dB at 5.2 GHz. The best case for the second
scenario has a maximum gain of around −6.3 dB at 5.8 GHz.
Therefore, the maximum Pt for the first scenario is 3.9 mW
(5.96 dBm), and 2.2 mW (3.46 dBm) for the second scenario.

BAHRAMI et al.: BIOLOGICAL CHANNEL MODELING AND IMPLANTABLE UWB ANTENNA DESIGN FOR NEURAL RECORDING SYSTEMS

93

Fig. 8. Fabricated antennas (a) radiator side, (b) ground plane side, (c) implanted antenna covered with an insulating layer [Al2 O3 ceramic substrate
(εr = 9.8)], and (d) illustration of connection of implanted antenna to integrated recording chip.

D. System Performance
For both antenna placement scenarios, the ANSI restrictions
(4.5 mW) are less restrictive than those imposed by the FCC
(3.9 and 2.2 mW) for maximum power, so maximum power is
set by the FCC criteria. In practice, both constraints are higher
than easily achievable signal powers from implantable devices
without amplification. The sensitivity of the receiver is obtained
as follows:
Fig. 7.
skull.

Simulated ASAR for different tissues (a) position under skull (b) above

In essence, the best-case channel sees less signal attenuation,
leading to greater restrictions to reduce potential interference.

Rec. sensitivity(dBm) + Link margin (dB) =
Max. transmitter power(dBm) + Path Loss (dB).

(4)

For a link margin of 6 dB, the worst-case sensitivities of the
receiver for both the first and the second scenarios with worst
transmission losses of −38 and −28 dB at 10.6 GHz are around
−38 and −30.5 dBm, respectively. As can be seen in Fig. 6(a),
operation at lower frequency enables better receiver sensitivity,
and better detection, because there is lower transmission loss.

C. Specific Absorption Rate
Average specific absorption rate (ASAR) is a critical parameter for assessing the tissue safety of our transmissions.
The peak 1-g ASAR distribution versus frequency is simulated
with HFSS for both scenarios using only the worst-case parameter set. Note that worst case for signal attenuation is also
worst case for ASAR as greater tissue thickness has electromagnet waves encountering more tissue. The average transmitted power at the excited port of the antenna in HFSS must
be below 4.5 mW in order to have an average absorption rate
of less than 1.6 W/kg (ANSI limitation [34]) in all tissues in
the UWB frequency range. This average transmitted power is
equal in both scenarios; transmitting more power results in tissue
damage.
This power is smaller than the 8-mW power level calculated
in [24] for the biomedical frequency band of 402–405 MHz
to satisfy the ANSI SAR limitation. This is understandable as
head tissue has significantly more loss in the UWB band than
the 402–405 MHz band. Fig. 7 shows the ASAR for each tissue.
In the first scenario, most power is absorbed by the skull (bone).
For the second scenario, the skin has highest ASAR.

V. FABRICATION AND MEASURED PERFORMANCE
In order to verify our simulation procedure in a realistic environment, we fabricated 12 mm × 12 mm monopole antennas on
a FR-4 PCB board with a thickness of 0.8 mm and a dielectric
constant of 4.4. Dimensions for scenario 1 (TX1) can be found
in [29, Table II, column 2], and dimensions for scenario 2 (TX2)
can be found in [29, Table II, column 3]. A 50-Ω subminiature
A (SMA) connector was used to connect the feeding strip; its
outer side was grounded to the ground plane. A 27 mm × 30 mm
monopole receiver antenna was fabricated as well (RX). Photos
of antennas are provided in Fig. 8(a)–(c). As seen in Fig. 8(d),
implanted antennas are assumed to couple to a neural recording
chip via a wire. To mimic implantation, we found animal tissues with thicknesses falling between the worst case and best
case values in the Table in Fig. 2. It was not possible to find
tissues with exactly the best or worst case thicknesses. In this
section, we present measurements and compare them to simulation results found with the thicknesses used in tissues for the
experimental measurements.

94

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 9. Setup for S-parameter measurement; (a) and (b) mimic biological
model for scenarios 1 and 2, respectively. (c) and (d) are screen shots of transmission losses for scenarios 1 and 2, respectively.

A. Network Analyzer Measurements
As reflection coefficient is a function of surrounding tissues,
measurements were made in ex vivo using fresh brain and bone
tissues of a sheep, as well as fat and skin from a chicken. The air
gap between the larger, external antenna, and the skin was set to
2 mm in both simulation and measurements. For scenario 1, the
antenna was placed underneath the skull, on top of the brain and
the bone, and the skin and fat were put back in place to cover
the antenna. For scenario 2, the antenna was placed on top of
the skull, underneath the fat and skin. Actual tissue thicknesses
used in the measurement are 0.5, 1, 4, 0.5, 0.5, and 30 mm for
skin, fat, bone, CSF, dura, and brain, respectively.
In reality, the human brain is larger in size and absorbs most
power from the back lobe of the implanted antenna. In simulations, the relative permittivity and loss tangent of human tissue
(not animal) were used, with the actual thicknesses of the animal tissue present in experiments. S11 and S21 of the antennas
were measured using a HP-8722ES network analyzer over a
8-GHz bandwidth, from 3 to 11 GHz. Fig. 9 shows the experimental setup for S-parameter measurements for both scenarios.
Fig. 10 compares the simulated and measured S11 (reflection
coefficient) for all three fabricated antennas. Results show good
impedance matching across a bandwidth of 3–10.6 GHz (S11
below −10 dB across the UWB band).
Although there is a slight difference between simulation and
experimental results, they still match (within 3 dB). Fig. 11(a)
and (b) compares simulation and measurement results for S21
(both amplitude and phase). Fig. 11(c) shows the comparison
between the simulated and measured group delay. The electrical parameters of head tissues of most animals (except for
some animal tissues like porcine skull) closely match those of
humans [35]. However, these parameters do not exactly match,

Fig. 10. Comparison of simulated and measured return losses (a) the TX
antenna for scenario 1, (b) the TX antenna for scenario 2, and (c) the RX
antenna.

and slight differences between measured and simulated results
arise. The differences can be attributed to 1) inevitable deviations of electrical parameters of the test setup from those of the
simulated model due to tissue age, temperature, the time passed
since its death, etc., [36]–[38], 2) parasitic effects caused by soldering the SMA connector to the PCB and the PCB fabrication
errors, 3) uncertainty in the reported electrical parameters in the
literature [39], and 4) presence of a small error in HFSS simulations due to convergence. Taking into account all these factors,
we find the deviations between simulations and measurements
acceptable.

BAHRAMI et al.: BIOLOGICAL CHANNEL MODELING AND IMPLANTABLE UWB ANTENNA DESIGN FOR NEURAL RECORDING SYSTEMS

95

Fig. 12. Comparison of measured and simulated radiation pattern in the XZ
plane and YZ plane for 7 GHz.

Fig. 13. Measured radiation efficiency of the TX antennas at broadside (ϕ =
0, θ = 0) for scenarios 1 and 2.

Fig. 11. Comparison of simulated and measured (a) amplitude of the channel,
(b) phase of the channel, and (c) group delay characteristic of scenarios 1 and 2.

B. Anechoic Chamber Measurements
Measurements were performed in an electromagnetic anechoic chamber with biological tissues present (using appropriate
antenna geometry for each scenario). The radiation pattern at
7 GHz (center frequency) was measured and is presented, in the
XZ and YZ planes for both scenarios, in Fig. 12. Patterns at other
frequencies showed the similar behavior. The measured patterns
are in good agreement with the simulated patterns. Clearly our
modeling captures the influence of the human tissues on the
antenna radiation patterns and it can be seen that the effective
antennas (combination of the biological tissues and the actual
antenna) are directional. There is a slight distortion in the YZ

plane, both in simulation and measurement results. Despite this
small distortion, the directivity peak of the implantable antennas is properly located at broadside. The radiation pattern is
perturbed by layers sliding on each other when the antenna is
rotated (by the motor that rotates the antenna when measuring
the radiation pattern). The radiation measurement of the antennas with biological tissues is a challenging task because of the
difficulties of keeping the tissue layers in a fixed position relative to one another. As expected, the omnidirectional radiation
of monopole antenna in free space has become directional due
to the reflection and absorption by the tissues, such as the dura,
CSF, and the brain.
By measuring the radiation patterns in E and H planes for each
frequency, the directivity peak at broadside has been calculated
using the following formula for different frequencies [25]:
D0 =

4π
θ1 × θ2

(5)

where
θ1 = half-power beam-width in one plane
θ2 = half-power beam-width in a plane at right angles.
The maximum total gain versus frequency in the broadside
direction (θ = 0 and ϕ = 0) was measured. From these results,
the efficiency of the antenna (shown in Fig. 13) is calculated by
dividing the gain by directivity. The antenna efficiency is much

96

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

lower than those designed for free-space applications, which are
typically having efficiencies around 70% [25], because the antenna is surrounded by the lossy biological environment. Fig. 13
shows that the antenna efficiency is greatest in lower frequencies
where biological tissues have lower loss.
VI. POTENTIAL FOR HIGH DATA RATE
In wireless communications, bit-error rate performance
(BER) is limited by several factors including intersymbol interference (ISI), maximum allowable transmitted power, path
loss, etc. When ISI is not present, the only constraint on achieving higher bit rates, for a specific bit-error rate (BER), is the
signal-to-noise [19]. Avoiding ISI requires wide bandwidth. For
data rates of several hundred kilobits per second, the 400-MHz
and 2.4-GHz frequency bands can be used for implant-to-air
communications [40], [41]. However, for multichannel neural
recording applications, the implanted transmitter needs higher
data rates. For this reason, we use UWB modulation techniques
due to its wide bandwidth. However, UWB signaling suffers
from large attenuation for implant-to-air, which leads to performance degradation. Therefore, characterizing the wireless
channel is crucial.
Several papers have studied different parts of the body as
a wireless digital communications channel; however, none has
studied the head [42]–[46]. Recently, two papers have investigated implant-to-air data communications [47], [48]; one has
a multipulse position modulation (MPPM) transmitter with a
bit rate of 1 Mb/s [47] and another has a multiband orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (MB-OFDM) wireless system
with a bit rate of 80 Mb/s [48]. In those systems, the distance
between the TX and RX antennas is around 120 mm in [47] and
33 mm in [48], which results in greater loss than our system with
10 mm separation. Additionally, their transmitters respect the
FCC limitations assuming free-space transmission. A TX antenna surrounded by biological tissues suffers significant signal
attenuation before leaving the body. Therefore, the implanted
transmitters can transmit more power to compensate the loss, as
long as tissue damage is avoided. In [48], the antenna was designed for free space, which also results in much more channel
insertion loss. The BER performance of implant-to-air UWB
data communications for high-speed applications and the capacity of UWB wireless channel for neural recording systems
have been discussed in [49] and [50].
VII. CONCLUSION
Designing a reliable wireless data link in the presence of lossy
tissues featuring frequency-dependent dielectric properties is a
challenging task. In this paper, we introduced a methodology
for designing a reliable wireless link for neural recording system using tissue modeling and designing suitable antennas. For
neural implants, the antennas and the channel cannot be treated
separately and needed to be simulated holistically. Simulations
were carried out with HFSS, exploiting a layered model with
differing dielectric constants to capture the effect of surrounding
tissues. The maximum power allowed to be transmitted from the
implanted antenna, taking into account the limits imposed by

both the ANSI and the FCC, was determined. Then, receiver
sensitivity was evaluated for two scenarios for transmitter antenna placement.
We reported simulation and experimental results for the two
scenarios in a UWB wireless link for neural recording systems.
Two UWB microstrip monopole antennas were designed and
fabricated as the implantable transmitter antennas. A receiver
antenna was also designed, fabricated, and tested. To verify our
modeling and design procedure in a realistic environment, measurements were made in ex vivo using fresh brain and bone
tissues of a sheep, as well as fat and skin from a chicken. Measurements matched simulation results, validating our approach.
Our results are significant as the measured S21 between the
receiver and the transmitter antenna allows derivation of the impulse response of the link, and, hence, achievable bit error rate
of the communication link.
APPENDIX
HUGO is a human model recently proposed for EM field simulations. This model is based on a dissected male corpse, where
each tissue layer has been characterized as a lossy dielectric
having specific frequency-dependent electrical parameters. We
compare our head model with HUGO and argue that using our
model is accurate enough for simulating the implanted antennas.
HUGO has the advantage of a 3-D context for the tissue characterization. However, our implanted antenna and the external
antenna are placed in and above an almost-flat region (parietal
lobe) of the brain. Furthermore, the EM field is confined to a
small area that can be considered even flatter. The close distance
between the RX and the TX antenna also makes the effect of
head curvatures negligible.
From a human-anatomy point of view, similar to HUGO, our
head model is also based on multiple layers of biological tissues
with frequency-dependent electrical properties. Such electrical
parameters are provided from [22]. The order of these layers is
also realistic and is based on the literature on human anatomy
[21]. For these reasons, we work with the more tractable HFSS
multiple-tissue layer model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the help of Prof. J.-J. Laurin,
from École Polytechnique de Montréal for providing access
to an anechoic chamber measurement setup, and also Prof. D.
Grenier from Université Laval for his advice. They also thank
R. Ameli from Université Laval for his helpful comments.

REFERENCES
[1] B. Gosselin, “Recent advances in neural recording microsystems,” Sensors, vol. 11, pp. 4572–4597, 2011.
[2] B. Gosselin, A. E. Ayoub, J. F. Roy, M. Sawan, F. Lepore, A. Chaudhuri,
and D. Guitton, “A mixed-signal multichip neural recording interface with
bandwidth reduction,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 3,
pp. 129–141, Jun. 2009.
[3] N. M. Neihart and R. R. Harrison, “Micropower circuits for bidirectional
wireless telemetry in neural recording applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1950–1959, Nov. 2005.

BAHRAMI et al.: BIOLOGICAL CHANNEL MODELING AND IMPLANTABLE UWB ANTENNA DESIGN FOR NEURAL RECORDING SYSTEMS

[4] M. Roham, J. M. Halpern, H. B. Martin, H. J. Chiel, and P. Mohseni,
“Wireless amperometric neurochemical monitoring using an integrated
telemetry circuit,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2628–
2634, Nov. 2008.
[5] E. Y. Chow, A. L. Chlebowski, and P. P. Irazoqui, “A miniatureimplantable RF-wireless active glaucoma intraocular pressure monitor,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 340–349,
Dec. 2010.
[6] Y. Gao, Y. Zheng, S. Diao, W. D. Toh, C. W. Ang, M. Je, and C.
H. Heng, “Low-power ultrawideband wireless telemetry transceiver for
medical sensor applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3,
pp. 768–772, Mar. 2010.
[7] U. M. Jow and M. Ghovanloo, “Optimization of data coils in a multiband wireless link for neuroprosthetic implantable devices,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 301–310, Oct. 2010.
[8] M. S. Chae, Z. Yang, M. R. Yuce, L. Hoang, and W. Liu, “A 128-channel
6 mW wireless neural recording IC with spike feature extraction and
UWB transmitter,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 312–321, Aug. 2009.
[9] H. Zamani and P. Mohseni, “A high-speed circuit architecture for IR-UWB
transmission of fast-scan cyclic voltammetry in 0.35 εm CMOS,” in Proc.
IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Buenos Aires, Argentina,
2010.
[10] M. Ojaroudi, C. Ghobadi, and J. Nourinia, “Small square monopole antenna with inverted T-shaped notch in the ground plane for UWB application,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 728–731,
Jul. 2009.
[11] R. Zaker and A. Abdipour, “A very compact ultrawideband printed omnidirectional monopole antenna,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett.,
vol. 9, pp. 471–473, Jun. 2010.
[12] M. Mark, T. Bjorninen, Y. D. Chen, S. Venkatraman, L. Ukkonen, L.
Sydanheimo, J. M. Carmena, and J. M. Rabaey, “Wireless channel characterization for mm-size neural implants,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 1565–1568.
[13] T. F. Chien, H. C. Yang, C. M. Cheng, and C. H. Luo, “Develop CPW-fed
monopole broadband implantable antennas on the high dielectric constant
ceramic substrates,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 2136–
2139, Sep. 2010.
[14] E. Pancera and W. Wiesbeck, “Fidelity based optimization of UWB
antenna-radiation for medical applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Antennas Propag., 2011, pp. 2411–2414.
[15] M. Leib, M. Frei, D. Sailer, and W. Menzel, “Design and characterization
of a UWB slot antenna optimized for radiation in human tissue,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Ultra-Wideband (ICUWB), Sep. 2009, pp. 159–163.
[16] T. Dissanayake, M. R. Yuce, and H. Chee, “Design and Evaluation of
a Compact Antenna for Implant-to-Air UWB Communication,” IEEE
Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 153–156, Apr. 2009.
[17] Q. Wang, K. Wolf and D. Plettemeier, “An UWB capsule endoscope
antenna design for biomedical communications,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp.
Appl. Sci. Biomed. Commun. Technol., 2010, pp. 1–6.
[18] J. C. Wang, E. G. Lim, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Tillo, M. Zhang, and R.
Alrawashdeh, “UWB planar antennas for wireless capsule endoscopy,” in
Proc. Int. Workshop Antenna Technol. (iWAT), Mar. 2013, pp. 340–343.
[19] B. Sklar, Digital Communications: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd
ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2001.
[20] K. Y. Yazdandoost, “A 2.4 GHz antenna for medical implanted communications,” in Proc. Asia Pacific Microw. Conf., 2009, pp. 1775–1778.
[21] A. Drossos, V. Santomaa, and N. Kuster, “The dependence of electromagnetic energy absorption upon human head tissue composition in the
frequency range of 300–3000 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn.,
vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 1988–1995, 2000.
[22] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues—Part II: Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to
20 GHz,” Phys. Med. . Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[23] C. A. Balanis, Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics. New York, NY,
USA: Wiley, 1989.
[24] K. Jaehoon and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “ Implanted antennas inside a human
body: Simulations, designs, and characterizations,” IEEE Trans. Microw.
Theory Techn., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1934–1943, Aug. 2004.
[25] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, New York: Wiley,
2005.
[26] C. Yen-Sheng, C. Shih-Yuan, and L. Hsueh-Jyh, “Analysis of antenna
coupling in near-field communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 3327–3335, Oct. 2010.

97

[27] F. Merli, B. Fuchs, J. R. Mosig, and A. K. Skrivervik, “The effect of
insulating layers on the performance of implanted antennas,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 21–31, Jan. 2011.
[28] H. Bahrami, B. Gosselin, and L. A. Rusch, “Design of a miniaturized
UWB antenna optimized for implantable neural recording systems,” in
Proc. IEEE 10th Int. New Circuits Syst. Conf., 2012, pp. 309–312.
[29] H. Bahrami, B. Gosselin, and L. A. Rusch, “Realistic modeling of the
biological channel for the design of implantable wireless UWB communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2012, pp. 6015–6018.
[30] D. Valderas, J. I. Sancho, D. Puente, and C. Ling, Ultrawideband Antennas: Design and Applications. London, U.K.: Imperial College Press,
2011.
[31] A. R. Eskandari and L. Mohammadi, “Group delay variations in wideband
transmission lines: Analysis and improvement,” Int. J. Soft Comput. Eng.,
vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 2231–2307, 2011.
[32] Y. Su, “Group delay variations in microwave filters and equalization
methodologies,” Master’s thesis, Microtechnol. Nanosci., Chalmers Univ.
Technology, Göteborg, Sweden, Microwave and High Speed Electronics
Research Center Ericsson Research, ERICSSON AB, Mölndal Sweden,
2012.
[33] Federal Communications Commission: Revision of part 15 of the commission’s rule regarding ultra-wideband transmission systems, First Report
and Order, ET Docket 98-153, FCC 02-48, pp. 1–118, 2002.
[34] IEEE Standard for Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 3 kHz to 300 GHz, IEEE Standard,
C95.1-2005, 2006.
[35] A. Peyman, C. Gabriel, E.H. Grant, G. Vermeeren, and L. Martens, “Variation of the dielectric properties of tissues with age: the effect on the values
of SAR in children when exposed to walkie-talkie devices,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 54, pp. 227–241, 2009.
[36] A. Peyman, S. J. Holden, S. Watts, R. Perrott, and C. Gabriel, “Dielectric
properties of porcine cerebrospinal tissues at microwave frequencies: in
vivo, in vitro and systematic variation with age,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52,
pp. 2229–2245, 2007.
[37] M. A. Stuchly, A. Kraszewski, S. S. Stuchly, and A. M. Smith, “Dielectric
properties of animal tissues in vivo at radio and microwave frequencies:
Comparison between species,” Phys. Med. . Biol., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 927–
936, 1982.
[38] A. Peyman, A. A. Rezazadeh, and C. Gabriel, “Changes in the dielectric
properties of rat tissue as a function of age at microwave frequencies,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 46, pp. 1617–1629, 2001.
[39] C. Gabriel and A. Peyman, “Dielectric measurement: Error analysis and
assessment of uncertainty,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, pp. 6033–6046,
2006.
[40] M. R. Yuce and T. Dissanayake, “Easy-to-swallow wireless telemetry,”
IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 90–101, 2012.
[41] M. R. Yuce, T. Dissanayake, and H. C. Keong, “Wireless telemetry for
electronic pill technology,” Proc. IEEE Sensors, Oct. 2009, pp. 1433–
1438.
[42] Y. Chen, J. Teo, J. C. Y. Lai, E. Gunawan, K. S. Low, C. B. Soh, and P. B.
Rapajic, “Cooperative communications in ultra-wideband wireless body
area networks: Channel modeling and system diversity analysis,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 5–16, Jan. 2009.
[43] J. Shi and J. Wang, “Channel characterization and diversity feasibility
for in-body to on-body communication using low-band UWB signals,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Appl. Sci. Biomed. Commun. Technol., 2010,
pp. 1–4.
[44] K. Sayrafian-Pour, W. B. Yang, J. Hagedorn, J. Terrill, and K. Y. Yazdandoost, “A statistical path loss model for medical implant communication
channels,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Commun., Sep. 2009, pp. 2995–2999.
[45] A. Khaleghi, R. Chávez-Santiago, and L. Balasingham, “Ultra-wideband
statistical propagation channel model for implant sensors in the human
chest,” IET Microw., Antennas Propag., vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 1805–1812,
Dec. 2011.
[46] R. Chavez-Santiago, K. Sayrafian-Pour, A. Khaleghi, K. Takizawa,
J. Wang, I. Balasingham, and H. B. Li, “Propagation models for IEEE
802.15.6 standardization of implant communication in body area networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 80–87, Aug. 2013.
[47] D. Anzai, K. Katsu, R. Chavez-Santiago, Q. Wang, D. Plettemeier,
J. Wang, and I. Balasingham, “Experimental evaluation of implant UWBIR transmission with living animal for body area networks,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 183–192, Jan. 2014.

98

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[48] R. Chavez-Santiago, I. Balasingham, J. Bergsland, W. Zahid, K. Takizawa,
R. Miura, and H. B. Li, “Experimental implant communication of high
data rate video using an ultra wideband radio link,” in Proc. 35th Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE, Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Jul. 2013, pp. 5175–5178.
[49] H. Bahrami, S. A. Mirbozorgi, L. A. Rusch, and B. Gosselin, “BER
performance of implant-to-air high-speed UWB data communications for
neural recording systems,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE, Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., to be published. 2014.
[50] M. E. Khaled, H. Bahrami, P. Fortier, B. Gosselin, and L. A. Rusch,
“Capacity of UWB wireless channel for neural recording systems,” in
Proc. 36th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE, Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., to be published.
2014.

Hadi Bahrami (S’12) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, and Tarbiat
Modares University, Tehran, Iran, in 2005 and 2007,
respectively. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree at Biomedical Microsystems Lab, Department of ECE, Université Laval, Canada.
His interests include ultrawideband low-power
transceiver for biomedical applications, antenna and
propagation, and electrooptic integrated devices for
digital comunications.

S. Abdollah Mirbozorgi (S’10) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Noshirvani University of Technology, Iran, in 2008, the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Ferdowsi University of
Mashhad, Iran, 2011, and is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree at Biomedical Microsystems Lab,
Department of ECE, Université Laval, Canada.
His interests include neural and bionic implants,
wireless implantable biomedical systems, integrated
analog circuit design, and wireless power/data transmission.

Leslie A. Rusch (S’91–M’94–SM’00–F’10) received the B.S.E.E. degree (Hons.) from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA,
in 1980 and the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ, USA, in 1992 and 1994, respectively.
She has experience in defense, industrial, and academic communications research. She was a communications Project Engineer for the Department of Defense from 1980–1990. While on leave from Université Laval, she spent two years (2001–2002) at Intel
Corporation creating and managing a group researching new wireless technologies. She is currently a Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at Université Laval, QC, Canada, performing research on wireless
and optical communications. Her research interests include digital signal processing for coherent detection in optical communications, spatial multiplexing
using orbital angular momentum modes in fiber, radio over fiber and OFDM for
passive optical networks; and in wireless communications, optimization of the
optical/wireless interface in emerging cloud based computing networks, optical
pulse shaping for high-bit rate ultrawide-band (UWB) systems, and implantable
medical sensors with high bit rate UWB telemetry. She is recipient of the IEEE
Canada J. M. Ham Award for Graduate Supervision. Prof. Rusch has published
over 100 journal articles in international journals (90% IEEE/IEE) with wide
readership, and contributed to over 130 conferences. Her articles have been cited
more than 3600 times per Google Scholar.

Benoit Gosselin (S’02–M’08) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical Engineering from École Polytechnique Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, in 2009.
He is currently the Head of the Biomedical Microsystems Lab, Department of ECE of Université
Laval, Canada, where he is an Assistant Professor.
His research has generated more than 50 journal and
conference articles, 4 book chapters, and 3 patents.
He has created several innovative wireless microelectronic systems dedicated to various implantable and
wearable biomedical applications. He organized and
chaired sessions in several international conferences, and he served on organization committees as well.
Dr. Gosselin is the Chapter Chair of the IEEE Computer Society, Quebec
Section, and he is a Member of the IEEE EMBS and the IEEE CASS. He was
an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellow at the Georgia Institute of Technology in 2010.

