1034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Patient-Specific Cortical Electrodes for Sulcal
and Gyral Implantation
Shayne Morris, Masayuki Hirata∗ , Hisato Sugata, Tetsu Goto, Kojiro Matsushita, Takufumi Yanagisawa,
Youichi Saitoh, Haruhiko Kishima, and Toshiki Yoshimine

Abstract—Purpose: Noninvasive localization of certain brain
functions may be mapped on a millimetre level. However, the interelectrode spacing of common clinical brain surface electrodes still
remains around 10 mm. Here, we present details on development
of electrodes for attaining higher quality electrocorticographic
signals for use in functional brain mapping and brain–machine
interface (BMI) technologies. Methods: We used platinum-plateelectrodes of 1-mm diameter to produce sheet electrodes after the
creation of individualized molds using a 3-D printer and a press system that sandwiched the electrodes between personalized silicone
sheets. Results: We created arrays to fit the surface curvature of the
brain and inside the central sulcus, with interelectrode distances
of 2.5 mm (a density of 16 times previous standard types). Rat
experiments undertaken indicated no long term toxicity. We were
also able to custom design, rapidly manufacture, safely implant,
and confirm the efficacy of personalized electrodes, including the
capability to attain meaningful high-gamma-band information in
an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient. Conclusion: We developed
cortical sheet electrodes with a high-spatial resolution, tailor-made
to match an individual’s brain. Significance: This sheet electrode
may contribute to the higher performance of BMI’s.
Index Terms—Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brain–
machine interface (BMI), brain sulcus, cortical electrodes,
personalized.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT developments in the area of brain–machine interfaces (BMI) have led to the possibility of a seamless interface between the human brain and devices [1]–[7]. To achieve

R

Manuscript received February 1, 2014; revised April 19, 2014; accepted May
28, 2014. Date of publication July 11, 2014; date of current version March
17, 2015. This work was supported in part by a BMI Development and Development of BMI Technologies for Clinical Application Grant carried out
under the Strategic Research Program for Brain Sciences from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan (MEXT), by a
KAKENHI (23390347, 26282165) grant funded by the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS), and through a Health Labour Sciences Research
Grant 23100101 from the Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
S. Morris, H. Sugata, T. Goto, K. Matsushita, T. Yanagisawa,
H. Kishima, and T. Yoshimine are with the Department of Neurosurgery,
Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan (e-mail:
morris.shayne@gmail.com; hsugata@nsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp; t-goto@nsurg.
med.osaka-u.ac.jp; matsushita@nsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp; takufumiy@gmail.
com; hkishima@nsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp; yoshimine@nsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.
jp).
∗ M. Hirata is with the Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan (e-mail:mhirata@nsurg.med.osaka-u.
ac.jp).
Y. Saitoh is with the Department of Neuromodulation and Neurosurgery,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan (e-mail: neurosaitoh@
mbk.nifty.com).
This paper contains supplementary material available online at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 203 KB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2329812

this, neural signals must be attained from the brain and then
decoded to interpret their meaning, where decoding relies on
the quality of the measured neural signals, particularly those of
the high-gamma-band range (60–200 Hz).
One practical method for obtaining high-quality neural activity is intracranial electrodes. Several needle electrode arrays
have been developed and used on animals and even in human
patients [8]–[11], but these electrodes have been reported to be
susceptibility to electromagnetic noise, micromotion [12], and
to undergo adverse tissue reactions [13]. In addition, needletype electrodes are invasive since they must be inserted into a
brain tissue.
On the other hand, brain surface electrodes or electrocorticographic (ECoG) electrodes are less invasive because they
do not penetrate the brain tissue. In comparison with standard
electroencephalographic electrodes, ECoG electrodes provide
not only superior spatial resolution, but also deliver signals with
higher sensitivities in the higher frequency ranges, making them
useful for neural decoding utilizing high-gamma-band eventrelated oscillatory changes [14], [15]. We have also shown that
intrasulcal ECoG electrodes on the motor bank side of the central sulcus provided a higher performance than those of the
gyral ECoG [14]. However, the interelectrode spacing of standard clinical-type ECoG electrodes used still remains at about
1 cm.
The surface of the human brain is curved with bumps, depressions, and grooves, called gyri and sulci. These structures allow
for increased cortical surface area and greater neural processing,
and in the case of the central sulcus, with the anterior surface
controlling motor function and the posterior surface being responsible for somatosensory function. By inserting electrodes
into this sulcus, we may be able to attain more information
on movements. Indeed, it has previously been shown that the
placement of electrodes into the central sulcus is superior to
placement on the brain surface alone from the perspective of
decoding accuracy [14].
However, the shape and depth of the central sulcus is highly
individualized, thus making a one-fits-all approach to the design
of electrodes, which has been the mainstay until now, inefficient.
More recently, high-density electrode arrays that are flexible
and foldable in the form of sheets have also been developed
[11], [16]–[18]. However, as the majority of these are in the
form of sheets, despite being flexible, they may not necessarily
provide maximum contact over the irregularly curved surfaces
seen within the central sulcus and on the cortical surface.
With this in mind, in order to attain neural measurements that
are stable over time, that have a higher signal resolution than
presently available ECoG electrodes, and that are less invasive

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MORRIS et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORTICAL ELECTRODES FOR SULCAL AND GYRAL IMPLANTATION

than needle-type electrodes, we aimed to create a high-density
array of electrodes designed to match the contour of an individual’s brain surface as well as to place electrodes both on the
gyral surface, and inside the central sulcus. In this paper, we
also briefly describe the placement of patient-specific cortical
electrodes into an ALS patient.
II. METHODS
A. Electrode Sheets
1) Sulcal Electrode Sheet: For the previously stated reasons,
we decided to create platinum plate sheet electrodes with an
electrode diameter of 1 mm, one-third the diameter of previous
standard types, while individualizing the shape of the sheet containing the electrodes using a press mold system. Our method
sandwiches the electrodes in-between silicone sheets individualized to fit the surface of an individual patient’s brain.
Informed consent was obtained from healthy volunteers and
patients, after authorization from the medical ethics committee
of our institution. First, we took a 1-mm thin-slice MRI series of
the subject’s brain. In the case of the model demonstrated in this
paper, the first subject was an intractable epileptic patient. Next,
we converted the patient’s DICOM data into the NIFI format.
We then imported these data into BrainVISA (BrainVISA 4.0.2,
http://brainvisa.info/), where we ran the sulci extraction routine
which allowed us to generate a 3-D image of the brain surface,
and also exudate the majority of the sulci [see Fig. 1(a)]. Having
generated the shape of the various sulci, we selected those making up the central sulcus. After selecting the related pieces, they
were exported in the MESH format and were then converted
into the STL format.
The pieces of the central sulcus in the STL format were then
imported into two 3-D computer-aided designing (CAD) software (Mimics v14.12, 3-matic v5.1, Materialize N.V. Leuven
Belgium). Using these software, we combined all the pieces of
the central sulcus to a 3-D representation of the central sulcus
[see Fig. 1(a)].
The created object consists of two surfaces, namely, representations of the motor side of the central sulcus and the sensory
side. These two surfaces were then separated, and the motor
side was selected for further processing with 3-matic, because,
as was previously stated, the motor side provides superior decoding accuracy of motor function [14], [15].
Next, sides were extended downward from the surfaces, after
which, a base was then added to generate CAD data for a mold of
the central sulcus. Then, an inverse of this mold was produced,
so that we now had both male and female molds. Holes were
placed in the four corners of the base of the molds to allow
for adjustments of the thickness of the silicon electrode sheets.
These data were then exported in the STL format [see Fig. 1(a)].
Using these data, we then used a 3-D printer (Polyjet
3-D printer, Objet Geometries Ltd., Israel) to create the actual
molds. The contour mold portion representing the central sulcus
was 95 mm at maximum length and measured between 6 and
24 mm in depth depending on the location along the maximum
length axis [see Fig. 1(b)]. We marked the desired positions of
the electrodes on the mold surface, with the surface facing the

1035

motor bank of the central sulcus having 35 electrodes while the
surface facing the sensory bank had 15, since the primary motor
cortex provides greater information on motor function. We also
placed a higher emphasis on the hand-knob area in the form of
higher electrode densities.
A silicone sheet (SILASTIC MDX4-4210) was then heated
to 76 °C for 5 s and placed on the mold. A heat gun was used
to improve contact with the mold surface and to remove air
bubbles. The sheet was then allowed to cool naturally to room
temperature and left for three days to harden. The silicone sheet
was then carefully removed from the molds. The same process
was repeated to produce three sheets (one for the motor side
(M1 sheet), one for sensory side (S1 sheet), and one for placement in between these two sheets (middle sheet) to isolate the
two sets of plate electrodes). Next, holes were punched out for
the electrodes at predetermined locations in the sheet facing
M1. Platinum electrodes (diameter 1 mm, thickness 0.02 mm)
were in-set into these locations and temporarily fixed before
flexible stainless leads (diameter 0.05 mm polyurethane coated,
impedance ࣘ 80 Ω) were attached individually to each of the
electrodes (impedance: electrodes ࣘ 10 Ω, lead ends (platinum)
ࣘ 10 Ω). After completion of attachments, the lead wires were
bundled together and passed through a silicone tube. To fix the
electrodes, wires, and silicone tube, a silicone adhesive was
added and the second silicone sheet was placed on top and compressed in the mold [see Fig. 1(b)]. The process was repeated
for the sensory side electrodes, the end result being two sets of
plate electrodes sandwiched between three silicone sheets, with
the leads all protruding from a single location near the middle
of the sheet electrode at the surface of the brain [see Fig. 1(c)].
2) Gyral Electrode Sheet: Using the same process, we were
able to not only create sulcal electrodes, but also patient-specific
gyral electrodes. These sheets were designed to have electrodes
on only the side facing the cortical surface, and the locations and
densities of the electrodes were tailored to match the functional
areas of this surface.
Next, the same 3-D printing methods were used to create a
model of the subject’s brain to confirm that the manufactured
electrodes fitted properly into the central sulcus, and onto the
surface of the brain [see Fig. 1(d)].
B. Strength, Cytotoxicity, and Biocompatibility Tests
In order to test the safety of the electrodes before implantation
into patients, in accordance with Japanese regulations and requirements for clinical applications, we undertook the following
tests.
1) Physical Tests: Prior to clinical trials, to test the strength
of the sheet electrodes, a 3-D sheet electrode (10 mm × 60 mm
silicone electrode sheet with 50 mm × 1.3 mm diameter lead)
was prepared and underwent dynamic tensile and compression
tests (TENSILON RTF1250 (A&D), Gauge length 25 mm,
stretching speed 500 mm/min, load cell 1 kN, 10 kN, 22 °C
57% humidity).
2) Cytotoxicity Tests: In accordance with the tests required
by Japanese regulations for clinical trials, cytotoxicity tests were
undertaken with concern to the effects of 3-D high-density elec-

1036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 1. (a) Various sulci shown on a 3-D image of the brain, generated with BrainVISA from a subjects MRI data. Sulcus data are removed and converted
into the STL format for further processing. CAD data of a mold created from the surface facing the motor side of the central sulcus were created with 3-matic.
(b) Silicone sheet compression between male and female molds created with a 3-D printer. (c) Silicone sheet is created on the mold, and holes were made for
electrode embedding. Flexible stainless leads were then individually connected. A second silicone sheet is adhered to the back of the sheet implanted with the
electrodes. Two layers of electrodes are embedded into the silicone sheets, with one layer facing the motor bank, and one layer facing the sensory bank, and a
silicone sheet in between to isolate the two electrode arrays.

trode extract on Chinese hamster fibroblasts (JCRB0603:V79)
in accordance with the ISO 10993-5: 2009(E) Biological evaluation of medical devices—Part 5: Tests for in vitro cytotoxicity, ISO 10993-12: 2007 (E) Biological evaluation of medical
devices—Part 12 : Sample preparation and reference materials
standards, and other related Japanese protocols. In these tests,
the 3-D grid electrodes were broken down into 2 × 15 mm sections containing all the constituents of the electrodes. Ten mL
of medium per 1 g of morcellation was added to these sections
and then, sealed, shielded from light, and cultivated with the
Chinese hamster fibroblasts (JCRB0603:V79) for 24 h. As positive controls, polyurethane films containing 0.1% and 0.25%
zinc diethyldithiocarbamate (referred to respectively, as positive
control A and B, respectively) were used, while a high-density
polyurethane film was used as a negative control.
3) Biocompatibility Tests: In accordance with tests required
by Japanese regulations for clinical trials, 3-D high-density electrodes and control materials (diameter 20 mm) were implanted
subcutaneously into 12 male rats and then removed after 26
weeks to examine the effects of the subject material on the implanted rats. This study was carried out in accordance with all
required and related regulations and protocols for the protection
of animals. The electrodes and a control material were symmetrically implanted subcutaneously at the dorsal end of the spinal
column while the subject was under intraperitonial anesthesia,

with the electrodes implanted on the left side and the control
(high-density polyethylene sheet (1 mm × 50 mm × 100 mm)
implanted on the right side of the scapula.
C. ALS Trial
Using the above processes, we also designed 3-D personalized electrodes for temporary implantation into an amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) patient, as part of our clinical BMI trial
on severe ALS patients. The patient was a 61-year-old male,
whom was only able to communicate using eye movement to
indicate characters on a letter chart, or by using a personal computer with a system that allowed for movement and clicking
of a cursor through a one-channel input system triggered by
minute movements of the patient’s lips. He had total upper and
lower limb paralysis and was in a locked-in state. Informed consent was obtained on repeated occasions, and the patient was
well aware that the electrode implant would be removed after
21 days, and would have no direct permanent benefit for him
himself. The trial was thoroughly reviewed and authorized by
the medical ethics committee of our institution. Preoperative
magnetoencephalography (MEG) tests were undertaken to test
the suitability of the patient, prior to electrode implantation.
In order to avoid possible errors in the determination of the
central sulcus, in addition to anatomical determinations, we per-

MORRIS et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORTICAL ELECTRODES FOR SULCAL AND GYRAL IMPLANTATION

form motor tasks studies on functional MRI and somatosensory
neuromagnetic evoked field using MEG to confirm its location.
III. RESULTS
A. Electrode Sheets
Using the semiautomated processes mentioned in the methods section, we were able to manufacture two types of patientspecific electrode sheets. These were the central sulcus electrode
sheet, and gyral surface electrode sheet.
1) Central Sulcus Electrode Sheet: We were able to manufacture an array of electrodes with an interelectrode distance
between electrodes of 2.5 mm (a density of 16 times that of
previous standard types), and we were able to create sheet electrodes molded to fit both the surface curvature of the brain and
to fit inside the central sulcus with a total of 50 plate electrodes
(35 facing the motor bank and 15 facing the sensory bank). The
length of the central sulcus electrode shown is around 95 mm
with a maximum depth of close to 24 mm. Unlike the standardtype electrodes that we have previously placed within the central
sulcus at our institution which were strip electrodes (4 × 1 electrodes) in one dimension, our patient-specific sheet electrode
was 2-D (11–17 × 2–3 electrodes). Distances from the surface
of the sheet electrode to the mold were 2.2 and 0.1 mm at maximum length extremities, and 3.8 and 1.2 mm at maximum width
extremities, with an average distance of 1.8 ± 1.4 mm (mean ±
SD). The thickness varied between 0.81 and 0.96 mm at sampled
locations. Using a 3-D model of the same subject’s brain, also
created with the 3-D printer, we confirmed that the electrodes
fitted into the central sulcus [see Fig. 1(d)].
2) Gyral Surface Electrode Sheet: We also used a similar
process to create patient-specific electrodes that matched the
contour of the brain’s gyral surface. Unlike the central sulcus
electrodes which had two layers of electrodes, these electrodes
are single layered. They may also be placed over the top of the
sulci electrodes to cover a predetermined surface of the brain
[see Fig. 1(d)]. The sheet shown here has 70 electrodes, which
are located at various densities in accordance with anatomically perceived functionality, such as the hand knob. As well as
matching the contour of the patient’s cortical surface, the sheet
electrodes are softer than standard electrodes and are thus less
invasive.
B. Strength, Cytotoxicity, and Biocompatibility Tests
1) Physical Tests: The electrodes passed the set strength
level (silicone sheet 5 N, leads 50 N) tests with values of 9.58 N
for the silicone sheet, and more than 60 N for the leads.
2) Cytotoxicity: A comparison with the extract containing
the electrode extract, and the controls was made. Using the
100% negative control extract, we confirmed that the number of
colonies was almost unchanged. The IC50s for Positive Control
A and B were 0.91% and 57.0%, respectively. The IC50 for
the positive control was 2.31 μg/mL, thus indicating no strong
cytotoxicity on colony growth. (see Supplementary Figure 1).
3) Biocompatibility: One out of 12 rats showed slight
swelling at the sites of implantation four days after subcuta-

1037

neous placement. In this subject, swelling on the electrodeimplanted side continued for 41 days, while swelling on the
control implanted side was also observed for 19 days. Superficial abnormalities disappeared after 20 days on the control
implanted side and 42 days on the electrode implanted side but
reoccurred on the electrode implanted side 175 days after implantation. Examinations after the completion of the test period
indicated the presence of an abscess most likely due to infection at the time of implantation. None of the other 11 subjects
developed abnormalities over the test period.
C. ALS Trial
In this patient, we designed only gyral electrodes. After the
creation of gyral molds using our patient-specific method described previously [see Fig. 2(a)], sheet electrodes were manufactured targeting mainly the primary motor cortex, primary
somatosensory cortex, and the premotor cortex (53 plate electrodes over the primary motor cortex (with a higher density over
the hand knob), 17 over the premotor cortex, and 24 over the
somatosensory cortex, with one subdural reference plate electrode facing toward the dura mater, and a ground electrode for
epidural placement). Leads from the plate electrodes were gathered into two groups, coated in a silicon sheath, and extended
out from two locations on the sheet [see Fig. 2(b)]. It took one
month to complete the manufacturing of the electrodes (two
days to finalize the CAD design, 14 days to manufacture the
mold, including shipping, and 14 days to manufacture the final sheet electrode). We used a neuronavigational system for
presurgical planning and intraoperative navigation. We preoperatively located the precentral gyrus and surrounding major
cortical veins [see Fig. 2(c)], and determined the optimal site
for craniotomy. Intraoperatively, we performed craniotomy at
the predetermined site, and identified the preoperative anatomical features of the cortical surface (precentral gyrus, cortical
veins, etc.) after the dural membrane was opened. We also reconfirmed the location of the central sulcus through N20 phase
reversal of somatosensory evoked potentials. The sheet electrode was placed on arachnoid surface of the left hemisphere
in the patient based on these preoperative and intraoperative
findings. The electrodes closely fitted the contour of the brain
surface as was designed [see Fig. 2(d)].
Intraoperatively monitoring showed clear ECoG signals from
all electrodes [see Fig. 3(a)]. In postoperative ECoG tests, motor
imaginary tasks induced localized high-gamma-band activity in
the hand-knob area [see Fig. 3(b)]. The electrodes were removed
as scheduled 21 days after implantation without any further
deterioration in neurological symptoms.
IV. DISCUSSION
In the present study, by using semiautomated methods to
map sulci and by utilizing CAD software and 3-D printers,
we created patient-specific cortical sheet electrodes with highspatial resolution for not only gyral but also sulcal implantation.
Using our method, we are able to rapidly design, manufacture, and implant electrodes, as well as obtain signals from every

1038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 2. (a) CAD model of ALS patient’s brain surface with pink area indicating minimal target area covering pre- and postcentral gyri. (b) Completed sheet
electrodes placed on a brain surface model. CS indicates the central sulcus, and HK indicates the hand knob. (c) Preoperative imaging for intraoperative navigation
indicating locations of precentral gyrus (magenta) and major cortical veins (red) etc. Blue dotted line indicates planned craniotomy. (d) Intraoperative image after
placement of electrodes, with the yellow dotted line indicating the central sulcus (CS) and the hand-knob (HK) area indicated in blue.

electrode, including high-frequency information after temporary implantation into an ALS patient.
In order to reduce production times, we used a semiautomated
process to design electrodes for placement into the central sulcus and on to the gyral surface. We used a 3-D printer for the
rapid manufacturing of molds that were in turn used to produce patient-specific high-density sheet electrodes capable of
covering a wide anatomical area with ability to set higher electrode densities over functionally significant areas such as the
hand knob. Through the use of this approach, we were able
to manufacture patient-specific high-density cortical electrodes
within one month for use in a clinical BMI trial on an ALS
patient.
Using our method, we were able to manufacture a sheet electrode array for placement into the central sulcus. Due to its
patient-specific design, the electrode is less invasive than the
standard sheet electrodes used in the past, and provides a higher
dimensional array of electrodes than the strip electrodes previously utilized. Electrode locations can also be altered to provide
higher densities within the central sulcus over areas such as
the hand knob, and can be placed over the whole length of the
central sulcus. Our electrodes also allow for electrodes to be
placed in the direction of the motor bank, as well as the somatosensory bank, which may provide the opportunity for the
sensory feedback required in closed-loop systems [19], [20]. Our
central sulcus electrode was designed to be simultaneously used
in conjunction with our gyral electrodes.

Using the aforementioned method, we were also able to manufacture a sheet electrode for placement over the gyral surface.
These sheet electrodes are patient specific and designed to match
the individual surfaces of a patient’s brain, thus meaning that
they apply less pressure at localized areas of contact than the
previous types of flat 2-D sheet electrodes, because all of the
electrodes are in contact with the brain surface.
This also means that compared to flat electrode sheets, with
larger type plate electrodes, there is a higher probability that
the plate electrodes on our sheet electrodes will be in contact
with the brain surface; thus there is a greater chance of attaining
useful EEG from all electrodes (see Supplementary Figure 2).
Due to these characteristics, the electrodes can be designed to
cover relatively large areas of the cortical surface, and thus have
the potential to simultaneously record data on a wide range of
brain functions.
It is also possible to increase the density of electrodes over
cortical areas of higher importance, for example the hand knob.
In our ALS patient trial, readable signals were obtained from all
plate electrodes on the implanted sheet. It is noteworthy that we
were successfully able to gain gamma-band information from
specific functional areas such as the hand knob. Our high-density
electrodes successfully detected a variety of gamma band activities that differed from electrode to electrode despite electrodes
being in close proximity (approximately 3-mm interelectrode
spacing) to one another, indicating that a higher density of electrodes may contribute to higher performance BMI systems.

MORRIS et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORTICAL ELECTRODES FOR SULCAL AND GYRAL IMPLANTATION

1039

Fig. 3. (a) Intraoperative EEG monitoring confirming signals attained from all electrodes. (b) Data during imagined hand movement. Increased amplitude in
the high-gamma-band prior to movement onset is observed particularly over the hand-knob (HK) area in a paralyzed ALS patient. Dotted black line indicates the
central sulcus (CS).

The power of high-frequency gamma-band information is
weak, and it is difficult measure this range using standard forms
of scalp EEG or MEG. On the other hand, we have previously shown that gamma-band activity is useful for predicting motor activity using standard-sized cortical electrodes [15],
[21]. Using the high-density patient-specific cortical electrodes
described in this study, we were able to measure gamma-band
activity with high-spatial resolution even in an ALS patient with

complete upper and lower limb paralysis, which we believe will
allow for the more accurate real-time control of external peripherals including robot devices.
Regarding safety, we have successfully completed the nonclinical studies necessary to move on to clinical trials, including those related to physical strength, cytotoxicity, and
biocompatibility, as well as long-term stability. In our ALS patient clinical trial, we implanted our sheet electrode for 21 days,

1040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

with no new neurological symptoms incurred after electrode
removal. We will continue clinical evaluations to confirm the
safety and efficacy of these sheet electrodes, moving toward the
implantation of a fully implantable wireless system [22].
One limitation of personalized electrodes, particularly in the
case of intrasulcal electrodes, is the problem of cortical surface
adhesion and the presence of vascular structures that may make
placement of predetermined single-electrode arrays within the
central sulcus difficult. In the past, in our experience with the
placement of standard-type electrodes in the central sulcus of
chronic pain patients, we have found that fine microscopic dissection by a skilled neurosurgeon can overcome this problem in
many cases. In addition, we have found that careful examination
of MRI can provide a good understanding of possible vascular
obstacles, which can then be taken into account at the planning
stage. In some cases, the sheet electrode may be divided to two
or more sheets. Also, it is possible to produce the electrodes
in a sterile environment that would allow for a certain degree
of fine-tuning during placement, although this should be used
as a last resort. In addition, the brains of many of the ALS patients, who may potentially benefit from our fully implantable
wireless system, are generally atrophic, making implantation
into the central sulcus easier. With increasingly improved MRI
imaging, we are able to attain greater information of localized
anatomical structures. In situations where it is determined intrasulcal electrodes cannot be safely used, however, placement
may be limited to gyral electrodes.
V. CONCLUSION
We developed a high-density patient-specific sheet electrode
that fit within the sulci or on gyral surfaces. They are designed
and rapidly manufactured with semiautomatic methods involving the use of a 3-D printer and resulted in the effective attainment of ECoG signals. We temporarily placed this patientspecific sheet electrode into an ALS patient and were able to
attain readable signals from all plate electrodes and measured
localized high-gamma-band activity in the hand-knob area. We
believe that this sheet electrode will contribute to higher performance BMI systems
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Khairul of Materialize
Japan Co. Ltd, Yokohama, Japan, for his help and advice with
among other things, the manufacturing of the models and casts
using the 3-D printer. They would also like to thank S. Morikawa
and Y. Watanabe of Unique Medical Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan, for
their help in the manufacturing process of the sheet electrodes.
REFERENCES
[1] J. N. Mak and J. R. Wolpaw, “Clinical applications of brain-computer
interfaces: Current state and future prospects,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 187–199, Dec. 2009.
[2] D. J. McFarland, D. J. Krusienski, W. A. Sarnacki, and J. R. Wolpaw,
“Emulation of computer mouse control with a noninvasive brain-computer
interface,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 101–110, 2008.

[3] F. Galán, M. Nuttin, E. Lew, P. W. Ferrez, G. Vanacker, J. Philips,
H. Van Brussel, and J. R. Millán, “An asynchronous and non-invasive
brain-actuated wheelchair,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Robot. Res. Hiroshima
Jpn., 2007, pp. 1–11.
[4] I. Iturrate, J. Antelis, A. Kubler, and J. Minguez, “A noninvasive brainactuated wheelchair based on a P300 neurophysiological protocol and
automated navigation,” IEEE Robot. Trans., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 614–627,
Jun. 2009.
[5] F. Cincotti, D. Mattia, F. Aloise, S. Bufalari, G. Schalk, G. Oriolo,
A. Cherubini, M. G. Marciani, and F. Babiloni, “Non-invasive braincomputer interface system: Towards its application as assistive technology,” Brain Res. Bull., vol. 75, no. 6, pp. 796–803, 2008.
[6] M. A. Lebedev and M. A. L. Nicolelis, “Brain-machine interfaces: Past,
present and future,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 536–546, 2006.
[7] G. R. Muller-Putz, R. Scherer, G. Pfurtscheller, and R. Rupp, “EEG-based
neuroprosthesis control: A step towards clinical practice,” Neurosci. Lett.,
vol. 382, nos. 1/2, pp. 169–174, 2005.
[8] E. M. Maynard, C. T. Nordhausen, and R. A. Normann, “The utah intracortical electrode array: A recording structure for potential brain-computer
interfaces,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 102, no. 3,
pp. 228–239, 1997.
[9] P. J. Rousche and R. A Normann, “Chronic recording capability of the Utah
intracortical electrode array in cat sensory cortex,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 1–15, Jul. 1998.
[10] A. S. Dickey, A. Suminski, Y. Amit, and N. G. Hatsopoulos, “Single-unit
stability using chronically implanted multielectrode arrays,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 1331–9, Aug. 2009.
[11] L. R. Hochberg, D. Bacher, B. Jarosiewicz, N. Y. Masse, J. D. Simeral,
J. Vogel, S. Haddadin, J. Liu, S. S. Cash, P. van der Smagt, and
J. P. Donoghue, “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a
neurally controlled robotic arm,” Nature, vol. 485, no. 7398, pp. 372–375,
May 2012.
[12] A. Gilletti and J. Muthuswamy, “Brain micromotion around implants in
the rodent somatosensory cortex,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 189–95,
Sep. 2006.
[13] V. S. Polikov, P. A Tresco, and W. M. Reichert, “Response of brain
tissue to chronically implanted neural electrodes,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 148, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Oct. 2005.
[14] T. Yanagisawa, M. Hirata, Y. Saitoh, A. Kato, D. Shibuya, Y. Kamitani,
and T. Yoshimine, “Neural decoding using gyral and intrasulcal electrocorticograms,” Neuroimage, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1099–106, May 2009.
[15] T. Yanagisawa, M. Hirata, Y. Saitoh, T. Goto, H. Kishima, R. Fukuma,
H. Yokoi, Y. Kamitani, and T. Yoshimine, “Real-time control of a prosthetic hand using human electrocorticography signals,” J. Neurosurg.,
vol. 114, no. 6, pp. 1–8, Feb. 2011.
[16] T. Stieglitz, “Flexible biomedical microdevices with double-sided electrode arrangements for neural applications,” Sens. Actuators A Phys.,
vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 203–211, May 2001.
[17] B. Rubehn, C. Bosman, R. Oostenveld, P. Fries, and T. Stieglitz, “A
MEMS-based flexible multichannel ECoG-electrode array,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 6, no. 3, p. 036003, Jun. 2009.
[18] J. Viventi, D.-H. Kim, L. Vigeland, E. S. Frechette, J. A. Blanco, Y.-S. Kim,
A. E. Avrin, V. R. Tiruvadi, S.-W. Hwang, A. C. Vanleer, D. F. Wulsin,
K. Davis, C. E. Gelber, L. Palmer, J. Van der Spiegel, J. Wu, J. Xiao,
Y. Huang, D. Contreras, J. A. Rogers, and B. Litt, “Flexible, foldable, actively multiplexed, high-density electrode array for mapping brain activity
in vivo,” Nat. Neurosci., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1599–605, Dec. 2011.
[19] Z. Li, J. E. O’Doherty, M. A. Lebedev, and M. A. L. Nicolelis, “Adaptive decoding for brain-machine interfaces through bayesian parameter
updates,” Neural Comput., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 3162–204, Dec. 2011.
[20] A. L. Orsborn and J. M. Carmena, “Creating new functional circuits for
action via brain-machine interfaces” Front. Comput. Neurosci., vol. 7,
p. 157, Jan. 2013.
[21] T. Yanagisawa, M. Hirata, Y. Saitoh, H. Kishima, K. Matsushita, T. Goto,
R. Fukuma, H. Yokoi, Y. Kamitani, and T. Yoshimine, “Electrocorticographic control of a prosthetic arm in paralyzed patients,” Ann. Neurol.,
vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 353–61, Mar. 2012.
[22] M. Hirata, K. Matsushita, T. Suzuki, T. Yoshida, F. Sato, S. Morris,
T. Yanagisawa, T. Goto, M. Kawato, and T. Yoshimine, “A fullyimplantable wireless system for human brain-machine interfaces using
brain surface electrodes: W-HERBS,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E94B, no. 9, pp. 2448–2453, 2011.

MORRIS et al.: PATIENT-SPECIFIC CORTICAL ELECTRODES FOR SULCAL AND GYRAL IMPLANTATION

Shayne Morris received the M.B.A. degree from
Yokohama National University, Yokohama, Japan, in
1994, and the M.D. degree in medicine from Osaka
University, Suita, Japan, in 2002. He was a Ph.D.
student at the Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine.
He is a Neurosurgeon at Nishinomiya Prefectural
Hospital, Kobe, Japan.

Masayuki Hirata received the B.S., M.S., M.D.,
and Ph.D. degrees. He graduated from the Faculty
of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan,
in 1985, and Osaka University Medical School,
Osaka, Japan, in 1994.
He is a board-certified Neurosurgeon who specializes in functional neurosurgery. He was promoted to
Specially Appointed Associate Professor at the Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Medical
School and is serving as the Leader of a neural engineering group.

Hisato Sugata received the M.Sc. degree from Kobe
University, Kobe, Japan, in 2009, and received the
Ph.D. degree in health science from the Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan,
in 2012.
He is currently working on brain–machine interfaces using MEG at the Department of Neurosurgery,
Osaka University Medical School.

Tetsu Goto received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees. He
graduated from Osaka University Medical School,
Osaka, Japan, in 2002. He is a board-certified Neurosurgeon and is currently working as a Neurosurgeon
at Kawachi Sogo Hospital, Osaka, Japan. He specializes in the analysis of motor and language signals
recorded with MEG and ECoG.

Kojiro Matsushita received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees. He graduated from the Department of Engineering, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, Japan,
in 2000 and from the Graduate School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, in 2007.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Computer
Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in 2008. He was
a Specially Appointed Assistant Professor at the Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Medical
School, Osaka, Japan, in 2009.

1041

Takufumi Yanagisawa received the M.D. and Ph.D.
degrees. He graduated from the Department of
Physics, Waseda University and Osaka University
Medical School, Osaka, Japan, in 2005.
He is a board-certified Neurosurgeon. He is currently a Specially Appointed Researcher in the Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Medical
School, with a principal interest in ECoG decoding.

Youichi Saitoh received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees.
He graduated from Osaka University Medical School,
Osaka, Japan, in 1982.
He is a board-certified Neurosurgeon and is currently a Specially Appointed Professor at the Department of Neuromodulation and Neurosurgery, Osaka
University. He specializes in functional neurosurgery,
in particular, motor cortex stimulation and deep-brain
stimulation.

Haruhiko Kishima received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees. He graduated from Osaka University Medical
School, Osaka, Japan, in 1991.
He is a board-certified Neurosurgeon and is currently an Associate Professor at the Department
of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Medical School,
Osaka. He specializes in functional neurosurgery,
specifically in epileptic surgery and deep brain
stimulation.

Toshiki Yoshimine received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees. He graduated from Osaka University Medical
School, Osaka, Japan, in 1975.
He is the Director of the Japan Neurosurgical Society. He currently serves as the Professor and Chairman of the Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University Medical School and Director of the Medical
Center for Translational Research, Osaka University
Hospital.

