IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

971

An Ontology-Based Annotation of Cardiac
Implantable Electronic Devices to Detect
Therapy Changes in a National Registry
Arnaud Rosier, Member, IEEE, Philippe Mabo, Michel Chauvin, and Anita Burgun

Abstract—The patient population benefitting from cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) is increasing. This study introduces a device annotation method that supports the consistent
description of the functional attributes of cardiac devices and evaluates how this method can detect device changes from a CIED
registry. We designed the Cardiac Device Ontology, an ontology
of CIEDs and device functions. We annotated 146 cardiac devices
with this ontology and used it to detect therapy changes with respect
to atrioventricular pacing, cardiac resynchronization therapy, and
defibrillation capability in a French national registry of patients
with implants (STIDEFIX). We then analyzed a set of 6905 device
replacements from the STIDEFIX registry. Ontology-based identification of therapy changes (upgraded, downgraded, or similar)
was accurate (6905 cases) and performed better than straightforward analysis of the registry codes (F-measure 1.00 versus 0.75 to
0.97). This study demonstrates the feasibility and effectiveness of
ontology-based functional annotation of devices in the cardiac domain. Such annotation allowed a better description and in-depth
analysis of STIDEFIX. This method was useful for the automatic
detection of therapy changes and may be reused for analyzing data
from other device registries.
Index Terms—Biomedical informatics, decision support systems,
information management, knowledge-based systems, pacemakers.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIAC-IMPLANTED electronic devices (CIEDs) are
increasingly being used to treat heart disease. Moreover,
extensions in the therapeutic features of these devices have led to
additional medical benefits in the treatment of heart failure and
the prevention of sudden death [1]–[5]. Dual-chamber pacemakers are the most frequently implanted CIEDs. Other new
devices include implantable cardioverter defibrillators, which
are able to treat life-threatening arrhythmias, and cardiac resyn-

C

Manuscript received November 11, 2013; revised May 27, 2014; accepted
June 24, 2014. Date of publication July 11, 2014; date of current version May 7,
2015. This work was supported in part under Grant ANR-07-TecSan-001 from
Agence Nationale pour la Recherche—TecSan.
A. Rosier was with the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, 35000 Rennes, France. He is now with the Department of Service de Rythmologie, Hôpital Privé Jacques Cartier, 91300 Massy, France
(e-mail: arnaud.rosier@gmail.com).
P. Mabo is with the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
35000 Rennes, France (e-mail: philippe.mabo@chu-rennes.fr).
M. Chauvin is with the Cardiology Department, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, 67000
Strasbourg, France (e-mail: michel.chauvin@chru-strasbourg.fr).
A. Burgun is with the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Paris Descartes University, 75270 Paris, France (e-mail: anita.burgun@egp.
aphp.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2338741

chronization therapy (CRT) devices, which can improve cardiac
function in patients with heart failure through the use of synchronous pacing impulses.
National pacemaker registries, such as the French registry
STIDEFIX [6] are considered key for data collection and the
analysis of cardiac pacing, CRT, and defibrillation therapy, allowing the long-term evaluation of patient prognosis, effectiveness, safety, and costs. Recalls of CIEDs concern hundreds of
thousands of patients worldwide, and long-term solutions to this
problem include better use of registries and the creation of tools
to identify and interpret safety signals [7].
Data annotation based on the functions of CIEDs would enable comparison of device-replacement procedures and analysis
of data in terms of an equivalent, improved, or decreased effect
of the therapy delivered to patients. To our knowledge, most
national registries rely on proprietary databases with lists of device names, and do not provide straightforward representations
of separate CIED functions.
In contrast to the pharmacological domain, where several drug
ontologies have been developed and are valuable resources with
which to analyze drug prescriptions [8], no standard resource
exists for cardiac device annotation and no ontology has been
designed for CIEDs to address the issues of classification, aggregation, and analysis of medical data in pacemaker registries.
Moreover, device characteristics cannot be inferred automatically from device names: for example, Medtronic InSync III is
a pacemaker with CRT, whereas Medtronic InSync III Marquis
is a defibrillator with CRT.
In this paper, we present the first attempt to annotate active
medical devices in order to analyze therapy changes in patients
from a longitudinal observational database. We describe the
creation of an ontology of cardiac devices in OWL-DL, which
we then use to represent information on device replacement
using data from the STIDEFIX registry. We also report on our
use of the ontology in detecting and classifying therapy changes
in a cohort of 6905 patients from the STIDEFIX registry.
II. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE
A. CIED Therapy
A CIED relies on two essential components: a pulse generator
that includes the software and an integrated battery; and leads
implanted in the heart cavities and connected to the generator.
Different leads may support additional function; moreover, depending on the location of the lead tip, different synchronization
patterns will occur while pacing.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

972

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Three major CIED kinds of features (we will call them functions in the rest of this paper) are possible:
1) Pacing mode (either ventricular pacing with one lead only
or atrioventricular sequential pacing which uses one atrial
lead and one ventricular lead).
2) Defibrillation function: in a defibrillator, the lead has special coils (defibrillation electrodes) to allow the device to
deliver a high-energy shock, and convert dangerous rapid
rhythms (ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation) back to a
normal rhythm.
3) CRT function (when resynchronization of the left ventricle
is performed by simultaneous pacing by two leads placed,
respectively, in the right and in the left ventricle).
A change in therapy with respect to those functions requires
not only device replacement, but also lead insertion and/or removal or abandon. For example, a pacemaker ventricular lead
may not be appropriate for defibrillation and will need to be
replaced by a new right ventricular lead that includes a specially
designed electrode, if the patient condition would require defibrillation. CRT requires to place the right ventricle pacing lead
and then, to advance the left ventricular lead into the coronary
sinus branch. The pulse generator can be replaced relatively easily because it is contained in the chest wall pocket and can be
reached through a surgical incision. The leads, however, run a
long course through the veins into the heart. The removal of such
systems is potentially a high-risk procedure, which exposes the
patient to increased morbidity risks [9]. For example, each time
the lead is separated from a scar tissue, there is a small chance
of bleeding in the chest or around the heart.
To replace the battery, the pulse generator must be changed
by a surgical procedure every 5 to 10 years. When it is possible,
i.e., when there is no major therapy change, implanted leads are
preserved and reconnected to the new device. Pulse generators
may be replaced with:
1) exactly the same model;
2) a model that is different but is equivalent with respect to
the three major functions (the CIED companies produce
numerous models and new models may be largely similar
to the older devices, with only minor improvements);
3) a model with significantly different functions regarding
therapy delivery (in this case, the procedure includes the
insertion or removal, or (sometimes) the abandoning of
at least one lead in the patient’s body). In most cases,
rationale is that the patient’s clinical condition has evolved
in an unexpected way, and needs therapy adjustment.

B. Implantable Cardiac Device in Existing Terminologies,
Ontologies, and Standards
As a preliminary step, we evaluated how existing standard
terminologies and ontologies cover the concepts required for
CIED description. Two medical experts in the CIED domain
wrote a list of concepts sufficient to describe the devices and
their functions. BioPortal [10] was searched for each concept
on the list, and the results were manually reviewed and further
defined using terminology browsing where appropriate.

Concept coverage for each of the seven resources is shown in
Table I. SNOMED CT, the NCI Thesaurus, and MeSH had the
best coverage, but none of them included all the categories on the
minimal list of concepts as determined by the domain experts.
For example, the entity “artificial pacemaker” was present in
SNOMED CT, the NCI Thesaurus, and MeSH, but only the NCI
Thesaurus included all types of CIEDs. On the other hand, no device function was represented as such in this ontology, whereas
SNOMED CT and MeSH include several essential functions.
Moreover, concept descriptions may be controversial; for example, the concept of CRT is present in the NCI Thesaurus, but
it represents the act of implanting the CRT device, rather than
the therapy delivered by the device itself.
Although the implantable device cardiac nomenclature [11]
[12] defines standard terminology for device data, it conveys a
summary of information obtained by device interrogation and
is not designed to support the description of CIEDs in terms of
functionality and comparisons between models.
C. NASPE/BPEG Code
The international coding system NASPE/BPEG generic
(NBG) pacemaker code [13]–[15] is used to represent CIED
functions in most pacemaker registries, including the French
STIDEFIX registry. The NBG coding system has several limitations:
1) It is intrinsically ambiguous: it is not explicit as to whether
the code represents the maximal capacity of the device, the
mode with which it is programmed, or the mode in which
the device is functioning at a given time. All of these
entities can be different. For example, an atrioventricular device —DDD— may be programmed in “ventricular
pacing only” mode—VVI—in some patients.
2) Several versions of the NBG code have been released. Initially based on a three-digit code, in 1987, it evolved into
a five-digit code in 1987. However, as the meaning of the
last two digits has changed with time, some NBG identifiers can have different meanings in different versions of
the coding system.
3) In 2000, the generic defibrillator code (NBD) coding system was created in 2000 to represent defibrillators, leading
to incomplete descriptions of CIEDs when the NBG system is used alone.
4) As a result, a given combination of letters can have a
different meaning in different databases or even within
the same database, depending on the NBG version. For
example, DDDRD can correspond to either a defibrillator,
D (dual) meaning pacing and shock or a pacemaker with
multisite pacing, D (dual) meaning resynchronization of
the atrium and ventricle.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Overview of the Method
The annotation and analysis of CIED data from the French
national STIDEFIX registry were performed in four steps:

ROSIER et al.: ONTOLOGY-BASED ANNOTATION OF CIEDS TO DETECT THERAPY CHANGES IN A NATIONAL REGISTRY

973

TABLE I
MOST DOMAIN CONCEPTS ARE MISSING IN AVAILABLE CONTROLLED VOCABULARIES

Physical Objects

Functions

Concept

SNOMED-CT

NCI Thesaurus

MeSH

RadLex

FDA Medical Devices

MedDRA

ICD-9/10

Medical device
Implanted medical device
CIED
Cardiac rhythm management device
Artificial pacemaker
(Implantable) Defibrillator
CRT device
Dual chamber pacemaker
Single chamber pacemaker
Cardiac pacing
Atrial cardiac pacing
Ventricular cardiac pacing
Atrio-ventricular cardiac pacing
Defibrillation
CRT

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Wrong

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Wrong

No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

SNOMED Clinical Terms is the most comprehensive multilingual healthcare terminology and is maintained and distributed by the IHTSDO (an international nonprofit standards
development organization).
NCI Thesaurus is a medical reference terminology maintained by the National Cancer Institute (U.S. National Institutes of Health).
MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) is a controlled vocabulary created by the U.S. National Library of Medicine; it is used for indexing the MEDLINE/PubMed article database.
RadLex is a lexicon of terms for indexing and retrieving radiology information resources maintained by the Radiological Society of North America.
FDA Medical Devices is a classification of medical devices maintained by the U.S. Food & Drug Administration.
MedDRA or Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities is an international medical dictionary and thesaurus used by the pharmaceutical industry during the regulatory
process and for adverse event classification.
ICD9/10 is the International Classification of Diseases maintained by the World Health Organization, and is used worldwide for morbidity and mortality statistics and
reimbursement purposes.

1) data from patients who underwent a pulse-generator
change were extracted from the STIDEFIX registry;
2) an ontology of cardiac devices was designed;
3) device models that were present in at least 100 records in
STIDEFIX were annotated using this ontology;
4) the functional device annotation based on the ontology
was compared with the registry coding on the basis of the
therapy change detected by each method.

B. Material
1) STIDEFIX Registry: The French national registry for
pacemakers and defibrillators was created in 1986. The registry, named STIDEFIX, has become increasingly exhaustive
since 2005, with physicians obliged to provide clinical and device data for every implanted patient in order to fulfill medical
reimbursement requirements [6]. STIDEFIX data are stored in
a relational database maintained by the French Society of Cardiology (Société Française de Cardiologie).
The data collected in the STIDEFIX registry include information about pulse generators (i.e., manufacturer, model name,
reference, mode, NASPE/BPEG code, polarity, and connection
type) and leads (i.e., manufacturer, model name, polarity, and
connection type).
2) Data Collection From the Registry: We extracted data
from the STIDEFIX registry for all 13684 patients who underwent a device-replacement procedure between July 2006 and
October 2010 by using PostgreSQL version 8.4.
Data curation consisted of removing records that had identical
serial numbers for the old device and the new device, as well
as records with inconsistent dates (e.g., when the first device

was not explanted on the same day that the second device was
implanted).
C. Methods
1) Ontology Design: We developed the Cardiac Device Ontology (CDO) to support the functional annotation of cardiac
devices (e.g., Medtronic Adapta DR is an example of a device
that performs two functions: atrioventricular pacing and recording of heart rhythms), and to classify replacement procedures
as upgrading, downgrading, or replacement with an equivalent
device by detecting whether a prominent function is added, removed, or unchanged compared with the previous device (e.g., if
a Medtronic Adapta DR pacemaker is replaced with a Biotronik
Lumax HF-T device then CRT and defibrillation functions will
have been added and the atrioventricular pacing function left
unchanged).
The aims of the CDO are to analyze CIED registries, (i.e., to
cluster cardiac devices according to their functional properties)
and distinguish between therapy changes and replacement with
an equivalent device. In addition, it may be used to detect data
inconsistencies and support data quality control.
Design of the CDO included the following steps:
1) Knowledge acquisition of core concepts: We interviewed
two electrophysiologists in order to elicit a set of core domain concepts. The same list of concepts established by
the experts was also used to evaluate existing terminologies. Each concept was given an unambiguous definition,
using appropriate documentation [16], [17]. In addition,
we used two other sources:
a) the device features in the different versions of the
NBG and NBD codes;

974

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

b) the upper-level concepts of the ontology developed
in the AKENATON project [18].
2) Formal concept definition: The definitions provided by
the medical experts were translated into logical definitions, which led to an Is-A concept hierarchy. Non-Is-A
relationships were added when needed (e.g., to link functions and devices).
3) Ontology augmentation: We used a bottom-up approach,
starting from lists of manufacturers’ products [19], [20]
to ensure that all CIED models could be appropriately
defined. New concepts were added where needed.
4) Class creation: Finally, 11 ontology classes that were
needed for inference purposes were created. They are described as follows:
a) “Patient with function X gained (with X being atrioventricular pacing, defibrillation or CRT). Fig. 1
illustrates the formal definition of the class “patient
with CRT gained,” defined as a patient who had previously a device with no CRT function and whose
new cardiac device supports CRT.
b) “Patient with function X lost.”
c) “Patient with function X idem” (identical).
Those three classes have been created for each function, which lead to nine new classes. They are used
to classify the cases and gather the evaluation results
directly.
d) “Old device” which is used to enter the first device
model name.
e) “New device” which is used to enter the new (replacing) device model name.
We developed the CDO in OWL-DL using Protégé release
4.1. Ontology reasoning tasks were performed using API-OWL
version 3.2.2 and HermiT 1.3.3.
2) CIED Annotation: We annotated the CIEDs to the three
major functions that are described in Section II-A, and were chosen for their clinical relevance. Each function is characterized
by a set of appropriate leads, which means that a change with
respect to these functions is associated with significant risks and
major modifications in the CIED features.
1) The ability to perform atrioventricular pacing (i.e.,
“double-chamber” devices). This function requires an
atrial lead in addition to the regular ventricle lead.
2) The ability to defibrillate (deliver an electric shock to
end a life-threatening arrhythmia). This ability requires a
generator with a capacitor, as well as a specific ventricular
lead (with an integrated coil, used to deliver the shock).
3) The ability to resynchronize the ventricles, by pacing both
walls synchronously. This requires an additional left ventricular lead placed on the epicardial side of the lateral
wall of the ventricle.
We selected the CIED models with at least 100 occurrences
in the STIDEFIX database and represented each one by a class
in the CDO. The number of 100 occurrences was chosen to allow
the CDO-based analysis of more than 50% of the records in
STIDEFIX. Moreover, a majority of the CIED models present in
STIDEFIX had less than ten occurrences and, therefore, would
be less relevant for statistical analysis.

The device characteristics were extracted from the documentation provided by the manufacturers, manually reviewed by
two domain experts, and represented as device properties in the
CDO (e.g., Medtronic Adapta DR is a model of a dual-chamber
pacemaker; the Biotronik Lumax HF-T device is a model of a
CRT defibrillator).
3) Evaluation of Therapy Changes Detection: For each patient, the CDO was populated with data from STIDEFIX. The
reasoning capabilities of the CDO were used as follows: 1)
three generic individuals, namely patient p, old device x, and
new device y, were created in the ontology using OWL-API;
2) we used the HermiT Reasoner [21] to classify the ontology;
and 3) we retrieved the inferred classification, including the
status of therapy changes, upon the three therapy axis.
For example, patient p has an old device “Medtronic Adapta
DR” (atrioventricular pacemaker) and a new device “Biotronik
Lumax HF-T” (atrioventricular defibrillator with resynchronization). At the end of the reasoning process, p should be classified
in the three following classes: “Patient with CRT gained,” “Patient with defibrillation gained,” and “Patient with atrioventricular pacing idem.”
In order to assess whether using an ontology-based annotation
performs better than inferring directly from NASPE/BPEG or
equivalent codes in the STIDEFIX registry, we used scripting to
detect the same therapy replacements directly from the database.
For each patient, we compared the results of the therapy changes
detected by the CDO on one hand and NASPE/BPEG on the
other hand, first for each function separately and then for the
device as a whole (i.e., at least one function was modified versus
no change in the three functions).
For example, “Medtronic Adapta DR” is coded as DDD in
NASPE/BPEG, which stands for double-chamber pacemaker,
whereas “Biotronik Lumax HF-T” is coded as CRT-D, which
stands for CRT plus defibrillator. Here, detection of therapy
changes by NASPE/BPEG coding would be correct using a
direct approach.
IV. RESULTS
A. CDO
The CDO is available as additional material for this paper
and can be explored using Protégé editor (downloadable at
http://protege.stanford.edu/).
The CDO contains 195 classes organized in three Is-A hierarchies.
1) “Implantable device” is a physical object with subclasses
corresponding to the different kinds of devices.
2) “Function” subsumes classes, describing the three major
functions defined previously. Two additional classes were
created for ontology completeness, namely antitachycardia pacing and cardiac rhythm recording.
3) Patient class and subclasses were used for inference purposes and consisted in the following nine variations: patient with atrioventricular pacing gained/lost/idem, CRT
gained/lost/idem, and defibrillation gained/lost/idem.
Non-Is-A relations consist of seven properties that were used
to link functions and devices (e.g., hasFunction) or to link

ROSIER et al.: ONTOLOGY-BASED ANNOTATION OF CIEDS TO DETECT THERAPY CHANGES IN A NATIONAL REGISTRY

Fig. 1.

975

Patient classes and the formal definition of the class “CRT gained” (to the right).

Fig. 2.

Device classes and Is-A relations between the classes.

Fig. 3.

Function classes and Is-A relations between the classes.

defibrillation. Cardiac rhythm recording is a function present in
any device in this version of CDO, represented for completeness.
As seen in the formal definition (see Fig. 4), the “St. Jude
Medical Anthem” model is defined as a pacemaker with CRT
pacing and without defibrillation. As such, it falls under the
CRT-P_Device group, which regroups any CRT device without
defibrillation. All members of this class have CRT function, as
inferred by CDO (yellow highlights, right side in Fig. 4).
A total of 146 distinct models (17% of all distinct models in
STIDEFIX) had at least 100 instances in the STIDEFIX database
and were described as a class in the CDO. That list of devices
allowed the analysis of 6905 device-replacement procedures
(57% of the STIDEFIX registry replacement procedures).
It was possible to cluster the models, after annotation using the CDO, into six distinct superclasses according to their
functional characteristics: ventricular-only pacing devices (38
distinct models), atrioventricular pacemakers (55 models), CRT
pacing devices (five models), ventricular defibrillators (16 models), atrioventricular defibrillators (17 models), and CRT defibrillators (15 models).

B. Detection of Therapy Changes
patients and devices (e.g., IsImplantedBy and its inverse property hasImplant).
Figs. 2 and 3 summarize, respectively, the function classes
and the corresponding properties.
Fig. 2 summarizes the taxonomical setting of CIED in CDO.
It illustrates that despite common medical language, every defibrillator with implanted lead is also a pacemaker (it always
has pacing function): CRT-defibrillator, atrioventricular defibrillator, and ventricular defibrillator are subsumed by the corresponding pacing device class.
Fig. 3 summarizes the functions defined in CDO. Although
the analysis is focused on the three major functions (CRT, atrioventricular pacing, and defibrillation), more features are represented. Antitachycardia pacing is a shockless function based
on the use of pacing stimulation techniques for termination of
tachyarrhythmia. Such techniques are usually associated with

The CDO-based identification of therapy changes (upgraded,
downgraded, or similar) performed perfectly compared to analysis of NASPE/BPEG codes, when each of three functions was
analyzed separately (F-measure 1.0 versus 0.75 to 0.97), as well
as for detecting at least one function change versus no change at
all (F-measure 1 and 1 versus 0.82 and 0.95). These results are
summarized in Table II. NASPE/BPEG analysis performed statistically better for atrioventricular pacing, which is consistent
with the fact that this coding system was originally designed to
describe atrioventricular versus atrial or ventricular pacing.
The total duration of CDO processing, including instance
creation, reasoning, and retrieving data, was 53 min 54 s (OS:
Windows 7, CPU Intel Core i3 3.2 GHz, 4-GB RAM), resulting
in mean duration of 468 ms/ patient. NASPEE/BPEG processing
was not measured in detail but was shorter, in regard of fewer
computational steps.

976

Fig. 4.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Device classes and the formal definition of the class CRT-P device (to the right).
TABLE II
ONTOLOGY-BASED ANNOTATION BRIDGES THE GAP BETWEEN NASPE/BPEG CODING AND PERFECT ANNOTATION
Ontology-based

atrio-ventricular-pacing

cardiac-resynchronization

defibrillation

at least one function change among the three
no function change at all

gained
lost
idle
gained
lost
idle
gained
lost
idle

NASPEE/BPEG

cases

Precision

Recall

F-measure

Precision

Recall

F-measure

220
607
827
550
53
6302
227
126
6552
1595
5310

1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00

1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00

1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00
1,00

0,95
1,00
0,99
0,94
0,68
0,99
1,00
0,99
1,00
0,77
0,97

0,90
0,94
0,93
0,76
0,83
0,92
0,84
0,73
0,93
0,88
0,93

0,93
0,97
0,96
0,84
0,75
0,96
0,91
0,84
0,96
0,82
0,95

In terms of misdetection of therapy changes, using
NASPE/NBG coding alone resulted in at least one error in 533
patients (7.7% of 6905 patients). Most errors were due to the
missing code in the database (83%) and the latter 17% were
improper coding (wrong code for the specified model); interestingly, a total of 103 patients had coding errors implying three
unique device models.
1) St. Jude Medical Victory DR was coded as a CRT-P device (CRT pacemaker) instead of an atrioventricular pacemaker (DDD).
2) St. Jude Medical Frontier II was coded as an atrioventricular pacemaker instead of CRT-P. An inversion in the
model list is likely to have caused the two errors mentioned
previously, but this hypothesis could not be confirmed.
3) Biotronik Lumax VR-T was classified as a pacemaker
instead of a defibrillator.
C. Clinical Results
We present hereafter some results on the basis of the clinical
relevance in terms of unexpected therapy changes in STIDE-

FIX patients. A total of 867 patients (12.6%) had at least one
additional lead inserted during device replacement, which took
place 3.89 years after the previous device was implanted. A total of 550 of these (8%) were left ventricular leads (for CRT),
220 (3.2%) were right atrium leads (for atrial pacing), and 227
(3.3%) were ventricular leads (mostly defibrillation leads). A
total of 660 patients (9.6%) had at least one lead abandoned
or explanted during device replacement. These data will be described further and discussed in a subsequent paper.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Strengths and Limitations of an Ontology-Based Approach
for Functional Annotation of Cardiac Devices
Data repositories in the domain of CIED therapy are still
limited, especially when compared with the pharmacological
domain. However, pacemaker registries provide a large data
source upon which decisions concerning the current state of
pacing can be made.
We have demonstrated that analysis of device registry data
can be made easier by annotating devices to an ontology. A

ROSIER et al.: ONTOLOGY-BASED ANNOTATION OF CIEDS TO DETECT THERAPY CHANGES IN A NATIONAL REGISTRY

limitation of this study is that, in the case of CRT devices,
atrioventricular pacing is always possible. As a consequence,
when switching from or to a CRT device, one cannot be sure
that the atrioventricular function was used unless one knows if
an atrial lead was physically connected to the pulse generator.
To address that issue, we are currently working on extending
our ontology to device parts such as leads (lead data are present
in some registries, including STIDEFIX).
In this study, our ontology-based approach performed better than a straightforward approach based on preexisting codes.
This was due to several factors. First, the NASPE/BPEG coding
system has become ambiguous over time as a result of new device functions. We believe that this phenomenon is not domainspecific and that unanticipated technological breakthroughs in
medical devices will cause more coding inconsistencies. Second, the ontology helped to present device models as groups of
devices sharing the same functions. The work presented in this
paper is a first step toward a controlled vocabulary for describing CIED characteristics and cardiac device annotation data, as
well as toward tools to access and process this data.
B. Reusability and Perspectives
One major issue raised by ontologies is the reusability issue
[22]. Our approach combined a formal definition of concepts,
reuse of upper-level classes from a preexisting foundational
ontology, and mapping to the models in manufacturers’ lists;
we believe that this approach enables optimal reusability of
this ontology for other devices in the same domain, as well as
for other domains. New device functions can easily be added
to the function axis, and new models can easily be represented.
However, because of the open-world assumption in OWL-DL, it
is crucial to add closure axioms (i.e., to assume that the functions
associated with the model in the ontology are the only functions
that the model can perform).
This also raises maintenance issues for the device functions:
when a new function is added to the ontology, all device descriptions must be updated with the new characteristic. This updating will be facilitated by our classification of the models in a
taxonomy composed of six classes. Moreover, formal function
definition is expected to help versioning. For instance, Reveal
is a cardiac monitoring device that can be implanted to record
arrhythmias [23]. It was not present in the STIDEFIX database,
but it would be easy to represent it within the ontology as a nonpacing and cardiac-recording-only device. The cardiac rhythm
recording function is already performed by pacing devices, and
thus, the corresponding concept is present in the ontology and
is reusable to annotate Reveal.
We evaluated the CDO using a French registry, but it can be
used to annotate and analyze other data repositories within the
same domain. Ideally, as in other domains (e.g., genomics, with
the HUGO gene nomenclature and gene ontology annotation),
efforts to promote standard naming of model devices should accompany ontology efforts. This normalization issue is currently
being discussed in IEEE and IHE working groups, and a standard that may support better normalization for naming models
is expected to emerge soon [24].

977

Extending the CDO to other medical devices would require
that the same formal definition steps be taken. We believe
that our method gives guarantees in favor of extensibility. We
have emphasized the basic “ontological” separation between
a physical object and a function it bears; this distinction will
be effective in representing most therapeutic devices and sensors. The objective of standardization for sensors and observations is shared with recent works from the world wide web
consortium, whose technological choices were consistent with
ours [25].

C. Device Annotation and Medication Annotation are Useful
to Evaluate Therapy
To our knowledge, a CIED ontology has not previously been
developed; by contrast, several ontologies are available for pharmaceutical drugs (e.g., RxNorm [26]). These include formal
representation of drug properties, such as chemical structure,
cellular or subcellular mechanisms of action, organ- or systemlevel physiologic effects, therapeutic intent, and pharmacokinetics [8]. Each drug is annotated using a list of attributes
describing these properties in order to support tasks, such as
drug substitution. Drug substitution involves replacing a drug
with another that is identical (e.g., Cardene instead of Loxen,
both commercial forms of nicardipine). Other uses for such
ontologies involve identifying suitable combinations of drugs
after the failure of monotherapy; for example, combined therapy with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide may be proposed
when blood pressure control cannot be obtained using lisinopril
alone. To aid the identification of functionally equivalent drugs,
and increases or decreases in drug therapy, it is crucial that
pharmaceutical ontologies enable meaningful semantic comparisons between different drugs.
Similarly, we designed an ontology for cardiac devices to support the analysis of device replacement, including the distinction
between switching to a new device with similar attributes and
switching to a device with upgraded or downgraded characteristics. This ontology is expected to provide clear and formal
device descriptions to support medical decision making, as well
as to help with classifying, aggregating, and finally analyzing
data from device registries. We expect this will lead to a better
understanding of the impact of CIED functions on patient prognosis, and hence allow better a priori selection of devices based
on individual patient clinical data.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have designed an ontology that enables the functional
annotation of CIEDs. We have shown that ontology-based functional annotation of medical devices is feasible and useful, and
performs better than straightforward exploitation of CIED codes
for analyzing registry data. We annotated a set of devices that
covered more than 50% of cardiac device replacements within
a database. This approach may be extended to other devices,
including therapeutic devices outside the cardiology domain.

978

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the French Society of Cardiology (Société Française de Cardiologie) and its members for the
opportunity to use data from the national registry of implanted
devices. The authors would also like to thank N. Roederer from
Innovelan Company for his technical assistance, and A Barton
for his comments and advices during the ontology design.
REFERENCES
[1] G. H. Bardy, K. L. Lee, D. B. Mark, J. E. Poole, D. L. Packer, R. Boineau,
M. Domanski, C. Troutman, J. Anderson, G. Johnson, S. E. McNulty, N.
Clapp-Channing, L. D. Davidson-Ray, E. S. Fraulo, D. P. Fishbein, R.
M. Luceri, and J. H. Ip, “Amiodarone or an implantable cardioverterdefibrillator for congestive heart failure,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 352,
no. 3, pp. 225–237, Jan. 2005.
[2] E. Erdmann, N. Freemantle, D. Ph, D. Gras, L. Kappenberger, L. Tavazzi,
J. G. F. Cleland, and J.-C. Daubert, “The effect of cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and mortality in heart failure,” N. Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 352, no. 15, pp. 1539–1549, Apr. 2005.
[3] C. Linde, C. Leclercq, S. Rex, S. Garrigue, T. Lavergne, S. Cazeau, W.
McKenna, M. Fitzgerald, J.-C. Deharo, C. Alonso, S. Walker, F. Braunschweig, C. Bailleul, and J.-C. Daubert, “Long-term benefits of biventricular pacing in congestive heart failure: results from the MUltisite STimulation in cardiomyopathy (MUSTIC) study,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol.,
vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 111–118, Jul. 2002.
[4] “Survival after Tachyarrhythmic Arrest—What Are We Waiting For?”
Saxon L. A., N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 358, no. 1, pp. 77–79, Jan. 2008.
[5] A. J. Moss, W. J. Hall, D. S. Cannom, H. Klein, M. W. Brown, J. P. Daubert,
N. A. M. Estes, E. Foster, H. Greenberg, S. L. Higgins, M. A. Pfeffer, S. D.
Solomon, D. Wilber, and W. Zareba, “Cardiac-resynchronization therapy
for the prevention of heart-failure events,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 361,
no. 14, pp. 1329–1338, Oct. 2009.
[6] M. Salvador-Mazenq, “The French pacemaker register,” Arch. Mal. Coeur
Vaiss., vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 42–45, Jan. 2004.
[7] K. Blake, “Postmarket surveillance of medical devices: Current capabilities and future opportunities,” J. Interventional Cardiac Electrophysiol.,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 119–127, Mar. 2013.
[8] C. Senger, H. M. Seidling, R. Quinzler, U. Leser, and W. E. Haefeli,
“Design and evaluation of an ontology-based drug application database,”
Methods Inf. Med., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 273–284, 2011.
[9] E. O. Udo, N. P. A. Zuithoff, N. M. van Hemel, C. C. de Cock, T. Hendriks,
P. A. Doevendans, and K. G. M. Moons, “Incidence and predictors of short
and long term complications in pacemaker therapy: The FOLLOWPACE
study,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 9, pp. 728–735, Dec. 2011.
[10] N. F. Noy, N. H. Shah, P. L. Whetzel, B. Dai, M. Dorf, N. Griffith, C.
Jonquet, D. L. Rubin, M.-A. Storey, C. G. Chute, and M. A. Musen,
“BioPortal: Ontologies and integrated data resources at the click of a
mouse,” Nucl. Acids Res., vol. 37, pp. W170–W173, Jul. 2009.
[11] Health Informatics—Point-of-Care Medical Device Communication Part
10103: Nomenclature—Implantable Device, Cardiac, IEEE Standard
11073–101032012.

[12] M. Yuksel and A. Dogac, “Interoperability of medical device information
and the clinical applications: An HL7 RMIM based on the ISO/IEEE
11073 DIM,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 557–
566, Jul. 2011.
[13] A. D. Bernstein, J.-C. Daubert, R. D. Fletcher, D. L. Hayes, B.
Lüderitz, D. W. Reynolds, M. H. Schoenfeld, and R. Sutton, “The revised NASPE/BPEG generic code for antibradycardia, adaptive-rate, and
multisite pacing. North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology/British Pacing and Electrophysiology Group,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 260–264, Feb. 2002.
[14] A. D. Bernstein, A. J. Camm, J. D. Fisher, R. D. Fletcher, R. H. Mead,
A. W. Nathan, V. Parsonnet, A. F. Rickards, N. P. Smyth, and R. Sutton,
“North american society of pacing and electrophysiology policy statement. The NASPE/BPEG defibrillator code,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol.,
vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 1776–1780, Sep. 1993.
[15] A. D. Bernstein and V. Parsonnet, “The NASPE/BPEG pacemaker-lead
code (NBL code),” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1535–
1536, Nov. 1996.
[16] D. Hayes and S. Asirvatha, Dictionnary of Cardiac Pacing, Defibrillation, Resynchronization and Arrythmias, 2nd ed. Minneapolis, MN, USA:
Cardiotext Publishing, 2007.
[17] W. Fischer and P. Ritter, Cardiac Pacing in Clinical Practice. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 1998.
[18] L. Temal, A. Rosier, O. Dameron, and A. Burgun, “Mapping BFO and
DOLCE,” Stud. Health Technol. Informat., vol. 160, no. Pt 2, pp. 1065–
1069, Jan. 2010.
[19] St. Jude Medical. (2011). Implantable Device Reference Guide. [Online].
Available:
javascript:ExternalSitePopUp(‘/_MediaAssets/documents/
devicerefguide.xls’)
[20] Medtronic. (2011). Pacemaker and ICD Encyclopedia. [Online]. Available: www.medtronic.com/downloadablefiles/Encyclopedia.pdf.
[21] Hermit OWL Reasoner version 1.3.3. (2013). [Online]. Available:
http://hermit-reasoner.com.
[22] T. R. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies used
for knowledge sharing,” Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 43, nos. 5/6,
pp. 907–928, 1995.
[23] A. D. Krahn, G. J. Klein, R. Yee, and A. C. Skanes, “Randomized assessment of syncope trial: Conventional diagnostic testing versus a prolonged
monitoring strategy,” Circulation, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 46–51, Jul. 2001.
[24] IHE Implantable Device Cardiac Observation Profile (IDCO). (2014).
[Online]. Available: http://www.ihe.net/Technical_Framework/upload/
IHE_PCD_TF_Supplement_IDCO_2009–08–10.pdf
[25] H. Rittenmeyer, “Sacral nerve neuromodulation (InterStim). Part I: Review of the InterStim system,” Urol. Nursing, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 15–20,
Feb. 2008.
[26] J. Pathak, R. L. Richesson, M. Clinic, and S. Florida, “Use of standard
drug vocabularies in clinical research: A case study in pediatrics,” in Proc
AMIA Annu. Symp., 2010, pp. 607–611.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

