IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

1029

Preventive Maintenance Prioritization Index
of Medical Equipment Using Quality
Function Deployment
Neven Saleh, Amr A. Sharawi, Manal Abd Elwahed, Alberto Petti, Daniele Puppato,
and Gabriella Balestra

Abstract—Preventive maintenance is a core function of clinical
engineering, and it is essential to guarantee the correct functioning
of the equipment. The management and control of maintenance
activities are equally important to perform maintenance. As the
variety of medical equipment increases, accordingly the size of
maintenance activities increases, the need for better management
and control become essential. This paper aims to develop a new
model for preventive maintenance priority of medical equipment
using quality function deployment as a new concept in maintenance of medical equipment. We developed a three-domain framework model consisting of requirement, function, and concept. The
requirement domain is the house of quality matrix. The second
domain is the design matrix. Finally, the concept domain generates a prioritization index for preventive maintenance considering
the weights of critical criteria. According to the final scores of
those criteria, the prioritization action of medical equipment is
carried out. Our model proposes five levels of priority for preventive maintenance. The model was tested on 200 pieces of medical
equipment belonging to 17 different departments of two hospitals in Piedmont province, Italy. The dataset includes 70 different
types of equipment. The results show a high correlation between
risk-based criteria and the prioritization list.
Index Terms—Medical equipment, preventive maintenance
(PM), prioritization, quality function deployment (QFD).

I. INTRODUCTION
REVENTIVE maintenance (PM) is a core function of clinical engineering, having as objectives the assurance of
ongoing safety and performance of medical devices and the
preservation of the investment in the equipment through improved longevity [1]. PM is mainly a risk-based approach and
considered as a core function of Clinical Engineering Department [2]. Despite its core role, the design and management of an
effective PM program is not a simple matter. Adequate administrative support is a requirement for an effective PM program.

P

Manuscript received November 19, 2013; revised June 12, 2014; accepted
July 4, 2014. Date of publication July 10, 2014; date of current version May 7,
2015.
N. Saleh is with the Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy (e-mail:
nevensaleh76@ gmail.com).
A. Sharawi and M. Abd Elwahed are with the Systems and Biomedical
Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt
(e-mail: amrarsha@link.net; manalaw2003@yahoo.com).
A. Petti is with ASLBI, 13900 Biella, Italy (e-mail: Alberto.petti@
aslbi.piemonte.it).
D. Puppato is with ARESS, 10122 Turin, Italy (e-mail: danipup@tiscali.it).
G. Balestra is with the Electronic and Telecommunication Department,
Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy (e-mail: gabriella.balestra@polito.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2337895

The two key issues for PM are the procedures to be executed
and execution frequencies [1]–[3]. The procedures indicate the
necessary steps that are required to assure the performance of
the device, whereas the second key is the frequency at which
the set of procedures should be done.
Maintenance prioritization is a crucial task in management
systems, especially when there are more maintenance work orders than available people or resources that can handle those
devices [4]. The literature is rich with different prioritization
approaches for medical equipment. In [5], Joseph and Madhukumar have developed a model for PM index considering
risk level coefficient (RLC) of the instrument. RLC was calculated through five different classified factors related to the
medical equipment electrical risk. The factors are static risk,
degree and quality of safety arrangements, insulation, physical
risk, and equipment contact with the patient.
In another work [6], the authors developed the system of information technology and support system for maintenance actions
(SISMA). The system considers two aspects for PM evaluation:
technical and economic needs to assess PM plan for medical
equipment. Analytical Hierarchy Process was used in [7] as
a multicriteria decision making tool to develop a maintenance
priority index for medical equipment.

II. BACKGROUND
Quality function deployment (QFD) is one of the total quality management quantitative tools and techniques that could be
used to translate customer requirements and specifications into
appropriate technical or service requirements [8]. QFD was conceived in Japan at the end of 1960s by Yoji Akao. The first usage
of QFD was implemented by Mizuno in 1972 to Mitsubishi’s
Kobe shipyard site [9].
QFD uses visual matrices that link customer requirements, design requirements, target values, and competitive performance
into one chart [8]. Therefore, QFD is considered a quantitative
tool that facilitates evaluation of customer’s satisfaction. Typically, a QFD system can be broken into four interlinked phases
to fully deploy the customer needs phase by phase [10]. The
four-phase model consists of house of quality (HOQ) matrix,
design matrix, process planning matrix, and finally production
matrix [10], [11].
Among the various matrices, the HOQ is commonly used in
the different applications. The HOQ matrix displays the voice of
customers (VOC) or customer requirements that are known as

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1030

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 2. Proposed three-domain framework for PM of medical equipment prioritization.

HOQ of function deployment [12].

III. METHODOLOGY
WHATs against the technical requirements or voice of engineers
(VOE) that are known as HOWs [8]–[11].
In Fig. 1, a simplified matrix of HOQ is presented depicting
the main parts of the matrix. The order suggested by letters
A to F is normally followed during the process. Room “A”
contains a list of customer needs, each of which is assessed
against competitors, and the results which are absolute and relative weights for customer needs prioritization are reported in to
room “B.” Room “C” has the information necessary to transform
the customer expectations into technical characteristics, and the
correlation between each customer requirements and technical
response is put into “D.” The roof, room “E,” considers the extent to which the technical responses support each other. The
prioritization of the technical characteristics, information on the
competition, and technical targets weights all go into “F” [12].
The most important parts in HOQ are “B” and “F,” respectively; more details can be found in [12]. The planning matrix
“B” is calculated based on a comparison between the intended
service within a hospital and other hospitals. In this matrix,
the importance of customer requirements is evaluated, and the
actual evaluations of the customer requirements are assigned.
The goal is the expected value for each requirement, and then,
the improvement ratio is calculated by dividing the goal to the
evaluation of the intended requirements. The absolute weight
is calculated by multiplication of goal and importance ratio,
while the relative weight is the normalization of the absolute
weight. Technical targets, room “F,” are prioritized through calculating the absolute weight of HOWs as given in (1) and then
normalizing it to determine the relative weight [13]
Absolute weight =



id WHAT X RWH

(1)

where id WHAT is the importance degree of WHAT and RWH
is the relationship value between WHAT and HOW.
According to the characteristics of the QFD technique,
our objective is to employee QFD as a new approach in
medical equipment management to solve the problem of
PM prioritization of medical equipment considering a set of
influential criteria.

By using QFD, we proposed a three-domain framework for
PM priority, as illustrated in Fig. 2: requirement domain, function domain, and concept domain.
The first domain considers the customer requirements and the
technical characteristics that meet the customer requirements,
i.e., HOQ of the model. The second domain is the function
domain, in which the top technical criteria that resulted in first
domain will be measured through new criteria to identify the
critical criteria for PM prioritization, i.e., top HOWs of the first
domain becomes the new WHATs of the second domain. In
last domain, the concept domain, a priority score (PS) index is
generated considering the weights of critical criteria in order to
determine PM priority of medical equipment.
A. Requirement Domain
The HOQ of PM prioritization model is the requirement domain of this framework. First, customer needs and technical
characteristics should be identified. In general, the customers
of medical equipment in hospitals include all customers that
have a direct interface with medical equipment and who expect a range of services. In particular, the patients and clinical
staff are considered the customers (WHATs) of medical equipment, whereas the Clinical Engineering Department is considered the one who is responsible to satisfy those requirements
(HOWs).
For patient’s requirements, no doubt that safety and availability of medical equipment are essential needs. Clinical staff
requirements were chosen based upon the literature [14] and
experience. Table I depicts the proposed customer’s requirements and technical characteristics. Prioritization of customer’s
requirements is performed considering a comparison between
Italian hospital and Jordanian hospital [14].
Table I shows that customer’s requirements are met by addressing five technical characteristics: risk, performance assurance, user competence, costs, and standard compliance, which
are presented with its subcriteria in this table. The requirement
domain (HOQ) is shown in Fig. 3.
The matrix is organized referring to Fig. 1; the left column
contains customer requirements (VOC), whereas the main part

SALEH et al.: PM PRIORITIZATION INDEX OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USING QFD

TABLE I
CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS AND TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HOQ
OF THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
Customer Requirements

Safety of medical.
equipment.
Efficiency.
Durability.
Quick response of
technical team.
Back up availability.
Check the device after
maintenance.
Regular monitoring of
the devices.
Priority based on
importance.
Obvious operating
instructions.
Knowledge of
maintained devices.
Existence of a contact
person 24 h.
Avoiding suspension of
services.

Technical Requirements
Criteria

Subcriteria

Risk

Physical risk Function
Maintenance
requirements

Performance
Assurance

Mission criticality
Function verification Age
Labeling Electrical safety
Parts replacement
Regular inspection

User
Competence

Qualification of
technicians Complexity
of devices Equipped
workshop Test equipment
availability Service
manual availability
Activities recording
Updating or loan Spare
parts availability Service
provider type
Meet standards

Costs

Standards

of the matrix contains the technical characteristics (VOE) segmented into five columns and the relationship matrix. The right
column is the planning matrix of HOQ. The bottom room is
the technical target matrix. The relationships between WHATs
and HOWs are indicated by scores 9 for strong relation, 3
for medium relation, 1 for low relation, and blank for no
relation [11]–[13].
In order to demonstrate how customer needs are prioritized,
consider “safety” requirement as an example, by using fivepoint scale, we evaluate 5 for importance, 3 for Italian hospital,
5 for Jordanian hospital, and 5 for goal. Regarding our perspective to Italian hospital, the improvement ratio is calculated
by dividing the goal to Italian hospital, i.e., 5/3. The absolute
weight is calculated through multiplication of improvement ratio by importance, i.e., 1.7 × 5; meanwhile, the relative weight
is obtained by normalizing the absolute weight, i.e., (8.3/91.5)
∗ 100. As such for technical targets, to explain how technical
criteria priority is identified, we consider “physical risk” as an
example. Utilizing formula (1), the absolute weight of “physical
risk” equals 9 × 9.1 + 9 × 7.3 + 9 × 4.4 + 3 × 8.7 = 213.3,
and the relative weight is calculated also by normalization
to become 5.03.
B. Function Domain
The next stage of our proposed model is to identify the critical
criteria among the technical criteria for PM priority. We selected

1031

the top 11 criteria of technical terms based upon their weights
and importance to become the inputs (WHATs) of the second
matrix as illustrated in Fig. 4. The design matrix is constructed
with the same way that is followed in building the HOQ in
Fig. 3, except the planning matrix; it is the top 11 output relative
weights of HOQ.
For better representation of five addressing criteria dimensions, we propose all subcriteria with relative weight greater
than 4.5% to be selected as top criteria in order to cover a wide
range of criteria ranging from risk criteria with its clear impact
in PM to a regular inspection since it is not regularly followed by
a lot of hospitals especially in developing countries. The criteria
are function, mission criticality, service provider type, standards
compliance, maintenance requirements, age, functional verifications, team qualification, device complexity, physical risk, and
regular inspection.
We classified the critical criteria into three categories for
HOWs of the second matrix: risk-based criteria including function, physical risk, and maintenance requirements; missionbased criteria including utilization level, area criticality, and
device criticality; and finally maintenance-based criteria incorporating, failure rate, useful life ratio, device complexity, number of missed maintenance, and downtime ratio. The criteria
were selected based upon the literature [3], [5]–[7], [14], in
addition to the authors experience.
The matrix roof depicts the relations among HOWs [15].
Strong relation is indicated by •, medium by , and low by
o. The relationships are proposed according to author’s experience. As shown in Fig. 4, the planning part of design matrix
(importance of WHATs) is the resultant relative weight of top
11 criteria of first domain. The critical targets of the technical
criteria are considered based upon the proposed thresholds as
presented in Table II. On the other hand, the technical targets,
i.e., the absolute weight and relative weight of the technical
criteria are calculated as the same for requirement domain. In
fact, the resultant ranking of most critical criteria for PM prioritization point to risk-based criteria is topping the list of criteria
(44.9%) that it is logical with previous survey, followed by
mission-based and maintenance-based.
C. Concept Domain
The concept domain is the output of the design matrix. The
output is a prioritization equation considering the 11 most critical factors with the resultant weights. Equation (2) generates
the priority index of PM that is presented as scores. Table II
illustrates a brief description of the critical criteria and their
proposed scores.
PS = 11.7(FN) + 12.8(PR) + 20.4(MR) + 11(UL)
+ 6.5(AC) + 11.4(DC) + 8.3(FR) + 5.1(LR)
+ 6.3(CM) + 3.4(MM) + 3.1(DR)
where
PS priority score;
FN function of equipment;
PR physical risk;
MR maintenance requirements;

(2)

1032

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 3.

HOQ matrix of the QFD model for PM prioritization of medical equipment (requirement domain).

Fig. 4.

Design matrix of the QFD model for pm prioritization of medical equipment (function domain).

SALEH et al.: PM PRIORITIZATION INDEX OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USING QFD

1033

TABLE II
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF CRITICAL PARAMETERS AND THEIR PROPOSED SCORES
Parameter

Description

Thresholds

Function

Device function

Life support
Therapeutic
Diagnostic /
monitoring
Analytical
Miscellaneous
Death
Injury
Misdiagnosis
Equipment
damage
No risk
Extensive
A above average
Average
Below average
Minimal
4 days
3/4 days
< 3 days
Urgent
Intensity care
units
Diagnostic area
Law intensity
area
Non clinical area
Critical
Important
Necessary

Physical risk

Probable harms
caused by
equipment
failure

Maintenance
requirements

Maintenance
activities
depending on
equipment type

Utilization level

Number of
working days a
week
Assessment of
area criticality
for patients

Area criticality

Device criticality

Failure rate

Useful life ratio

Device complexity

Missed maintenance

Downtime ratio

The importance
level of
equipment in
serviced area
Number of
failures a year
based on device
criticality level

Ratio between
age to expected
life time of a
device
Technical
complexity
based on a
model
Number of
missed
maintenance a
year
Ratio between
the duration of
downtime in
days to days a
year

UL utilization level;
AC area criticality;
DC device criticality;
FR failure rate;
LR useful life ratio;
CM device complexity;
MM missed maintenance;
DR downtime ratio.

TABLE III
DATA SAMPLE OF INVESTIGATED EQUIPMENT FOR PM PRIORITY

Scores

Equipment FN PR MR UL AC DC FR LR CM MM DR

PS

PS %

5
4
3

Ventilator
C-arm
Monitor
Centrifuge
Scale

377
316
269
228
121

93
78
66
56
30

2
1
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
3
2
1

ࣙ2 for critical,
ࣙ4 for
important, ࣙ5
for necessary
1 for critical, 2/3
for important,
3/4 for necessary
0 for critical, ࣘ1
for important,
ࣘ2 for necessary
Ratio > 80 %
50% < Ratio
ࣘ80%
Ratio ࣘ 50 %
Score 6—8
Score 3—5
Score 0—2

3

ࣙ2
1
0

3
2
1

Ratio ࣙ 20 %
10% ࣘ Ratio <
20%
Ratio < 10 %

3
2

2

1

3
2
1
3
2
1

1

Fig. 5.
model.

5
3
3
2
1

5
3
3
3
1

5
4
3
3
1

2
2
3
3
1

5
5
3
2
3

3
3
2
2
1

2
3
3
1
1

3
3
3
3
2

3
3
2
1
1

3
2
1
1
2

1
2
1
1
1

PM priority index groups based on PS value of the proposed QFD

The complexity model [16] assesses the technical complexity
of a device considering four factors: equipment maintainability,
installation requirements, repair, and connectivity. The scores
are given for each factor range from 0 to 2 for evaluation based
upon the complexity level for each device in the list.
IV. RESULTS
For model verification, we utilized a dataset of 200 medical
equipment of two hospitals with one management system in
Piedmont province, Italy. Seventy different types of equipment
belonging to 17 different kinds of departments were analyzed
along data collected for one year (2012). Table III shows a
sample data of various types of investigated equipment along
with PS based upon our proposed model.
The scores in Table III are obtained referring to the scores that
are given in Table II. For instance, considering the “Ventilator”
device, and according to concept domain, “Function” is life support, “Physical Risk” is death, “Maintenance Requirements” is
extensive, “Area Criticality” is urgent, and “Device Criticality”
is critical; meanwhile, other parameters “Failure Rate,” “Useful
Life,” “Missed Maintenance,” and “Downtime Ratio” are depending on the actual status of each device. Device complexity
is calculated relied on complexity model [16]. Accordingly, by
utilizing formula (2), the PS for every device is calculated as
shown in Table III.
By using the result of PS percentages, the PM priority is
classified into five categories as illustrated in Fig. 5. The first
class is very high-priority class and includes equipment that
supposed to be maintained within two weeks with PS percentage
equal or greater than 80. In second class, high-priority PM
should be performed within one month if priority percentage
in range 70–80. Class 3 is medium priority and contains all
equipment that should be considered for PM within two months
in case of priority percentage in range 60–70.

1034

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 6. Results of the PM prioritization index for investigated medical
equipment.

Class 4 is low priority and includes all equipment with priority percentage of 50 to 60, and in this case, PM should be
performed within three months. Finally, all equipment with priority percentage less than 50 could be visually inspected and
considered for next PM as minimal PM.
In our dataset of equipment and according to the proposed
model and priority classification, the results indicate that 30
devices (15%) need very high priority PM, 39 devices (19%)
should be included as high priority, 59 devices (30%) should be
considered for medium priority, 54 devices (27%) for low priority, and finally, 18 devices (9%) should be with minimal priority
PM. Fig. 6 presents dataset output classification considering the
QFD model.
By analyzing the results, very high priority class incorporates all equipment with high-risk criteria, relatively highmission-based criteria, and also with high-complexity level.
High-priority class contains relatively high-risk criteria and
mission-based criteria in addition to high missed maintenance.
Medium priority class is considered for equipment with relatively high utilization level, area criticality, and old equipment.
Low-priority class contains old not risky devices. Relatively stable equipment does not need PM. The results are consistent with
the classification given by an experienced clinical engineer. In
other words, the devices that pose risk for patients and users in
case of PM omission, old devices, and complex devices such as
radiology equipment are highly considered for PM; meanwhile,
low risk devices, reliable devices, and relatively new devices are
modestly considered for PM. Moreover, as indicated in Fig. 4,
the risk-based criteria contribute to approximately 45% of the
weight of priority index. In fact, this contribution reflects high
correlation existence between risk assessment and PM management of medical equipment.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, QFD is presented for the first time to solve the
problem of PM prioritization of medical equipment. The proposed model has proven its validity in real environment correctly
separating equipment that needs PM from those that do not need
it. The model was tested based upon the periodical schedule of
the hospitals. It is important to note that the classification is
founded considering the requirements of patients and clinical

staff. By analyzing the results, we can state that the risk-based
criteria have a great impact on PM prioritization decision in addition to criticality and age of medical equipment. Also, the work
highlights the importance of existence of a detailed history for
every device that helps the decision makers to manage the medical equipment obviously. The model can be used every time a
PM is to be planned modifying only the instruments data. Moreover, the model development could be improved by addressing
the customer requirements according to Kano’s model to clarify the attitudes of customer satisfactions in medical equipment
PM. In addition, the developed QFD model can be implemented
in other stages of management of medical equipment such as
acquisition and procurement of medical equipment. The model
could be extended to maintenance agencies in order to organize
their PM programs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Bassel Twafik for
his valuable advises in selecting QFD approach. Also, sincere
thanks is extended to Eng. Ahmed Awadallh for his constant
support and useful recommendations.

REFERENCES
[1] W. A. Hyman, “The Theory and practice of preventive maintenance,”
J. Clin. Eng., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 31–36. Jan.–Mar. 2003.
[2] M. Ridgway, “Optimizing our PM programs,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol.,
vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 244–254. May/Jun. 2009.
[3] R. B. Arslan and Y. Ulgen, “Smart IPM: An adaptive tool for the preventive
maintenance of medical equipment,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Istanbul, Turkey, 2001, vol. 4, pp. 3950–3953.
[4] J. Ni and X. Jin, “Decision support systems for effective maintenance
operations,” CIRP Ann.—Manuf. Technol., vol. 61, pp. 411–414, 2012.
[5] J. Joseph and S. Madhukumar, “A novel approach to data driven preventive
maintenance scheduling of medical instruments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Syst.
Med. Biol., Kharagpur, India, 2010, pp. 193–197.
[6] R. Miniati, F. Dori, and G. B. Gentili, “Design of a decision support system
for preventive maintenance planning in health structures,” Technol. Health
Care J., vol. 20, pp. 205–214, 2012.
[7] S. Taghipour, D. Banjevic, and A. K. S. Jardine, “Prioritization of medical
equipment for maintenance decisions,” J. Oper. Res. Soc., vol. 62, no. 9,
pp. 1666–1687, 2010.
[8] S. O. Duffuaa, A. H. Al-Ghamdi, and A. Al-Amer, “Quality function
deployment in maintenance work planning process,” in Proc. 6th Saudi
Eng. Conf., 2002, vol. 4, pp. 503–512.
[9] B. M. Deros, N, Rahman, M. N. A. Rahman, A. R. Ismail, and
A. H. Said, “Application of quality function deployment to study critical service quality characteristics and performance measures,” Eur. J. Sci.
Res., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 398–410, 2009.
[10] S. Bennur and B. Jin, “A conceptual process of implementing quality
apparel retail store attributes: An application of Kano’s model and the
quality function deployment approach,” Int. J. Bus., Humanities Technol.,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 174–183, 2012
[11] X. X. Shen, K. C. Tan, and M. Xie, “An integrated approach to innovative
product development using Kano’s model and QFD,” Eur. J. Innovative
Manag., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 91–99, 2000.
[12] D. J. Delgado, K. E. Bampton, and E. Aspinwall, “Quality function
deployment in construction,” Constr. Manag. Econ. J., vol. 24, no. 6,
pp. 597–609, 2007.
[13] L.K. Chan and M.-L. Wu, “A systematic approach to quality function
deployment with a full illustrative example,” Int. J. Manag. Sci., vol. 33,
no. 2, pp. 119–139, 2005.
[14] A. Al-Bashir, M. Al-Rawashdeh, R. Al-Hadithi, A. Al-Ghandoor, and M.
Barghash, “Building medical devices maintenance system through quality
function deployment,” Jordan J. Mech. Ind. Eng., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 25–36,
Feb. 2012.

SALEH et al.: PM PRIORITIZATION INDEX OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USING QFD

[15] N. Z. Haron and F. L. M. Kairudin, “The application of quality function
deployment (QFD) in the design phase of industrialized building system
(IBS) apartment construction project,” Eur. Int. J. Sci. Technol., vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 56–66, 2012.
[16] N. F. Youssef and W. A. Hyman, “A medical device complexity model: A
new approach to medical equipment management,” J. Clin. Eng., vol. 34,
no. 2, pp. 94–98, 2009.

Neven Saleh received the B.Sc. degree in electronics and electrical communication and the diploma degree in electrical communication from Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt, in 1999 and 2001, respectively, and the M.Sc.
degree in systems and biomedical engineering from Cairo University, Giza,
Egypt, in 2011. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in Biomedical
Engineering from Cairo University, and also from the Politecnico di Torino,
Turin, Italy, since she was granted a channel scholarship.
Since 2001, she has been a Clinical Engineer with Mansoura University
Children Hospital, Mansoura.

Amr A. Sharawi received the B.Sc. degree in electronics and communication
and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in systems and biomedical engineering, all
from Cairo University, Giza, Egypt, in 1976, 1981, and 1991, respectively.
Since 2001, he has been an Associate Professor in biomedical engineering,
Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University.

Manal Abd Elwahed received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from the Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt,
in 1987, 1992, and1999, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor in the Systems and Biomedical Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University.

1035

Alberto Petti received the first M.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering and
the second M.Sc. degree in management and health technologies from the
Politecnico di Torrino, Torino, Italy, in 2007 and 2008, respectively.
Since 2000, he has been responsible for the clinical engineering service in
the Public Hospital of Biella, Italy. He is currently involved in realization of the
new hospital of the city. He is currently a Mechanical Engineer. His research
interests include the applications of methods for better organizations of the
public health system, involving technologies and ICT tools, particularly related
to management of health technologies.

Daniele Puppato received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in biomedical engineering from the Politecnico di Torrino, Torino, Italy, in 2003 and 2005, respectively.
From 2006 to June 2013, he was with AReSS Piemonte as a Health Care
Technology Management Leader. He is currently working as a Consultant in a
leading Italian company developing software solutions for technical management of hospitals.
Mr. Puppato is a Member of the Italian Association of Clinical Engineers.

Gabriella Balestra received the M.Sc. degree in computer science from the
University of Turin, Turin, Italy, in 1980, and the Ph.D. degree in computer and
system engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Turin, in 1989.
She is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electronics
and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, where she is a Lecturer for
the Biomedical Engineering course. She also teaches decision support systems,
biomedical data classification techniques, and medical informatics.
Dr. Balestra is a member of GNB, the Italian National Group of Bioengineering, and the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation.

