IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

1757

Computer-Aided Diagnosis Software
for Hypertensive Risk Determination
Through Fundus Image Processing
Sandra Morales, Valery Naranjo, Amparo Navea, and Mariano Alcañiz

Abstract—The goal of the software proposed in this paper is to
assist ophthalmologists in diagnosis and disease prevention, helping
them to determine cardiovascular risk or other diseases where the
vessels can be altered, as well as to monitor the pathology progression and response to different treatments. The performance of the
tool has been evaluated by means of a double-blind study where its
sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility to discriminate between
health fundus (without cardiovascular risk) and hypertensive patients has been calculated in contrast to an expert ophthalmologist
opinion obtained through a visual inspection of the fundus image.
An improvement of almost 20% has been achieved comparing the
system results with the clinical visual classification.
Index Terms—Bifurcation angles, hypertension, retinal vascular
tree, retinal vessels, vessel caliber.

I. INTRODUCTION
ETINAL vasculature is able to indicate the status of other
vessels of the human body. Classically, its study is included in the standard screening of any patients with cardiovascular risk and other diseases in which the vessels may be altered
inasmuch as it is a noninvasive or minimally invasive procedure.
Nowadays, retinopathies associated with systemic diseases
such as diabetes and hypertension are increasingly affecting the
population. A direct, regular, and complete ophthalmologic examination seems to be the best approach for risk population
assessment [1]. However, population growth, ageing, physical
inactivity, and rising levels of obesity are contributing factors

R

Manuscript received November 26, 2013; revised March 25, 2014; accepted
July 2, 2014. Date of publication July 10, 2014; date of current version November
3, 2014. This work was supported in part by Ministerio de Economı́a y Competitividad of Spain, Project ACRIMA (TIN2013-46751-R) and partially by the
Projects Consolider-C (SEJ2006 14301/PSIC), CIBER of Physiopathology of
Obesity and Nutrition, an initiative of ISCIII, and the Excellence Research Program PROMETEO (Generalitat Valenciana. Conselleria de Educación, 2008157).
S. Morales and V. Naranjo are with the Instituto Interuniversitario de Investigación en Bioingenierı́a y Tecnologı́a Orientada al Ser Humano, Universitat
Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, and also with the Grupo Tecnologı́as
de Informática Aplicadas a la Oftalmologı́a, Unidad Conjunta UPV- FISABIO,
Spain (e-mail: smorales@labhuman.com; vnaranjo@labhuman.com).
A. Navea is with FISABIO Oftalmologı́a Médica, 46015 Valencia, Spain and
also with the Grupo Tecnologı́as de Informática Aplicadas a la Oftalmologı́a,
Unidad Conjunta UPV- FISABIO, Spain (e-mail: navea_amp@gva.es).
M. Alcañiz is with the Instituto Interuniversitario de Investigación en Bioingenierı́a y Tecnologı́a Orientada al Ser Humano, Universitat Politècnica de
València, 46022 Valencia, Spain, and also with Ciber, Fisiopatologı́a de Obesidad y Nutrición, CB06/03 Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, and with
the Grupo Tecnologı́as de Informática Aplicadas a la Oftalmologı́a, Unidad
Conjunta UPV- FISABIO, Spain (e-mail: malcaniz@labhuman.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2337960

in increasing this type of diseases, so that the number of ophthalmologists required for a direct examination of the risk
population is high [2].
Due to high resolution of digital fundus images, they can be
automatically processed providing invaluable help to clinicians
in diagnosis and disease prevention. Most attempts to automate
the process of interpretation of retinal vascular imaging are focused on a specific disease, diabetic retinopathy, a disease of
high incidence, and a significant risk of blindness that occupies a very important part of the medical-surgical activity of
the ophthalmologic resources [3], [4]. In some of these studies,
it has been possible to relate the evolution of the disease and
the positive or negative response to treatment with retinal vessel
caliber [5]–[7]. However, there is not too much experience in the
use of these methods to evaluate other types of vascular pathology although fundus photography allows also determination of
cardiovascular risk factors [8]. Vascular changes produced in
systemic diseases usually induce particular modifications in the
vessels, such as changes in the angle of intersection between
arteries and veins, and changes in the vessel calibers. Based on
these facts, a system capable of detecting the retinal vessels and
measuring some geometrical properties from a fundus image has
been developed. The goal of the software proposed in this paper
is to assist ophthalmologists in diagnosis and disease prevention,
helping them to establish objective relations between the different vessels, to determine cardiovascular risk or other diseases
where the vessels can be altered, as well as to monitor the pathology progression and response to different treatments. This tool
has been applied in a clinical study in order to evaluate sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility of the developed system to
discriminate between a normal vascularization and cardiovascular pathology in contrast to the opinion of an expert ophthalmologist obtained through visual inspection of the fundus image.
Regarding vessel extraction techniques present in the literature, they can be mainly grouped into four categories: edge
detectors, matched filters, pattern-recognition techniques, and
morphological approaches. A more extensive classification can
be found in [9]. Most edge-detection algorithms assess changes
between pixels values by calculating image gradient magnitude
and then it is thresholded to create a binary edge image [10],
[11]. Matched filters are filters rotated in different directions in
order to identify the cross section of blood vessels [12], [13].
Pattern-recognition techniques can be divided into supervised
and unsupervised approaches. Supervised methods, such as artificial neural networks [14] or support vector machines [15],
[16], exploit some prior labeling information to decide whether

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1758

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

a pixel belongs to a vessel or not, while unsupervised algorithms [17] perform the vessel segmentation without any prior
labeling knowledge. Morphological processing is based on vessels characteristics known a priori (line connected segments)
and combines morphological operators to achieve the segmentation [18]–[20]. In general, techniques focused on edge detectors lack of strength in distinguishing which are desired edges
and which are not, for example, in our case, the border of the
vessels and the optic disc (OD). Matched filters have difficulty
adapting to changes in width and orientation of vessels, in all
databases. Techniques that use supervised methods get a better
performance than those focused on unsupervised ones and can
produce very good results for healthy retinal images. However,
they need a large training set of manually segmented reference
images and it is difficult to automate them for any dataset. Morphological processing runs the risk of fragmenting the vessels.
As for state-of-the-art systems which compute measurements
of retinal vessels, most software is focused only on caliber determination and no other measures are performed [21]–[23].
Moreover, they are not used to detect retinal vessels or measure geometrical properties automatically but the diameters of
all arterioles and venules are measured by trained graders using
different tools provided by the systems to make this task simpler.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II,
the proposed method is presented, including material definition,
theoretical background, and algorithm description. Section III
shows the system validation through a double-blind study in
addition to an intermediate validation of the image processing.
Finally, Section IV provides discussion and Section V conclusions and some future areas for work.
II. METHOD
A. Material
Two different validations were performed to determine effectiveness of the proposed study. One for validating the main stage
of the image processing and the other to validate the results provided by the software. For each validation, a different database
was used due to its particular characteristics.
To validate the vessel segmentation, our method results were
compared with a public database of hand-segmented images
widely used in the literature. In the DRIVE database [24], original images and the images manually segmented by two different
specialists are included. The first-observer images were taken as
reference (gold standard) to calculate similarity degree between
them and our segmentation.
For system validation, a set of 67 fundus images was used.
These images belong to a private database of the Fundación
Oftalmológica del Mediterráneo (Spain), which contains color
images of 2048 × 1536 pixels. The implemented system was
installed in this organization in order to be used by its clinicians in their daily practice and be able to carry out a clinic
validation of the developed software based on a double-blind
study. The study was performed on 67 patients between 33 and
73 years old. Among them, a control group without previous
known pathology and the study group of hypertensive patients
were established. The control group was formed by 38 healthy

people and the study group by 29 diseased patients previously
diagnosed and treated or not for more than five years of evolution. Both groups were established based on the disease history of its members. Their fundus images were evaluated twice.
Once, by qualified ophthalmologists who determined the presence or absence of vascular alteration through visual inspection
of the original image, and another time using the developed
system. A patient was considered hypertensive if the clinician
detected in their fundus at least one sign of pathological arteriovenous crossing. The same tree ophthalmologists rated the
entire dataset with and without the software. A minimum period
of one month was established between both rates to avoid the
effect of the repeated exposure to the images. The final expert
rates were obtained taking the majority vote among the three
clinicians.
B. Theoretical Background
Mathematical morphology is a nonlinear image processing
methodology based on minimum and maximum operations [25]
whose aim is to extract relevant structures of an image. Let f be a
gray scale image and B be a subset or window, called structuring
element (SE) in morphological image processing, whose shape
is usually chosen according to some a priori knowledge about
the geometry of the relevant and irrelevant image structures that
want to be removed or kept. The two basic morphological operators are: dilation (δB (f )) and erosion (εB (f )). Their purpose
is to expand light or dark regions, respectively, according to
the size and shape of the SE. Those elementary operations can
be combined to obtain a new set of operators or basic filters:
opening (γB (f )) and closing (ϕB (f )). Light or dark structures
are respectively filtered out from the image by these operators
regarding the SE chosen.
The method proposed in this paper applies these basic filters
directly along with more complexes derived from them, such
as a dual top-hat (ρB (f ) = ϕB (f ) − f ) and a supremum of
su p
(f ) = maxi=1,...,N {γB i (f )},
openings which is defined as γB
where i is the number of openings and B represents the family
of linear SEs with different orientations. The dual top-hat lets
detect dark objects smaller than the SE and the supremum of
openings is used when an only opening is not enough to remove
certain objects because they have different orientations.
Different morphological operators that complement the previous ones are geodesic transformations. In these transformations,
two images are required, a marker and a reference image. The
geodesic operator used in the algorithm proposed in this paper
is the geodesic dilation which allows to filter objects that are
present in the reference image but not in the marker. It is used
to simplify the original image removing no desired objects and
preserving the shape of the rest.
With the aim of detecting specific patterns in an image, other
binary morphological operation can be applied, the hit-or-miss
transformation (HMT) [26]. The SE employed in this operation
is called composite SE since it contains two SE. The first, denoted by BFG , defines the set of pixels that should match the
foreground while the second, denoted by BBG , defines the set
of pixels that should match the background. By definition, BFG

MORALES et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS SOFTWARE FOR HYPERTENSIVE RISK DETERMINATION

1759

and BBG share the same origin and are disjoint sets, i.e., BFG ∩
BBG = 0. Depending on whether the origin belongs to BFG or
BBG , the HMT extracts foreground or background pixels.
The effect of these operators on an image will be shown in
Section II-C where they will be applied to the images under
study.
C. Algorithm
The computer-aided diagnosis software presented in this
paper is based on digital fundus image processing for the determination of hypertensive risk. In general, systemic diseases
produce vascular changes in our blood system and usually induce specific modifications in the retinal vessels; hence, the
system is focused on vessel detection and the measurement of
some of their features to characterize any retinal morphological change. So, the main stages involved in the system are:
first, vessel segmentation process; second, retinal tree labeling
to identify the pixels that correspond to each vessel and the existing relationship between the branches; and third, performing
characteristic measurements on the retinal tree, using the previous information, to quantify significant changes in the vascular
network. These data will be used to classify an image as belonging to a healthy patient or to other with cardiovascular risk.
The mentioned stages can be observed in the block diagram of
the Fig. 1, where the entire image processing carried out by the
proposed system is illustrated.
1) Preprocessing: Generally, based on a standard protocol,
the measurement of retinal vessel calibers is focused on a specific region of interest (ROI) of the fundus image [21]–[23].
This area is concentric to the OD and it is related to with its
diameter. So, for that reason, in first place, the proposed system detects the OD in an automatic way in order to be able to
determine the ROI where all measures will be performed [see
Fig. 4(b)]. The method used for the extraction of the OD is
mainly based on mathematical morphology along with a principal component analysis (PCA) [27]. First, PCA is applied on the
RGB fundus image in order to obtain a gray image in which the
different structures of the retina are differentiated more clearly
to get a more accurate detection of the OD. Then, the vessels are
removed through an inpainting technique to make the segmentation task easier. Next, a variant of the watershed transformation,
the stochastic watershed transformation, followed by a stratified watershed, are implemented on a region of the original
image. Finally, it must be discriminated which of the obtained
watershed regions belong to the OD and which ones are not.
A geodesic transformation and a further threshold are used to
achieve that purpose.
Once the ROI has been established, although original fundus images are RGB images, the system is only drawn on
monochrome images for vessel detection. They are obtained
from the green band because this band provides an improved
visibility of retinal blood vessels. Afterwards, an image enhancement [19] is applied to improve even more, if it is possible,
their visibility.
2) Processing: The segmentation method used by the system is based on mathematical morphology [26], curvature

Fig. 1.

Block diagram of the presented tool.

evaluation, and k-means clustering [28] for the detection of a
vascular tree [29]. First, a small opening, using a disc of radius
1 (B1 ) as the SE, is performed on the enhanced green component image to fill in any gaps of the vessels which could induce
errors in segmentation. In particular, the image enhancement is
carried out through a local shade correction [19]. Then, a dual
top-hat, with a circular SE larger than the biggest vessel (B2 ), is
applied with the goal of extracting all of them and eliminating
structures with high curvature that are not vessels, as occurs in
the OD. After that, to highlight the vessels on the background,
the next steps are followed. Principal curvature is calculated
as the maximum eigenvalue of the Hessian matrix (H) [10].
Subsequently, a reconstruction by dilation is applied to reconstruct the principal curvature from a supremum of openings
which were calculated using a line of size 31 as SE every 15◦
(B3 = {B3 1 , B3 2 , . . . , B3 N }, with N the total number of openings). This operation removes any structure smaller than this SE
in any orientation obtaining a cleaner background. Finally, to
binarize the resulting image a k-means clustering [28] is used
with a k value equals to 3, giving rise to fkm = (f1 , f2 , f3 ).
Afterwards, a modification of the k-means output is carried
out; two of the three obtained clusters are defined as vessel
(fout = f1 ∪ f2 ), considering that f3 corresponds to the background. Three classes are required because thick and thin vessels
can be very different.

1760

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

The next algorithm summarizes the main steps of the segmentation method and Fig. 2 depicts the resulting images.
Algorithm Segmentation.
Data: Original RGB fundus image f = (fR , fG , fB )
Result: Vessel binary mask, fout
initialization: B1 , B2 , B3 ;
fin ← fG Green component selection;
fenh ← LSC(fin ) Local shade correction;
fop ← γB 1 (fenh ) Opening;
fdth ← ρB 2 (fop ) Dual top-hat ;
fκ ← max[eig(H(fdth ))] Principal curvature;
sup
(fκ ) Supremum of openings;
fso ← γB
3
frec ← γ rec (fκ , fso ) Reconstruction by dilation ;
fout ← MKM(frec ) Modified k-means clustering;
After the vessels have been detected, they must be labeled.
Retinal vascular tree labeling is focused on obtaining the skeleton of vascular tree, detecting significant points (terminal, bifurcation, and crossing points), and a tracking process [29]. They
are necessary steps to perform later the desired measures.
The skeleton of the vascular tree is obtained by a thinning
process from the segmented binary image [26]. Next, a pruning process is applied to eliminate possible spurs and to avoid
multiple paths that are inherent in an eight-connected boundary.
In a vascular tree skeleton, there are three types of significant points and all of them must be detected: terminal, bifurcation, and crossing points. To locate the terminal and bifurcation
points, the hit-or-miss transform [26] is used. Fig. 3 shows the
SEs used to detect these points on a skeleton. 1’s define the set of
pixels that should match the foreground and 0’s the background.
Notice that all of them must be used in all its orientations, one
every 90◦ . On the other hand, to detect the crossing points, it
will be necessary to have a manual intervention as some of them
are incorrectly defined as bifurcation points.
The tracking purpose is to analyze the direction of every
pixel of the skeleton and to identify which pixels belong to each
branch. The method used is proposed in [30]. The algorithm
is able to specify the direction of any skeleton point from a
starting point. In order to keep the relation information between
the branches, a specific numbering scheme is used.
3) Postprocessing: Certain geometric measurements of
blood vessels can help to establish whether they have undergone morphological changes over time and facilitate disease
diagnosis. The remaining parameters have been chosen due to
the fact that they have particular interest for the early hypertension detection:
a) Bifurcation angle: Angle formed by the daughter
branches for each bifurcation point. The branches are fitted for
straight lines by least-squares into a circular window centred on
these points.
b) Vessel caliber: It has been estimated as two times the
average of the geodesic distance [26] calculated from the skeleton points of the branch to the edge of the corresponding vessel.
Fig. 4 shows different stages of the image processing performed by the developed software.

Fig. 2. Vessel segmentation steps: (a) Original fundus image, (b) green component enhancement, (c) dual top-hat filtering, (d) principal curvature, (e) reconstruction by dilation, and (f) k-means clustering (segmented image).

Fig. 3. SEs used to detect significant points: (a–c) bifurcation points and
(d) terminal points.

III. RESULTS
A. Segmentation Validation
The performance of the vessel segmentation algorithm was
evaluated based on three concepts: accuracy (Ac), true positive
(TPF), and false positive (FPF) fractions. In Table I, these results
can be observed. In summary, the average values obtained by
the proposed method are: Ac = 0.9417, TPF = 0.6570, and
FPF = 0.0166. The segmented images by the second observer

MORALES et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS SOFTWARE FOR HYPERTENSIVE RISK DETERMINATION

1761

Fig. 4. Image processing performed by the developed software: (a) Original fundus image, (b) ROI determination, (c) vessel segmentation, (d) bifurcation angles
(up) and vessel calibers (down).

TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE RESULTS OF THE PROPOSED METHOD AND THE
SECOND OBSERVER (AVERAGE VALUES AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS)
REGARDING THE GOLD STANDARD

Ac
TPF
FPF

Proposed method

Second observer

0.9417 (0.0076)
0.6570 (0.0668)
0.0166 (0.0093)

0.9473 (0.0048)
0.7757 (0.0596)
0.0275 (0.0083)

TABLE II
ACCURACY (AVERAGE AND STANDARD DESVIATION) OF SEVERAL METHODS
ON THE SAME PUBLIC DATABASE
Ac
Proposed method
Second observer
Niemeijer et al.[31]
Zana and Klein [18]
Jiang and Mojon [11]
Martinez-Perez et al.[33]
Chaudhuri et al.[32]

0.9417 (0.0076)
0.9473 (0.0048)
0.9416 (0.0065)
0.9377 (0.0077)
0.9212 (0.0076)
0.9181 (0.0240)
0.8773 (0.0232)

was also compared with the gold standard in order to note that
there are also differences between the two experts (see Table I).
In a parallel way, a study about the accuracy of different
vessel segmentation methods on the same database was carried
out in [31]. This study compared several approaches: matched
filter [32], scale-space analysis and region growing [33], mathematical morphology and curvature estimation [18], verificationbased local thresholding [11], and pixel classification [31]. Table II shows a comparison between the aforementioned methods
and ours. To sum up, it can be concluded that our method has
achieved a higher accuracy ratio and its false positive fraction is
even lower than the second observer fraction. Moreover, apart
from improving the accuracy ratio, it must be understood out the
OD edge is not detected as a vessel unlike most edge detection
methods, for example [10]. Fig. 5 shows the resulting image of
our method along with the image obtained by [10]. The nondetection of this feature is crucial to avoid multiple errors in the
tracking process.

The OD segmentation is needed to establish the ROI where
the measurements are performed. In [27], a wide validation of
this intermediate processing can be found.

B. Computer-Aided Diagnosis Software Validation
With the implemented tool, bifurcation angles, inside of an
existing region of the original image concentric to the OD,
were measured along with the caliber of a vein and an artery
manually selected and situated at the same distance from the
OD. Subsequently, a statistical analysis on different variables,
extracted from data provided by the system, was conducted to
see if any of them were able to discriminate whether a patient
belonged to the group of hypertensive or without cardiovascular
disease. Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, IBM
SPSS Data Collection) version 17.0 was used for this purpose.
Two parallel statistical studies were performed, one analyzing
the variables related to the caliber and the other analyzing those
related to the bifurcation angles. The reason for the distinction
was that only fundus images with at least five measured bifurcation angles were considered valid for this specific study. In
both, the comparison between control and study groups was conducted using one-way ANOVA, where the dependent variables
were each of the parameters calculated from the data provided
by the software [vein caliber, artery caliber, relative caliber of
the vein, and artery (A/V ratio), average, median, deviation and
variance of the branching angles, minimum and maximum angle, and difference between the maximum and minimum angle]
and the factor was the group formed by the control (no known
disease) and study (hypertension) subgroups.
Previous to the analysis, the normality of the calculated parameters was checked using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.
From the obtained values, it can be concluded that only the
caliber of the artery (F (1; 66) = 4.471; p < 0.05) and the ratio between the caliber of the vein and the artery (F (1; 66) =
4.161; p < 0.05) show statistically significant differences between the control and study subgroups. Afterwards, using only
these parameters, the optimal threshold to separate both classes
was established and then the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the system to discriminate between healthy patients and

1762

Fig. 5.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2014

Vessel segmentation comparison: (a) Proposed method, (b) [10] method, and (c) Manually segmented image belonging to the DRIVE database.

with hypertensive pathology were calculated.
TP
Sensitivity =
= 56.41%
TP + FN
TN
= 67.86%,
Specificity =
TN + FP
TP + TN
= 61.19%
Accuracy =
TP + FP + FN + TN

V. CONCLUSION

(1)
(2)
(3)

where TP = 22, FN = 17, TN = 19, and FP = 9 are the true
positives, false negatives, true negatives, and false positives,
respectively. If the proportion of true results of the analyzed
population is taken into account (i.e., the system accuracy),
ophthalmologist visual diagnoses agreed with patient history
42% of the time without the computer assistance and that value
increases up to 61% with the computer assistance. Their sensitivity and specificity are also improved from 38% and 50% to
56% and 68%, respectively. Therefore, it can be concluded that
the use of this computer-aided diagnosis software provides an
improvement of almost 20% in hypertension detection.

IV. DISCUSSION
Thanks to the software validation, it has been demonstrated
that the caliber of the arteries and the relative caliber of the
veins and arteries show significant differences when patients are
classified either healthy or hypertensive. Despite these results,
it cannot be concluded that bifurcation angles are not significant
for this purpose because only 54% of the fundus of the dataset
could be analyzed due to the fact that the remainder contains less
than five angles per image. Thus, the region where the measures
are taken, should be enlarged or the database increased to repeat
the same analysis.
Although the values of accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of
the system are not too much high in the hypertension discrimination, it must be stressed that the results achieved by clinicians
by visual inspection of the fundus are improved almost 20%.
With regard to the obtained measures, they are accurate and
reliable but also dependent on a correct skeleton detection and
significant point classification.

A computer-aided diagnosis software for hypertensive risk
determination has been presented. From a fundus image, the tool
automatically detects blood vessels and allows measurement of
bifurcation angles and selection of branches to determine their
caliber. These data facilitate expert medical diagnosis and study
of the progression of the disease. In particular, the software
has been used by expert ophthalmologists to help them to discriminate between a normal vascularization and cardiovascular
pathology. It has improved by almost 20% the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity in hypertension detection achieved by
direct visual inspection of the fundus.
In future work, the system will be applied to analyze the retinal microvascular architecture of children with low birthweight
in order to establish the relationship between the measurements
obtained in these children and diseases such as hypertension and
cardiovascular problems in adult life, using it as a prognostic
marker of cardiovascular risk. The base of this study [carried
out by the Department of Paediatrics of General Hospital of Valencia (Spain)] is that bifurcation angles, which are determined
at birth, are predictors of future development of hypertension
and cardiovascular disease. Moreover, the analysis of the angles
should be repeated enlarging the region of measures or increasing the database, as has been mentioned in the previous section.
Regarding the values of sensitivity and specificity of the system,
they could be improved if other classifiers were used, such as
support vector machines, among others, or by increasing the
database size. In addition, the study to correlate segmentation
parameters and hypertensive pathologies will be widened.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their deep gratitude to the
Fundación Oftalmológica del Mediterráneo for their participation in this work.
REFERENCES
[1] H. M. Herbert, K. Jordan, and D. W. Flanagan, “Is screening with digital
imaging using one retinal view adequate?” Eye, no. 4, p. 497-500, 2003.
[2] L. Verma, G. Prakash, and H. K. Tewari, “Diabetic retinopathy: Time
for action. No complacency please!” Bull. World Health Org., vol. 80,
pp. 419–419, 2002.

MORALES et al.: COMPUTER-AIDED DIAGNOSIS SOFTWARE FOR HYPERTENSIVE RISK DETERMINATION

[3] K. Goatman, A. Charnley, L. Webster, and S. Nussey, “Assessment of
automated disease detection in diabetic retinopathy screening using twofield photography,” PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 419–419, 2011.
[4] M. D. Abràmoff, J. M. Reinhardt, S. R. Russell, J. C. Folk, V. B. Mahajan,
M. Niemeijer, and G. Quellec, “Automated early detection of diabetic
retinopathy,” Ophthalmology, vol. 117, no. 6, pp. 1147–1154, 2010.
[5] T. T. Nguyen, J. J. Wang, and T. Y. Wong, “Retinal vascular changes in
pre-diabetes and prehypertension: New findings and their research and
clinical implications,” Diabetes Care, vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 2708–2715,
2007.
[6] S. L. Rogers, G. Tikellis, N. Cheung, R. Tapp, J. Shaw, P. Z. Zimmet,
P. Mitchell, J. J. Wang, and T. Y. Wong, “Retinal arteriolar caliber predicts incident retinopathy: The Australian diabetes, obesity and lifestyle
(ausdiab) study.” Diabetes Care, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 761–763, 2008.
[7] N. Cheung and T. Y. Wong, “Diabetic retinopathy and systemic vascular
complications,” Prog. Retinal Eye Res., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 161–176, 2008.
[8] M. D. Abràmoff, M. K. Garvin, and M. Sonka, “Retinal imaging and
image analysis,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 169–208, Dec. 2010.
[9] M. M. Fraz, P. Remagnino, A. Hoppe, B. Uyyanonvara, A. R. Rudnicka,
C. G. Owen, and S. A. Barman, “Blood vessel segmentation methodologies in retinal images—A survey,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed.,
vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 407–433, 2012.
[10] M. E. Martinez-Perez, A. D. Hughes, S. A. Thom, A. A. Bharath, and
K. H. Parker, “Segmentation of blood vessels from red-free and fluorescein
retinal images,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 11, pp. 47–61, 2007.
[11] X. Jiang and D. Mojon, “Adaptive local thresholding by verificationbased multithreshold probing with application to vessel detection in retinal
images,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 131–
137, Jan. 2003.
[12] A. Hoover, V. Kouznetsova, and M. Goldbaum, “Locating blood vessels
in retinal images by piecewise threshold probing of a matched filter response,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 203–210, Mar. 2000.
[13] M. Al-Rawi, M. Qutaishat, and M. Arrar, “An improved matched filter
for blood vessel detection of digital retinal images,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 262–267, 2007.
[14] C. Sinthanayothin, J. F. Boyce, H. L. Cook, and T. H. Williamson, “Automated localisation of the optic disc, fovea, and retinal blood vessels from
digital colour fundus images,” Brit. J. Ophthalmol., vol. 83, pp. 902–910,
1999.
[15] E. Ricci and R. Perfetti, “Retinal blood vessel segmentation using line
operators and support vector classification,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1357–1365, Oct. 2007.
[16] D. Marı́n, A. Aquino, M. E. Gegúndez-Arias, and J. M. Bravo, “A new
supervised method for blood vessel segmentation in retinal images by
using gray-level and moment invariants-based features,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imag., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 146–158, Jan. 2011.
[17] G. B. Kande, P. V. Subbaiah, and T. S. Savithri, “Unsupervised fuzzy
based vessel segmentation in pathological digital fundus images,” J. Med.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 849–858, 2010.
[18] F. Zana and J. C. Klein, “Segmentation of vessel-like patterns using mathematical morphology and curvature evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1010–1019, Jul. 2001.
[19] T. Walter and J. C. Klein, “A computational approach to diagnosis of
diabetic retinopathy,” in Proc. 6th Conf. Systemics Cybern. Informat.,
2002, pp. 521–526.

1763

[20] K. Sun, Z. Chen, S. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Morphological multiscale
enhancement, fuzzy filter and watershed for vascular tree extraction in
angiogram,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 811–824, 2011.
[21] T. Y. Wong, M. D. Knudtson, R. Klein, B. E. K. Klein, S. M. Meuer,
and L. D. Hubbard, “Computer-assisted measurement of retinal vessel
diameters in the beaver dam eye study: methodology, correlation between
eyes, and effect of refractive errors.” Ophthalmology, vol. 111, no. 6,
pp. 1183–1190, 2004.
[22] M. D. Knudtson, K. E. Lee, L. D. Hubbard, T. Y. Y. Wong, R. Klein, and
B. E. Klein, “Revised formulas for summarizing retinal vessel diameters.”
Current Eye Res., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 143–149, Sep. 2003.
[23] L. D. Hubbard, R. J. Brothers, W. N. King, L. X. Clegg, R. Klein, L. S.
Cooper, A. Sharrett, M. D. Davis, and J. Cai, “Methods for evaluation of
retinal microvascular abnormalities associated with hypertension/sclerosis
in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study,” Ophthalmology,
vol. 106, no. 12, pp. 2269–2280, 1999.
[24] J. Staal, M. Abramoff, M. Niemeijer, M. Viergever, and B. van Ginneken,
“Ridge-based vessel segmentation in color images of the retina,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 501–509, Apr. 2004.
[25] J. Serra, Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology. London, U.K.:
Academic, 1982, vol. 1.
[26] P. Soille, Morphological Image Analysis: Principles and Applications.
2nd ed., New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, Inc., 2003.
[27] S. Morales, V. Naranjo, J. Angulo, and M. Alcaniz, “Automatic detection
of optic disc based on PCA and mathematical morphology,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 786–796, Apr. 2013.
[28] J. B. MacQueen, “Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations,” in Proc. Fifth Berkeley Symp. Math. Statistics
Probability, 1967, vol. 1, pp.281–297.
[29] S. Morales, V. Naranjo, J. Angulo, J. J. Fuertes, and M. A. niz, “Segmentation and analysis of retinal vascular tree from fundus images processing,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Bio-inspired Syst. Signal Process., Feb. 2012, pp. 321–
324.
[30] M. E. Martinez-Perez, A. D. Hughes, A. V. Stanton, S. A. Thorn, N.
Chapman, A. A. Bharath, and K. H. Parker, “Retinal vascular tree morphology: A semi-automatic quantification,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49,
no. 8, pp. 912–917, Aug. 2002.
[31] M. Niemeijer, J. Staal, B. van Ginneken, M. Loog, and M. Abramoff,
“Comparative study of retinal vessel segmentation methods on a new
publicly available database,” in Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., 2004, vol. 5370,
pp. 648–656.
[32] S. Chaudhuri, S. Chatterjee, N. Katz, M. Nelson, and M. Goldbaum,
“Automatic detection of the optic nerve in retinal images,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Image Process., 1989, vol. 1, pp. 1–5.
[33] M. Martinez-Perez, A. Hughes, A. Stanton, S. Thom, A. Bharath, and
K. Parker, “Retinal blood vessel segmentation by means of scale-space
analysis and region growing,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.Assisted Intervention, 1999, vol. 1679, pp. 90–97.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

