IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1689

Dependence Independence Measure for Posterior
and Anterior EMG Sensors Used in Simple
and Complex Finger Flexion Movements:
Evaluation Using SDICA
Ganesh R. Naik, Member, IEEE, Kerry G. Baker, and Hung T. Nguyen, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Identification of simple and complex finger flexion
movements using surface electromyography (sEMG) and a muscle
activation strategy is necessary to control human–computer interfaces such as prosthesis and orthoses. In order to identify these
movements, sEMG sensors are placed on both anterior and posterior muscle compartments of the forearm. In general, the accuracy of myoelectric classification depends on several factors, which
include number of sensors, features extraction methods, and classification algorithms. Myoelectric classification using a minimum
number of sensors and optimal electrode configuration is always a
challenging task. Sometimes, using several sensors including high
density electrodes will not guarantee high classification accuracy.
In this research, we investigated the dependence and independence
nature of anterior and posterior muscles during simple and complex finger flexion movements. The outcome of this research shows
that posterior parts of the hand muscles are dependent and hence
responsible for most of simple finger flexion. On the other hand, this
study shows that anterior muscles are responsible for most complex
finger flexion. This also indicates that simple finger flexion can be
identified using sEMG sensors connected only on anterior muscles
(making posterior placement either independent or redundant),
and vice versa is true for complex actions which can be easily identified using sEMG sensors on posterior muscles. The result of this
study is beneficial for optimal electrode configuration and design
of prosthetics and other related devices using a minimum number
of sensors.
Index Terms—Anterior, blind source separation (BSS),
posterior, simple and complex flexion, subband decomposition independent component analysis (ICA) (SDICA), surface
electromyography (sEMG).

I. INTRODUCTION
URFACE electromyography (sEMG) represents the level
of muscle activity recorded from the skin surface. It provides rich motor control information and is closely related to the
strength of muscle contraction [1], [2]. In the recent past, myoelectric signals were extensively used for prosthetics [3]–[6],

S

Manuscript received April 15, 2014; revised June 25, 2014; accepted July 4,
2014. Date of publication July 17, 2014; date of current version September 1,
2015. This work was supported in part by the UTS Chancellor’s Postdoctoral
Fellowship Grant.
G. R. Naik and H. T. Nguyen are with the Centre for Health Technologies,
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, N.S.W. 2007, Australia (e-mail:
Ganesh.Naik@uts.edu.au; Hung.Nguyen@uts.edu.au).
K. G. Baker is with the School of Medical and Molecular Biosciences, Faculty
of Science, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, N.S.W. 2007, Australia
(e-mail: Kerry.baker@uts.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2340397

wheel chairs [7], [8], exoskeleton robotics [9], [10], silent speech
recognition [11] and rehabilitation applications [9], [12].
Myoelectric classification depends on several factors which
include electrode selection [13], placement of electrodes [14]–
[17], feature extraction methods, selection of appropriate classifier algorithms [18], and computational complexity associated
with myoelectric classification [19], [20]. Researchers have been
working extensively to improve the myoelectric classification
accuracy by improving the previous factors; however, crosstalk
and noise make it difficult to achieve higher rate of recognition.
The most significant elements that contribute to the amount of
detected crosstalk signal are as follows: 1) sensor placement
on the surface of the muscle; and 2) the spacing between the
electrodes on the sEMG sensor [21]. The electrode placements
and effect of electrode shift on sEMG pattern recognition have
been previously investigated with varied results [22], [23]. In a
recent study, Hargrove et al. [23] found different results using
five electrodes that are connected parallel to the muscle fibers.
Another study conducted by the same authors investigated the
placement of electrode poles and concluded that transverse orientation of electrodes are more sensitive to shift than longitudinal orientation [14]. A previous version of our proposed method
on sEMG electrode sensor placement concentrated mainly on
simple gestures [15]. However, issues remain to be resolved
such as selection and placement of electrodes for identification
of simple and complex gestures [1], [18].
Anterior and posterior hand muscles are responsible for simple and complex finger flexions and actions. However, it is
known phenomenon that while muscles in the anterior compartment are contracting there is coactivation of muscles in the
posterior compartment [24], [25]. In general, these (anterior and
posterior) muscles are not contributing to flexion but are impeding movement to better control the action by muscles in the
anterior compartment [24]. Hence, there is a need for proper
signal processing and pattern recognition methods, which can
evaluate and identify approximate location for placement of
electrodes in identifying gestures. By doing the previous, we
can identify different simple and complex gestures efficiently
using minimum number of sensors.
One approach is to select/reduce the number of sensors (used
for simple and complex gestures) based on independence and
dependence among different sensors/muscles. However, noise
and crosstalk make this task tedious. This opens an opportunity to use blind source separation (BSS) techniques such as

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1690

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

independent component analysis (ICA) for this task. This research reports pattern recognition based on the subband decomposition ICA (SDICA) system that is able to identify dependence
and independence among sensors/muscles placed on posterior
and anterior compartment of muscles while doing simple and
complex finger flexions.
One of the main aims of this research is to measure dependence and independence among sEMG sensors/muscles, which
helps in the identification of suitable muscles responsible for
each finger/hand actions. The specific aim of this study is to
reduce the necessary number of sEMG channels presented in a
sEMG pattern recognition system. There are two main reasons
for this reduction. First, if we reduce the number of physical
sEMG channels, we make the sEMG-recording device simpler
and cheaper. Second, if we diminish the number of channels
and features, we reduce the dimension of the vector of variables presented to the classifier; hence, less training examples
are needed and, furthermore, the classifier requires less memory
and computational power.
Fig. 1.

ICA source separation system.

II. SDICA AND GLOBAL MATRIX COMPUTATION
ICA has been found very effective in solving BSS problems.
It is a statistical technique for decomposing a complex dataset
into independent subelements. It develops from BSS and tries
to transform an observed multidimensional vector into factors
that are statistically independent from each other as much as
possible [26], [27]. For a linear ICA model, the recordings are
a linear combinations of the sources, and also that the original
sources are independent from each other. In fact, it factorizes
the observation vector x into mixing matrix A and source matrix
s by searching the most non-Gaussianity distributions, i.e., x =
As, where x and s are n-dimensional real vectors, and A is a
mixing matrix. ICA strives to find a separation matrix W (up
to permutation and scaling) that maximizes the non-Gaussian
features of the data x, thus optimally separating the original
signals s to make estimated sources u, i.e., u = Wx [27].
The key assumption used in ICA is that: 1) the sources should
be as statistically independent as possible; and 2) the sources
should not have Gaussian distributions. The performance of
the estimated sources is determined by cost functions such as
kurtosis, mutual information, negentrophy, etc. Hence, ICA is
considered as an optimization technique, which maximizes the
cost function under the condition u = Wx. An example of the
ICA source separation process is shown in Fig. 1.
For traditional ICA, one of the major requirements is that
the sources are linear and independent. This option is relaxed
somewhat in SDICA, where we assume that only a certain set
of subcomponents are independent from each other. The main
idea here is to divide the signal into its subspectra or subbands,
and then process individual subbands using traditional ICA algorithms. These subbands can then be ranked and processed
independently by ICA/BSS algorithms, provided that some of
the time/frequency subbands (at least one) are temporally decorrelated or mutually independent [28]–[30].
In order to apply ICA algorithms to any application, it is
assumed that the sources si (t) are non-Gaussian and mutually

Fig. 2. Subband decomposition: a filter bank structure and computation of
unmixing matrices.

independent. For biomedical applications such as EMG, electroencephalography, and electrocardiography, this assumption
may not be true. Hence, we assume that all sources si (t) are
not essentially independent (this could be due to crosstalk or
artefacts) and can be represented as
si (t) = si,1 (t) + si,2 (t) + si,3 (t) + · · · + si,M (t)

(1)

where si,p p = 1, . . . , M are narrow band subcomponents. In
practical applications, we must find at least two groups of subcomponent which are mutually independent [28], [30]. Similarly, the observed signals are represented as
xi (t) = xi,1 (t) + xi,2 (t) + xi,3 (t) + · · · + xi,M (t)

(2)

where si,p p = 1, . . . , M are narrow band subcomponents
which are obtained from the filter bank (refer to Fig. 2).
In general, subbands are chosen based on high pass or bandpass filtering methods. The basic structure of the subbands is
illustrated in Fig. 2, where the transform consists of a set of bandpass filters whose transfer functions are B1 (z) , . . . , BM (z)
with the associated impulse responses b1 , . . . , bM ,respectively.
In the ICA/BSS, the global matrix G is computed as: G = WA.
We apply traditional ICA/BSS algorithm such as FastICA [27]
on each subband signal and obtain the series of separating

NAIK et al.: DEPENDENCE INDEPENDENCE MEASURE FOR POSTERIOR AND ANTERIOR EMG SENSORS USED IN SIMPLE AND COMPLEX

1691

TABLE I
SEMG SENSOR PLACEMENT AND MUSCLES
USED FOR DATA ACQUISITION [32]

Sensors
Electrode 1
Electrodes 2 and 3
Electrode 4
Electrodes 5, 6, and 7
Electrode 8

Muscles
Extensor digitorum
Brachioradialis
Flexor carpi radialis
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Extensor carpi ulnaris

matrices: W1 , W2 , W3 , . . . , WM , where W1 is the separation matrix estimated for subband x1 (t) and WM is the separation matrix estimated for subbandxM (t). If the specific subband
components are mutually independent for at least two subbands,
say subband p and subband q, then global matrix Gp,q can be
represented as
Gp,q = Wp ∗ Wq−1 ,

p = q.

(3)

Gp,q is a sparse generalized permutation matrix P with only
one nonzero component in the diagonal of the matrix (each row
and column). In this way, we can identify independent components for any linearly transformed signals in time, frequency,
and time–frequency representations [28], [30], [31].
III. METHODOLOGY AND DATA ACQUISITION
For this research study, required sEMG data were taken from
the Khushaba et al. [32] EMG data repository. The sEMG data
acquisition and experimental procedures are described in detail
in [32]. A brief description of their data acquisition procedure
is explained next: the EMG data were acquired from eight normally limbed individuals (six males and two females) with no
muscular disorders. During the experiment, subjects were seated
on an armchair, with their arm supported and fixed in one position. The sEMG data were recorded using eight EMG sensors
(DE 2.x series EMG sensors) mounted across the circumference
of the forearm and processed by the Bagnoli desktop EMG system (Delsys, Inc). In their research study, Khushaba et al. [32]
placed four sEMG channels (ch1, ch2, ch7, and ch8) on posterior
compartment of the hand and the other four channels (ch3, ch4,
ch5, and ch6) were placed on anterior part of the participant’s
hand. Based on the location of the forearm surface electrodes
numbered 1–8, it is possible to identify the muscles located immediately beneath each of these electrodes. The approximate
location of the sEMG sensor placement used by Khushaba et al.
[32] is explained in Table I.
Khushaba et al. [32] collected 15 classes of movements
from eight individuals, which included both simple and complex finger movements. The simple flexions include the movement of just one finger flexion at a time; they are as follows:
Thumb (T), Index (I), Middle (M), Ring (R), and Little (L).
The complex finger flexions include the following: Thumb–
Index (T-I), Thumb–Middle (T-M), Thumb–Ring (T-R),
Thumb–Little (T-L), Index–Middle (I-M), Middle–Ring (M-R),
Ring–Little (R-L), Index–Middle–Ring (I-M-R), Middle–Ring–
Little (M-RL), and finally the Hand Close (HC). The surface

Fig. 3.

Algorithm to compute dependence and independence of sEMG signals.

EMG data were collected at the rate of 4000 samples/s and were
amplified with a gain of 1000 using a Delsys Bagnoli Desktop
EMG measurement system.
For this research, the original data [32] were resampled to
1000 samples/s. Movement artefact (<20 Hz), power-line interference (50 Hz), and high-frequency noise (>450 Hz) were also
removed. In total, 2880 recordings with a length of 20 000 samples (5 s) were available for analysis (8 subjects × 8 channels ×
15 motions × 3 sets). These sEMG signals were further processed using SDICA and normalized determinant values of
global matrices were computed. The entire feature extraction
and data analysis process is shown in Fig. 3 and is explained in
the next section.
IV. FEATURE EXTRACTION AND DATA ANALYSIS
Initially, anterior and posterior (four sensors each) sEMG
subbands were computed using bandpass filters in the frequency range 10–450 Hz. For each subband, we applied the
traditional ICA/BSS algorithm and extracted succession of
separating matrices W1 , W2 , W3 , . . . WM , where W1 is the
separation matrix estimated for subband x1 (t) and WM is the
separation matrix estimated for subband xM (t) . The most independent/dependent anterior and posterior sEMG subbands were

1692

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

chosen based on band performance index (BPI). BPI is given by


n
n
2
1
i=1 |gij |
BPI =
−1
n i=1 maxi |gij |2


n
n
2
1
|g
|
ij
i=1
+
−1
(4)
n i=1 maxj |gij |2
where gij represents the ijth element of the matrix G. The term
maxj gij specifies the maximum value among the elements in
the ith row vector of G. The minimum value of BPI will give
independent pair of subbands [28], [31]. For each finger flexion,
BPI indices were computed for all global matrices BPI (Gl,m ) ,
for l, m = 0, . . . , L(up to eight subbands). Among them (series
of global matrices), for each finger flexion task, two subbands
ll and lm that correspond to the minimal BPI were selected. A
rigorous empirical study was employed to select subbands with
minimum BPI values, which has ensured the selection of the
best subband combination for further analysis.
Source dependence and independence of simple and complex
finger flexions of sEMG signals were computed using determinant of global matrix. Like other matrix factorization techniques
such as principal component analysis, ICA has a scaling problem. Hence, prior to the measure of dependence and independence, the determinant of G need to be normalized. Frobenius
norm is one of the widely used matrix norm found in the literature and is explained as


m in{m ,n }

n
 
√
m 
2
∗
|gij | = trace G G = 
σi2
GF = 
i=1 j =1

i=1

(5)
where G∗ denotes the conjugate transposition of G and σi represents the singular values of G [33].
According to mathematical principle, determinant values
are zero for linear dependence and closer to one for linear
independence [34]. Based on the previous principle, normalized global matrix determinant values are mapped as independent (0.5 ≤ G ≤ 1), dependent (0.1 ≤ G ≤ 0.5), and highlevel-dependent (0.01 ≤ G ≤ 0.1) values. The rationale for the
previous selection is explained in detail in [35] and [36].
V. RESULTS
The performance indexes (BPI values) and the relevant subbands computed for posterior and anterior sensors of each finger
flexion are listed in Table II. The results show consistency and
are significant with p value, p < 0.001. The dependence independence results for posterior and anterior muscles (mean and
standard deviation) are shown in Table III. Based on the results
obtained from this study, muscles responsible for simple and
complex actions were mapped and the results are explained in
Table IV.
One of the main objectives of this study was to reduce the
number of sensors in sEMG-based finger movement studies.
Based on the results (independence and dependence of muscles)
obtained from this study (see Tables III and IV), we can map the

muscles and identify the minimum number of sensors needed
for each action; the results are given in Table V.
VI. DISCUSSION
The use of surface electrodes to record myoelectric signals
is extremely difficult due to large variation in EMG features
[25]. Although surface electrodes are less reliable and precise
than fine-wire electrodes [2], [37], the former are self-evidently
superior for practical purposes, where invasive procedures are
inappropriate or ill advised. Therefore, it is not surprising that
a number of the results in Tables III and IV are counterintuitive. For example, despite only anterior forearm muscles having
the capacity to cause flexion of the hand and fingers, posterior
muscles are frequently either “dependent” or “high-level dependent.” Furthermore, out of the electrodes placed over the
muscles (described in Table I), only electrode 1 on extensor
digitorum is able to cause finger movement: brachioradialis assists with elbow flexion and the remainder all act on the hand at
the wrist. Of the forearm muscles, only flexor digitorum superficialis (no electrode), flexor digitorum profundus (no electrode),
extensor digitorum (electrode 1), extensor indices, and extensor
digiti minimi are able to flex or extend the medial four digits.
With regard to the thumb, flexor pollicis longus and extensor
pollicis longus are primarily responsible for thumb flexion and
extension. A possible explanation for myoelectric signals from
muscles acting on the elbow and wrist is coactivation to stabilize
these joints during finger movement [24], [38].
A. Simple Finger Movements
Recording of myoelectric signals from the thumb showed that
the signal for the anterior muscles was dependent (see Table III),
implying that the anterior muscles of the forearm were active
during thumb flexion. With regard to the other digits, the myoelectric signal from the anterior muscles was independent for the
index, middle, ring, and little fingers whereas the signal from the
posterior muscles was dependent suggesting that the posterior
muscles were active during flexion of these fingers. Therefore,
of the recordings of the digits acting unilaterally, only the thumb
is dependent for the anterior muscles, with the remaining digits
showing greater activity for the posterior muscles.
It is difficult to explain the correlation of “dependent” with
“anterior” for the thumb. The primary muscle causing thumb
flexion is flexor pollicis longus. This muscle is a deep flexor and
its electrical activity is unlikely to be recorded by an electrode
on the anterior surface of the forearm. Although extensor pollicis longus is probably coactivated during thumb flexion, this
muscle is also located deeply in the posterior compartment of
the forearm until near the wrist where it is more superficial and
it is seen “outcropping” from under extensor carpi radialis and
extensor digitorum. In any case, there are no electrodes in the
proximity of either flexor pollicis longus or extensor pollicis
longus.
With regard to individual flexion of the index, middle, ring,
and little fingers, there is consistent correlation of “dependent”
with “posterior” for recordings of myoelectric signals including those from extensor digitorum muscle (electrode 1). This

NAIK et al.: DEPENDENCE INDEPENDENCE MEASURE FOR POSTERIOR AND ANTERIOR EMG SENSORS USED IN SIMPLE AND COMPLEX

TABLE II
TWO SUBBANDS ll AND lm THAT CORRESPOND TO THE MINIMAL BPI (PERFORMANCE INDEX OF SUBBANDS) COMPUTED
FOR EACH FINGER FLEXION
Finger movements

Subbands l l and l m (posterior)
l2 ,
l1 ,
l3 ,
l1 ,
l4 ,
l2 ,
l5 ,
l4 ,
l5 ,
l7 ,
l5 ,
l6 ,
l7 ,
l6 ,
l5 ,

Thumb (T)
Index finger (I)
Middlefinger (M)
Ring finger (R)
Little finger (L)
Thumb–Index(TI)
Thumb–Middle (TM)
Thumb–Ring (TR)
Thumb–Little (TL)
Middle–Ring (MR)
Ring–Little (RL)
Index–Middle (IM)
Index–Middle–Ring (IMR)
Middle–Ring–Little (MRL)
Hand Close (HC)

BPI value

l3
l2
l4
l2
l5
l3
l6
l5
l6
l8
l6
l7
l8
l7
l6

Subbands l l and l m (anterior)
l1 ,
l2 ,
l1 ,
l2 ,
l3 ,
l3 ,
l4 ,
l6 ,
l4 ,
l1 ,
l4 ,
l2 ,
l1 ,
l2 ,
l1 ,

0.0184
0.125
0.163
0.161
0.125
0.091
0.085
0.064
0.248
0.213
0.216
0.225
0.0276
0.0240
0.0235

BPI value

l3
l5
l4
l6
l7
l5
l7
l7
l8
l3
l5
l4
l5
l6
l7

0.126
0.0150
0.0153
0.0151
0.0182
0.258
0.218
0.216
0.095
0.097
0.094
0.093
0.127
0.114
0.135

TABLE III
INDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE MEASURE (AVERAGE GLOBAL MATRIX VALUES) OF POSTERIOR
AND ANTERIOR MUSCLES USING ICA
Finger movements
Thumb (T)
Index finger (I)
Middle finger (M)
Ring finger (R)
Little finger (L)
Thumb–Index (TI)
Thumb–Middle (TM)
Thumb–Ring (TR)
Thumb–Little (TL)
Middle–Ring (MR)
Ring–Little (RL)
Index–Middle (IM)
Index–Middle–Ring (I-M-R)
Middle–Ring–Little (M-RL)
Hand Close (HC)

Independent (G  > 0.5)

Dependent(G  < 0.5)

High-level dependent (G  < 0.1)

Posterior (0.7±0.05)
Anterior (0.7±0.036)
Anterior (0.65±0.03)
Anterior (0.81±0.04)
Anterior (0.75±0.04)

Anterior (0.2±0.03)
Posterior (0.3±0.04)
Posterior (0.25±0.04)
Posterior (0.23±0.03)
Posterior (0.31±0.05)
Posterior (0.3±0.03)
Posterior (0.2±0.02)
Posterior (0.3±0.02)
Anterior (0.2±0.03)
Anterior (0.3±0.02)
Anterior (0.2±0.03)
Anterior (0.3±0.03)
Anterior (0.25±0.02)
Anterior (0.3±0.01)
Anterior (0.26±0.03)

Anterior (0.07±0.01)
Anterior (0.06±0.01)
Anterior (0.06±0.02)
Posterior (0.07±0.01)
Posterior (0.06±0.02)
Posterior (0.07±0.01)
Posterior (0.05±0.02)
Posterior (0.06±0.01)
Posterior (0.05±0.02)
Posterior (0.04±0.01)

TABLE IV
MUSCLES RESPONSIBLE FOR SIMPLE AND COMPLEX ACTIONS
(BASED ON THE RESULTS OBTAINED FROM THIS STUDY)
Finger movements
Thumb (T)
Index finger (I)
Middle finger (M)
Ring finger (R)
Little finger (L)
Thumb–Index(TI)
Thumb–Middle (TM)
Thumb–Ring(TR)
Thumb–Little(TL)
Middle–Ring (MR)
Ring–Little (RL)
Index–Middle (IM)
Index–Middle–Ring (IMR)
Middle–Ring–Little (MRL)
Hand Close (HC)

Posterior
X
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

Anterior
√
X
X
X
X
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

Muscles responsible for digit flexion
a
b
b
b
c
a+ b
a+ b
a+ b
a+ b+ c
a+ b
b+ c
a+ b
a+ b
b+ c
a+ b+ c

a = f lexor pollicis longus and flexor pollicis brevis; b = f lexor digitorum superficialis, flexor
√
digitorum profundus and lumbricals; c = f lexor digiti minimi brevis. Note: Here indicates the
dependence (muscles responsible for finger flexion) and X indicates independence (muscles either
inactive or not contributing for finger flexion).

1693

1694

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE V
NUMBER OF SENSORS RESPONSIBLE FOR SIMPLE AND COMPLEX ACTIONS
(BASED ON THE RESULTS OBTAINED FROM THIS STUDY)
Finger movements

Number of sensors needed for each flexion

Thumb (T)
Index finger (I)
Middle finger (M)
Ring finger (R)
Little finger (L)
Thumb–Index(TI)
Thumb–Middle (TM)
Thumb–Ring (TR)
Thumb–Little (TL)
Middle–Ring (MR)
Ring–Little (RL)
Index–Middle (IM)
Index–Middle–Ring (IMR)
Middle–Ring–Little (MRL)
Hand Close (HC)

1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

may indicate coactivation of extensor digitorum muscle during
flexion of these fingers by flexor digitorum superficialis. Similarly, myoelectric signals from the other two muscles mentioned
in [32], extensor carpi ulnaris (electrode number 8), and flexor
carpi ulnaris (electrodes 5, 6, and 7) may be due to stabilization
of the wrist by these muscles while the long finger flexor muscle
flexor digitorum superficialis contracts. Furthermore, there is a
possibility that flexor carpi radialis muscle (electrode 4) and extensor carpi radialis (no electrode) may also stabilize the wrist
during finger flexion.
B. Combined Finger Movements
Correlation of “dependent” with “posterior” for combined
flexion of the thumb with the index (TI), middle (TM), and
ring (TR) fingers fit the pattern described previously for these
three fingers individually. Furthermore, there is a correlation
of “high-level dependent” for the thumb and little fingers (TL),
middle and ring (MR), ring and little (RL), and index and middle
(IM) fingers, presumably for the same reason. However, the
reason for the reversal of “anterior” and “posterior” between
the categories of “dependent” and “high-level dependent” is not
known. From Tables III and IV, it is evident that there is a
correlation of dependence and high-level dependence between
the three-finger movements (IMR and MRL) and hand closure.
It is possible that this correlation is related to the fact that hand
closure consists primarily of flexion of the index, middle, ring,
and little fingers which are extensively represented in both the
three-finger movements.
Very few muscles are directly involved in flexion of the
thumb: these are flexor pollicis longus and flexor pollicis brevis.
Similarly, there are relatively few muscles directly involved in
finger flexion: chiefly flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor
digitorum profundus. On the other hand, a large number of muscles may be coactivated during both normal flexion of the thumb
and fingers, and forced flexion of these digits (see list earlier).
However, since myoelectric signals can only be recorded from
superficial muscles directly under each electrode, only those
specific muscles identified for each electrode can be responsi-

ble for the EMG recordings discussed in this study and hence
the same (minimum number of sensors needed for each flexion)
is justified in Table V.
Despite the difficulties associated with myoelectric signals
from surface electrodes, this remains the only pragmatic method
of recording muscle activity with real-world applications such
as myoelectric and prosthetic control. These difficulties may
contribute to the seemingly anomalous activation of posterior
muscles during finger flexion. However, coactivation of muscles acting on the wrist in order to stabilize finger movement
may explain myoelectric signals from muscles such as flexor
carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, and extensor carpi ulnaris.
Similarly, either coactivation or crosstalk may be responsible
for recording of myoelectric signals from extensor digitorum
(a finger extensor) during flexion of the index, middle, ring,
and little fingers. Only a few specific anterior forearm muscles
cause thumb and finger flexion. In contrast, a larger number of
anterior and posterior muscles may be coactivated during thumb
and finger flexion. With forceful thumb and finger flexion, more
proximal muscles may also be recruited for coactivation of muscles stabilizing the thumb, fingers, wrist, and even elbow. The
dependence nature of posterior (during simple flexion) and anterior (during complex finger flexions) muscles highlighted the
importance of sEMG sensor placement during simple and complex finger flexion movements.
VII. CONCLUSION
In myoelectric prostheses design, it is normally assumed that
the necessary control information can be extracted from the
surface myoelectric signal. In order to extract valuable sEMG
features, it is essential to place the sensors in optimum location
so that the best features can be extracted without any artifacts
or crosstalk. Moreover, it has been acknowledged in the literature that the classification accuracy in a pattern recognition
framework is more affected by the location of the electrodes
and choice of the feature set than by the classification algorithm
itself. Hence, in order to get higher classification accuracy and
robustness, prior to myoelectric and prosthetic design, it is essential to investigate the optimum sensor placement.
Classification of simple and complex gestures using minimum number of sEMG sensors is always a challenging task.
Due to the complex nature of human hand muscle anatomy, the
placement of sEMG electrodes in a correct position is very difficult. Artefact and crosstalk from adjacent muscles also make
it very hard to identify the optimum location of the myoelectric
sensors. In this study, an attempt has been made to identify the
dependence and independence of sEMG muscles/sensors which
are used for identification of simple and complex gestures. The
study has identified the redundant nature of some of the posterior
and anterior muscles and hence, helps in optimizing the number of sensors required for myoelectric and prosthetic control
applications.
From this study, it can be concluded that it is possible to
obtain most of the simple finger flexion movements by using
sEMG sensors connected to posterior part of the muscles only.
On the other hand, most of the complex finger flexions can be
identified using sEMG sensors connected to the anterior part

NAIK et al.: DEPENDENCE INDEPENDENCE MEASURE FOR POSTERIOR AND ANTERIOR EMG SENSORS USED IN SIMPLE AND COMPLEX

of the muscles. The proposed research study will certainly help
in optimization of sEMG sensors and also help researchers and
scientists who want to design prosthetic and myoelectric control systems for simple and complex gestures. Results from this
study show that both simple and complex finger flexions can
be recognized using only a few number sensors (up to two sensors). This requires careful study of hand muscles, choice of
electrodes, and the signal processing methods used to achieve
the task. We believe that the outcome of this study (dependence/independence) could be used as one of the important
preprocessing steps (electrode/muscle configuration) in myoelectric control, stroke rehabilitation, and other prosthetic applications. In the near future, the authors would like to investigate
the aforementioned concept for prosthetics and stroke rehabilitation applications using a minimum number of sensors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Dr.
R. Khushaba, who made the sEMG database available for this
research study.

REFERENCES
[1] M. A. Oskoei and H. Hu, “Myoelectric control systems—A survey,”
Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 2, pp. 275–294, 2007.
[2] J. V. Basmajian and C. De Luca, “Muscles alive,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Med.,
vol. 278, pp. 35–47, 1985.
[3] C. Castellini and P. van der Smagt, “Surface EMG in advanced hand
prosthetics,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 100, pp. 35–47, 2009.
[4] J. Rafiee, M. Rafiee, F. Yavari, and M. Schoen, “Feature extraction
of forearm EMG signals for prosthetics,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38,
pp. 4058–4067, 2011.
[5] A. Singh, “Prosthetic hand control,” Int. J. Eng. Res. Appl., vol. 2,
pp. 311–339, 2012.
[6] S. A. Dalley, H. A. Varol, and M. Goldfarb, “A method for the control
of multigrasp myoelectric prosthetic hands,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 58–67, Jan. 2012.
[7] A. Silva, Y. Morere, E. Naves, A. de Sa, and A. Soares, “Virtual electric
wheelchair controlled by electromyographic signals,” in Proc. 4th ISSNIP
Biosignals Biorobot. Conf., 2013, pp. 1–5.
[8] S. Uzun, A. Pourmoghaddam, M. Hieronymus, and T. Thrasher, “Evaluation of muscle fatigue of wheelchair basketball players with spinal
cord injury using recurrence quantification analysis of surface EMG,”
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 112, pp. 3847–3857, 2012.
[9] Y. H. Yin, Y. J. Fan, and L. D. Xu, “EMG and EPP-integrated human–
machine interface between the paralyzed and rehabilitation exoskeleton,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 542–549, Jul. 2012.
[10] N. Ho, K. Tong, X. Hu, K. Fung, X. Wei, W. Rong, and E. Susanto, “An
EMG-driven exoskeleton hand robotic training device on chronic stroke
subjects: Task training system for stroke rehabilitation,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2011, pp. 1–5.
[11] T. Schultz and M. Wand, “Modeling coarticulation in EMG-based continuous speech recognition,” Speech Commun., vol. 52, pp. 341–353, 2010.
[12] C. Baten, R. S. Uiterkamp, and R. Wassink, “Lower extremity kinematics
and EMG in multi-moment follow-up study during ACL rehabilitation
program,” Gait Posture, vol. 36, pp. S67–S68, 2012.
[13] U. Imtiaz, L. Bartolomeo, Z. Lin, S. Sessa, H. Ishii, K. Saito, M. Zecca,
and A. Takanishi, “Design of a wireless miniature low cost EMG sensor
using gold plated dry electrodes for biomechanics research,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Mechatron. Autom., 2013, pp. 957–962
[14] A. J. Young, L. J. Hargrove, and T. A. Kuiken, “The effects of electrode
size and orientation on the sensitivity of myoelectric pattern recognition
systems to electrode shift,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9,
pp. 2537–2544, Sep. 2011.

1695

[15] G. R. Naik, D. K. Kumar, and M. Palaniswami, “Signal processing evaluation of myoelectric sensor placement in low-level gestures: Sensitivity
analysis using independent component analysis,” Expert Syst., vol. 31,
pp. 91–99, 2014.
[16] F. Zaheer, S. H. Roy, and C. J. De Luca, “Preferred sensor sites for surface
EMG signal decomposition,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 33, pp. 195–206, 2012.
[17] J. Raubenheimer, T. Churchward, W. Ruehland, J. Tolson, F. O’Donoghue,
and P. Rochford, “Investigation into periodic limb movements (PLM)
muscle activation patterns and the impact of sensor type on
PLM detection,” Amer. J. Respiratory Crit. Care Med., vol. 189,
p. A5057, 2014.
[18] A. B. Ajiboye and R. F. Weir, “A heuristic fuzzy logic approach
to EMG pattern recognition for multifunctional prosthesis control,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 280–291,
Sep. 2005.
[19] P. Geethanjali and K. Ray, “EMG based man–machine interaction—
A pattern recognition research platform,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 62,
pp. 864–870, 2014.
[20] P. Geethanjali and K. Ray, “Statistical pattern recognition technique for
improved real-time myoelectric signal classification,” Biomed. Eng.: Appl.
Basis Commun., vol. 25, pp. 1–9, 2013.
[21] C. J. De Luca, M. Kuznetsov, L. D. Gilmore, and S. H. Roy, “Interelectrode spacing of surface EMG sensors: Reduction of crosstalk contamination during voluntary contractions,” J. Biomech., vol. 45, pp. 555–561,
2012.
[22] L. Hargrove, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “The effect of electrode displacements on pattern recognition based myoelectric control,”
in Proc. 28th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006,
pp. 2203–2206
[23] L. Hargrove, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A training strategy to reduce classification degradation due to electrode displacements in pattern
recognition based myoelectric control,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control,
vol. 3, pp. 175–180, 2008.
[24] U. Ervilha, T. Graven-Nielsen, and M. Duarte, “A simple test of muscle
coactivation estimation using electromyography,” Brazilian J. Med. Biol.
Res., vol. 45, pp. 977–981, 2012.
[25] G. Tsenov, A. Zeghbib, F. Palis, N. Shoylev, and V. Mladenov, “Neural
networks for online classification of hand and finger movements using
surface EMG signals,” in Proc. 8th Semin. Neural Netw. Appl. Elect. Eng.,
2006, pp. 167–171.
[26] J. V. Stone, Independent Component Analysis. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, 2004.
[27] A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja, “Independent component analysis: Algorithms
and applications,” Neural Netw., vol. 13, pp. 411–430, 2000.
[28] T. Tanaka, and A. Cichocki, “Subband decomposition independent component analysis and new performance criteria,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 5, 2004, pp. V-541–V-544.
[29] I. Kopriva, “Approach to blind image deconvolution by multiscale subband
decomposition and independent component analysis,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer.
A vol. 24, pp. 973–983, 2007.
[30] K. Zhang and L.-W. Chan, “An adaptive method for subband decomposition ICA,” Neural Comput., vol. 18, pp. 191–223, 2006.
[31] M. K. Mukul, and F. Matsuno, “Comparative study between subband
and standard ICA/BSS method in context with EEG signal for movement
imagery classification,” in Proc. IEEE/SICE Int. Symp. Syst. Integr., 2010,
pp. 341–346.
[32] R. N. Khushaba, and S. Kodagoda, “Electromyogram (EMG) feature reduction using mutual components analysis for multifunction prosthetic
fingers control,” in Proc.12th Int. Conf. Control Autom. Robot. Vis., 2012,
pp. 1534–1539.
[33] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012.
[34] C. Meyer, Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra Book and Solutions
Manual. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, vol. 2, 2000.
[35] G. R. Naik and D. K. Kumar, “Dimensional reduction using blind source
separation for identifying sources,” Int. J. Innovative Comput. Inf. Control,
vol. 7, pp. 989–1000, 2011.
[36] G. R. Naik and D. K. Kumar, “Determining number of independent sources
in undercomplete mixture,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2009,
pp. 1–5, 2009.
[37] J. V. Basmajian, “Muscles alive. Their functions revealed by electromyography,” Acad. Med., vol. 37, p. 802, 1962.
[38] N. Hogan, “Adaptive control of mechanical impedance by coactivation
of antagonist muscles,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-29, no. 8,
pp. 681–690, Aug. 1984.

1696

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Ganesh R. Naik (M’08) received the B.E. degree in
electronics and communication engineering from the
University of Mysore, Mysore, India, in 1997, the
M.E. degree in communication and information engineering from Griffith University, Brisbane, Qld.,
Australia, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering, specializing in biomedical engineering and signal processing from RMIT University,
Melbourne, Vic., Australia, in 2009.
Since 2013, he has been a Chancellor’s Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney,
N.S.W., Australia. As an early career researcher, he has edited nine books, authored more than 80 papers in peer-reviewed journals, conferences, and book
chapters over the last five years.
Dr. Naik serves as an Associate Editor for two Springer journals (Circuits,
Systems, and Signal Processing and Australasian Physical & Engineering Sciences in Medicine). He received the Baden–Württemberg Scholarship from
the University of Berufsakademie, Stuttgart, Germany (2006–2007). In 2010,
he was awarded an ISSI overseas fellowship from Skilled Institute Victoria,
Australia.

Kerry G. Baker received the B.App.Sc. degree in physiotherapy and Ph.D.
degree in anatomy.
He is a Lecturer in the School of Medical and Molecular Biosciences,
University Technology Sydney (UTS), Sydney, N.S.W., Australia. The bulk of
his research has been on immunohistochemistry of the human brain and stroke.
Apart from his teaching and research at UTS, he is actively involved in teaching
anatomy to medical students at the University of Notre Dame Australia.

Hung T. Nguyen (SM’99) received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Newcastle, Callaghan, N.S.W.,
Australia, in 1980.
He is a Professor of electrical engineering at the
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, N.S.W.
He is Dean of the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology and the Director of the Centre
for Health Technologies. His research interests include biomedical engineering, advanced control and
artificial intelligence. He has developed biomedical
devices for diabetes, disability, and cardiovascular
diseases.
Dr. Nguyen is a Fellow of the Institution of Engineers, Australia, the British
Computer Society, and the Australian Computer Society.

