210

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Network-Based Modeling and Intelligent Data
Mining of Social Media for Improving Care
Altug Akay, Member, IEEE, Andrei Dragomir, Member, IEEE,
and Björn-Erik Erlandsson, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Intelligently extracting knowledge from social media has recently attracted great interest from the Biomedical and
Health Informatics community to simultaneously improve healthcare outcomes and reduce costs using consumer-generated opinion.
We propose a two-step analysis framework that focuses on positive
and negative sentiment, as well as the side effects of treatment, in
users’ forum posts, and identifies user communities (modules) and
influential users for the purpose of ascertaining user opinion of
cancer treatment. We used a self-organizing map to analyze word
frequency data derived from users’ forum posts. We then introduced a novel network-based approach for modeling users’ forum
interactions and employed a network partitioning method based on
optimizing a stability quality measure. This allowed us to determine
consumer opinion and identify influential users within the retrieved
modules using information derived from both word-frequency data
and network-based properties. Our approach can expand research
into intelligently mining social media data for consumer opinion
of various treatments to provide rapid, up-to-date information for
the pharmaceutical industry, hospitals, and medical staff, on the
effectiveness (or ineffectiveness) of future treatments.
Index Terms—Data mining, complex networks, neural networks,
semantic web, social computing.

I. INTRODUCTION
OCIAL media is providing limitless opportunities for patients to discuss their experiences with drugs and devices,
and for companies to receive feedback on their products and
services [1]–[3]. Pharmaceutical companies are prioritizing social network monitoring within their IT departments, creating
an opportunity for rapid dissemination and feedback of products
and services to optimize and enhance delivery, increase turnover
and profit, and reduce costs [4]. Social media data harvesting
for bio-surveillance have also been reported [5].
Social media enables a virtual networking environment. Modeling social media using available network modeling and computational tools is one way of extracting knowledge and trends
from the information ‘cloud:’ a social network is a structure
made of nodes and edges that connect nodes in various relationships. Graphical representation is the most common method
to visually represent the information. Network modeling could

S

Manuscript received January 24, 2014; revised May 4, 2014 and June 19,
2014; accepted June 30, 2014. Date of publication July 10, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014.
A. Akay and B.-E. Erlandsson are with the School of Technology and
Health, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm SE-141 52, Sweden (e-mail:
altu@kth.se; bjorn-erik.erlandsson@sth.kth.se).
A. Dragomir, is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University
of Houston, Houston, TX 77204–5060 USA (e-mail: adragomir@uh.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2336251

also be used for studying the simulation of network properties
and its internal dynamics.
A sociomatrix can be used to construct representations of
a social network structure. Node degree, network density, and
other large-scale parameters can derive information about the
importance of certain entities within the network. Such communities are clusters or modules. Specific algorithms can perform
network-clustering, one of the fundamental tasks in network
analysis. Detecting particular user communities requires identifying specific, networked nodes that will allow information
extraction. Healthcare providers could use patient opinion to
improve their services. Physicians could collect feedback from
other doctors and patients to improve their treatment recommendations and results. Patients could use other consumers’
knowledge in making better-informed healthcare decisions.
The nature of social networks makes data collection difficult.
Several methods have been employed, such as link mining [6],
classification through links [7], predictions based on objects
[8], links [9], existence [10], estimation [11], object [12], group
[13], and subgroup detection [14], and mining the data [15],
[16]. Link prediction, viral marketing, online discussion groups
(and rankings) allow for the development of solutions based on
user feedback.
Traditional social sciences use surveys and involve subjects
in the data collection process, resulting in small sample sizes per
study. With social media, more content is readily available, particularly when combined with web-crawling and scraping software that would allow real-time monitoring of changes within
the network.
Previous studies used technical solutions to extract user sentiment on influenza [17], technology stocks [18], context and
sentence structure [19], online shopping [20], multiple classifications [21], government health monitoring [22], specific terms
relating to consumer satisfaction [23], polarity of newspaper articles [24], and assessment of user satisfaction from companies
[25], [26]. Despite the extensive literature, none have identified
influential users, and how forum relationships affect network
dynamics.
In the first stage of our current study, we employ exploratory
analysis using the self-organizing maps (SOMs) to assess correlations between user posts and positive or negative opinion
on the drug. In the second stage, we model the users and their
posts using a network-based approach. We build on our previous study [27] and use an enhanced method for identifying user
communities (modules) and influential users therein. The current approach effectively searches for potential levels of organization (scales) within the networks and uncovers dense modules

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

AKAY et al.: NETWORK-BASED MODELING AND INTELLIGENT DATA MINING OF SOCIAL MEDIA FOR IMPROVING CARE

Fig. 1. Processing tree in Rapidminer to ascertain the TF-IDF scores of words
in the data

using a partition stability quality measure [28]. The approach enables us to find the optimal network partition. We subsequently
enrich the retrieved modules with word frequency information
from module-contained users posts to derive local and global
measures of users opinion and raise flag on potential side effects of Erlotinib, a drug used in the treatment of one of the most
prevalent cancers: lung cancer [29].

211

loaded the data into the first component (‘Read Excel’). The
uploaded data was then processed in the second component
(‘Process Documents to Data’) using several subcomponents
(‘Extract Content’, ‘Tokenize’, ‘Transform Cases’, ‘Filter Stopwords’, ‘Filter Tokens,’ respectively) that filtered excess noise
(misspelled words, common stop words, etc.) to ensure a uniform set of variables that can be measured. The final component
(‘Processed Data’) contained the final word list, with each word
containing a specific TF-IDF score.
We then assigned weights for each of the words found in the
user posts using with the following formula:

log tfi,d + 1) log xnt if tf ≥ 1
t,d
weighti,d
otherwise
0
in which tfi,d represents the word frequency (t) in the document
(d), n represents the number of documents within the entire
collection, and xt represents the number of documents where t
occurs [30].
C. Cataloging and Tagging Text Data

II. METHODS
A. Initial Data Search and Collection
We first searched for the most popular cancer message boards.
We initially focused on the number of posts on lung cancer. The
chart below gives the number of posts of lung cancer per forum:
Forums
Cancer-forums.net
cancerforums.net
forums.stupidcancer.org
csn.cancer.org/forum

Posts on Lung Cancer
36 051
34 328
17
7959

We chose lung cancer because, according to the most recent statistics, it is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in the
world for both sexes [30], and the second most prevalent cancer
in the US between both sexes [31], [32]. We then compiled a
list of drugs used by lung cancer patients to ascertain which
drug was the most discussed in the forums. The drug Erlotinib
(trade name Tarceva) was the most frequently discussed drug
in the message boards. A further search revealed that Cancerforums.net, despite having slightly fewer posts on lung cancer, had
more posts dedicated to Erlotinib than the other three message
boards mentioned above.
Next, we performed a search of the drug, using both the
trade name (Tarceva) and drug name (Erlotinib). The trade name
garnered more results (498) compared to the drug name (66).
The search using the trade name returned 920 posts, from 2009
to the present date.
B. Initial Text Mining and Preprocessing
A Rapidminer (www.rapidminer.com) [33] data collection
and processing tree was developed to look for the most common
positive and negative words, and their term-frequency-inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF) scores within each post. Fig. 1
shows the data collection and processing tree. We initially up-

Text data containing the highest TF-IDF scores were tagged
with a modified NLTK toolkit (http://www.nltk.org/) [34] using
MATLAB to ensure that they reflected the negativity of a negative word and the positivity of a positive word in context. This
approach was used before using negative tags on positive words
[35]. We added a positive tag on negative words. We used the
NLTK toolkit for the analysis, and classification, of words to
match their exact meanings within the contextual settings. For
example, the context should be considered in phrases such as ‘I
do not feel great’ so that the term ‘great’ would be adequately
tagged as a negative one (in our case it is tagged as ‘great_n’
before it is returned to its specific position). Das and Chen used
a similar approach in classifying words [18]. We went one step
further and considered positive tag on negative words. A sentence that states ‘No side effects so I am happy!’ resulted in the
word ‘No’ being tagged as ‘No_p’ (reflecting its positive context) before it is returned to its specific position. These tagged
words were thus reclassified based on the context of the post.
We then reduced the number of similar words, both manually (checking the words using online dictionaries such as
Merriam-Webster (http://www.merriam-webster.com/), and automatically (synonym database software such as the Thesaurus
Synonym Database (http://www.language-databases.com/) and
Google’s synonym search finder.
Our final wordlist was pruned using the aforementioned methods, with the results displayed in Table I, with the division of
both positive and negative words.
We eliminated each word that appeared less than ten times.
This allowed us to achieve a uniform set of measurements while
eliminating statistically insignificant outliers. The end result
was a modified wordlist of 110 words (55 positive words and
55 negative words) shown in Table I.
In a parallel procedure, we automatically browsed the user
posts to look for side effects of Erlotinib. To this goal, we
used the National Library of Medicine’s Medical Subject Heading (MeSH), which is a controlled vocabulary

212

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
FINAL POSTANALYSIS WORDLIST
Positive
Agree
Appreciate
Beneficial
Benefit
Comfort
Comfortable
Ease
Easier
Effective
Enjoy
Favorable
Favorably
Feasible
Good
Grateful
Great
Greater
Greatest
Greatly
Help
Helped
Helpful
Helping
Helps
Honest
Honestly
Hope
Hoped
Hopeful
Hopefully
Hopes
Hoping
Importance
Important
Importantly
Impresses
Improve
Improved
Improvement
Improves
Improving
Inspiration
Like
Love
Loved
Positive
Right
Success
Successful
Support
Thank
Thanks
Useful
Well
Wonderful

Negative
Bad
Cannot
Concern
Concerns
Damage
Dangerous
Depression
Didn
Died
Difficult
Discomfort
Don’t
Doubt
Error
Failure
Fear
Hard
Hasn
Hate
Hurt
Impossible
Isn
Lack
Limited
Lose
Loss
Lost
Miss
Nasty
Nausea
Negative
No
Not
Pain
Painful
Poor
Problem
Problems
Sad
Sacred
Scary
Severe
Sorry
Sucks
Suffer
Suffering
Terrible
Unable
Unfortunately
Wasn
Weak
Worried
Worse
Worst
Wrong

(http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/) that consists of a hierarchy of
descriptors and qualifiers that are used to annotate medical
terms. A custom designed program was used to map words
in the forum to the MeSH database. A list of words present in
forum posts that were associated to treatment side effects was
thus compiled. This was done by selecting the words simultaneously annotated with a specific list of qualifiers in MeSH (CI
– chemically induced; CO – complications; DI – diagnosis; PA
– pathology, and PP – physiopathology). We then compared the

TABLE II
FINAL SIDE EFFECTS WORDLIST
Acne
Cachexia
Headaches
Itching
Lesion
Pneumonia
Rash
Tremor
Weakness
Vomiting

Fig 2. Thread model where nodes represent users/posts and the edges represent information transferred among users.

full list of side effect words with the results that were fed into the
Rapidminer processing tree: we kept the side effect words with
the highest TF-IDF scores (ensuring that each word appeared at
least ten times in the forum posts).
Table II shows the final wordlist of the side effects. We subjected the initial side effect wordlist with the same methods that
were used in Table I.
After these preprocessing steps, our forum data was represented as two sets of vectors containing the TF-IDF scores of
the words in the two wordlist. Namely, each user post in the
forum was thus transformed into a vector of 110 variables representing the TF-IDF scores of positive and negative words, and
a 10 variable vector containing the TF-IDF scores corresponding
to the side effect terms (see Fig. 2, steps A1-A3).
D. Consumer Sentiment Using a SOM
For this part of the analysis, all posts were manually labeled
according to the general user opinion observed within the post
as positive and negative before feeding the collected data for
exploratory analysis via SOMs. The manual labeling allowed us
to use this as a method of results validation.
SOMs are neural networks that produce low-dimensional representation of high-dimensional data [33]. Within this network,
a layer represents output space with each neuron assigned a specific weight. The weight values reflect on the cluster content.
The SOM displays the data to the network, bringing together
similar data weights to similar neurons.

AKAY et al.: NETWORK-BASED MODELING AND INTELLIGENT DATA MINING OF SOCIAL MEDIA FOR IMPROVING CARE

The benefits and capabilities have been demonstrated where
despite the reduction of the space size, the information, and
identification schema of the clusters remained the same [36].
When new data is fed into the network, the closest weights
matching the data change to reflect the new data. The neurons
farther from the new data rarely change. This process continues
until data is no longer fed, resulting in a two-dimensional map.
The SOM toolbox (www.cis.hut.fi/projects/somtoolbox) [37]
was used and the SOM was fed with our first wordlist (see
Table I) TF-IDF vectors. The purpose was to assess the existence
of clusters in the data and how the SOM weights of these clusters
would correlate to positive and negative opinion. The SOM
was trained using various map sizes, using quantization and
topographic errors as validation measures. The former is the
result of the average distance between every input vector and
its best matching neuron (BMN), in addition to measuring how
the trained map fits into the input data [33]. The latter uses the
structure of the map to preserve its topology by representing
its accuracy: it is calculated using the proportion of the weights
for the first and second BMNs are farther than required for
measuring the topology.
The best map size was based on the minimum values of the
quantization (0.24) and topographic (10−5 ) errors. The wordlist
data was mapped and the emerging weights were analyzed for
positive and negative variable correlations of the wordlist. Words
of no interest, and groups containing three or fewer words, were
eliminated.
Subgroups were visually identified and analyzed for further
information on the consumer opinion of Erlotinib.
E. Modeling Forum Postings Using Network Analysis
Discovering influential users was the next step in our analysis. To this goal, we built networks from forum posts and
their replies, while accounting for content-based grouping of
posts resulting from the existing forum threads. Networks are
composed of nodes and their connections: they are either nondirectional (a connection between two nodes without a direction)
or directional (a connection with an origin and an end). The
nodal degree of the latter measures the number of connections
from the origin to the destination. Four node types have been
identified [38] within a network: Isolated, transmitter, receptor,
and carrier. The network’s density measures the current number
of connections.
The network-based analysis is widely used in social network
analysis based on its ability to both model and analyze intersocial dynamics. We devised a directional network model due to
the nature of the forum under scrutiny (multiple threads with
multiple thread initiators) and its internal dynamics among the
members (members reply to thread initiators as well as to other
users). Fig. 2 describes the approach we chose to build our
network, which shows how each posting-reply pair is modeled.
Based on the nature of the forum, all of the posters within each
thread are context posters for the thread initiator (e.g., Node 1 is
the thread initiator in Fig. 2 and Nodes 2, 3, 4, and 5 in represent
context posters). Thus, all of the posters receive an incoming
edge from the thread initiator. Some context posters respond

213

Fig. 3. Diagram describing the framework of our network-based analysis.
First, the posts collected from the forum via Rapidminer are preprocessed using
the NTLK Toolbox (Step A1) and transformed into two wordlists (Step A2). For
this step, direct mapping to the MeSH vocabulary is used to identify words representing side-effects Based on the two wordlists, forum posts are transformed
into numerical vectors containing word-frequency based TF-IDF scores (Step
A3). In parallel, forum posts and replies are modeled as a directed network (Step
B1). Obtained network is further refined to identify communities/modules of
highly interacting users, based on the MCSD method [28] (Step B2). Finally,
the two wordlist vectors datasets (their info reflecting the forum information
content) are overlaid onto the network modules to identify influential users and
highlight side-effects intensively discussed within the modules, respectively
(Step B3).

directly to another poster, using the forum option ‘Reply.’ We
used bidirectional edges to reflect the ensuing information transfer from the poster to the replier and vice versa (in Fig. 2, Node
5 is a direct replier to Node 4, as is Node 3 to Node 2). This
user-interaction model allowed us to build a network that reflects
faithfully the information content of the forum.
F. Identifying Subgraphs
Our modeling framework has consequently converted the forum posts into several large directional networks containing a
number of densely connected units (or modules) (see Fig. 3,
step A1). These modules have the characteristic that they are
more densely connected internally (within the unit) than externally (outside the unit). We chose a multiscale method that
uses local and global criteria for identifying the modules, while
maximizing a partition quality measure called stability [28].
The stability measure considers the network as a Markov
chain, with nodes representing states and edges being possible
transitions among these states. In [28], the authors proposed an
approach in which transition probabilities for a random walk of
length t (t being the Markov time) enable multiscale analysis.
With increasing scale t, larger and larger modules are found.
The stability of a walk of length t can be expressed as


1 
di dj
At i , j −
∗ δ (i, j)
(1)
QM t =
2m i,j
2m
where At is the adjacency matrix, t is the length of the network,
m is the number of edges, i and j are nodes, di is node i’s (and j’s)
strength, and δ (i,j) function becomes one if one of the nodes
belong to the same network and zero if it does not belong to

214

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

any network. At is computed as follows (in order to account
for the random walk): At = D · M t , where M = D−1 · A (D
being the diagonal matrix containing the degree vector giving
for each node its degree) [28].
The method for identifying the optimal modules is based on
alternating local and global criteria that expand modules by
adding neighbor nodes, reassigning nodes to different modules,
and significantly overlapping modules until no further optimization is feasible, according to (1). The approach follows similar
methods presented in [28], [39], and [40].
Several partitioning schemes were obtained pending on the
range of scales employed by the method, with the optimal partitioning having the largest stability. We named the modules thus
retrieved information modules (see step A2 in Fig. 3).
G. Module Average Opinion and User Average Opinion
We then proceeded to refine the information modules through
feeding them with the information obtained from the forum
posts (using the wordlist vectors). In a first step, we aimed
at identifying influential users within our networks. Influential
users are users which broker most of the information transfer
within network modules and whose opinion in terms of positive or negative sentiment towards the treatment is ‘spread’ to
the other users within their containing modules. To this goal,
we enriched the information modules obtained as described in
Section II-F with the TF-IDF scores of the user posts corresponding to the users found in each module. The TF-IDF scores
from the wordlist of positive and negative words (see Table I)
were used to build two forms of measurement. The global measure (pertaining to the whole information module) is represented
by the module average opinion (MAO). It examined the TF-IDF
scores of postings matching the nodes in a specific module
MAO =


Sum+ − Sum−
.
Sumall

Sum+ =
xij is the total sum of the TF-IDF scores
matching the positive words in the wordlist vectors within the
module. The units i represent post index. The unit j represents
the wordlist
index
 (matching the positive words in the list).
xij is the total sum of the TF-IDF scores
Sum− =
matching the negative words in the wordlist vectors within the
module. The units i represent post index. The unit j represents
the wordlist index
the negative words in the list).
M
 (matching
Sumall = N
i=1
k =1 xik is the sum of both of the aforementioned sums. The unit k is the index running across variables
throughout the entire wordlist.
The local measure that illustrates specific user opinion to
each node in the module (the user average opinion, or UAO)
that examines the TF-IDF scores to the average of the collected
posts of the user is the following:
UAOi =

Sumi + − Sumi −
.
Sumiall


Sumi+ = j ∈P xij is the TF-IDF score’s sum matching to
positive words for the ith user’s wordlist vector. P is the index
set denoting the wordlist’s positive variables.

Fig. 4.

U-Matrix of the posts from the Cancerforums.net forum.


Sumi− = j ∈N xij is the TF-IDF score’s sum matching to
negative words for the ith user’s wordlist vector. N is the index
set denoting 
the wordlist’s negative variables.
Sumall = M
j =1 xij is the total of both sums, and j is the
index of the whole wordlist.
H. Information Brokers Within the Information Modules
We first ranked individual nodes in terms of their total number
of connecting edges (in and out-degree) to identify influential
users within the modules.
We then looked nodes in each module based on the following
criteria:
1) The nodes have densest degrees within the module (highest number of edges).
2) The UAO scores equate the signs of the MAO of the
containing module.
The nodes that qualified were dubbed information brokers,
based on the aforementioned criteria. Their large nodal degrees
ensure increased information transfer compared to other nodes
while their matching UAO and MAO scores reflect consistency
of positive or negative opinion within the containing module.
I. Network-Based Identification of Side Effects
In the second step of our network-based analysis, we devised a
strategy for identifying potential side effects occurring during
the treatment and which user posts on the forum highlight. To
this goal, we overlay the TF-IDF scores of the second wordlist
(see Table II) onto modules obtained in Section II-F. The TFIDF scores within each module will thus directly reflect how
frequent a certain side-effect is mentioned in module posts.
Subsequently, a statistical test (such as the t-test for example)
can be used to compare the values of the TF-IDF scores within
the module to those of the overall forum population and identify
variables (side-effects) that have significantly higher scores.
Fig. 3 presents a diagram that visually describes the steps in
our network-based analysis.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 4 shows the unified matrix resulting from the SOM analysis for the wordlist vectors corresponding to the positive and
negative terms from the message board Cancerforums.net. A
subset consisting of 30% of the data was used for training the
SOM. We used a 12 × 12 map size with 110 variables corresponding to the positive and negative terms to ascertain the

AKAY et al.: NETWORK-BASED MODELING AND INTELLIGENT DATA MINING OF SOCIAL MEDIA FOR IMPROVING CARE

215

TABLE III
USER OPINION OF ERLOTINIB
Satisfaction

Dissatisfaction

70 percent

30 percent
BREAKDOWN OF USER OPINION
Fully Satisfied (23)
Full Dissatisfaction (4)
Satisfied Despite Side Effects (37)
Dissatisfaction because of Side Effects (20)
Satisfied Despite Costs (10)
Dissatisfaction because of Costs (6)

weight of the words corresponded to the opinion of the drug
Erlotinib. As mentioned in Section II, each word from the list
appeared more than ten times. This achieved a uniform measurement set while eliminating statistically insignificant outliers.
Much of the user’s posts converged on three areas of the map.
We checked the respective nodes’ correlation with their weight
vectors’ values corresponding to positive or negative words to
define the positive and negative areas of the map.
The user opinion of Erlotinib was overall satisfactory, with
Table III summarizing the satisfaction/dissatisfaction below:
According to chart, and from our readings of both the user
posts and the SOM, the most pressing concern from both camps
was the side effects, which are extensively documented in the
medical literature [41]–[46]. The costs of the drug were also
another matter of concern (albeit limited).
We then proceeded to identify influential users. Our modeling
approach yielded initially a single loosely connected network,
linking all users within the forum. Subsequent module identification using the methods described in Section II-F yielded an
optimal partitioning containing five densely connected module.
We varied our scale parameter within the interval t ࢠ [0,2] in
0.1 increments, as suggested by [28]. Varying the scale parameter resulted in a set of partitions ranging from modules based
on single individual users (for scale parameter t = 0), to large
modules (for values of t close to the upper limit of the interval).
The optimal partition (maximizing the quality measure in (1)
was obtained for t = 1.
On the Cancerforums.net message board, ten users out of the
920 posts were identified as information brokers as shown in
Fig. 5(a)–(e) below.
Densities of the retrieved modules range from 0.2 to 0.6.
These density values were within the observed density values
interval (towards the upper limit), when compared to those generally noted in social networks, thus confirming our network
modeling approach [47], [48]. Information brokers were identified following the procedure described in Sections II-G–H.
Further scrutinizing these users and their containing modules
we confirmed their connections were the densest. A thorough
reading of these ten users’ posts throughout the threads they
started and participated in revealed that they were informative
and actively interacting with users across many threads. Other
members sought out these ten posters for their wisdom and
experience. Their forum ‘behavior’ has confirmed to us that
these users were the premier information brokers of the drugs
Erlotinib on the Cancerforums.net forum.

Fig. 5. Ten users were identified as information brokers on the Cancerforums.net Forum. Modules in parts a)–e) show where these ten users reside in
the forum.

216

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE IV
SIDE-EFFECT FREQUENCY AND LOCATION IN SELECTED MODULES
Module 1 (A)

‘rash’ (p − value < 0.01)
‘itch’ (p − value < 0.05)

Module 2 (B)
Module 5 (E)

‘rash’ (p − value < 0.05)
‘rash’ (p − value < 0.01)

In the last part of our analysis, we investigated which modules
were significantly involved in discussing specific side effects.
As described in Section II-I, retrieved modules were enriched
with the TF-IDF scores corresponding to the side-effect wordlist
vectors. For each module and each side-effect scores sample, ttests were performed to assess the significant difference between
the in-module sample and the overall forum population scores.
Rash and itching were identified as the side effect terms with
significantly higher scores in Modules 1, 2, and 5 when compared to the overall scores population in the forum, as described
in Table IV. This reflects the fact that users grouped within these
modules repeatedly discussed these side effects in their posts.
This was confirmed by subsequent scrutiny of the respective
posts. A literature search confirmed that rash and itching are
indeed two of the most common side-effects of Erlotinib with
as much as 70% of the patients affected, as indicated by clinical
studies. [44]–[46]
IV. DISCUSSION
We converted a forum focused on oncology into weighted
vectors to measure consumer thoughts on the drug Erlotinib
using positive and negative terms alongside another list containing the side effects. Our methods were able to investigate
positive and negative sentiment on lung cancer treatment using
the drug by mapping the large dimensional data onto a lower
dimensional space using the SOM. Most of the user data was
clustered to the area of the map linked to positive sentiment, thus
reflecting the general positive view of the users. Subsequent network based modeling of the forum yielded interesting insights
on the underlying information exchange among users. Modules
of strongly interacting users were identified using a multiscale
community detection method described in [28]. By overlaying
these modules with content-based information in the form of
word-frequency scores retrieved from user posts, we were able
to identify information brokers which seem to play important
roles in the shaping the information content of the forum. Additionally, we were able to identify potential side effects consistently discussed by groups of users. Such an approach could be
used to raise red flags in future clinical surveillance operations,
as well as highlighting various other treatment related issues.
The results have opened new possibilities into developing advanced solutions, as well as revealing challenges in developing
such solutions.
The consensus on Erlotinib depends on individual patient
experience. Social media, by its nature, will bring different individuals with different experiences and viewpoints. We sifted

through the data to find positive and negative sentiment, which
was later confirmed by research that emerged regarding Erlotinib’s effectiveness and side effects. Future studies will require more up-to-date information for a clearer picture of user
feedback on drugs and services.
Future solutions will require more advanced detection of intersocial dynamics and its effects on the members: such interests
of study may include rankings, ‘likes’ of posts, and friendships.
Further emphasis on context posting will require formal language dictionaries that include medical terms for specific diseases, and informal language terms (‘slang’) to clarify posts.
Finally, different platforms will allow up-to-date information
on the status of the drug in case one social platform ceases to
discuss the drug. Another solution can look at multiple wordlists
that can include multiple treatments that, when combined with
contextual posting and medical lexical dictionaries, can pinpoint the source (or multiple sources) of user satisfaction (or
dissatisfaction), which can open the door towards mapping consumer sentiment of multidrug therapies for advanced diseases.
The combined solutions can open new avenues of postmarketing
surveillance research as companies seek real-time, ‘intelligent’
data of their products and services to remain competitive.
This solution can be envisioned on future medical devices
that can serve as postmarketing feedback loop that consumers
can use to express their satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) directly
to the company. The company benefits from real-time feedback
that can then be used to assess if there are any problems and
rapidly address such problems.
Social media can open the door for the health care sector in
address cost reduction, product and service optimization, and
patient care.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ochoa, A. Hernandez, L. Cruz, J. Ponce, F. Montes, L. Li, and L.
Janacek. “Artificial societies and social simulation using ant colony, particle swarm optimization and cultural algorithms,” New Achievements in
Evolutionary Computation, P. Korosec, Ed. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, pp.
267–297, 2010.
[2] W. Cornell and W. Cornell. (2013). How Data Mining Drives Pharma:
Information as a Raw Material and Product. [Online]. Available:
http://acswebinars.org/big-data
[3] L. Toldo, “Text mining fundamentals for business analytics,” presented at
the 11th Annual Text and Social Analytics Summit, Boston, MA, USA,
2013.
[4] L. Dunbrack, “Pharma 2.0 – social media and pharmaceutical sales and
marketing,” in Proc. Health Ind. Insights, 2010, p. 7.
[5] C. Corley, D. Cook, A. Mikler, and K. Singh, “Text and structural data
mining of influenza mentions in web and social media,” Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health, vol. 7, pp. 596–615, Feb. 2010.
[6] L. Getoor and C. Diehl, “Link mining: a survey,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl.,
vol. 7, pp. 3–12, Dec. 2005.
[7] Q. Lu. And and L. Getoor, “Link-based classification,” in Proc. 20th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learning, Washington, D.C., USA, 2003, pp. 496–503.
[8] A. Ng, A. Zheng, and M. Jordan, “Stable algorithms for link analysis,” in
Proc. SIGIR Conf. Inform. Retrieval., New Orleans, LouisianaLO, USA,
2001, pp. 258–266.
[9] B. Taskar, M. Wong, P. Abbeel, and D. Koller, “Link prediction in relational data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Vancouver, B.C.
Canada, 2003.
[10] D. Liben-Nowell and J. M. Kleinberg, “The link prediction problem for
social networks,” J. Am. Soc. Inform. Sci. Technol., vol. 57, pp. 556–559,
May 2007.

AKAY et al.: NETWORK-BASED MODELING AND INTELLIGENT DATA MINING OF SOCIAL MEDIA FOR IMPROVING CARE

[11] Z. Lacroix, H. Murthy, F. Naumann, and L. Raschid, “Links and paths
through life sciences data sources,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Data Integr.
Life Sci., Leipzig, Germany, 2004, pp. 203–211.
[12] J. Noessner, M. Niepert, C. Meilicke, and H. Stuckenschmidt, “Leveraging
terminological structure for object reconciliation,” in The Semantic Web:
Research and Applications, Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer, 2010, pp. 334–
348.
[13] M. E. J. Newman, “Detecting community structure in networks,” Eur.
Phys. J., vol. 38, pp. 321–330, Mar. 2004.
[14] J. Huan and J. Prins, “Efficient mining of frequent subgraphs in the presence of isomorphism,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Melbourne, Florida.FL, USA, 2003, pp. 549–552.
[15] D. Hand, “Principles of data mining,” Drug Safety, vol. 30, pp. 621–622,
Jul. 2007.
[16] J. Hans and M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. 2nd ed.
Burlington, MassMA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2006
[17] C. Corley, D. Cook, A. Mikler, and K. Singh, “Text and structural data
mining of influenza mentions in web and social media,” Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health, vol. 7, pp. 596–615, Feb. 2010.
[18] S. R. Das and M. Y. Chen, “Yahoo! for Amazon: Sentiment extraction
from small talk on the Web,” Manag. Sci., vol. 53, pp. 1375–1388, Sep.
2007.
[19] E. Riloff, “Little words can make a big difference for text classification,” in
Proc. 18th Annu. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inform. Retrieval,
Seattle, WashingtonWA, USA, 1995, pp. 130–136.
[20] W. Yih, P. H. Chang, and W. Kim, “Mining online deal forums for hot
deals,” in Proc. IEEE/WIC/ACM Int. Conf. Web Intell., Beijing, China,
2004, pp. 384–390.
[21] B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan, “Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. ACL-02 Conf. Empirical
Methods Natural Language Process., Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2002, pp.
79–86.
[22] X. Feng, A. Cai, K. Dong, W. Chaing, M. Feng, N.S. Bhutada, J. Inciardi, and T. Woldemariam, “Assessing pancreatic cancer risk associated
with dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors: data mining of FDA adverse event
reporting system (FAERS),” J. Pharmacovigilance, vol. 1, Jul. 2013.
[23] K. Y. Chan, C. K. Kwong, and T. C. Wong, “Modeling customer satisfaction for product development using genetic programming,” J. Eng. Design,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 56–68, Jan. 2011.
[24] I. Frommholz and M. Lechtenfeld, “Determining the polarity of postings
for discussion search,” in Proc. Workshop Woche Lernen Wissen Adaptivität., Würzburg, Germany, 2008, pp. 49–56.
[25] J. Schectman, (2013, May 1). Glaxo Mined Online Parent Discussion Boards For Vaccine Worries. [Online]. Available (http://
blogs.wsj.com/cio/2013/05/01/glaxo-mined-online-parent-discussionboards-for-vaccine-worries/)
[26] R. McBride, (2012, Aug. 1). Merck to Draw on Social Network for Psoriasis Patients. [Online]. Available
(http://www.fiercebiotechit.com/story/merck-draw-social-networkpsoriasis-patients/2012–08–13)
[27] A. Akay, A. Dragomir, and B. E. Erlandsson, “A novel data-mining
approach leveraging social media to monitor consumer opinion of
sitagliptin,” J. Biomed Health Inform. Vol: PP, Issue: 99.
[28] E. Le Martelot and C. Hankin, “Multi-scale community detection using
stability as optimisation criterion in a greedy algorithm,” Proceedings
of the 2011 International. Conf. erence on Knowledge Discovery and
Information Retrieval (KDIR 2011), Paris, France: SciTePress, Oct. 2011,
pp. 216–225.
[29] National Cancer Institute. (2014, Apr. 21). Erlotinib Hydrochloride. [Online]. Available: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/druginfo/
erlotinibhydrochloride
[30] World Cancer Research Fund International. (2013, Dec. 13). Cancer Statistics Worldwide. [Online]. Available: http://www.wcrf.org/
cancer_statistics/world_cancer_statistics.php
[31] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, Oct. 24). Cancer
Data by Demographic. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/
dcpc/data/men.htm
[32] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, Oct. 24).
Cancer Data by Demographic. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.
gov/cancer/dcpc/data/women.htm
[33] I. Mierswa, M. Wurst, W. Michael, R. Klinkenberg, M. Scholz, and T.
Euler, “YALE: Rapid prototyping for complex data mining tasks,” in
Proc. 12th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2006, pp. 935–940.

217

[34] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper, Natural Language Processing With Python.
Sebastopol, CA, USA: O’Reilly Media, 2009, pp. 504
[35] P. Soucy and G. W. Mineau, “Beyond TFIDF weighting for text categorization in the vector space model,” in Proc. 19th Int. Joint Conf. Artificial
Intell., Edinburgh, U.K., 2005, pp. 1130–1135.
[36] P. Bonato, P. J. Mork, D. M. Sherill, and R. H. Westgaard, “Data mining
of motor patterns recorded with wearable technology,” IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 110–119, May/Jun. 2003.
[37] J. Vesanto, J. Himberg, E. Alhoniemi, and J. Parhankangas, “SelfOrganizing Map in MATLAB: The SOM Toolbox,” in Proc. Matlab DSP
Conf., Espoo, Finland, 1999, pp. 35–40.
[38] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp.
825
[39] A. Arenas, A. Fernandez, and S. Gomez, “Analysis of the structure of
complex networks at different resolution levels,” New J. Phys., vol. 10, p.
053039, 2008.
[40] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, “Finding and evaluating community
structure in networks,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 69, p. 026113, 2004.
[41] M. N. Balak, Y. Gong, G. J. Riely, R. Somwar, A. R. Li, M. F. Zakowski,
A. Chiang, G. Yang, O. Ouerfelli, M. G. Kris, M. Ladanyi, V. A. Miller,
and W. Pao, “Novel D761Y and common secondary T790M mutations
in epidermal growth factor receptor-mutant lung adenocarcinomas with
acquired resistance to kinase inhibitors,” Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 6494–501, 2006.
[42] C. H. Yun, K. E. Mengwasser, A. V. Toms, M. S. Woo, H. Greulich, K.
K. Wong, M. Meyerson, and M. J. Eck, “The T790M mutation in EGFR
kinase causes drug resistance by increasing the affinity for ATP,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 105, no. 6, pp. 2070–2075, 2008.
[43] J. A. Engelman, K. Zejnullahu, T. Mitsudomi, Y. Song, C. Hyland, J. O.
Park, N. Lindeman, C. M. Gale, X. Zhao, J. Christensen, T. Kosaka, A.
J. Holmes, A. M. Roger, F. Cappuzzo, T. Mok, C. Lee, B. E. Johnson,
L. C. Cantley, and P. A. Jänne, “MET amplification leads to Gefitinib
resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling,” Science, vol.
316, no. 5827, pp. 1039–1043, 2007.
[44] A. Anna, C. Liza, A. L. C. Agero, S. W. Dusza, C. Benvenuto-Andrade, K.
J. Busam, P. Myskowski, and A. C. Halpem, “Dermatologic side effects
associated with the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors,” J. Am.
Acad. Dermatology, vol. 55, pp. 657–670, 2006.
[45] R. Esther, E. Roe, M. P. Garcia Muret, E. Marcuello, J. Capdevila, C.
Pallares, and A. Alomar, “Description and management of cutaneous side
effects during cetuximab or erlotinib treatments: a prospective study of 30
patients,” J. Am. Acad. Dermatology, vol. 55, pp. 429–437, 2006.
[46] R. Caroline, C. Robert, J. C. Soria, A. Spatz, A. Le Cesne, D. Malka, P.
Pautier, J. Wechsler, C. Lhomme, B. Escudier, V. Boige, J. P. Armand, and
T. Le Chevalier, “Cutaneous side-effects of kinase inhibitors and blocking
antibodies,” Lancet Oncology, vol. 6, pp. 491–500, 2005.
[47] K. Faust, “Very local structure in social networks,” Sociological Methodology, vol. 37, pp. 209–256, Nov. 2007.
[48] K. Faust, “Comparing social networks: Size, Density and Local Structure,”
Adv. Methodology Statist., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 185–216, 2006.

Altug Akay (M’11) received the B.A. degree from
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA,
in 2005, and the M.A. degree from Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA, in 2007. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in the School of
Technology and Health at the Royal Institute of Technology, Huddinge, Sweden.
Upon graduating from Dartmouth, he worked
at Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany, for one
year under the supervision of Dr. Gudrun Zahlmann.
He worked at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital under the supervision of Dr. Paolo Bonato from 2008 to 2009. He also contributed a book chapter entitled “ß-thalassemia’s social and economic geography: A possible prevention/treatment program to rout “legacy” genetic
mutations,” in the book entitled “Mathematical Methods in Scattering Theory and Biomedical Engineering,” (London, U.K.: World Scientific, 2008).
His current research interests include public health, health policy, and health
technology.

218

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Andrei Dragomir (M’09) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering at the Politehnica University
of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, in 1999 and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering at
the University of Patras, Patras, Greece, in 2002 and
2006 respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, from
2006 to 2010. He is currently an Assistant Professor
at the University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
His current research interests include biocomplexity,
neural engineering, pattern recognition, machine learning, and bioinformatics.

Björn-Erik Erlandsson (SM’82) received the Ph.D.
degree from Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, Sweden, in the field of applied electronics, in 1977.
He is currently a Senior Advisor and Professor
at the School of Technology and Health, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, primarily
responsible for technology and quality in health care.
His work experience ranges from research and development, quality management, and regulatory affairs
in the international medical device industry, Siemens,
and Nobel Industries. He worked as a Quality Manager in the pacemaker industry and has been the Director in Medical Informatics and Technology at the
University Hospital of Northern Sweden, Umeå, Sweden, and Akademiska Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, and also as a Professor in Biomedical Engineering. In
his role as a Director for technical operations at the university hospitals, he has
also been heavily involved in investment issues and investment management,
and chairman of the investment planning groups. He is also involved in the
standardization work in medical technology and medical informatics, chairman
of SIS/TK334.
Dr. Erlandsson was the Chairman of the Joint Working Group in Software and
Medical Devices (SAMD) at CEN / CENELEC during 2010, and the Cochairman during 2011. He was the Chairman of the Medical Society’s Division of
Medical Informatics for two years, Member of the Swedish Council on Health
Technology Assessment, SBU Alertråd, and Coordinator EU policies at the
Royal Institute of Technology’s Life.

