110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Compressed Sensing MRI via
Two-stage Reconstruction
Yang Yang, Feng Liu∗ , Wenlong Xu, and Stuart Crozier, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Compressed sensing (CS) has been applied to magnetic resonance imaging for the acceleration of data collection.
However, existing CS techniques usually produce images with
residual artifacts, particularly at high reduction factors. In this
paper, we propose a novel, two-stage reconstruction scheme, which
takes advantage of the properties of k-space data and undersampling patterns that are useful in CS. In this algorithm, the
under-sampled k-space data is segmented into low-frequency and
high-frequency domains. Then, in stage one, using dense measurements, the low-frequency region of k-space data is faithfully reconstructed. The fully reconstituted low-frequency k-space data from
the first stage is then combined with the high-frequency k-space
data to complete the second stage reconstruction of the whole of
k-space. With this two-stage approach, each reconstruction inherently incorporates a lower data under-sampling rate and more
homogeneous signal magnitudes than conventional approaches.
Because the restricted isometric property is easier to satisfy, the reconstruction consequently produces lower residual errors at each
step. Compared with a conventional CS reconstruction, for the
cases of cardiac cine, brain and angiogram imaging, the proposed
method achieves a more accurate reconstruction with an improvement of 2–4 dB in peak signal-to-noise ratio respectively, using
reduction factors of up to 6.
Index Terms—Compressed sensing (CS), K-space segmentation, stationary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), two-stage
reconstruction.

I. INTRODUCTION
OMPRESSED sensing (CS), a relatively new signal processing theory, has been successfully applied to accelerate
the scan speed of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [1]. MR
images can be represented by a relatively small number of significant coefficients with nonzero values under an appropriate
transform domain. CS takes advantage of the MR image sparsity and reconstructs the image with an under-sampling rate
far lower than that required by the Nyquist sampling theorem
[2]–[4]. However, in stationary two-dimensional (2D) imaging,

C

Manuscript received October 20, 2013; accepted July 10, 2014. Date of
publication July 23, 2014; date of current version December 18, 2014. This
work was supported in part by the Australian Research Council, Quarantine of
China under Grant 201210079 and Science Technology Department of Zhejiang
Province of China under Grant 2013C24019. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
Y. Yang and S. Crozier are with the School of Information Technology and
Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072,
Australia (e-mail: y.yang13@uq.edu.au; stuart@itee.uq.edu.au).
∗ F. Liu is with the School of Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld. 4072, Australia
(e-mail: feng@itee.uq.edu.au).
W. Xu is with the School of Information Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail: wenlongxu@cjlu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2341621

CS is still limited in providing diagnostically accurate images
because it usually results in MR images with large residual
artifacts [5].
Over the past few years, various methods have been proposed
to improve the reconstruction quality of CS MRI. These methods
can be generally categorized in three ways. First, designing
irregular k-space sampling, such as variable density k-space
sampling and random sampling, is an effective method. It makes
the aliasing interference less visually prominent and incoherent
in the sparse transform domain, which is an essential aspect for
CS [5]–[7]. However, artifacts are difficult to distinguish from
real signals at larger reduction factors (the ratio between the
amount of subsampled data (D) and fully sampled data (N),
D
) [2]. This is because the final reconstructed image
i.e., R = N
quality not only relies on the limited randomness of the k-space
sampling, but it is also largely determined by another major
factor, that is the total amount and property of the collected
signal [5], [8]–[10].
A second approach attempts to use a range of sparsity bases
in spatial and temporal dimensions to provide sufficient sparsity
for faithful reconstruction using a subset of the largest transform coefficients. For example, the discrete wavelet transform
[11], curvelet transform [12], Walsh transform [13], and singular value decomposition-based transforms [14], [15] are commonly used as sparsity transforms. However, without sufficient
k-space data, sparse coefficients transformed from the sampling
signals cannot faithfully represent the original object, and thus,
the quality of the reconstructed images is degraded.
The third category comprises optimization methods for nonlinear signal recovery [11], [16], [17]. These have been a focus
of research interest since CS was introduced. These algorithms,
such as the focal underdetermined system solution, the iterative
reweighted least squares and the conjugate gradients, enforce
both the image sparsity and data consistency between the reconstruction and the acquisition. In these methods, a simple
regularization scheme is typically used to balance the sparsity
of the whole image, relative to the required data consistency
[11], [16]. However, one threshold may not satisfy both conditions simultaneously, thus affecting the final reconstruction
accuracy, especially with high reduction factors [11], [18], [19].
Typically, the sparsity properties of the low-frequency and highfrequency k-space data can be significantly different [5], [19].
Frequency-specific regularization schemes could be used to resolve this issue.
In this paper, we introduce a novel reconstruction scheme
to relieve some of the shortcomings of previous methods. The
two-part CS framework proposed in [20] treats the whole reconstruction with two algorithms, while our method focuses on

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YANG et al.: COMPRESSED SENSING MRI VIA TWO-STAGE RECONSTRUCTION

111

the study of the underlying signal properties of under-sampled
k-space data. It consists of a two-stage reconstruction procedure
to treat the low-frequency and high-frequency parts progressively. In this algorithm, an image outline will first be reconstructed based on the densely sampled k-space center, and then a
full image will be recaptured using the recovered low-frequency
k-space data and the sparsely sampled high-frequency data. The
feasibility and accuracy of the proposed method will first be theoretically analyzed and then validated through typical cardiac
cine, brain, and angiography MRI imaging examples.

part of image] is nonzero (except in very few situations) [5]. The
leaves of the trees (the high frequency subbands) are typically
the most sparse.
During the reconstruction process, the sparsity is constrained
by the l1 norm, which conventionally includes both the coarser
scale and high-frequency subbands. It is difficult to balance the
different sparsities of these parts during optimization [11], [19].
Therefore, it is not an optimal method for sparsifying the images
by global sparisty constraint.
In addition, the global sparsity constraint in conventional CS
methods tends to select the signals with large magnitude in the
k-space [19]. The k-space signal magnitudes corresponding to
these two parts of the wavelet coefficients also show different
features. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the signal magnitudes in the central part of the k-space are much higher than the peripheral part.
Thus, the global sparsity constraint leads the CS reconstruction
to focus on the central region of k-space data. However, the l2
norm operation in (2) is restricted by this in a conventional CS
algorithm. The l2 norm of the entire k-space is minimized to
ensure the data fidelity. Although the signal magnitude of the
k-space is typically smaller in the peripheral data, if it is not
reconstructed faithfully, the error can accumulate over a population much larger than in the central region, and can strongly
affect the effectiveness of the l2 norm. To solve this problem, different weights are applied to balance l1 and l2 norms. However,
this is a somewhat difficult implementation and the accuracy of
reconstruction cannot be guaranteed [23].
Focusing on nonuniform sampling, [19] introduced a method
with local sparsity constraints instead of a global one. Here, we
will propose a new method based on k-space segmentation.

II. THEORY
A. CS MRI
CS MRI can be briefly described as follows. Suppose an
N × N object MR image, which is known to have a sparse
representation in some basisΨ. Its k-space data are collected in
a random manner. The CS MRI reconstruction model can be
described as the following convex optimization problem [11]
Minimize : ||Ψ(m)||0 , subject to ||P ϕ (m) − y||2 < ε

(1)

where || · ||0 counts the number of nonzero components, Ψ denotes the sparse transform, m is the reconstructed image, ϕ the
Fourier transform, P the random under-sampling pattern, y consists of the measurements, ε is the tolerance that controls the
reconstruction data fidelity and relates to the expected noise
level.
In this optimization problem, the first l0 norm term promotes
the sparsity of the reconstructed image m and the constraint
||P ϕ (m) − y||2 < ε enforces the data fidelity [11].
In CS MRI, the restricted isometry property (RIP) is usually
used to analyze the performance and robustness of the CS algorithms. If the RIP condition holds [17], the reconstructed image
m will be close to the original image.
Equation (1) is a well-known nondeterministic polynomialtime (NP) hard problem [21]. By replacing the l0 norm with the
l1 norm to enforce the sparsity, it can be solved efficiently as a
convex optimization, as follows:
Minimize : ||Ψ(m)||1 , subject to || P ϕ (m) − y||2 < ε

|xi |.
Here, the l1 norm is defined as || x ||1 =

(2)

i

B. Nonuniform Signal Sparsity
It is known that the k-space distribution concentrates in the region of origin while it has low levels at the borders [see Fig. 1(c),
which shows the k-space data of a phantom]. This reveals that
the signal sparsity varies in different sections of the k-space.
The nonuniform sparsity distribution can also be clearly seen in
2-D Fourier transform [see Fig. 1(c)].
Naturally indexed on dyadic cubes, the wavelet has a tree
structure under inclusion [22]. The wavelet coefficients are
monotonically nonincreasing along the tree branches, outwards
from the root. In the example shown in Fig. 1, the tree structure
[see Fig. 1(a)] illustrates that a wavelet coefficient is nonzero
only if the wavelet coefficient in the coarser scale [the area in
the red box in Fig. 1(b), corresponding to the lower frequency

C. k-Space Segmentation
As shown in Section II-B, the energy of the k-space is concentrated close to the central region for the majority of MR images.
The variable density-sampling pattern generally collects more
data near the k-space center (low-frequency parts) and less in
the periphery of the k-space (high-frequency parts). One example of a random sampling pattern (256 × 256 pixels) with the
∗
256
reduction factor R = 256
16395 = 3.99 is illustrated in Fig. 2(a).
Its central region (the red square box with 64 × 64 pixels) has a
∗
64
reduction factor Rcenter = 64
2296 = 1.36, which is much lower
than the reduction factor of the whole k-space. Hence, the central region of the k-space can be reconstructed more faithfully
with a low reduction factor [24].
In addition, the aforementioned wavelet coefficients in the
coarser-scale part can be obtained from the faithfully recovered k-space data in the central region. Using the tree structure of the wavelet coefficients, the nonzero coefficients in the
high-frequency subband can be constrained based on the reconstructed coarser-scale data [5]. Because the sparsities of both
the coarser-scale and high-frequency subbands in the wavelet
domain have been improved, the reconstruction accuracy of the
whole image is meliorated.
In this section, we will describe how to segment the k-space in
accordance with different sampling patterns. Suppose the size of
the k-space is N × N, a square box with size n × n is chosen in

112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 1. Relationship between the wavelet domain and k-space domain. (a) The tree structure of the Wavelet. Wavelet coefficients flow from the coarsest scale
to the finest as the arrow shows. (b) The Wavelet coefficients of a phantom image. The nonzero coefficients focus on the coarser scale as in the red box. (c) The
k-space data are transformed from the Wavelet coefficients by k = ϕΨ −1 w. The signal magnitudes of the central part in the red box [corresponding to the wavelet
coefficients in the red box of (b)] are much higher than the peripheral part.

Fig. 2. k-space segmentation. (a) Selected central part (the area in the red square box with n × n pixels) in a random sampling pattern (256 × 256 pixels)
when the reduction factor R = 4. (b) Sampling density of the selected central part (n × n pixels) in the sampling pattern as in (a) with n = 2 m, m ε [1, 128].
(c) Under-sampled k-space of a cardiac cine MR image with the sampling pattern as in (a). (d) Power ratio of the selected central part (n × n pixels) in (c) when
n = 2m, m ε [1, 128]. (e) Average power ratio in the selected central part of the under-sampled k-space data as in (c).

the k-space center, as shown in the previous example in Fig. 2(a).
The sampling density of the selected part can be calculated by
D = k/n2 , where k is the number of the sampled points in the
square box. With the increase of n as n = 2 m, m ε [1, N/2], the
curve of D can be obtained. Fig. 2(b) illustrates the sampling
density curve of the random sampling pattern in Fig. 2(a). It is
obvious that the sampling density of the selected central part is
much higher than that in the whole of the k-space.
Not only the sampling density, but also the k-space power of
the selection is essential for the faithful reconstruction of the

representative outline. If the central part is too small to obtain a
high sampling density, it will contain too little k-space information. Thus, the image outline corresponding to the selected part
cannot be representative of the whole image.
The determination of the size of the central part is important
to the reconstruction of the image outline and also the final
CS MRI solution. To find the proper size of a central k-space
region, we define the k-space power ratio of the selected part
p(n)
, n = 2 m, m ε [1, N/2], where the function p(n)
by P = p(N)
means the sum of the power in the selected square area with size

YANG et al.: COMPRESSED SENSING MRI VIA TWO-STAGE RECONSTRUCTION

113

Fig. 4. Catesian k-space under-sampling patterns used for reconstructions
with R = 6. (a) 2-D random sampling pattern. (b) 1-D random sampling pattern.

higher sampling density ensures more accurate information in
the central k-space region. A larger power ratio indicates that the
k-space data in the selected region contains more information
for the whole image. However, with the increase of n (size of the
selected area), the sampling density and the power ratio show
the opposite trends [see Fig. 2(b) and 2(d)]. Therefore, a proper
size for segmenting the k-space should be considered.
To balance the two contrary elements of the segmentation
and to designate the segmentation, we define the average power
ratio (AP) of the selected part as
AP = D × P.

(3)

The average power ratio can be thought of as a metric of
the k-space power/information density of the selected region.
One example is shown in Fig. 2(e) by combining the sampling
density (D) data from Fig. 2(b) and the power ratio (P) data from
Fig. 2(d). The peak point of the AP curve in Fig. 2(e) at n = 42
is obviously the optimal choice of selected region size.
For the consideration of 2-D wavelets, in the sparse base
used here, the n value will be rounded to be the power of 2.
However, the peak point of AP n = 42 does not satisfy the
condition n = 2j , j ∈ N, which is a fundamental property of the
2-D wavelet transformation. Therefore, the proper choice n of
the selected central part should satisfy n = 2j , j ∈ N and is
closest to the peak point of the average power ratio curve. In the
example shown in Fig. 2(e), n1 = 32 and n2 = 64 are the two
satisfied choices. Because AP (n1 ) < AP (n2 ), n2 = 64 is the
more suitable choice.
D. Proposed Two-Stage Reconstruction

Fig. 3.

Flowchart of the proposed two-stage reconstruction algorithm.

n × n. Fig. 2(d) shows the power ratio curve of under-sampled
cardiac cine MRI data with the sampling pattern from Fig. 2(a).
As Fig. 2(d) shows, it is clear that the power ratio P increases
with the extension of the selected area.
A proper balance of the sampling density and power ratio
is considered for the selection of the central region size. A

We now illustrate the flowchart of two-stage process in Fig. 3.
The image reconstruction procedure of the proposed method
consists of the following four steps:
Step 1: Initialization. Suppose m is a MR image with N × N
pixels, p is the under-sampling pattern, y consists of the undersampled measurements with pattern p, ϕ is the Fourier transform, Ψ is the 2-D wavelet transform in advance, and ε is the
tolerance in (1).
Step 2: k-space segmentation. Using the strategy explained
in Section II-C, we segment the k-space into two parts.
Step 3: The reconstruction of the image outline (Level 1 reconstruction). According to the segmentation, the central part of

114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 5. Performance comparison between conventional CS and two-stage CS
for cardiac cine MR data under different reduction factors: (a) with 2-D random
sampling pattern and (b) with 1-D random sampling pattern.

the k-space measurements and sampling pattern can be obtained
as yC and pC . According to the truncated-Fourier transform, the
central part of the k-space data corresponds to the image outline
[1]. The outline of the image mC can be reconstructed by the
CS algorithm for solving the following problem:
minx ||Ψ(mC )||1 , subject to ||pC ϕ (mC ) − yC ||2 < ε.

(4)

Step 4: k-space combination. Transformed from the reconstructed image outline mc , the recovered k-space central part
kC = ϕ(mc ) will replace the responding part yC in the whole
k-space measurement y to obtain the new k-space data kR .
Step 5: The reconstruction of the whole image (Level 2 reconstruction). Because the central region of the k-space has been re-

Fig. 6. Performance comparison between conventional CS and two-stage CS
for brain MR data under different reduction factors: (a) with 2-D random sampling pattern and (b) with 1-D random sampling pattern.

constructed, for the Level 2 reconstruction, we use pR = p + pac
(pac represents the central region to be all 1s) as the new sampling pattern. Using mR = ϕ−1 (kR ) as the initial solution, the
whole image mR can be reconstructed by the CS as follows:
minx ||Ψ(mR )||1 , subject to ||pR ϕ (mR ) − y||2 < ε.

(5)

III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Acquisition
The performance of the proposed method was tested with
three typical MR datasets: cardiac cine MR data, brain MR
data, and angiography MR data [25]–[27].
The cardiac cine MR data was a frame of full k-space data
acquired using a 1.5 T Philips system, as a typical test case.
The brain MR image, as a complex form with large contrast in

YANG et al.: COMPRESSED SENSING MRI VIA TWO-STAGE RECONSTRUCTION

115

transform domain [3]. Whilst 2-D random sampling patterns
cannot be physically realized in an MRI scanner, it is mainly
considered as an ideal case for algorithm evaluation.
The 1-D random sampling pattern [see Fig. 4(b)] was implemented only in the phase-encoded direction and by using a
variable-density sampling scheme with a denser sampling at a
low-frequency. It was easily implemented by randomly changing the amplitudes of the phase-encoding [7]. However, the
incoherence of a 1-D random sampling pattern is weaker than a
2-D random sampling pattern, which can cause regular aliasing
interference along the phase-encoded direction (data sampled
randomly in this direction) in the reconstructed image. We will
mainly evaluate the robustness and sensitivity of the proposed
algorithm using 1-D random sampling scheme.
B. Experimental Methods

Fig. 7. Performance comparison between conventional CS and two-stage CS
for angiography MR data under different reduction factors: (a) with 2-D random
sampling pattern and (b) with 1-D random sampling pattern.

the pixel domain, was employed to test the algorithm performance for the cases with general MR images. The angiography
MR images were chosen to represent MR images already being
sparse in the pixel domain. The k-space was fully acquired by
a Siemens (Siemens Magnetom TIM Trio, Erlangen, Germany)
1.5 T MRI system (CCAI, 2012). For all these cases, the image
size was 256 × 256 pixels.
Two different Cartesian under-sampling schemes: 2-D random sampling pattern and 1-D (only in phase direction) random
sampling pattern were simulated based on the fully sampled
k-space data. For all the cases, the reduction factor R = 6,
which means only 16.67% of the k-space data were sampled
(see Fig. 4). The 2-D random sampling pattern [see Fig. 4(a)] is
guaranteed to have incoherent aliasing interference in the sparse

We utilized nonlinear conjugate gradients and a backtracking line-search [15] for solving the optimization in (4) and (5).
For all the reconstruction methods, the initial estimations are
directly set as the under-sampled k-space data. With an adjustment to the dataset, the parameter λ, as the weighting of l1 and l2
norms, are experimentally set to be 0.005, 0.0044, and 0.006 for
cardiac cine, brain, and angiography. All reconstructions were
implemented on a desktop computer with Intel Core i7–3770
eight-core Processor and 12GB of RAM utilizing MATLAB
(R2013b: The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA).
The peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) is used as the metric
for the quality assessment. PSNR is commonly used to measure
the quality of the processed image, which includes the mean
square error of the reconstructed image in comparison with the
reference image [28]. The PSNR was calculated as
⎛
⎞
MAX
I
⎠
PSNR = 20log10 ⎝ 
m n
2
1
[I
(i,
j)
−
I
(i,
j)]
rec
i=1
j =1
mn
(6)
where I is the benchmark (fully sampled image), MAXI is the
maximum possible pixel value of the image, and Irec is the
reconstructed image.
In addition, the intensity difference between the reconstructed
images and the fully sampled images are also used to visually
assess the reconstruction quality.
IV. RESULTS
A. Reconstruction Performance With Different
Reduction Factors
The PSNR of the reconstructed images by a conventional CS
method and the proposed method was recorded with respect
to the different reduction factors. The results of cardiac cine,
brain, and angiography MR datasets are shown as Figs. 5–7,
respectively. The circles in the figure represent the conventional method, while the squares denote the two-stage method.
As these figures illustrate, the improvements of the proposed
method were very obvious in various cases and sampling patterns. They yielded an enhancement in quality of about 1.5 to
4 dB.

116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 8. Reconstructed images of cardiac cine MR data (top row images) and
difference images (bottom row images) under 2-D random sampling pattern at
R = 6: (left) with conventional CS (right) with the proposed two-stage CS.

Fig. 9. Reconstructed images of cardiac cine MR data (top row images) and
difference images (bottom row images) under 1-D random sampling pattern at
R = 6: (left) with conventional CS, (right) with the proposed two-stage CS.

With the comparison of three different cases, the proposed
method shows its capability in handling the cases with larger
reduction factors. Using the 2-D random sampling pattern, less
k-space data in the peripheral part were obtained with a higher
reduction factor. The resulting images were blurred both at
the edges and in the details. The proposed method can more

Fig. 10. Reconstructed images of brain MR data (top row images) and difference images (bottom row images) under 2-D random sampling pattern at R = 6:
(left) with conventional CS, (right) with the proposed two-stage CS.

faithfully reconstruct an outline of the image with a higher sampling ratio and use the tree structure of the 2-D wavelet to control
the sparsity of the whole image. The sparsity control provided
better reconstruction quality compared with the conventional
method. For detailed comparison, see Figs. 5(a), 6(a) and 7(a).
As Fig. 4 shows, the 1-D random sampling pattern with
Cartesian trajectories is more coherent compared with the 2D random sampling pattern. Comparing the PSNR curves of
the conventional CS method under these two random sampling
patterns (see Figs. 5–7), we can see the aliasing artifacts accompanied by 1-D random sampling pattern obviously degrade
the quality of the reconstructed images. Under the 1-D random
sampling pattern, the PSNR curve of a conventional CS method
decreases steeply with the increase of reduction factor R. The
proposed method uses the higher sampling ratio in the selected
region to suppress the aliasing artifacts in the reconstructed image outlines. For the tree structure of a 2-D wavelet, the more
faithfully recovered image outline leads to an accurate sparsity control of the whole image. As shown in Figs. 5(b), 6(b)
and 7(b), the proposed method showed substantial improvement
compared with the conventional ones.

B. Comparison of Image Reconstruction
The reconstruction results of the conventional method and the
proposed method are presented in Figs. 8–13. Three imaging
cases (cardiac cine, brain, and angiography) are compared and
R = 6 in each case. The differences between the reconstructed
images and the originals are also shown to facilitate comparison.

YANG et al.: COMPRESSED SENSING MRI VIA TWO-STAGE RECONSTRUCTION

117

Fig. 11. Reconstructed images of brain MR data (top row images) and difference images (bottom row images) under 2-D random sampling pattern at R = 6:
(left) with conventional CS, (right) with the proposed two-stage CS.

Fig. 13. Reconstructed images of angiography MR data (top row images) and
difference images (bottom row images) under 2-D random sampling pattern at
R = 6: (left) with conventional CS, (right) with the proposed two-stage CS.

reconstruction of image details than the conventional method.
For the examples, note the improvements marked by red arrows
in Figs. 8–13.
V. DISCUSSION

Fig. 12. Reconstructed images of angiography MR data (top row images) and
difference images (bottom row images) under 2-D random sampling pattern at
R = 6: (left) with conventional CS, (right) with the proposed two-stage CS.

For better visualization, the difference image in each case is
normalized by its individual maximum.
The imaging studies indicate that, the proposed method effectively reduces the residual artifacts in 2-D random sampling
patterns and aliasing artifacts in 1-D random sampling patterns.
In most cases, the proposed method offers higher fidelity in the

Compared with the conventional method, the reconstruction
of a two-stage method localizes different parts of the k-space
to exploit the redundancy of the sampled data. To balance the
reduction factor and reconstruction quality, the two-stage CS
method takes advantage of the inhomogeneous distribution of
the k-space power and the variable-density of the sampling pattern. The higher sampling ratio of the selected central k-space
data leads to a more faithful reconstruction. The reconstructed
image outline in stage one can conduce a better initial solution
for the whole k-space reconstruction of stage two. The corresponding wavelet coefficients in the coarser scale can approach
the sparsity control of the whole image. The solution also avoids
most incoherent artifacts caused by the estimation errors at the
low-frequencies. For the 2-D random sampling pattern with
a high level of incoherence, the faithful reconstruction of the
image outline will lead to less residual errors in the whole image reconstruction, because it provides more general features.
For the 1-D random sampling pattern, the reconstruction of the
conventional CS schemes usually has more aliasing artifacts,
because the sampling pattern is only random in one direction.
Using the proposed method, the low-frequency k-space information was recovered with a lower reduction factor first that
could reduce the aliasing effects. With a more faithful image
outline (coarser scale of wavelet coefficient), the whole image

118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

reconstruction was more accurate and with less aliasing artifacts
by the sparsity control of wavelet tree structure.
As mentioned, the sparsity of the wavelet coefficients in the
coarser scale and the high-frequency subband are different. It is
useful to adjust the weights of l1 and l2 in the two-stage optimization process of the CS algorithm. From previous case studies, the results manifested the effects of weighting adjustment in
different k-space parts. We also note that, the 2-D wavelet sparsity in the two-stage reconstruction can be replaced by other
proper sparsifying transformations [13], [15].
In the implementation of the proposed two-stage reconstruction, the algorithm convergence of each iteration is better owing
to smaller problem size (in stage one) and better initial condition (in stage two). Therefore, although the total iteration times
(including two stages) of the proposed method are similar to
those of the conventional method, the two-stage CS has less
total computational time.
VI. CONCLUSION
To reduce the large reconstruction artifacts that occur when
using existing CS schemes with high reduction factors, we have
proposed a two-stage CS method that recovers the central and
peripheral k-space data in a sequential manner. From the relatively dense sampled inner k-space part, an image outline is
first reconstructed. Using image outline from stage one and
the sampled peripheral k-space data, a full image recovery is
then implemented. This stepped reconstruction naturally solves
a number of technical difficulties in conventional CS methods,
including the processing of a large magnitude contrast between
the low-frequency and high-frequency k-space data. The new
method has been applied to cardiac cine, brain, and angiography
MRI datasets and compared with conventional CS schemes.
We have demonstrated that the new method improves the
reconstruction accuracy and reduces the reconstruction time.
Because the presence of aliasing artifacts also limits the application of the CS in dynamic MRI, in our future work, we plan
to extend the developed CS algorithm to dynamic MRI studies.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Haase, “Snapshot flash mri. applications to t1, t2, and chemical-shift
imaging,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 13, pp. 77–89, 1990.
[2] M. Stehling, R. Turner, and P. Mansfield, “Echo-planar imaging: Magnetic
resonance imaging in a fraction of a second,” Science, vol. 254, pp. 43–50,
1991.
[3] M. Lustig, D. Donoho, J. M. Santos, and J. M. Pauly, “A look at how CS
can improve on current imaging techniques,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 72–82, Mar. 2008.
[4] E. Candès, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.
[5] K. Sung and B. A. Hargreaves. (2012). High-frequency subband compressed sensing MRI using quadruplet sampling. Magn. Reson. Med.,
vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 1306–1318. [Online]. Available: http://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mrm.24592/abstract;jsessionid
=
403CC7AB962031BE9C94F0D97A960083.f02t01
[6] E. Candès and T. Tao, “Near optimal signal recovery from random projections: Universal encoding strategies,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 5406–5425, Dec. 2006.

[7] H. Wang, D. Liang, and L. Ying, “Pseudo 2D random sampling for compressed sensing MRI,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Annu. Int.
Conf., 2009, pp. 2672–2675.
[8] P. M. Margosian, G. DeMeester, and H. Liu, “Partial fourier acquisition
in MRI,” in Encyclopaedia of Magnetic Resonance. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, 2007.
[9] N. Chauffert, P. Ciuciu, J. Kahn, and P. Weiss, “Variable density sampling
with continuous sampling trajectories,” arXiv:1311.6039, 2013.
[10] R. W. Chan, E. A. Ramsay, E. Y. Cheung, and D. B. Plewes, “The influence
of radial undersampling schemes on compressed sensing reconstruction
in breast MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 67, pp. 363–377, 2012.
[11] M. Lustig, D. Donoho, and J. M. Pauly, “Sparse MRI: The application of
compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 58,
pp. 1182-1195, 2007.
[12] E. Cande‘s and D. Donoho, Curvelets—A Surprisingly Effectivenonadaptive Representation for Objects With Edges, in A. Cohen, C. Rabut, and
L. Schumaker, Eds. Nashville, TN, USA: Vanderbilt Univ. Press, 2000,
pp. 105–120.
[13] Z. Feng, F. Liu, M. Jiang, S. Crozier, H. Guo. and Y. Wang, “Improved
l1-SPIRiT using 3D Walsh transform-based sparsity basis,” Magn. Reson.
Imag., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 924–933, 2014.
[14] M. Hong, Y. Yu, H. Wang, F. Liu, and S. Crozier, “Compressed sensing
MRI with singular value decomposition based sparsity basis,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 56, no. 19, pp. 6311–6325, 2011.
[15] Y. Yu, J. Jin, F. Liu, and S. Crozier, “Multidimensional compressed sensing
MRI using tensor decomposition-based sparsifying transform,” PLoS One,
vol. 9, no. 6, p. e98441, Jun. 5, 2014.
[16] D. S. Taubman and M. W. Marcellin, JPEG 2000: Image Compression
Fundamentals, Standards and Practice (International Series in Engineering and Computer Science). Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer, 2002.
[17] D. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[18] R. Chartrand, “Fast algorithms for nonconvex compressive sensing: MRI
reconstruction from very few data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed.
Imag.: From Nano to Macro, Jun. 28/Jul. 1, 2009, pp. 262–265.
[19] F. A. Razzaq, S. Mohamed, A. Bhatti, and S. Nahavandi, “Non-uniform
sparsity in rapid compressive sensing MRI,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst.
Man, Cybern., 2012, pp. 2253–2258.
[20] Y. Ma, D. Baron, and D. Needell, “Two-part reconstruction in compressed sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Conf. Signal Inf. Process., 2013,
pp. 1041–1044.
[21] E. J. Candès, J. K. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Stable signal recovery from
incomplete and inaccurate measurements,” Commun. Pure Appl. Math.,
vol. 59, pp. 1207–1223, 2006.
[22] R. G. Baraniuk, R. A. DeVore, G. Kyriazis, and X. M. Yu, “Near best tree
approximation,” Adv. Comput. Math., vol. 16, pp. 357–373, 2012.
[23] H. Oh and S. Lee, “Visually weighted reconstruction of compressive sensing MRI,” Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 32, pp. 270–280, 2014.
[24] E. J. Candès, “Compressive sampling,” presented at the Int. Congr. Mathematicians, Madrid, Spain, 2006.
[25] K. T. Block, M. Uecker, and J. Frahm, “Undersampled radial MRI with
multiple coils. Iterative image reconstruction using a total variation constraint,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1086–1098, 2007.
[26] H. Jung, K. Sung, K. S. Nayak, E. Y. Kim, and J. C. Ye, “k-t FOCUSS:
A general compressed sensing framework for high resolution dynamic
MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 103–116, 2009.
[27] D. Liang, E. V. DiBella, R. R. Chen, and L. Ying, “k-t ISD: dynamic cardiac
MR imaging using compressed sensing with iterative support detection,”
Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 41–53, 2012.
[28] S. G. Lingala, H. Yue, E. DiBella, and M. Jacob, “Accelerated dynamic
MRI exploiting sparsity and low-rank structure: k-t SLR,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1042–1054, May 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

