1682

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

BreathSens: A Continuous On-Bed Respiratory
Monitoring System With Torso Localization Using
an Unobtrusive Pressure Sensing Array
Jason J. Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Ming-Chun Huang, Student Member, IEEE, Wenyao Xu, Member, IEEE,
Xiaoyi Zhang, Student Member, IEEE, Luke Stevens, Nabil Alshurafa, Student Member, IEEE,
and Majid Sarrafzadeh, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The ability to continuously monitor respiration rates
of patients in homecare or in clinics is an important goal. Past
research showed that monitoring patient breathing can lower the
associated mortality rates for long-term bedridden patients. Nowadays, in-bed sensors consisting of pressure sensitive arrays are
unobtrusive and are suitable for deployment in a wide range of
settings. Such systems aim to extract respiratory signals from timeseries pressure sequences. However, variance of movements, such
as unpredictable extremities activities, affect the quality of the extracted respiratory signals. BreathSens, a high-density pressure
sensing system made of e-Textile, profiles the underbody pressure
distribution and localizes torso area based on the high-resolution
pressure images. With a robust bodyparts localization algorithm,
respiratory signals extracted from the localized torso area are insensitive to arbitrary extremities movements. In a study of 12 subjects, BreathSens demonstrated its respiratory monitoring capability with variations of sleep postures, locations, and commonly
tilted clinical bed conditions.
Index Terms—Pictorial structure, pressure sensor, respiration
monitoring, signal extraction.

I. INTRODUCTION
RGENT medical care is required when patients have abnormal respiration such as tachypnea (high respiration),
bradypnea (low respiration), or apnea (no respiration). Peberdy
et al. reported that 44% of over 14 000 cardiac arrests in acute
care hospitals were attributed to respiratory problems [1]. Furthermore, the 2011 HealthGrades study showed that 20% of

U

Manuscript received May 16, 2014; revised July 21, 2014; accepted July 23,
2014. Date of publication July 31, 2014; date of current version September 1,
2015.
J. J. Liu, N. Alshurafa, and M. Sarrafzadeh are with the Wireless Health Institute, Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA 90095 USA (e-mail: jasonliu@cs.ucla.edu; nabil@cs.ucla.edu; majid@cs.
ucla.edu).
M.-C. Huang is with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA (e-mail: ming-chun.
huang@case.edu).
W. Xu is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State
University of New York at Buffalo, New York, NY 14260 USA (e-mail:
wenyaoxu@buffalo.edu).
X. Zhang is with the Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: xiaoyiz@cs.washington.edu).
L. Stevens is with Medisens Wireless, Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA
(e-mail: luke@medisens.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2344679

postoperative respiratory failures in 5000 hospitals resulted in
death [2].
Hodgetts et al. [3] and Fieselmann et al. [4] observed that a
large proportion of cardiac arrest patients had high-respiration
rate. In addition, the variation in respiratory rate is another
important marker for cardiac arrest or admission to the intensive
care unit [5].
Despite such information, respiration rate monitoring has not
received the same level of attention compared with monitoring
of the other vital signs such as blood pressure and heart rate
[6]. McBride et al. showed the lack of consideration toward
respiratory rate reporting that only 30% of patients have their
respiratory rate recorded daily [7]. Reasons include the lack of
reliable and unobtrusive respiration rate measurement systems
[5]. Hospitals pay less attention to respiratory rates due to the
fact that current monitoring systems require direct contact with
the skin [8]. Other methods such as video analysis to infer
breath rate are noncontact; however, there are issues with privacy
and low-light level at night. Thus, in many hospitals, medical
personnel manually measure breathing rates.
This paper introduces BreathSens, a system that unobtrusively monitors on-bed respiration. By targeting the torso region
of the body, this system converts the pressure distribution to a
respiratory signal. We summarize the innovations as
1) design of an indirect contact respiration rate monitoring
system that has better usability and comfort due to body
localization;
2) a framework that applies a torso localization algorithm to
enable measurement of respiration rate;
3) results of experimental studies in both controlled and tilted
bed environments.
Furthermore, we also show a method of visualization of the
breathing patterns during regular sleep periods. This study focuses on respiration monitoring over continuous periods with
the purpose of measuring average respiration rates over extended time periods or during sleep.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes current related work in measurement of respiration
rate. Section III details briefly the pressure sensitive bedsheet
used for respiration monitoring. The algorithmic method is described in Section IV, and the experimental setup and results
are given in Section V. Finally, a discussion and future work are
given in Section VI.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LIU et al.: BREATHSENS: A CONTINUOUS ON-BED RESPIRATORY MONITORING SYSTEM WITH TORSO LOCALIZATION

1683

II. RELATED WORK
This section describes the current state of the art in measuring
respiration rate. There are three main categories of respiratory
rate monitoring: on-body, indirect contact, and noncontact.
On-body sensors are either directly attached on the skin or
wearable through straps. The main concern with on-body sensors is their obtrusive nature and setup issues. Hospitals use
pulse oximeters, such as the Nellcor Respiratory Monitor [9],
to estimate respiratory rate from oximetry measurements on
the patient’s finger. However, the results are often inaccurate
when patients have abnormal levels of oxygen saturation or low
pulses [10]. Respiratory inductance plesthysmography is a dual
belted sensor worn around the chest and abdomen. As patient’s
body expands and contracts during breathing, this sensor reflects changes in the inductance of its coils. Now, many sleep
centers use this sensor solution, which is recommended by the
American Academy of Sleep Medicine [11].
The second category of respiratory rate monitoring is indirect
contact. Typically, this method involves sensors embedded in
the mattress, sheet, or pillow, which overcomes the discomfort
issues inherent with on-body sensors. An air mattress sensor
system [12] allows measurement of the respiration and heart
beat movements without use of any on-body sensor. However,
the shape, type, or thickness of the mattress may introduce
noise to the sensed data. Another type of indirect contact sensor
is capacitance sensor, which measures the changes in electrical
permittivity above the sensor caused by air in the lungs [13].
Again, it required the subject to be localized directly above the
sensor. Using hetero-core fiber optic pressure sensors, Nishyama
et al. [14] relaxed the restriction of sleep pose a little further by
having a wider sensitivity to small pressure changes and could
account for large changes.
The third category of respiratory rate monitoring is noncontact. For instance, using video or other electromagnetic radiation sensing [15]. Current developments in video analyses can
measure respiratory rate and heart rate by analyzing the small
changes in color of subjects’ faces [16]. The Philips Vital Signs
Camera [17] application on iOS devices performs this contactless measurement of breathing rate. However, using video cameras leads to a concern about patient privacy in hospital and
lighting during the night can be a significant problem. The use
of infrared sensors can diminish some of these issues. Murthy
et al. used an infrared imaging system to detect the temperature
change of exhaled air out of patients’ mouths [18].
In summary, noncontact-based respiratory rate monitoring
has the advantage of noninvasiveness, however, still needs to be
localized, while contact sensors are obtrusive and need manual
setup. On the other hand, our system, a high-density pressure
sensitive bed sheet, is noninvasive, comfortable, and can measure respiration at any location on the mattress. It is able to
provide sufficient accuracy to be used as a screening tool for
changes in respiration.
III. PRESSURE-SENSITIVE BEDSHEET SYSTEM
The designed prototype bed sheet is a 2.5 m × 1.25 m system
that contains 64 × 128 pressure sensors (see Fig. 1). Sixty-four

Fig. 1. High-density pressure sensor array captures a full pressure distribution.
The pressure is represented as pixel intensities.

Fig. 2. Respiration monitoring flow consists of three components. (a) Torso
localization. (b) Respiratory signal extraction. (c) Peak detection.

column conductive lines and 128 row conductive lines generate
8192 intersections. A sheet of e-Textile fabric, which is regular
fabric coated with piezoelectric polymer is located in between
the row and column layers. Therefore, each joint intersection
forms a pressure sensor within the three-layer sandwich structure (the resistance of the e-Textile changes when pressure is
applied [19], [20]). Because of the fabric, the feel of the sensing
system is just like regular fabric.
A sampling unit is connected to all conductive lines and performs matrix scanning to measure pressure map sequences. Retrieved pressure map signals of the 8192 sensors are quantified
to values ranging from 0 to 255 [21], [22]. Sampling rate is
adjustable up to 10 Hz. For this respiratory rate measurement,
a sampling rate of 1.5 Hz was used. This allows the system to
achieve a maximum breathing detection rate up to 45 breaths
per minute according to the Nyquist rule.
IV. BREATH MONITORING ALGORITHM
The method for monitoring respiration rate is composed of
three parts: torso localization, respiratory signal extraction, and
peak detection (see Fig. 2). Locating the torso area in the timeindexed pressure images reduces interference caused by extremities movement. The torso localization algorithm is based
on a pictorial model and cost minimization method. Mismatch
and deformation costs combine as the overall cost to most accurately fit a pictorial model into a pressure image. The torso
localization algorithm aims to find the best fit among all possible body model configurations in the pressure image and so the

1684

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

high-density bedsheet enables accurate body localization. Once
the torso area is localized, the pressure values in the area of
chest and stomach are used to extract respiratory signals using a
vertical weighting calculation. A peak detection algorithm with
adaptive thresholding is applied to mark breathing events and
intervals. Fig. 2 shows the overview of the algorithm.
A. Torso Localization
The torso localization method is based on the pictorial structures model proposed by Fischler and Elschlager [23] for identifying structured objects in images. Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher improved the matching efficiency of the parts based algorithm using distance transforms within dynamic programming
[24]. An adaptation of the model is presented here and we apply
it to find the bodyparts in pressure images.
A graph model can be used to represent the human body.
Each part of the human body can be represented as a node
in a graph, e.g., shoulders, hips, upper legs, and lower legs
are nodes connected by edges. In this method, the appearance
of a bodypart j is measured using a mismatch cost mj (I, lj )
where I is the image and lj = (xj , yj , θj ) is the center location and rotation of the bodypart. A low value of mismatch
means the bodypart model is well recognized at that location
and rotation. The calculation for mismatch cost is described in
Section IV-A1.
In addition to this appearance cost for each bodypart model,
there is a cost which measures the relationship between bodypart
locations, called the deformation cost dij (li , lj ). For bodyparts i
and j, it gives a measure of the error of their expected separation.
For instance, the hip and shoulders are known to be separated
by the spine length. The calculation for deformation cost is
described in Section IV-A.
So for a given set of bodypart models and relationships between them, the best configuration of bodyparts L =
(l1 , . . . , ln ) in an image minimizes the total cost of mismatch
for all parts and deformation between all pairs of parts
⎛
⎞


arg min ⎝
mj (I, lj ) +
dij (li , lj )⎠ . (1)
L

allparts

allpairs

For n bodyparts, the calculation of this expression grows exponentially. However, with the tree representation of bodyparts,
it can be solved more efficiently as a chain of computations using
dynamic programming. For any leaf node (having no children),
its best location ˆlj can be calculated as a function of its parent
location li . So the best leaf node location is a function of parent
location
Bj (li ) = arg min (mj (I, lj ) + dij (li , lj )) .
lj

(2)

For a nonleaf, nonroot node, its best location ˆlj as a function
of its parent location li is given by
Bj (li ) = arg min(mj (I, lj ) + dij (li , lj ) +
lj


Ch(j)

Bc (lj )) (3)

Fig. 3. Transformation of bodypart models. The upper box represents the
shoulder region and the lower box represent the hip region. The locations of
the bodypart models are transformed into a common space, which allows the
calculation of a deformation cost.

where Ch(j) means children of j, and Bc (lj ) are the costs of
the best locations of the children of j. This is already calculated
and memorized via the dynamic programming methodology.
Then, for the root node (no parent), its best location is

ˆlj = arg min(mj (I, lj ) +
Bc (lj ))
(4)
lj

C h(j )

where Bc (lj ) is known for each of the children of j. This formulation, (2)–(4), reduces the number of computations from
exponential to polynomial while still producing the globally
best solution.
1) Compute Mismatch Cost: To compute the mismatch cost
mj (I, lj ) for each bodypart, we select a representative template.
The bodyparts are simply represented as rectangular boxes surrounded by a border (see Fig. 3 which shows an example of the
shoulder and hip models). To account for different pressure images with varying weights of subjects, the image I is binarized
at different thresholds. A convolution operation of this kernel
with the binary images efficiently gives the mismatch cost at all
locations. This computes how many pixels do not match inside
the inner box and within the border. Then, the mismatch cost is
the smallest cost across all threshold levels for each location.
2) Compute Deformation Cost: To compute the deformation
cost dij (li , lj ) between bodyparts, we define this cost to have
the form
dij (li , lj ) = ||Tij (li ) − Tj i (lj )||.

(5)

This is a simple distance metric between locations transformed
to a common space (refer to Fig. 3). The transforms can
be translations, rotations, and scaling, hence they are invertible.
The effect of the transforms is to specify the expected relations
between the locations, i.e., if two bodyparts have no deformation
cost and are correctly positioned, then the transformed locations
will coincide. The pairwise distance metric takes quadratic time
in the number of locations. For every location of the parent, we
want to compute the distance to each location of the child. On
the surface, quadratic time may seem satisfactory but this can be
improved to linear time through the use of distance transforms
[25]. In fact, every pairwise distance between li and lj need not

LIU et al.: BREATHSENS: A CONTINUOUS ON-BED RESPIRATORY MONITORING SYSTEM WITH TORSO LOCALIZATION

be computed. From (2), only the smallest sum of deformation
cost and mismatch cost is needed at each location of li .
The generalized form of a distance transform given a function
f is
D(z) = min(||z − w|| + f (w))
w

(6)

where z and w are locations in a grid. This formulation states
that, for every location z, it finds the closest location w with the
smallest value for f (w).
In (6), we can map z to a translated location for li , i.e., z =
Tij (li ). w maps to a translated location for lj , i.e., w = Tj i (lj ).
f (w) is a function that maps to f (w) = mj (I, Tj−1
i (lj )).
With these equivalences, we write (2) in a form where the
generalized distance transform applies

Bj (li ) = D(Tij (li )) = min ||Tij (li ) − Tj i (lj )||
lj


+mj (I, Tj−1
i (Tij (li ))) .

(7)

For nodes that are not leaves or root, (3) converts to

Bj (li ) = D(Tij (li )) = min ||Tij (li ) − Tj i (lj )||
lj

+ mj (I, Tj−1
i (Tij (li )))


Bc (Tj−1
+
i (Tij (li ))) . (8)
C h(j )

Now, the final discussion describes how to speed up the calculation of (7) and (8). For the leaf nodes, we initialize an array
D[x, y, θ] with the values of mj (I, Tj−1
i (Tj i (lj ))), which is just
the mismatch cost of the child but translated to a new location
in the same space as the parent. For nonleaf nodes, we initialize
the array D[x, y, θ] with the values of

Bc (Tj−1
(9)
mj (I, Tj−1
i (Tij (li ))) +
i (Tij (li )))
C h(j )

which is the mismatch cost of the child (translated to a new
location in the same space as the parent) plus the cost of the
children. The values of D[x, y, θ] can be updated according to
D[x, y, θ] = min(D[x, y, θ],
D[x − 1, y, θ] + kx ,

1685

pressure indicator which is based on an observation that, while
breathing, the pressure distribution along with vertical direction
(from chest to stomach direction) varies with certain patterns
and rhythms. For every frame, the pressure indicator sums the
pressure values with their corresponding vertical directional coordinates

y ∗ I[x, y](t).
(11)
Resp(t) =
(x,y )∈torso

The range of the pixels in the torso is the region between chest
and hip bounding boxes, which is enclosed by the bottom of
the shoulder bounding box and the top of the hip bounding box.
The calculated pressure indictor forms a time-series respiratory
signal stream.
Algorithm 1: Peak Detection With Adaptive Thresholds
Input: time series data of size n
Output: number of detected breaths
Initialize: lookf ormax=true
1: maxdif f = maximum magnitude difference in data
2: for thresh = 0 to maxdif f do
3: for all n points in data do
4:
if lookf ormax = true and
data.value < currentmax − thresh then
5:
Peak detected and set lookf ormax = false
6:
else
7:
Update currentmax
8:
end if
9:
if lookf ormax = f alse and
data.value > currentmin + thresh then
10:
Valley detected and set lookf ormax = true
11:
else
12:
Update currentmin
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
Record the number of breaths (peak and valley
pairs) and the corresponding thresh in graph
16: end for
17: Find the first flat region in graph and output the
number of detected breaths

D[x, y − 1, θ] + ky ,
D[x, y, θ − 1] + kθ )

(10)

where kx , ky , kθ are constants that account for different pixel
scales. This is executed in sequence starting from array point [1,
1,1] linearly through the array, which is followed by a second
sweep in the reverse direction.
With this computation, we have found the best location of the
child for all locations of parents. Continuing this pattern for all
vertices, the best location of the root can be solved efficiently,
and the best location of the children are traced from the parents.
B. Respiratory Signal Extraction
This section describes the respiratory signal extraction
method from the time series pressure regions. This results in a

C. Peak Detection With Adaptive Thresholding
In general, a simple peak detection algorithm [26] is sufficient
to recognize the periodic peak and valley of the time series data.
However, arbitrary thresholding does not always work since
the magnitude difference between peak and valley of time series data varies among testing subjects. Subjects breathing with
moderate muscle activity in their shoulder or back area tend to
generate large magnitude differences in the calculated pressure
indictor time series. To accommodate the differences among
subjects, the selected peak detection algorithm is augmented
with adaptive threshold version as shown in the Algorithm 1.
Given a time series data of the extracted respiration signal,
this adaptive threshold method profiles the relationship between
the number of breaths and threshold values. A threshold is

1686

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
RESPIRATION RESULTS IN THREE COMMON LYING POSTURES
(DETECTED BREATHS/GROUND TRUTH) OVER 10-MIN PERIODS
ID

Fig. 4.

Number of detected breaths for threshold values.

defined as the value difference by which a peak is recognized
from surrounding data. So for each threshold value between 0
and the maximum magnitude difference in the data, the algorithm detects a peak when the data falls below the peak value
by more than the threshold value. Similarly, a valley is detected
when the data rises above the valley value by more than the
threshold. Once all thresholds have been tested, it then finds the
range of thresholds that have the least effect on the number of
breathing events. This coincides with the flat area (see Fig. 4).
It means that, within certain threshold ranges, the number of
breathing events is consistent and implies those thresholds are
less sensitive to the random hardware noise. The number of
breathing events is recorded and the corresponding event intervals are used to calculate respiratory rate. A period of peak
and valley is viewed as a complete respiration and the intervals
between two peaks are viewed as breath intervals.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Avg.
Error

Supine

Lateral

Prone

174/176
147/155
171/175
184/185
127/130
136/142
155/162
179/177
160/166
138/144
164/168
152/150
157.5/160.8
2.0%

169/172
137/154
162/173
184/186
125/133
138/144
162/162
174/176
158/167
137/142
170/172
147/146
155.3/160.6
3.3%

176/177
143/152
170/175
187/188
130/127
139/144
157/160
172/175
162/166
139/141
168/172
148/148
157.6/160.4
1.8%

A. Results for Respiration Monitoring
Pressure values variation within the torso region is of most
interest for respiratory signal extraction. In this experiment,
respiratory signals were extracted from pressure image sequences when participants lied in common lying postures:
supine, side, and prone for 10 min each. The method of torso localization was applied to the pressure image sequences to keep
track of the regions between chest and stomach areas. Then,
signal extraction via vertical weighting calculation and peak
detection methods were used to extract the breathing events.
Table I summarizes the results and shows comparisons between
the detected respiration events and the ground truth visually recognized from video recordings for all three lying postures. On
average, the detected respiration events match well with ground
truth across the three common lying postures. Different lying
postures and extremities movements did not affect the quality
of torso localization and the extracted respiratory signals.

V. EXPERIMENTS
Twelve subjects participated in this study with heights 152–
190 cm, weights 46–83 kg. The high-density pressure sensor
sheet was deployed on top of a foam mattress with memory in
a lab environment. The experimental goals were to evaluate the
effectiveness of the torso localization algorithm for respiratory
signals extraction on a regular soft bed environment. During
experiments, subjects were allowed to lie in their preferred posture and keep their regular lying habits. In addition, data were
recorded in full without segmentation and truncation due to interferences caused by extremity movements. Full experiment
processes were taped, breath events were timed and labelled
manually from the taped videos according to the visible chest
wall movement. Recording started when the subjects lied on top
of the pressure sensing system in their preferred lying posture.
They were asked to breathe as usual and not to make any large
posture changes, such as rolling or sliding, during the recording.
Furthermore, tilted bed situations as commonly seen in clinics
were simulated by changing the tilted angles of the bed head
and foot areas. For these tilted bed situations, the subjects were
evaluated in supine posture only.

B. Visualization of Respiration Motion
It is useful to illustrate the effect that vertical weighting calculation makes on respiratory signal extraction. There is an
apparent geometrical delay from chest to stomach area and
weighted pressure values with its vertical coordinates relative to
the bounding box border emphasizes the respiration pattern. Visualizing the vertical momentum calculation can be a useful tool
to investigate the nature of the geometrical delay phenomenon
in pressure image sequences.
In order to visualize calculated vertical momentum, results
from peak detection algorithm are used. Peak detection algorithm returns a series of peaks and valleys from the pressure
indicator time series. By subtracting two consecutive peak and
valley indexed pressure images, the differences between images
of peaks and valleys are obtained. Fig. 5 visualizes the peaks
and valleys of respiration by averaging the pressure differences
between peaks and valleys. To better visualize the difference
of chest and stomach area, all positive differences were marked
as black and negative differences were marked as white. Gray
area stands for no obvious pressure differences. It can be seen

LIU et al.: BREATHSENS: A CONTINUOUS ON-BED RESPIRATORY MONITORING SYSTEM WITH TORSO LOCALIZATION

Fig. 5. Examples of change in pressure distribution for inhaling and exhaling
events. The red boxes show the location of detected shoulder and hip regions.
The black and white areas show the locations of greatest pressure change.

TABLE II
RESULTS SHOW HOW THE REGION OF EXTRACTED DATA
AFFECTS THE QUALITY OF BREATH COUNTS
ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Ave.
Error

Fullsheet

Center of Mass

Torso Area

11
14
−8
−8
12
−7
6
−6
11
8
4
−9
9.18
5.7%

10
9
−6
−4
8
−2
1
−5
9
8
5
−7
6.67
4.1%

2
4
−3
−1
3
−2
3
−3
4
2
3
−2
2.79
1.7%

This table shows the difference in counts between estimated breathing and the ground truth over 10-min periods.
The recordings contain 160–180 breaths. Three regions of
feature extraction are tested and the torso region shows
the least error.

that pressure distribution of chest area is in opposite phase of
the stomach area. This opposite phase phenomenon explains
the reason why vertical weighting calculations can be a useful
indicator for respiratory patterns extraction, because the geometrical delay from chest to stomach region is included in the
indicator calculation.
C. Comparison of Body Region Locations
Three scenarios were evaluated and compared to demonstrate
the importance of torso tracking: signals from the whole sheet
without applying torso localization algorithm; signals from half
of the sheet and centralized in the center of the weight; and signals from torso localized area, same as the results presented previously. The difference between the estimated breathing events
and ground truth are reported in Table II for the supine posture.
Extracted respiratory events from torso localized areas
showed good consistency with the ground truth. This is because
during breathing, large periodic pressure variances are expected
in the chest to stomach regions. Pressure variance outsides the
torso regions can be viewed as interference, which directly im-

Fig. 6.

1687

Tilted bed setup. (a) Original. (b) HeadLift. (c) EndLift. (d) BothLift.

pacts the calculation of vertical weighted signal extraction. Interference caused by the extremities movements were time-varied
and subject-dependent; therefore, the accuracy of respiratory
signal extraction from the whole sheet largely was highly impacted by the movements of the participants. For the case of
extracting signals from the area nearby the center of mass, the
accuracy of respiratory signal extraction was reduced because
the targeted area included parts of extremities. In summary,
respiratory signal extraction with torso localization effectively
reduces the interference caused by the extremities movement,
and the accuracy of respiratory signals were less varied across
subjects.
D. Respiration in Tilted Bed Environments
Another common scenario of sleep environment in clinics
is tilted bed setup. Tilted bed environments change the original pressure distribution underneath a human body. Hence, it is
necessary to evaluate the effect of tilted environment on respiratory signal extraction. Fig. 6 shows pressure image samples
from tilted environment with raised head (15◦ ), raise knee (15◦ ),
and both raised head and knee. Although pressure distribution
changed with degree of tilting, the areas of chest and stomach
were still visually recognizable. Pressure redistribution caused
by tilted bed environment has limited effect on body contact
area size and the pressure values in chest and hips areas are
still prominent compared to other regions. However, the major
difference is the distribution of pressure within the body profile.
In this experiment, participants were requested to lie in supine
position for 5 min of recording. Results of Fig. 7 reveal that respiratory signals can be extracted from tilted bed environment
and show consistency. Actually, it is worth noticing that much
under body pressure was accumulated in the chest area for the
case of raised knee tilting; hence, the interference caused by
the upper extremities movements had larger weight in the vertical weighting calculation. On the other hand, much under body
pressure was accumulated in the stomach and hip area for the
case of the raised head tilting; hence, the interference caused by
the lower extremities movements had larger impact on the respiratory signals extraction. Therefore, torso localization becomes
more important in a tilted bed environment because redistributed
pressure tends to increase the weight of extremity movements.
Slight extremities movement may incur large interference to
respiratory signal extraction.

1688

Fig. 7.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Breath count comparison for each subject on tilted beds.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present BreathSens, a continuous and unobtrusive system that monitors on-bed respiration using a highdensity pressure bedsheet made of e-Textile. Our experimental
results show that breathing events are accurately identified in
several different situations. All sleep movements are recorded
as pressure images detected by the e-Textile bed sheet and are analyzed via pressure images analysis, namely torso localization,
respiration signal extraction, and peak detection. The complete
system design can promote clinical or at-home sleep condition
monitoring and assist in notifications due to possible breathingrelated disorders. It could be used for situations, such as sleep
apnea screening to alert for possible medical diagnoses.
Tracking a moving subject is difficult in the current stage, because body movement largely redistributes the pressure between
the human body and the sensing system. For some applications,
such as sleep apnea screening, losing respiration tracking for a
moving subject is acceptable. However, monitoring respiration
during movement can be an important future work. Although
high-density pressure sensors are required for accurate localization, other future work includes optimizing the number of
sensors while providing an adequate level of performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Medisens Wireless Inc. for
their contributions in discussion, building, and supply of the
hardware.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Peberdy, W. Kaye, J. Ornato, G. Larkin, V. Nadkarni, M. Mancini,
R. Berg, G. Nichol, and T. Lane-Trultt, “Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
of adults in the hospital: A report of 14720 cardiac arrests from the national
registry of cardiopulmonary resuscitation,” Resuscitation, vol. 58, no. 3,
pp. 297–308, 2003.
[2] K. Reed, and R. May, “Healthgrades seventh annual patient safety in
American hospitals study,” HealthGrades, Inc., Denver, CO, US, 2011.
[3] T. J. Hodgetts, G. Kenward, I. G. Vlachonikolis, S. Payne, and N. Castle,
“The identification of risk factors for cardiac arrest and formulation of
activation criteria to alert a medical emergency team,” Resuscitation,
vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 125–131, 2002.
[4] J. Fieselmann, M. Hendryx, C. Helms, and D. Wakefield, “Respiratory rate predicts cardiopulmonary arrest for internal medicine patients,”
J. Gen. Internal Med., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 354–360, 1993.

[5] M. Cretikos, J. Chen, K. Hillman, R. Bellomo, S. Finfer, and A. Flabouris,
“The objective medical emergency team activation criteria: A case-control
study,” Resuscitation, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 62–72, 2007.
[6] M. Cretikos, R. Bellomo, K. Hillman, J. Chen, S. Finfer, and A. Flabouris,
“Respiratory rate: The neglected vital sign,” Med. J. Aust., vol. 188,
no. 11, pp. 657–659, 2008.
[7] J. McBride, D. Knight, J. Piper, and G. B. Smith. (2005). Long-term
effect of introducing an early warning score on respiratory rate charting
on general wards. Resuscitation. [Online]. 65(1), pp. 41–44. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0300957204004381
[8] F. AL-Khalidi, R. Saatchi, D. Burke, H. Elphick, and S. Tan, “Respiration
rate monitoring methods: A review,” Pediatr. Pulmonol., vol. 46, no. 6,
pp. 523–529, 2011.
[9] Covidien. (2012). Nellcor bedside respiratory patient monitoring system.
[Online]. Available: http://www.covidien.com
[10] S. DeMeulenaere, “Pulse oximetry: Uses and limitations,” J. Nurse Pract.,
vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 312–7, 2007.
[11] J. S. Cardozo, “New AASM recommendations for sensors: A simple guide
for the sleep technologist,” Sleep Diagnosis Therapy, vol. 21, no. 3, pp.
21–22, 2008.
[12] Y. Chee, J. Han, J. Youn, and K. Park, “Air mattress sensor system with
balancing tube for unconstrained measurement of respiration and heart
beat movements,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 413–422, 2005.
[13] A. Hart, K. Tallevi, D. Wickland, R. Kearney, and J. Cafazzo, “A contactfree respiration monitor for smart bed and ambulatory monitoring applications,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010,
pp. 927–930.
[14] M. Nishyama, M. Miyamoto, and K. Watanabe. (2011). Respiration and body movement analysis during sleep in bed using heterocore fiber optic pressure sensors without constraint to human activity. J. Biomed. Opt. [Online]. 16(1), pp. 17002–17007. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/1.3528008
[15] W. Xu, C. Gu, C. Li, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Robust doppler radar demodulation via compressed sensing,” Electron. Lett., vol. 48, no. 22,
pp. 1428–1430, 2012.
[16] M.-Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard, “Non-contact, automated
cardiac pulse measurements using video imaging and blind source separation,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, pp. 10762–10774, 2010.
[17] Philips. (2013). Vital signs camera. [Online]. Available: http://www.
vitalsignscamera.com
[18] R. Murthy, I. Pavlidis, and P. Tsiamyrtzis, “Touchless monitoring of
breathing function,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2004, pp. 1196–1199.
[19] M. Rofouei, W. Xu, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Computing with uncertainty
in a smart textile surface for object recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Multisens. Fusion Integr. Intell. Syst., Sep. 2010, pp. 174–179.
[20] M. Huang, J. Liu, W. Xu, N. Alshurafa, X. Zhang, and M. Sarrafzadeh,
“Using pressure map sequences for recognition of on bed rehabilitation
exercises,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 411–418,
Mar. 2014.
[21] W. Xu, Z. Li, M. Huang, N. Amini, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Ecushion: An
etextil device for sitting posture monitoring,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Body
Sens. Netw., 2011, pp. 194–199.
[22] J. Liu, W. Xu, M. Huang, N. Alshurafa, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “A dense
pressure sensitive bedsheet design for unobtrusive sleep posture monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun., 2013,
pp. 207–215.
[23] M. A. Fischler and R. Elschlager, “The representation and matching of
pictorial structures,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. C-22, no. 1, pp. 67–92,
1973.
[24] P. F. Felzenszwalb and D. P. Huttenlocher, “Pictorial structures for object
recognition,” Int. J. Comput. Vision, vol. 61, pp. 55–79, 2005.
[25] G. Borgefors, “Distance transformations in digital images,” Comput. Vis.,
Graph. Image Process., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 344–371, 1986.
[26] E. Billauer. (2008). peakdet: Peak detection using MATLAB. [Online].
Available: http://www.billauer.co.il/peakdet.html.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

