IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1697

LMI-Based Approaches for the Calibration
of Continuous Glucose Measurement Sensors
Harald Kirchsteiger, Luca Zaccarian, Senior Member, IEEE, Eric Renard,
and Luigi del Re, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The problem of online calibration and recalibration
of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices is considered.
Two different parametric relations between interstitial and blood
glucose are investigated and constructive algorithms to adaptively
estimate the parameters within those relations are proposed. One
characteristic is the explicit consideration of measurement uncertainty of the device used to collect the calibration measurements.
Another feature is the automatic detection of fingerstick measurements that are not suitable to be used for calibration. Since the
methods rely on the solution of linear matrix inequalities resulting
in convex optimization problems, the algorithms are of moderate
computational complexity and could be implemented on a CGM
device. The methods were assessed on clinical data from 17 diabetic
patients and the improvements with respect to the current state of
the art is shown.
Index Terms—Continuous glucose measurement, diabetes, sensor recalibration.

I. INTRODUCTION
T is essential in effective diabetes treatment to measure the
blood glucose concentration (BG) frequently throughout the
day. This involves pricking the finger using a lancet device and
extraction of a blood drop, which is applied on a disposable
test strip. Because this method causes some discomfort, selfmonitoring of BG (SMBG) is on average performed only 2–5
times per day, i.e., hypoglycemic (BG < 70 mg/dl) or hyperglycemic (BG > 180 mg/dl) events might remain undetected.
In contrast, continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices
provide a continuous estimation of the current BG based on
measurements in the interstitial fluid of subcutaneous (SC) tissues. This technology was thought to be a breakthrough in the
diabetes treatment, and improvement in glycemic control was
indeed shown, e.g., in [1]. However, the accuracy of CGM systems is not comparable with fingerstick measurements [2]. See,

I

Manuscript received April 8, 2014; revised June 5, 2014; accepted July 14,
2014. Date of publication July 29, 2014; date of current version September 1,
2015. This work was supported in part by the Linz Center of Mechatronics in
the framework of the Austrian COMET-K2 programme.
H. Kirchsteiger and L. del Re are with the Institute for Design and Control of
Mechatronical Systems, Johannes Kepler University Linz, 4040 Linz, Austria
(e-mail: harald.kirchsteiger@jku.at; luigi.delre@jku.at).
L. Zaccarian is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Industriale, University
of Trento, 38123 Trento, Italy and also with the Laboratory of Analysis and
Architectures of Systems, CNRS, 31400 Toulouse, France and the Laboratory of
Analysis and Architectures of Systems, University of Toulouse, 31400 Toulouse,
France (e-mail: zaccarian@laas.fr).
E. Renard is with the Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Montpellier University Hospital, 34090 Montpellier, France (e-mail:
e-renard@chu-montpellier.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2341703

for example [3], for a performance comparison of 43 SMBG
devices and [4] for a head-to-head comparison of three CGM
devices, where two sensors of each brand were installed in
parallel on study participants. In agreement with the results in
[4], no CGM sensors are, thus, far approved as a replacement
to traditional monitoring devices [5]. In the particular situations of insulin dosage decision or administration of diabetes
medication, SMBG must be performed [5]. Currently, the BG
measurement technology is considered as a major limitation in
the development of automated control systems [6], i.e., systems
that measure BG and automatically administer insulin in order
to reach a desired BG target.
Most CGM devices measure an electrical current in the SC
tissues, which is proportional to the interstitial glucose concentration (IG), exploiting the glucose-oxidase enzyme reaction [7].
To relate this measured quantity to the desired BG, a calibration
is necessary that is usually accomplished through proposition
of an affine relation [8] of the form x = ay + b, where x is collected by SMBG and y is the current. A straightforward way to
determine the parameters (a, b) is to collect two SMBG measurements x(t1 ), x(t2 ) and the corresponding current signals
y(t1 ), y(t2 ). Then, the aforementioned equation can be solved
for (a, b). This method is known as two-point calibration. Similarly, one can collect a larger number of measurements and
solve an overdetermined system of equations employing leastsquares methods. This method is known as n-point calibration.
An overview of calibration algorithms implemented in CGM
devices can be found in [9].
It is important to choose calibration measurements at appropriate times [8], [10]: one should calibrate when the signals are
in a static rather than dynamic regime. Once the device is calibrated, the calibration might get lost over time mainly because
of a process called Biofouling [11], which continuously deteriorates the measurements over time, because protein molecules
stick to the sensor element and the diffusion process is altered.
Therefore, sensor needles need to be replaced every 5–7 days
and recalibration is required every 12–24 h [12].
The state of the art calibration technique described previously
does not take into account the IG to BG dynamics, which makes
it suboptimal. It is well known from physiology that there is a
time-lag between the two compartments of approximately 4–
10 min [13]. It was also postulated that there is a first-order
dynamics between them [14].
Knobbe et al. [15] were the first to exploit first-order dynamics and proposed an extended Kalman filter to estimate online
the SC glucose and BG, and a time constant τ characterizing
the dynamics between the compartments. As their results show,

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1698

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

τ varies in a wide range for single patients over time, which
strongly suggests to make use of adaptive algorithms. Since a
Kalman filter was used, errors of the CGM and SMBG measurements are considered in a straightforward way, and are assumed
to be white noise with zero mean and Gaussian distribution.
Lately, the author in [16] showed that errors are nonwhite and
have a Johnson distribution. It has to be mentioned that errors
in reference measurements can cause a substantial bias in the
calibrated CGM signal [17].
Facchinetti et al. [18] further developed the extended Kalman
filter method of [15] using the same first-order dynamics and
demonstrated performance on ten simulated patient datasets.
They fixed τ for individual patients a priori and demonstrated a
certain degree of robustness to wrong selections of τ . An adaptive calibration algorithm is proposed in [19]. A kernel adaptive
regularization algorithm to estimate BG out of a raw current,
which aims at a reduction of required calibration measurements
is shown in [20].
A related topic to calibration is denoising of CGM data, which
is treated, e.g., in [21]. In those approaches, the raw CGM electrical current signal is considered unavailable, and the developed
algorithms can be seen as signal enhancement modules using
the delivered CGM signal. In this context, a recently presented
method [12] proposes a first-order filter model with an impulse
response of the form 1/τ exp(−t/τ ) between the two compartments, where τ is again an a priori fixed time constant.
Superiority compared to state of the art methods was shown
in simulation and on real data, however, the method might be
improved if τ could be adapted online.
In this paper, we propose two adaptive, online methods for
calibration and online recalibration that rely on internal models
of the IG to BG dynamics. One model assumes a pure time delay and the other first-order dynamics similar to the works cited
earlier. The parameters are estimated online by solving convex optimization problems. The implementation of a forgetting
factor guarantees up to date rather than average calibration parameters. The algorithms are of moderate computational complexity and could be implemented in a signal postprocessing
unit on CGM devices. The methods are not intended to find the
physical reason for the loss of calibration, which would require
more information. Both methods rely on raw electrical current
measurements of the CGM device and suitably sampled SMBG
references. Early results using the time delay model were already presented in our preliminary work [22] and also in [23].
In this paper, both methods are compared to each other and
results are presented comprehensively.
The details of the addressed problem are explained in
Section II. Constructive algorithms to solve the problem are
given in Sections III and IV for the assumption of a time delay
or first-order dynamics, respectively. Numerical results using
datasets from 17 diabetic patients are presented in Section V.
Conclusions in Section VI complete the paper.

continuous measurement signal yint (·) related to the IG. Based
on past results present in the literature [6], [8], [24], the raw
measurement signal yint is a function of the actual glucose concentration xint in the interstitial fluid and can be described by
the affine function1 .

II. PROBLEM STATEMENT

1 Actually, the measurement signal (1) produced by the sensor installed on
the patient is sampled, but since the sampling time is synchronous and significantly higher than the fingerstick measurements (2), we regard the continuous
measurement as a continuous-time signal for simplicity.

We address the problem of calibration of the signal produced by a CGM sensor installed on a patient, which provides a

xint (t) = k1 yint (t) + k0 ,

t∈R

(1)

where k0 , and k1 are the unknown calibration constants. In the
sequel, we will denote yint as the continuous measurements.
The typical approach that is followed in the literature, see, e.g.,
[8], to estimate the pair k0 , k1 is to rely on higher accuracy
sampled measurements yblo o d of the BG—measured either directly using venous blood samples in clinical applications or by
using fingerstick samples—which are strongly related to the IG
[14], [25]. In particular, the current methods for SMBG can be
characterized by a reasonably small confidence range using the
following relation:
xblo o d (ti ) ∈ yblo o d (ti ) + B (Δ(yblo o d (ti ))) ,

i∈Z

(2)

where ti , i = 1, 2, . . . denote the times when the patient performs SMBG, xblo o d is the actual (unknown) BG, B(v) denotes
the interval [−v, v], and Δ(·) is a function characterizing the
confidence level of the measurement. Typical characterizations
of Δ(·) are linear strictly increasing functions (the smaller the
measured value, the higher the confidence or piecewise constant
nondecreasing functions (resembling the fact that the precision
is characterized in terms of intervals that the measured value
belongs to). In the sequel, we will denote yblo o d as fingerstick
or sampled measurements.
Most of the existing results for sensor calibration briefly reviewed in Section I are based on the assumption that the quantities yint (ti ) and yblo o d (ti ) are the same, and then, estimation of
k0 , k1 for calibration is carried out by minimizing (typically by
least-squares methods) the difference between yblo o d (ti ) and the
rescaled continuous measurement xint (ti ) = k1 yint (ti ) + k0 at
the (typically few) times ti when the sampled value is available, i.e., when the patient performs a SMBG. In this paper,
we will investigate the calibration problem by establishing a
parametric relation between the BG and IG, and in addition,
to estimating the calibration constants k0 , and k1 in (1), we
will also use the available continuous and sampled fingerstick
measurements yint (t), t ∈ R, yblo o d (ti ), i ∈ Z, to estimate the
parameters within this relation. In particular, we will focus on
two possible linear relations for reasons explained below. A first
one comes from relating the two concentrations by a pure time
delay, resembling the well-known fact [13] that upon a sudden
increase of the BG, the same increase is detected in the IG after
a suitable delay.
Xint (s) = exp(−T s)Xblo o d (s)

(3a)

where s denotes the complex variable in the Laplace transformed
space and T denotes the unknown delay to be estimated. Using

KIRCHSTEIGER et al.: LMI-BASED APPROACHES FOR THE CALIBRATION OF CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MEASUREMENT SENSORS

(3a), the BG can be estimated from the knowledge of the IG
using
x̂blo o d (t) = xint (t + T ).

(3b)

Note that (3b) is a noncausal relation when one wants to estimate the current BG. For the purpose of recalibration, we can
use the relation in a causal way by computing the new calibration parameters in the time interval [ti , ti + T ] (ti denotes the
time of the most recent SMBG value). The parameters can, however, be first updated at time ti + T , see Section III for details
on the method. Also note that (3b) will only be used internally
in the procedure for determining (k0 , k1 ), but not for estimating
the BG.
A second model corresponds to a linear first-order filter, similar to [12] and [15], with the property that with constant BG, the
same concentration is asymptotically measured in the interstitial
fluid (namely, the static gain is one)
Xint (s) =

1
Xblo o d (s)
1 + τs

(4a)

where τ denotes the unknown time constant to be estimated. In
this case, the time derivative of the IG is necessary
x̂blo o d (t) = xint (t) + τ ẋint (t).

(4b)

In the rest of this paper, we will use convex optimization tools
to address the following problem.
Problem 1: Given the continuous and sampled measurements in (1) and (2), respectively, and one of the two linear
models (3), (4) relating the two sets of measurements, for each
time t ∈ R, define the set of indices
I(t)  {i : ti ≤ t}

k 0 ,k 1 ,p

i∈I(t)

subject to: (3) or (4)
ηi ≥ 0,

|x̂blo o d (ti ) − yblo o d (ti )| ≤ Δ(yblo o d (ti ))2

∀i ∈ I(t)

which states that all the predicted and actual measurements are
within the tolerance of the SMBG measurements. Therefore, the
value of the cost at the current time can be used as an indication
of the reliability of the current sensor calibration. Possibly, this
information can be used to assess the reliability of either the
continuous measurement given by the CGM or of the fingerstick
measurement.
III. SOLUTION USING THE DELAY MODEL
A solution to Problem 1 when there is a pure time delay
between the BG and the IG, see (3), is proposed here.
Proposition 1: Given t ∈ R, consider the index set I(t) in
(5). Assume that for some Tm ax > 0, the optimization problem (7) has a unique global optimum. Then, the optimal values
(T ∗ , k0∗ , k1∗ ) solve Problem 1 with (3), restricted to p = T ∈
[0, Tm ax ].

min (T )  min
ηi
(7a)
T ∈[0,T m a x ]

k 0 ,k 1

subject to: ηi ≥ 0


i∈I(t)

∀i ∈ I,

ξi = k0 + k1 yint (ti + T ) − yblo o d (ti )

Δ(yblo o d (ti ))2 + ηi ψ (t̄ − ti ) ξi
≥0
ξi
1

∀i ∈ I.

(7b)

Proof: Using (3b), the last constraint in (6) becomes
|k0 + k1 yint (ti + T ) − yblo o d (ti )|2

i ∈ I(t)

|x̂blo o d (ti ) − yblo o d (ti )|2 ≤ Δ(yblo o d (ti ))2
+ ηi ψ (t̄ − ti ) ,

is collected by the user (T minutes later when the delay model
is implemented, to be precise).
Remark 2: The optimization problem (6) corresponds to a
modified least-squares optimization problem. The most relevant
modification corresponds to the constant tolerance levels given
by Δ(·).
Remark 3: Note that whenever the
 optimization in Problem
1 leads to a zero value of the cost i∈I(t) ηi , this implies that
ηi = 0 ∀ i ∈ I(t), namely from the last constraint in (6)

(5)

denote t̄  maxj ∈I tj and determine a solution to the following
optimization problem

k0∗ (t), k1∗ (t), p∗ (t) = argmin
ηi
(6)

1699

i ∈ I(t)

where ψ(·) is a nondecreasing positive function representing a
desired forgetting factor for the parameter estimates and p = T
when (3) is used and p = τ when (4) is used.
Remark 1: Note that the optimization is carried out at time t
by only taking into account past fingerstick measurements (this
is embedded in the definition of I(t)), therefore, it can be carried
out in a causal way although, whenever relation (3) is used, an
additional delay of at least T minutes is required so that the
signal yint (t + T ) is available.
The solution to (6) is a piecewise constant function, because
the set of indices I(t) is piecewise constant. Therefore, the optimized calibration parameters are piecewise constant functions
of time and are updated every time a new sampled measurement

≤ Δ(yblo o d (ti ))2 + ηi ψ(t̄ − ti ).
Using a Schur complement [26], this is equivalent to (7b). 
Note that the inner optimization problem in (7) is a set of
linear matrix inequalities (LMIs) in the unknown variables ηi ,
i ∈ I and k0 , k1 , which can be efficiently solved using standard
tools [27]. Since the case studies that we will address in Section V are characterized by a continuous measurement device
providing a sequence of values yint (tk ), tk = kTs ∀k ∈ Z, we
illustrate in the following procedure a sensor calibration strategy exploiting Proposition 1, which addresses this special case.
Note that the next procedure is effective under the assumption
that the sampling time Ts of yint is small enough as compared to
the intersample time of the irregularly sampled fingerstick measurements (2) and that the optimal time delay T ∗ is significantly
smaller than the time elapsed between each pair of fingerstick
measurements.

1700

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 1. Illustration of Procedure 1: Expected shape of (T ) in the top panel;
two abnormalities detected at Step 6 of the procedure in the bottom panel.

Procedure 1: Estimation of the optimal time delay
Step 1. Fix a forgetting function ψ(·) and the maximum expected delay Tm ax . Fix (k0∗ , k1∗ , T ∗ ) = (0, 0, 0).
Step 2. Wait for the next capillary measurement yblo o d (tcap ).
Denote its arrival time by tcap . Compute the index set
I(tcap ). Wait for the next continuous measurement
yint (t). Initialize the state T = t − tcap and compute
the optimal value (T ) of the inner convex optimization problem in (7). Set the initial and optimal values
0 = ∗ = (T ). Initialize the state  = 0 .
Step 3. Wait for the next SMBG value and, using the next
state T + = t − tcap , compute the optimal value
+  (T + ) of the inner convex optimization problem in (7) and denote by (k0 , k1 ) the corresponding
optimal parameters.
Step 4. If (+ − )(+ − ∗ ) ≤ 0, then report an error and go
back to Step 2: the function (T ) is not quasi-convex
in [0, Tm ax ]. Otherwise go to the next step.
Step 5. Shift forward  = + and T = T + . If  ≤ ∗ , then set
∗ =  and (k0∗ , k1∗ , T ∗ ) = (k0 , k1 , T ).
Step 6. If T ≤ Tm ax and ( − ∗ )( − 0 ) ≤ 0, then go to
Step 3. Otherwise compute e = sign((0 − ∗ )( −
∗ )). If e = 0, then report an error: the function does
not have a minimum in the interior of [0, Tm ax ]. If
e > 0, then update the calibration parameters with
the optimal values (k0∗ , k1∗ , T ∗ ). Go to Step 2 to wait
for the next SMBG value.
Intuitively, the rationale behind Procedure 1 is the following
which is also illustrated in Fig. 1. At some time tcap a new SMBG
value is available. Then, a sequence of convex optimizations
are carried out as the continuous measurement signal yint (t),
with t ≥ tcap become available. Then, with reference to the top
plot of Fig. 1, the sequence of optimal values (tk − tcap ) is a
function, which is expected to decrease until the optimal delay
T ∗ , solution to the optimization problem (7) is reached (this is
marked by an “” in the top plot of Fig. 1). Subsequently, this

function is expected to increase again and the search algorithm
terminates when the current value of  is different from the
current minimum ∗ and larger than the initial value 0 evaluated
at the first sample (this is marked by an “×” in the top plot of
Fig. 1), or the maximum time Tm ax is elapsed (this is checked
at Step 6).
In normal operating conditions, the expected curve is a (locally quasi-convex) “U”-shaped function with a single minimum
value in the interior of the interval T ∈ [0, Tm ax ]. Whenever the
detected function does not comply with these requirements, Procedure 1 terminates with a fault. In particular, if (T ) is monotonically nonincreasing or nondecreasing, then the check at Step
6 results in e = 0 (because either ∗ = 0 or ∗ = , namely the
initial or the final value) and the procedure returns a faulty result.
Moreover, if the function has one or more local maxima in the
interval, then the test at Step 4 will give a faulty result because
there will be a pair of subsequent samples where the function is
decreasing (+ −  < 0) even though the detected minimum is
smaller than + (which implies that the function was increasing
in some previous interval, thereby certainly presenting a local
maximum in between).
If the procedure terminates with a fault, the calibration
constants simply remain unchanged and the SMBG value is
disregarded for calibration. In this way, unsuitable values are
automatically neglected. As an example, Fig. 2 shows the corresponding “U”-shaped curves evaluated for the measurement set
used in Section V. For each curve, a star indicates the detected
local minimum ∗ .
IV. SOLUTION USING THE FIRST-ORDER MODEL
An alternative to the solution to Problem 1 given in the previous section corresponds to using the first-order linear filter
(4) between BG and IG. To this aim, since the inversion (4b)
of the filter dynamics also depends on the derivative of xint , it
is necessary to compute an estimate of the derivative of yint .
One possible approach to determine this solution is to apply the
high-gain observer technique used in [28], which corresponds
to
hp
(yint − ŷint )
ŷ˙ int = ŷint,dot +
ε
hv
ŷ˙ int,dot = 2 (yint − ŷint )
ε

(8)

where ŷint is an estimate of yint and ŷint,dot an estimate of
the derivative of yint . According to [28], the filter parameters
(hp , hv ) should be selected in such a way that the polynomial
s2 + hp s + hv has roots with negative real part, whereas the
positive scalar ε is to be tuned in such a way that the output
ŷint is sufficiently close to the input yint while at the same time
guaranteeing that the noise affecting yint is sufficiently filtered
out from the signal ŷint,dot .
Note that (8) performs an estimation of the derivative of a
given signal, which is not related to the problem of deconvolution, i.e., computing the input signal of a dynamic system with
known transfer function and output. With the filter (8), a twofold
goal is achieved: the output ŷint provides a filtered version of

KIRCHSTEIGER et al.: LMI-BASED APPROACHES FOR THE CALIBRATION OF CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MEASUREMENT SENSORS

1701

Fig. 2. Three snapshots of the “U” shaped curves generated by Procedure 1 on the different patients (numbers next to curves) in the dataset around lunch time
of the first (left), second (middle), and third day (right plot). Circles indicate initial values,  the optimum and × the final values of the cost  in (7).

the raw signal yint , while ŷint,dot provides an estimate of the
derivative of yint , to be used when estimating the calibration parameters (1) together with the dynamics (4). This is illustrated
in the next result which parallels that of Proposition 1.
Proposition 2: Given t ∈ R, consider the index set I(t) in
(5) and denote t̄ := maxj ∈I tj . Consider any optimal solution to
the convex optimization problem (9). Then, the optimal values
(τ ∗ , k0∗ , k1∗ ) = (k2∗ /k1∗ , k0∗ , k1∗ ) provide an approximate solution
to Problem 1 with (4).

min
ηi
(9a)
k 0 ,k 1

i∈I(t)

xblo o d,est (t) = k0 + k1 ŷint (t) + τ k1 ŷint,dot (t)

(10)

extrapolated from the derivative of yint , exploiting the inverse
relation (4b). Clearly it is expected that the extrapolated signal
in (10) is imprecise close to cusps, and in general, in places
where the curvature of the signal yint is very large. Note that a
similar result cannot be obtained for the delay model since this
would involve the noncausal relation (3b).
V. CALIBRATION ASSESSMENT ON EXPERIMENTAL DATA

subject to : ηi ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ I
ξi = k0 + k1 ŷint (ti ) + k2 ŷint,dot (ti ) − yblo o d (ti )


Δ(yblo o d (ti ))2 + ηi ψ (t̄ − ti ) ξi
≥ 0 ∀i ∈ I.
ξi
1

procedure requires the knowledge of the time derivative of yint ,
this information can be used to obtain the BG estimation

In this section, we will apply the two procedures to a set of
experimental data from 17 diabetes patients.
(9b)

Proof: From (1), we get ẋint (t) = k1 ẏint (t) so that the
inverse relation (4b) characterizing the filter dynamics becomes k0 + k1 yint (t) + τ k1 ẏint (t) − x̂blo o d (t) = 0, which, using τ = k2 /k1 , coincides with the off diagonal term in constraint
(9b). The proof then is completed by performing a Schur complement [26], as in the proof of Proposition 1.

As compared to the parallel result of Proposition 1, this one
is more appealing because the optimal set of parameters can
be determined by running a single convex optimization each
time a new SMBG value becomes available. It is, therefore, not
necessary to construct the “U”-shaped curves discussed in the
previous section and to apply Procedure 1. Moreover, the LMI
optimization problem (9) is always feasible so that for each
new fingerstick measurement, an updated set of calibration parameters will be determined. Nevertheless, it will be shown in
Section V that when applying the two approaches to a set of
experimental data, it remains unclear what is the best solution.
Indeed, there are cases where the more involved solution proposed in Section III provides improved results as compared to
the one illustrated in this section.
Remark 4: The optimal solution obtained from Proposition 2
allows to compute an estimate of the IG, as measured by the
continuous sensor. Upon arrival of a new SMBG value, the
calibration constants can be updated. Since the optimization

A. Description of the Dataset
Datasets from 17 patients (15 with Type 1 and 2 with Type 2
diabetes) consisting of three day in-hospital data collected at
the Centre d’Investigation Clinique (CIC INSERM 1001) at the
Montpellier University Hospital, France, have been used. Out
of a complete set of 30 patients, only the data from the patients
1–9,11,15,16,18,19, 20, 28, and 30 were usable. Indeed, the
remaining 13 patients had to be removed due to the lack of
complete CGM information over the three days.
The continuous measurements used here have been collected
with the FreeStyle Navigator (Abbott Diabetes Care, Alameda,
CA, USA) CGM system. The CGM data consists of a series
of blood glucose concentrations, estimated every minute from
the mean signal related to the glucose concentration in the
subcutaneous interstitial fluid over this time period and calibrated against fingerstick measurements (SMBG) performed
on a timely basis according to the manufacturer instructions.
Additionally, the raw electrical current signal measured in the
interstitial fluid and sampled on a 1 min basis is available. The
glucose sensing element was inserted 48 h before the clinical
trial started.
Sparse fingerstick measurements were taken with a HemoCue
β-glucose system (HemoCue AB, Angelholm, Sweden), corresponding to the SMBG measurements in (2). The HemoCue
measurements were performed at times 10, 20, 30, 45, 60,
90, and 120 min after a meal and at 2-h intervals thereafter.

1702

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Additionally, patients used their personal SMBG meter individually to decide upon their insulin needs. Those measurements
were typically performed before and some hours after each
meal. During their visit, patients received three standard meals
per day.
We test both proposed algorithms on the aforementioned
datasets, by using all the available SMBG values until midnight
of the first day, and then, only using roughly six measurements
per day, corresponding to the ones performed by the patients using their personal SMBG meter. We are, therefore, not a priori
selecting the samples that give best performance but consider a
more realistic situation, where the user enters a reference value
individually. In particular, on average for all considered patients,
33 of the 33 measurements were used on the first day, 6 out of
36 on the second, and 6 out of 25 on the third day for the recalibration procedure. Due to the implemented forgetting and
limitation of the cardinality of the index set I, the SMBG values
of the first day will not influence the calibration procedure on
the third day.
To assess the quality of the calibration procedures, we use all
available SMBG measurements (most of them not taken into account for calibration) and compute the paired difference between
the calibrated signal and the SMBG sample. This comparison is
done for all the three recalibration strategies.
1) The CGM internal strategy according to the manufacturer
by the built-in strategy.
2) The proposed strategy exploiting the delay model (3).
3) The proposed strategy exploiting the filter model (4).
B. Calibration Results Using the Delay Model
We follow Procedure 1 selecting Tm ax = 30 min and only
update the calibration values whenever the procedure does not
report an error. We select the forgetting function ψ as the linear
interpolation of the following data points (time in hours):
(ψ(0), ψ(1), ψ(2), ψ(4), ψ(6), ψ(12), ψ(24), ψ(48))
= (1, 3.5, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 20)

(11)

and the tolerance level function Δ(v) = v/30 so that a tolerance
of ±2 mg/dl is assumed for a low SMBG value of 60 mg/dl
and a tolerance of ±6 mg/dl is assumed for a high value of
180 mg/dl. Moreover, we limit the cardinality of the index set
I in (5) to 10, as a larger number essentially does not make any
difference due to the effect of the forgetting function.
Fig. 2 presents three snapshots of the “U” shaped curves
determined for all of the analyzed patients around three different
and representative times over the three days of observation:
around lunch time of the first day (left curves), of the second
day (middle curves), and of the third day (right curves). In the
figures, each one of the “U” curves is marked with a circle on the
initial value 0 , with a star on the optimal value ∗ and with an
× on the final termination value. From Fig. 2, it already appears
that some of the data leads to less regular behavior of the “U”
shaped curves, and a large number of failures of the calibration
method of Procedure 1 is expected: see also the last column in
Table I reporting the individual number of measurements, which
were automatically disregarded for the recalibration procedure.

TABLE I
MARD AND NR. OF NEGLECTED MEASUREMENTS OF PROCEDURE 1
Id

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
11
15
16
18
19
20
28
30
Average

MARD

Neglected

Sensor

Delay

Filter

Delay

18.23
10.75
10.06
13.33
9.70
20.09
14.88
14.42
11.08
11.61
9.26
11.52
16.93
11.52
16.38
19.71
18.58
14.00

7.42
10.52
8.52
9.68
7.21
11.45
7.84
9.07
6.95
5.88
6.60
7.61
12.78
5.50
8.91
6.88
16.55
8.79

8.77
8.72
9.23
11.57
8.66
11.74
13.75
9.67
9.28
8.95
7.60
9.11
12.79
7.38
9.86
6.42
13.08
9.80

6
8
18
2
7
11
4
5
6
2
15
3
2
4
10
7
15
7.35

Note that failures are generally expected and correspond to
possibly inconsistent measurements (either the sampled or the
continuous ones) and simply lead to leaving the calibration parameters unchanged (see Procedure 1 for details). Nevertheless,
it is expected to see a larger number of failures in patients with
a large average error, as the failures indicate that some of the
measurements are inaccurate.
To assess the quality of the proposed algorithm, we compare
all SMBG values to the expected glucose concentration determined by evaluating the model (1), where (k0 (t), k1 (t)) are the
optimal parameters estimated by Procedure 1. In particular, we
compute the absolute relative error as
erel (t) = 100

|k0 (t) + k1 (t)yint (t) − yblo o d (t)|
yblo o d (t)

(12)

and form the mean absolute relative difference (MARD) by
computing the mean value of (12).
Fig. 3 shows the absolute relative errors for all patients in
a boxplot, where the red line is the median and the edges of
the blue box mark the 25th and 75th percentile. In this figure,
the results of all three recalibration strategies are compared
with each other. The number 1 on the x-axis of all the subplots
refers to the standard sensor recalibration strategy, i.e., (12) is
computed as relative absolute difference between the calibrated
value from the CGM device and the corresponding SMBG value.
The numbers 2 and 3 in the figure refer to the error (12) when
applying the proposed methods employing a delay, and a filter
model, respectively. It can be seen that the median is smaller
for all patients when applying the proposed delay model, when
compared to the sensor. In most of the cases, also the variability
(25/75th percentile) is smaller.
It has to be mentioned that there is a relatively large number
of outliers for all methods (characterized with a “+” sign in
Fig. 3). Those large errors correspond typically to calibration
measurements performed next to peaks of the BG concentration,
which will become clear in the following figures. Also note that

KIRCHSTEIGER et al.: LMI-BASED APPROACHES FOR THE CALIBRATION OF CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MEASUREMENT SENSORS

1703

Fig. 4. Glucose levels for patient 19 when using the “delay” model (green
solid) and its comparison with 1) the interpolated high precision signal (blue
diamonds) and 2) the sensor output (black dashed).

Fig. 5. Glucose levels for patient 30 when using the “delay” model (green
solid) and its comparison with 1) the interpolated high precision signal (blue
diamonds) and 2) the sensor output (black dashed).

Fig. 3. Boxplot of absolute relative error for all patients, 1 = sensor, 2 = delay
model, 3 = first-order model. The number n in the title indicates the number of
capillary reference points used for assessment.

not all outliers are shown in the boxplot, the y-axis was limited
to 60% relative error, while some error outliers were in the range
up to 100%: for example, patient 30, which will be discussed in
more detail later.
The computed MARD are summarized numerically in Table I.
There, it appears that the average error using the delay model is
never worse than the one obtained from the sensor output. It is
instructive to inspect the time history of the calibrated signal for
a few patients. In Figs. 4 and 5, we report the time histories for

1704

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

patient 19, which corresponds to the best performance of Table I
and patient 30, which corresponds to the worst performance of
Table I for the delay model. In both figures, the upper plot reports the whole trace, where the blue diamonds represent the
whole set of SMBG values used for performance assessment,
while the red “X”s correspond to the ones used for calibration.
The SMBG values are interpolated using a “pchip” fit, to provide a rough estimate at times in-between the measurements.
The black dashed trace is the CGM sensor output, while the
green solid trace is the calibrated signal arising from Procedure 1. In the lower plot of the two figures, we show a zoomed
portion of data corresponding to the last 700 min (roughly the
afternoon of the third day). The good fit provided by the model
for patient 19 can be appreciated in Fig. 4, where the green
solid trace always remains very close to the fingerstick samples.
The lower plot illustrates the advantage of the proposed calibration method as compared to the sensor output, which shows
significant errors. As for patient 30 and the curves of Fig. 5, an
interesting feature is that most of the errors come from inaccurate measurements for large BG values, whereas the accuracy
for small values remains quite good. This is an attractive and
promising feature of the proposed technique. As mentioned earlier, large error usually appear next to cusps, which can be seen
at time 3460 min in Fig. 5. In this patient, errors up to 100%
were detected for all three calibration methods. The reason are
two consecutively low SMBG values at around 500 min. When
taking into account the preceding and following SMBG values, those two could be classified as measurement errors. They
might also be the reason of the bad initial performance of the
proposed calibrated signal up to 1500 min. Afterwards, the signal quality improves gradually since the erroneous calibration
measurements are weighted less in the optimization problem
thanks to the implemented forgetting strategy.
C. Calibration Results Using the First-Order Model
For the calibration, we use the same dataset of Section V-B.
Moreover, we select once again the forgetting function ψ
as the interpolation of the values in (11) and the function
Δ(v) = v/30 so that the function minimized by the calibration optimization coincides with the one of the previous section.
In addition, we implement the filter (8) with the parameters
(hp , hv ) = (1 · 10−3 , 6 · 10−6 ) and ε = 0.02, which provides a
desirable filtered version of yint and a reasonable estimate of
its derivative. One advantage of the calibration performed exploiting Proposition 2 is that only one optimization needs to be
carried out at each occurrence of a new SMBG sample, which
makes it significantly simpler.
Paralleling the assessment technique of Section V-B, we measure the quality of the calibrated curve by making a paired comparison with all available SMBG values yblo o d . We once again
compute the absolute relative error (12), where the calibration
coefficients k0 (t) and k1 (t) are now determined based on the
optimal estimate of the parameter τ in the filter (4), according
to Proposition 2. All relative errors are visualized also for this
method in the boxplot in Fig. 3 and are indicated with the number 3 on the x-axis of all subplots. Comparing those results with

Fig. 6. Glucose levels for patient 15 when using the first-order model (green
solid) and its comparison with 1) the interpolated high precision signal (blue
dotted) and 2) the sensor output (black dashed).

the sensor recalibration strategy, the median is in all but one
case (patient Id-16) smaller.
The direct comparison between the two proposed methods
does not lead to straightforward conclusions. For some patients,
the filter model leads to better results, while for others, the delay
model seems to be more suitable. When considering the MARD
in Table I, the delay model is best in 14 cases, while the filter
model is best in only 3 cases. The values are, however, very
close to each other in some cases.
In the following, we illustrate again the calibrated signals for
two selected patients. First, patient 15, which shows the highest
accuracy of the sensor calibration in terms of the MARD in
Fig. 6, and second patient 1 where the proposed methods lead
to a significant improvement in Fig. 7.
In Fig. 6, the good agreement of all calibration methods with
the reference samples is evident. Also in this case of very good
performance of the sensor calibration method, the proposed
filter model calibration can still improve the signal. This is also
true for the last day of the observational period, where a few
calibration measurements are used.
According to Table I, the patient providing the minimum
MARD for the delay method is once again patient 19. We prefer,
however, to illustrate the performance arising from applying the
algorithm to patient 1, indeed for this patient, the table reveals
an extremely large improvement as compared to the numbers
obtained from the sensor output. The corresponding curves are
represented in Fig. 7, which reveals great advantages from using
the proposed calibration technique.
As emphasized in Remark 4, we can use the inverted model
(4) and the estimate of the time derivative of yint to obtain
an estimate of the BG, as specified in equation (10). The resulting curve for patient 1 is represented in Fig. 8, where the
dotted blue line corresponds to the “pchip” interpolated SMBG

KIRCHSTEIGER et al.: LMI-BASED APPROACHES FOR THE CALIBRATION OF CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MEASUREMENT SENSORS

1705

VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 7. Glucose levels for patient 1 when using the first order model (green
solid) and its comparison with 1) the interpolated high precision signal (blue
dotted) and 2) the sensor output (black dashed).

Two strategies for on-line calibration of raw measurement
signals coming from a CGM device were presented. Both assume an affine dependence of the electrical current measured
in the interstitial fluid and the interstitial glucose, whereas the
first method additionally implements a variable time delay between the interstitial and the blood compartment and the second
method implements a first-order filter with variable filter time
constant. The methods can explicitly take into account a given
measurement uncertainty of the device used to collect the calibration measurements, and use a forgetting strategy to ensure
that the calibration mainly considers the current operating conditions of the sensor.
Efficient ways to implement the procedures using LMIs
were presented. The computational effort for the first method
(a number Tm ax , the maximum expected time delay, optimization problems have to be solved for every available calibration
measurement) is larger than that for the second one (only one
optimization problem has to be solved for every available calibration measurement). However, as a by-product, additional
information on the reliability of the measurements may be obtained from the first method, as explained in Remark 3. This is an
appealing practical feature when considering that inappropriate
calibration measurements (e.g., taken when the BG is rising or
falling rapidly) deteriorate the signal performance [10]. More
specifically, calibration measurements that result in a fault of
Procedure 1 will be automatically neglected in the optimization
of the calibration coefficients thus avoiding a deterioration of
the estimated calibration parameters.
Validation of both algorithms on real measurement data from
17 type 1 diabetes patients over a three-day in hospital period
was performed. The results showed that the calibrated signals
are much closer to the actual blood glucose even in the case
when only a few calibration measurements are performed and
even when those measurements are performed by the patients
themselves, with their own personal devices.
REFERENCES

Fig. 8. Predicted blood glucose levels for patient 1 when inverting the firstorder model (green solid) and its comparison with 1) the interpolated high
precision signal (blue dotted) and 2) the sensor output (black dashed).

samples, thereby providing a rough estimate of the actual BG,
and the green line is the signal xblo o d,est computed as in (10)
using the optimal values of the calibration and filter parameters.
Note that the estimation is quite accurate, especially during the
monotonic phases of the BG, but exhibits a typical overshoot
around the peaks, certainly arising from the fact that signal (10)
is obtained by some sort of linear extrapolation and produces
larger errors wherever the actual signal is characterized by a
large curvature.

[1] D. Deiss, J. Bolinder, J.-P. Riveline, T. Battelino, E. Bosi, N. Tubiana-Rufi,
D. Kerr, and M. Phillip, “Improved glycemic control in poorly controlled
patients with type 1 diabetes using real-time continuous glucose monitoring,” Diabetes Care, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 2730–2733, Dec. 2006.
[2] B. Kovatchev, L. Heinemann, S. Anderson, and W. Clarke, “Comparison of
the numerical and clinical accuracy of four continuous glucose monitors,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1160–1164, 2008.
[3] G. Freckmann, C. Schmid, K. Ruhland, A. Baumstark, and C. Haug,
“System accuracy evaluation of 43 blood glucose monitoring systems
for self-monitoring of blood glucose according to din en iso 15197,” J.
Diabetes Sci. Technol., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1060–1075, 2012.
[4] G. Freckmann, S. Pleus, M. Link, E. Zschornack, H.-M. Klötzer, and
C. Haug, “Performance evaluation of three continuous glucose monitoring
systems: Comparison of six sensors per subject in parallel,” J. Diabetes
Sci. Technol., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 842–853, 2013.
[5] I. B. Hirsch, D. Armstrong, R. M. Bergenstal, B. Buckingham, B. Childs,
W. L. Clarke, and A. Peters, “Clinical application of emerging sensor technologies in diabetes management: Consensus guidelines for continuous
glucose monitoring (cgm),” Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 10, no.
4, pp. 232–244, 2008.
[6] C. Cobelli, C. Dalla Man, G. Sparacino, L. Magni, G. De Nicolao, and
B. Kovatchev, “Diabetes: Models, signals and control,” IEEE Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 2, pp. 54–96, Dec. 2009.

1706

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

[7] J. Wang, “Electrocemical glucose biosensors,” Chemical Rev., vol. 108,
no. 2, pp. 814–825, 2008.
[8] V. Lodwig and L. Heinemann, “Continuous glucose monitoring with glucose sensors: calibration and assessment criteria,” Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 572–586, 2003.
[9] P. Rossetti, J. Bondia, J. Vehi, and C. G. Fanelli, “Estimating plasma
glucose from interstitial glucose: The issue of calibration algorithms in
commercial continuous glucose monitoring devices,” Sensors, vol. 10,
pp. 10 936–10 952, 2010.
[10] B. A. Buckingham, C. Kollman, R. W. Beck, A. Kalajian, R. FialloScharer, M. J. Tansey, L. A. Fox, D. M. Wilson, S. A. Weinzimer,
K. J. Ruedy, and W. V. Tamborlane, “Evaluation of factors affecting cgms
calibration,” Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 318–325,
2006.
[11] U. Klueh, Z. Liu, B. Feldman, T. P. Henning, B. Cho, T. Ouyang, and
D. Kreutzer, “Metabolic biofouling of glucose sensors in vivo: Role
of tissue microhemorrhages,” J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 583–595, 2011.
[12] S. Guerra, A. Facchinetti, G. Sparacino, G. De Nicolao, and C. Cobelli, “Enhancing the accuracy of subcutaneous glucose sensors: A realtime deconvolution-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 6, pp. 1658–1669, Jun. 2012.
[13] M. S. Boyne, D. M. Silver, J. Kaplan, and C. D. Saudek, “Timing of
changes in interstitial and venous blood glucose measured with a continuous subcutaneous glucose sensor,” Diabetes, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 2790–
2794, 2003.
[14] K. Rebrin, G. Steil, W. Van Antwerp, and J. Mastrototaro, “ Subcutaneous
glucose predicts plasma glucose independent of insulin: implications
for continuous monitoring,” Amer. J. Physiol.-Endocrinol. Metabolism,
vol. 277, no. 3, pp. E561–E571, Sep. 1999.
[15] E. J. Knobbe and B. Buckingham, “The extended Kalman filter for continuous glucose monitoring,” Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 7,
no. 1, pp. 15–27, 2005.
[16] M. D. Breton and B. Kovatchev, “Analysis, modeling, and simulation of
the accuracy of continuous glucose sensors,” J. Diabetes Sci. Technol.,
vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 853–862, 2008.
[17] B. W. Bequette, “Continuous glucose monitoring: Real-time algorithms
for calibration, filtering, and alarms,” J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., vol. 4,
no. 2, pp. 404–418, 2010.
[18] A. Facchinetti, G. Sparacino, and C. Cobelli. (2010). Enhanced accuracy
of continuous glucose monitoring by online extended Kalman filtering.
Diabetes Technol. Therapeutics [Online]. 12(5), pp. 353–363. Available:
http://www.liebertonline.com/doi/abs/10.1089/dia.2009.0158
[19] F. Barcelo-Rico, J.-L. Diez, P. Rosetti, J. Vehi, and J. Bondia, “Adaptive
calibration algorithm for plasma glucose estimation in continuous glucose
monitoring,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 530–
538, May 2013.
[20] V. Naumova, S. V. Pereverzyev, and S. Sivananthan, “Extrapolation in
variable RKHs with application to the blood glucose reading,” Inverse
Problems, vol. 27, no. 7, Jul. 2011.
[21] A. Facchinetti, G. Sparacino, and C. Cobelli, “Online denoising method
to handle intraindividual variability of signal-to-noise ratio in continuous
glucose monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2664–
2671, Sep. 2011.
[22] H. Kirchsteiger, L. Zaccarian, E. Renard, and L. Del Re, “A novel online recalibration strategy for continuous glucose measurement sensors
employing LMI techniques,” in Proc. 35th Annu. IEEE EMBC Conf.,
Jul. 2013, pp. 3921–3924.
[23] H. Kirchsteiger, Robust Model-Based Control of Blood Glucose Concentration in Type 1 Diabetic Patients. Linz, Austria: Trauner Verlag, 2013.
[24] E. F. Pfeiffer, C. Meyerhoff, F. Bischof, F. S. Keck, and W. Kerner, “On
line continuous monitoring of subcutaneous tissue glucose is feasible by
combining portable glucosensor with microdialysis,” Hormone Metabolic
Res., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 121–124, 1993.
[25] E. Kulcu, J. A. Tamada, G. Reach, R. O. Potts, and M. J. Lesho, “Physiological differences between interstitial glucose and blood glucose measured in human subjects,” Diabetes Care, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 2405–2419,
Aug. 2003.
[26] S. Boyd, L. E. Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V. Balakrishnan, Linear Matrix Inequalities in System and Control Theory. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1994.
[27] P. Gahinet, A. Nemirovski, A. J. Laub, and M. Chilali, LMI Control
Toolbox. Natick, MA, USA: The MathWorks Inc., 1995.
[28] S. Nicosia, A. Tornambe, and P. Valigi, “Experimental results in state estimation of industrial robots,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Conf. Decision Control,
1990, vol. 1, pp. 360–365.

Harald Kirchsteiger was born in Altmünster,
Austria in 1981. He received the Dipl.Ing. degree in
mechatronics in 2007 and the Ph.D. degree in 2012
both from the Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at the
Institute for Design and Control of Mechatronical
Systems, Johannes Kepler University. His current
research interests include data-based modeling and
control of biomedical systems in general and specifically of the human glucose metabolism.

Luca Zaccarian (SM’09) received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Roma Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy, in 2000.
He has been an Assistant, and then, an Associate Professor at the University of Roma Tor Vergata, from 2000 to 2011. Since 2011, he has been the
Directeur de Recherche at the Laboratory for Analysis and Architecture of Systems, CNRS, Toulouse,
France. Since 2013, he also holds a part-time Associate Professor position at the University of Trento,
Trento, Italy. His main research interests include analysis and design of nonlinear and hybrid control systems and their applications.
Prof. Zaccarian received the 2001 O. Hugo Schuck Best Paper Award given
by the AACC.

Eric Renard received the Doctorate degree in
medicine (MD) from Montpellier Medical School,
Montpellier, France, in 1987 and the Ph.D. degree in
biochemistry & molecular biology from the University of Montpellier, Montpellier, in 1995.
He was a Research Fellow (Arthur Sachs Scholarship) at Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA, in 1992. He has been
a Chair of Professor of Endocrinology, Diabetes &
Metabolism at the Medical School, University of
Montpellier, since 1999, and heads the Department
of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition at Lapeyronie University Hospital,
Montpellier since 2010. He has been also a Medical Director of Clinical Research, since November 2008 and the Head of the INSERM Clinical Research
Center, Montpellier University Hospital, since January 2010. He leads a research
team focusing on Determinants and correction of the loss of insulin secretion in
diabetes at the Institute of Functional Genomics, Montpellier I & II Universities,
Montpellier, since 2012. His main field of clinical research include developing
insulin pump therapy, especially investigating the use of intraperitoneal insulin
delivery and implantable pumps. During the last 15 years, he extended his
research activity toward continuous blood glucose monitoring and artificial endocrine pancreas models. His recent research includes participation in European
FP7 Projects DIAdvisor, bringing artificial pancreas at home, BIOSID, and in
JDRF-sponsored Artificial Pancreas Project.

Luigi del Re (SM’11) received the Doctoral degree
in electrical engineering from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, ETH, Zürich, Switzerland.
He was a Research Associate with the Institute of
Automatic Control, ETH. He left the ETH in 1994
to work for the Swatch group on different automotive issues and he has been a Full Professor with Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria, since
1998. His main contributions are in the field of engine
and vehicle technology, hydraulics, process control,
and biomedicine. His current research interests include complex control problems that cannot be solved using purely analytical
approaches, and in this context, both nonlinear control design and nonlinear
identification, in particular, using approximation classes.

