IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

99

An Ingestible Sensor for Measuring
Medication Adherence
Hooman Hafezi, Timothy L. Robertson∗ , Member, IEEE, Greg D. Moon, Kit-Yee Au-Yeung,
Mark J. Zdeblick, Member, IEEE, and George M. Savage

Abstract—In this paper, we describe the design and performance
of the first integrated-circuit microsensor developed for daily ingestion by patients. The ingestible sensor is a device that allows
patients, families, and physicians to measure medication ingestion
and adherence patterns in real time, relate pharmaceutical compliance to important physiologic metrics, and take appropriate
action in response to a patient’s adherence pattern and specific
health metrics. The design and theory of operation of the device
are presented, along with key in-vitro and in-vivo performance results. The chemical, toxicological, mechanical, and electrical safety
tests performed to establish the device’s safety profile are described
in detail. Finally, aggregate results from multiple clinical trials involving 412 patients and 5656 days of system usage are presented
to demonstrate the device’s reliability and performance as part of
an overall digital health feedback system.
Index Terms—Electrochemical devices, galvanic coupling,
gastrointestinal fluid, human body tissues, intra-body networks,
pharmaceutical adherence, sensor, wireless communication.

I. INTRODUCTION
IGITAL medicine—the use of wearable and implantable
physiological sensors, mobile communication technology, and web-based patient communities in managing patient
health—represents a new and rapidly evolving paradigm in
healthcare. Continuous measurement of physiological metrics
and rapid sharing of data between patients and caregivers offers
unprecedented opportunities for diagnosing disease, tailoring
treatment to individual patient physiology and behavior, and
responding to new information with little or no delay. These
capabilities can provide solutions to some of the most elusive
and intractable challenges in healthcare.
Medication nonadherence is one such problem. Recent studies have estimated that 30–50% of drug prescriptions are
never taken [1]–[3], resulting in significant complications and
deterioration of patient health [4], [5]. In 2009, the estimated

D

Manuscript received December 2, 2013; revised March 11, 2014; accepted
April 9, 2014. Date of publication July 21, 2014; date of current version December 18, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author
H. Hafezi was with Proteus Digital Health, Redwood City, CA 94065 USA.
He is now with Nernst Engineering, Redwood City, CA 94065 USA (e-mail:
HH@NERNST.NET).
K.-Y. Au-Yeung was with Proteus Digital Health, Redwood City, CA 94065
USA. She is now with Profusa Corporation, San Francisco, CA 94107 USA
(e-mail: kauyeung@proteusdh.com).
∗ T. L Robertson was with Proteus Digital Health, Redwood City, CA 94065
USA. He is now with Mousera, Inc., Belmont, CA 94002 USA (e-mail: timothyr@timothyr.org).
G. D. Moon, M. J. Zdeblick, and G. M. Savage are with Proteus Digital Health, Redwood City, CA 94065 USA (e-mail: gmoon@proteusdh.com;
mzdeblick@proteusdh.com; gsavage@proteusdh.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2341272

Fig. 1 Proteus Digital Health Feedback System—the system consists of ingestible sensors embedded in tablets, a skin-worn receiver patch, and a mobile
device based user interface.

economic cost of nonadherence in the U.S.—including wasted
drugs, treatment of complications, and hospitalizations—was
nearly equal to the total spending on prescription drugs—$289B
[2] versus $301B [6]. The extent and impact of the problem are
expected to grow as patients live longer lives, often requiring
management of one or more chronic conditions with multiple
medications.
In this paper, we present a novel sensor for detecting the
ingestion of a pharmaceutical tablet or capsule. The microfabricated sensor is designed to be incorporated into every “digital”
tablet or capsule during pharmaceutical manufacturing. Upon
ingestion and contact with the fluid in the stomach, each sensor communicates a unique and private digital code to identify
the medication and dose. In combination with a wearable sensor patch and a mobile-phone-based user interface (see Fig. 1),
the sensor provides a system for real-time, continuous measurement of medication adherence. The system further allows
direct correlation between drug ingestion, health-related behaviors such as physical activity, and critical metrics of physiological response, such as heart rate, sleep quality, and blood
pressure. The ingestible sensor and digital health feedback system have received regulatory approval from the Food and Drug
Administration [7] in the U.S. and CE Mark designation in
Europe.
We begin with a discussion of the sensor design and theory of
operation. Results from in vitro tests, finite-element simulations,
and clinical and preclinical studies are discussed to highlight
the key factors involved in sensor operation and detection. Of
particular importance is the sensor’s ability to function in a wide
range of fluids that may be present in the stomach. A series of
clinical studies have been performed since 2008, comprising
20 000+ device ingestions. The results of these studies are
reviewed in terms of sensor performance and safety.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

are then singulated using a laser scribe. The individual ICs are
placed into a previously punched hole in a sheet of skirt material using a pick-and-place machine, then attached to the skirt
material using an edible adhesive material. The final round skirt
is formed using a punch, releasing the individual sensors which
are then secured to an IC-industry-standard reel that holds thousands of completed sensors. These reels of ingestible sensors
are delivered to a semicustom pharmaceutical press, where an
ingestion sensor is inserted into each die along with the pharmaceutical powder that is then pressed into a tablet.
Each component of the sensor provides a specific function.
The active layers are thin films of magnesium and cuprous chloride. The gold underlayer acts as current collector underneath
the cuprous chloride. Upon contact with gastric fluid, these layers create a battery that activates and powers the device. The
following electrode reactions are initiated as soon as the electrolytic fluid in the stomach creates a continuous conductive
path between the anode (Mg) and cathode (CuCl):
Anode : Mg(s) → Mg2+ (aq) + 2e−

(1)

Cathode : CuCl(s) + e− → Cu(s) + Cl− (aq)

(2)
−

Overall : Mg(s) + 2CuCl(s) → 2Cu(s) + 2Cl +Mg

2+

(aq).
(3)

The theoretical open circuit voltage (Eo ) of the overall reaction is 2.5 V. In aqueous solution however, the maximum
observed open circuit potential is 1.85 V, due to a side reaction that occurs on the magnesium electrode and reduces the
available voltage
Fig. 2 Photograph and schematic of the ingestible sensor and cross-section
showing electric potential and current flow (arrows) around the sensor.

Safety was a critical consideration in developing the sensor,
which represents the first instance of a microfabricated device
developed and commercialized for daily ingestion. The safety
considerations and evaluations are presented and discussed in
detail. Together with the sensor’s performance in clinical trials,
these results demonstrate that the device is a safe and reliable
tool for measuring medication adherence.
II. SYSTEM DESIGN
A. Design and Principle of Operation
The sensor (see Fig. 2) consists of three functional components: 1) the active layers, 2) the integrated circuit (IC), and
3) the insulating skirt disk. The integrated circuit is a foodparticle sized 1 mm × 1 mm × 0.3 mm CMOS chip. After
production of the IC, the active layers are deposited directly on
the silicon wafers using a sequence of microfabrication steps.
This begins with the deposition by evaporation of 8 μm of
magnesium on the substrate side of the wafer. Afterward, using shadow masks to define deposition areas, 9 μm of Gold
is deposited by evaporation over the integrated circuit side of
the wafer. Next, again using shadow masks, 7 μm of Cuprous
Chloride is deposited on top of the gold underlayer. The wafers

Mg (s) + 2H2 O(l) → Mg(OH)2 (s) + H2 (g).

(4)

The electrode materials are the same as those used in magnesium reserve batteries [8], [9]. Other electrode materials have
been previously proposed for powering devices using physiological fluids as electrolyte [10], [11]; however, the Mg/CuCl pair
provides an optimum combination of biocompatibility, power,
compatibility with microfabrication processes, and cost. Once
activated, reactions (1)–(3) proceed at a rate equal to the current flow through the IC. Copper is deposited on the cathode
and is gradually converted to copper oxide, which gradually
dissolves to release Cu2+ ions as the device travels through the
GI tract. Mg2+ ions are released at the anode through reaction
(2) as well as the slow dissolution of Mg(OH)2 from reaction
(4). The quantities of various materials released to the body are
extremely low compared to the levels commonly present in the
GI tract or ingested as part of a typical diet. This is discussed in
detail in the safety and toxicology section.
The electrochemical reactions continue until the electrode
materials are exhausted. The duration of discharge depends on
both the amount of active material on the sensor (7 μm CuCl,
8 μm Mg) and the conductivity of the fluid environment around
the device. In vivo, the fluid conductivity is variable and depends
on gastric secretions and the composition of food or medication
ingested with the sensor. The sensor must function over the
full range of such solutions that define the device’s impedance,
output current, and discharge lifetime. Typical in-vivo values of

HAFEZI et al.: INGESTIBLE SENSOR FOR MEASURING MEDICATION ADHERENCE

101

the voltage axis in Fig. 3(c) is shown as an arbitrary axis that
depends on the test cell configuration, while the current output
[see Fig. 3(a) and (b)] depends only on solution conductivity
and device impedance and is thus unambiguous. The output
currents in Fig. 3 provide in-vivo signals of up to 150 μV at the
wearable receiver, although this value again depends somewhat
on the choice and location of receiver system. These effects are
discussed in detail in the following section.
B. Signal Propagation in the Body
Besides the integrated circuit and active layers, the third component of the sensor is the insulating “skirt” disk. The function
of the skirt is to shape and amplify the electric field generated
by the sensor. To see this, it is helpful to start with the theoretical
expression for the potential surrounding a dipole in a conductive
sphere [12]. For a dipole with current I and length d, located at
the center of a sphere of radius R and conductivity κ, the voltage
on the sphere surface is given by
V = 3Id cos θ/4 πκR2
Fig. 3 Output from a typical sensor in a benchtop test cell using a saline
solution at 7 mS/cm and 37 °C. A data packet (a) consists of a sequence of
low and high current pulses (b). Packets are detected as voltage differences
(c) between a pair of receiver electrodes in the test cell (d). Each dot in Fig. 3
(c) is due to one data packet. A device transmits hundreds of packets over its
discharge life.

average discharge current and lifetime are 0.1 mA and 4 min,
respectively.
The flow of current produced by reactions (1)–(3) generates
an electric field similar in shape to that of an electric dipole
(two electrostatic charges or potentials separated by a finite
separation) (see Fig. 2). The electric field is shaped by the insulating skirt, propagates through the surrounding tissue, and is
detected on the skin by a wearable voltage probe or receiver.
This electric field is similar in nature to the electrophysiological
signals generated by the brain, heart, and gastrointestinal tract.
The code transmitted by the device consists of a binary number
that represents the medication and dose of interest. The code is
stored in the nonvolatile memory of the IC. To transmit the code,
the IC modulates the discharge current between high (∼1 mA)
and low (<20 μA) levels. Data packets are transmitted approximately twice a second at several frequencies between 10 and
30 kHz. The frequencies were chosen to avoid interference from
common medical instruments, consumer electronic devices, and
the electrophysiological signals of the body which are typically
between 10–100 Hz. These frequencies further ensure that the
electric signal does not stimulate any cells or tissue as discussed
in the electrical safety section.
A typical data packet is shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). The current pulses generated by the sensor result in a voltage difference
between a pair of electrodes immersed in the test beaker [see
Fig. 3(d)] or on a skin-worn or implanted receiver unit. The
detected voltage is directly proportional to the current output,
but its exact value depends on the position of the receiver electrodes relative to the sensor and the size of the test cell. Hence,

(5)

and the voltage difference between two probes on the surface is
ΔV = 3Id/4 πκR2 (cos θ1 − cos θ2 ).

(6)

In (5), θ is the angle between the dipole vector and the measurement location on the sphere. For a vertically oriented dipole,
θ = 0° at the top of the sphere and 90° in the plane of the equator.
The addition of the skirt extends the current path and increases
V and ΔV in a similar fashion to increasing d. Fig. 4(a) shows
benchtop measurements (symbols) and finite element simulations (lines) of signals due to sensors of varying skirt size. The
simulations and benchtop results agree well and show that the
detected signal is indeed proportional to skirt radius. Fig. 4(a)
also shows simulations of dipoles of varying lengths without a
skirt (blue line). Comparison of the two lines shows the effect
of the skirt. For example, a 0.3-mm long dipole with a 2.5-mm
radius skirt generates a signal equal to a 1.9-mm-long dipole
without skirt, a ∼6× improvement in amplitude.
The skirt is made of standard pharmaceutical excipients (ethyl
cellulose, hydroxypropyl cellulose, and triethyl citrate) and is
a critical part of the sensor design. By enhancing the signal
amplitude, the skirt allows the sensor to be only 300 μm thick.
This makes it feasible to manufacture the device almost entirely
on a silicon wafer without the need for extended electrical antennas and connections. More importantly, it allows the rigid
part of the device to be very small—the size of a small food
particle—which ensures facile passage through the GI tract.
Equation (6) shows the other key parameters that influence the
detected signal. These include the conductivity of the torso κ, the
distance between the sensor and the receiver R (equivalent to the
size of the patient), and the current output of the device. Current
output is a function of the device’s voltage and impedance.
The latter depends strongly on the conductivity of the gastric
medium. Gastric fluid has a conductivity that is approximately
10× that of the rest of the torso (see Table I). This difference
in conductivity has an important impact on the detected signal.
This can be seen with a modified form of (5) derived for a sphere

102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4 Effect of skirt size on signal strength shown in terms of (a) average
detected signal over device lifetime and (b) relative signal strength as a function
of angle between receiver and the device in the setup shown in Fig. 3(d).
Experimental data (symbols) and finite elements (lines) simulations show good
agreement. The different curves in 4b are for skirt radii of 5, 10, and 15 mm,
respectively.

PH,

TABLE I
OSMOLALITY, AND CONDUCTIVITY (κ) OF GASTRIC FLUID, VARIOUS
FOODS, AND DIFFERENT HUMAN TISSUES AT 37 °C
Fluid

Human gastric
fluid, fasted
statea
Tap water
Orange juice
Coca Cola
Milk (2% fat)
Coffee

pH [20],
[21]

Osmolality
(mosm/kg)
[20], [21]

κb (mS/cm)

1.5–7

191

6–17

5.7–7.4
3.75
2.4
6.73
5.14

2–40
594–622
493–695
271–282
58

0.1
5.3
1.4
6.3
4.5

Tissue
Fat, Lung, Spleen, Bone
Lung, Liver, stomach, kidney, muscle (noncardiac)
Cardiac muscle (parallel, transverse)

κ(mS/cm)[22]
0.0625–0.1
0.667–1.49
7.604, 1.319

a
Typical human gastric fluid composition [16–19]: Typical concentrations:
Chloride (102±28 mM), Sodium (68±29 mM),Potassium (13.4±3 mM),
Pepsin (1 mg/mL).
b
Measured according to the Materials and Methods section.

with two conductivity domains [13]:
2
V = 3αId cos θ/4 π κouter Router

(7)

where α = 3/{2 + κinner /κouter + 2 (κinner /κouter − 1)
(Rinner /Router )3 }.

Fig. 5 Finite element simulations of the sensor signal (a) Potential (mV) on
the skin surface. (b) Potential (mV) inside the body. (c) Potential difference
(mV) measured by the imaginary 4 cm probe shown in (b) as it is moved away
from the device. The voltages shown in (a) and (b) are relative to the center of
the sensor, which is taken as the arbitrary zero of potential. The two curves in
(c) compare the signal with a uniform conductivity in the body versus a stomach
with 10× higher conductivity than the torso.

Equation (7) shows that the detected signal depends on the ratio between the inner and outer-domain conductivities. When the
inner region is small and has a significantly higher conductivity,
(7) provides up to a 3× increase in signal over the homogeneous
case (5). In effect, the device’s current and power are concentrated within the small high-conductivity region (the stomach)
instead of being spread over the entire body. The low conductivity tissue outside the stomach behaves like a high impedance
probe, allowing the electrical signal to be detected at the skin
surface without drawing significant current.
For a nonspherical geometry, these effects are best seen with
finite element simulations (see Fig. 5). The body can be modeled as a stomach with a conductivity of 7 mS/cm, surrounded
by tissue with a uniform conductivity of 0.7 mS/cm. While this
simplified model does not account for the heterogeneity and
anisotropy of tissue, it in fact predicts the correct magnitude of
the detected voltages on the skin compared to clinical results
(10–100 μV, Fig. 7). For a sensor situated at the closest possible point relative to a receiver with 6-cm probe spacing, the
simulations predict a detected signal of 150 μV. This is in fact
very close to the value observed in clinical studies, as described
later.
The finite element simulations are also useful for examining
the potential due to the sensor throughout the body. The enhancement in signal due to the difference in stomach and torso

HAFEZI et al.: INGESTIBLE SENSOR FOR MEASURING MEDICATION ADHERENCE

conductivity can be seen in Fig. 5(b), for the case of a theoretical “probe” as it is moved away from the sensor. The simulations show that the potential due to the sensor drops off very
rapidly with distance; outside a distance of ∼2 cm [Fig. 5(a)],
all voltages are within ±5 mV of each other and the center of
the sensor (used as the arbitrary ground reference). This is an
important result as it indicates that the maximum voltage that
the sensor can exert outside its immediate vicinity is ∼10 mV,
far below the levels that would stimulate tissue or interfere with
implantable devices such as pacemakers.
Equations (5)–(7) and the finite element simulations also predict a cosine dependence between the signal strength and the
angle between the device and the receiver. This is verified in
isotropic benchtop experiments [Fig. 4(b)]. The angular dependence was of some concern in the early stages of development
as it implies that some devices in the stomach may be perfectly
“misaligned” relative to the receiver and become undetectable.
We have not found this “null” condition during preclinical and
clinical testing, perhaps because of the conductive anisotropy
present in human anatomy. Thus, such misalignment occurs over
the life of a sensor less than 1% of the time. This is because the
stomach and torso are highly heterogeneous media, providing
multiple tortuous paths for the electric field to reach the receiver.
Furthermore, over the typical in-vivo transmission time (several
minutes), the sensor and receiver move relative to each other
due to the peristaltic action of gastric waves and respiration.
Thus, while the signal may be weak for certain periods of time,
the probability of the sensor remaining perfectly misaligned relative to the receiver for the entire duration of communication is
small.
Two additional aspects of the sensor design and signal propagation are worth noting. First, the physical parameters of the
sensor can be traded off against each other to maintain or increase signal strength. For example, it may be desirable to reduce the size of the sensor and skirt to accommodate tablets or
capsules whose smallest dimension is below 5 mm. This can
be achieved without affecting the sensor’s detection ability by
increasing the output current of the sensor or increasing the
receiver dipole length.
Second, the sensor has been specifically designed to provide a detectable signal while maintaining the simplest possible
physical design. This is important for low cost, high volume
manufacturing. The features that enable scalable manufacturing
are the use of the skirt to enhance the sensor signal—eliminating
the need for extended antennas and off-chip connections—and
the integration of multiple functions into the same pair of electrodes on the device, which simultaneously provide for activation, power generation, and signal transmission. While this
requires a high level of sophistication in the integrated circuit
design, it ensures that the device can be made with a highly
scalable manufacturing process.
III. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A. Benchtop Testing
Test solutions were placed in a water-jacketed beaker maintained at 37+/−1 °C. The sensor was immersed and held in

103

a fixed location at the center of the beaker using customized
tweezers. The signal generated by the sensor was measured
with two stainless steel electrodes, symmetrically located at a
fixed distance from the device [see Fig. 3(d)] and connected to
a high speed data acquisition system for measuring and decoding the signal. The currents shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b)
were obtained using metal pincers to connect sensors to an
oscilloscope and the current flow was determined by measuring the voltage across a known resistor. Solution conductivities were measured with a Hach Sension 5 conductivity
meter.
B. Safety Studies
1) Chemical Extraction Studies: Sensors were incubated in
deionized water adjusted to pH 1.2 and pH 7 with HCl or phosphate buffer to simulate gastric and intestinal conditions. Incubations were performed for 72 h at 37 °C with gentle agitation.
Extraction ratios were selected per the ISO-10993-12 standard
[14]. The extracts were tested using Inductively-Coupled Plasma
Mass Spectroscopy to quantify inorganic compounds and Gas
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry to quantify organic compounds.
2) Toxicology: Repeat dose study in canines—the canine
study was a 7-day, repeat-dose oral toxicology study. The
test articles were complete devices placed in gelatin capsules prior to dosing. Twelve beagle dogs (n = 4 in the 1×
group, n = 4 in the 2× group, and n = 4 controls) were used
in this study. The daily dosage for the 1× and 2× dosing
groups 24 and 48 devices per day, respectively. Daily clinical observations were performed during dosing, and whole
blood was drawn from each animal at Day 0 and Day 7. Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) was
used for the quantification of materials in the blood. Animals
were sacrificed on Day 7 for gross pathological analysis, organ weights, and histological analysis of gastrointestinal tract
tissues.
Oral gavage in rats—sensors were incubated for 4 h at 37 °C
in simulated gastric fluid (0.15 M NaCl solution, buffered to
pH 1.8 + 1.0% pepsin), followed by simulated intestinal fluid
(0.15 M NaCl, buffered to pH 7.0 + 0.035% bile salts + 0.035%
pancreatin) for 68 h. The extraction ratio was selected per the
ISO-10993-12 standard [14]. Eighty-four Sprague–Dawley rats
were divided evenly into seven dosing groups: two control
groups (water and extraction vehicle groups) and 0.33×, 1×,
10×, 100×, and 1000× groups. The 1× group represented the
weight-adjusted rat equivalent to 30 sensors ingested simultaneously on a daily basis by a human. Animals received a single,
daily oral gavage dose for 14 days, using a constant dose volume
of 10 mL fluid/kg body weight. Regular clinical observations,
including exams, mortality/moribundity checks, body weights,
food consumption, and ophthalmoscopy, were performed. Blood
counts, biochemistries, and coagulation were obtained under
anesthesia on Day 14. Thereafter, animals were sacrificed for
gross necropsy, organ weights, and histopathological analysis
of a broad set of tissues commonly examined in dose-response
toxicology studies.

104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

C. Mechanical Safety
Assessment of luminal injury–sensors were prepared incorporating a thin layer of tantalum to ensure radiopacity on digital radiographs. Four canines (two in the experimental group,
one positive control, and one negative control) were used. Sensors were administered in gelatin capsules to the experimental animals (50 devices each) and the positive control animal
(10 devices). The negative control group received ten cellulosic discs without microchips. Serial digital radiographs, obtained at t = 0, t = 3 h, t = 24 h, and t = 72 h, were interpreted independently by two veterinary radiologists, who
had been provided with in-vitro images of sensors in various
orientations.
Assessment of transit time—sensors labeled with tantalum as
above were administered in gelatin capsules to the experimental group (two animals, given 50 sensors each) and the positive control group (one animal, ten ingestible sensors). For the
negative control group (one animal), ten cellulosic discs without microchips were administered. Serial digital radiographs,
obtained at t = 0, t = 3 h, t = 24 h, and t = 72 h, were interpreted independently by two veterinary radiologists, who
had been provided with in-vitro images of sensors in various
orientations.

Fig. 6 Effect of (a) conductivity (KCl solutions) (b) chloride concentration
(0 and 130 mM) (c) pH, and (d) pepsin concentration on discharge profiles. All
testing was done at 37 °C.

E. Clinical Studies
D. Electrical Safety
Assessment of cardiac dysrhythmia—two canine subjects
were used to test the effect of typical and exaggerated sensor pulses delivered from the esophagus—the location in closest proximity to the heart. An electrophysiology (EP) catheter
was used to deliver pulses at two locations in the esophagus: 1) at the point of maximal mechanical cardiac impact,
visualized in the esophagus with an endoscope and 2) at the
point where the highest amplitude transesophageal electrogram was measured. A signal generator produced simulated
sensor signals, with frequencies ranging from 3 to 100 kHz
and a maximum amplitude of 10 V (>6× the maximal voltage produced by the sensor), each delivered for 2 min. During pulse delivery, surface ECG traces were continuously
monitored.
Assessment of electrochemical injury—an endoscope was
used to visualize the gastric mucosa to identify pristine tissue
suitable for a test location in a canine model. A custom-made
pulse delivery paddle, incorporating the sensor’s anode and cathode materials, was inserted and apposed to the stomach wall
with the help of suction capability built into the periphery of the
device. Electrical pulses of nominal and exaggerated strength
were delivered to the test location. This included signals with a
carrier frequency of 10 kHz as well as direct current, at current
of ࣘ10 mA delivered for 1 min. Each test location was marked
using suction and electrocautery. This pulse delivery method
was repeated on the stomach and the esophagus endoscopically,
and again on the stomach via a gastrostomy. After the animal
was sacrificed, gross necropsy and histologic analysis were performed.

The clinical studies were observational prospective studies
conducted in healthy volunteers or specific patient populations.
In each study, patients wearing a receiver were asked to ingest
devices integrated into a suitable dose form to evaluate system
performance and safety. Directly observed ingestion was used
as a comparator to assess system performance, with the performance primary—positive detection accuracy—defined as the
number of detected devices divided by the number of ingested
devices. Further details are described in [15].
IV. RESULTS
A. Performance in Biological Fluids
The stomach is a complex and variable chemical environment. Upon ingestion, food or medication is mixed with saliva
and the basal stomach contents. The secretion of acid, electrolytes, enzymes, and surfactants modifies this mixture soon
after ingestion, as do the slower processes of dissolution, digestion, and gastric emptying. Further variations may occur due to
differences in patient physiology and medication, such as the
use of proton pump inhibitors.
A series of in vitro tests were performed to assess the sensor’s
ability to function over the range of conditions created by these
phenomena. Test solutions were selected based on the ranges
of pH, conductivity, and enzyme and surfactant concentrations
reported in the literature or measured in vitro.
The most critical property of stomach fluid is its conductivity.
This is shown in Fig. 6(a) with KCl solutions at 3, 7, 10, and
17 mS/cm conductivity (all at 37 °C). Changing solution conductivity results in a proportionate decrease in discharge lifetime

HAFEZI et al.: INGESTIBLE SENSOR FOR MEASURING MEDICATION ADHERENCE

105

TABLE II
KEY SAFETY STUDIES
Category

Purpose

Model

Chemical
safety
Toxicology

-Quantify extractable species, simulated
gastric / intestinal fluids
-Dose response (24 or 48 devices per day,
7 days)
-High-dose oral gavage (up to 33,000
devices per day on a body-weight adjusted
basis, 14 days)
-Gastric transit time

None

Mechanical
safety
Electrical
safety

Fig. 7 Typical in-vivo discharge profiles for three ingestible sensors (a–b) and
histograms of device lifetimes (b) and mean amplitude (c) from a representative
clinical study.

due to the change in the sensor’s impedance and output current.
Over the wide range of conductivities shown in Fig. 6(a), the
device runs for 120–400 s. In vivo discharge lifetimes vary over
a comparable range. The minimum time needed for successful
detection is about 5 s, so that the discharge times shown in
Fig. 6(a) represent significant margin above the level necessary
for successful detection.
The effects of other parameters—chloride, pH, and pepsin
are shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). Only pH has a noticeable effect.
Changing pH from 1.6 to 7 (a change of five orders of magnitude
in H+ concentration) at a constant conductivity produces very
little change.
The effects seen in Fig. 6 are best understood in the context of
reactions (1)–(4). The reactants required by the main electrode
reactions are copper and magnesium, both of which are supplied
by the device itself. The only essential component provided by
the stomach fluid is a medium with sufficient ionic conductivity
to complete the circuit and reactions. The minor effect of pH
is through side reaction (4). Lower pH increases the rate of
the side reaction and increases the solubility of the Mg(OH)2
byproduct; the two effects partially compensate for each other,
resulting in a modest effect. The other species do not participate
as reactants and have little impact on the kinetics of the electrode
reactions.
B. Device Safety
Safety considerations were an essential part of the sensor
design. As a mucosal contacting device, the Ingestible Sensor was evaluated according to the framework defined by the
ISO-10993 International Standard for Biological evaluation of
Medical Devices [14]. The key studies used to assess chemical,

-Luminal injury
-Cardiac stimulation / dysrhythmia
-Electrochemical injury to GI lumen

Canine
Rodent

Canine
Canine
Canine
Canine

toxicological, mechanical, and electrical safety are listed in Table II.
1) Chemical Safety and Toxicology: The Ingestible sensor is
comprised of an integrated circuit (0.85 mg, primarily silicon),
the two active layers (CuCl (0.02 mg), and Mg (0.015 mg), and
excipient materials that make up the insulating skirt disk and
adhesive layer used to attach the IC to the skirt (ethyl cellulose,
hydroxypropyl cellulose, and triethyl citrate). The total weight
of the device is 7.1 mg.
According to the ISO-10993 guideline, the Ingestible Sensor
is a mucosal contacting device. However, since the device is
designed to elute species like copper and magnesium ions during
operation, the levels of material released by the device were
assessed using the International Conference on Harmonisation’s
standard for reporting and qualifying impurities in a new drug
substance [23]. From this perspective, the ingestible sensor is
viewed as another component of a pharmaceutical dose form,
and any materials released by the device in the body are viewed
as “impurities.”
In the first phase, the quantities of all species or impurities released by the sensor in the gastrointestinal tract were established
using in-vitro extraction studies. Extractions were performed on
devices incubated in pH 1.2 or pH 7 media for 72 h at 37 °C
to represent both low- and high-pH gastric environments. The
media consisted of deionized water and hydrochloric acid or
phosphate buffer. No surfactant or enzyme was added to the media to avoid introduction of extraneous species and impurities
during analysis. Inorganic and organic species were quantified
using ICP-MS and GC-MS, respectively. The species detected
above the reporting threshold of 0.05% of device weight (the
criteria established by the ICH [23] for a new drug substance)
are shown in Table III. These consist of copper and magnesium
ions, ethyl citrate, and various fragments of cellulose polymers.
The safety of each of these components was evaluated related
to established ingestion guidelines (see Table III), typically expressed as a recommended daily average (RDA) or acceptable
daily intake (ADI) for each material. For copper and magnesium,
the detected levels are 125× [24] and 53 000X [25] below the
recommended daily intakes of each species. Similarly, the level
of ethyl citrate was 4600× below the established acceptable
daily limit [26]. A variety of peaks in the GC-MS spectrogram

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE III
MATERIALS DETECTED IN EXTRACTION STUDIES COMPARED TO NUTRITIONAL
GUIDELINES

Element
Copper
Magnesium
Ethyl citrate
Cellulose

mg/device
pH 1.2
.0071
.0079
0.263
Not quantified

pH 7

ADI or RDA
(mg/day)

0.0002
.0070
0.231
Not quantified

0.9 [24]
420 [25]
1200 [26]
Laxative effect at 5–30 g/day

were identified as cellulose fragments due to HPC and EC but
were not quantified due to the large number of fragments. This
is as expected given the high molecular weight and polydispersity of the cellulosic polymers used in the skirt. These cellulose
derivatives are widely used as pharmaceutical excipients and
food additives. The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food
Additives [27] has specified that these additives may be included
in food products with no upper limit, since they are essentially
dietary fiber materials. The only recommendation regarding ingestion levels is a precaution regarding laxative effects, which
occur at 5–30 g/day [27]; the quantities used in Ingestible Sensor
are three orders of magnitude below this range.
In the second phase, two toxicological studies were performed
to further assess device safety by administering sensors or concentrated sensor extracts to animal models. In the first toxicological study, daily doses of 24 or 48 devices were administered
to 12 canines for seven consecutive days. Blood samples were
analyzed on days 0 and 7 and showed no differences in the levels
of materials between test and control groups or between pre- and
post-7-day-dosing states. No significant differences were found
at these dose levels in terms of clinical observations, bodyweights, and food consumption. At the end of the 7 day period,
gross organ pathology, organ weights, and microscopic analysis
of selected gastrointestinal tissues and liver were performed and
also indicated no difference between control and test groups.
A second toxicological study was performed using oral gavage in Sprague–Dawley rats to test dose response at even higher
dose levels. Sprague–Dawley rats were selected because they
have no vagal response to ingestion of relatively high concentration copper solutions. Solution extracts were obtained by
incubating devices in simulated gastric fluid (4 h) followed by
simulated intestinal fluids (68 h). Doses of 0, 0.7, 2.1, 21, 214,
and 2143 mg/kg body weight/day were administered daily for
14 days using oral gavage. On a body-weight adjusted basis,
these correspond to ingestion of 0, 11, 33, 330, 3300, 33 000
devices a day for 14 days in a 70-kg human subject. Animals
were examined daily for mortality/moribundity, body weight,
food consumption, and ophthalmoscopy. At the end of the
study, subjects were evaluated for the evidence of toxicity in
terms of blood counts, biochemistry, and coagulation, gross
necropsy, organ weight, and tissue histopathology. The results
showed no evidence of sensor-related toxicity, even in the highest dosing group. There were no differences between the control
groups and the treatment groups with regard to clinical observations and histopathology. A statistically significant increase in

thyroid gland weight was observed in the male subjects at dosing levels of 2.1 mg/kg body weight/day or greater. The increase
was not correlated to dosing level and not observed in any of
the female dose groups. No histological correlation was found
between thyroid weight increase and examination of liver or pituitary gland tissue, which are typically associated with thyroid
function. Therefore, this difference was considered unrelated
to sensor exposure. Given the lack of toxicity, a NOAEL (no
observable adverse effect level) could not be established.
2) Mechanical Safety: The sensor consists of an insoluble
portion—the integrated circuit—equivalent in size to a food
particle—and a cellulosic disk comprised of insoluble (ethyl
cellulose) and soluble components (hydroxypropyl cellulose
and triethyl citrate). The skirt becomes mechanically soft after immersion in gastrointestinal fluids. The sensor is therefore
expected to be mechanically handled by the gut like a food
particle or incidentally ingested grain of sand.
To confirm this, two animal experiments were performed to
assess gastric transit time and any potential risk for luminal
injury. In the first experiment (luminal injury), 40 sensors were
administered per day for three days to canine subjects (two
test subjects, one control subject). Stool frequency, character,
and hemoccult were checked for three days prior to dosing and
during dosing. No changes were observed in any of the stool
parameters. Gross necropsy following day 3 and examination of
the gastrointestinal tract in its entirety revealed no evidence of
any mechanical injury.
In the second experiment (gastrointestinal transit time), canines were given 50 devices (experimental group, two animals),
ten devices (positive control group, one animal), or ten skirts
with no IC (negative control group, one animal). The devices
were labeled with radiopaque tags and each animal was imaged
via X-ray at t = 0, 3, 24, and 72 h. At t = 0 and t = 3 h, ten devices were identified as expected in the positive control animal.
Multiple devices (nonquantified by design) were identified in
the experimental animals. At t = 24 h, devices were visualized
in only one experimental animal, and by t = 72 h, no devices
were visualized in any animal, indicating transit and excretion of
all devices. No devices were visualized at any of the time points
in the negative control animal. These results confirmed that the
device transits through the GI tract on a time scale comparable
to the transit times for foods and small particles in humans and
canines [17], [28]–[30].
We note also that the mechanical tests described earlier were
conducted with an earlier generation of the sensor than the one
shown in Fig. 2. This version of the sensor contained an integrated circuit with a higher thickness −0.45 mm instead of
0.3 mm. This was because at the time of the study, the IC
was manufactured with an earlier version of the manufacturing process. The surface dimensions of the IC and amounts of
active materials were otherwise identical. The success of the mechanical tests with the larger version of the IC provides further
confidence in the mechanical safety of the final design.
3) Electrical Safety: Electrical safety was evaluated with regards to three potential mechanisms: 1) stimulation of cardiac or
gastrointestinal tissue, 2) interference with implanted medical
devices such as pacemakers and defibrillators, and 3) luminal

HAFEZI et al.: INGESTIBLE SENSOR FOR MEASURING MEDICATION ADHERENCE

injury to the gastrointestinal tract due to the electrochemical
reactions occurring at the electrodes. All three risks are low, as
the sensor outputs a maximum voltage of only 1.85 V at open
circuit with very short pulses of 5 to 50 μs. Furthermore, the
voltage due to the sensor drops off as the square of the distance
from the device, so that outside a 1–2 cm volume, all voltages
are between −5 and +5 mV and the maximum voltage available
to stimulate tissue is at most 10 mV (see Fig. 5).
To assess the possibility of cardiac stimulation, a canine study
was performed using two canine subjects. An electrophysiology
(EP) catheter delivered representative and exaggerated pulses
at two different locations in the esophagus, the section of the
GI tract where the sensor would be in closest proximity to
the heart. The two locations stimulated were 1) the point of
maximal mechanical cardiac impact, visualized in the esophagus with an endoscope and 2) the point where the highest
amplitude transesophageal electrogram could be measured. A
signal generator produced simulated electrical pulses, with carrier frequencies ranging from 3 to 100 kHz and a maximum
amplitude of 10 V (>6× the maximum open circuit voltage
produced by the sensor), each delivered for 2 min. During
pulse delivery, surface ECG traces were continuously monitored. No ECG abnormalities were observed in either animal,
confirming the initial assessment that there is no practical risk of
cardiac stimulation.
To put this in further context, many literature studies have
evaluated the magnitude and frequency of electrical signal required to stimulate cardiac tissue. These results are usually presented as strength-duration curves [31], [32] and show that with
a shorter pulse, a higher value of current or voltage is required to
elicit a response. At the pulse width characteristic of the sensor
(5 to 50 μs), a current of 5.5–50 mA would have to reach the
heart to elicit a response. This is virtually impossible since the
current generated by the sensor has a peak value of ∼1–2 mA
and the voltage due to the sensor is almost entirely confined to
the high conductivity stomach environment.
Strength-duration curves are not readily available for gastrointestinal tissue. A number of recent studies have successfully utilized electrical signals to modulate gastric slow waves or
improve clinical symptoms associated with gastroparesis [33]–
[35]. The voltages and pulse widths needed to elicit a response
in these studies are significantly larger than those generated by
the sensor. In one study [35], electrodes implanted 2–3 cm apart
on the mucosal side of the gastric lining were unable to generate
any response with pulses of up to 10 V and 330 μs pulse width.
Thus, the ingestible sensor operates in a regime with essentially
no risk of tissue stimulation.
The final part of the electrical safety evaluation was addressing the risk of chemical burns due to species generated at the
sensor electrodes. Chemical burns due to implanted electrodes
are typically due to electrochemical reactions that break down
water and drive the local pH to very high (pH > 12) or very low
values [36]. Due to its relatively low operating voltage, the sensor does not possess sufficient power to drive water electrolysis
at an appreciable rate. The main chemical burn risk is due to
side reaction (4), which consumes acid and produces Mg(OH)2 ,
thereby raising the local pH. The maximum pH change is set by

107

the solubility product of Mg(OH)2 (1.5e−11 mol3 /L3 ) which sets
a maximum pH of 10.5 in a saturated Mg2+ solution. This value
is ∼5× lower than that needed to cause injury. Furthermore,
electrochemical lesion formation is most probable when there
is a prolonged electrode-tissue contact. For the ingestible sensor, the tissue contact duration is likely to be short and variable
as stomach peristalsis will constantly turn the device and propel
it forward.
To confirm the low risk of electrochemical injury, a canine
study was performed. An endoscope was used to visualize the
gastric mucosa to identify pristine tissue suitable for a test location. A custom-made pulse delivery paddle, incorporating the
same anode and cathode materials as the sensor, was inserted
and apposed to the stomach wall, with the help of suction capability built into the periphery of the device. Electrical pulses
of nominal and exaggerated strength were delivered to the test
location. This included signals identical to the sensor with a
carrier frequency of 10 kHz as well as direct current, at current
of up 10 mA delivered for 1 min. Each test location was marked
using suction and electrocautery. This pulse delivery method
was repeated on the stomach and the esophagus endoscopically,
and again on the stomach via a gastrostomy. After the animal
was euthanized, gross necropsy and histologic analysis were
performed. No evidence of pulse-related injury was detected,
supporting the assessment of negligible risk of electrochemical
injury from the sensor.
C. Pharmaceutical Integration
The ingestible sensor is intended to be integrated with a pharmaceutical oral dose form (tablet or capsule). This can be accomplished via one of three approaches during pharmaceutical
manufacturing. The device can be incorporated into a tablet
during tablet compression, placed inside a hard gelatin capsule
during capsule filling, or attached to the surface of a tablet or
capsule using an edible adhesive layer.
All three approaches have been successfully demonstrated
via benchtop, preclinical, and clinical studies. In all cases, the
combined dose form must meet the requirements of the pharmaceutical product—drug assay and effective release (typically
evaluated via dissolution testing), stability, visual appeal, and
physical integrity—while providing a suitable vehicle for delivery and activation of the sensor. The approaches and relevant
case studies are presented in detail elsewhere [37], [38].
D. Clinical Performance
The ingestible sensor was evaluated in a series of clinical
trials involving healthy volunteers or patients in specific therapeutic areas, including those with hypertension, heart failure,
diabetes mellitus, tuberculosis, bipolar affective disorder, and
schizophrenia (see Table IV). Testing was performed in adults
with body mass index ranging from 16.0 to 56.8 kg/m2 . The
therapeutic areas selected were those where a compelling need
exists for a networked system to measure medication adherence
and complementary physiologic metrics. In each trial, the sensor was tested as part of a complete system, consisting of the
sensor integrated with a suitable dose form (tablet or capsule),

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE IV
EXPOSURE AND PERFORMANCE IN CLINICAL TRIALS
412 subjects
20,993 ingestions
Maximum daily ingestion: 34
Maximum use days: 90 days

99.1% Detection accuracy
100% Correct identification
0% False positives
No SAEs / UADEs related to system

Trials were conducted in the following patient populations. The number
of patients in each study is indicated in parentheses: Healthy Volunteers
(296), Cardiovascular disease (53), Tuberculosis (30), Psychiatry (28).
SAE = Serious Adverse Event; UADE = Unanticipated Adverse Device
Effect).

a receiver unit worn by the patient, and a device for interfacing
with the system (typically a cell phone with a graphical user interface). Physiologic metrics such as heart rate, blood pressure,
activity, and sleep quality were measured and compared with
adherence patterns to provide a continuous, real-time picture of
a patient’s health. The designs and results of individual clinical trials have been reported elsewhere [15], [37], [38]. Here,
we focus on the aggregate performance of the ingestible sensor
across all trials (see Table IV).
The primary measure of sensor performance in vivo is the
positive detection accuracy (PDA). PDA is defined as the percentage of detected devices that have been administered under
direct observation. The most recent confirmatory study of performance, which tested the latest configuration of the system,
demonstrated a PDA of 99.1% (321 detected/324 ingested under
direct observation, 95% CI 97.3%–99.7%).
The 0.9% of devices that went undetected represent contributions from all components of the system. For the sensor, the most
likely contribution is due to physiological corner cases, where a
combination of stomach environment and receiver–sensor orientation may result in a small proportion of devices (no greater
than 0.9%) being missed.
Fig. 7(a) shows typical in-vivo signals from several sensors
ingested by healthy volunteers. Sensors were compressed inside
nonactive tablets for this study. The difference in duration of discharge of the devices shown is due to differences in local stomach conductivity and device impedance. The signal strengths
are different because the local environment, sensor position,
and orientation are free to vary with time; the discrete amplitude changes within each device are most likely due to sensor
movement, whereas differences in chemical environment occur
on a slower time scale and are more likely to account for differences between sensors ingested at different times. Due to the
characteristic drop off in electric potential as a function of distance from a dipole, signal strengths tend to be lower in subjects
with larger BMI, but remain well above the receiver’s detection
threshold of 1 μV in subjects up to a BMI of 56.8 kg/m2 .
V. DISCUSSION
The results presented here demonstrate the safety and clinical performance of the ingestible sensor, the first instance of a
microfabricated integrated circuit developed and approved for
daily ingestion by patients. The sensor has been designed and
optimized to measure ingestion events in a direct and accurate

manner and allows direct correlation of medication adherence
to other physiological metrics.
The first application of the ingestion sensor is to measure a
patient’s adherence to oral medication therapy regimens. By allowing direct and timely feedback to the patient and caregivers,
the sensor provides a tool for improving adherence behavior.
This can be done by sensing enough ingestion events to allow
statistically meaningful determination of a pattern of behavior
for a given patient. It is important to note that the detection accuracy of such events need not be perfect, rather only sufficient
to provide a statistically meaningful classification of adherence
behavior within a reasonable period of time. The higher the
detection accuracy, the fewer ingestion events needed for such
classification for a given statistical level of confidence. Beyond
medication adherence, the sensor can also be combined with
nutritional supplements and foods for applications such as optimization of athletic performance and diet management.
The sensor also represents a platform for a new category of
highly integrated physiological sensors, combining the functions of power generation and communication in a small, safe,
and inexpensive form factor. The power source—a partial battery that utilizes the gastric fluid as its electrolytic solution—
eliminates the need for a bulky power source. The communication channel utilizes the same electrodes as the power source
to transmit data, enabling reliable and private communication
within the body between multiple devices.
Many applications are possible beyond the measurement of
ingestion events. Foremost among these is the detection of clinically important chemical species, including gastric pH, blood,
and enzymes. By modifying the amount of active material on the
device, applying suitable coatings, and using triangulation methods, the device can be adapted to activate and sense in specific
parts of the GI tract. Gastric transit times and gastrointestinal
electric activity can also be measured. Since the electrical signal
must pass through the torso to reach the receiver, it offers the
possibility of measuring properties such as hydration and fat
content. Finally, the availability of a proven and safe ingestible
integrated circuit can enable a new generation of “smart” drug
delivery dose forms, with the ability to generate very specialized
drug release profiles, target specific locations, and respond to
local sensing events.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank their many colleagues at
Proteus Digital Health who assisted with this work.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Osterberg and T. Blaschke, “Adherence to medication,” N. Eng. J. Med.,
vol. 353, no. 5, pp. 487–497, 2005.
[2] “Thinking outside the pillbox: A system-wide approach to improving patient medication adherence for chronic disease,” New England Healthcare
Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2009.
[3] K. Nasseh, S. G. Frazee, J. Visaria, A. Vlahiotis, and Y. Tian, “Cost
of medication nonadherence associated with diabetes, hypertension, and
dyslipidemia,” Amer. J. Pharmacy Benefits, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 41–47, 2010.
[4] J. N. Rasmussen, A. Chong, and D. A. Alter, “Relationship between
adherence to evidence-based pharmacotherapy and long-term mortality
after acute myocardial infarction,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., vol. 297, no. 2,
pp. 177–186, 2007.

HAFEZI et al.: INGESTIBLE SENSOR FOR MEASURING MEDICATION ADHERENCE

[5] R. Balkrishnan, “The importance of medication adherence in improving
chronic disease-related outcomes: What we know and what we need to
know further,” Med Care, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 517–520, 2005.
[6] “The use of medicines in the united states : Review of 2011,” IMS Institute
for HEalth Informatics, Parsippany, NJ, USA, 2012.
[7] Evaluation of automatic class III designation (de Novo) for Proteus Personal Monitor Including Ingestion Event Marker—K113070. Food and
Drug Administration Health, Center for Device and Radiological Health,
2012.
[8] D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries, 3rd ed. New York,
NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[9] F. Sammoura, K. B. Lee, and L. Lin, “Water-activated disposable and
long shelf life microbatteries,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 111, no. 1,
pp. 79–86, Mar. 2004.
[10] A. Heller, “Potentially implantable miniature batteries,” Anal. Bioanal.
Chem., vol. 385, pp. 469–473, 2006.
[11] H. Jimbo and N. Miki, “Gastric-fluid-utilizing micro battery for micro
medical devices,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 219–224,
Aug. 2008.
[12] E. Frank, “Electric potential produced by two point current sources in
a homogeneous conducting sphere,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 1225–1228, 1952.
[13] S. Rush and D. a Driscoll, “EEG electrode sensitivity—An application
of reciprocity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 15–22,
Jan. 1969.
[14] Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices—Part 12: Sample Preparation
and Reference Materials, vol. 12. International Organization for Standardization ISO 10993-12, 2007.
[15] K. Y. Au-Yeung, G. D. Moon, T. L. Robertson, L. A. Dicarlo,
M. S. Epstein, S. E. Weis, R. R. Reves, and G. Engel, “Early clinical experience with networked system for promoting patient self-management,”
Amer. J. Managed Care, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. e277–e287, Jan. 2011.
[16] S. J. Watson, R. H. Smallwood, B. H. Brown, P. Cherian, and
K. D. Bardhan, “Determination of the relationship between the pH
and conductivity of gastric juice,” Physiological Meas., vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 21–27, Feb. 1996.
[17] F. Kong and R. P. Singh, “Disintegration of solid foods in human stomach,”
J. Food Sci., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. R67–R80, Jun. 2008.
[18] M. Vertzoni, J. Dressman, J. Butler, J. Hempenstall, and C. Reppas, “Simulation of fasting gastric conditions and its importance for the in vivo
dissolution of lipophilic compounds,” Eur. J. Pharmaceutics Biopharmaceutics, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 413–417, Aug. 2005.
[19] A. Lindahl, A. Ungell, L. Knutson, and H. Lennernas, “Characterization
of fluids from the stomach and proximal jejunum in men and women,”
Pharmaceutical Res., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 497–502, 1997.
[20] M. Feldman and C. Barnett, “Relationships between the acidity and osmolality of popular beverages and reported postprandial heartburn,” Gastroenterology, vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 125–131, Jan. 1995.
[21] B. Büttel, M. Fuchs, and B. Holz, “Freezing point osmometry of milk to
determine the additional water content–an issue in general quality control
and German food regulation,” Chem. Central J., vol. 2, pp. 6–12, Jan.
2008.
[22] C. Ramon, Y. Wang, J. Haueisen, P. Schimpf, S. Jaruvatanadilok, and
A. Ishimaru, “Effect of myocardial anisotropy on the torso current flow
patterns, potentials and magnetic fields,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45,
pp. 1141–1150, 2000.

109

[23] Guidance for Industry—Q3A Impurities in New Drug Substances. Silver
Spring, MD, USA: Food and Drug Administration, 2008.
[24] Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron,
Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and Zinc. Washington, DC, USA: National Academy
Press, 2001.
[25] Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium, Phosphorous, Magnesium,
Vitamin D, and Fluoride. Washington, DC, USA: National Academy
Press, 1997.
[26] WHO Food Additive Series 44 - Safety Evaluation of Certain Food Additives and Contaminants. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2000.
[27] Thirty Fifth report of the joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food
Additives—Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants.
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press, 1990.
[28] T. Kararli, “Comparison of the gastrointestinal anatomy, physiology, and
biochemistry of humans and commonly used laboratory animals,” Biopharmaceutics Drug Disposition, vol. 16, pp. 351–380, 1995.
[29] R. Khosla and S. S. Davis, “The effect of tablet size on the gastric emptying
of non-disintegrating tablets,” Int. J. Pharmaceutics, vol. 62, no. 2–3,
pp. R9–R11, Jul. 1990.
[30] D. A. Adkin, S. S. Davisa, R. A. Sparrow, and I. R. Wildingb, “Colonic
transit of different sized tablets in healthy subjects,” J. Controlled Release,
vol. 23, pp. 147–156, 1993.
[31] L. Geddes, “Chronaxie,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med., vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 13–17, 1999.
[32] L. Geddes, “Accuracy limitations of chronaxie values,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 176–181, Jan. 2004.
[33] J. Zhang and J. D. Z. Chen, “Systematic review: Applications and future
of gastric electrical stimulation,” Alimentary Pharmacology Therapeutics,
vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 991–1002, Oct. 2006.
[34] G. Song, X. Hou, B. Yang, Y. Sun, J. Liu, W. Qian, and J. D. Z. Chen,
“Efficacy and efficiency of gastric electrical stimulation with short pulses
in the treatment of vasopressin-induced emetic responses in dogs,” Neurogastroenterology Motility, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 385–391, May 2006.
[35] A. Arriagada, A. S. Jurkov, E. Neshev, G. Muench, M. P. Mintchev,
and C. N. Andrews, “Comparative gastric motility study of enterraTM
therapy and neural gastric electrical stimulation in an acute canine model,”
Neurogastroenterology Motility, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 271–278, Mar. 2011.
[36] T. Litovitz, N. Whitaker, and L. Clark, “Preventing battery ingestions:
An analysis of 8648 cases,” Pediatrics, vol. 125, no. 6, pp. 1178–1183,
Jun. 2010.
[37] K. Y. Au-Yeung, T. Robertson, H. Hafezi, G. Moon, L. DiCarlo,
M. Zdeblick, and G. Savage, “A networked system for self-management
of drug therapy and wellness,” in Proc. Wireless Health Conf., 2010,
pp. 1–9.
[38] L. DiCarlo, G. Moon, A. Intondi, R. Duck, J. Frank, H. Hafazi, Y. Behzadi,
T. Robertson, B. Costello, G. Savage, and M. Zdeblick, “A digital health
solution for using and managing medications,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 3, no. 5,
pp. 23–26, Sep. 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

