154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Detection of Abnormal Cardiac Activity Using
Principal Component Analysis—A Theoretical Study
Ariel Greisas, Zohar Zafrir, and Sharon Zlochiver∗

Abstract—Electrogram-guided ablation has been recently developed for allowing better detection and localization of abnormal
atrial activity that may be the source of arrhythmogeneity. Nevertheless, no clear indication for the benefit of using electrograms
guided ablation over empirical ablation was established thus far,
and there is a clear need of improving the localization of cardiac
arrhythmogenic targets for ablation. In this paper, we propose a
new approach for detection and localization of irregular cardiac
activity during ablation procedures that is based on dimension reduction algorithms and principal component analysis (PCA). Using
an 8 × 8 electrode array, our method produces manifolds that allow easy visualization and detection of possible arrhythmogenic
ablation targets characterized by irregular conduction. We employ mathematical modeling and computer simulations to demonstrate the feasibility of the new approach for two well established
arrhythmogenic sources for irregular conduction—spiral waves
and patchy fibrosis. Our results show that the PCA method can
differentiate between focal ectopic activity and spiral wave activity, as these two types of activity produce substantially different
manifold shapes. Moreover, the technique allows the detection of
spiral wave cores and their general meandering and drifting pattern. Fibrotic patches larger than 2 mm2 could also be visualized
using the PCA method, both for quiescent atrial tissue and for tissue exhibiting spiral wave activity. We envision that this method,
contingent to further numerical and experimental validation studies in more complex, realistic geometrical configurations and with
clinical data, can improve existing atrial ablation mapping capabilities, thus increasing success rates and optimizing arrhythmia
management.
Index Terms—Atrial arrhythmias, electrogram-guided ablation,
numerical modeling, principal component analysis (PCA), source
mapping.

I. INTRODUCTION
TRIAL fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained
arrhythmia in adults, affecting millions of patients in the
U.S. alone and associated with increased morbidity and mortality [1]. Since the physiological mechanisms underlying AF
are multifactorial and poorly understood, pharmacological therapy for AF exhibits limited success, and in some cases administration of antiarrhythmic drugs may even increase the risk

A

Manuscript received February 17, 2014; accepted July 22, 2014. Date of
publication July 25, 2014; date of current version December 18, 2014. This
work was supported in part by a grant from the Nicholas and Elizabeth Slezak
Super Center for Cardiac Research and Biomedical Engineering at Tel Aviv
University. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Greisas and Z. Zafrir are with the Biomedical Engineering Department,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: ariel.greisas@intel.com;
zoharzaf@post.tau.ac.il).
∗ S. Zlochiver is with the Biomedical Engineering Department, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: sharonz@eng.tau.ac.il).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2342792

of adverse effects, such as in patients with impaired left ventricular function [2], [3]. Consequently, atrial ablation procedure, a nonpharmacological therapy, has become an attractive
alternative procedure for curing AF in symptomatic patients.
In this procedure, radio frequency (RF) energy (typically 300–
1000 kHz) is delivered to cardiac tissue sustaining suspected
arrhythmogenic sources causing permanent ablation, in order to
prevent either arrhythmogenic impulse generation or the conduction of arrhythmias [4], [5]. Traditionally, the pulmonary
veins are first targeted automatically and electrically isolated,
followed by repetitive empirical linear ablations until AF termination. Nonetheless, due to the uncertainty regarding the exact
location of the arrhythmogenic source, these repetitive empirical ablations often result in unnecessary applications of RF
energy that cause inadvertent injury and thromboembolic complications in the atrial tissue. Electrogram-guided ablation techniques have been recently developed in the hope of minimizing
these negative consequences. These techniques are done stepwise, whereby ablation is performed successively until AF is
terminated and noninducible, with the simultaneous acquisition
of endocardial electrograms for guiding the ablation procedure.
The electrograms are used to characterize the spatiotemporal
organization of the myocardial electrical activity during fibrillation via measures such as fractionation and rate, which have
been reported to be useful for tracking the arrhythmia dynamics
in experimental models [6]. Several studies describe termination
of AF in patients when ablation is performed at sites identified
as showing complex fractionated atrial electrograms (CFAEs)
[7]. Yet, CFAEs are difficult to analyze and their interpretation
can be misleading [8], [9]. Other studies emphasized the importance of sites exhibiting the highest activation rate as measured
by their dominant frequency (DF) for AF maintenance in patients [10]. This is also related to experimental and mapping
studies that have shown that, at least in some cases, functional
reentry (rotors) maintain AF and underlie the highest activation
rate [11], [12]. Nevertheless, no clear indication for the benefit
of using electrograms guided ablation over empirical ablation
was established as reported empirical ablation success rates are
similar and range between 60% and 90% for both techniques
[13]. Therefore, following the limitations in the currently practiced ablation techniques, the inconsistent success rates and the
ambiguities in interpreting the electrograms, there is a clear need
of improving the localization of cardiac arrhythmogenic targets
for ablation.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for automated
detection and localization of irregular cardiac activity during electrogram-guided ablation procedures that is based
on dimension reduction algorithms and principal component

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GREISAS et al.: DETECTION OF ABNORMAL CARDIAC ACTIVITY USING PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS—A THEORETICAL STUDY

analysis (PCA). Our method produces manifolds that allow an
easy visualization and detection of possible arrhythmogenic ablation targets characterized by irregular conduction. We employ
mathematical modeling and computer simulations to demonstrate the feasibility of the new approach for two well established
arrhythmogenic sources for irregular conduction—spiral waves
and patchy fibrosis. Spiral waves, or rotors, are stable or meandering re-entrant circuits which have become widely accepted
as drivers for many cardiac arrhythmias [11], [14], [15]. These
electrical waves repeatedly activate the tissue at a higher rhythm
than that produced by the heart’s natural pacemaker, and create
conduction irregularities that can deteriorate into AF. Fibrosis,
the second source for irregular conduction that we tested in this
study, refers to the proliferation of cardiac fibroblast and the
concomitant collagenous matrix accumulation that develop during myocardial remodeling in many cardiomyopathies. Fibrotic
clusters, or patches, are known to initiate and maintain arrhythmias in the cardiac tissue via various mechanisms [16], [17],
e.g., by creating microstructural obstacles that slow or block
electrical pulse conduction, by reducing regional coupling or
by anchoring microanatomical reentry. Recent studies have also
suggested a possible arrhythmogenic mechanism of fibrosis that
is based on myofibroblast-myocyte electrotonic coupling that
may be present in some pathological conditions that promote
the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts [18]–[20].
II. METHODS
A. Electrophysiological Modeling
The electrical activity in the heterogeneous cardiac tissue
was simulated using an extended model that incorporates both
fibroblasts and myocytes, as proposed by Corrias et al. [21]
and Sachse et al. [22]. The original model accounts only for
diffusive fibrosis, in which a constant ratio of fibroblasts to myocytes spans the entire tissue. In order to extend its relevance to
patchy fibrosis, we have applied several modifications to facilitate spatial variations in the amount of fibroblasts coupled to a
single myocyte. The extracellular potential φe and the myocyte
and fibroblast transmembrane voltages Vmyo and Vﬁb , respectively (all in millivolt), are governed by the following coupled
equations:
∇((σi

myo

+ σi

ﬁb

+ σe )∇φe )

= − ∇(σi
Cmyo

myo ∇Vmyo )

− ∇(σi

ﬁb ∇Vﬁb )

(1)

∂Vmyo
= − Iion m y o
∂t


∇(σi m y o ∇Vmyo ) + ∇(σi m y o ∇φe )
+
βmyo

Cﬁb

∂Vﬁb
∂t

− Ggap · Nﬁb (Vmyo − Vﬁb ) + Istim
(2)


∇(σi f i b ∇Vﬁb ) + ∇(σi f i b ∇φe )
= − Iion f i b +
βﬁb
+ Ggap (Vmyo − Vﬁb )

(3)

where Iion m y o and Iion f i b [pA] are the total myocyte and fibroblast ion channel current across the membrane, Cmyo and Cﬁb

155

TABLE I
PARAMETER VALUES USED IN SIMULATIONS
Parameter
Cm yo
Cfib
σi m yo
σi fib
σe
N f i b , N̄ f i b
Ggap
βm y o , βfib

Value (range)

Reference

185 pF
6.3 pF
0.47 S/m
0.047 S/m

[23]
[23]
[22]
taken as tenth of
σi m yo
[22]

0.375 S/m
(0–10)
fibroblasts/myocyte
0.00002 μS
0.5

[26], [18]
[22]

[pF] are the myocyte and fibroblast membrane capacitance [23],
σi m y o and σi ﬁb [S/m] are the intracellular myocyte and fibroblast conductivity tensors due to the existence of homocellular
gap junctions, σe [S/m] is the medium extracellular conductivity tensor, Nﬁb is the local number of fibroblasts connected
to a single myocyte, Ggap [μS] is the gap junction conductance of a coupled fibroblast-myocyte pair, Istim [pA] is an
external stimulation current, and βmyo and βﬁb [1/m3 ] refer to
the myocyte and fibroblast per volume ratio, respectively. For
myocytes to which no fibroblasts are coupled (Nﬁb = 0), σi f i b
is 0 and (3) is not used. Tissue isotropy was assumed, effectively reducing all conductivity parameters to scalars. Table I
summarizes all parameter values employed in the simulations.
The conduction velocity (CV) of a planer wave in a tissue with
Nﬁb = 0 was 0.3 m/s. Equations (1)–(3) describe a trilayer geometrical configuration, in which each volume unit consists of
three parallel domains—the extracellular space, the fibroblast
intracellular space, and the myocyte intracellular domain. The
domains are electrically coupled to each other by membrane
currents (between the extracellular and intracellular spaces) and
by the heterocellular gap junctions (between a myocyte and
fibroblast). The human atrial myocyte ionic kinetics of Courtemanche et al. [24] were employed for calculating Iion m y o , with
the addition of IK−ACh as in [25] with a small acetylcholine
concentration of [ACh] = 0.03 μM in order to enable the establishment of stable spiral waves. Fibroblast membrane currents
Iion f i b were calculated using the ionic kinetics of MacCannel
et al. [23]. This model accounts for several ion channels and
pumps, including an inward-rectifying potassium current IK1 , a
voltage-gated potassium current IKv , a sodium/potassium pump
INa/K , and a background sodium pump Ib−Na . A 2-D square
tissue of size 25 × 25 mm2 was modeled in a bilayer scheme,
which assembles atrial myocytes in a matrix-like monolayer,
along with fibroblasts that are aligned on top in a parallel matrix to simulate a fibrotic tissue, where appropriate (see Fig. 1).
Fibrotic patches were modeled with sizes ranging from 1 to
14 mm2 . Within each fibrotic patch, each myocyte was coupled
to the same number of fibroblasts Nﬁb , having a maximum value
of 10, while the rest of the myocytes in the tissue were not coupled to any fibroblast. In some simulations, diffusive fibrosis
was modeled in order to study rotor drifting and spiral wave
meandering. In those simulations, each myocyte was coupled

156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

calculated as follows:
mi = φe i − mean(φe i )

(4)

where ϕe i is a vector of length n = 2000, representing the 2000ms-long measurement at the ith pseudoelectrode (i = 1 . . . 64).
This resulted in a measurement matrix of size 64 × 2000.
For some analyses, the trajectory of the spiral tip was charted.
The spiral tip location was calculated as the point of intersection
of the 0 mV isopotential line and the line dVdtm ≈ 0 [27].
B. PCA

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the simulated cardiac tissue. The 8 × 8
pseudoelectrode array is marked by the orange squares. A zoom-in of a small
segment is shown to the right. This segment consists of a 7 × 6 grid cells
(myocyte tissue, in blue), upon which fibroblasts (small black squares) are
placed in a bilayer scheme. In this specific case, a fibrotic patch occupying
0.6 mm2 (3 × 3 grid cells) with Nﬁ b = 2 is shown.

PCA is a well-established technique for dimensionality reduction [28] that is based on eigenvector multivariate analysis
and transformation. To find the principal components for the
measured signals, the covariance matrix of M is first calculated, resulting in an 64 × 64 matrix C, with the (i, j) element,
cij
mi , mj 
(5)
n−1
where n is the length of a row in M (in this case, n = 2000).
Next, an eigenvalue decomposition is performed on the symmetric matrix C, resulting is the following canonical form:
cij =

to a random number of Nﬁb fibroblasts, where Nﬁb having a
normal distribution with a mean value of N̄ﬁb and a standard
deviation of 2.
The biophysical model equations were solved numerically
by applying both spatial and temporal discretization with resolutions of Δh = 0.25 mm and Δt = 0.025 ms, respectively.
Those values were set after ensuring convergence of the signal
analysis results by comparison to those obtained with finer resolution values. For each time step, (1) was first solved using the
finite-difference method to calculate the spatial distribution of
ϕe given the distributions of both Vmyo and Vﬁb . For this calculation, the reference electrode was chosen at the bottom right
corner of the tissue. Then, both Vmyo and Vﬁb were updated by
solving (2) and (3) using Euler time integration. Coding was performed in C++ using the message-passing interface library on
a high performance cluster computer (Altix X86-PTO, Silicon
Graphics).
Two patterns of electrical conduction were simulated: focal activity and spiral waves. Focal activity was initiated by
repetitive local point stimulations at (x, y) = (12, 12) mm using
pulse magnitude and duration of Istim = 100 μA and T = 1 ms,
respectively, and with a frequency of 12.8 Hz. Spiral waves
were initiated using standard S1-S2 cross-field stimulation, with
S1 occupying the top 5 rows of the tissue (Istim = 100 μA,
T = 1 ms, width = 25 mm, and length = 1.25 mm), and
S2 given 110 ms following S1 at the top-left quarter of the
tissue (Istim = 100 μA, T = 1 ms, width = 12.5 mm, and
length = 12.5 mm). This protocol induced a clockwise rotating
spiral wave with a dominant activation frequency of 12.8 Hz,
corresponding to the focal activity frequency. The measurement
matrix M consisted of the extracellular potentials recorded for
a duration of 2000 ms in an array of 8 × 8 pseudoelectrodes
overlaid on the 2-D tissue matrix, with interelectrode intervals
of ten grid cells (2.5 mm, see Fig. 1). This configuration yielded
64 recorded signals per simulation, the mean value of each was
subtracted for normalization, so that the ith row of M was

C = U ΛU T

(6)

where Λ is a diagonal eigenvalue matrix, with the descendingordered eigenvalues of C, λi , on its main diagonal (so that Λii >
Λj j for any i < j), and U is a matrix containing the eigenvectors
ui (corresponding to λi ) of C in its columns. The final step is
the projection of the original data on the eigenvectors, resulting
in the principal components matrix T
T = UTM ·

(7)

To reduce the problem dimensionality, only the first principal components (called the primary components) should be
considered for further analysis and visualization. To establish
the number of primary components, we plotted the mean and
the variance of the 64 principal components for various measurement matrices M . A typical example is shown in Fig. 2.
In this specific example, a point stimulation was given at the
center of a tissue that was uniform except for a local irregularity
(densed fibrosis) at electrode (7, 7). The principal component
distribution for the 64 measured signals is given in panel a,
demonstrating that both the mean and the variance of the first
two components are substantially larger than the following components. We therefore denoted the primary components as P C1
and P C2 . Following the PCA transformation, the primary components of each measurement signal were charted on a 2-D
map, and an optimal qudratic curve manifold corresponding to
the entire 64 measurements was fitted using minimum square
error optimization [see an example in Fig. 2(b)].
Consequently, regular measurements (i.e., measurement signals that obtain high correlations with the measurements from
other pseudoelectrodes) exhibited primary components that lied
on, or in close proximity, to the central manifold, while local
irregular activities exhibited primary components that were distant to the manifold (see, e.g., the marked point corresponding

GREISAS et al.: DETECTION OF ABNORMAL CARDIAC ACTIVITY USING PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS—A THEORETICAL STUDY

Fig. 2. Example of PCA and regularity map construction. (a) Principal component distribution for 64 measured signals (mean and standard deviation values).
(b) Primary components 2-D map charting the first two principal components
for all 64 measurements. An optimal second-order manifold is shown in black,
and an irregularly distant point from the manifold is indicated. (c) Regularity
map showing the distance of the primary components (in arbitrary distance units
[ADU]) at each pseudoelectrode on the 8 × 8 array from the manifold. The map
demonstrates the localization of conductivity irregularity at electrode (7, 7).
(d) Propagation map of the activation wave. (e) Myocyte transmembrane voltage at the four locations marked in panel (c), all at a similar distance from the
point stimulation.

157

Fig. 3. Typical manifolds and regularity maps for ectopic focal activity versus
spiral wave activity. (a) Extracellular potential signals measured at the pseudoelectrode located at (x, y) = (20, 5) mm. The two traces in blue (for focal
activity simulations) and in red (for spiral wave simulation) show a very similar
morphology. (b) Bipolar potentials for the two types of activity measured at
the same location as in (a). (c, d) Primary components 2-D charts for the two
activity types. The ectopic activity manifold is (c) open, parabolic curve, while
the spiral wave manifold is (d) closed circle. (e, f) Regularity maps for the two
activity types. While the ectopic activity map exhibits a highly regular activity
all across the model, the spiral wave map clearly shows a region with increased
irregularity, corresponding to the core of the spiral wave.

III. RESULTS
A. PCA for the Detection of Focal Activity and Spiral Waves

to electrode index (7, 7)). To visualize the degree of regularity
in local activity, we therefore calculated the Euclidean distance
of each point on the 2-D primary components map (each corresponding to one measurement signal) to the manifold, and
generated 2-D regularity maps that represent those distances
[see an example in Fig. 2(c), corresponding to the primary components map in panel b]. For reference, the corresponding propagation map and the myocyte transmembrane voltage Vmyo , at
four locations having the same distance from the stimulation
point [as marked in Fig. 2(c)], are shown in Fig. 2(d) and (e), respectively. Both figures demonstrate the conduction irregularity
underneath electrode (7, 7): the propagation map shows that the
activation wave circumvented around the area of fibrosis, while
the transmembrane voltage at that location is both delayed and
attenuated in comparison to those at the other three locations.

The PCA algorithm was applied on data measured for two
types of periodic cardiac activity—focal activity and spiral
wave, as described in the methods section. The extracellular potentials φe measured at a pseudoelectrode located at
(x, y) = (10, 15) mm are shown in Fig. 3(a), demonstrating
typical unipolar recordings and no clear distinction between
the two types of periodic activity. Typical bipolar recordings
were established by subtracting the extracellular potentials
at two adjacent pseudoelectrodes ((x, y) = (10, 15) mm and
(x, y) = (10, 15.25) mm), again demonstrating similar signal
morphology for the two types of activity [see Fig. 3(b)]. Application of the PCA, on the other hand, resulted in distinct
manifolds for the two activity types. As shown in Fig. 3(c)
and (d), while a focal point activity resulted in an open, disconnected, manifold, the spiral wave activity yielded a closed

158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4. Propagation maps (top row) and transmembrane voltages (bottom row)
at the two locations (a and b) marked in Fig. 3(e) and (f) for the focal activity
(left) and spiral wave (right) from Fig. 2.

loop, circular manifold. In addition, the focal activity manifold
exhibited a high degree of regularity in its trajectory, meaning
that the principal component data points of all pseudoelectrodes
measurements were almost perfectly laid on the manifold curve
(manifold fitting correlation coefficient of R2 = 0.99). In contrast, the spiral wave manifold showed some degree of irregularity, with principal component data points scattered in the vicinity
of the manifold trajectory (R2 = 0.93). Furthermore, some of
the electrode signals yielded principal components that more
significantly deviated from the manifold trajectory, as marked
by the electrode indices in parentheses in Fig. 3(d), suggesting
increased irregularity in the extracellular potentials measured at
those electrodes. The regularity maps given in Fig. 3(e) and (f),
which present the distances between the primary components of
each measurement signal to the manifold, clearly visualize the
high degree of regularity sustained by focal activity in comparison to spiral wave activity. Moreover, the location of the spiral
wave core is easily observed due to its higher degree of irregularity. Therefore, PCA seems to effectively distinguish between
the two arrhythmia mechanisms—focal activity and spiral wave.
For reference, the corresponding propagation maps and typical
traces of myocyte transmembrane voltage are given in Fig. 4
for the two simulations from Fig. 3. The results demonstrate
again the correspondence between the increased distance-frommanifold values as visualized by the regularity maps [as shown
in Fig. 3(e) and (f)] and the irregularity in the membrane voltage
or propagation pattern.
Next, we conducted simulations to assess the effect of spiral
wave meandering and drifting on the primary components maps,
the manifolds and the regularity maps. In order to reduce spiral
wave stability and to induce meandering/drifting, we simulated
activity in tissues with N̄ﬁb = 0, 3, or 6 (representing the average number of fibroblasts attached to each myocyte, as described
in the methods section). Our previous studies have shown that
adding fibroblasts in a diffusive pattern results in reduced spiral
wave stability [26]. This is also illustrated in Fig. 5(a), where

the spiral wave tip trajectory is plotted in the 2-D space for the
three cases of fibrosis density. While for N̄ﬁb = 0 the tip trajectory demonstrated high stability (blue), both meandering and
drifting became more substantial with increasing fibroblast to
myocyte ratios (red and green traces for N̄ﬁb = 3 and N̄ﬁb = 6,
respectively). The respective primary components maps for the
three cases are given in Fig. 5(b), from which the following
observations could be made: 1) increased spiral wave tip meandering and drifting is reflected by manifolds with decreasing radii. In this case, the manifolds radii were 605, 265, and
135 for N̄ﬁb = 0, 3, and 6, respectively. This observation originates from decreased correlation of activation times between
electrodes. 2) Increased spiral wave tip meandering and drifting
is also reflected by reduced degree of alignment of the primary
components coordinates over the manifold. In other words, the
points are more scattered, resulting in impeded goodness-of-fit
of the manifold to the data points.
The regularity maps corresponding to the primary components maps are given in Fig. 5(c)–(e), over which the spatiotemporal trajectories of the spiral wave tip are plotted. The trajectory
colors designate the times at which the tip traveled along the
trajectory, according to the color legend to the left of Fig. 5(c).
Typical traces of the myocyte transmembrane voltage at irregular and regular locations [marked as location “a” and “b” on
the regularity maps in Fig. 5(c)–(e)] are given in Fig. 5(f)–
(h) for the three cases of fibrosis density. The regularity maps
in Fig. 5(c)–(e) demonstrate that decreased regularity regions,
i.e., regions that exhibited larger distance-from-manifold values, corresponded to the location and path of the spiral wave
tip and to decreased regularity of electrical activity. This correspondence was weakened to some extent in the case of the
most significant meandering and drifting pattern [for the case
of N̄ﬁb = 6, Fig. 5(e)], in which reduced regularity was charted
only along part of the tip trajectory. Still, when considering in
this case also the temporal properties of the tip trajectory, it can
be noted that the reduced regularity was established in regions
where the tip spent most of its traveling duration (approximately
to the last 1000 ms of the 1700-ms-long simulation). Overall,
these results demonstrate the capability of the proposed PCA
to detect tissue regions with decreased regularity of electrical
activity due to spiral wave meandering and drifting.

B. PCA for the Detection of Fibrotic Patches
Fibrotic patches are an established arrhythmogenic source
in diseased cardiac tissues, and previous studies have demonstrated their role in anchoring reentrant wave and modulating
the conduction dynamics. Nonetheless, their real-time mapping
and visualization are difficult during ablation procedures. In this
part of the study, we examined the feasibility of the PCA technique to address the clinical need of reliable mapping of fibrotic
patches. Two scenarios were considered, the first of which corresponds to a cardiac tissue at rest, i.e., without existing activation
waves or fibrillation. In such scenario, it is possible in principle
to artificially apply external point stimulation via one of the
electrodes while measuring the activity at all the others. The

GREISAS et al.: DETECTION OF ABNORMAL CARDIAC ACTIVITY USING PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS—A THEORETICAL STUDY

159

Fig. 5. PCA of meandering and drifting rotors. (a) Spiral wave tip trajectory for three levels of instability. Increased instability (i.e., increased meandering
and drifting) was achieved by adding random diffusive fibrosis to the tissue with increasing values of N̄ ﬁ b . (b) Primary components 2-D charts for the three
cases—N̄ ﬁ b = 0, 3, and 6, in blue, red, and green, respectively. As N̄ ﬁ b increased, the manifold radius decreased and the data points were more scattered
and exhibited less regularity. (c)–(e) Regularity maps for the three cases—N̄ ﬁ b = 0 in (c), N̄ ﬁ b = 3 in (d), and N̄ ﬁ b = 6 in (e). The maps allow an immediate
visualization of the location and stability of the spiral waves. The spatiotemporal trajectory of the spiral wave tip is overlaid. (f)–(h) Transmembrane voltages at
two locations (a and b, as marked in panels c–e).

other scenario is that of an existing spiral wave in the cardiac
tissue.
1) Point Stimulation Applied to Quiescent Tissue: Fibrotic
patches of sizes ranging between 1 and 14 mm2 (corresponding
to areas covered by 4 × 4 to 15 × 15 cells) were added to the
lower right part of the tissue, and fibroblast densities ranging
from N̄ﬁb = 0 to N̄ﬁb = 10 were applied. Focal activity due
to point stimulation was established as described in Section II.
Fig. 6 presents several examples of the regularity maps established from the primary components maps that were generated
for the electrode-array measurements. While the visualization of
a relatively small patch occupying 3 × 3 grid cells and having
Nﬁb = 3 was insufficient (top-left example), the location and
size of the fibrotic patches could be easily detected in the other
cases. Visualization quality improved (i.e., the electrodes over

the fibrotic patch exhibited higher distance from the manifold)
with either higher Nﬁb value or larger patch area. Fig. 7 (top)
shows the propagation maps corresponding to the simulations
in the middle row of Fig. 6, i.e., with a patch area of 6.25 mm2
having Nﬁb = 3 or Nﬁb = 10 (left and right panels, respectively). The action potentials (APs) at four locations equidistant
from the point of stimulation (a–d, as marked in Fig. 6, middle
row) are given in the bottom row of Fig. 7. The results demonstrate the correspondence between the degree of irregularity as
established by the PCA to propagation delays and irregular AP
morphology.
Fig. 8 summarizes the results, and shows the regularity map
values corresponding to the electrode closest to the center of the
fibrotic patch for various sizes of fibrotic patches and values of
Nﬁb . The figure demonstrates a generally monotonic increase in

160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 8. PCA for detection of fibrotic patches by point stimulation applied to a
quiescent tissue. Distance to the manifold of the data point corresponding to the
electrode closest to the center of the fibrotic patch for various sizes of fibrotic
patches and values of N ﬁ b .

Fig. 6. PCA for detection of fibrotic patches by point stimulation applied to a
quiescent tissue. Regularity maps are shown for three sizes of fibrotic patches—
1.56, 6.25, and 14 mm2 (top, middle, and bottom rows, respectively)—and for
two values of N ﬁ b —3 and 10 (left and right columns, respectively).

Fig. 7. Propagation maps (top row) and transmembrane voltages (bottom
row) at the four locations (a–d) marked in Fig. 6 (middle row) for the models
consisting of a fibrotic patch of size 6.25 mm2 with N ﬁ b = 3 or 10 (left and
right columns, respectively).

these values as both the fibrotic tissue size and Nﬁb increased.
By assuming a qualitative visible distance threshold of 100 (as
marked by the horizontal blue line in Fig. 6), fibrotic patches
of size smaller than ∼2 mm2 cannot exhibit sufficiently good
visualization on the regularity maps, regardless of Nﬁb .
2) Spiral Wave Activity: Next, we examined the feasibility
of the PCA technique to detect fibrotic patches in a scenario
of an existing spiral wave activity. Fibrotic patches of similar
sizes and density as in the previous section were added to the

Fig. 9. PCA for detection of fibrotic patches during spiral wave activity.
Regularity maps are shown for three sizes of fibrotic patches—1.56, 6.25, and
14 mm2 (top, middle, and bottom rows, respectively)—and for two values of
N ﬁ b —3 and 10 (left and right columns, respectively).

lower right part of the tissue. Spiral wave activity was initiated
as described in Section II. Several examples of PCA regularity
maps are given in Fig. 9. The maps clearly show the location
of the spiral wave tip in the upper part of the tissue (marked
in green in panel a). It is also evident that neither the size nor
the density of the fibrotic patches affects the way (shape and intensity) by which the spiral wave is visualized on the regularity
maps. As was the case for the point stimulation, the detection
quality in the sense of intensity and size improved with both
increased fibrotic patch size and increased Nﬁb . Fig. 10 shows
the propagation maps (top) corresponding to the middle row of

GREISAS et al.: DETECTION OF ABNORMAL CARDIAC ACTIVITY USING PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS—A THEORETICAL STUDY

Fig. 10. Propagation maps (top row) and transmembrane voltages (bottom
row) at the four locations (a–d) marked in Fig. 9 (middle row) for the models
consisting of a fibrotic patch of size 6.25 mm2 with N ﬁ b = 3 or 10 (left and
right columns, respectively).

Fig. 11. PCA for detection of fibrotic patches during spiral wave activity.
Distance to the manifold of the data point corresponding to the electrode closest
to the center of the fibrotic patch for various sizes of fibrotic patches and values
of N ﬁ b .

Fig. 9. Transmembrane myocyte voltages at four locations a–d
(as marked in Fig. 9, middle row) are given in the bottom row
of Fig. 10. Similarly to the previous results from Figs. 6 and 7,
here again a good correspondence was demonstrated between
reduced regularity as visualized by the PCA in Fig. 9 to irregularities and increased complexity in the conduction patterns and
membrane voltages. Fig. 11 summarizes the results in a similar
manner as in Fig. 8. This figure also demonstrates a generally
monotonic increase in these values as both the fibrotic tissue size
and Nﬁb increased, with the former factor being more dominant.
By setting a qualitative visible distance threshold of 100, here
again fibrotic patches of size smaller than ∼2 mm2 could not be
sufficiently visualized on the regularity maps.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we have investigated the feasibility of PCA,
a widely used mathematical tool in many disciplines requiring
multivariate data analysis, to provide a visual tool for robust
detection of cardiac electrical conduction abnormalities. More
specifically, we were aiming at improved mapping capabili-

161

ties of two arrhythmogenic targets, spiral waves and fibrotic
patches, during atrial ablation procedures. Ablation of the spiral
wave pivot point or core has been proven beneficial for a successful ablation and improved clinical outcome, e.g., in acute
AF patients [11], [29]. Nevertheless, existing methods for mapping spiral waves during guided ablation are limited, and cannot
direct the clinician with sufficient resolution to their core. For
example, DF analysis can only detect the broader region of
highest DF in which the spiral wave is contained (representing
1:1 conduction) that may span the majority of the atrial tissue.
Moreover, recently proposed irregularity measures (such as the
irregularity index or fractionated electrograms) may not necessarily imply on the locations of the spiral wave core or tip, but
rather on the periphery of a source region [8].
In addition to spiral waves, fibroblast clusters, which are
known anchors for reentrant activity and thus arrhythmogenic,
are attractive targets for atrial ablation. Nevertheless, the detection and the localization of fibrotic clusters in situ and in realtime during an ablation procedure are difficult, due to the limited
mapping resolution (in contrast to in vitro studies that employ
optical mapping), and, in the case of electrotonic coupling between myocytes and fibroblasts, since their membrane potential
closely follows that of their neighboring myocytes [30]. Other
methods that exist for the detection of fibrotic clusters are either expensive (e.g., magnetic resonance [31]) or inapplicable to
ablation procedures (e.g., histology). In PCA, a set of measurements is converted into a finite number of linearly uncorrelated
variables (called the principal components) by employing eigenvalue decomposition on the data covariance matrix. The data
are transformed into a new orthogonal coordinate system, such
that the first coordinate represents the largest variance by any
projection of the data, with the other coordinates representing
gradually decreasing variances. In most scenarios, only the first
few principal components can faithfully represent significant
correlations in the data, retaining much of the variance in the
measured data, while the rest may be dismissed. Consequently,
PCA can supply the user with a lower dimensionality picture,
and is typically used as a tool in exploratory data analysis and
for making predictive models. We employed the PCA technique
to establish spatial regularity maps using extracellular potential
measurements gathered by an array of electrodes. These maps
were based upon the hypothesis that organized, regular electrical
activity produces a distinct manifold on the primary components
space maps due to the high correlations existing among the electrode measurements. In contrast, local conduction irregularities
sustain lower correlation values in comparison to the activity
in other regions, thus being charted to coordinates far from the
main activity manifold. These features were exploited for visualizing the distance of the principal components from each
electrode on a 2-D map.
Our results show that the first two principal components
provide the most information regarding variations among
electrodes’ measurements [see Fig. 2(a)], and thus 2-D primary component maps were sufficient for reliably representing
correlations among measurements. When the PCA was applied
to simulations of two basic arrhythmia drivers—focal ectopic
activity and spiral waves—two significantly different primary

162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

components maps were observed (see Fig. 3). While ectopic activity resulted in open, parabolic manifolds, spiral waves yielded
closed loop manifolds. Moreover, due to the very high regularity
of propagated focal point activity all over the simulated tissue,
its primary components map demonstrated a perfect alignment
of all points along the manifold. In contrast, the primary components map corresponding to spiral wave activity showed several
electrodes whose primary components lied relatively far from
the manifold, suggesting that the electrical activity measured
on these electrodes was irregular, i.e., sustained low correlation
with the global tissue activity. Those electrodes corresponded
to the spiral wave tip. Unlike focal point activity, where the entire tissue is periodically excited in the same manner, the cells
inside the core of the rotor that emanates the spiral wave remain stagnant and do not get depolarized. This phenomenon is
consequently easily detected by the PCA as the measurements
taken from electrodes at the core sustain low correlation with
the rest of the measurements, and thus transformed into coordinates far from the manifold in the primary components map.
Therefore, PCA may not only be employed in practical applications to distinguish between these two types of drivers and to
optimize treatment, but also to detect the location of spiral wave
cores. Drifting and meandering spiral waves were also successfully detected and visualized using the PCA, as is shown in
Fig. 5. On the primary components maps, increased irregularity
manifested by increased tip meandering and spiral wave drifting
resulted both in smaller manifolds (i.e., with smaller radii) and
in reduced alignment of the primary components coordinates
on the manifolds (i.e., increased scattering). On the regularity
maps, the region covered by the spiral wave trajectory could
be detected by the increased intensity. Nevertheless, this correspondence deteriorated to some degree for significant drifting
[as in Fig. 5(e)]. As can be seen in Fig. 5(b), the highly unstable
meandering wave in this case resulted in a much less organized
and scattered manifold (data in green), which led to poor curve
fitting capabilities. Consequently, the detection of the meandering pattern on the regularity map was limited, and corresponded
mostly to the latter part of the spiral wave spatiotemporal tip
trajectory (specifically, to the last 60% of the path). Therefore,
the ability to detect a meandering and drifting wave is limited
and depends on the size of the area covered by the spiral wave
tip trajectory. Since the proposed method is designed to locate
localized conduction abnormalities, it will not perform as well
in situations of extremely unorganized activity, e.g., during fibrillatory conduction manifested by multiple wavelets. Yet, in
many cases, such unorganized activity is driven and preceded
by a single or small number of stable rotors, which the proposed
method is designed to detect.
With respect to irregularities created by fibroblast clusters,
our results showed that fibrotic patches can be visualized, both
in a quiescent tissue and in a tissue that sustains spiral wave
activity. Detection and visualization quality improved for larger
fibrotic patches and for larger fibrosis density (as determined
by Nﬁb ), see Figs. 6–11, with the minimum detectable fibrotic
patch size being 2 mm2 . These results can be explained by the
notion that the PCA detects regions exhibiting lower correlation
in their electrical activity to that of the rest of the tissue. Indeed,

myocytes that are coupled to fibroblasts are influenced by the
elevated electrotonic load sustained by those cells, resulting in
modified AP profile (as shown, e.g., in [18] and [23]) as well as
in modified electrical CV in the tissue (as shown, e.g., in [32]).
For example, the AP of a myocyte can be either prolonged or
shortened based on the number of fibroblasts coupled to it and
the coupling level due to the fact that the fibroblasts may act as
current source or sink.
Several limitations in our study should be noted. Our modeling considered electrotonic coupling between fibroblasts and
myocytes. While several in vitro studies have demonstrated the
formation of gap junctions between the two cell types [19], [20],
there is still ambiguity in the literature regarding the existence
of such coupling in vivo. Nevertheless, some evidence suggests
that it exists, at least in specialized areas (e.g., SA node) and in
some pathology. As a preliminary feasibility study and in order
to reduce computational loads, we chose to employ simple 2-D
tissue geometry model rather than a full 3-D model with realistic
atrium geometry. This allowed us to assess the direct correlations between the electrical conduction patterns and the PCA
and to remove any effects of geometrical complexities and variations. Our models were also simplified by considering either
fibrotic patches in otherwise pure myocyte tissues, or diffusive fibrosis with uniform spatial distribution (when spiral wave
meandering was studied). More realistic scenarios will likely
consist of a mixture between patchy and diffusive fibrosis in the
same tissue region accounting for both interstitial fibrosis and
structural heterogeneity. These latter factors should be investigated in a future study in order to test the proposed technique
in a more clinically realistic setup. Finally, our simulations employed a 8 × 8 electrode array grid for data measurement and
analysis to demonstrate the potential visualization capabilities
of PCA in an ideal, symmetric Cartesian electrode array. While
such a configuration is not standard in electrogram guided atrial
ablation procedures, new catheters with such arrays can be theoretically designed, or, alternatively, the PCA could be applied
with existing multielectrode lasso or flower catheters. For example, Fig. 12 demonstrates PCA results for the case of detecting
a fibrotic patch with a size of 6.25 mm2 and Nﬁb = 10 [the
same case as in Fig. 6 (right, middle row)] using two electrode
configurations: the 8 × 8 grid and a flower-like array.
The flower array consisted of 32 electrodes (i.e., half the
number used in this paper) arranged in eight rays having angular intervals of 45° and radial intervals of 2.5 mm between
electrodes. Fig. 12(a) shows the location and size of the fibrotic
patch that was modeled. Fig. 12(b) and (d) presents the calculated distance-from-manifold values at each pseudoelectrode
for the 8 × 8 grid (panel b) and the flower array (panel d). The
data are shown at discrete points corresponding to the geometrical location of the electrodes, in order to allow comparison
between the two arrays. To improve the visualization, Fig. 12(c)
and (e) shows the interpolated data from panels (b) and (d),
respectively. This example clearly demonstrates the feasibility
of the PCA method with the flower catheter configuration to
detect the fibrotic patch, and the good correspondence between
the obtained regularity map and that obtained using the 8 × 8
Cartesian grid.

GREISAS et al.: DETECTION OF ABNORMAL CARDIAC ACTIVITY USING PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS—A THEORETICAL STUDY

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
Fig. 12. PCA using two electrode arrays. (a) Geometrical model consisting
of a fibrotic patch of size 6.25 mm2 at the lower right region of the tissue.
(b) Distance from manifold values at the 64 electrodes arranged in a 8 × 8
Cartesian array. (c) Interpolated data from panel (b) shown as a continuous
regularity map. (d) Distance from manifold values at the 32 electrodes arranged
in an electrode array resembling a flower catheter. (e) Interpolated data from
panel (d) shown as a continuous regularity map.

[12]

[13]

In conclusion, this study has demonstrated the feasibility of
PCA to detect and map atrial conduction abnormalities resulting
from ectopic foci, spiral waves or fibrotic patches. Moreover,
the generated primary components maps and regularity maps allowed for the effective distinction between ectopic focal activity
and spiral wave activity, and to track the regions of rotor drifting
or fibrotic patches. We believe that this method, contingent to
further numerical and experimental validation studies in more
complex, realistic geometrical configurations and with clinical
data, can improve existing atrial ablation mapping capabilities.
REFERENCES
[1] W. A. Wattigney, G. A. Mensah, and J. B. Croft, “Increased atrial fibrillation mortality: United States, 1980–1998,” Amer. J. Epidemiol., vol. 155,
pp. 819–826, 2002.
[2] D. Roy, M. Talajic, S. Nattel, D. G. Wyse, P. Dorian, K. L. Lee, M.
G. Bourassa, J. M. Arnold, A. E. Buxton, A. J. Camm, S. J. Connolly,
M. Dubuc, A. Ducharme, P. G. Guerra, S. H. Hohnloser, J. Lambert,
J. Y. Le Heuzey, G. O’Hara, O. D. Pedersen, J. L. Rouleau, B. N. Singh,
L. W. Stevenson, W. G. Stevenson, B. Thibault, and A. L. Waldo, “Rhythm

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

163

control versus rate control for atrial fibrillation and heart failure,” N. Eng.
J. Med., vol. 358, no. 25, pp. 2667–2677, 2008.
G. C. Flaker, J. L. Blackshear, R. McBride, R. A. Kronmal, J. L. Halperin,
and R. G. Hart, “Antiarrhythmic drug therapy and cardiac mortality in
atrial fibrillation,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 20, pp. 527–532, 1992.
H. Oral, “Atrial fibrillation: Mechanisms, features, and management,” in
Cardiac Electrophysiology, From Cell to Bedside, D. P. Zipes and J. Jalife,
Eds., 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Saunders Elsevier, 2009, p. 577.
C. Pappone, S. Rosanio, G. Oreto, M. Tocchi, F. Gugliotta, G. Vicedomini, A. Salvati, C. Dicandia, P. Mazzone, V. Santinelli, S. Gulletta, and
S. Chierchia, “Circumferential radiofrequency ablation of pulmonary vein
ostia: A new anatomic approach for curing atrial fibrillation,” Circulation,
vol. 102, pp. 2619–2628, 2000.
F. Atienza, J. Almendral, J. Jalife, S. Zlochiver, R. Ploutz-Snyder, E. G.
Torrecilla, A. Arenal, J. Kalifa, F. Fernandez-Aviles and O. Berenfeld,
“Real-time dominant frequency mapping and ablation of dominant frequency sites in atrial fibrillation with left-to-right frequency gradients
predicts long-term maintenance of sinus rhythm,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 33–40, 2009.
K. Nademanee, J. McKenzie, E. Kosar, M. Schwab, B. Sunsaneewitayakul,
T. Vasavakul, C. Khunnawat, and T. Ngarmukos, “A new approach for
catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: Mapping of the electrophysiologic
substrate,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 43, pp. 2044–2053, 2004.
J. Kalifa, K. Tanaka, A. V. Zaitsev, M. Warren, R. Vaidyanathan,
D. Auerbach, S. Pandit, K. L. Vikstrom, R. Ploutz-Snyder, A. Talkachou, F. Atienza, G. Guiraudon, J. Jalife, and O. Berenfeld, “Mechanisms
of wave fractionation at boundaries of high-frequency excitation in the
posterior left atrium of the isolated sheep heart during atrial fibrillation,”
Circulation, vol. 113, pp. 626–633, 2006.
S. Zlochiver, M. Yamazaki, J. Kalifa, and O. Berenfeld, “Rotor meandering
contributes to irregularity in electrograms during atrial fibrillation,” Heart
Rhythm, vol. 5, pp. 846–854, 2008.
P. Sanders, O. Berenfeld, M. P. Jaı̈s, R. Vaidyanathan, L. F. Hsu,
S. Garrigue, Y. Takahashi, M. Rotter, F. Sacher, C. Scavée, R. PloutzSnyder, J. Jalife, and M. Haı̈ssaguerre, “Spectral analysis identifies sites
of high-frequency activity maintaining atrial fibrillation in humans,” Circulation, vol. 112, no. 6, pp. 789–797, 2005.
R. Mandapati, A. Skanes, J. Chen, O. Berenfeld, and J. Jalife, “Stable
microreentrant sources as a mechanism of atrial fibrillation in the isolated
sheep heart,” Circulation, vol. 101, pp. 194–199, 2000.
F. Atienza, J. Almendral, J. Moreno, R. Vaidyanathan, A. Talkachou,
J. Kalifa, A. Arenal, J. P. Villacastı́n, E. G. Torrecilla, A. Sánchez,
R. Ploutz-Snyder, J. Jalife, and O. Berenfeld, “Activation of inward rectifier potassium channels accelerates atrial fibrillation in humans: Evidence
for a reentrant mechanism,” Circulation, vol. 114, no. 23, pp. 2434–2442,
2006.
K. T. Lim, S. Knecht, M. Wright, and M. Haissaguerre, “Atrial substrate
ablation in atrial fibrillation,” in Cardiac Electrophysiology, From Cell to
Bedside, D. P. Zipes and J. Jalife, Eds., 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Saunders Elsevier, 2009, p. 1059.
R. A. Gray, A. M. Pertsov, and J. Jalife, “Spatial and temporal organization
during cardiac fibrillation,” Nature, vol. 392, pp. 75–78, 1998.
A. C. Skanes, R. Mandapati, O. Berenfeld, J. M. Davidenko, and J. Jalife,
“Spatiotemporal periodicity during atrial fibrillation in the isolated sheep
heart,” Circulation, vol. 98, pp. 1236–1248, 1998.
K. Tanaka, S. Zlochiver, K. L. Vikstrom, M. Yamazaki, J. Moreno,
M. Klos, A. V. Zaitsev, R. Vaidyanathan, D. S. Auerbach, S. Landas,
G. Guiraudon, J. Jalife, O. Berenfeld, and J. Kalifa, “Spatial distribution
of fibrosis governs fibrillation wave dynamics in the posterior left atrium
during heart failure,” Circ. Res., vol. 101, pp. 839–847, 2007.
M. S. Spach and J. P. Boinea, “Microfibrosis produces electrical load
variations due to loss of side-to-side cell connections: A major mechanism of structural heart disease arrhythmias,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol.,
vol. 20, pp. 397–413, 1997.
Y. Xie, A. Garfinkel, J. N. Weiss, and Z. Qu, “Cardiac alternans induced
by fibroblast-myocyte coupling: Mechanistic insights from computational
models,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 297, pp. H775–H784,
2009.
S. Zlochiver, V. Munoz, K. L. Vikstrok, S. M. Taffet, O. Berenfeld,
and J. Jalife, “Electrotonic myofibroblast-to-myocyte coupling increases
propensity to reentrant arrhythmias in two-dimensional cardiac monolayers,” Biophys. J., vol. 95, pp. 4469–4480, 2008.
S. Rohr, “Myofibroblasts in diseased hearts: New players in cardiac arrhythmias?” Heart Rhythm, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 848–856, 2009.

164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[21] A. Corrias, P. Pathmanathan, D. J. Gavaghan, and M. L. Buist, “Modelling
tissue electrophysiology with multiple cell types: Applications of the extended bidomain framework,” Integr. Biol., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 192–201,
2012.
[22] F. B. Sachse, A. P. Moreno, G. Seemann, and J. A. Abildskov, “A model of
electrical conduction in cardiac tissue including fibroblasts,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 874–89, 2009.
[23] K. A. MacCannell, H. Bazzazi, L. Chilton, Y. Shibukawa, R. B. Clark, and
W. R. A. Giles, “Mathematical model of electrotonic interactions between
ventricular myocytes and fibroblasts,” Biophys. J., vol. 92, pp. 4121–4132,
2007.
[24] M. Courtemanche, R. J. Ramirez, and S. Nattel, “Ionic mechanisms underlying human atrial action potential properties: Insights from a mathematical model,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 275, pp. H301–H321, 1998.
[25] J. Kneller, R. Zou, E. J. Vigmond, Z. Wang, L. J. Leon, and S. Nattel,
“Cholinergic atrial fibrillation in a computer model of a two-dimensional
sheet of canine atrial cells with realistic ionic properties,” Circ. Res.,
vol. 90, no. 9, pp. E73–E87, 2002.
[26] A. Greisas and S. Zlochiver, “Modulation of spiral-wave dynamics and
spontaneous activity in a fibroblast/myocyte heterocellular tissue—A
computational study,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1398–
1407, May 2012.
[27] A. R. Nayak, T. K. Shajahan, A. V. Panfilov, and R. Pandit, “Spiralwave dynamics in a mathematical model of human ventricular tissue with
myocytes and fibroblasts,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1–25, 2013.

[28] I. Baruchi, D. Grossman, V. Volman, M. Shein, J. Hunter, V. L. Towle,
and E. Ben-Jacob, “Functional holography analysis: Simplifying the complexity of dynamical networks,” Chaos, vol. 16, pp. 1–16, 2006.
[29] S. M. Narayan, D. E. Krummen, K. Shivkumar, P. Clopton, W. J. Rappel,
and J. M. Miller, “Treatment of atrial fibrillation by the ablation of localized sources: CONFIRM (Conventional Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation
With or Without Focal Impulse and Rotor Modulation) trial,” J. Amer.
Coll. Cardiol., vol. 60, pp. 628–636, 2012.
[30] P. Kohl, P. Camelliti, F. L. Burton, and G. L. Smith, “Electrical coupling
of fibroblasts and myocytes: Relevance for cardiac propagation,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 38, pp. 45–50, 2005.
[31] L. Iles, H. Pfluger, A. Phrommintikul, J. Cherayath, P. Aksit, S. N. Gupta,
D. M. Kaye, and A. J. Taylor, “Evaluation of diffuse myocardial fibrosis
in heart failure with cardiac magnetic resonance contrast-enhanced T1
mapping,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 52, no. 19, pp. 1574–1580, 2008.
[32] V. Jacquemet, and C. S. Henriquez, “Modelling cardiac fibroblasts: Interactions with myocytes and their impact on impulse propagation,” Europace., vol. 9, no. Suppl. 6, pp. vi29–vi37, 2007.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

