208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Blind Focusing of Electromagnetic Fields
in Hyperthermia Exploiting Target
Contrast Variations
Gennaro Bellizzi∗ and Ovidio M. Bucci, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper suggests a novel approach to the blind focusing of the electromagnetic field for microwave hyperthermia.
The idea is to induce a contrast variation in the target and to exploit this variation for the synthesis of the excitations of the antenna
array employed for the focusing, by performing a differential scattering measurement. In particular, the excitation vector is set as
the right singular vector associated with the largest singular value
of the differential scattering matrix, obtained as difference of two
scattering matrixes measured by the antenna array itself before
and after the contrast change. As a result, the approach is computationally effective and totally blind, not requiring any a priori
knowledge of the electric and geometric features of the region hosting the target, as well as of its spatial position with respect to the
antenna array.
Index Terms—Biomedical applications, blind focusing, contrast
agents, microwave hyperthermia, nanocomposites.

I. INTRODUCTION
EGIONAL hyperthermia is a promising therapeutic approach for the treatment of many diseases, including cancer, which is based on the selective heating of the diseased
tissue (target) above a therapeutic temperature [1]–[3]. Nowadays, there are different approaches to hyperthermia, which can
be classified according to the nature of the stimulus employed
for heating (ultrasound, radiofrequency, microwave, or optical
electromagnetic fields, etc.) and to the modality adopted for its
application, namely by inserting probes near or directly into
the target (interstitial hyperthermia), or through probes located
externally to the body able to concentrate the stimulus on the
target (external hyperthermia).
With reference to external microwave hyperthermia, the focusing of the electric field can be obtained either by means of
passive devices (like mirrors, lenses, etc.), able to concentrate
the radiation produced by an antenna [4], [5], or by properly
feeding an array of antennas located outside the region to be

R

Manuscript received November 12, 2013; revised June 3, 2014 and June 25,
2014; accepted July 26, 2014. Date of publication July 31, 2014; date of current
version December 18, 2014. This work was supported by the Italian Ministry
of University and Research under the Project MERIT. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ G. Bellizzi is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e delle Tecnologie
dell’Informazione, Università di Napoli Federico II, 80125 Naples, Italy (e-mail:
gbellizz@unina.it).
O. M. Bucci is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e delle Tecnologie dell’Informazione, Università di Napoli Federico II, 80125 Naples, Italy, and
also with the Istituto per il Rilevamento Elettromagnetico dell’Ambiente, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 80124 Naples, Italy (e-mail: bucci@unina.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2344711

heated [6], [7]. Concerning the latter, several approaches have
been proposed for the synthesis of the excitations of the antenna array. In [8] and [9], the excitations are determined by
maximizing the ratio between the power dissipated in the target
and a weighted sum of the powers dissipated in a set of healthy
regions surrounding the target. Since this ratio is a positivedefinite quadratic form in the (normalized) excitations, the optimal excitation vector is the eigenvector associated with the
largest eigenvalue of the Hermitian matrix of the coefficients of
such quadratic form. A similar approach, with some difference,
is also adopted in [10] and [11]. In [12], the excitations are
synthesized by time reversing the electric field computed at the
probe positions, generated by a virtual primary source placed at
the center of the region to be heated. In [13], the excitations are
determined following the same procedure used for the synthesis
of pencil beams, namely requiring that the squared intensity of
the total electric field produced by the array is maximum at the
center of the target and below assigned upper bounds outside
the target. A similar approach, based on the fulfillment of an
assigned mask for the electric field intensity, is the one in [14].
In [15] and [16], the excitations are synthesized by directly imposing a mask on the induced temperature field. The bioheat
equation is used for coupling the electromagnetic and thermal
problems. More recently, hybrid approaches have been also suggested which combine the aforementioned methods with the use
of nanocomposites, such as carbon nanotubes, in order to selectively increase the electric losses of the target [17].
All these approaches require some a priori information, such
as the knowledge of the morphological and electric features of
the region hosting the target, as well as of its position with respect to the antenna array, which are not easily obtainable and are
unavoidably affected by uncertainty that could significantly degrade the actual performances. For instance, the morphological
and electric information could be derived from patient-specific
MRI images. However, this solution has at least two downsides: 1) the conversion of MRI images into permittivity and
conductivity maps is made by using measurement data carried
out on ex-vivo and not patient-specific tissue samples; 2) being
computationally heavy, the acquisition and conversion of MRI
images cannot be performed online; therefore, the resulting electric model does not exactly reflect the state of the organ at the
time of the treatment. Accordingly, an effective approach which
does not need such information would be desirable. A first step
toward the achievement of this goal is the approach recently
proposed in [18], which relies on a physical interpretation of
the linear sampling method (LSM). However, apart from the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BELLIZZI AND BUCCI: BLIND FOCUSING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS IN HYPERTHERMIA

limits stemming from those of the LSM, it requires the knowledge of the target location and, possibly, at least an approximate
knowledge of the electromagnetic properties of the scenario of
interest.
Adopting a theranostic attitude, in this paper, we propose, as
in [18], to exploit the same antenna array radiating the field to
acquire the information required for its proper focusing, but in
a way which makes the method really “blind.” The idea is to
induce a change of the electromagnetic properties of the target
and to exploit this variation for an initial estimate1 of the excitations of the antennas, by performing a differential scattering
measurement. Due to the localized nature of the target, this allows us to find the optimal excitation vector as the right singular
vector associated with the largest singular value of the differential scattering matrix, obtained as difference of two scattering
matrixes measured by the antenna array itself before and after
the change of the target contrast. That change could be obtained,
for instance, by selectively inserting into the target metallic implants of millimetric size, or micro- or nano-composites (like,
nanotubes [17], nanoparticles [19], microbubbles [20], etc.), in
form of suspensions, as recently suggested in the microwave
imaging context [21]–[24]. By itself, the approach is computationally effective, thereby applicable online, and totally blind
not requiring any a priori knowledge on the electric and geometric features of the organ hosting the target and on its spatial
position with respect to the antenna array.
This paper is organized as follows. The electromagnetic formulation of the proposed approach is given in Section II. In
Section III, we analyze some possible ways to change the contrast of the target. In Section IV, a preliminary assessment of the
approach is given by means of 2-D numerical examples involving tumors embedded in realistic phantoms of female breast.
Conclusions follow in Section V.
II. FORMULATION OF THE APPROACH
From the electromagnetic point of view, the problem at hand
can be schematized as shown in Fig. 1, i.e., an array of N Tx/Rx
antennas radiating in presence of an electrically inhomogeneous
medium consisting of the organ (region Ω in Fig. 1) hosting the
target (region Ωt in Fig. 1) and the background medium (BM)
wherein the organ and the antennas are embedded. Later on,
an exp(iωt)2 time dependence will be assumed and dropped, ω
being the angular frequency and i is the imaginary unit.
Now, let us denote with (ε(r), μ0 ) and (εχ (r), μχ (r)) the
equivalent permittivity and permeability of the inhomogeneous medium before and after the contrast change of the target, respectively (μ0 is the permeability of vacuum), and let
χε = εχ /ε − 1 and χμ = μχ /μ0 − 1 be the relative electric
and magnetic contrast variations induced in the target. The difference between the electromagnetic fields due to the nth Tx an1 We talk of an initial estimate for the antenna excitations because it refers to
the time when the differential measurement is performed, i.e., at the beginning
of the treatment. As the treatment goes on, they should usually be adjusted, in
order to control the focusing of the beam in dependence on the change of some
physical and physiological parameters, such as the target temperature, location,
patient’s discomfort, etc.
2 Note that all the outcomes can be extended to the multifrequency case.

209

Fig. 1. External microwave hyperthermia setup. The target (Ω t ) is enclosed
in a hosting organ (Ω), which is surrounded by an array of N Tx/Rx antennas.
The whole system is embedded in a BM.

n
n
tenna, before and after the contrast change, say (Eb ,Hb ) and
n
n
(Ea ,Ha ), respectively, is solution of the following Maxwell
equations:

 n (r) − Jh n (r)
 n (r) = −iωμ0 H
∇×E

(1)

n

 n (r) + Je (r)
 n (r) = iωε(r)E
∇×H
n

n

n

(2)

n

 n = Ha − Hb is the difference
 n = Ea − Eb and H
where E
field, r is the position vector (with respect to a fixed reference
n
n
system), and (Je , Jh ) are the equivalent electric and magnetic
sources arising from the contrast variation, given by3
n
n
Jh (r) = iωμ0 χμ Ha (r)

(3)

n

Jne (r) = iωε(r)χε Ea (r)

(4)

Depending on the nature of the contrast change, electric or
n
n
magnetic, one has Jh = 0 or Je = 0, respectively.
 n ) is the same field radi n ,H
From (1)–(4) it turns out that (E
ated by proper electric and/or magnetic sources located in the
target and embedded in a medium with permittivity ε(r).
Now, in most of (if not all) the cases where it is important to achieve good focusing, the target size is comparable or
smaller than the characteristic length of the spatial variations
of the field (localized target), so that the equivalent sources can
be well represented by the first term of their multipole expansion. Therefore, the differential field at the antenna positions
can be practically assumed as due to elementary electric and/or
magnetic sources located inside the target. As a result, back
 n ), i.e., feeding the antenna array with an
 n, H
propagating (E
excitation vector whose elements are (proportional to) the com n ), the radiated field
 n, H
plex conjugates of the samples of (E
will be mainly focused on the target [25]. Better focusing is
expected if, instead of the field samples due to a single (i.e.,
nth)-Tx antenna, one considers the differential scattering matrix, S = Sa − Sb , obtained as difference of the two scattering
3 If |χ

e Ea

n



ε | and |χ μ | are much smaller than 1, in (3)–(4), one can put H a
n
≈ Eb (Born approximation).

n

n
≈ Hb

210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

matrixes,4 Sb and Sa , measured by the antenna array itself before
and after the change of the target contrast, respectively. Now,
due to the localized nature of the target, it is expected that S has
a very low effective rank. This implies that the singular value
decomposition [26] of S is characterized by a singular value significantly larger than the others. As a result, a practically optimal
excitation vector is the right singular vector associated with the
largest singular value of S [27].5 Since S is a measured (i.e., experimental) datum, the focusing is achieved without requiring
any a priori knowledge on ε(r), as well as on the location of the
hosting region Ω with respect to the antenna array.
As a concluding remark, we would like to stress that dependn
n
ing on whether Je = 0 or Jh = 0, the field focused in the target
is the magnetic or the electric one, respectively. For hyperthermia application, the goal is to focus the electric field in order to
exploit the significant electric losses of the human tissues in the
microwave frequency range.

TABLE I
ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC CONTRAST ACHIEVABLE IN THE TARGET, AT
1.5 GHZ, BY THE INFUSION OF μ-BUBBLES, SWCNTS, AND MNPS
Contrast Agent

μ-Bubbles
(c = 10% by volume)
SWCNT
(c = 1 mg/cm3 )
MNP
(c = 20 mg/cm3 )

A. Micro- or Nanocomposites Interstitially Inserted
in Form of Injectable Suspensions
A first way to change the contrast of the target is by introducing into it micro- or nano-composites in the form of injectable
suspensions. These contrast agents are attractive for our purposes for the following features:
1) very small size, which make their infusion minimally invasive, e.g., by means of interstitial injection;
2) possibility to bind them to biological molecules, which
increases both their biocompatibility and cellular uptake
(hence, their persistence in the target);
3) remarkable electromagnetic response, in particular, in the
microwave frequency range.
Concerning the last feature, in Table I, we report, for a frequency of 1.5 GHz, typical values for χε and χμ achievable by
exploiting as contrast agents: microbubbles (μ-Bubbles), singlewalled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), and magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). These values are realistic, since they come from
experimental characterizations carried out on suspensions of
these micro- and nanocomposites in tissue mimicking media,
and since they refer to concentrations, c,which are well tolerated by the human body and easily achievable in the target by
means of interstitial injection.
4 The scattering matrix is an N × N matrix whose ij element is the field
measured by the jth Rx antenna and due to the ith Tx antenna.
5 Notice that the backscattered signal, i.e., the elements of the main diagonal
of S are unessential for the evaluation of the first right singular vector of S.

Reference

χ ε = −0.14
χμ = 0
χ ε = 0.12 −i 0.06
χμ = 0
χε = 0
χ μ = (−2 − i20) × 10−3

[20]
[17]
[28], [29]

TABLE II
REQUIRED RADIATED POWER PER 1-W DISSIPATED IN THE TARGET
AND NORMALIZED FROBENIUS NORM OF S

Contrast Agent

III. CONTRAST AGENTS
From a practical point of view, the most challenging issue to
be addressed for the implementation of the proposed method
is to induce a contrast variation, which is detectable and localized in the target. Here, we analyze a number of possible ways
to get this, highlighting for each of them strengths and weaknesses from both the electromagnetic and practical standpoints.
The considered solutions, although new in microwave hyperthermia, are already adopted or are under investigation in other
biomedical contexts [21]–[24].

Electric and Magnetic
Contrast

Breast

   
   
( S  / S b ) d B

PΩ /Pt

model ID

μ-Bubbles
(10% by volume)
SWCNT
(c = 1 mg/cm3 )
Metallic rod
(Radius = 0.75 mm)
Time reversal
approach

080304
071904
080304
071904
080304
071904
080304
071904

case 1

case 2

case 1

case 2

8.1
4
5.7
3.0
7.1
3.6
11.3
4.9

6.8
2.5
4.8
2.0
6.0
2.3
14.5
9.1

−57.5
−49.3
−57.9
−49.6
−40.7
−32.9
–
–

−56.0
−47.1
−56.4
−47.4
−38.6
−29.8
–
–

Herein, we analyze these three types of micro- and nanocomposites since their use is already suggested in other biomedical applications [17], [20]–[24], even if other types of microand nanocomposites (such as nanodots, nanowires, metallic
nanoparticles) could be considered. As already stressed, the use
of micro- or nanocomposites for inducing a detectable and localized change of the electromagnetic properties of the target is not
a novelty in biomedicine, since it is already under investigation
to improve the microwave imaging of breast cancer [21]–[24].
In our context, the knowledge of the target position makes this
solution even more feasible and effective, since the knowledge
of the target location allows the direct insertion of these composites, without requiring the use of the biochemical targeting
as in diagnostic imaging. This enables higher concentrations of
contrast agent in the target, which translate into higher contrast
variations, hence, into higher levels of useful (i.e., differential)
signal, much more easily detectable.
1) μ-Bubbles and SWCNTs: As it can be seen from Table I,
both μ-Bubbles and SWCNTs determine a change of the electric
properties of the target, which can be exploited to achieve the
desired focusing of the electric field. In addition, the contrast
variation they produce is high enough to assure a significant and
well-detectable level of useful signal (see Table II). Furthermore, SWCNTs have the advantages of increasing the electric
losses of the target, hence, the heat generation, even if their
biocompatibility is still an open question.
The drawback of these contrast agents is the fact that the contrast variation they induce can be obtained only by physically

BELLIZZI AND BUCCI: BLIND FOCUSING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS IN HYPERTHERMIA

injecting them into the target. Therefore, the acquisition of S is
not fast since it requires the measurement of Sb and Sa at two
different stages, namely before and after the physical infusion
of the contrast agent, and this could lead to unwanted differences between Sb and Sa (not ascribable to the contrast agent,
but to other causes such as patient movement and breathing),
which could affect the focusing performance. Actually, for μBubbles, this drawback could be, at least in principle, overcome
by exploiting the possibility, experimentally verified in the drug
delivery context [30]–[32], of inducing a phase transition of the
μ-Bubbles by irradiation with ultrasound. Indeed, the observed
phase transition could be used to allow the remote activation
of the contrast change via ultrasound, once the μ-Bubbles have
been infused into the target. However, this solution relies on
the assumption that this phase transition of the μ-Bubbles translates into a change of their electric properties which, even if
reasonable, is still to be investigated.
2) Magnetic Nanoparticles: Unlike μ-Bubbles and SWCNTs, MNPs induce a change of the magnetic properties of the
target, but not of the electric properties. Therefore, the field focused on the target is not the electric field, as desired, but the
magnetic one. Moreover, the achievable contrast change is significantly smaller, hence, the useful signal is much less intense
[22]. As a consequence, its measurement is more challenging in
terms of signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) and dynamic range (DR)
required to the measurement apparatuses.
However, MNPs ar e worthy of consideration for the following advantages. First, iron oxide MNPs can be made biocompatible and are already approved for clinical use in MRI. Second,
their magnetic contrast can be turned ON and OFF in a reversible
manner by applying a static magnetic field of proper strength
[29]. This, from one hand, would allow the measurement of Sb
and Sa in a fast and effective way by simply switching ON and
OFF the magnetic field, once the MNPs have been injected into
the target. On the other hand, this would allow the real-time
control of the beam focusing during the therapy. Indeed, the
possibility of a remote and reversible triggering of the contrast
change would enable the repeated measurement of S during the
treatment and consequently a continuous, blind, adjustment of
the antenna excitations. Third, MNPs with low Curie temperature (around 42–43 °C) [33] could be used, in combination with
SWCNTs or μ-Bubbles (or other kind of micro- and nanocomposites), to allow a continuous and not invasive in situ monitoring of the temperature, again through the repeated measurement
of S during the treatment, thus, enabling the control of the power
delivered by the antenna array for a safe and successful increase
of the temperature of the target.
Finally, the use of MNPs is appealing in all those biomedical
applications, for example, the microwave-assisted protein digestions [34], where the region to be heated does not present relevant electric losses. In those cases, the heating can be achieved
by focusing the magnetic field and exploiting the magnetic
losses of the MNPs themselves (see Table I).
B. Small Implants Interstitially Inserted Inside the Target
Another way to change the electric contrast of the target
is by introducing inside (or near to) it a small implants having

211

electric properties significantly different from those of the target.
From the electromagnetic viewpoint, this solution is effective
since it is sufficient a single-metallic implant (like a metallic
rod) of few millimeters in size to ensure a remarkable contrast
variation of the target, hence, a high level of useful signal (see
Table II).
This solution is also attractive from a practical point of view
because it is already implemented in brachytherapy [35], even
though for purposes completely different from ours. Accordingly, our approach can take advantage of the implementation
solutions devised for brachytherapy, where the implant is positioned inside the target through a thin plastic catheter previously
loaded before starting the treatment.
A first drawback of this technique is the invasiveness related
to the insertion of catheters, even if in hyperthermia the use of
catheters is generally required for the in situ monitoring of the
temperature. Another drawback, already encountered for microand nano-composites, is the fact that the contrast change can be
triggered only by physically inserting and removing the implant
from the target. As a consequence, also in this case, this could
lead to unwanted differences between Sb and Sa , hence to a
worsening of the focusing performance.
As concluding remark, it is worth to notice that the presence
of the plastic catheter does not affect the focusing performance
since once inserted, it becomes integral part of the medium enclosing the target, described by the permittivity ε(r). Therefore,
its presence is taken into account in both Sb and Sa .
IV. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
In order to provide a validation of the theoretical discussion in Section II and of the proposed approach, a preliminary
numerical analysis has been carried out. As a case study, we
have considered solid tumors (target) embedded in human breast
(breast cancer). For the sake of comparison, the approach has
been tested for both metallic implants of millimetric size and
the contrast agents listed in Table I. In agreement with the preliminary character of this analysis, 2-D simulations have been
devised. For the same reason, the study of the robustness of the
approach with respect to the measurement noise, as well as to
unwanted variations of the electric scenario not ascribable to the
contrast agent, has not been addressed. Reasonably, the sensitivity of the approach to the measurement noise is expected to
be comparable to those characterizing the microwave imaging
methods exploiting the same contrast agents [21]–[24] (see also
Table II), while the robustness against the uncertainties on the
electric scenario is expected to be even better than that characterizing the methods cited in Section I. This will be the subject
of future investigations.
A. Breast Phantom
To perform the analysis in realistic conditions, we have exploited the realistic numerical breast phantoms of the online
repository available at [36]. In particular, the electric model was
constructed by following the procedure described in the instruction manual provided with the repository files, where the electric
properties of each voxel of the model, at the working frequency
f, were determined by combining the information on the tissue

212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 2. Relative permittivity (a) and effective electric conductivity (b) maps,
at 1.5 GHz, of the 2-D breast phantom considered in the numerical analysis
(white circles delimit the malignant region in cases 1 and 2).

type filling the voxel, stored in the file mtype.txt, and the measurement data in [37], [38] (synthetically reported in the instruction manual as parameters of a Cole–Cole dispersion model),
properly weighted by the values stored in the file pval.txt. To test
the focusing performance of the approach in the worst case, an
anatomically (and electromagnetically) dense breast (phantom
ID 080304) has been considered. The 2-D scenario has been
obtained by extracting a slice from the 3-D original phantom
(see Fig. 2). Since this phantom is relative to a healthy patient, a circular target of 9 mm in size, having εr = 56 σ = 1.5
S/m has been inserted in the model, at two different positions:
close to the mammary ducts (case 1) and in the mammary ducts
(case 2). They are shown in Fig. 2 for a frequency of 1.5 GHz
(the working frequency). Note that the values assumed for the
electric properties of the target are within the 10% of variation
found in [38] between the properties of normal fibro/glandular
and malignant tissues.
B. Antenna Array Configuration and Matching Medium
For the sake of simplicity, the antenna array is made of N ideal
z-directed currents wires,6 equally spaced along a circumference
of radius R = 15 cm, surrounding the breast. Moreover, the
overall system is embedded in an infinitely extended matching
liquid, acting as BM. The working frequency, f, as well as the relative permittivity, εb , of BM are set to improve both the penetration of the wave in the breast and the focusing performance. According to [39], εb should be chosen between 20 and 36 depending on the value of f. Here, we have set f = 1.5 GHz and εb =
6

As a result, each element of the array radiates a TM wave, i.e. a wave having
a single component of electric field, that along the z-axis (scalar field), and two
component of the magnetic field, lying in the xy plane (vector field).

20, which is the value obtained for water-oil emulsions (34%
water and 66% oil) in [40] at f = 1.5 GHz. These emulsions
also exhibit an effective electric conductivity, σb = 0.13 S/m,
which has been taken into account in the simulations. The matching liquid can also act as a refrigerant, if it is circulated and
cooled [6]; thus, preserving both the skin and healthy tissue
from unnecessary and harmful overheating.
Concerning the number of antennas, here N has been chosen according to the theory of the degrees of freedom of the
electromagnetic field [41], which prescribes N ≈ |2kbm a| for
an accurate and not redundant representation of the field, where
kbm is the wavenumber in BM and a is the radius of the smallest
circle enclosing the breast. Assuming a = 6.5 cm, a suitable
number of antennas, at f = 1.5 GHz, is N = 20. It is worth
noting that N depends on the electric size of the breast and not
on the electric size of the target, as it could be envisaged. This
is related to the fact that the target can be located anywhere in
the breast. Therefore, the set of all observable S, by varying
the target position in the breast, spans a space whose dimension
depends on the electric size of the entire breast and not on the
electric size of the target.
Concerning the implementation of the exposure apparatus,
it is worth to point out that the architecture of antenna system
is not so much different from that of other prototypal systems
designed for microwave hyperthermia and proposed in the literature [6], [7], except for an additional acquisition network
required for measuring Sb and Sa . Like in [6] and [7], the most
suited radiating elements will be patch or cavity backed antennas, realized on a metallic case which also will act as holder for
the matching liquid. The interior of the case will have to be accessible from the outside in order to allow the liquid to circulate
and the insertion of the contrast agent, as well as the possible
integration with the ultrasound system in the case of remotely
activated contrast change. With reference to this last point, we
wish to underline that, provided that the remote triggering of the
electric response of μ-Bubbles via ultrasound is possible, the implementation of an integrated ultrasound-microwave system is
surely a challenging, but not an unfeasible goal. Indeed, similar
systems have been recently developed and tested in microwave
induced thermoacoustic imaging [42].
C. Numerical Solver
The data have been generated using a full-wave forward solver
based on the Method of Moments. The 2-D phantom is imported
in the solver as a complex matrix, where each element represents a square voxel of the breast whose value is the equivalent
permittivity associated with the voxel. Each voxel has a size
d = 1.5 mm, which is smaller than λm in /10, λm in being the
wavelength corresponding to the highest value of the real part
of ε(r), evaluated at f = 1.5 GHz. This choice guarantees a
negligible discretization error.
D. Results and Discussion
Fig. 3 shows the results of the focusing strategy, in terms of
(normalized) squared amplitude of the electric field radiated in
the breast, when the contrast change is induced by filling the

BELLIZZI AND BUCCI: BLIND FOCUSING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS IN HYPERTHERMIA

213

Fig. 3. Results of the focusing strategy. Columns 1 and 2 show the (normalized) squared amplitude of the electric field radiated in the breast for cases 1 and 2,
when: the target is filled with μ-Bubbles [parts (a) and (e))] the target is filled with SWCNTs [parts (b) and (f)] ; a metallic rod is inserted at the target center [parts
(c) and (g)]; a standard time reversal approach is adopted as focusing strategy [parts (d) and (h)]. Column 3 shows the results relative to MNPs: (i) and (j) show
the (normalized) squared amplitude of the electric field radiated in the breast for case 1 and 2, while (k) and (l) show the (normalized) squared amplitude of the
magnetic field radiated in the breast for cases 1 and 2. In all the figures, white circles delimit the target.

target with: μ-Bubbles [parts (a) and (e)], SWCNTs [parts (b)
and (f)], by placing at the center of the target a thin metallic
rod with a radius of 0.75 mm [parts (c) and (g)]. As it can be
seen, for both cases 1 and 2, the field is mainly concentrated in
the target. Furthermore, very similar results are achieved for all
the considered contrast agents, despite the different entity of the
contrast change induced in the target. This is an expected result
and is due to the localized nature of the target. Regarding the
results (c) and (g), it is worth to notice that because of the presence of the metallic rod, a null electric field should be expected
at the target center. This does not occur in our simulations, since
we have assumed that the rod is left in the target just the time for
acquiring S and is removed when the treatment is started. For
the sake of comparison, in Fig. 3(d) and (h), we report the results
of a standard time reversal approach, obtained by assuming the

target embedded in a homogeneous medium with the permittivity of BM. As can be seen, worse performance is achieved,
especially for case 2 where the focusing is practically lost.
Again for comparison, in Fig. 3(i)–(l), we show the results
obtained when the contrast change is attained by filling the target with MNPs. As expected, due to the magnetic nature of
the contrast induced by the MNPs, the field focused in the target is not the electric field, but the magnetic one, as shown in
Fig. 3(k)–(l). Accordingly, MNPs appear to be unsuitable for
focusing the electric field by means of the proposed approach.
However, the results for MNPs are worthy of presentation because they provide a preliminary proof of the effectiveness of
the approach in the more realistic case of a vector field, thanks
to the (2-D) vector nature of the magnetic field. Actually, the
focusing of the electric field is possible also in this case if a

214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

more complex spatial distribution of the MNPs, not inside but
in a ring around the target having a size of one half the local wavelength, is exploited (results not reported for brevity).
However, this distribution of MNPs is very difficult (if not impossible) to achieve in clinical setting. Therefore, an alternative
focusing strategy must be devised for successfully dealing with
MNPs.
From Fig. 3(a)–(h), one can also notice that additional “hot
spots” take place, but, at least for the cases at hand, they are not
critical from the thermal point of view as they are located in low
loss regions or near the skin where the thermoregulatory action
of the refrigerant liquid is the highest. This is corroborated by the
results in Fig. 4, where we report the corresponding (normalized)
power distribution, say pe , dissipated in the breast (pe = σE 2 /2,
σ being the effective conductivity of the breast model, after the
contrast change and E the amplitude of the total electric field
in the breast), which represents the actual quantity of interest.
As it can be seen, an energy dissipation highly concentrated in
the target is obtained, despite the significant and widely spread
electric losses and a target location close to or even inside the
high loss region.
Comparable results, not reported for brevity, have been obtained by changing the target position or lowering εb and even
better results have been observed in the case of anatomically
(and electromagnetically) less dense breast models [44], confirming the effectiveness of the proposed focusing approach, at
least in the 2-D scalar case.
Fig. 5(a)–(b) shows, for cases 1 and 2, respectively, and a
target filled with μ-Bubble, the computed excitation vectors
(normalized amplitudes and phases), namely the right singular vector associated with the largest singular value of S. The
insets show the singular values of S, normalized to the first
one. As predicted in Section II, the first singular value is much
larger than the others. Again, similar results have been obtained
for all the simulated cases, thus, confirming the assertion of
a low effective rank of S due to the localized nature of the
target.
In order to give a quantitative information of the input power
to the antenna system required for a successful treatment, as well
as of the SNR and DR required for measuring S, we report in
Table II, for each of the considered cases, and for two different
breast models, namely phantoms ID 080304 (see Fig. 2) and ID
071904 (mostly fatty breast adopted in [44]), the ratio between
the total power dissipated in the breast,7 say PΩ , and the power
dissipated in the target, say Pt , as well as the ratio (in dB)
between the Frobenius norms of S (i.e., the level of the useful
signal) and Sb (i.e., the level of the signal actually measured).
Concerning the power requirement, for all the cases at hand
a value of radiated power not higher than 8.1 W is required
to dissipate 1 W in the target. From Table II, one can notice
that the values of PΩ /Pt depend on the type of contrast agent.
In particular, PΩ /Pt is smallest for SWCNTs, largest for μBubbles and intermediate for the metallic rod. This is consistent
7 Note that the power dissipated in the breast is practically equal to the power
radiated by the antenna array if one assumes, as in part B of this section, that
the whole radiating system is enclosed in a metallic case, and the antennas are
near (not more than few centimeters far from) the breast.

with the fact that SWCNTs increase both the target contrast
and losses, while μ-Bubbles decrease both the target contrast
and losses (see Table I). Unlike SWCNTs and μ-Bubbles, the
metallic rod is removed from the target once S is gathered,
thus it does not affect the target losses during the treatment.
Concerning this last point, it is worth to notice that the value of
PΩ /Pt are estimated by assuming that SWCNTs or μ-Bubbles
remain localized in the target over the entire treatment duration.
However, this assumption, even if feasible (the persistence of
the contrast agents in the target could be significantly increased
by a proper biochemical functionalization, which increase the
cellular uptake), is not necessary neither for focusing the field
nor for a successful heating of the target. As for the focusing, the
contrast agent mainly serves for inducing a detectable contrast
variation of the target, needed for getting S. Therefore, it has to
be localized in the target for a short time, namely that allowing
the acquisition of S. As for the target heating, the increase of the
energy dissipation due to SWCNTs and μ-Bubbles represents
only a fraction (about ±20%) of the total energy dissipated in the
target, which is mainly due to the intrinsic losses of target itself
(for the simulated cases, the losses are those of a cancerous
tissue, at f = 1.5 GHz). Therefore, their leakage should not
significantly affect the heating of the target. From Table II, one
can also notice that smaller values of PΩ /Pt are obtained for the
breast model with higher fat content, in agreement with the fact
that the higher the fat content the smaller the power dissipated in
the tissues surrounding the target (fatty tissues have an electric
conductivity lower than that of fibro-glandular tissues).
For comparison, in Table II, we also include the value of
PΩ /Pt obtained by adopting the time reversal approach for the
synthesis of the antenna excitations. Again, worse performance
is observed,
for case 2. Concerning the levels of useful
 
  especially
signal (S/Sb  in Table II), as expected, a level significantly
above the noise level and the DR characterizing the microwave
imaging systems available in the literature [45] is obtained for
the metallic rod, as well as for SWCNTs and μ-Bubbles at
tolerable concentrations. Moreover, this level increases as the
amount, w, of injected contrast agent (w = cvt , c being the
concentration of agent in the tissue and vt the tissue volume
filled by the agent) is increased, or as R decreases. In particular,
as long as the Born approximation holds (see Section II) and R
is a couple of wavelengths
  (in BM) larger than the breast radius,
a simple estimate of S is given by
 
 q 

 

exp (−αR) R0
S(w, R) =  S(w0 , R0 ) w
w0
exp (−αR0 ) R
(5)


where S(w0 , R0 ) is the level of the useful signal evaluated
for reference values of w and R, say w0 and R0 (for instance, w0
and R0 can be those used in the simulations), α is the attenuation
constant in the BM (namely, the opposite of the imaginary part of
kbm ) and q = 0.5 in our 2-D case (q = 1 for the 3-D geometry).
In (5), the linear dependence on w reflects the fact that, in the
limit of the Born approximation, the scattered field due to the
contrast change induced in the target is proportional to the to
the polarizability χε vt , which is proportional to w = cvt (being
χε proportional to c). The exponential dependence on R arises
from the presence of losses in the BM medium between the

BELLIZZI AND BUCCI: BLIND FOCUSING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS IN HYPERTHERMIA

215

Fig. 4. Normalized power distribution dissipated in the breast when the target
is filled with μ-Bubbles: (a) case 1; and (b) case 2. White circles delimit the
target.

Fig. 6. (a) Dynamics of the singular values of S for different target size. The
insets show, for each target size, the amplitudes and phases of the singular
vector corresponding to the largest singular value. (b) Critical target size versus
working frequency

target and the antenna system, while the (1/R)q factor takes
into account the spatial divergence of the field far from the
source (target).
As conclusive study, we have analyzed the influence of the
target size (or, equivalently, of a possible spread of the contrast
agent in the surrounding tissue) on the performance of the approach. In particular, we have analyzed how the dynamics of
the singular values of S changes by increasing the target size.8
The results, for case 1 and f = 1.5 GHz, are reported in Fig. 6
(a). As expected, by increasing the target size the relative level
of the higher order singular values (which correspond to higher

Fig. 5. Normalized amplitudes and phases of the antenna excitations synthesized for case 1 (a) and case 2 (b), when the contrast change is induced by
μ-Bubbles. The insets show the singular values dynamics.

8 It is worth noting that, in the case of small target, the usual ordering of
the singular values of S in decreasing way exactly reflects the order of the
corresponding multipole terms of the equivalent source in the target (in other
words, the n th singular value correspond to the multipole term of order n ).
Therefore, in order to keep such correspondence, hence a physical meaning for
each singular value of S in Fig. 6 (a) we have kept, for all the considered target
sizes, the ordering of the singular values obtained for the smallest size.

216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

order multipoles of the equivalent source arising in the target
from the contrast variation) also increases, thus making the assumption that S has a dominant singular value not longer valid.
Nonetheless, as shown in the insets of Fig. 6 (a), the singular
vector associated with the largest singular value does not significantly change with the target size (what changes with the
target size is the number of significant higher order multipoles
terms of the equivalent source in the target and their relative
weight, but not their spatial shape), thus leaving the focusing
performance practically unaffected. Therefore, the approach is
effective also for a non very localized target. However, this is
true up to a target size of about 17 mm. Above this critical size,
the approach fails because the largest singular value changes (it
becomes the old second singular value, i.e., the singular value
corresponding to the second-order multipole of the equivalent
source induced in the target), and the corresponding singular
vector does not enable the focusing of the field on the target,
being completely different from the optimal vector, as shown in
the insets of Fig. 6(a). However, this critical size increases by
decreasing f, as shown in Fig. 6(b). This is an expected result,
since the dynamics of the singular values of S depends on the
electric size of the target, which decreases by increasing f. For
instance, the computed critical size is about 23 mm for f = 1
GHz and about 10 mm for f = 2 GHz. Accordingly, the approach can be made more robust to the variation of target size or
possible spread of the contrast agent in the surrounding tissue
simply by lowering the operating frequency.
As a final consideration, let us remark that the proposed approach allows the blind focusing of the field, hence, of the
energy deposition in the target. However, the actual temperature
distribution, while depending on the total power radiated by
the exposure system, can be quantified only through a thermal
analysis, which requires the knowledge of both the dissipated
power distribution and the thermal properties in the irradiated
tissues. Accordingly, from this point of view, the approach is not
blind. Of course, an estimate of the input power can be obtained
by performing numerical simulations or experiments involving realistic phantoms. However, the uncertainty with which
the thermal properties can be known makes the monitoring of
the temperature during the treatment, for a controlled tuning of
the delivered power, a mandatory task, as always happens in hyperthermia. Possibly, a totally blind approach could be, at least
in principle, devised by using contrast agents characterized by
a temperature-dependent electric or magnetic response, as e.g.,
MNPs with low Curie temperature [33]. Indeed, this would allow the continuous monitoring of the temperature in the target
(hence, the tuning of the power feeding the antenna system)
during the treatment, by detecting the variations of S due to the
variations with the temperature of the response of the contrast
agent. This idea will be the subject of future investigations.
V. CONCLUSION
A novel method of blind focusing of the electromagnetic field
for microwave hyperthermia has been proposed. The novelty is
the way the excitations driving the antenna array are determined, which is based on the acquisition and processing of the

difference between the electromagnetic fields measured by the
antenna array itself before and after the induction of a change
in the target contrast. The optimal array excitations are determined through a direct and fast processing of the differential
scattering matrix, without requiring any a priori information on
the geometry and the electric properties of the exposed organ,
as well as on its position with respect to the exposure system.
Future investigation in this framework will involve the assessment of the effectiveness of the approach in full 3-D realistic
cases (including realistic antennas and set up) and of its robustness with respect to the target size, the measurement noise
and changes of the electric scenario not induced by the contrast
agents. Moreover, we will investigate, from one side, the possibility of a remote activation of electric type contrast agents, and
in particular μ-Bubbles, as suggested in Section III. On the other
hand, our goal will be to devise an alternative focusing strategy
for dealing with the MNPs case in order to exploits the advantages they offer. The final objective will be the experimental
assessment of the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Wust, B. Hildebrandt, G. Sreenivasa, B. Rau, J. Gellermann, H. Riess,
R. Felix, and P. M. Schlag, “Hyperthermia in combined treatment of
cancer,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 8, pp. 487–97, Aug. 2002.
[2] W. Rao, Z. S. Deng, and J. Liu, “A review of hyperthermia combined
with radiotherapy/chemotherapy on malignant tumors,” Crit. Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 38, pp. 101–116, 2010.
[3] G Bellizzi and O. M. Bucci, “On the optimal choice of the exposure
conditions and the nanoparticle features in magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 26, pp. 389–403, Jun. 2010.
[4] I. S. Karanasiou, K. T. Karathanasis, A. Garetsos, and N. K. Uzunoglu,
“Development and laboratory testing of a noninvasive intracranial focused
hyperthermia system,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 56, no. 9,
pp. 2160–2171, Sep. 2008.
[5] Y. Tao and G. Wang, “Conformal hyperthermia of superficial tumor with
left-handed metamaterial lens applicator,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 3525–3530, Dec. 2012.
[6] J. Stang, M. Haynes, P. Carson, and M. Moghaddam, “A preclinical system
prototype for focused microwave thermal therapy of the breast,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2431–2438, Sep. 2012.
[7] P. Togni, Z. Rijnen, W. C. M. Numan, R. F. Verhaart, J. F. Bakker,
G. C. Van Rhoon, and M. M. Paulides, “Electromagnetic redesign of
the HYPERcollar applicator: Toward improved deep local head-and-neck
hyperthermia,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, pp. 5997–6009, Aug. 2013.
[8] A. Boag and Y. Leviatan, “Optimal excitation of multiapplicator system for deep regional hyperthermia,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37,
no. 10, pp. 987–995, Oct. 1990.
[9] A. Boag, Y. Leviatan, and A Boag, “Analysis and optimization of waveguide multiapplicator hyperthermia systems,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 946–952, Sep. 1993.
[10] F. Bardati, A. Borrani, A. Gerardino, and G. A. Lovisolo, “SAR optimization in a phased array radiofrequency hyperthermia system,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1201–1207, Dec. 1995.
[11] M. J. Burfeindt, E. Zastrow, S. C. Hagness, B. D. Van Veem, and
J. E. Medow, “Microwave beamforming for non-invasive patient-specific
hyperthermia treatment of pediatric brain cancer,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 56, pp. 2743–2754, May 2011.
[12] D. H Trefná, J. Vrba, and M. Persson, “Time-reversal focusing in microwave hyperthermia for deep-seated tumors,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55,
pp. 2167–2185, Apr. 2010.
[13] D. Iero, T. Isernia, A. F. Morabito, I. Catapano, and L. Crocco, “Optimal
constrained field focusing for hyperthermia cancer therapy: A feasibility
assessment on realistic phantoms,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 102,
pp. 125–141, Mar. 2010.
[14] K. S. Nikita, N. G. Maratos, and N. K. Uzunoglu, “Optimization of the
deposited power distribution inside a layered lossy medium irradiated by
a coupled system of concentrically placed waveguide applicators,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 909–920, Jul. 1998.

BELLIZZI AND BUCCI: BLIND FOCUSING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS IN HYPERTHERMIA

[15] K. S. Nikita, N. G. Maratos, and N. K. Uzunoglu, “Optimal steady-state
temperature distribution for a phased array hyperthermia system,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 1299–1306, Dec. 1993.
[16] M. E. Kowalski and J. M. Jin, “Determination of electromagnetic phasedarray driving signals for hyperthermia based on a steady-state temperature criterion,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 48, no. 11,
pp. 1864–1873, Nov. 2000.
[17] A. Mashal, B. Sitharaman, X. Li, P. K. Avti, A. V. Sahakian, J. H. Booske,
and S. C. Hagness, “Toward carbon-nanotube-based theranostic agents for
microwave detection and treatment of breast cancer: Enhanced dielectric
and heating response of tissue-mimicking materials,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1831–1834, Aug. 2010.
[18] L. Crocco, L. Di Donato, D. Iero, and T. Isernia, “An adaptative method
to focusing in an unknown scenario,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 102,
pp. 563–579, Aug. 2012.
[19] G. Bellizzi, O. M. Bucci, and A. Capozzoli, “On the energy transfer
between the electromagnetic field and nanomachines for biological applications,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 29, pp. 331–339, Jul. 2008.
[20] A. Mashal, J. H. Booske, and S. C. Hagness, “Toward contrast-enhanced
microwave-induced thermoacoustic imaging of breast cancer: A experimental study of the effects of microbubbles on simple thermoacoustic
targets,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 641–650, Feb. 2009.
[21] J. D. Shea, P. Kosmas, B. D. Van Veen, and S. C. Hagness, “Contrastenhanced microwave imaging of breast tumors: A computational study
using 3D realistic numerical phantoms,” Inverse Prob., vol. 26, pp. 1–22,
Jul. 2010.
[22] G. Bellizzi, O. M. Bucci, and I. Catapano, “Microwave cancer imaging
exploiting magnetic nanoparticles as contrast agent,” IEEE Trans. Biomed
Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2528–2536, Sep. 2011.
[23] Y. Chen and P. Kosmas, “Detection and localization of tissue malignancy
using contrast-enhanced microwave imaging: Exploring information theoretic criteria,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 766–776,
Mar. 2012.
[24] Y. Chen, I. J. Craddock, and P. Kosmas, “Feasibility study of lesion classification via contrast-agent-aided UWB breast imaging,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1003–1007, May 2010.
[25] J. De Rosny, G. Lerosey, and M. Fink, “Theory of electromagnetic
time-reversal mirrors,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 10,
pp. 3139–3149, Oct. 2010.
[26] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations. Baltimore, MD,
USA: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1996
[27] A. J. Devaney, “Time reversal imaging of obscured targets from multistatic data,” IEEE Trans. Antenna Propag., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1600–1610,
May 2005.
[28] G. Bellizzi, O. M. Bucci, and A. Capozzoli, “Broadband spectroscopy
of the electromagnetic properties of aqueous ferrofluids for biomedical
applications,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 322, pp. 3004–3013, Oct. 2010.
[29] G. Bellizzi and O. M. Bucci, “A novel measurement technique for the
broadband characterization of diluted water ferrofluid for biomedical applications,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2903–2912, Jun. 2013.
[30] K. Ferrara, R. Pollard, and M. Borden, “Ultrasound microbubble contrast
agents: Fundamentals and application to gene and drug delivery,” Annu.
Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 9, pp. 415–47, Aug. 2007.
[31] N. Y. Rapoport, A. M. Kennedy, J. E. Shea, C. L. Scaife, and
K. H. Nam, “Controlled and targeted tumor chemotherapy by ultrasoundactivated nanoemulsions/microbubbles,” J. Controlled Release, vol. 138,
pp. 268–276, Sep. 2009.

217

[32] A. L. Klibanov, T. I. Shevchenko, B. I. Raju, R. Seip, and C. T. Chin,
“Ultrasound-triggered release of materials entrapped in microbubble–
liposome constructs: A tool for targeted drug delivery,” J. Controlled
Release, vol. 148, pp. 13–17, Nov. 2010.
[33] S. Mornet, S. Vasseur, F. Grasset, and E. Duquet, “Magnetic nanoparticle design for medical diagnosis and therapy,” J. Mater. Chem., vol. 14,
pp. 2161–2175, Jun. 2004.
[34] S. Lin, D. Yun, D. Qi, C. Deng, Y. Li, and X. Zhang, “Novel microwaveassisted digestion by trypsin-immobilized magnetic nanoparticles for proteomic analysis,” Proteome Res., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1297–1307, Feb. 2008.
[35] C. F. Njeh, M. W. Saunders, and C. M. Langton, “Accelerated partial breast
irradiation (APBI): A review of available techniques,” Radiat. Oncol.,
vol. 5, no. 90, pp. 1–28, Oct. 2010.
[36] E. Zastrow, S. K. Davis, M. Lazebnik, F. Kelcz, B. D. Van Veem, and S.
C. Hagness, “Database of 3D grid-based numerical breast phantom for
use in computational electromagnetic simulations,” [ONLINE]. available
at URL: https://uwcem.ece.wisc.edu/index.html
[37] M. Lazebnik, L. McCartney, D. Popovic, C. B. Watkins, M. J. Lindstrom,
J. Harter, S. Sewall, A. Magliocco, J. H. Booske, M. Okoniewski, and
S. C. Hagness, “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric properties of normal breast tissue obtained from reduction surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 2637–2656, May 2007.
[38] M. Lazebnik, L. McCartney, D. Popovic, C. B. Watkins, M. J. Lindstrom,
J. Harter, S. Sewall, T. Ogilvie, A. Magliocco, T. M. Breslin, W. Temple,
D. Mew, J. H. Booske, M. Okoniewski, and S. C. Hagness, “A large-scale
study of the ultrawideband microwave dielectric properties of normal
benign and malignant breast tissue obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 6093–6115, Oct. 2007.
[39] I. Catapano, L. Di Donato, L. Crocco, O. M. Bucci, A. F. Morabito,
T. Isernia, and R. Massa, “On quantitative microwave tomography of
female breast,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 97, pp. 75–93, Sep. 2009.
[40] L. M. C. Van Nieuwstadt, “Microwave measurement system for breast
cancer imaging: An experimental prototype towards time-domain inverse
scattering,” Ph.D. dissertation Dept. Electr. Eng., Univ. Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA, 2011.
[41] O. M. Bucci, C. Gennarelli, and C. Savarese, “Representation of electromagnetic fields over arbitrary surfaces by a finite and non redundant number of samples,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 351–359, Mar. 1998.
[42] L. Nie, D. Xing, and S. Yang, “In vivo detection and imaging of lowdensity foreign body with microwave induced thermoacoustic tomography,” Med. Phys., vol. 36, pp. 3429–3437, Jul. 2013.
[43] X. Zhou, Z. Zhao, J. Wang, J Song, and Q. H. Liu, “Microwave-induced
thermal acoustic tomography for breast tumor based on compressive
sensing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1298–1307,
May 2013.
[44] G. Bellizzi and O. M. Bucci, “Blind focusing in microwave hyperthermia
by target contrast variation,” presented at the 8th Eur. Conf. Antennas
Propag. , The Hague, The Netherlands, Apr. 6–11, 2014.
[45] J. Bourqui, J. Garrett, and E. Fear, “Measurement and analysis of microwave frequency signals transmitted through the breast,” Int. J. Biomed.
Imag., vol. 2012, p. 562563, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

