IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

181

Analysis of Protein Interaction Networks
for the Detection of Candidate Hepatitis B
and C Biomarkers
Thomas Simos, Urania Georgopoulou, George Thyphronitis, John Koskinas, and Costas Papaloukas

Abstract—Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection are the major causes of chronic liver disease, cirrhosis
and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The resolution or chronicity
of acute infection is dependent on a complex interplay between
virus and innate/adaptive immunity. The mechanisms that lead a
significant proportion of patients to more severe liver disease are
not clearly defined and involve virus induced host gene/protein alterations. The utilization of protein interaction networks (PINs)
is expected to identify novel aspects of the disease concerning the
patients’ immune response to virus as well as the main pathways
that are involved in the development of fibrosis and HCC. In this
study, we designed several PINs for HBV and HCV and employed
topological, modular, and functional analysis techniques in order to
determine significant network nodes that correspond to prominent
candidate biomarkers. The networks were built using data from
various interaction databases. When the overall PINs of HBV and
HCV were compared, 48 nodes were found in common. The implementation of a statistical ranking procedure indicated that three
of them are of higher importance.
Index Terms—Biomarkers, functional analysis, hepatitis, modularity analysis, protein interaction network (PIN), topological
analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
IRAL hepatitis is a global threat to public health with
hundreds of millions of people chronically infected with
hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV) [1]. Patients with chronic infection present liver injury and have a high
probability to develop cirrhosis, liver failure or hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Furthermore, chronic HBV and HCV infection is the leading cause of liver transplantation. The prevalence
of chronic hepatitis B or C has a great geographical variety
with areas of low and high endemicity. HCV predominates in
Western countries, USA and Japan whereas HBV accounts for

V

Manuscript received December 24, 2013; revised May 27, 2014; accepted
July 23, 2014. Date of publication July 31, 2014; date of current version December 30, 2014. This work was cofinanced by the European Union (European
Regional Development Fund) and Greek national funds through the Operational
Program “Thessaly—Mainland Greece and EPIRUS—2007–2013” of the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF 2007-2013).
T. Simos, G. Thyphronitis, and C. Papaloukas are with the Department of Biological Applications and Technology, University of Ioannina, 45110 Ioannina,
Greece (e-mail: thsimos@cc.uoi.gr; gthyfron@uoi.gr; papalouk@cc.uoi.gr).
U. Georgopoulou is with the Molecular Virology Laboratory, Hellenic Pasteur
Institute, 11527 Athens, Greece (e-mail: uraniag@pasteur.gr).
J. Koskinas is with the Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School
of Athens at Hippokration General Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece (e-mail:
koskinas@ath.forthnet.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2344732

the majority of patients with chronic viral hepatitis in Asia and
Africa.
The HBV genome is around 3.2 kb in length and encodes
eight viral proteins, namely pre-core, core, pre-S1, pre-S2, S,
SP, P, and X. The diagnosis of chronic infection is made by
the detection of HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) in the blood for
more than six months [2]. Concerning HCV, its 9.6 kb genome
encodes a polyprotein precursor that translates four structural
proteins, namely core, E1, E2, and p7, and seven nonstructural
proteins, namely NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, NS5B, and
F [3]. The diagnosis of chronic HCV infection is made by the
presence of HCV-RNA in serum for more than six months after
the acute infection. Even today the mechanisms which HBV
or HCV employs to overcome the host immune response and
promote chronic infection remain poorly understood.
On the other hand, cellular functions are coordinated activities of many proteins and biological molecules that interact
with each other. Protein interactions have an important role to
all cellular processes. At the molecular level, they are present
in a variety of ways, with most common being the specific
contacts between the globular domains of the interacting proteins [4]. Domains are considered as the main functional units
of proteins due to their ability to evolve and function independently. Domain–domain interactions are crucial for the inference
of their underlying protein interactions, considering their evolutionary conservation [5]. Moreover, the protein interactions
between a host and a pathogen actually regulate the infection
mechanism and can designate the pathogen itself. Furthermore,
information gathered from protein interactions allow the determination of the function of a protein based on its position and
partners in a network system of protein interactions [6]. The
assessment of this information greatly contributes to biological
research and to the discovery of new diagnostic biomarkers and
more effective drug targets [7], [8].
A system of interacting elements can be abstracted with the
mathematical structure of a graph. In most studies of biological networks, system elements like proteins and genes are depicted by graph nodes and the physical interactions between
those elements by edges. Protein interaction networks (PINs)
are commonly represented by undirected graphs and can be
characterized by several properties [9]. The increasing knowledge on PINs in humans and pathogens provides the ability to
create network-based models for various diseases. Recent studies have analyzed the PINs of HBV and HCV, in order to give
an insight of their infection mechanisms and also to investigate
their association with HCC [3], [10]. Topological measures like

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

182

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Schematic representation of the employed methodology.

the degree, betweenness or the clustering coefficient were used
to assess the interactions between viral and cellular proteins
and to identify essential nodes, indicated as hubs [11]. In addition, degree distribution and shortest path lengths were used
to classify the networks into scale-free models. Furthermore,
functional analysis using gene ontology (GO) annotations and
KEGG pathway enrichments was performed to reveal proteins
that participate in certain biological processes and map genes
into specific pathways known to be related with the progress of
the viruses’ infection [12], [13].
Acute HBV and HCV infections are usually asymptomatic
and can be clinically diagnosed in an advanced stage where
liver dysfunction eventually appears. Despite the recent progress
in therapy, novel soluble biomarkers for monitoring both
HBV and HCV, which can be detected and measured with a
simple blood test, are still needed. For that purpose, in this study,
we designed the PINs for HBV and HCV using protein interactions gathered from several related biomedical databases (DBs).
Next, we evaluated their topological, modular, and functional
properties and particularly the role of hub proteins (i.e., highly
connected proteins). The derived data were assessed in order to
determine key properties among them and discover prominent
protein nodes that can serve as candidate biomarkers. Moreover,
we estimated the intersection of the two networks and analyzed
the corresponding common nodes according to their importance.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The proposed methodology consists of two main steps. In
the first step, all the required data are gathered and processed in
order to produce the interaction networks. In the second step, the
networks are analyzed and the candidate biomarkers are derived.
The schematic representation of the adopted methodology is
illustrated in Fig. 1. In the following, each step will be described
in more detail.
A. Protein Interaction Data
In order to construct the employed PINs for HBV and HCV
analysis, we used data from various relevant DBs, namely

BOND, IntAct, VirusMINT, VirHostNet, HCVpro, BioGRID,
database of interacting proteins (DIP), and HHBV. The data
from each DB exhibit certain characteristics that provide complementary information to the design of our PINs. In particular,
BOND is the biomolecular object network databank which contains a variety of DBs, including GenBank and biomolecular
interaction network database (BIND). The BIND is a collection
of records documenting over 175 000 molecular interactions
for nearly 3000 protein complexes and several pathways, drawn
from publications and high-throughput experiments [14].
IntAct is an open data molecular database with interactions
either from the literature or from direct data depositions. It
contains 275 000 verified interactions attained from more than
5000 publications [15].
In VirusMINT DB, all interactions between viral and human
proteins are collected from the literature [16]. The DB contains
over 5000 interactions involving more than 490 viral proteins
from more than 110 different viral strains.
VirHostNet is dedicated to the development and analysis of
PINs between viruses and human. It contains data from taxonomy, interactome, networks and text-mining. The human interactome, in particular, is currently composed of 72 357 interactions. The DB provides also data for 5175 more interactions
between 1474 cellular proteins and 1162 viral proteins from 220
viral strains [17].
The HCV protein interaction DB (HCVpro) is a specially tailored knowledge-base for HCV protein interactions. It contains
621 manually verified literature and DB curated interactions between HCV and host human cellular proteins. HCVpro includes
canonical pathways, gene ontologies, and microarray expression data that can facilitate the discovery of drugs, drug targets,
and diagnostic biomarkers [18].
BioGRID is a public DB that archives and disseminates genetic and protein interaction data from model organisms and humans. It holds over 630 000 interactions curated from both highthroughput datasets and individual focused studies, as derived
from over 37 000 publications in the primary literature [19].
The DIP stores data on experimentally determined protein–
protein interactions. It combines information from a variety of
sources to create a single consistent set of records. The DB provides data for 75 420 interactions between 25 628 proteins [20].
Finally, we used data derived from the work of Wu et al.
which refer to the construction of a PIN between human and
HBV [12]. Their network composed of 153 verified interactions
between 152 HBV and human proteins collected from PubMed
using text mining techniques.
B. Network Analysis
We searched the above DBs with the eight HBV and the
11 HCV proteins, mentioned previously, separately for each
type of virus, to find interactions between them and the human proteins. The derived protein interactions were imported
to Cytoscape. Cytoscape is an open-source platform for complex network analysis and visualization. It can be used to design
molecular interaction networks or biological pathways and integrate them with annotations or other available data [21].

SIMOS et al.: ANALYSIS OF PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS FOR THE DETECTION OF CANDIDATE HEPATITIS B AND C BIOMARKERS

For each database, we created separate network visualizations and calculated their general topological parameters. Subsequently, the networks were merged for each type of hepatitis into two separate overall PINs (HBV and HCV). To avoid
any duplicate entries between the DBs due to different synonyms, we used the Entrez symbols of the human genes that
encode the interacting cellular proteins as well as their assigned
UniProt IDs.
For the topological analysis of both networks, we calculated
several parameters such as the number of nodes and edges, the
clustering coefficient, the connected components, the network
diameter and centralization, the characteristic path length, the
average number of neighbors, the node degree distribution, and
the neighborhood connectivity distribution [22]. The majority of
these parameters refers to the general architecture of a network
and provides overall statistics about its size, density, and connectivity. The more complex parameters estimate certain distributions in the network that point out the distinct characteristics
of its topology.
In specific, degree is a topological index that corresponds to
the number of nodes directly connected to a given node. Based
on the degree calculation, we can define the degree distribution
P(k), which estimates the probability of a node to have exactly
k links. A network following a power law degree distribution,
i.e., P (k) = αk −γ (where α is a scaling factor and γ a positive
constant), indicates that there are many low-degree and few
high-degree nodes in this network. Nodes with high degree
(highly connected) are called hubs and hold together several
nodes of lower degree. Likewise, the neighborhood connectivity
distribution gives the average of the neighborhood connectivity
of all nodes with k neighbors (k = 0, 1, . . .). If the distribution
decreases, then most edges in the network connect low-degree
nodes with high-degree nodes, which is an indicator that the
network consists of subnetworks.
C. Biomarkers Discovery
In order to identify common intrinsic nodes in our PINs,
we estimated their intersection and derived the human proteins
found to interact with both HBV and HCV. For these proteins,
we subsequently retrieved, from the DBs described earlier, the
interaction data among them using both their gene and protein
identifiers. Based on that, we designed the corresponding interaction network by internally mapping their interconnections
[23]. To determine the best candidate biomarkers, we further
analyzed the intersection network by combining topological,
modular, and functional tools that produced a set of features for
each protein node.
1) Topological Analysis: For the topological analysis, we
calculated the following parameters in order to determine the
importance of each node in the intersection network: degree,
betweenness, closeness, clustering coefficient, eccentricity, average shortest path length, neighborhood connectivity, radiality, and the topological coefficient [24]. In particular, the
betweenness centrality Cb (n) of a node n is given by
Cb (n) =

 σst (n)
σst

s= n = t

(1)

183

where s and t are two network nodes, different from n, σst is the
number of shortest paths from s to t, and σst (n) is the number of
shortest paths from s to t that n lies on. This measure reveals the
nodes that control the interactions of other nodes in the network.
The closeness centrality Cc (n) measures how fast information spreads from a given node n to other reachable nodes within
the network and is reversely proportional to the average length
of the shortest path between node n and the rest of the nodes.
The clustering coefficient Cn of a node n is given by the
following equation:
Cn =

2en
kn (kn − 1)

(2)

where kn is the number of neighbors of n and en is the number
of connected pairs between all neighbors of n.
The eccentricity Cecc of a node n represents the easiness of
a protein to be functionally reached by all other proteins in
the network. Cecc (n) is reversely proportional to the longest
shortest path between n and the most distant node from it.
The average shortest path length of node n is the average
length of a shortest path between n and any other node.
The neighborhood connectivity of a node n is defined as the
average connectivity of all neighbors of n.
The radiality Crad of a node n defines whether n is closer
to other nodes (high value) or peripheral (low value) and is
calculated as follows:

(ΔG + 1 − L(n, w))
(3)
Crad = w ∈N
m−1
where ΔG is the diameter, L is the shortest path between n and
any other node, and m is the number of nodes.
Finally, the topological coefficient Tn of a node n with kn
neighbors is the number of neighbors shared between a pair of
nodes, n and m, plus one if there is a direct link between them,
divided by the number of neighbors of node n:
avg(J(n,m))
.
(4)
kn
2) Modularity Analysis: In addition to the topological features described earlier, we investigated also the modular aspects
of the intersection PIN. Modularity analysis detects protein complexes and functional modules within the interaction networks
[25]. A protein complex is a group of proteins that interact with
each other and form a multimolecular subsystem. The difference
with a functional module is that in the latter the protein cluster
is involved in a particular cellular process.
In modularity analysis, the basic elements are cliques and
cores. A clique defines a subnetwork within the network that is
complete, i.e., it contains nodes that are fully connected to each
other. A maximum clique is the largest clique in the network
while a maximal clique is a clique not contained to any other
clique. A k-core is a subnetwork where all nodes are connected
to at least k other nodes within the core. Core estimation can be
used to detect subnetworks of certain density in large networks.
Based on that we calculated for each node the bottleneck (BN),
the edge percolated component (EPC), the maximum neighborhood component (MNC), the density of MNC (DMNC), the
stress, and maximal clique centralities (MCCs) [26].
Tn =

184

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
TOPOLOGICAL PARAMETERS OF THE PINS FOR EACH DATABASE
Parameters

Number of nodes
Number of edges
Clustering
coefficient
Connected
components
Network diameter
Network
centralization
Characteristic path
length
Average number of
neighbors
Node degree
distribution (γ )
Neighborhood
connectivity
distribution (γ )

BOND

IntAct

VirusMint

VirHostNet

HCVpro

BioGRID

DIP

HH B V

HBV

HCV

HBV

HCV

HBV

HCV

HBV

HCV

HCV

HCV

HBV

HBV

10
7
0

139
160
0.08

16
14
0

170
213
0.10

9
8
0

38
39
0.08

107
103
0

415
478
0.05

467
546
0.07

106
104
0

9
7
0

152
153
0

3

1

2

1

1

2

5

1

2

2

2

3

2
0.22

5
0.29

2
0.85

4
0.27

2
1.00

4
0.54

4
0.43

6
0.48

5
0.47

2
0.98

2
0.55

5
0.80

1.41

3.17

1.84

2.95

1.77

2.35

2.61

2.99

2.85

1.98

1.61

2.43

1.40

2.30

1.75

2.51

1.77

2.05

1.93

2.30

2.34

1.96

1.56

2.01

1.77

0.89

1.05

1.04

1.00

1.04

0.93

0.86

0.86

1.00

1.15

0.73

0.86

0.77

0.95

0.67

1.00

0.75

0.90

0.78

0.80

1.00

0.84

1.05

More specifically, BNs are nodes with high betweenness and
low degree. They are significantly less coexpressed with their
direct neighbors and usually serve as the connectors among
different functional modules.
The EPC measures the correlation between any two nodes
in a network and can be used to describe the direct or indirect
impact of a protein to others within the PIN. For a graph G
EPC assigns to an edge eij , with links nodes i and j, a random
number pij distributed evenly from 0 to 1. If pij is greater than
p (a given percolation probability), then the edge is removed
from the original graph. Assuming that graph G is connected,
then from the value of p depends whether the final graph G’ will
remain a single connected component or not [27].
The maximum neighborhood component MNC(n) of a node
n is defined as the size of the maximum connected component
of a subnetwork N(n) that is induced from the nodes adjacent
to n and without containing n. Essential proteins are usually
characterized by a larger maximum connected component than
nonessential ones.
The density of maximum neighborhood component DMNC( n )
for a node n is the ratio of the edge number of MNC(n) divided
by nε (1 ≤ ε ≤ 2). This measure can reveal essential proteins
with a denser maximum connected component.
The stress centrality Cs (n) of a node n is the number of shortest paths between all node pairs passing through n. Nodes with
a high stress value are of high relevance and connect regulatory
molecules.
Finally, the MCC is similar to the betweenness centrality
and identifies also essential nodes in the network but through
modular analysis and the utilization of the clique components
[28].
3) Functional Analysis: Functional analysis aims at the enrichment of the derived interaction network with semantic terms
from the GO database. Ontologies are a set of terms that describe
entities with encoded semantic relationships between other en-

tities assembled and organized for a certain field of knowledge.
GO constitutes of three controlled structured ontologies that describe gene products in terms related to biological processes,
cellular components, and molecular functions [29].
GO analysis was performed using the GO terms of the biological process domain [30]. In that way, the interactions between
the network nodes actually corresponded to semantic similarities between them. Hence, the same parameters described in
the topological analysis section were able to be estimated for
functional analysis, based on the GO data.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. PINs Analysis
The information of protein–protein interactions is scattered
among several databases. Some of them are specialized in interactions for specific organisms (e.g., human, viruses, etc.) while
others contain interactions for multiple organisms. Table I indicates the topological differences among the employed DBs
that contributed to the design of the overall networks. Although
some of the DBs are considerably larger than the rest (like IntAct or BioGRID), their size is not reflected also on the size of
their respective networks as can be seen from the related parameters of the number of nodes and edges. On the other hand,
DBs like VirHostNet and HCVpro compensate their lack of
records with high specialization on the problem under study. It
should be noted that other DBs were also assessed (e.g., HPRD,
Reactome, etc.) but Table I contains data only from those that
returned any information after they were queried with the HBV
and HCV proteins.
The PINs designed with the data from the eight DBs were
merged into two overall networks, one for the case of HBV and
one for HCV, in order to create more comprehensive association networks between the human proteins and those of the two
types of the virus. The overall HBV network consists of 241

SIMOS et al.: ANALYSIS OF PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS FOR THE DETECTION OF CANDIDATE HEPATITIS B AND C BIOMARKERS

Fig. 2.

185

Distribution of interactions between the human proteins and (a) eight proteins of HBV and (b) 11 of HCV.

TABLE II
TOPOLOGICAL PARAMETERS OF THE PINS FOR THE TWO TYPES OF HEPATITIS
Parameters

HBV

Random
HBV

HCV

Random
HCV

Number of nodes
Number of edges
Clustering coefficient
Connected components
Network diameter
Network centralization
Characteristic path length
Average number of
neighbors
Node degree distribution
(γ )
Neighborhood
connectivity distribution
(γ )

236
241
0
2
7
0.665
2.908
2.042

236
241
0.011
41
19
0.026
6.921
2.042

763
961
0.142
1
6
0.392
2.832
2.518

763
961
0.003
74
16
0.009
6.802
2.516

0.791

–

0.889

–

1.067

0.064

0.726

0.011

interactions and 236 proteins, while the HCV network consists
of 961 interactions observed between 763 human and virus proteins. Fig. 2 depicts the number of interactions between HBV or
HCV and the human proteins. The X protein from HBV and the
NS3 from HCV are the two proteins with the most interacting
partners (157 and 301, respectively) indicating their potential of
multifunctionality during the infection.
For each PIN, we also created a random network of the same
size (the same number of nodes and edges) with the Erdos–Renyi
model [31] and compared their topological features. Table II depicts the main topological parameters for the HBV and HCV
networks that describe their prominent architectural properties.
The values of the topological parameters for HBV and HCV
are relatively close, indicating that both PINs have similar architecture. At the same time, both random networks contain
mostly nodes with a similar degree that is distributed evenly
around their average, indicating that their degree distributions
are binomial. On the other hand, the degree distributions of the
HBV and HCV PINs decrease slowly in consistence with the
power law; therefore, they are characterized as scale free. This
is also depicted from the value of γ, which ranges from 0.791
to 0.889 (see Fig. 3). Scale-free networks, in general, exhibit
high tolerance against random removal of peripheral nodes but
are vulnerable in targeted exclusions of hubs. Also, both PINs

Fig. 3. Node degree distribution of HBV and HCV PINs. The approximations
to the corresponding power law equations are also given.

have few high-degree hub proteins, while most nodes have few
connections. Furthermore, the characteristic path length values
(2.908 for HBV and 2.832 for HCV) show that both networks
have small world properties. This implies that most proteins are
connected very closely.
Subsequently, we calculated the topological coefficients for
the two PINs in order to study further their characteristics (see
Fig. 4). The topological coefficients, in specific, decrease as the
degree raises per protein indicating that the networks have a
hierarchical modularity organization and hubs share less common neighbors than proteins with fewer interactions. Hierarchical modularity networks have two levels of organization, local
clustering, which represents protein complexes or functional
modules, and global connectivity, which is related with hubs
and their connections with higher order communication points
between protein complexes.
B. Candidate Biomarkers
Multiple studies have focused on the investigation of the
mechanisms of HBV and HCV infections and their effects on
viral hepatocarcinogenesis [3], [10]. Most of these mainly used
global topological parameters (e.g., degree distribution, clustering, and topological coefficients or shortest paths) in order to

186

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4. Topological coefficients distribution of (a) HBV and (b) HCV PINs.
The constant decrease of the topological coefficient as the degree increases per
protein indicates that the networks have a hierarchical modularity.

TABLE III
HBV AND HCV COMMON PROTEINS
ACTN1
AKT1
APOH
ATF6
BAX
CALR
CD81
CDK2
CDKN1A
CHUK
COPS3
COX2

COX3
CSNK2A1
CTGF
CTNNB1
DDB1
DNAJA3
EFEMP1
EIF1
FADD
FAS
FGB
GAPDH

GSK3B
HLA-A
HSPA5
HSPA8
HSPD1
JUN
KPNB1
MAVS
MIF
MPDU1
MT2A
MYD88

PSMB8
RXRA
SERPINC1
SMYD3
SRC
STAT1
STAT3
TMSB4X
TNF
TNFRSF10B
TNFRSF1A
TP53

classify hub proteins [12] and functional analysis to investigate
their enrichment in cancer pathways [13]. Nevertheless, comparisons at a network level between HBV-human and HCV-human
PINs have scarcely been done before [32]. In this study, we
analyzed and compared HBV and HCV PINs in order to identify prominent protein nodes that could be used as candidate
biomarkers.
As described earlier, the obtained results for both PINs (i.e.,
HBV and HCV) enclose certain similarities between them, indicating probable common intrinsic nodes. Therefore, we considered their intersection for further analysis. The HBV–HCV
intersection network consists of 105 interactions observed between 48 human proteins (shown in Table III) with a degree
exponent value (γ) of 0.506. Fig. 5 depicts the visualization of
the intersection network based on the number of interactions
(degree) of each protein. The red squares indicate that these
proteins have up to four interactions and for more than five the
color of octagons gradually varies from yellow to green as the
number of interactions increases. This is in accordance with the
DIP database which defines as nonhub proteins those with up to
four interactions, while the rest are named as hubs or intermediately connected [20], [33]. Based on that, we denote proteins
with a degree of 5 or more as hubs and are considered to have a
significant role in the network. This degree centrality criterion
has been used to characterize the importance of a node in several
other studies as well [34]. It should be noted that the number of
interacting partners of hub proteins in the intersection network
points out their potential multiple functionality during HBV and
HCV infection.
As a first approach, we tried to normalize the values for the
employed topological, modular, and functional features of the

intersection network and sum up their values in order to classify
the protein nodes. But this, evidently, led to biased results due
to a small number of features with higher values. Thus, we
chose a different approach following the notion of gene ranking
used in microarray data analysis [35], [36]. According to that,
we first estimated for each feature the deviation from its mean
value and normalized the derived values (between −1 and 1).
Next, we calculated their average in order to obtain a single
value for each protein and sorted the overall values to receive
the protein ranks. In this way, more prominent conclusions can
be drawn since each feature absolute value has smaller effect to
the statistical ranking.
From the previous list, we subsequently considered only those
with a positive overall value. When all (27) features were taken
into account, 13 proteins scored a positive value (see Table IV).
However, when we utilized a combination of the three most
commonly used features in interaction networks analysis (i.e.,
betweenness centrality from topological analysis, MCC from
modularity, and degree and betweenness centrality from functional), only three proteins remained, namely the cellular tumor
antigen p53 (TP53), the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1
(CDKN1A), and the transcription factor AP-1 (JUN). Betweenness centrality is an important criterion which can classify hubs
by their position in the network and also can identify essential
nonhub proteins which have low degree but high betweenness.
These proteins are called BNs and have many paths passing
through them highlighting their ability to interconnect functional modules. MCC on the other hand utilizes the tendency of
nodes to create cliques in order to perform a specific functional
process. MCC characterizes nodes by examining the impact of
their participation in structurally adjacent subgraphs and has
been used to rank essential proteins [31]. As for the nodes degree, its significance was described earlier in this section.
TP53 is a well-known tumor suppressor in many tumor types
inducing growth arrest or apoptosis depending on the physiological circumstances and cell type. For that reason, it is one of
the most widely studied proteins and probably this (indirectly)
affects its positive ranking value in our analysis. Nonetheless,
mutations in TP53 have been detected in both HBV- and HCVinduced HCC [37], [38]. CDKN1A is considered to be an important intermediate by which p53/TP53 mediates its role as
an inhibitor of cellular proliferation in response to DNA damage. It binds to and inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase activity,
preventing phosphorylation of critical cyclin-dependent kinase
substrates blocking that way the cell cycle progression. Recent studies have also related its function with both HBV and
HCV while it has been corroborated to serve as a marker for
progression of chronic hepatitis C to HCC [39], [40]. Finally,
JUN is a transcription factor that recognizes and binds to the
enhancer heptamer motif 5 -TGA[CG]TCA-3 . When phosphorylated by HIPK3, it promotes the activity of NR5A1 and leads
to an increased steroidogenic gene expression upon the cAMP
signaling pathway stimulation. According to the literature, it
is associated with the X protein of HBV which enhances JUN
activation through the interaction with Jab1 [41].
Other studies have also revealed that human proteins targeted
by HBV participate in many pathways while those targeted by

SIMOS et al.: ANALYSIS OF PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS FOR THE DETECTION OF CANDIDATE HEPATITIS B AND C BIOMARKERS

Fig. 5.

187

HBV–HCV intersection network.

TABLE IV
PROTEIN RANKING FOR THE INTERSECTION PIN
27 features

Ranking value

Four features

Ranking value

CDKN1A
HSPA8
AKT1
CDK2
ACTN1
CHUK
HSPD1
JUN
CSNK2A1
COPS3
DDB1
MAVS
TP53

0.286
0.152
0.131
0.130
0.130
0.108
0.080
0.056
0.056
0.051
0.029
0.026
0.010

TP53
CDKN1A
JUN

0.560
0.537
0.188

HCV are mostly involved in cancer pathways and focal adhesion [42]. Additionally, they have identified CDKN1A, TP53,
JUN, and AKT1 as common targets of HBV–HCV viral proteins
and demonstrated their relation in cancer development [32]. It
should be noted that some of the markers previously proposed
in the literature for the prognosis and treatment of hepatitis
were also included in the derived sorted list but their ranking
values were worse (negative) than the ones proposed here. For
example, the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily member 6 (FAS) scored −0.089 and −0.631 using the 27
and the 4 features, respectively, while the TNF scored −0.306
and −0.879. Likewise STAT3, BAX, and SRC have also been
verified in these studies to be targeted from both viruses.
IV. CONCLUSION
HBV and HCV acute infection can hardly be diagnosed in
time due to the initial lack of symptoms. Thus, the identification

of novel candidate biomarkers that can detect the infection in
early stages is essential. For that purpose, we combined data
from various biomedical interaction DBs in order to design
several PINs for HBV and HCV and study the interactions between the viral and the human proteins. Each DB contributed
differently to the overall networks’ structure according to their
size and specialization. Besides the topological and modularity
analysis of the PINs, we considered also the use of semantic
similarities as a means of incorporating functional information
about the nodes to the networks and increase that way the reliability of their interactions.
The obtained results showed that both PINs have similar overall architecture, suggesting the existence of probable common
intrinsic nodes [43], [44]. The values of almost all topological
features were very close except those referring to the networks’
connectivity (nodes and edges) which is mostly due to the more
extensive study of HCV. The intersection of the two PINs revealed 48 common protein nodes, some of which are already
used as biomarkers, indicating strongly the robustness of the
proposed approach. By applying a statistical ranking procedure,
we identified three of them as of higher importance.
We are presently working to validate their classification efficacy under clinical conditions. Specifically, we have collected
peripheral blood samples from patients infected with chronic
HBV or HCV and evaluate the derived soluble biomarkers using
“sandwich” ELISA tests. The samples were divided in two main
categories: those that refer to patients with fibrosis/cirrhosis and
HCC and those without HCC. A control group was also included to our study population in order to estimate the normal
reference levels for the employed biomarkers. The experimental
procedure will be carried out in two phases. In the first phase,
all soluble candidate biomarkers will be assessed using a limited but representative set of samples while in the second phase
a more extensive evaluation will be carried out for selected

188

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

candidates, based on the results obtained from the first phase.
All measurements will be then analyzed in order to determine
the optimal diagnostic criteria for each biomarker, which will
be subsequently compared against those of current diagnostic
protocols.
REFERENCES
[1] Global Policy Report on the Prevention and Control of Viral Hepatitis in
Who Member States, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland,
2013.
[2] P. Dény and F. Zoulim, “Hepatitis B virus: From diagnosis to treatment,”
Patholog. Biol., vol. 58, pp. 245–253, 2010.
[3] B. de Chassey, V. Navratil, L. Tafforeau, M. S. Hiet, A. Aublin-Gex,
S. Agaugue, G. Meiffren, F. Pradezynski, B. F. Faria, T. Chantier, M.
Le Breton, J. Pellet, N. Davoust, P. E. Mangeot, A. Chaboud, F. Penin,
Y. Jacob, P. O. Vidalain, M. Vidal, P. Andre, C. Rabourdin-Combe, and
V. Lotteau, “Hepatitis C virus infection protein network,” Mol. Syst. Biol.,
vol. 4, 2008, article 230. [Online]
[4] L. Skrabanek, H. K. Saini, G. D. Bader, and A. J. Enright, “Computational prediction of protein-protein interactions,” Mol. Biotechnol., vol. 38,
pp. 1–17, 2008.
[5] L. Zheng, C. Li, J. Ping, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, and P. Hao, “The domain landscape
of virus-host interactomes,” BioMed Res. Int., vol. 2014, article 867235,
pp. 1–13, 2014. [Online]
[6] Y. R. Cho and A. Zhang, “Predicting protein function by frequent functional association pattern mining in protein interaction networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 30–36, Jan. 2010.
[7] B. A. Shoemaker and A. R. Panchenko, “Deciphering protein-protein
interactions. Part II. Computational methods to predict protein and domain
interaction partners,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 3, pp. 595–601, 2007.
[8] V. Neduva, R. Linding, I. Su-Angrand, A. Stark, F. de Masi, T. J. Gibson,
J. Lewis, L. Serrano, and R. B. Russell, “Systematic discovery of new
recognition peptides mediating protein interaction networks,” PLoS Biol.,
vol. 3, pp. 1–10, 2005.
[9] T. Klingstrom and D. Plewczynski, “Protein-protein interaction and pathway databases, a graphical review,” Briefings Bioinformat., vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 702–713, 2010.
[10] S. Zheng, W. P. Tansey, S. W. Hiebert, and Z. Zhao, “Integrative network
analysis identifies key genes and pathways in the progression of hepatitis C
virus induced hepatocellular carcinoma,” BMC Med. Genomics, vol. 4,
article 62, 2011. [Online]
[11] J. E. McDermott, D. L. Diamond, C. Corley, A. L. Rasmussen, M. G.
Katze, and K. M. Waters, “Topological analysis of protein co-abundance
networks identifies novel host targets important for HCV infection and
pathogenesis,” BMC Syst. Biol., vol. 6, article 28, 2012. [Online]
[12] Z. J. Wu, Y. Zhu, D. R. Huang, and Z. Q. Wang, “Constructing the HBVhuman protein interaction network to understand the relationship between
HBV and hepatocellular carcinoma,” J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 29,
no. 1, article 146, 2010. [Online]
[13] F. V. Chisari, “Unscrambling hepatitis C virus-host interactions,” Nature,
vol. 436, pp. 930–932, 2005.
[14] G. D. Bader, D. Betel, and C. W. Hogue, “BIND: The biomolecular
interaction network database,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 248–
250, 2003.
[15] S. Kerrien, B. Aranda, L. Breuza, A. Bridge, F. Broackes-Carter, C.
Chen, M. Duesbury, M. Dumousseau, M. Feuermann, U. Hinz, C. Jandrasits, R. C. Jimenez, J. Khadake, U. Mahadevan, P. Masson, I. Pedruzzi,
E. Pfeiffenberger, P. Porras, A. Raghunath, B. Roechert, S. Orchard, and
H. Hermjakob, “The IntAct molecular interaction database in 2012,”
Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 40, pp. D841–D846, 2012.
[16] A. Chatr-aryamontri, A. Ceol, D. Peluso, A. Nardozza, S. Panni, F. Sacco,
M. Tinti, A. Smolyar, L. Castagnoli, M. Vidal, M. E. Cusick, and G. Cesareni, “VirusMINT: A viral protein interaction database,” Nucleic Acids
Res., vol. 37, pp. D669–D673, 2009.
[17] V. Navratil, B. de Chassey, L. Meyniel, S. Delmotte, C. Gautier, P. André,
V. Lotteau, and C. Rabourdin-Combe, “VirHostNet: A knowledge base for
the management and the analysis of proteome-wide virus-host interaction
networks,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 37, pp. D661–D668, 2009.
[18] S. K. Kwofie, U. Schaefer, V. S. Sundararajan, V. B. Bajic, and A. Christoffels, “HCVpro: Hepatitis C virus protein interaction database,” Infect.
Genet. Evol., vol. 11, pp. 1971–1977, 2011.
[19] A. Chatr-aryamontri, B. J. Breitkreutz, S. Heinicke, L. Boucher, A.
Winter, C. Stark, J. Nixon, L. Ramage, N. Kolas, L. O’Donnell,

[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

T. Reguly, A. Breitkreutz, A. Sellam, D. Chen, C. Chang, J. Rust, M. Livstone, R. Oughtred, K. Dolinski, and M. Tyers, “The BioGRID Interaction
Database: 2013 update,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 41, pp. D816–D823,
2013.
L. Salwinski, C. S. Miller, A. J. Smith, F. K. Pettit, J. U. Bowie, and D.
Eisenberg, “The database of interacting proteins: 2004 update,” Nucleic
Acids Res., vol. 32, pp. D449–D451, 2004.
P. Shannon, A. Markiel, O. Ozier, N. S. Baliga, J. T. Wang, D. Ramage,
N. Amin, B. Schwikowski, and T. Ideker, “Cytoscape: A software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks,”
Genome Res., vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 2498–2504, 2003.
F. Ramı́rez, A. Schlicker, Y. Assenov, T. Lengauer, and M. Albrecht,
“Computational analysis of human protein interaction networks,” Proteomics, vol. 7, no. 15, pp. 2541–2552, 2007.
A. Martin, M. E. Ochagavia, L. C. Rabasa, J. Miranda, J. Fernandez-deCossio, and R. Bringas, “Bisogenet: A new tool for gene network building, visualization and analysis,” BMC Bioinformat., vol. 10, article 91,
2010. [Online]
Y. Assenov, F. Ramı́rez, S. E. Schelhorn, T. Lengauer, and M. Albrecht,
“Computing topological parameters of biological networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 24, pp. 282–284, 2008.
A. Zhang, Protein Interaction Networks: Computational Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009, ch. 5.
C. Y. Lin, C. H. Chin, H. H. Wu, S. H. Chen, C. W. Ho, and M. T.
Ko, “Hubba: hub objects analyzer—A framework of interactome hubs
identification for network biology,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 36, pp. W438–
W443, 2008.
C.-S. Chin and M. P. Samanta, “Global snapshot of a protein interaction network—A percolation based approach,” Bioinformatics, vol. 19,
pp. 2413–2419, 2003.
C. H. Chin, Prediction of Essential Proteins and Functional Modules from
Protein-Protein Interaction Networks. Chung-Li, Taiwan: Dept. Comput.
Sci. Inf. Eng., Nat. Central Univ., 2010, ch. 3.
The Gene Ontology Consortium, “Gene ontology: Tool for the unification
of biology,” Nature Genet., vol. 25, pp. 25–29, 2000.
H. Wang, H. Zheng, and F. Azuaje, “Ontology- and graph-based similarity
assessment in biological networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 26, pp. 2643–
2644, 2010.
B. H. Junker and F. Schreiber, Analysis of Biological Networks. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2008, ch. 1.
W. Yuan, T. Huang, J. Yu, L. Zeng, B. Lian, Q. He, Y. Li, X. Zhang, F. Zhou,
and L. Xie, “Comparative analysis of viral protein interaction networks in
hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infected HCC,” Biochim. Biophys.
Acta—Proteins Proteomics, vol. 1844, no. 1, pp. 271–279, 2014.
D. Ekman, S. Light, A. K. Bjorklund, and A. Elofsson, “What properties
characterize the hub proteins of the protein-protein interaction network
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae?” Genome Biol., vol. 7, article R45, 2006.
[Online]
S. Maslov and K. Sneppen, “Specificity and stability in topology of protein
networks,” Science, vol. 296, no. 5569, pp. 910–913, 2002.
V. G. Tusher, R. Tibshirani, and G. Chu, “Significance analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing radiation response,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, vol. 98, no. 9, pp. 5116–5121, 2001.
K. Kadota and K. Shimizu, “Evaluating methods for ranking differentially expressed genes applied to microArray quality control data,” BMC
Bioinformat., vol. 12, article 227, 2011. [Online]
M. Anzola and J. J. Burgos, “Hepatocellular carcinoma: Molecular interactions between hepatitis C virus and p53 in hepatocarcinogenesis,”
Expert Rev. Mol. Med., vol. 5, no. 28, pp. 1–16, 2003.
M. L. Tornesello, L. Buonaguro, F. Tatangelo, G. Botti, F. Izzo, and F.
M. Buonaguro, “Mutations in TP53, CTNNB1 and PIK3CA genes in
hepatocellular carcinoma associated with hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus
infections,” Genomics, vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 74–83, 2013.
M. Yano, S. Ohkoshi, Y. H. Aoki, H. Takahashi, S. Kurita, K. Yamazaki,
K. Suzuki, S. Yamagiwa, A. Sanpei, S. Fujimaki, T. Wakai, S. E. Kudo,
Y. Matsuda, and Y. Aoyagi, “Hepatitis B virus X induces cell proliferation in the hepatocarcinogenesis via up regulation of cytoplasmic p21
expression,” Liver Int., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1218–1229, 2013.
A. Kasprzak, A. Adamek, W. Przybyszewska, K. Olejniczak, W. Biczysko,
I. Mozer-Lisewska, and M. Zabel, “p21/Wafl/Cipl cellular expression in
chronic long-lasting hepatitis C: Correlation with HCV proteins (C, NS3,
NS5A), other cell-cycle related proteins and selected clinical data,” Histochem. Cytobiol., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 385–394, 2009.
Y. Tanaka, F. Kanai, T. Ichimura, K. Tateishi, Y. Asaoka, B. Guleng, A.
Jazag, M. Ohta, J. Imamura, T. Ikenoue, H. Ijichi, T. Kawabe, T. Isobe,

SIMOS et al.: ANALYSIS OF PROTEIN INTERACTION NETWORKS FOR THE DETECTION OF CANDIDATE HEPATITIS B AND C BIOMARKERS

189

and M. Omata, “The hepatitis B virus X protein enhances AP-1 activation
through interaction with Jab1,” Oncogene, vol. 25, pp. 633–642, 2006.
[42] A. Mukhopadhyay and U. Maulik, “Network-based study reveals potential
infection pathways of hepatitis-C leading to various diseases,” PLoS One,
vol. 9, no. 4, article e94029, 2014. [Online]
[43] T. Simos, G. Thyphronitis, and C. Papaloukas, “Topological comparison
of protein interaction networks between HBV and HCV,” in Proc. 5th
Panhellenic Conf. Biomed. Technol., 2013, Paper 25 (poster presentation).
[44] T. Simos, C. Papaloukas, G. Thyphronitis, and U. Georgopoulou, “Novel
biomarkers discovery for HBV and HCV monitoring through protein interaction networks analysis,” in Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf. Bioinformat.
Bioeng., 2013, pp. 1–4, Paper 109.

George Thyphronitis received the Diploma degree
in biology from the University of Athens, Athens,
Greece, and the Ph.D. degree in animal physiology
from the P&M Curie University, Paris, France, in
1979 and 1983, respectively.
He is an Associate Professor of immunology in
the Department of Biological Applications and Technology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. His
research interests include autoimmunity and inflammation.

Thomas Simos received the B.E. degree in floriculture and landscape designing from the Technological Educational Institute of Epirus, Arta, Greece, in
2005, and the M.Tech. degree in biological cultivation from the Department of Chemistry, University of
Ioannina, Ipiros, Greece, in 2009 where in the same
year, he started working toward the Ph.D. degree in
bioinformatics in the Department of Biological Applications and Technology.
His current research interests include the design
and analysis of protein interaction networks and the
detection of protein motifs.

John Koskinas graduated from the Medical School
of Athens, Athens, Greece, with “Honors” in
1981 and he received the specialization in internal
medicine in 1988 and also received the Ph.D. degree.
He is a Professor of medicine and hepatology in
the Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School
of Athens at Hippokration General Hospital, Athens.
For four years he was with the Liver Unit at King’s
College Hospital at the Medical School in London as
a Research Fellow and Clinical Lecturer. His main
interest is viral hepatitis and HCC.

Urania Georgopoulou received the D.E.A. degree
from the University “Pierre et Marie Curie”, Paris VI,
France, in 1983, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Paris XI, Orsay, France, in 1986.
She is a Biologist. She is currently a Researcher
in the Laboratory of Molecular Virology at the Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, Greece. Her research
interest was focused on multiple aspects of virology
and on characterizing the host-cell factors and pathways that are manipulated and otherwise exploited
by HCV virus.

Costas Papaloukas received the Diploma degree in
computer science and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical
technology from the University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, in 1997 and 2001, respectively.
He is an Associate Professor of bioinformatics in
the Department of Biological Applications and Technology, University of Ioannina. His research interests
include bioinformatics and biomedical engineering.

