218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Extrinsic Finger and Thumb Muscles Command
a Virtual Hand to Allow Individual Finger
and Grasp Control
J. Alex Birdwell∗ , Member, IEEE, Levi J. Hargrove, Member, IEEE, Richard F. ff. Weir, Member, IEEE,
and Todd A. Kuiken, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Fine-wire intramuscular electrodes were used to obtain electromyogram (EMG) signals from six extrinsic hand muscles associated with the thumb, index, and middle fingers. Subjects’
EMG activity was used to control a virtual three-degree-of-freedom
(DOF) hand as they conformed the hand to a sequence of hand
postures testing two controllers: direct EMG control and pattern
recognition control. Subjects tested two conditions using each controller: starting the hand from a predefined neutral posture before
each new posture and starting the hand from the previous posture
in the sequence. Subjects demonstrated their abilities to simultaneously, yet individually, move all three DOFs during the direct
EMG control trials; however, results showed subjects did not often
utilize this feature. Performance metrics such as failure rate and
completion time showed no significant difference between the two
controllers.
Index Terms—Artificial hand, electromyogram (EMG), hand
control, prosthetics.

I. INTRODUCTION
RADITIONAL myoelectric prosthetic hands have a single
degree of freedom (DOF), which transradial amputee users
control with electromyogram (EMG) signals from their residual
forearm muscles [1], [2]. These hands are often composed of
rigid-curved digits connected to a motor that moves the fingers
and opposed thumb either toward or away from one another.

T

Manuscript received December 26, 2013; revised April 10, 2014 and June 24,
2014; accepted July 19, 2014. Date of publication July 31, 2014; date of current
version December 18, 2014. This work was supported by the Daniel F. and
Ada L. Rice Foundation and by the DARPA RE-NET Program, administered
through the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center under Contract N6600112-1-4029. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. A. Birdwell was with the Center for Bionic Medicine, The Rehabilitation
Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611 USA. He is now with the Mechanical
Engineering Department, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
(e-mail: j-birdwell@northwestern.edu).
L. J. Hargrove is with the Center for Bionic Medicine, The Rehabilitation
Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL60611 USA, and also with the Department
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL60611 USA (e-mail: l-hargrove@northwestern.edu).
R. F. ff. Weir is with the Biomechatronics Development Laboratory,
Bioengineering Department, University of Colorado Denver|Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045 USA, and also with the Veterans Affairs Eastern Colorado Healthcare System, Denver, CO80220 USA (e-mail:
Richard.Weir@ucdenver.edu).
T. A. Kuiken is with the Center for Bionic Medicine, The Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL60611 USA, and also with the Departments of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL60611 USA (e-mail: tkuiken@northwestern.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2344854

Direct myoelectric control generally uses the difference in the
magnitude of the two EMG signals to proportionally control
the velocity of a device’s DOF. Despite having only velocity
control, these hands have been used for decades and provide
functionality that is otherwise lost due to amputation.
Several research groups have recently developed robotic
hands that more closely mimic the form and function of human hands [3]–[6]. Commercial hands are now available that
use multiple motors to individually move fingers, allowing for
more complex motions and hand postures that could provide
more functionality. However, novel control methods need to be
developed in order to fully utilize these hands’ capabilities. Initial work is only just beginning that explores intuitive methods
for controlling multi-DOF hands using physiologically realistic
neural control signals [7].
Direct myoelectric control uses two individually controllable
EMG sites to command each DOF, but obtaining more than two
sites is very difficult because the extrinsic hand muscles in the
forearm are small, close together, and vary in depth from the
skin’s surface. This leads to difficulty in distinguishing individual muscle activation using surface EMG sensors. Many groups
have devised pattern recognition controllers [8]–[14] and principal component analysis [15], [16] to map between user’s intent
and prosthesis motion. While pattern recognition control has
shown promising results, it is currently limited to controlling a
single classified pattern (e.g., one hand posture) at a time.
Implantable wireless EMG sensors have been developed that
can provide measurements of muscle activity from individual
extrinsic hand muscles within the forearm [17]–[19]. This allows
additional information to be acquired from the user and could
potentially provide simultaneous control of multiple DOFs [20].
Additionally, Smith and Hargrove [21] have demonstrated
that intramuscular EMG measurements decreased classifier error, when compared to surface EMG signals, for parallel pattern
recognition classifiers but not for single-classifier conditions.
Kamavuako et al. [22] have also shown that the inclusion of intramuscular and surface EMG measurements can improve performance metrics when controlling a four-function, two-DOF
hand, compared to using surface EMG measurements alone.
They have also shown that intramuscular EMG signals could be
mapped to grasping force, which can further aid in prosthesis
control [23].
Single-digit motions in healthy individual has been demonstrated [24], [25], which is due in part to extrinsic finger muscles. Extensor digitorum communis (EDC), flexor digitorum

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BIRDWELL et al.: EXTRINSIC FINGER AND THUMB MUSCLES COMMAND A VIRTUAL HAND

profundus (FDP), and flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) are
extrinsic muscles that have individual finger and tendon compartments and have been shown to be physically and functionally
distinct [26]–[31]. Regardless, these individual digit motions are
the coordinated effort of multiple muscles and usually result in
both force being exerted by adjacent digits (force enslavement)
[32], [33] and activity emitted from adjacent muscle compartments (spillover recruitment) [30], [34]–[36]. In controlling an
artificial hand, the spillover recruitment, or co-activity, may
cause an issue; however, intramuscular electrodes used in these
finger muscle compartments would provide more localized activity measurements [19], [37] and have been demonstrated to
measure from these muscles free of EMG crosstalk [38].
In addition, abductor pollicis longus (APB), extensor pollicis brevis (EPB), extensor pollicis longus (EPL), and flexor
pollicis longus (FPL) are the four extrinsic thumb muscles and
their activity could provide additional information to command
a robotic thumb. The three multitendon extrinsic finger muscles and the four extrinsic thumb muscles have previously been
studied for their ability to activate individually from one another
[39], [40].
This work tests the feasibility of using the extrinsic thumb
muscles and finger muscle compartments to command individual digits on a virtual hand to mimic grasping hand postures.
Furthermore, subjects tested two controllers, direct myoelectric
control and a pattern recognition classifier, and the results from
each were compared.
II. METHODS
Seven able-bodied subjects gave informed written consent before participating in this study, which was approved in advance
by the Northwestern University Institutional Review Board.
These subjects had no history of neurological or physical ailments and were right-hand dominant.
Intramuscular nickel-alloy bipolar fine-wire electrodes
(φ0.002 Stablohm 800 A with HPN insulation, California
Fine Wire Co., Grover Beach, CA, USA) were inserted using
27-gauge hypodermic needles and standard intramuscular electrode insertion techniques [37]. Electrodes were placed into the
FPL and EPL muscles of the thumb and the first two compartments of the EDC (EDC1, EDC2) and FDP (FDP1, FDP2)
muscles, which are associated with the index and middle fingers, respectively. Each muscle and muscle compartment was
initially located by palpation and ultrasound. During electrode
insertion, EMG activity was observed on a monitor and played
through a loudspeaker to minimize signal detection from adjacent muscles and compartments. Once the desired muscle or
compartment was located with the electrode, the needle was
withdrawn and the wires shortened to the minimum length required for connection to the data acquisition system.
After insertion, each electrode’s location was verified by electrical stimulation using a constant-current stimulator (Digitimer
Ltd., Model DS7A, Hertfordshire, U.K.) and observing the resultant motion during the muscle’s stimulation. EMG signals
were measured using a Delsys Bagnoli-16 system (Delsys Inc.,
Boston, MA, USA) connected to a PC running custom software

219

Fig. 1. Six hand grasp postures represented in the virtual environment with
CAPS: from top left (clockwise) are cylindrical, tip/fine pinch, hook, palmar,
thumb enclosed, and lateral grasps.

(described below) and sampling at 1000 Hz. The Delsys system
has hardware bandpass filters set at 20–450 Hz. Intramuscular
electrodes were used to access EMG activity from individual
muscle and muscle compartments and not to measure higher
frequency EMG content, which would not have improved the
velocity controllers used in this study. Subjects placed their
hands and wrists in a standard ball splint, after electrodes were
placed, to allow for isometric muscle contractions and to standardize hand position across subjects.
These six muscles provided EMG signals to command the
three DOFs in a virtual hand. Our previous work demonstrated
that intramuscular electrodes residing in these muscles and compartments were capable of measuring and quantifying individual
EMG activities [38], [40]. Those findings provided the foundation for this study.
A. CAPS and the TAC Test
CAPS is custom software developed by the Center for Bionic
Medicine to acquire EMG signals, test prosthesis control systems, and send output commands to either a virtual or physical
prosthesis [10]. CAPS was used in this experiment to measure EMG from extrinsic finger and thumb muscles, display a
virtual hand, and move the hand according to one of two controllers: direct proportional EMG control or a pattern recognition
classifier.
These experiments required subjects to conform a virtual hand
into one of six randomly selected hand postures: cylindrical
grasp, fine pinch, hook grasp, palmar grasp, thumb enclosed (in
a fist), and lateral grasp (see Fig. 1). These postures were chosen
for three reasons: 1) they represent functional grasping postures
used in activities of daily living, except the thumb-enclosed
posture; 2) they span the range of motion (ROM) of the virtual
hand’s three controllable DOFs from the fully open position;
and 3) they require different combinations of the DOFs to be
coordinated in order to conform to the posture.
A target achievement control (TAC) test tasked subjects to
conform the virtual hand into displayed target postures [9],
[10]. An example is shown in Fig. 2(A) with the controllable
avatar, which appears tan to the subjects, and the target pose in

220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 2. TAC test visual display example. (a) TAC test avatar (tan-colored hand)
with semitransparent target posture overlaid (dark gray). (b) When the subject
conformed the virtual hand to the target posture, the hand turned green.

This pattern recognition system included proportional speed
control of the motions and smoothed the output decisions with
a velocity ramp [41]. Computation times for both algorithms
were completed in less than 5 ms and the remainder of each
frame was used to update and render the virtual environment.
All output motions were restricted to have a maximum angular
velocity of 100° s–1 .
C. Controlling the Virtual Hand

semitransparent dark gray. Subjects had control over a singleDOF thumb, index finger, and middle finger using the direct
EMG controller. The ring and little fingers were slaved to follow
the position of the middle finger. Using the pattern recognition
classifier, the subjects had control over the hand’s end posture
and the classifier coordinated the fingers’ movements to move
the hand toward that posture. Subjects could not command individual fingers while using the pattern recognition classifier.
The avatar turned green while the hand was aligned within
the target [see Fig. 2(B)]. If the hand remained in the target
zone for 2 s, the trial ended in success and the hand would
turn from green to dark green to signal successful completion
of that trial. Subjects had 15 s to get the hand within the target
and hold it there for the required 2 s before the end of the 17-s
trial. Otherwise, the hand would turn yellow, the trial would
end, and would be counted as a failed attempt. This trial length
was chosen based on previous studies [10], discussions with
prosthetists on how long prosthesis users typically require to
complete a grasping task with their device, and a consideration
for how long subjects would be willing to sit for an experiment.
There was a 10° target zone of acceptable error centered about
the target posture for each DOF. This target window has been
shown to be effective in previous studies [10]. Each TAC test
comprised 12 consecutive randomized trials, which tested the
six hand postures twice, and was constrained so that no two
consecutive trials tested the same posture.
B. Signal Processing
Two control algorithms were configured for these experiments: a direct proportional EMG control setup and a pattern
recognition classifier. For both controllers, a 250-ms window incremented every 25 ms was used to process the data and output
a decision. The direct EMG controller used the mean absolute value (MAV) of the windowed EMG signals to determine
motion of the virtual hand’s DOFs. Agonist/antagonist muscle
pairs were used to proportionally control each DOF. The pattern recognition controller used a well-studied configuration of
time-domain and autoregressive signal features and a linear discriminate analysis algorithm to determine the output class [9],
[10], [13], [24]–[27]. EMG activity from the six control sites
were fed into a pattern recognition classifier, which was trained
to choose one of the six hand postures, a hand open command,
or a relaxed “no-motion” state. This controller used a predetermined linear path between the start and end postures when
moving the virtual hand and subjects controlled the speed the
hand moved toward that posture.

The same six control sites were used as the inputs to each
controller. The sites measured EMG activity from two muscles each for the thumb (FPL, EPL), index (FDP1, EDC1), and
middle finger (FDP2, EDC2).
1) Direct EMG Control Setup: The two muscles associated
with each digit acted as an agonist–antagonist pair under the
direct proportional EMG control paradigm. The difference between their two activity levels determined the direction and
magnitude of the output motion of the associated DOF in the
artificial hand. This setup is most-commonly implemented for
modern prosthesis users to control their devices.
The virtual fingers’ MCP and IP joints extended or flexed together with no abduction/adduction motion. The resultant motion for the fingers ranged from a straight position coplanar with
the palm (all joints fully extended) to being curled with fingertips
touching the palm (all joints flexed). The thumb’s motion combined flexion–extension and abduction–adduction of its joints.
The range of motion started from “fully open” with the thumb
abducted with slight flexion of the MCP joint and the IP joint
fully extended. The “fully open” position approximated the position of your thumb just before shaking someone’s hand and is
shown in Fig. 2(A) (tan hand). The thumb was “fully closed”
when it was adducted with the CMC, MCP, and IP joints flexed
in a position as if to hold a coin against the palm of the hand
using only the thumb tip.
2) Pattern Recognition Control Setup: Each subject trained
the pattern recognition classifier to recognize eight patterns of
his or her activity. Subjects were sequentially shown a picture of
a hand posture (six grasps, hand open, or no motion), and they
contracted their hand muscles as if to move their hand to that
posture. The subjects performed isometric contractions because
their hand was in a splint. Data were collected for 3 s for each
posture so the classifier could learn to associate that pattern of
activity with the desired posture. Subjects repeated each posture
twice during a training phase. Three-second training trials have
been demonstrated to be effective in prior TAC test studies [10].
The classifier output a single motion class for each decision
cycle after training was completed. Classifying any of the six
hand posture classes when the hand was at its fully open position
(0% range of motion—ROM) would result in the hand moving
toward that posture (i.e., “key grip”). Once the hand reached
10% ROM, only additional EMG activity pattern of the motion
class selected at 10% ROM would continue to close the hand
toward that particular posture. Functionally, this meant that if
the subject wanted to change the hand to a different posture,
they would have to fully open the hand and then close the hand
in a different posture. This constraint was imposed to mimic

BIRDWELL et al.: EXTRINSIC FINGER AND THUMB MUSCLES COMMAND A VIRTUAL HAND

221

implementation in a physical prosthesis that would limit object
release due to inadvertent classifier selection once a grasp was
already in use holding an object.
The range of motion of each hand posture class spanned from
0% to 115%. The hand in the fully open position was 0%, the
target posture was 100%, and the full range of motion allowed
for 15% overshoot. Once the hand was in the target posture, the
subject would have to relax, classifying as “no motion,” in order
to hold the hand in the target region.
D. Experimental Conditions
There were two conditions for which both the direct EMG
control and the pattern recognition classifier TAC tests were
conducted. The first condition tested each of the six grasps,
starting the hand from the fully open position (neutral condition). The hand was reset to the fully open position between
each trial. The second condition did not reset the hand to the
open position between trials, but instead started each trial from
the previous trial’s target posture (posture-to-posture (P2P) condition). The P2P condition was used to test the subjects’ ability
to move the hand from varying postures to other postures. This
demonstrated the subjects’ adaptability and versatility in controlling the hand throughout the hand’s full ROM and in several
different starting configurations.
Each subject completed four TAC tests for each of the four
conditions. Each TAC test consisted of 12 randomized trials
(postures), giving a total of 48 trials for each condition. Each
subject was given as much time to practice as desired before
data collection for each new controller and condition. In general,
subjects took 10–15 min to become familiar with the controller
interface and to learn how to move the hand. Unbeknownst to
the subjects, the first TAC test of each new set was treated as
a practice and was not used in the data analysis. Consequently,
36 trials for each condition–controller combination were analyzed.
The order for which controller was tested first, direct proportional EMG control or pattern recognition control, was randomized. The neutral condition was tested first. Then the more
visually complex P2P condition was performed.

Fig. 3. Median amount of normalized trial time spent simultaneously moving
DOFs. Data are shown for one, two, and three DOFs together for the (top) neutral
condition tests and (bottom) P2P condition tests. Error bars depict interquartile
range.

Fig. 4. Simultaneous DOF percentages during increments of 10% of normalized trial time. Median values are shown for the (top) neutral condition
tests and (bottom) P2P condition tests. Traces represent no movement (white),
single-DOF (green), two-DOF (purple), and three DOF (red) movements.

E. Statistical Analysis
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the data
to determine if significant differences (P-value less than 0.05)
existed between controllers in the same testing condition. “Failure Rate” and “Completion Time” were tested and compared
between “Direct Control” and “Pattern Recognition.”
III. RESULTS

time, respectively. Subjects coordinated the movement of all
three DOFs simultaneously only 2.7% of trial time. However,
during P2P tests [see Fig. 3(B)], subjects spent more time moving single DOF (40% of the time) than they did moving two of
the DOFs together (30% of the time).

A. Direct Control of Simultaneous DOF

B. Did the Number of Simultaneously Moving DOFs Change
During the Trial? (Neutral Condition)

The percentage of trial time spent moving one, two, or three
DOFs was measured for successfully completed trials. Median
values are shown in Fig. 3 for single-, two-, and three-DOF
movements. Error bars depict the interquartile range.
During neutral condition tests [see Fig. 3(A)], subjects moved
a single DOF and two DOFs of the hand 33% and 42% of trial

Fig. 4 shows how subjects simultaneously moved the hand’s
DOFs during the trials. All trials were normalized by their trial
time and then divided into ten divisions. The amount of time
spent moving no DOFs, a single DOF, two DOFs, or three DOFs
together was tabulated for each segment. Median data are shown
across all subjects.

222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 5. Simultaneous DOF combinations. Breakdown showing how subjects
moved combinations of degrees of freedom across all target postures during
(top) neutral condition tests and (bottom) P2P condition tests. Median values
with error bars depicting the interquartile range across all successful trials and
all subjects. Combinations are shown for thumb (T), index finger (I), and middle
finger (M).

During the neutral condition tests [see Fig. 4(A)], subjects
initially moved a single DOF at the start of a trial, but shortly
afterward initiated a second DOF to move simultaneously. Trials
can be distinguished into two phases: the first phase focused on
two simultaneously moving DOFs and a second phase where
the amount of trial time spent moving a single DOF increased.
This trend was representative of each subject. However, the
point within the trial when the change between phases occurred
varied between subjects.
Fig. 4(B) shows how subjects moved the DOFs simultaneously during the P2P condition tests. Similar to the neutral condition breakdown, there was an increase in two-DOF movement
during the middle half of the trials and an increase in single
degree movement during the final quarter. However, unlike the
neutral condition, single-DOF movement was greater than twoDOF movement throughout the trial.
C. Which DOF Moved Together?
Under direct control, Fig. 5 shows the median amount of time
spent moving each combination of the hand’s three DOFs during successful trials and error bars depict the interquartile range.
Calculations were made for each successful trial based on the
output from the controller, and a tally was made for each DOF
at each time step to determine whether or not it was moving.
Each successful trial was then normalized by its completion
time. Examining the breakdown for single-DOF movement (T,
I, or M) demonstrates that subjects were capable of independently moving each DOF. During the neutral condition, there
was more isolated index finger movement (11.6% of normalized
trial time) than thumb or middle finger movement (6.6% and 2%
of normalized trial time). From the neutral position, fine pinch
and hook grasps only required the movement of two DOFs to
reach the target posture. All other grasps required all DOFs to
be moved.

Fig. 6. TAC test failure rates. Mean failure rates of TAC test trials shown for
direct EMG control and pattern recognition control for both test conditions:
neutral and P2PError bars depict the standard error.

The strategies for controlling the hand’s DOFs were different
between the neutral condition and the P2P condition, namely,
there was more time spent in the latter moving single DOF
(see Fig. 5, bottom). However, the thumb performed most of
the single-DOF movements during this condition. The index
finger was the primary individual mover during the neutral condition tests. These results are interesting as Wing et al. [42]
have observed that during grasping between the thumb and the
index finger, one side (usually the thumb) tends to remain more
stationary while the other moves to accommodate the object.
The movements that involved two DOFs also differ from the
patterns seen in the neutral condition tests. Subjects spent more
time coordinating movements of the thumb and the index finger
and less time moving the fingers together. There is still very
little time spent moving the thumb along with the middle finger
and moving all three DOFs simultaneously, similar to the results
from the neutral condition.
D. Pattern Recognition Classifier Accuracy
Average classifier accuracy across subjects was 85% with a
standard deviation of 8%, when tested off-line on training data.
This was acceptable as a previous study has reported a classifier accuracy of 69% for hand grasp postures using a pattern
recognition classifier discriminating surface EMG signals [9].
E. Failure Rate
Performance metrics were calculated for each controller and
condition in order to compare the direct myoelectric controller
to the pattern recognition classifier. These included the failure
rate, completion time, and percent of completed trials.
The failure rate measures the proportion of trials that were unsuccessfully completed during the TAC tests and were averaged
across subjects. Fig. 6 shows the TAC test failure rates for each
of the four control conditions. Failure rates were below 20%,
which shows that subjects were generally able to complete the

BIRDWELL et al.: EXTRINSIC FINGER AND THUMB MUSCLES COMMAND A VIRTUAL HAND

Fig. 7. TAC test completion times. Average completion time of TAC trials
for direct EMG control and pattern recognition control and both the neutral and
P2P conditions. Error bars represents standard error. Shaded region represents
average time spent initially performing “hand open” in the P2P condition using
pattern recognition control.

task, but it was not an easy task. This also coincides with previously reported failure rates for wrist and hand motions [10],
[41]. There was no significant difference (P > 0.05, ANOVA)
between the failure rates of the two controllers in the neutral condition tests or the P2P condition tests. P2P conditions resulted
in lower failure rates when compared to the neutral condition
tests.
F. Completion Time
The completion time is the time it took the subjects to conform
the virtual hand to the target. The completion time does not
include the 2 s of dwell time that was required in order to
successfully complete each trial. Only successful trials were
used to compute the average completion times shown in Fig. 7.
Averages were computed across subjects for each controller,
and condition and error bars represent the standard error.
In the neutral condition, pattern recognition control resulted
in a significantly lower completion time (P < 0.05, ANOVA)
than the direct controller. The pattern recognition controller was
faster with the same completion success rate as direct control.
The completion times were not significantly different (P >
0.05, ANOVA) between the direct EMG control and the pattern
recognition control in the P2P condition. The software limitation
imposed during pattern recognition control required subjects
to return the hand to the fully open position before switching
to a different posture. Therefore, the P2P test using pattern
recognition control was essentially a neutral condition test with
an additional step of first opening the hand. Average pattern
recognition completion time of the P2P condition was 6.8 s, and
the hand-opening phase averaged 1.61 s (gray shaded region).
G. Completion Time Versus Percentage of Completed Trials
Fig. 8 shows the cumulative percentage of completed trials,
out of 36 total trials for each controller and condition pair, as a

223

Fig. 8. TAC test completion time versus percentage of completed trials. More
trials were completed as time increased with a majority of the trials being
completed after 5–7 s.

function of the trial time. All four TAC tests followed a similar
and expected pattern.
In the neutral condition tests, pattern recognition control (triangles) resulted in faster completions when compared to the
direct control (plus signs) results. The P2P condition TAC tests
(circles and squares) resulted in higher completed trials than
the neutral condition tests (plusses and triangles). These results
show that it took subjects approximately 10 s to achieve 80%
completed trails across the six grasping postures under the P2P
condition.

IV. DISCUSSION
A. Direct Control Extrapolations: Moving DOFs
Simultaneously and the Bias of Target Postures
Providing the ability to simultaneously control several prosthetic fingers is a laudable goal and one would expect greater
dexterity with such capabilities. However, providing this ability
does not ensure that the subjects will actually use that ability.
The hand postures in this experiment required the index and middle fingers to be stopped next to one another when commanded
using direct control—except for the “fine pinch” posture. The
fingers also started in the same configuration during the neutral
condition tests and therefore could follow the same trajectory
from start to target configurations. This may have contributed
to the large portion of the time spent moving the index and middle fingers together. The similar motions of these digits seemed
to be easier for subjects to accomplish than dissimilar motions
such as moving digits different directions, distances, or to/from
different start or target configurations.
From Figs. 4 and 5, it is surmised that subjects started moving two DOFs simultaneously early on and through the middle
portion of the trials, and those two DOFs were most often the
index and middle fingers. Subjects would intuitively move the

224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

fingers together since five of the six postures required the fingers
to have the same position in the target posture.
It was surprising how little time was spent simultaneously
moving all the digits. From the neutral position, the cylindrical, chuck, lateral, and thumb-enclosed postures each required
movement of all the hand’s digits. Fine pinch and the hook grasp
only required movement from two DOFs to reach the target from
the neutral position. It was hypothesized that subjects would initially move all the digits close to the target simultaneously and
then move each digit into the target one at a time. This strategy
seems to have been implemented with only two DOFs instead
of all three.
The index finger spent more time moving than any other digit,
moving by itself and in conjunction with the middle finger DOF.
The index finger was the only digit that was required to move
from the neutral pose to conform the hand for the six target
postures. All target postures except fine pinch showed that the
index finger DOF was moving a majority of the time, either
alone or with the middle finger DOF.
Fig. 3 shows that, using the Direct Control setup, very little
time was spent simultaneously moving all DOFs. Analysis of
the movements during each target posture showed that simultaneous three-DOF movements occurred most frequently during the “thumb-enclosed” target posture (12.8% of the time).
The chuck, key, and cylindrical postures also included simultaneous three-DOF motions (9.5%, 5.4%, and 2.7% of time,
respectively). These amounts are not enough to affirm our initial assumptions that subjects would prefer to move all DOFs
simultaneously toward the target and then sequentially once the
hand was relatively close to the final target posture. Instead,
subjects chose to move simultaneous DOFs, given the desired
target posture, and it is assumed that different simultaneous
DOF movement patterns would be observed with different target postures.
B. Limitations in Simultaneously Controlling Multiple DOFs
Physiologically, realistic mappings between the muscles being used as control inputs and the resultant hand movement
sought to minimize the cognitive load on the subjects by reducing how much they had to “think” about what they were
doing. However, it was found that subjects did not coordinate
movements of all of the digits of the hand simultaneously, as is
done with a healthy and intact hand. There are many differences
to consider between normal hand movement and that done by
EMG in these experiments. Perhaps the two keys issues are the
number of control inputs used and the lack of proprioceptive
feedback. In these experiments, the subjects were moving digits
with the input of just six muscles. In the normal hand, many
more extrinsic and intrinsic muscles would be used. Although
in the direct control experiments the EMG signals used were
functionally related to the DOFs they were controlling, they
were far from a complete or normal set of muscle inputs. Thus,
there was still a much larger cognitive burden than in a normal hand. Perhaps this is why the subjects generally used few
simultaneous DOFs.
Additionally, subjects were asked to control their EMG activity, which is a very unusual task. In an intact hand, single-digit

movements generally require the activation of multiple muscles
and the person is typically focused on the position, velocity,
and/or force of the digit. In this study, subjects were wearing
a splint, which constrained movement but allowed large force
generation, and all the while they were asked to focus on their
muscles’ activity.
The lack of proprioception is also an important difference.
The subjects had to rely on visual feedback to control all three
DOF’s. This mimics how a prosthesis user is limited to primarily
visual feedback from the device. Simultaneously controlling up
to three DOFs, based on visual feedback, may be the limitation
of human attention. Williams and Kirsch have found that subjects controlling a two-DOF cursor using four EMG sites tended
to move sequential DOFs instead of simultaneously [20], [43].
However, that may have been due to the nonintuitive nature of
using face and neck muscles as control sites for the computer
cursor. Masliah and Milgram measured subjects’ coordination
of simultaneous controlling six DOFs and found that they tended
to focus on subsets of the DOFS, limiting themselves to at most
three at a time [44]. Our lab has documented amputee subjects
using a prosthetic arm and hand to simultaneously move four
DOFs to perform gross positioning motions of the limb; however, subject’s focused on one or two simultaneous DOFs once
the hand was close to the intended target [45].
Future work could increase the number of control inputs to an
artificial hand by using activity from additional extrinsic finger
muscles and compartments. Researchers are currently working
on bringing commercially available intramuscular electrodes
to market [18], [46]–[49]. This could allow for an increase in
controllable digits and DOFs in artificial hands; however, simultaneous control of all of the DOFs may be limited. Furthermore,
additional training may improve performance of simultaneous
DOF control. Subjects in this study were not limited in the
amount of training they wished to take, but none took more than
30 min. Typical prosthesis users, by contrast, train for weeks
with their device.
C. Direct EMG Control Versus Pattern Recognition Control
for the Hand
The results from these experiments strongly suggest that the
control of a multiple DOF hand is feasible using intramuscular EMG with either direct or pattern recognition control. This
is required for the direct EMG control setup because surface
electrodes are not capable of distinguishing the muscle activity of individual finger muscle compartments. Our hypothesis
was validated that extrinsic finger and thumb muscles can serve
as control inputs and allow for individual finger control of a
multifunctional artificial hand. Pattern recognition control has
also been effective in controlling multiple DOFs with extrinsic muscles. In these experiments, intramuscular direct EMG
and pattern recognition control of a three-DOF hand performed
equally well.
Another consideration is how the user expects to interact
their prosthetic hand with the environment. Pattern recognition
control is limited to a few, predefined grasping patterns and
does not allow for the user to change or modify the grasping

BIRDWELL et al.: EXTRINSIC FINGER AND THUMB MUSCLES COMMAND A VIRTUAL HAND

motion once it has been initiated. Using the direct EMG control
could enable users to move individual digits during and after
the initiation of a grasping motion. This potentially allows the
user more adaptability in grasping different sized and shaped
objects as well as gesturing and doing many other complex
hand functions needed every day.
D. Summary of Important Results
1) Subjects could individually control multiple muscles for
each digit, including agonist/antagonist muscle pairs.
EMG activity from EDC1, FDP1, EDC2, and FDP2 of
the fingers as well as EPL and FPL of the thumb were
used as EMG control sites to command individual digits
on a three-DOF artificial hand.
2) Subjects were able to use direct proportional EMG control and pattern recognition control to conform the virtual
hand prosthesis into six functional grasps from a neutral
position. Furthermore, subjects using direct EMG control
also demonstrated their ability to command the hand to
change from one posture directly into another.
3) Functional performance metrics suggested that direct
EMG control performed similar to pattern recognition
control, when moving a hand from a neutral, fully open
start posture.
4) Subjects demonstrated simultaneous control of two of
the three DOFs using direct EMG control; however, they
rarely controlled all three of the DOFs simultaneously. Simultaneous control of two DOFs was frequently observed,
but the determination of which two DOFs was biased by
the target posture.
5) Evidence suggested that subjects used simultaneous control during gross motions to approximate the hand to the
target posture before commanding single DOF for fineposition control into the desired posture.
REFERENCES
[1] D. S. Childress and R. F. F. Weir, “Control of limb prostheses,” Atlas of
Amputations and Limb Deficiencies, D. G. Smith, J. W. Michael, and J. H.
Bowker, Eds. Rosemont, IL, USA: Amer. Acad. Orthopaedic Surgeons,
2004, pp. 173–195.
[2] D. G. Smith, J. W. Michael, J. H. Bowker, and American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons, Atlas of Amputations and Limb Deficiencies: Surgical, Prosthetic, and Rehabilitation Principles, 3rd ed. Rosemont, IL,
USA: Amer. Acad. Orthopedic Surgeons, 2004.
[3] C. Cipriani, M. Controzzi, and M. C. Carrozza, “The SmartHand transradial prosthesis,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 29, 2011.
[4] K. A. Farry, I. D. Walker, and R. G. Baraniuk, “Myoelectric teleoperation
of a complex robotic hand,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 12, no. 5,
pp. 775–788, Oct. 1996.
[5] P. J. Kyberd and P. H. Chappell, “The Southampton hand—An intelligent myoelectric prosthesis,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 31, no. 4,
pp. 326–334, 1994.
[6] J. L. Pons, R. Ceres, E. Rocon, S. Levin, I. Markovitz, B. Saro, D. Reynaerts, W. Van Moorleghem, and L. Bueno, “Virtual reality training and
EMG control of the MANUS hand prosthesis,” Robotica, vol. 23, pp.
311–317, May–Jun. 2005.
[7] C. Cipriani, J. L. Segil, J. A. Birdwell, and R. F. F. Weir, “Dexterous
control of a prosthetic hand using fine-wire intramuscular electrodes in
targeted extrinsic muscles,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol.
22, no. 4, pp. 828–836, Jul. 2014.
[8] K. Englehart and B. Hudgins, “A robust, real-time control scheme for
multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 7, pp. 848–854, Jul. 2003.

225

[9] G. L. Li, A. E. Schultz, and T. A. Kuiken, “Quantifying pattern recognitionbased myoelectric control of multifunctional transradial prostheses,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 185–192, Apr. 2010.
[10] A. M. Simon, L. J. Hargrove, B. A. Lock, and T. A. Kuiken, “Target achievement control test: Evaluating real-time myoelectric patternrecognition control of multifunctional upper-limb prostheses,” J. Rehabil.
Res. Develop., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 619–627, 2011.
[11] L. H. Smith, L. J. Hargrove, B. A. Lock, and T. A. Kuiken, “Determining
the optimal window length for pattern recognition-based myoelectric control: Balancing the competing effects of classification error and controller
delay,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 186–192,
Apr. 2011.
[12] C. Cipriani, C. Antfolk, M. Controzzi, G. Lundborg, B. Rosen, M. C.
Carrozza, and F. Sebelius, “Online myoelectric control of a dexterous hand
prosthesis by transradial amputees,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 260–270, Jun. 2011.
[13] L. Hargrove, Y. Losier, B. Lock, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A realtime pattern recognition based myoelectric control usability study implemented in a virtual environment,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, vol. 1–16, pp. 4842–4845.
[14] T. R. Farrell and R. F. Weir, “A comparison of the effects of electrode
implantation and targeting on pattern classification accuracy for prosthesis control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2198–2211,
Sep. 2008.
[15] L. Hargrove, E. Scheme, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “Principal components analysis preprocessing to reduce controller delays in pattern recognition based myoelectric control,” in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2007, vol. 1–16, pp. 6512–6515.
[16] G. C. Matrone, C. Cipriani, M. C. Carrozza, and G. Magenes, “Real-time
myoelectric control of a multi-fingered hand prosthesis using principal
components analysis,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 9, no. 1, p. 40, Jun. 15,
2012.
[17] R. F. Weir, P. R. Troyk, G. DeMichele, and T. Kuiken, “Implantable
myoelectric sensors (IMES) for upper-extremity prosthesis control- preliminary work,” in Proc. 25th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.
2013, vol. 1–4, no. 25, pp. 1562–1565.
[18] R. E. F. Weir, P. R. Troyk, G. A. DeMichele, D. A. Kerns, J. F. Schorsch,
and H. Maas, “Implantable myoelectric sensors (IMESs) for intramuscular
electromyogram recording,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 1, pp.
159–171, Jan. 2009.
[19] M. M. Lowery, R. F. Weir, T. A. Kuiken, “Simulation of intramuscular
EMG signal detection using implantable myoelectrical sensors,” in Proc.
2nd Int. IEEE/EMBS Conf. Neural Eng., New York, NY, USA, 2005, pp.
360–363.
[20] D. R. Merrill, J. Lockhart, P. R. Troyk, R. F. Weir, and D. L. Hankin, “Development of an implantable myoelectric sensor for advanced prosthesis
control,” Artif. Organs, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 249–252, Mar. 2011.
[21] L. H. Smith and L. J. Hargrove, “Comparison of surface and intramuscular
EMG pattern recognition for simultaneous wrist/hand motion classification,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2013, pp.
4223–4226.
[22] E. N. Kamavuako, E. J. Scheme, and K. B. Englehart, “Combined surface and intramuscular EMG for improved real-time myoelectric control
performance,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 10, pp. 102–107,
Mar. 2014.
[23] E. N. Kamavuako, J. C. Rosenvang, M. F. Bog, A. Smidstrup, E. Erkocevic,
M. J. Niemeier, W. Jensen, and D. Farina, “Influence of the feature space on
the estimation of hand grasping force from intramuscular EMG,” Biomed.
Signal Process. Control, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–5, Jan. 2013.
[24] C. Hager-Ross and M. H. Schieber, “Quantifying the independence of
human finger movements: Comparisons of digits, hands, and movement
frequencies,” J. Neurosci., vol. 20, no. 22, pp. 8542–8550, Nov. 2000.
[25] C. E. Lang and M. H. Schieber, “Human finger independence: Limitations
due to passive mechanical coupling versus active neuromuscular control,”
J. Neurophysiol., vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 2802–2810, Nov. 2004.
[26] D. A. Keen and A. J. Fuglevand, “Role of intertendinous connections in
distribution of force in the human extensor digitorum muscle,” Muscle
Nerve, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 614–622, Nov. 2003.
[27] D. A. Keen and A. J. Fuglevand, “Distribution of motor unit force in human extensor digitorum assessed by spike-triggered averaging and intraneural microstimulation,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 91, no. 6, pp. 2515–2523,
Jun. 2004.
[28] D. A. Keen and A. J. Fuglevand, “Common input to motor neurons innervating the same and different compartments of the human extensor
digitorum muscle,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 57–62, Jan. 2004.

226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[29] S. L. Kilbreath and S. C. Gandevia, “Neural and biomechanical specializations of human thumb muscles revealed by matching weights and grasping
objects,” J. Physiol. London, vol. 472, pp. 537–556, Dec. 1993.
[30] K. T. Reilly and M. H. Schieber, “Incomplete functional subdivision of
the human multitendoned finger muscle flexor digitorum profundus: An
electromyographic study,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 2560–2570,
Oct. 2003.
[31] M. H. Schieber, “Muscular production of individuated finger
movements—The roles of extrinsic finger muscles,” J. Neurosci., vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 284–297, Jan. 1995.
[32] V. M. Zatsiorsky, Z. M. Li, and M. L. Latash, “Coordinated force production in multi-finger tasks: Finger interaction and neural network modeling,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 139–150, Aug. 1998.
[33] V. M. Zatsiorsky, Z. M. Li, and M. L. Latash, “Enslaving effects in multifinger force production,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 131, no. 2, pp. 187–195,
Mar. 2000.
[34] S. L. Kilbreath and S. C. Gandevia, “Limited independent flexion of
the thumb and fingers in human-subjects,” J. Physiol. London, vol. 479,
no. 3, pp. 487–497, Sep. 1994.
[35] K. T. Reilly and G. R. Hammond, “Independence of force production by
digits of the human hand,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 290, no. 1, pp. 53–56,
Aug. 2000.
[36] H. van Duinen and S. C. Gandevia, “Constraints for control of the human
hand,” J. Physiol. London, vol. 589, no. 23, pp. 5583–5593, Dec. 2011.
[37] J. V. Basmajian and G. Stecko, “A new bipolar electrode for electromyography,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 849–849, 1962.
[38] J. A. Birdwell, L. J. Hargrove, and R. F. F. F. Weir, “Quantification of
isolated muscle compartment activity in extrinsic finger muscles for potential prosthesis control sites,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. 2011, pp. 4104–4107.
[39] J. A. Birdwell, “Investigation of extrinsic finger and thumb muscles to
command individual digits on a multi-functional artificial hand,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Dept. Mech. Eng., Northwestern Univ., Evanston, IL, USA,
2012.
[40] J. A. Birdwell, L. J. Hargrove, T. A. Kuiken, and R. F. F. Weir, “Activation
of individual extrinsic thumb muscles and compartments of extrinsic finger
muscles,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 110, no. 6, pp. 1385–1392, Sep. 2013.
[41] A. M. Simon, L. J. Hargrove, B. A. Lock, and T. A. Kuiken, “A decisionbased velocity ramp for minimizing the effect of misclassifications during
real-time pattern recognition control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 8, pp. 2360–2368, Aug. 2011.
[42] A. M. Wing, A. Turton, and C. Fraser, “Grasp size and accuracy of
approach in reaching,” J. Motor Behav., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 245–260,
Sep. 1986.
[43] M. R. Williams and R. F. Kirsch, “Evaluation of head orientation and neck
muscle EMG signals as command inputs to a human–computer interface
for individuals with high tetraplegia,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 485–496, Oct. 2008.
[44] M. R. Masliah and P. Milgram, “Measuring the allocation of control in a
6 degree-of-freedom docking experiment,” in Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human
Factors Comput. Syst., The Hague, The Netherlands, 2000, pp. 25–32.
[45] T. A. Kuiken, G. L. Li, B. A. Lock, R. D. Lipschutz, L. A. Miller, K.
A. Stubblefield, and K. B. Englehart, “Targeted muscle reinnervation for
real-time myoelectric control of multifunction artificial arms,” J. Amer.
Med. Assoc., vol. 301, no. 6, pp. 619–28, Feb. 11, 2009.
[46] E. Y. Chow, M. M. Morris, and P. P. Irazoqui, “Implantable RF medical
devices,” IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 64–73, Jun. 2013.
[47] D. Farina, K. Yoshida, T. Stieglitz, and K. P. Koch, “Multichannel thinfilm electrode for intramuscular electromyographic recordings,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 104, no. 3, pp. 821–827, Mar. 2008.
[48] C. L. Pulliam, J. M. Lambrecht, and R. F. Kirsch, “Electromyogrambased neural network control of transhumeral prostheses,” J. Rehabil.
Res. Develop., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 739–754, 2011.
[49] K. H. Polasek, H. A. Hoyen, M. W. Keith, R. F. Kirsch, and D. J. Tyler,
“Stimulation stability and selectivity of chronically implanted multicontact nerve cuff electrodes in the human upper extremity,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 428–437, Oct. 2009.

J. Alex Birdwell (S’11–M’12) received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, in 2004, the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering
from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA,
in 2006 and 2012, respectively.
He is currently a Lecturer of Mechanical Engineering at Northwestern University. His current research interests include intersection of robotics and
biomechanics, prosthetics, human–machine interactions, and rehabilitation engineering. He was a Graduate Research Assistant at the Center for Bionic Medicine, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL. He is currently involved in teaching an array of
manufacturing, design, and experimental methods courses.
Levi J. Hargrove (S’05–M’08) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and PhD degrees in electrical engineering
from the University of New Brunswick (UNB), Fredericton, NB, Canada, in 2003, 2005, and 2007, respectively.
He joined the Center for Bionic Medicine, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, in 2008. He is also a
Research Assistant Professor in the Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (PM&R) and
Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University.
Evanston, IL, USA. His current research interests include pattern recognition, biological signal processing, and myoelectric control
of powered prostheses.
Dr. Hargrove is a Member of the Association of Professional Engineers and
Geoscientists of New Brunswick.
Richard F. ff. Weir (M’92) received the B.A. degree
in mathematics and the B.A.I. degree in microelectronics and electrical engineering from Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, U.K., in 1983, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
He was a Control Engineer in England. He is
currently the Director of the Biomechatronics Development Laboratory, University of Colorado Denver|Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, USA. He is
a Research Healthcare Scientist for the VA Eastern
Colorado Health Care System–Denver VA Medical Center, and holds Research
Associate Professor appointments in the Departments of Bioengineering and
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Colorado Denver|Anschutz
Medical Campus. his current research interests include designing of advanced
artificial hand/arm replacements and covering all aspects of the problem ranging from development of neural control interfaces and clinical deployment of
these systems, to mechatronic design and development of novel prosthetic components. He is currently involved in the development of prosthetic hand/arm
controller systems based on implantable myoelectric sensors (IMES) to create
a neural interface for the user. These sensors when placed in the muscles of an
amputee’s residual limb, sense the muscle’s inherent electrical activity and send
signals out of the body to an external controller, which will use these signals
to control a multifunction prosthesis and research into novel ways to interface
with peripheral nerves using opto-genetic approaches as well as a number of
straight forward mechanical hand and arm component design projects.
Todd A. Kuiken (SM’99) received the M.D. and
Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA, in 1990, and
the Residency in PM&R at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, in 1995.
He is currently the Director of the Center for
Bionic Medicine, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago.
He is a Professor in the Departments of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, Biomedical Engineering, and Surgery, Northwestern University.

