IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

119

Robotic Adherent Cell Injection for Characterizing
Cell–Cell Communication
Jun Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Vinayakumar Siragam, Zheng Gong, Member, IEEE, Jun Chen,
Michael D. Fridman, Clement Leung, Member, IEEE, Zhe Lu, Member, IEEE, Changhai Ru, Shaorong Xie, Jun Luo,
Robert M. Hamilton, and Yu Sun∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Compared to robotic injection of suspended cells (e.g.,
embryos and oocytes), fewer attempts were made to automate the
injection of adherent cells (e.g., cancer cells and cardiomyocytes)
due to their smaller size, highly irregular morphology, small thickness (a few micrometers thick), and large variations in thickness
across cells. This paper presents a robotic system for automated microinjection of adherent cells. The system is embedded with several
new capabilities: automatically locating micropipette tips; robustly
detecting the contact of micropipette tip with cell culturing surface
and directly with cell membrane; and precisely compensating for
accumulative positioning errors. These new capabilities make it
practical to perform adherent cell microinjection truly via computer mouse clicking in front of a computer monitor, on hundreds
and thousands of cells per experiment (versus a few to tens of cells
as state of the art). System operation speed, success rate, and cell
viability rate were quantitatively evaluated based on robotic microinjection of over 4000 cells. This paper also reports the use of
the new robotic system to perform cell–cell communication studies
using large sample sizes. The gap junction function in a cardiac
muscle cell line (HL-1 cells), for the first time, was quantified with
the system.
Index Terms—Cell communication, drug testing, gap junction,
microinjection, robotics, toxicology testing.

I. INTRODUCTION

I

NTERCELLULAR communication is a critical part of cellular activities and coordinates cell functions [1]. Disorders

Manuscript received May 22, 2014; revised July 14, 2014; accepted July
20, 2014. Date of publication July 24, 2014; date of current version December
18, 2014. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, Ontario Centres of Excellence, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology
Commission Project under Grant 14JC1491500. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J. Liu, Z. Gong, J. Chen, C. Leung, and Z. Lu are with the Department
of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON M5S 3G8, Canada (e-mail: ljun@mie.utoronto.ca; zgong@mie.utoronto.ca;
junchen@mie.utoronto.ca; clement.leung@utoronto.ca; zhe.lu@utoronto.ca).
V. Siragam, M. D. Fridman, and R. M. Hamilton are with the Division
of Cardiology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8,
Canada (e-mail: vsiragam@gmail.com; michaeldfridman@gmail.com; robert.
hamilton@sickkids.ca).
∗ Y. Sun is with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G8, Canada, the College of Automation, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China, and also with
the School of Mechatronic Engineering and Automation, Shanghai University,
Shanghai 200072, China (e-mail: sun@mie.utoronto.ca).
C. Ru is with the College of Automation, Harbin Engineering University,
Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: rchhai@gmail.com).
S. Xie and J. Luo are with the School of Mechatronic Engineering and
Automation, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, China (e-mail: srxie@
shu.edu.cn; luojun@shu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2342036

Fig. 1. Adherent cells (HL-1) under 20×. Inset shows the schematic of a gap
junction for cell–cell communication.

of intercellular communication are responsible for diseases such
as cancer [2], autoimmunity [3], and diabetes [4]. A standard
technique for measuring intercellular communication is based
on monitoring transfer of fluorescent molecules from an individual cell to adjacent cells through functional gap junctions (see
Fig. 1). The quantitative measurement of dye transfer requires
injection of fluorescent molecules into single cells. In present
gap junction testing experiments, only a few or tens of cells can
be injected due to the limitations of manual operation, posing
a practical hurdle in attaining statistically significant data, for
instance, for testing drug molecules on the alteration of gap
junction function [5].
Manually manipulating single cells is tedious and time consuming and has high skill requirements. In manual operation, a
skilled operator must dexterously control multiple devices such
as micromanipulator, pump, and microscope stage. Robotic cell
manipulation technologies progressed significantly over the past
decade. The vast majority of demonstrated robotic systems focused on the manipulation of suspended cells (i.e., oocytes and
embryos) [6]–[11]. Fewer attempts were made to automate the
injection of adherent cells.
Most mammalian cells (e.g., cancer cells and cardiomyocytes) adhere to a culturing surface. Different from large suspend cells (e.g., mouse oocytes∼100 μm; zebrafish embryos∼
1 mm), adherent cells are smaller in size and highly irregular
in morphology (versus spherical for oocytes/embryos), making
robust pattern recognition difficult and automation challenging
[12]. Additionally, adherent cells are only a few micrometers
thick and vary significantly in thickness, posing more stringent
requirements in robotic positioning.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

A few joystick-based systems were demonstrated to assist operators for adherent cell microinjection [13], [14]. Long training,
low success rates, and poor reproducibility make these systems
incapable of injecting more than tens of cells per experiment.
For example, the most popular commercial system for adherent
cell injection is Eppendorf’s InjectMan system that requires an
operator to look into the eyepieces of a microscope and perform
microinjection by controlling joysticks. The injection success
rate and cell survival rate of the system are 49.2% and 49.72%,
respectively [13]. The only other joystick-based adherent cell injection system was demonstrated for the injection of fluorescent
molecules into adherent cell lines with a 49% injection success
rate [14]. Due to the difficulty of operating joysticks for fine
positioning control, this system does not permit the injection of
a high number of cells (only 82 cells injected). An automated
system integrating a cell detection algorithm reported in [15]
produced a success rate of 67% at a speed of 7–8 cells/min.
In our previous study in robotic injection of adherent cells
[16], we attempted to transform joystick-based operation to
computer mouse clicking. However, several practical limitations in the system required the operator to manually perform
a few key steps using joysticks and look into the eyepieces of
the microscope. This hybrid way of system operation (mouse
clicking in front of a computer monitor and operating joysticks
under microscope) precluded the system’s potential for routine
use in biology labs. First, the system lacked the critical capability for automatically locating a micropipette tip. In adherent
cell injection, the size of micropipette tip must be kept within
a few hundreds of nanometers to ensure a high cell viability.
Locating the tip under optical microscopy requires high skills
and extreme care since tip breakage can easily occur. Additionally, the small tip often gets clogged by large molecules or
cell debris, necessitating regular replacement of micropipette
tips (e.g., every 100 cells), demanding the system to possess the
capability for locating micropipette tip automatically.
The second limitation in our previous system was the limited
contact detection capability. In experiments, adherent cells are
often cultured on gels or protein-coated (e.g., collagen) surfaces.
Our previously reported contact detection algorithm works well
on a bare culturing surface but has a low success rate on these
coated surfaces. Furthermore, the previous contact detection
algorithm is not applicable when cell confluency (i.e., density)
is high (>80%). Third, the previous system was not able to
compensate for accumulated positioning errors, which made
the system unable to inject more than 100 cells.
In this study, we present a new robotic system capable of
injecting thousands of adherent cells. The system successfully
addresses the limitations of our previous system prototype [16]
and has the following new capabilities: automatically locating
micropipette tips; robustly detecting the contact of micropipette
tip with cell culturing surface and directly with cell membrane;
and precisely compensating for accumulative positioning errors.
These new capabilities, for the first time, make it practical to
perform adherent cell microinjection truly via computer mouse
clicking in front of a computer monitor, making the robotic system suitable for routine use in biology labs. We also demonstrate
the use of the new robotic system to perform cell–cell communication studies with large sample sizes (over 1000 cells versus

Fig. 2.

(a) and (b) RACI system. (c) System control architecture.

a few to tens of cells as state of the art). Finally, the gap junction
function in a cardiac muscle cell line (HL-1 cells), for the first
time, was quantified with the new robotic system.
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
This system uses well-calibrated air pressure to deliver aqueous solution into either the cytoplasm or nucleus of a cell. As
shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), the system consists of a standard
inverted microscope (Nikon TE2000-S, Nikon Microscopes)
and a motorized X–Y translational stage (ProScan, Prior Scientific, Inc.). The X–Y stage has a travel range of 75 mm along
both axes with a resolution of 0.01 μm, the maximum speed
of 5 mm/s, and a repeatability of ±1 μm. A CMOS camera
(acA1300-32 gm, Basler) is connected to the microscope for
visual feedback. A glass micropipette, laser pulled to have an
outer diameter of 500 nm and an inner diameter of 300 nm,
is mounted to a 4-DOF micromanipulator (MX7600, Siskiyou,
Inc.) that has a travel range of 20 mm and a 0.1-μm positioning resolution along each axis. A host computer executing

LIU et al.: ROBOTIC ADHERENT CELL INJECTION FOR CHARACTERIZING CELL–CELL COMMUNICATION

computer vision microscopy and motion control algorithms controls all hardware.
The robotic micromanipulator and X–Y stage are cooperatively controlled for positioning the micropipette along the XYZ
axes and positioning cells in the XY plane, respectively. The
overall control architecture of the system is summarized in
Fig. 2(c). Microscopy visual feedback is used to control the
positioning of the micromanipulator and X–Y stage, forming an
image-based visual servo control system.
When a micropipette is mounted on the system, the system
detects the micropipette tip’s position and automatically moves
it to the center of the field of view (see Section III-A). The
system is capable of detecting the contact in two modes, either on cell culturing surface or directly on cell membrane
(see Sections III-B and III-C), to determine the relative vertical distance between the micropipette tip and the cells in the
Z direction. After the injection location (inside cytoplasm or
nucleus) on each cell is selected via computer mouse clicking,
the system controls the micropipette to deliver a precise volume
into each cell, and completes the injection of all selected cells
following the shortest path. The system then controls the X–Y
translational stage to bring cells in the next field of view under
microscopy imaging for injection.
III. KEY METHODS
A. Locating Micropipette Tip
When a micropipette tip is mounted on the micromanipulator,
the system automatically locates the micropipette tip and moves
it to the center of the field of view. This process involves two
main steps: micropipette detection and autofocus adjustment.
In the detection step, the micropipette is swept in the XY plane
for detecting its presence in the field of view. In some cases, the
micropipette tip cannot be detected when it is far away from the
focal plane. When this occurs, the system moves the focal plane
up by controlling the focus adjustment motor, and the X–Y sweep
is then repeated. During the sweep of the micropipette, motion
history images (MHI) are generated and used for detecting the
presence of the micropipette. The MHI method is discussed in
Section III-C.
In the autofocus step, the system uses the normalized variance
method [17] to calculate the focus measure. The autofocus step
consists of coarse and fine focus adjustments. Coarse focus
adjustment moves the focal plane in a large step size until the
entire image produces a maximal focus measure value. In fine
focus adjustment, a recursive quad-tree autofocusing method is
used to accurately focus on the micropipette tip with smaller step
sizes. After the focus adjustments, the in-focus micropipette tip
is moved to the center of the field of view through closed-loop
visual servoing under a low magnification objective and then
under a high magnification objective. The detailed methods for
detecting and tracking micropipette tips are described in [18].
B. Contact Detection on Cell Culture Surface
In order to inject materials into a cell, the relative vertical
distance between the micropipette tip and the cell along the Zdirection must be accurately detected. Without the inclusion of

121

Fig. 3. Detection of contact on cell culture surface. (a) Micropipette tip is
lowered toward the cell culture surface while the X–Y stage moves along the X
axis from left to right. (b) Micropipette tip slides horizontally when it contacts
the culture surface. (c) and (d) Schematic side view of (a) and (b).

an extra sensor (e.g., tactile or force sensors), which increases
hardware complexity [19], two modes of computer vision-based
contact detection algorithms are developed to accurately determine the relative heights of the micropipette tip and adherent
cells. This section describes the first mode, in which the system
detects the initial contact of micropipette tip on the cell culturing
surface that is protein coated (versus bare surface).
1) Empty Region Detection: When cell confluency is lower
than 80%, empty areas on the culturing surface can be detected
and used for contact detection. The system divides the field of
view into subregions, the size of which is 100 pixels×100 pixels.
The normalized variance of the pixel value, F , is calculated for
each region to represent its smoothness, according to

1
(I(x, y) − μ)2
(1)
F =
W ·H ·μ
W

H

where W and H are the region width and height, I(x, y) is the
pixel intensity at the point (x, y), and μ is the average region
intensity. This algorithm effectively compensates for differences
in average intensity among different regions. The region with
the lowest variance value is considered empty and used for
performing contact detection.
2) Contact Detection via Three-Dimensional Motion: The
system moves the detected empty region in the XY plane until it is directly under the micropipette tip [see Fig. 3(a) and
(c)]. The micropipette tip is then lowered by the micromanipulator along the Z direction. When the micropipette tip contacts
the bare surface of a Petri dish, further vertical movement of
the micropipette tip induces horizontal motion [20]. However,
in cell culturing, the Petri dish surface is usually coated with
gel or protein (e.g., collagen). The coating makes it difficult
for the micropipette tip to “slide” horizontally (it “stabs” directly into the coated layer). Therefore, in this system, the X–Y
stage is also servoed simultaneously to move along the direction in which micropipette tip enters the field of view, while the
micropipette tip is being lowered by the micromanipulator. The
X–Y stage’s motion enables the reliable generation of the pipette
tip’s horizontal “sliding” motion [see Fig. 3(b) and (d)], resulting in highly reliable contact detection on protein-coated cell
culture surfaces.

122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

In our system, the motion region M (x, y, t) contains motion
from both the lowering micropipette and cell deformation due
to micropipette–cell contact. Hence
M (x, y, t) = Mp (x, y, t) + Mc (x, y, t)

(4)

where Mp (x, y, t) is the micropipette lowering motion and
Mc (x, y, t) is the motion from cell deformation. When the
micropipette is moved along Z axis during contact detection,
the tip’s location in the XY plane, (xp , yp ), is constant, and
the lowering motion results from the defocusing phenomenon.
Since a defocusing blurred image is equivalent to an exponential decay function [21], the micropipette lowering motion
can be described as Mp (x, y, t) = M (xp , yp , t0 ) ∗ e−λt , where
M (xp , yp , t0 ) is the initial micropipette’s motion before cell
contact occurs. Thus, motion from cell deformation is
Mc (x, y, t) = M (x, y, t) − M (xp , yp , t0 ) ∗ e−λt .

Fig. 4. Detection of contact on cell surface. (a) At high cell confluency, the
system detects direct contact of the pipette tip on the cell surface. (b) ROI image
shows cell being deformed: white dot indicates tip position. (c) Modified ROI
removing the motion of micropipette tip. (d) MHI showing the deformation of
cell: red arrows indicate motion gradients.

C. Contact Detection on Cell Membrane
When cell confluency is high, empty regions on the culture
surface become unavailable; hence, the system performs contact
detection by detecting direct contact of the micropipette tip on
the cell membrane [see Fig. 4(a)]. After the operator selects a
cell via computer mouse clicking, the system moves the cell to
the micropipette tip position in XY plane and then moves the
micropipette tip downwards along the Z axis. When the micropipette tip contacts the cell membrane, the cell is deformed
and a subtle motion appears around the contact point. To detect this subtle motion, we developed an algorithm based on
MHI. The MHI-based method enhances motion representation
by accumulating cell deformation over a period of time.
A region of interest (ROI) is first obtained around the micropipette tip [see Fig. 4(b)]. Within the ROI, the image is
I(x, y, t) = bt (x, y) + mt (x, y) + nt (x, y)

(2)

where bt (x, y) is the static background; mt (x, y) is the moving
object; nt (x, y) is the background noise; and t is time. The
moving object is extracted via taking the difference between
consecutive frames.

= M (x, y, t) + N (x, y, t)

Since the micropipette is controlled to move downwards at a
constant speed v, its Z-displacement is proportional to time t.
Hence, the cell deformation term can also be expressed as a
function of Z-displacement, Mc (x, y, t) = Mc (x, y, Z/v). After removing micropipette tip’s motion, the noise term N (x, y, t)
in the difference image can be removed by a Gaussian low-pass
filter and image binarization. The binary image representing cell
deformation-caused motion is

1, if Mc (x , y, t)> ξ
(6)
Ψ(x, y, t) =
0,
otherwise.
The MHI is
Hτ (x, y, t)

τ,
if Ψ(x , y, t)= 1
=
(7)
max(0, Hτ (x, y, t − 1) − γ), otherwise
where the duration τ determines the temporal extent of the
movement and γ is the decay parameter. The subtle cell deforming motion is greatly enhanced by adding the motion history information [see Fig. 4(d)].
The sum of pixel values in MHI, s(H), is calculated as a
measure to determine the contact of cell membrane. If s(H)
is above a threshold value δ, the micropipette tip is considered
as contacting cell top membrane. The threshold δ is calculated
dynamically by analyzing MHIs in which the micropipette tip
has not contacted cell surface.
δ = s̄ + a · σ(s)

D(x, y, t) = I(x, y, t + 1) − I(x, y, t)
(3)

where M (x, y, t) is the motion region; N (x, y, t) is noise; and
D(x, y, t) is the difference image containing the moving object
and background aberration due to motion and noise. Background
aberration can lead to incorrect detection (e.g., motion ambiguity and distortion) and make detection fail when object motion
speed is low.

(5)

(8)

where s̄ is the average of MHIs’ sum of pixel values before
cell contact occurs; σ(s) is the standard deviation; and a is a
preset parameter which is experimentally determined. By adding
a · σ(s) to the mean value, the threshold δ effectively rejects
those MHIs that do not contain cell deformation. In addition, the
motion gradient of the MHI is also used to avoid false positive
detection. The motion gradient is computed by convolution with
Sobel filters to yield spatial derivatives, Fx (x, y) and Fy (x, y).

LIU et al.: ROBOTIC ADHERENT CELL INJECTION FOR CHARACTERIZING CELL–CELL COMMUNICATION

123

TABLE I
ROBOTIC MICROINJECTION SPEED OF THREE DIFFERENT CELL LINES
cell line

HeLa

HEK293

HL-1

overall

injection number
injection time (min)
speed (cells/min)

2281
97
23.5

1068
48
22.3

1116
52
21.5

4465
197
22.7

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Performance of Locating Micropipette Tip

Fig. 5. Robotic injection of adherent cells. (a) and (b) When the micropipette
is inserted into the cell, material deposition triggered by pressure pulses results
in a “shock wave” motion inside the cell. (c) Fluorescence is present only in
cytoplasm. (d) Fluorescence is present only in cell nucleus.

The orientation of the motion gradient at each pixel is
Φ(x, y) = arctan

Fy (x, y)
.
Fx (x, y)

(9)

As the micropipette tip touches the cell membrane, deformation occurs around the contact point. Accordingly, the motion
gradients in MHI converge to the contact point.

To evaluate the system’s performance of automatically locating micropipette, micropipette tip’s initial distance to the
culture surface was divided into five groups. The task of locating micropipette tips in the five groups was also conducted
manually by three skilled micromanipulation operators. Experimental results demonstrate that the overall time for autolocating
micropipette tip (30.2 s in an average) is significantly shorter
(p-value< 0.001) than in manual operation (averagely 64.8 s).
Autolocating micropipette tip was also tested under three
imaging modes: bright field, phase contrast, and differential
interference contrast (DIC). Although the phase contrast or DIC
imaging modes are desired for producing pseudo-3-D view of
cells, it was found in experiments that bright field imaging produced a high success rate because the micropipette tip appears
more uniform and “halo” free under bight field imaging.
B. Injection Speed

D. Robotic Microinjection
In this new robotic system, an operator performs every step
throughout the microinjection process via computer mouse
clicking. The operator readily selects injection locations (i.e.,
cell nucleus or cytoplasm) since the cell nucleus and cytoplasm
are distinct on a computer monitor. The operator can select a single cell or multiple cells to inject within the field of view. During
computer mouse clicking, cell templates centered at the mouse
clicking positions are extracted. The templates are used for template matching to provide position feedback. After performing
contact detection, the system moves the micropipette tip close
to the first target cell and inserts the micropipette into the target
cell along the tilting axis at the maximal speed. Injection depth
was set to be either 2 μm above the cell bottom surface (i.e.,
detected by contact on dish substrate) or 2 μm below the cell
top surface (i.e., detected by contact on cell membrane). The
pressure source is then triggered to apply a positive pressure to
deposit the preloaded material into the cell. Material deposition
results in a “shock wave” motion inside the cell, around the injection location [see Fig. 5(b)]. The volume of injected materials
is precisely controlled by the injection pressure magnitude and
width. Although target cells are selected in a random order by
the operator, the system injects all cells along the shortest path.
The system then moves to the next field of view to continue
the injection of more cells. The locations of injected cells are
all recorded by the system, permitting time-lapsed imaging of
every injected cell.

Injection speed of the system was evaluated by injecting three
different adherent cell lines: HeLa cells, HEK293 cells, and
HL-1 cells. The number of injected cells and time consumed are
summarized in Table I. The injection time summarized in Table I
is the total experimental time for all steps including locating
micropipette tip (after replacement of a new micropipette due
to tip damage or clogging), contact detection, cell selection,
and injection. The results from the injection of over 4000 cells
show that the injection speed of the robotic system is consistent
across different adherent cell lines. The average injection speed
is 22.7 cells/min, which enables users to inject over a thousand
of adherent cells within 1 h.
C. Injection Success Rate and Cell Survival Rate
In order to evaluate the injection success rate and cell survival
rate, a Dextran–Rhodamine fluorescent dye was injected into the
cytoplasm or nucleus of HeLa cells. The Dextran–Rhodamine
dye was chosen because it is highly water soluble and membrane
impermeable. Therefore, only the cells that are successfully
injected with Dextran–Rhodamine are able to reveal red fluorescent color. The system permits material deposition into the
cytoplasm [see Fig. 5(c)] or into the cell nucleus [see Fig. 5(d)].
When the deposition target (i.e., either cytoplasm or nucleus
but not both) reveals strong red fluorescent signals, injection
was considered successful. Experimental results summarized in
Table II show that the success rates for cytoplasmic (n = 1245)

124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE II
INJECTION SUCCESS RATE AND CELL SURVIVAL RATE AFTER INJECTION
injection location
into cytoplasm
into nucleus

injection number

success rate

survival rate

1245
1036

95.2%
97.5%

97.2%
96.5%

Fig. 6. Only one cell is injected in an area, and fluorescence dye is transferred
from the injected cell to adjacent cells through gap junctions.

and nuclear (n = 1036) injection were comparable (95.2% and
97.5%).
Cell postinjection viability was evaluated by using a cell viability assay kit (Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit, Life Technologies)
after 30 min postinjection incubation. The measured cell survival rate after cytoplasmic injection was 97.2% and after nuclear injection was 96.5%.
D. Characterization of Cell–Cell Communication
We used the robotic system to perform dye transfer experiments for measuring gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC). In the dye transfer experiments, a membraneimpermeable HPTS (8-Hydroxypyrene-1,3,6-Trisulfonic Acid)
fluorescent dye mixing with Dextran–Rhodamine dye was injected into a cell. HPTS fluorescent dye was chosen because of
its small molecule size and membrane-impermeable property.
The small HPTS molecule (MW = 524.37 Da) can be transferred from the injected cell to adjacent cells through only gap
junctions. In contrast, the Dextran–Rhodamine molecule, because of its large molecule size (MW = 10 000 Da), cannot
pass through gap junctions. Therefore, only the injected cell reveals a red fluorescent signal, while the injected cell as well as
a number of adjacent cells reveal green fluorescent signal (see
Fig. 6). The exact number of neighboring cells that can reveal
green fluorescent signal is determined by the capability of the
cells’ gap junctions. Thus, GJIC was quantitatively investigated
by measuring the dye transferred cell number (i.e., the number
of cells uptaking fluorescent molecules from the injected cell
through gap junctions) and dye transferred distance (i.e., the
furthest distance that the fluorescent dye can be transferred).
GJIC was investigated on three cell lines (i.e., Hela cells,
HEK293 cells, and HL-1 cells). These cell lines are known to
have absent, moderate, and high expression of gap junctions,
respectively. We also used 18-α glycyrrhetinic acid (18-αGA)

Fig. 7. Results of dye transfer experiments. (a) Histogram of dye transfer
distance for HeLa cells (n = 200), HEK293 cells (n = 200), and HL-1 cells
(n = 400). (b) Number of HL-1 cells uptaking fluorescence dye from the injected
cells. Over 200 cells were injected for each group.

to treat HL-1 cells as a demonstration of quantifying drug effect
on regulating gap junction function. It is known that 18-αGA
inhibits the role of GJIC in fibroblast growth [22], myoblast
fusion [23], and trophoblast proliferation [24]. In our experiments, the robotic system was used to assess GJIC of three
experiment groups with different doses (25, 50, or 100 μM)
of 18-αGA treatment. Two control groups were also included.
Control group 1 [see 0 μM in Fig. 7(b)] had no 18-αGA. Since
the 18-αGA stocking solution was dissolved in DMSO, a second control group [see DMSO in Fig. 7(b)] with only DMSO
treatment was also examined.
The dye transfer distance was measured to quantitatively characterize the GJIC for the three cell lines. The histogram of dye
transfer distance for the three cell lines shown in Fig. 7(a) reveals
that HL-1 cells have higher GJIC than the other two cell lines.
HL-1 is a cardiac muscle cell line. The strong GJIC of HL-1 cells
is physiologically necessary for impulse propagation in cardiac
tissue [25]. The impulse signal is passed efficiently through gap
junctions, allowing the cardiac tissue to contract at the same
tandem. In contrast, Hela cells, a cancer cell line derived from
cervical cancer cells, express little GJIC, confirming they do
not pass signals via gap junctions for cell coordination. Limited
GJIC results in poor inhibition of cancer cell mitosis, causing
tumor formation [26].

LIU et al.: ROBOTIC ADHERENT CELL INJECTION FOR CHARACTERIZING CELL–CELL COMMUNICATION

The experimental data in Fig. 7(b) shows that the number of
HL-1 cells that uptook fluorescent dye from the injected cells
decreased significantly with a higher dose of GJIC inhibitor.
The results show that 100 μM of 18-αGA effectively blocked
almost all the gap junctions. There is no significant difference
between the two control groups of HL-1 cells [i.e., the first two
bars in Fig. 7(b)].

[6]
[7]

[8]

E. Discussion

[9]

Microinjection of adherent cells permits the direct insertion
of foreign materials (e.g., DNA/RNA, fluorescent dyes, quantum dots, etc.) into single cells. It is a decades-old technology that is still widely used in cell biology for testing cell–
cell communication, studying intracellular behavior, and gene
transfection [27].
Manual microinjection of adherent cells and existing robotic
system prototypes are limited to the injection of a few to tens of
cells per experiment at best. Our new robotic system described
in this paper is the first system capable of performing microinjection on hundreds and thousands of cells per experiment. The
system is embedded with strong automation capabilities in every step of operation, enabling an operator to perform the entire
microinjection process via mouse clicking in front of a computer
monitor. Training of a user with no skills in microinjection takes
10–15 min, and after a few hours’ operation, the user becomes
highly proficient at operating the system to perform adherent
cell microinjection with high success rates.

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

V. CONCLUSION
This paper described a robotic adherent cell injection (RACI)
system equipped with several key technologies that were recently developed. These new techniques include automatically
locating micropipette tips, robustly detecting the contact of micropipette tip with cell culture surface and directly with cell
membrane, and precisely compensating for accumulative positioning errors. The high degree of automation of the system
enables users with no microinjection training to perform largescale cell injection with high success rates. System operation
speed, success rate, and cell viability rate were quantitatively
evaluated. Dye transfer experiments were conducted on different cell lines to establish a powerful assay for characterizing cell
gap junction functions.

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

REFERENCES
[1] T. Pawson, “Protein modules and signalling networks,” Nature, vol. 373,
no. 6515, pp. 573–580, Feb. 1995.
[2] P. Friedl and K. Wolf, “Tumour-cell invasion and migration: Diversity and
escape mechanisms,” Nat. Rev. Cancer, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 362–374, May
2003.
[3] I. Stefanová, J. R. Dorfman, and R. N. Germain, “Self-recognition promotes the foreign antigen sensitivity of naive T lymphocytes,” Nature,
vol. 420, no. 6914, pp. 429–434, Nov. 2002.
[4] K. M. Abdullah, G. Luthra, J. J. Bilski, S. A. Abdullah, L. P. Reynolds,
D. A. Redmer, and A. T. Grazul-Bilska, “Cell-to-cell communication and
expression of gap junctional proteins in human diabetic and nondiabetic
skin fibroblasts: Effects of basic fibroblast growth factor,” Endocrine,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 35–41, Feb. 1999.
[5] M. Abbaci, M. Barberi-Heyob, W. Blondel, F. Guillemin, and J. Didelon,
“Advantages and limitations of commonly used methods to assay the

[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]

125

molecular permeability of gap junctional intercellular communication,”
BioTechniques, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 33–52, Jul. 2008.
Z. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Leung, N. Esfandiari, R. F. Casper, and Y. Sun,
“Robotic ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection),” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2102–2108, Jul. 2011.
H. B. Huang, D. Sun, S. Member, J. K. Mills, and S. H. Cheng, “Robotic
cell injection system with position and force control: Toward automatic
batch biomanipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 727–737,
Jun. 2009.
A. Pillarisetti, M. Pekarev, A. D. Brooks, and J. P. Desai, “Evaluating the
effect of force feedback in cell injection,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 322–331, Jul. 2007.
K. Sakaki, N. Dechev, R. D. Burke, and E. J. Park, “Development of an
autonomous biological cell manipulator with single-cell electroporation
and visual servoing capabilities,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56,
no. 8, pp. 2064–2074, Aug. 2009.
Q. Zhao, M. Wu, M. Cui, Y. Qin, J. Yu, M. Sun, X. Zhao, and X. Feng, “A
novel pneumatic micropipette aspiration method using a balance pressure
model,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 84, no. 12, pp. 123703-1–123703-11, Dec.
2013.
H. Ladjal, J.-L. Hanus, and A. Ferreira, “Micro-to-nano biomechanical
modeling for assisted biological cell injection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2461–2471, Sep. 2013.
H. Esmaeilsabzali, K. Sakaki, N. Dechev, R. D. Burke, and E. J. Park,
“Machine vision-based localization of nucleic and cytoplasmic injection
sites on low-contrast adherent cells,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 11–21, Jan. 2012.
S. Lim, N. A. Zeenathul, M. L. Mohd Azmi, O. Abas Mazni, and
O. Fauziah, “Effect of protein concentration and injection pressure in microinjection delivery of maltose binding protein into breast cancer cells,”
Pertanika J. Sci. Technol., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 273–283, 2011.
K. Viigipuu and P. Kallio, “Microinjection of living adherent cells by
using a semi-automatic microinjection system,” Alternatives Laboratory
Animals: ATLA, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 417–423, Oct. 2004.
G. Becattini, L. Mattos, and D. Caldwell, “A fully automated system for
adherent cells microinjection,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 83–93, Jan. 2014.
W. Wang, Y. Sun, M. Zhang, R. Anderson, L. Langille, and W. Chan, “A
system for high-speed microinjection of adherent cells,” Rev. Sci. Instrum.,
vol. 79, no. 10, pp. 104302-1–104302-6, Oct. 2008.
Y. Sun, S. Duthaler, and B. J. Nelson, “Autofocusing in computer microscopy: Selecting the optimal focus algorithm,” Microsc. Res. Tech.,
vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 139–149, Oct. 2004.
J. Liu, Z. Gong, K. Tang, Z. Lu, C. Ru, J. Luo, S. Xie, and Y. Sun,
“Locating end-effector tips in robotic micromanipulation,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 125–130, Feb. 2014.
L. Wang, J. K. Mills, and W. L. Cleghorn, “Automatic microassembly using visual servo control,” IEEE Trans. Electron. Packag. Manuf.,
vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 316–325, Oct. 2008.
W. Wang, X. Liu, and Y. Sun, “Contact detection in microrobotic
manipulation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 821–828,
Aug. 2007.
D. Ziou and F. Deschênes, “Depth from defocus estimation in spatial
domain,” Comput. Vis. Image Understanding, vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 143–165,
2001.
W. Martin, G. Zempel, D. Hülser, and K. Willecke, “Growth inhibition
of oncogene-transformed rat fibroblasts by cocultured normal cells: Relevance of metabolic cooperation mediated by gap junctions,” Cancer Res.,
vol. 51, no. 19, pp. 5348–5351, Oct. 1991.
R. M. Mège, D. Goudou, C. Giaume, M. Nicolet, and F. Rieger, “Is intercellular communication via gap junctions required for myoblast fusion?,”
Cell Adhesion Commun., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 329–343, Aug. 1994.
T. Nishimura, C. Dunk, Y. Lu, X. Feng, A. Gellhaus, E. Winterhager,
J. Rossant, and S. J. Lye, “Gap junctions are required for trophoblast
proliferation in early human placental development,” Placenta, vol. 25,
no. 7, pp. 595–607, Aug. 2004.
S. Rohr, “Role of gap junctions in the propagation of the cardiac action
potential,” Cardiovascular Res., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 309–322, May 2004.
J. W. Holder, E. Elmore, and J. C. Barrett, “Gap junction function and
cancer,” Cancer Res., vol. 53, no. 15, pp. 3475–3485, Aug. 1993.
T. K. Kim and J. H. Eberwine, “Mammalian cell transfection: The present
and the future,” Anal. Bioanalytical Chem., vol. 397, no. 8, pp. 3173–3178,
Aug. 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

