166

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

A CADx Scheme for Mammography Empowered
With Topological Information From Clustered
Microcalcifications’ Atlases
Ioannis I. Andreadis, George M. Spyrou, and Konstantina S. Nikita

Abstract—A computer-aided diagnosis (CADx ) framework for
the diagnosis of clustered microcalcifications (MCs) has already
been developed, which is based on the analysis of MCs’ morphologies, the shape of the cluster they form and the texture of
the surrounding tissue. In this study, we investigate the diagnostic information that the relative location of the cluster inside the
breast may provide. Breast probabilistic maps are generated and
adopted in the CADx pipeline, expecting to empower its diagnostic
procedure. We propose a flowchart combining alternative classification algorithms and the aforementioned probabilistic maps in
order to provide a final risk for malignancy for new considered
mammograms. For the evaluation performance, a large dataset of
mammograms provided from the Digital Database of Screening
Mammography (DDSM) has been used. The obtained results indicate that the proposed modifications lead to the enhancement of
the diagnostic process, as the classification results are further improved. Additionally, a straightforward comparison between the
CADx pipeline and the radiologists who assessed the same mammograms, reveal that the CADx pipeline performs toward the right
direction, as the sensitivity remains at high levels, while improving
both the accuracy, from 51.4% to 69%, and the specificity, from
16.6% to 54.7%.
Index Terms—Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD), computational intelligence, microcalcifications (MCs), probabilistic maps,
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
ICROCALCIFICATIONS (MCs) are tiny deposits of
calcium salts that can be located anywhere in breast
tissue [1]. Although mammography is considered the most effective screening tool for the examination of breast MCs [2],
specific inherent limitations of the method led to the development of computer-aided diagnosis (CADx ) systems [3]. The role
of a CADx system is to help the radiologists in their diagnostic
process by supporting them with a reliable second opinion [4].
In a previous work [5], we have already developed a CADx
framework for the classification of cluster of MCs. The framework implemented the main steps followed for the diagnosis,
including the segmentation of MCs from the surrounding tissue,

M

Manuscript received January 9, 2014; revised May 5, 2014 and June 18,
2014; accepted June 20, 2014. Date of publication July 25, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014.
I. I. Andreadis and K. S. Nikita are with the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 15573 Athens, Greece
(e-mail: iandr@ biosim.ntua.gr; knikita@ece.ntua.gr).
G. M. Spyrou is with the Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of
Athens, Athens 11527, Greece (e-mail: gspyrou@bioacademy.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2334491

the extraction of objective features for the description of the cluster, the proper selection of the most representative features, and
the final classification using a machine learning algorithm [4].
A great variety of image features has been considered, containing features describing the texture of the surrounding tissue in
which the MCs are embedded [6], features describing the shape
of the individual MCs and their optical density [7], and finally
features representing the morphology of the whole cluster and
the distribution of the MCs within the cluster [8].
However, there is an additional factor that is taken under consideration by the radiologists and concerns the relative location
of the findings inside the breast [9]. Despite the importance of
this factor, there are few studies that have incorporated position
features in their CADx pipeline. Veldkamp et al. [10] used the
relative distance of the cluster from the pectoral muscle and the
breast’s skin line as measures for the discrimination of clusters of MCs. Russakoff and Hasegawa [11] generated a set of
probabilistic breast cancer atlases to reveal areas of higher risk
of breast cancer, but took under consideration regions of interest (ROIs), including only cancerous masses and not cluster of
MCs. The reason for this lack is probably due to the fact that the
description of the relative location of a finding inside the breast
requires much introductory work, since the proper segmentation
of important breast landmarks (breast skin, pectoral muscle, and
nipple) is considered prerequisite step. In a previous work [12],
we have performed the introductory steps for the use of location
features in the CADx pipeline. Specifically, we have proposed
a framework leading to the generation of breast MC occurrence
and probabilistic maps. The specific maps revealed areas with
higher occurrence of cluster of MCs, as well as areas that seem
to be more susceptible to cancer.
In this study, we investigate whether the location of a cluster
may provide quantified information to support diagnosis. We
adopt the generated maps in the diagnostic procedure expecting to optimize the classification performance. For performance
evaluation, we used a great number of mammograms of varying
subtlety provided by the Digital Database of Screening Mammography (DDSM) [13]. To the best of our knowledge, it is
the largest dataset used in CADx diagnosis for MCs, since we
exploited almost all the available cases of the database containing clusters of MCs ending in a dataset consisted of 1715
different ROIs.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II
we briefly present the considered dataset, we describe the basic steps of the CADx framework and we mainly discuss the
proposed set of rules, where the contribution of the location

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ANDREADIS et al.: CADx SCHEME FOR MAMMOGRAPHY EMPOWERED WITH TOPOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Fig. 1. Flowchart for the CADx framework. The main steps presented in [5]
are depicted using continuous lines. The proposed modifications in this study
are presented with dashed lines.

features is implemented. In Section III, we present the results
achieved after receiver operating characteristic (ROC) evaluation and we compare the reported performance with the corresponding achieved by the radiologists who assessed the same
mammograms. Finally, in Sections IV and V, we discuss the
achieved results and we proceed on the extraction of the most
important conclusions, while discussing the main future work
toward refining the diagnostic process.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. CADx Framework
Each CADx system includes specific steps such as the segmentation of MCs, the feature extraction process and the final
classification of a considered case [4]. The framework investigated in the current study has been presented in a previous
work [5], whose efficacy has been investigated using subsets of
varying findings’ subtlety [14]. The main steps of this CADx
framework are presented in Fig. 1 using the continuous arrows.
A segmentation algorithm is used to isolate the detected MCs
from the surrounding breast tissue. Afterwards, feature extraction methodologies are applied to extract objective image features. Specifically, a great variety of image features has been
applied, including features based on shape representation of the
finding (area, circularity, elongation, etc.), features concerning
the morphology of the cluster of MCs and features representing
the texture of the surrounding tissue (first-order statistics, features based on the gray-level occurrence matrices). A total of
188 different image features have been considered. Due to the
great number of image features considered, a feature selection
phase is appropriate, in order to remove irrelevant features and
locate a satisfactory subset able to improve the classification results. To this end, the sequential forward selection (SFS) method
has been applied for the feature selection. Finally, a classification scheme is required to discriminate between benign and
malignant cases.
In this study, we perform proper changes on the CADx
pipeline, concerning mainly the final step, the classification
scheme. The proposed changes are presented in Fig. 1 with
dashed arrows. Instead of using only one classification algo-

167

rithm, a series of classification algorithms is exploited in order
to form an ensemble classifier, which provides the estimation
of the final risk assessment. Specifically, the following machine
learning algorithms are utilized: support vector machines, using four different kernels (Gaussian RBF, sigmoid, linear, and
polynomial), k-nearest neighbors, artificial neural network, classification tree, random forests, and probabilistic neural network
using two different functions (Gaussian and exponential). Therefore, we end in a set consisted of ten different classifiers.
All the aforementioned classification schemes are combined
in an ensemble classifier, which estimates the risk of the malignancy of a considered ROI in a continuous scale. Specifically,
each individual classifier provides a binary decision by classifying the ROI as benign or malignant. We initially apply each
classification scheme, and we count the number of malignant
predictions (votes for malignancy). We divide then this number
to the total number of votes (the total number of classifiers,
herein 10). For example, since we utilized ten different classifiers, if eight of them classify the case as malignant, the final
estimate of the ensemble classifier for malignancy is 80%. This
is the final output of the CADx framework indicating the risk
for malignancy for the considered case.
B. Clustered MCs’ Atlases
Apart from the use of shape, cluster, distribution and textural
features, we add in this study an extra feature type concerning
the location of the cluster inside the breast. In a previous work
[12], we have introduced the main principles for the use of location features. Specifically, we proposed a framework, including
segmentation and determination of important breast landmarks,
computation of distances of the center of the cluster to those
landmarks, and finally a pipeline leading to the generation of
probabilistic maps, that are used to enhance the classification
process (see Fig. 1).
The first step in the proposed framework addresses the task
of segmenting the breast area from the background in a mammogram. To this end, we applied a segmentation algorithm presented in [15]. It is a simple and fast algorithm that is mainly
based on three steps, including analysis of the mammogram’s
histogram, application of morphological filters, and smoothing
of breast’s border. We applied the specific algorithm to segment
the breast area on all the available mammograms, both from
CranioCaudal (CC) and MedioLateral (MLO) view. Apart from
the breast’s silhouette, another important landmark that has to
be located is the pectoral muscle, which is a triangular area appeared in the left upper corner of a mammogram and it is visible
exclusively on mammograms acquired from the MLO view. We
applied a simple algorithm based on locating the boundary pixel
between the pectoral muscle and the breast area on an initial line
of the muscle. The boundary pixel is considered the pixel that
appears the greatest decrease in the average brightness throughout the line. The specific process is repeated from all the lines
of the image above and below the initial line, by limiting the
search only in neighboring pixels of the boundary pixels defined
on previous lines, since the border of the pectoral muscle is usually a straight line or at least a small curve. The criteria followed

168

Fig. 2.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Description of the relative location of the cluster inside the breast area.

for the choice of the initial line and the choice of the boundary pixel were proposed in [16]. Finally, for the determination
of the nipple, we followed basic principles of the geometry of
the breast and we considered as nipple point the point of the
breast border with the largest distance to the chest side for CC
mammograms and the point of the breast border with the largest
distance from the pectoral muscle for MLO mammograms.
After segmenting the aforementioned breast landmarks, the
second step of the proposed framework concerns the extraction
of position features that describe the relative location of the
finding inside the breast. These features are presented in Fig. 2
for a mammogram from the MLO view. To this end, using the
segmented breast area, we compute the breast length and width,
the distance of the center of the cluster to the nipple of the breast
(d1) and the angle that is formed between the current line and
the horizontal level (θ). The distance of the center of the cluster
to the nipple is computed either relatively to the distance from
the chest wall to the nipple, in case of the CC view, or relatively
to the distance between the nipple and the pectoral muscle for
the MLO view (d2).
Finally, using the aforementioned features, we generate breast
atlases. Specifically, we project all the available ROIs on the
breast silhouette of a random case that has been chosen to be
the shape-container. For each different mammogram we apply
the segmentation algorithms discussed earlier and we compute
for each ROI the corresponding position features that provide the
relative location of the cluster. Therefore, each ROI is projected
on the corresponding location into the atlas shape. More specific
information on the generation of breast atlases is given in our
previous work [14].
Following this method, we may extract occurrence maps,
as well as probabilistic maps between benignity and malignancy for each different view (CC/MLO). The achieved occurrence and discrimination maps for different parts of the
breast are presented in Fig. 3. The values of occurrence
maps are normalized to the maximum value of occurrence.
For the probabilistic maps, value equal to 1 indicates higher
probability of malignancy.
Observing the occurrence maps, it seems that there exist indeed areas of the breast with higher occurrence of clusters of
MCs. The majority of MCs clusters are located on the upper

Fig. 3. Occurrence maps for (a) the CC view and (b) the MLO view and the
corresponding probabilistic maps for (a) the CC view and (b) the MLO view [14].

outer quadrant of the breast. Similarly, the probabilistic maps
reveal areas more susceptible to cancer or the opposite, areas with increased probability to host a benign cluster. In this
study, we exploit the topological information and proceed on
the adoption of the specific maps in the diagnostic process of
the CADx pipeline, as a new cluster may be projected on the
probabilistic maps and therefore a priori probabilities for cancer
may be estimated.
C. Proposed Flowchart
The classifiers implemented in the final step of the CADx
pipeline provide a binary prediction for a new case, e.g., whether
this case is benign or malignant. Applying all of them into the
ensemble classifier discussed earlier, we may obtain an initial
risk for the new considered case, namely, RISK1 hereafter. Similarly, using the probabilistic maps, we may obtain another risk,
namely, RISK2 , which is based exclusively on the location of
the cluster. The main aim of this study is to propose a proper way
to combine these two risks, in order to exploit the topological
information that the discrimination maps offer and optimize the
diagnostic process.
The proposed scenario to combine these two risks is presented
in Fig. 4. The main idea is to avoid the two risks to contribute
equally to the final risk estimation. Instead, we want the RISK1

ANDREADIS et al.: CADx SCHEME FOR MAMMOGRAPHY EMPOWERED WITH TOPOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Fig. 4. Proposed flowchart for the combination of CADx framework and
probabilistic maps.

169

for their diagnosis the location of the cluster, by splitting the
mammograms into different quadrants [9].
We should note here that the classifiers of the CADx framework providing the RISK1 have to be evaluated with cases that
have not been used during their training. Similarly, a case projected on the map should not have been used previously for its
generation. For this reason, the probabilistic maps are slightly
differentiated from those presented in Fig. 3 and reformed, in
order to exclude the case considered, as shown in Fig. 4. In general, the validation and the evaluation of the proposed flowchart
will be carried out with a totally unknown subset of cases, according to the random separation of the dataset that will be
discussed in the next section.
D. Data Collection

to play the primary role for the classification of the case, since its
computation is the result of several different machine learning
algorithms and various feature types (morphology, distribution,
and texture). The role of the second risk (RISK2 ) is to modify
properly the initial risk (RISK1 ), taking under consideration
exclusively the relative location of the finding.
The second risk is computed as follows: we project the new
considered ROI into the corresponding atlas (CC/MLO) in order
to extract a pair of probabilities, concerning benignity and malignancy, namely, [Pb , Pm ], where Pb = 1 − Pm . The specific
probabilities are computed as the mean value of the corresponding pixels of the atlas on which the current ROI is projected. The
first value represents the probability for the projected cluster to
be benign, while the second value represents the corresponding probability for malignancy, depending exclusively on the
projection of the cluster into the probabilistic atlas. Obviously,
whether the risk of benignity (Pb ) is greater or smaller than the
risk of malignancy (Pm ) , the RISK2 suggests increased probability toward benignity or malignancy, respectively. In order
to simulate the contribution of the location of the finding, we
compute the final risk (RISKF ) through the following equation:
RISKF = RISK1 + RISK2

(1)

where RISK2 is computed as
RISK2 = alpha ∗ (Pm − Pb )

(2)

The risk RISKF represents the final risk computed as indicated in the flowchart presented in Fig. 4. The second term of the
above relation (RISK2 ) concerns exclusively the risk based on
the location of the cluster. The parameter alpha may take only
positive values and determines the grade that the second risk
should contribute to the estimation of the final risk. The second
risk works as a shift of the first risk, either by reducing it, when
the location of the cluster recommends benignity, or by further
increasing it, when the location of the cluster shows increased
probability for malignancy. Therefore, the relative location of
the cluster is considered as an additional component that may
be analyzed independently and contribute to the initial risk estimation, which is based on the analysis of the ROI. We achieve
that way to mimic radiologists’ strategy, since they co-estimate

As mentioned earlier, we used cases provided by the DDSM,
which is the largest database currently available. Almost all
cases contain images from both MLO and CC views, while a
mammogram may contain more than one annotated ROI. For
each ROI, the database provides accompanying files that include the assessment performed by the radiologists according
to the BIRADS standard [9], information on the ROI concerning
the exact location, and annotation of the finding, as well as its
pathology status according to the biopsy that has been preceded.
We collected almost all the cases of the database that contained
annotated clusters of MCs, and we ended in a dataset consisted
of 843 mammograms from the CC view and 846 mammograms
acquired from the MLO view, containing 1715 different ROIs
with both benign and malignant clusters. Only a few cases have
been excluded from the study, such as cases that contained
clusters diffused throughout the whole breast area without a
local annotation specified by radiologists, cases where segmentation of mammograms was not feasible or cases with unproven
pathology results.
In order to ensure both satisfying training and evaluation of
the CADx framework, we divided the initial dataset consisted
of 1715 ROIs into two groups: the training set consisted of 1114
cases (65%) and the evaluation set consisted of 601 cases (35%).
Both subsets are randomly chosen, whereas the only assumption
is that the training set should be balanced by containing equal
number of benign and malignant cases. As mentioned previously, the aim of this study is to propose a flowchart that fuses
the CADx pipeline with the probabilistic maps. For this reason,
we proceed on further separation of the evaluation set into two
different subsets. The first subset is small enough containing
120 cases (20%) and will be used as the validation set for the
design of the proposed flowchart. The second subset consisted
of 481 cases (265 benign and 216 malignant) will be used as the
test set for the evaluation of the proposed scenario.
Previously, we have indicated the crucial role that the composition of the dataset plays on the classification performance
[14]. The grade of difficulty for cluster’s analysis is characterized by a value of subtlety (ranging from 1 to 5), provided in
the database, where smaller values imply increasing grade of
difficulty. The subtlety rating differs from the BI-RADS standard and it is a subjective measure determined by experienced

170

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 5. Distribution of cases based on the subtlety rating for the three considered subsets. The first column represents the train set, the second column the
validation set and the third column the test set.

radiologists, who participated in the preparation of the DDSM
database. In order to achieve objective results, all three subsets
(training, validation and test) have to contain cases of varying
subtlety. This demand is satisfied thanks to the random separation of the initial dataset. The distribution of the cases for all
three subsets based on the subtlety rating is presented in Fig. 5.
III. RESULTS
According to the separation of the initial dataset into training,
validation and test set we present the results achieved for each
different subset. The training set has been used for the training of
the classification schemes. During this phase, all classifiers are
properly trained with the training set, which is consisted of 1114
cases of varying subtlety. Proper parameterization is followed
for each different classifier, so as to find the optimal parameters’
values for the classification task. Proper feature selection has
also been applied to locate the optimal features’ subset. The
obtained classifiers are combined in order to form the ensemble
classifier that may provide the final risk for malignancy. This
final scheme is applied on the cases of both the validation and
the test set to evaluate its performance.
A. Performance on the Validation Set
The cases of the validation set will be used for the evaluation
of the general CADx classifier, as well as for the validation
of the potential of the proposed flowchart to contribute in the
optimization of the diagnostic process. The CADx pipeline is
applied on each of the 120 cases of the validation set. For each
case, we record the final risk estimated (RISK1 ), which indicates
the probability for malignancy for the considered case. Then,
each case is projected on the corresponding probabilistic map,
depending on the view of the mammogram, to estimate the pair
of probabilities for malignancy based on the location of the
cluster (RISK2 ). The two risks are then combined following the
proposed flowchart in order to estimate the final risk estimation
(RISKF ).
Initially, we focus on the RISK1 for the cases of the validation set, and we extract the corresponding ROC curve to estimate the Az metric (area under curve), which is the best-suited
metric for two-class classification problems. Considering the
CADx framework and the initial risk RISK1 , we found that the
achieved Az value is equal to 0.789 (see Fig. 6). When applying
only the Gaussian radial basis function (RBF) SVM classifier

Fig. 6. ROC curves for the initial risk (RISK1 ) and the final risk (RISKF )
using the validation set.

(implemented in the previous version of the CADx scheme) the
Az value achieved is equal to 0.752. This fact indicates that
the application of all the ten classifiers in an ensemble scheme
improved the classification results.
We proceed then on the validation of the proposed flowchart.
Firstly, we study the influence of the parameter alpha in the
classification results. We choose different values ranging from
(0, 2] with steady step 0.05. We search for the specific value
that optimizes the classification performance. We observed that
the maximum Az value is achieved for the value 0.8 of the
parameter alpha.
Using the specific value, we applied the flowchart to compute
the final risk (RISKF ). We extracted the ROC curve and we
observe that the probabilistic maps contribute positively in the
improvement of the diagnostic performance, since the Az value
of the ROC curve is improved from 0.789 to 0.861. Both ROC
curves, the former for the RISK1 and the latter for the RISKF ,
are presented in Fig. 6.
We may use the specific ROC curve to perform a straightforward comparison between the current CADx framework and
the radiologists who assessed the same cases of the validation
subset. We remind that the DDSM database provides also the
assessment for each different case that has been performed by
experience radiologists, according to the BIRADS standard [9].
Based on the final diagnosis performed by the radiologists using
the BIRADS score, we follow the procedure proposed in [17]
for the extraction of the ROC curve of the radiologists. In Fig. 7,
we provide both ROC curves for the validation set in a common graph. The difference between the two Az values is almost
0.072, which indicates the potential of the proposed scenario
to support the radiologists’ diagnostic process performed in the
real clinical practice.
Until now, we based the comparisons performed on the Az
value extracted from the ROC curves. In order to estimate important metrics such as the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity,
we analyze further the ROC curve in order to locate the point
that optimizes the discrimination between benign and malignant
cases. According to [18], the optimal point of the ROC curve
should be the point that has the shortest distance to the upper left
of the axes, that means the point (0,1). Following this method,

ANDREADIS et al.: CADx SCHEME FOR MAMMOGRAPHY EMPOWERED WITH TOPOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Fig. 7. ROC curves for the final risk (RISKF ) and the radiologists using the
validation set.

171

Fig. 8. ROC curves for the initial risk (RISK1 ) and the final risk (RISKF )
using the test set.

TABLE I
CADx AND RADIOLOGISTS PERFORMANCE ON THE VALIDATION SET

CADx (threshold 27%)
CADx (threshold 17%)
Radiologists

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

0.817
0.808
0.691

0.850
0.950
1.000

0.783
0.667
0.383

the optimal threshold is selected to be the percentage 27%. That
means, when the final risk computed is equal or greater than
27% the case is classified as malignant, otherwise is classified
as benign. However, the choice of the threshold may be slightly
differentiated, in order to be in accordance to the requested behavior of the system, depending on whether we aim at high
accuracy, sensitivity or specificity respectively. Concerning a
CAD system, we aim in general at high sensitivity, so as to limit
the number of missed cancers. For this reason, we locate the
point that provides enough high sensitivity (sensitivity ࣙ 0.95),
providing at the same time the greatest possible specificity. Satisfying this demand, we select as threshold the percentage 17%.
Using these two different thresholds, we proceed on the computation of the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. For reasons
of comparison, we compute the same metrics for the radiologists, using the BIRADS assessment [9]. If a case is classified as
BIRADS 2 or 3, the case is considered benign. On the contrary,
if a case is classified as BIRADS 0, 4 or 5, the case is considered malignant. Cases classified as BIRADS 1 do not exist in
the current manuscript, since we examined cases with annotated
findings (clusters of MCs) and not normal mammograms. The
obtained results are presented in Table I.
We may observe that sensitivity between CADx and radiologists is comparable on the validation set. Especially when considering the threshold 17%, we see that both achieve very high
sensitivity. However, the accuracy and the sensitivity provided
by the CADx framework are greater than the corresponding
values achieved by the radiologists.
B. Performance on the Test Set
Using a small validation subset at the previous section, we
determined a flowchart that led to improvement of the perfor-

Fig. 9. ROC curves for the final risk (RISKF ) and the radiologists using the
test set.

mance. However, the validation set is quite small to allow us
to extract conclusions with high generalization ability. For this
reason, we proceed on the evaluation using the test set consisted
of 481 cases, which have not been used at all either during the
training or the validation procedure. Therefore, we apply for
each different case of the test set the CADx ensemble classifier,
as well as the proposed flowchart presented in Fig. 4, using the
recommendation for the exact location of the cluster. The corresponding ROC curves are presented in Fig. 8, respectively. We
observe that the contribution of the probabilistic maps is also
positive on the test set, since the performance is improved from
0.746 to 0.786.
As in the case of the validation set, we proceed on a straightforward comparison with the radiologists who assessed the
mammograms of the test set. We generated the ROC curve for
the radiologists presented in Fig. 9 accompanied by the ROC
curve of the CADx framework.
Due to the fact that BIRADS score is a discrete value, the ROC
curve has to be fitted. However, this fitting leads to optimistic
results for the classification of human experts. Specifically, we
observe a quite large increase between the empiric and the fitted
ROC area. The former value is the most representative evaluation criterion for the radiologists and it will be used thus as the
basis for the proper comparison between the radiologists and the
CADx . It is obvious that there is a quite importance difference
(0.13) between these two Az values.

172

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE II
CADx AND RADIOLOGISTS PERFORMANCE ON THE TEST SET

CADx (threshold 27%)
CADx (threshold 17%)
Radiologists

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

0.713
0.690
0.514

0.764
0.866
0.935

0.672
0.547
0.166

We also compare the CADx system and the radiologists in
terms of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. To extract the specific measures, we use the two thresholds (27% and 17%) obtained during the validation phase and the analysis of the ROC
curve. The specific results are presented in Table II. An important observation that can be made is that the CADx framework is
able to provide better accuracy than the corresponding achieved
by the radiologists. The sensitivity remains at high levels, while
the specificity is enough greater than the corresponding achieved
by the radiologists.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we try to enhance the pipeline of a CADx framework in order to improve the diagnostic performance. Two are
the main major contributions proposed in this study. The first
concerns the implementation of several classification schemes
and their combination into an ensemble classifier. As a result,
the final output of this ensemble classifier is a continuous risk, a
percentage ranging from 0 to 100, and not the binary prediction
provided by each individual classifier, which consequently may
be combined more easily with the probabilities that are computed afterwards from the probabilistic maps. We implemented
various classification schemes, in order to ensure a satisfactory diversity in the classification rules and combined them in a
powerful ensemble that exploits the individual strengths of the
base classifiers, reducing at the same time their individual weaknesses. The second contribution concerns the use of topological
information to support diagnosis. The novelty of this study is
that we do not compute location features to feed the aforementioned classifiers, but we propose the use of such features to
generate probabilistic maps. Specifically, we adopt the use of
breast probabilistic maps, as a new case may be projected on
them and a priori estimation for the risk of malignancy may be
computed. The specific a priori risk is combined properly with
the initial risk provided by the CADx framework to obtain the
final risk estimation. Therefore, we consider the analysis of the
ROI and the location of the cluster inside the breast as two independent diagnostic components. They are studied separately and
the diagnostic information that each component provides is then
properly combined. We manage to mimic that way the strategy
that the radiologists follow when examining a new mammogram, since they analyze independently the morphology of the
findings in the ROI and the relative location of the cluster inside
the breast.
For the evaluation performance, we used a great variety of
mammograms provided by the DDSM database. To the best of
our knowledge, it is the largest dataset that has been used in

CADx diagnosis for breast MCs. The random separation of the
data into training, validation, and test set serves, respectively,
the generation of classifiers with high generalization ability, the
validation of their potential, the formulation of the proposed
framework, and finally, the objective evaluation of the proposed
methodologies using a totally unknown subset.
Using the validation set, we investigate the diagnostic performance of the ensemble classifier and the achieved Az value is
0.789. We introduce then the adoption of the generated probabilistic maps, as presented in Fig. 4, following (1) and (2). We
have noticed from the values of the probabilistic maps that the
maximum difference between Pb and Pm values is about 35%.
Therefore, a value of 0.8 for alpha indicates a possibility for
a maximum shift in the final risk of about 0.8 ∗ 35% = 28%.
This value is capable to shift the output to a different grade
of malignancy risk. Indeed, we showed that the adoption of
the probabilistic maps appeared positive contribution to the diagnostic performance, as it may provide an increase equal to
0.072 on the classification performance on the validation set.
These initial results are quite encouraging, but the small size
of the validation set forces us to repeat the measurements on a
larger dataset.
For this reason, we exploit the final available dataset, the
test set, consisted of 481 cases, which consists a very large
dataset, enabling us to extract secure conclusions. The developed methodologies are sequentially applied on each case of
the test set. Again, observing Fig. 8, it seems that the proposed
framework performs better than the initial ensemble classifier, as
the improvement achieved is equal to 0.04. The final conclusion
is that the adoption of probabilistic maps presents positive influence to the classification performance, both on the validation
and test set.
The fact that the mammograms used in this study have been
previously assessed by radiologists enabled us to perform a
straightforward comparison between them and the CADx framework. Analyzing the ROC curves and comparing the corresponding performance in terms of sensitivity, specificity and
accuracy, according to the results presented in Tables I and II,
we conclude that the CAD system may retain the high levels of sensitivity by improving at the same time the specificity
achieved. It is noticeable that the accuracy of the radiologists
is 51.4% on the test set. In other words, almost only one out
of two cases is correctly classified, mainly due to the fact that
the radiologists pursuit almost perfect sensitivity so as to avoid
missed cancers. This demand is satisfied by the CADx system,
since the sensitivity obtained on the test set is slightly decreased
(0.866 instead of 0.935), while the specificity achieved is about
three times greater than the corresponding value achieved by
the radiologists.
Despite the fact that we use DDSM data, it is difficult to
perform a straightforward comparison with previous studies in
the field. The reason is that the majority of the previously published studies did not use the whole set of cases but a random
subset, which is not always determined. Instead, in the present
study, we have incorporated almost the whole subset containing
clusters of MCs (1715 cases) in order to perform large-scale
evaluation. Many studies report high values of Az (Az > 0.85),

ANDREADIS et al.: CADx SCHEME FOR MAMMOGRAPHY EMPOWERED WITH TOPOLOGICAL INFORMATION

but for a small number of cases (cases < 150), without discussing important factors such as the subtlety of the cases [4].
In a previous study [14], we have studied various subsets of
mammograms and we have located a subset consisted of 256
cases where we reported Az equal to 0.909. When implementing the proposed methodologies on the whole database (1715
cases) we reported a value equal to 0.75 [5]. To the best of our
knowledge, few studies have used the whole database or even a
well-defined subset larger than 1000 mammograms of DDSM.
Hapfelmeier and Horsch [19] have used 1314 cases and reported
Az = 0.78, while Pereira et al. [20] mention that have used the
whole database and reported Az = 0.607, without declaring the
exact number of cases.
Despite the fact that the DDSM database is the largest publicly available database and the most popular choice for the
development of CAD methodologies, it has the disadvantage
that contains only cases of screen film mammograms. Unfortunately, no comparable reference database of modern full-fielddigital mammograms (FFDM) is publicly available today, so
as to exploit it and evaluate the proposed CAD methodologies.
Taking under consideration the results of the current study and
the encouraging conclusions extracted from the comparison between CADx and radiologists performance, we expect that the
application of the proposed methodologies in FFDM along with
the improved image quality will lead to an enhanced diagnostic
pipeline and improved classification performance.
V. CONCLUSION
The main question investigated in this study is the way that
we may expand CADx methodologies in order to optimize the
diagnostic process. The proposed methods are mainly focused
on the final output of the CADx pipeline. Instead of simply applying a trained classification scheme on new upcoming cases,
we propose a scenario where extra classification schemes are
applied to provide a percentage risk for the malignancy, while
this initial estimated risk is empowered according to probabilistic breast maps, which provide topological information to
support the diagnosis. The results provided reveal the valuable
diagnostic information and the beneficiary contribution in the
CADx pipeline that may be obtained by exploiting the probabilistic maps proposed. It is of great importance the fact that the
performance achieved outperforms the corresponding achieved
by the radiologists.
The specific conclusions determine the first steps toward the
optimization of the diagnostic process of a CAD system for
breast MCs. It seems that a set of rules that combines alternative
classifiers, probabilistic breast maps, and various feature types
may perform better than individual classifications schemes, offering at the same time a more completed diagnostic process for
the radiologists. This study will be used as the proper baseline
to work toward the refinement of the diagnostic procedure in
order to make it applicable in clinical routine. Our future steps
include the adoption of radiologists’ recommendations and data
from the medical folder of the patient, in order to form a scenario
for the CADx use, which will simulate the interaction between
CADx and radiologists in daily clinical practice.

173

REFERENCES
[1] M. Lanyi, “Microcalcifications in the breast—A blessing or a curse? A
critical review,” Diagn. Imag. Clin. Med., vol. 54, pp. 126–145, 1985.
[2] H. H. Ng and M. Muttarak, “Advances in mammography have improved
early detection of breast cancer,” J. H.K. Coll. Radiol., vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 126–131, 2003.
[3] M. Giger, H. Chan, and J. Boone, “Anniversary paper: History and status
of CAD and quantitative image analysis: The role of medical physics and
AAPM,” Med. Phys., vol. 35, pp. 5799–5820, 2008.
[4] M. Elter and A. Horsh, “CADx of mammographic masses and clustered
microcalcifications: A review,” Med. Phys., vol. 36, pp. 2052–2068, 2009.
[5] I. Andreadis, G. Spyrou, and K. Nikita, “A comparative study of image
features for classification of breast microcalcifications,” IOP Meas. Sci.
Technol., vol. 22, no. 11, 2011.
[6] A. Karahaliou, S. Skiadopoulos, I. Boniatis, P. Sakellaropoulos, E. Likaki,
G. Panayiotakis, and L. Costaridou, “Texture analysis of tissue surrounding microcalcifications on mammograms for breast cancer diagnosis,”
Br. J. Radiol., vol. 80, pp. 648–656, 2007.
[7] M. Kallergi, “Computer-aided diagnosis of mammographic microcalcification clusters,” Med. Phys., vol. 31, pp. 314–326, 2004.
[8] A. Papadopoulos, D. Fotiadis, and A. Likas, “Characterization of clustered
microcalcifications in digitized mammograms using neural networks and
support vector machines,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 34, pp. 141–150, 2005.
[9] American College of Radiology (ACR), ACR Breast Imaging Reporting
and Data System, Breast Imaging Atlas, 4th ed. Reston, Virginia, USA,
2003.
[10] W. J. Veldkamp, N. Karssemeijer, J. D. Otten, and J. H. Hendricks, “Automated classification of clustered microcalcifications into malignant and
benign types,” Med. Phys., vol. 27, pp. 2600–2608, 2000.
[11] D. B. Russakoff and A. Hasegawa, “Generation and application of a
probabilistic breast cancer atlas,” in MICCAI (LNCS 4191), R. Larsen,
M. Nielsen, J. Sporring, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, Heidelberg, pp.
454–461, 2006.
[12] I. Andreadis, G. Spyrou, P. Ligomenides, and K. Nikita, “Generation of
clustered microcalcifications’ atlases for benign and malignant cases,”
presented at the 13th Int. IEEE Conf. BioInform. Bioeng., Chania, Greece,
Nov. 10–13, 2013.
[13] M. Heath, K. Bowyer, D. Kopand, R. Moore, and W. Kegelmeyer,
“The digital database for screening mammography,” in Proc. 5th IWDM,
M. J. Yaffe, Ed. Toronto, ON, Canada: Med. Phys. Publishing, 2001,
pp. 212–218.
[14] I. Andreadis, G. Spyrou, P. Ligomenides. and K. Nikita, “Variations on
breast density and subtlety of the findings require different computational
intelligence pipelines for the diagnosis of clustered microcalcifications,”
presented at the 13th Int. IEEE Conf. Bioinform. Bioeng., Chania, Greece,
Nov. 10–13, 2013.
[15] T. Ojala, J. Nappi, and O. Nevalainen, “Accurate segmentation of the
breast region from digitized mammograms,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph.,
vol. 25, pp. 47–59, 2001.
[16] L. Wang, M. Zhu, L. Deng, and X. Yuan, “Automatic pectoral muscle
boundary detection in mammograms based on Markov chain and active
contour model,” J. Zhejiang Univ.-Sci. C, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 111–118,
2010.
[17] A. Karahaliou, S. Skiadopoulos, I. Boniatis, P. Sakellaropoulos, E. Likaki,
G. Panayiotakis, and L. Costaridou, “Texture analysis of tissue surrounding microcalcifications on mammograms for breast cancer diagnosis,”
Br. J. Radiol., vol. 80, pp. 648–656, 2007.
[18] R. Kumar and A. Indrayan, “Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve for medical researchers,” Indian Pediatrics, vol. 48, pp. 277–287,
2011.
[19] A. Hapfelmeier and A. Horsch, “Image feature evaluation in two new
mammography CAD prototypes,” Int. J. CARS, vol. 6, pp. 721–735, 2011.
[20] R. R. Pereira, P. M. Azevedo Marques, M. O. Honda, S. K. Kinoshita,
R. Engelmann, C. Muramatsu, and K. Doi, “Usefullness of texture analysis
for computerized classification of breast lesions on mammograms,” J. Dig.
Imag., vol. 20, pp. 248–255, 2007.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

