IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

2733

Electromagnetic Thermotherapy for Deep Organ
Ablation by Using a Needle Array Under
a Synchronized-Coil System
Sheng-Chieh Huang, Jui-Wen Kang, Hung-Wen Tsai, Yan-Shen Shan, Xi-Zhang Lin, and Gwo-Bin Lee∗

Abstract—Thermal ablation by using electromagnetic thermotherapy (EMT) has been a promising cancer modality in recent
years. It has relatively few side effects and has therefore been extensively investigated for a variety of medical applications in internal
medicine and surgery. The EMT system applies a high-frequency
alternating electromagnetic field to heat up the needles which are
inserted into the target tumor to cause tumor ablation. In this study,
a new synchronized-coil EMT system was demonstrated, which was
equipped with two synchronized coils and magnetic field generators to provide a long-range, penetrated electromagnetic field to effectively heat up the needles. The heating effect of the needles at the
center of the two coils was first explored. The newly designed twosection needle array combined with the synchronized-coil EMT
system was thus demonstrated in the in vitro and in vivo animal
experiments. Experimental data showed that the developed system
is promising for minimally invasive surgery since it might provide
superior performance for thermotherapy in cancer treatment.
Index Terms—Ablation, electromagnetic thermotherapy (EMT)
system, minimally invasive surgery (MIS), needle arrays,
synchronized-coil system.

I. INTRODUCTION
HERMAL ablation [1], [2] has been a popular method for
cancer treatment or other treatments since its advent. This
method involves rapid and local heating of the tumor or tissue
to above 60 °C to cause necrosis of tumor cells. It is a simple
therapy with relative few side effects and fewer complications.
Recently, thermal ablation has been combined with minimally
invasive surgery (MIS) [3], [4] as a new approach for treating
cancer or other organ-enlargement diseases. For example, radio frequency ablation (RFA) [5]–[7] and microwave ablation

T

Manuscript received March 26, 2014; revised July 1, 2014; accepted July
7, 2014. Date of publication July 18, 2014; date of current version October
16, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Science Council (NSC 101-2325-B-006-014, NSC 102-3011-P-006-004, and NCNU D102105104 B102-F55). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S.-C. Huang is with the Department of Power Mechanical Engineering,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: xaviersty@
hotmail.com).
J.-W. Kang and X.-Z. Lin are with the Department of Internal
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan (e-mail:
pete1594@yahoo.com.tw; linxz@mail.ncku.edu.tw).
H.-W. Tsai is with the Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan (e-mail: hungwen@mail.ncku.edu.tw).
Y.-S. Shan is with the Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan (e-mail: ysshan@mail.ncku.edu.tw).
* G.-B. Lee is with the Department of Power Mechanical Engineering,
National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: gwobin@
pme.nthu.edu.tw)
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2339499

[8]–[10] have all been applied in a variety of cancer treatments
such as organ resection surgery and necrosis of tumor cells in
internal medicine. Briefly, RFA employs a probe and a power
generator to provide the required heating when an alternating
electric current passes through the probe with a frequency ranging from 460 to 500 kHz. The temperature of the tissue could be
rapidly and efficiently raised to about 100 °C locally such that
the tissue ablation occurs. Alternatively, microwave ablation is
another treatment approach using thermal ablation in which a
probe delivers microwave energy to heat up water molecules
in the cells and therefore generate a high temperature to cause
ablation in the tissue. Applying RFA or microwave ablation in
needle-array layout or large-range tumor treatment, however, is
challenging because RFA and microwave ablation probes are
expensive. The number of probes that could be simultaneously
applied during treatments is thus limited to two to four probes
[11], [12], which may hinder their practical applications in largerange treatment or organ-enlargement treatment.
Electromagnetic thermotherapy (EMT) systems [13], [14] by
using a high-frequency alternating electromagnetic field (EMF)
provided by induction coils have been reported as a promising
method to treat cancer [15] in the internal medicine [16] and
surgery [17]. It used a magnetic material (such as stainless steel)
as a needle or treating apparatus which can be affected by the
EMF and heated up to high temperature rapidly due to induced
eddy currents and hysteresis energy loss [18]. When the needle
was inserted into the target tumor or tissue under ultrasonic
image guidance, the needle can be heated up to a specific high
temperature and then cause thermal ablation of target tumors
or tissues within a short period of time. For instance, stainless
steel needles were successfully inserted into the target tissue
and heated under the EMF to 90–120 °C for several minutes to
cause tissue ablation or seal the vessels in the organ [19]. This
unique treating method can be further applied in the internal
medicine and adopted with MIS by using a two-part needle in
an array layout to increase the heat treating area [14]. With this
approach, the induced high temperature can be used for ablation
or coagulation of the tissue or tumors without the limitation of
the treating area.
However, the reported EMF has a limited effective range of
the penetrating EMF which was only 7–15 cm away from center
of the induction coils by using the existing power system [13].
It is still challenging to demonstrate EMT on deep organs in
large animal tests or clinical human trials for MIS applications.
Therefore, there is a great need to develop a new EMT system
which can induce an effective EMF which is deep and wide.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the new two-section needle equipped with a
thermocouple.

Fig. 1. Photograph of the synchronized-coil EMT system. It consisted of a
power supplier, two high-frequency EMF generators (which were synchronized
with driving frequencies), a cooling water circulation system, and two induction
coils.

In this paper, we therefore demonstrated a new EMT system
equipped with two synchronized coils for this purpose. Note
that the intensity of the EMF was experimentally found to decrease when the needles were placed away from the induction
coils. The distance between the two synchronized coils (which
should be higher than the dimension of abdomen, around 35 cm
for MIS applications) may thus affect the effective range of the
EMF to heat up the needle arrays accordingly. Moreover, two
types of the magnetic cores were placed on top of the two synchronized coils and needles to concentrate the magnetic field
and therefore increase the heating effect. The distribution of the
effective EMF and the temperature of the two-section needle
under the synchronized-coil system equipped with two types of
the magnetic core were therefore explored in this paper. Two
experiments were conducted to demonstrate its capability, including in vitro and in vivo animal experiments. The in vitro
results showed that the developed apparatus and the new therapy progress could successfully cause wider ablation of the
target tissue with a needle array. The results from the in vivo
animal experiments showed that the livers of pigs were also
successfully ablated by using the needle arrays and the new
therapy protocol. The developed EMT system and needle array
treatment process may provide a promising tool for treatment
of cancerous tumors.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Hardware
1) Synchronized-Coil EMT System: The new synchronizedcoil EMT system consisted of a power supplier, two highfrequency EMF generators, a cooling water circulation system,
and two induction coils. Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic diagram
of the new EMT system. The distance between two coils can
be adjusted from 20 to 40 cm, which is sufficient for human
trial. The input voltage of the synchronized-coil EMT system
is 380 V, 60 Hz and the power consumption is 25 kW for each
high-frequency EMF generator. The output current could be am-

Fig. 3. Photograph of the new two-section needle equipped with a thermocouple.

plified to 900 A and the frequency range of the synchronizedcoil EMT system is from 30 to 100 kHz which was adjusted
automatically by using the difference type’s coils. The two
high-frequency EMF generators were interconnected and the
frequency of the output alternating currents was synchronized.
By using the newly designed induction coils (diameter: 40 cm,
single loop), the newly developed EMT system could be used
for long-range treatment. Note that the operating frequency was
measured to be about 58 kHz by using the newly designed
coils.
2) Newly Designed Two-Section Needle: The two-section
needle is a specifically designed apparatus for MIS. The
schematic diagram of the two-section needle is shown in Fig. 2.
The new two-section needle includes a nonmagnetic section and
a magnetic section. The upper 7-cm section of the needle was
made of a SUS-316 stainless steel (nonmagnetic materials) for
contacting with the normal tissue such as skin or muscle during
MIS. Note that the nonmagnetic section of the needle would
not be heated under the EMF, which helps prevent the normal
tissues from being ablated and damaged by the inserted needle.
The nonmagnetic section was hollowed and therefore a thermocouple could be placed in the needle to detect the treatment
temperature in real time. The outside diameter of the needle is
1.0 mm and the inside diameter is 0.6 mm. The lower 3-cm magnetic section of two-section needle was designed to be inserted
into the target tissue and was therefore made of a magnetic material (SUS-631 stainless steel). When placed under the EMF,
the lower section of the needles would be effectively heated to
a specifically set temperature to cause ablation of the target tissue. The length of the heating section could be custom designed
if a larger ablation area is required. Note that the magnetic
part is solid and the outside diameter is 1.0 mm. Fig. 3 shows
s photograph of the new two-section needle equipped with a
thermocouple.
3) Needle-Array Insertion Apparatus: The MIS could be
demonstrated by using needle arrays to treat large-area tumor
or tissue under the EMF. A needle-array insertion apparatus

HUANG et al.: EMT FOR DEEP ORGAN ABLATION BY USING A NEEDLE ARRAY

2735

Fig. 5.

Fig. 4. Photograph of the needle-array insertion apparatus. The apparatus was
composed of seven needle insertion tunnels and a plank. The distance between
each needle insertion hole was 1.5 cm and insertion tunnel was 1.5 cm long.

was therefore designed to precisely control the arrangement of
the needles and the distance between each needle. Furthermore,
the apparatus made all needles parallel, which could provide
a precise control of the ablation area [13]. Compared with our
previous work, the newly designed needle-array insertion apparatus contained a plank made of acrylic. The plank can make
the insertion apparatus fit on the animals or human body to
stabilize the apparatus during the insertion process. Moreover,
the length of the insertion tunnel was increased to 1.5 cm to
fix the insertion angle of each needle such that all needles were
parallel to each other. Fig. 4 shows a photograph of the needlearray insertion apparatus, which includes seven needle insertion
tunnels and a plank. The distance between each needle insertion hole was 1.5 cm, which was determined by the effective
heating range of each needle. Note that the apparatus was made
of acrylic and would be fixed on the animal body before the
needle insertion. During the needle insertion process, a needle with a thermocouple would be first inserted into the target
tissue under ultrasonic image guidance. After the insertion of
the temperature-monitoring needle, the other six needles could
be inserted subsequently through the other holes around the
temperature-monitoring needle. Compared with the insertion
time required for the needle insertion apparatus previously developed (15–20 min) [13], the new needle insertion apparatus
only took 3–5 min. The apparatus could simplify the surgery
steps and shorted the needle insertion time to ease the pain of
the patients during the needle insertion.
B. Experimental Setup
1) Heating Effect of the Needle: The needle was heated
at the center of the synchronized coils with E-magnetic core
(EE5521/AT2.1 K, A&T Magnetic, Taiwan) and O-magnetic
core (T3615, A&T Magnetic, Taiwan) by using four different
kinds of induction coils including a newly designed coil (40-cm
long diameter, single loop), a single-loop coil (30-cm long diameter), a surface coil (25-cm long diameter, two loops), and a
two-circle coil (25-cm long diameter). Note that the single-loop
coils, the surface coils, and the two-circle coils were demonstrated in our previous works [13]. The needle was heated up

E-magnetic core and the O-magnetic core used to focus the EMF.

for 5 min under the generated EMF with 90% output power and
the highest temperature was measured and recorded by using a
thermometer (K-type, InterTech Technology, Inc., Taiwan).
2) Intensity of the EMF: The heating effect and the highest
temperature of the needles under the synchronized-coil system
were dependent on the intensity of the EMF. In this paper, the intensity of the EMF without the magnetic core and with the magnetic core was measured at different positions (0–40 cm away
from the coils). The average treatment distance is estimated to
be about 6–10 cm in the clinical case (from the skin of the human
to the liver). Note that an E-magnetic core (EE5521/AT2.1K)
and O-magnetic core (T3615, A&T Magnetic, Taiwan) were
used to focus the EMF. The E-magnetic core and O-magnetic
core were made of ferrite materials. The magnetic permeability
of the E and O magnetic cores was about 800 × 10−6 H/m. The
length, width, and thickness of the E-magnetic core were 25,
12, and 5 cm, respectively. The outside and inside diameters
of the O-magnetic core were 3 and 1.5 cm, respectively. The
height of the O-magnetic core was 1 cm. In this experiment, the
intensity of the EMF was also measured 10 cm away from the
coils when an E-magnetic core was placed on top of the coils
and the O-magnetic core was placed on the top of the probe. A
Tesla meter (model 7010, SYPRIS, USA) was used to measure
and record the EMF generated under the synchronized-coil system while the probe was placed under the coils with 90% output
power. Fig. 5 shows the E-magnetic core and the O-magnetic
core which were used in this study.
3) In vitro Test by Using the Needle Arrays Under the
Synchronized-Coil EMT System: The distance between each
needle plays an important role for MIS thermal ablation surgery
[20]. In order to ensure that the area encompassed by the needle array was completely ablated under EMF, the effective distance (1.5 cm) [14] between each needle has to be well defined.
In this experiment, a needle array was inserted into a porcine
liver ex vivo under the synchronized-coil EMT system with an
E-magnetic core and an O-magnetic core by using the needles
array insertion apparatus. After heating, the needles were removed and the ablation area was observed and measured on the
porcine liver. In this experiment, whether the tissue between
each needle would be ablated was crucial in this study. Fig. 6
shows a schematic diagram of the synchronized-coil system, the
E-magnetic core, the O-magnetic core, the coils, the needle, and
the liver.
4) In vivo Animal Test: Needles array treatment by using the
synchronized-coil system was then performed on three Lan-Yu

2736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of the synchronized-coil system, the E-magnetic
core, the O-magnetic core, the coils, the needle, and the liver.

pigs. As mentioned previously, the newly designed two-section
needle equipped with a thermocouple was first inserted into
the pig liver under the ultrasonic image guidance. The needlearray insertion apparatus was then aligned with the temperaturecontrol monitoring needle. Finally, the other six two-section needles without thermocouples were inserted into the liver around
temperature-monitoring needle through the needles array insertion apparatus. Before the insertion, the two-section needles
were all placed in a 20 G Intravenous Cannula to prevent the
heat conducted from the magnetic section to the nonmagnetic
part to ablate the skin or muscle tissue during the heating. After the insertion, the needles array apparatus was removed. All
two-section needles were then heated to 98 °C for 10 min under the EMF by using an ON–OFF treating process (ON: 45 s,
OFF: 15 s, ten loops). The output alternating current of the system was about 900 A and the power was about 25 kW. After the
treatment, the abdomen was carefully incised and the ablation
area on the liver was measured. After the surgery, the abdomen
was closed and the animal was kept under observation. After the
observation period, the animals were humanely sacrificed by an
anesthesia overdose and the remaining organ liver was removed
and processed for further histological examinations.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Temperature of the Needle
The temperature distribution of the needle was measured under the synchronized-coil EMT system by using four different
types of coils. Fig. 7 shows the temperature curve of the needle
as a function of distance from the coils. The highest needle temperature was set at 200 °C for safety during the experiments and
the lowest temperature was the room temperature (26 °C). If the
heating effect was too prominent and the heating temperature
was higher than was 200 °C, the EMT system would be turned
off for safety. Experimental data show that the temperature for
the needle heated by the surface coils and the two-circle coils
was not raised significantly when the distance between the two
coils was 40 and 35 cm, respectively, away from the coils. It
indicates that these two coils cannot be used for long-distance
MIS applications.
Alternatively, the effective heating range of the single-loop
coils was higher than the two-circle coils and the surface coils.

Fig. 7. Temperature curve of the four different coils including a newly designed coil, a single-loop coil (30-cm long diameter), a surface coil (25-cm long
diameter, two loops), and a two-circle coil (25 cm long diameter) along with the
distance between the two coils.

Fig. 8. Electromagnetic intensity by using the synchronized-coil EMT system
without an E-magnetic core.

Note that five consecutive experiments were repeated and the
variation was measured to be about 1.2%. It achieved about
79 °C when the distance was 40 cm. Furthermore, the newly
designed coils had the most effective heating range. It could
maintain a high temperature of 200 °C when the distance was
20–25 cm. Furthermore, it still could achieve a relatively high
temperature of 85 °C when the distance of these two induction
coils was 40 cm. The temperature curve of the needle heated
by using the four different types of coils was consistent with
the measurements of the EMF, which will be discussed in the
next section. From the experimental results, the effective heating
range of the newly designed coils could be as high as 40 cm.
The range was long enough to treat larger animals or apply it in
human clinical trials in the near future.
B. EMF Measurements
The intensity of the EMF by using the E-magnetic core and
the O-magnetic core under the synchronized-coil EMT system
was then explored. Fig. 8 shows the intensity curve of the EMF
by using the newly designed coils without an E-magnetic core.
The output power of the system was 25 kW and the output
current was amplified to 900 A. From the figure, the intensity

HUANG et al.: EMT FOR DEEP ORGAN ABLATION BY USING A NEEDLE ARRAY

Fig. 9. Electromagnetic intensity by using the synchronized-coil EMT system
equipped with an E-magnetic core.

of EMF could only achieve 0.8 kG at the center of the two
coils when measured at 20 cm away from the coils. From the
results, the high intensity of the EMF only existed around the
coils; the intensity of the EMF at the center of the coils was
too low to heat the needle to a high temperature (98 °C) in the
animals or human body. Therefore, the magnetic core was then
added to increase the intensity of the EMF at the center of the
two coils. Fig. 9 shows the intensity curve of the EMF when
an E-magnetic core was placed on top of the center of each
induction coils. From the figure, the intensity of EMF could
be dramatically raised to 2.2 kG at the center of the two coils
at 20 cm away from the coils. Similarly, the average intensity
of the EMF was also raised at different positions when the
E-magnetic core was used. Compared with data from Figs. 7
and 8, the intensity of the EMF with E-magnetic core at the
center of the two coils was increased about 275% higher than
the coils without E-magnetic core. The E-magnetic core could
further extend the EMF to deeper locations and also focus the
EMF on the position of the target tissue. Compared the effective
range of EMF with the previous work [13], the effective range of
the EMF could be dramatically increased to 40 cm in this study
while the effective range of the EMF in the previous work was
only 15 cm. The synchronized-coils system with magnetic cores
can be therefore applied for the target tumor or organ which is
deep in the animals or human body.
In addition to placing an E-magnetic core on top of the induction coils, one may further increase the local EMF intensity by
placing another O-magnetic core on top of the needles. Fig. 10
shows the intensity curve of the EMF by placing the E-magnetic
core and O-magnetic core at the center of induction coils and
the needles. From the figure, the intensity of EMF without any
magnetic core was about 1.2 kG at a distance 10-cm away from
the coils. When the E-magnetic cores were placed on top of the
coils, the intensity of EMF was raised to about 4.6 kG. Then,
when the O-magnetic core was placed on the top of the needle,
the intensity of EMF was further raised to about 5.5 kG.
From these experimental results, it was then concluded that
the O-magnetic core could also focus the local intensity of the
EMF. By simultaneously using the E-magnetic core and the

2737

Fig. 10. Electromagnetic intensity by using the synchronized-coil EMT system with an E-magnetic core on top of the coils and an O-magnetic core on top
of the needle.

Fig. 11. Ablation area of the porcine liver which was ablated by the needle
arrays under the synchronized-coil EMT system with an E-magnetic core and
O-magnetic core.

O-magnetic core, the intensity of the EMF could be raised and
focused; furthermore, the position of the locally focused EMF
could be controlled onto the target to increase the treating effect.
C. In vitro Test
Fig. 11 shows the ablation area of a needle array under the
synchronized-coil EMT system by using the new treatment process. The output power of the synchronized-coil EMT system
was 25 kW. Experimental results show that the surrounded area
of the needle arrays could be completely ablated when the distance of the two coils was 40 cm and the needle was placed
at a distance of 15 cm away from the upper coils. From the
figure, the tissue between each needle was completely ablated
by the high temperature of the two-section needle. By using
this method, the tumor located in the range of the needles array
would be also ablated by the needle array. From the results, the
needles which were placed in the effective EMF range would
be effectively heated up to the specific setting temperature (e.g.,
98 °C for ablation). Note that there was no limitation of the

2738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2014

Fig. 12. Photograph of the surgery site on the pig after the insertion of the
needle array by using the insertion apparatus.

Fig. 13. Ablation area on the pig’s liver. The liver was successfully ablated by
the two-section needle array under the synchronized-coil system. The ablation
area was measured to be about 35 mm × 25 mm.

numbers of the needles in one treatment as long as they were
placed inside the coils. Therefore, the newly developed EMT
system could be used in the large-range tumor in the animals or
human without the limitation of the treating area.
D. In vivo Animal Tests
In needle-array treatment by using the synchronized-coil system in the in vivo animal tests, the aim was to generate a wide
ablation area on the Lan-Yu pig’s liver with the new treatment
process. Note that the MIS was demonstrated on the Lan-Yu pigs
without abdomen opening before the treatment. Fig. 12 shows
a photograph of the surgery site on the pig after the insertion of
the needle array by using the insertion apparatus. The insertion
angle of the needle should be less than 40° to make sure the
needle could be heat up to the effective temperature. After the
needle insertion, the needle array would be heated under the
ETS to 98 °C for 10 min by using the new treatment process.
The distance between the induction coils and the lower magnetic section of the two-section needle (heating part) was about
10 cm in this treatment and the distance between two induction
coils was set to be 30 cm. The E-magnetic core was placed in
the coils, and the O-magnetic core should be placed between the
needle and the coils. The best distance between the O-magnetic
core and the needle was less than 5 cm. After heating, the needles would be all removed without sticking to the normal tissue
and the abdomen of the pigs was opened to be observed.
Fig. 13 shows the ablation area on the pig’s liver. The liver
was successfully ablated by the two-section needle array under
the synchronized-coil system. The ablation area was measured
to be about 35 mm × 25 mm. There was no any bleeding observed around the needle insertion hole when the needle was
retracted from the liver, indicating that the blood vessels around
the needle were successfully cauterized. It is noted that the
normal tissue around the two-section needle was not damaged
and there was no inflammation observed after the treatment.
After the observation, the abdomen of the Lan-Yu pigs was
sealed. After two weeks from the treatment, the animals were
humanely sacrificed by an anesthesia overdose and the remaining organ was removed and processed for further histological

Fig. 14. Remnant porcine liver two weeks after the EMT surgery by using
the synchronized-coil system. (A) Necrotic tissue (N) showed a homogeneous
eosinophilic change of the hepatocytes and blurring of original liver lobular
architecture compared to the viable tissue (V). (B) There was a fibrous band (F)
between viable tissue (V) and necrotic tissue (N). (B: H-E stain; C: Masson’s
trichrome stain, 20×).

examinations. Grossly, there was a well-defined cauterized area
of necrosis. Microscopically, the original liver lobular architecture in the cauterized area was lost and there was a homogeneous
eosinophilic change of the hepatocytes, indicating complete coagulative necrosis [see Fig. 14(A) and (B)]. The necrotic area
was separated from viable liver tissue by a fibrotic band, indicating a healing process at the edge of the cauterization area
[see Fig. 14(B)].
IV. CONCLUSION
This study has demonstrated a new synchronized-coil EMT
system. The newly designed coils have been developed and
demonstrated to increase the effective heating range of the EMF
and therefore could heat the stainless steel needle to a high
temperature. It could reach a high temperature of 85 °C at the
center of the two coils even though it was placed 40 cm away
from the coils. The measurements about the intensity of the EMF
distribution indicated that the newly designed coils can produce
a highly penetrated EMF when placing an E-magnetic core on
top of these induction coils. Furthermore, a local enhanced EMF
could be generated on the target tissue when another O-magnetic
core was placed on top of the needles. In in vitro and the in vivo
animal tests, the tissue in the range of the needle array could be
successfully ablated.

HUANG et al.: EMT FOR DEEP ORGAN ABLATION BY USING A NEEDLE ARRAY

2739

The uniqueness of the developed method is that there is no
limitation of the numbers of the needles. The needles could be all
heated up to the specific temperature in the ranger between two
coils. The distance of the effective EMF between two coils was
also dramatically extended to 40 cm, which was wider than the
existing electromagnetic thermal therapy system. Furthermore,
by using the unique needle array treatment, the large ablation
range was also achieved. The system could be therefore applied in the large-range tumor treatment and deep organ tumor
treatment. Moreover, the dimensions of the synchronized-coil
EMT system were reduced to 160 cm × 65 cm × 65 cm which
is about 60% smaller than our previous EMT system [13]. The
developed system and the associated treatment apparatus may
be promising for MIS-based thermal ablation treatment in large
animal surgery and clinical human trials.

[8] B. Lepers, P. Clegg, N. Cronin, and I. Wieland, “A microwave surface
applicator for tissue coagulation: Technical characteristics and performances,” J. Med. Devices, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 502–507, 2012.
[9] R. P. Jones, N. R. Kitteringham, M. Terlizzo, C. Hancock, D. Dunne,
S. W. Fenwick, G. J. Poston, P. Ghaneh, and H. Z. Malik, “Microwave
ablation of ex vivo human liver and colorectal liver metastases with a novel
14.5 GHz generator,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 43–54, 2012.
[10] J. Chiang, K. A. Hynes, M. Bedoya, and C. L. Brace, “A dual-slot microwave antenna for more spherical ablation zones: Ex vivo and in vivo
validation,” Radiology, vol. 268, no. 2, pp. 382–389, 2013.
[11] F. T. Lee, Jr., D. Haemmerich, A. S. Wright, D. M. Mahvi, L. A. Sampson,
and J. G. Webster, “Multiple probe radiofrequency ablation: Pilot study
in an animal model,” J. Vascular Interventional Radiol., vol. 14, no. 11,
pp. 1437–1442, 2003.
[12] A. S. Wright, F. T. Lee, and D. M. Mahvi, “Hepatic microwave ablation
with multiple antennae results in synergistically larger zones of coagulation necrosis,” Ann. Surg. Oncol., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 275–283, 2003.
[13] S. C. Huang, Y. Y. Chang, J. W. Kang, H.W. Tsai, Y. S. Shan, X. Z. Lin,
and G. B. Lee, “An electromagnetic thermotherapy system with a deep
penetration depth for percutaneous thermal ablation,” Ann. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 86–96, 2014.
[14] S. C. Huang, Y. Y. Chang, Y. J. Chou, Y. S. Shan, X. Z. Lin, and G. B. Lee,
“Dual-row needle arrays under an electromagnetic thermotherapy system
for bloodless liver resection surgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 3, pp. 824–831, Mar. 2012.
[15] A. Jordana, R. Scholza, K. M. Hauffb, M. Johannsenc, P. Wusta,
J. Nadobnya, H. Schirrad, H. Schmidtd, S. Degerc, S. Loeningc,
W. Lankschb, and R. Felixa, “Presentation of a new magnetic field therapy system for the treatment of human solid tumors with magnetic fluid
hyperthermia,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 225, nos. 1/2, pp. 118–126,
2001.
[16] P. R. Stauffer, T. C, Cetas, and R. C. Jones, “Magnetic induction heating of
ferromagnetic implants for inducing localized hyperthermia in deep-seated
tumors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-31, no. 2, pp. 235–251,
Feb. 1984.
[17] Y. S. Shan, R. Zuchini, H. W. Tsai, P. D. Lin, G. B. Lee, and X. Z. Lin,
“Bloodless liver resection using needle arrays under alternating electromagnetic fields,” Surg. Innovation, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 95–100, 2010.
[18] T. B. Flanagan, B. S. Bowerman, and G. E. Biehl, “Hysteresis in
metal/hydrogen systems,” Scr. Metall., vol. 14, pp. 443–447, 1980.
[19] E. J. Patterson, C. H. Scudamore, D. A. Owen, A. G. Nagy, and A. K.
Buczkowski, “Radiofrequency ablation of porcine liver in vivo: Effects of
blood flow and treatment time on lesion size,” Ann. Surg., vol. 227, no. 4,
pp. 559–565, 1998.
[20] R. B. Turnbull, K. Kyle, F. R. Watson, and J. Spratt, “Cancer of the colon:
The influence of the no-touch isolation technic on survival rates,” Ann.
Surg., vol. 166, no. 3, pp. 420–427, 1967.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank S.-Y. Chen, S.-F. Chen, and
K.-C. Chen for assisting with the minimally invasive surgery on
animal models.
REFERENCES
[1] S. N. Goldberg, G. S. Gazelle, and P. R. Mueller, “Thermal ablation
therapy for focal malignancy a unified approach to underlying principles,
techniques, and diagnostic imaging guidance,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol.
174, no. 2, pp. 323–331, 2000.
[2] C. J. Diederich, “Thermal ablation and high-temperature thermal therapy:
Overview of technology and clinical implementation,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 745–753, 2005.
[3] N. Masakuni, “Minimally invasive surgery for small breast cancer,”
J. Surg. Oncol., vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 94–101, 2003.
[4] K. H. Fuchs, “Minimally invasive surgery,” Endoscopy, vol. 34, no. 2, pp.
154–159, 2002.
[5] S. Nierkens, M. H. den Brok, T. J. Ruers, and G. J. Adema, “Radiofrequency ablation in cancer therapy: Tuning in to in situ tumor vaccines,”
Tumor Microenviron., vol. 5, pp. 39–59, 2013.
[6] J. P. McGahan and G. D. Dodd, “Radiofrequency ablation of the liver
current status,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 176, no. 1, pp. 3–16, 2001.
[7] L. Solbiati, T. Ierace, S. N. Goldberg, S. Sironi, T. Livraghi, R. Fiocca,
G. Servadio, G. Rizzatto, P. R. Mueller, A. D. Maschio, and G. S. Gazelle,
“Percutaneous US-guided radio-frequency tissue ablation of liver metastases: Treatment and follow-up in 16 patients,” Radiology, vol. 202, pp.
195–203, 1997.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

