IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

1019

Performance-Power Consumption Tradeoff
in Wearable Epilepsy Monitoring Systems
Syed Anas Imtiaz, Student Member, IEEE, Lojini Logesparan, Student Member, IEEE,
and Esther Rodriguez-Villegas, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Automated seizure detection methods can be used to
reduce time and costs associated with analyzing large volumes of
ambulatory EEG recordings. These methods however have to rely
on very complex, power hungry algorithms, implemented on the
system backend, in order to achieve acceptable levels of accuracy.
In size, and therefore power-constrained EEG systems, an alternative approach to the problem of data reduction is online data
selection, in which simpler algorithms select potential epileptiform
activity for discontinuous recording but accurate analysis is still
left to a medical practitioner. Such a diagnostic decision support
system would still provide doctors with information relevant for
diagnosis while reducing the time taken to analyze the EEG. For
wearable systems with limited power budgets, data selection algorithm must be of sufficiently low complexity in order to reduce the
amount of data transmitted and the overall power consumption.
In this paper, we present a low-power hardware implementation of
an online epileptic seizure data selection algorithm with encryption
and data transmission and demonstrate the tradeoffs between its
accuracy and the overall system power consumption. We demonstrate that overall power savings by data selection can be achieved
by transmitting less than 40% of the data. We also show a 29%
power reduction when selecting and transmitting 94% of all seizure
events and only 10% of background EEG.
Index Terms—Data reduction, electroencephalography (EEG),
encryption, epilepsy, low power, monitoring, seizure, wearable.

I. INTRODUCTION
PILEPSY is a serious neurological condition that affects
50 million people worldwide [1]. It is characterized by
spontaneous debilitating seizures that could cause harm to the
individual, deteriorate their quality of life, and may even lead to
sudden death [2]. Despite its high incidence and serious consequences, 25% of patients have been reported to be misdiagnosed
[3]. For definitive diagnosis of epilepsy, an electroencephalography (EEG) recording of the brain activity during an epileptic seizure is often required [4]. However, seizures may occur
within a space of few hours, weeks, or even months, and thus,
long-term EEG monitoring may be required to be able to record
the patient’s brain activity during a seizure.

E

Manuscript received December 20, 2013; revised June 9, 2014; accepted July
20, 2014. Date of publication July 23, 2014; date of current version May 7,
2015. This work was supported by the European Research Council under the
European Community’s seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC
Grant 239749.
S. A. Imtiaz and E. R.-Villegas are with the Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ U.K.
(e-mail: anas.imtiaz@imperial.ac.uk; e.rodriguez@imperial.ac.uk).
L. Logesparan is with Schlumberger, West Sussex RH6 0NZ, U.K. (e-mail:
lojini.logesparan04@imperial.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2342501

There are two main limitations of this long-term monitoring
approach. First, the patients undergoing monitoring for long periods of time need to carry around a portable EEG monitoring
system which is both uncomfortable and unaesthetic. Because
of this, most patients prefer to stay at home or in clinic during
these recording sessions. Present portable and ambulatory EEG
systems that are suitable for clinical use weigh about 500 g, can
monitor up to 72 h, and have large battery packs connected by
long cables (making it difficult to ensure good electrode connection for the entire recording duration) [5]. Thus, patients undergoing long-term monitoring for several days are required to
attend a clinic regularly to check electrode connections, recharge
batteries, and save EEG data obtained from recording. The second limitation is that long-term monitoring generates enormous
amount of diagnostic data that takes medical practitioners a proportionally long time to analyze (approximately 2 h per 24 h of
recording [6]).
There has been significant research on methods to improve
ambulatory EEG systems in order to make them comfortable,
easy to use, and last for a longer time. Power consumption
of such systems is an important issue since it needs to be reduced to make them wearable [5]. A reduction in the amount
of data to be processed can save significant amount of power.
Different methods of reducing data for long-term epilepsy monitoring include using lower sampling frequency, compression
of data, and discontinuous recording [7]. Daou and Labeau [8]
presented a method combining compression of EEG and detection of seizures at the same time. Tolbert et al. [9] reduced
data by applying wavelet compression when there was no significant activity and transmitted raw data when they detected
spikes and related activity. Other methods of reducing data at
the sensor node include the use of optimal features [10], [11] to
save useful information, reducing the number of channels [12],
and dynamically selecting relevant EEG channels [13]. All these
techniques can lead to reduction in data rate and consequently
power consumption.
Several research groups have also worked on methods to reduce the time taken to analyze large volume of recorded EEG
data from long-term monitoring. This involves developing algorithms aimed at analyzing the recording for the presence of
epileptic seizures automatically. These algorithms could be used
to detect either the start or onset of a seizure event, its termination, or any part of its occurrence. Furthermore, the algorithms
may be developed for offline use or online, real-time application.
Qu and Gotman [14] extracted features including wave amplitude, duration, power and dominant frequency and used
template matching for patient-specific seizure onset detection.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/

1020

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Osorio et al. [15] proposed a method for real-time detection of
seizures and onset prediction using bandpass and median filtering of intracranial recordings. Saab and Gotman [16] proposed
a method using three features extracted from wavelet coefficients, relative average amplitude, relative scale energy, and
coefficient of variation of amplitude to estimate the probability
of seizure onset. Kuhlmann et al. [10] used the same method
to analyze six additional features and compared their performance to determine the best performing features for seizure
detection.
Meier et al. [17] used features extracted from scalp EEG, including continuous wavelet transform powers, number of zero
crossings, mean variance, cross correlation coefficient, and spectral powers with a support vector machine (SVM) classifier for
online detection of seizures. Zandi et al. [18] also proposed a
method using wavelet packet transform to derive a seizure index for real-time seizure detection. Since both of these methods
were implemented on a desktop computer for real-time operation, their applicability in a wearable setting, where power
budget is extremely limited, is not known. Kelly et al. developed an algorithm, called IdentEvent [19], for offline processing and detection of seizure events. They used pattern-matching
regularity statistics, amplitude variation, and local maximum
frequency with fixed thresholds, and stored the timestamps
of detected seizures for later analysis. Shoeb et al. [20] developed an algorithm to detect termination of seizure once
its start has been identified using spectral energies and SVM
classifier.
Artificial neural networks have often been used to classify
seizures with a large number of features used as inputs. Wilson et al. [21] described an algorithm, called Reveal, based
on matching pursuit and small neural network rules. GhosDastidar et al. [22] used wavelet decomposition and chaos
analysis to extract three features in different EEG subbands
which were used with neural network classifiers. Srinivasan
et al. [23] used approximate entropy (ApEn) as feature input to
two different types of neural networks and evaluated their performance for seizure detection in ambulatory EEG recordings.
Tzallas et al. [24] also used neural networks with power spectral density and features extracted from time-frequency analysis,
while Yuan et al. [25] used fractal intercept and relative fluctuation index as feature inputs to a neural network for seizure
detection. In another method, Alam and Bhuiyan [26] used
higher order statistical features with an artificial neural network to classify EEG signals in to healthy, interictal, or seizure
groups.
More recently, Niknazar et al. [27] applied wavelet decomposition and recurrence quantification analysis to classify
scalp EEG recordings as either ictal, interictal, or healthy.
Hopfengärtner et al. [28] used adaptive thresholding of integrated and average power in 3–12 Hz band to detect seizures in
long-term EEG recordings.
The seizure detection algorithms based on neural networks
and other complex signal processing methods are suitable for
offline analysis of data, or even real-time analysis when power
consumption is not a limiting factor. In wearable systems, power
requirements, amount of data, and system size are all important

Fig. 1. Principle of data selection as discussed in [5]. Interesting data sections
(marked by vertical dashed lines) are selected for transmission and subsequent
discontinuous recording while noninteresting data is rejected.

factors. Therefore, any detection method used needs to be of
such low complexity that it could run on a very small processor,
sourcing power from a small battery and run for a long period
of time.
The approach of discontinuous recording [7] for wearable
epilepsy monitoring systems, described in [5], allows data reduction in real time, by selecting interesting data and discarding
others. A low-complexity algorithm could be incorporated in
the portable EEG system to select epilepsy-related brain activity that could be analyzed later by a neurologist. This principle
of data selection, shown in Fig. 1, would reduce the duration of
data provided to the neurologists and, thus, reduce the time taken
for them to analyze the discontinuous recording while keeping
their decisive role in diagnosing the patient [5]. Such sampled
reviews of discontinuous EEG recording has been shown to not
substantially alter the final electroclinical diagnosis of the patient [29], [30]. Casson et al. [5] also suggest combining the
data selection algorithm with wireless transmission in order to
increase the monitoring duration, reduce the power consumption and subsequently the weight and volume of the portable
EEG system. Wireless transmission will also overcome issues
of electrode disconnection caused by tugging on long connecting cables.
This paper demonstrates the practical implementation of the
discontinuous recording approach for epileptic seizure analysis and detection. It describes the design of a data selection
algorithm for epileptic seizures, its implementation on a lowpower microcontroller with encryption and data transmission.
It demonstrates how the low-power implementation of the data
selection algorithm could be utilized to reduce the power consumption of a portable EEG system. Section II describes the
theoretical approach proposed in [5], the dataset used in this
study, and the design and implementation of the data selection
algorithm, data encryption, and wireless transmission. The performance has been detailed in Section II as a tradeoff between
the seizure detection accuracy of the algorithm and the power
consumption of the overall system. Finally, the design tradeoffs of the algorithm and wireless transmission are described in
Section III, and its implications on the development of a smaller,
light-weight EEG system and medical diagnosis of epilepsy will
be discussed in Section IV.

IMTIAZ et al.: PERFORMANCE-POWER CONSUMPTION TRADEOFF IN WEARABLE EPILEPSY MONITORING SYSTEMS

1021

Fig. 2. Simplified model of the wearable EEG system [5] showing the headmounted processing system with: the low power detection unit containing intelligent signal processing to achieve data reduction, and the data transmission
unit that interfaces with the wireless base station to discontinuously transmit
and record.

II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A block diagram of the wearable EEG system proposed in [5]
is shown in Fig. 2. It illustrates the head-mounted processing
system connected to electrodes placed on the scalp of an individual and a separate base station for recording the transmitted
data. The head-mounted processing system consists of: a low
power detection unit that contains the front-end circuitry (such
as an amplifier, analog-to-digital converter and antialiasing filter) in addition to intelligent signal processing to achieve data
reduction; and a data transmission unit consisting of a wireless
transmitter with possible encryption. The head-mounted system
is wirelessly linked to a base station that receives the transmitted
data and saves it for real-time or offline analysis by a neurologist
or EEG technician.
In this model of the wearable EEG system, the power consumption of the head mounted system, PS , is given by
PS = PF + PA + CPT

(1)

where PF is the power consumption of the front-end circuitry,
PA is the power consumption of the signal processing algorithm
to achieve data reduction, PT is power consumption of the wireless transmission unit, and C is the compression ratio obtained
by dividing the compressed bit rate with uncompressed bit rate
(lower values of C denote higher compression). In (1), assuming
the power consumption of the front-end circuitry to be fixed at
25 μW per EEG channel [31], there are two interesting cases:
1) When there is no data reduction: PA = 0, and thus, C =
1. The power consumption of the head-mounted system
is PS = PF + PT .
2) When data reduction C is achieved, and the power consumption of the system is given by (1).
In the latter case, data reduction is only beneficial in terms
of power if the implementation of signal-processing techniques
consume less power than the savings achieved due to reduced
wireless transmission, i.e., PA < (1 − C)PT . Nevertheless, the
advantage of less analysis time for reduced data would still hold
even when power saving is not achieved.

Fig. 3. Proposed multichannel data selection algorithm developed to identify
epileptic seizures and reject normal brain activity.

(U.K.), Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium) [32], [33],
and Freiburg University Hospital (Germany). It consists of scalp
EEG signals with a total duration of over 168 h obtained from
21 adults. The data contained 16 EEG channels common to all
records: C3, C4, CZ, F3, F4, FZ, F7, F8, FP1, FP2, O1, O2,
T3, T4, T5, and T6. A total of 181 recordings were analyzed,
34 of which contained sections of seizure occurrence marked
by medical practitioners (total seizure duration of 4158 s). All
of the data had been sampled at a frequency of at least 200 Hz
during routine, long-term and ambulatory monitoring sessions.

A. Database

B. Data Selection Algorithm

The database used for performance assessment in this study
was obtained from multiple recordings at the Epilepsy Society

The proposed multichannel seizure data selection algorithm
is illustrated in Fig. 3. The algorithm contains two parts:

1022

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

channel-specific processing and collating information across
channels. The channel-specific processing is identical across all
channels, and the result from each is then collated for the final
decision making. Line length [34] is used as the main discriminatory feature in the algorithm to distinguish between seizure
and nonseizure events. This feature is selected because of its
high discriminatory ability and low computational complexity,
as established in our previous study comparing 65 different
features [11].
The multichannel input EEG signal is represented as
x = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xN )

(2)

where N is the number of channels.
All EEG channels are processed separately in parallel, using
the input signal xn [k], where k is a sample in time, and n
is the channel number. The results from each channel-specific
processing are combined to determine whether or not an EEG
section contains an epileptic seizure.
In Fig. 3, a single-channel EEG signal is initially filtered by a
first-order high-pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 0.16 Hz to
remove any dc offset (as recommended by [35]). The output of
this is then passed through a third-order Bessel low-pass filter
(LPF) with a cutoff frequency of 10 Hz. The resulting time
domain signal is then down-sampled to 20 Hz and split into
2 s nonoverlapping epochs. The cutoff frequency is selected
to achieve maximum down-sampling without affecting seizure
detection performance. Next, the line length is calculated within
each epoch as
F (e) =

S


|w(k − 1) − w(k)|

(3)

k =1

where F (e) is the line length for an epoch e being analyzed, w
is the down-sampled signal, k is the sample number, and S is
the total number of samples within the epoch.
The calculated feature F (e) is normalized to correct for broad
level amplitude changes between EEG channels and patients
[36] so that a fixed threshold may then be applied to the normalized feature to discriminate between the high-amplitude seizure
sections and the low-amplitude normal EEG sections. Normalization is carried out by estimating the background activity z(e)
using median decaying memory and is calculated as

newer median{F (e − 1) · · · F (e − B)} decays to 1% in about
15 min, which is a reasonable lifetime considering the majority
of records in the test database have a duration of more than 1
h. Since the background estimate is calculated over a period of
2 min (120 s), B should be 60 for 2 s epochs.
The feature F (e) is divided by the normalization estimate
z(e) to restrict the range of values prior to applying a fixed
detection threshold
A(e) = F (e)/z(e).

(5)

The normalized feature A(e) is then compared against a fixed
threshold β. If A(e) exceeds β, a detection flag for the channel
n being analyzed, DFn (e), is set to one. If not, the flag is set to
zero. The detection threshold β is a tunable parameter that can
be set to vary the algorithm sensitivity:

1, if A(e) ≥ β
DFn (e) =
(6)
0, otherwise.
The channel-specific processing has now ended, and information in the epoch across all N channels can be analyzed. The
flags across all the channels are summed and compared to γ (the
minimum number of channels required for a detection which is
set to 4) to see how many channels have detected the presence
of abnormal activity within the same epoch. If the sum of flags
C(e) exceeds γ, then it is considered a seizure, and 2 s data
from all N channels are selected for transmission. Otherwise
the epoch is rejected as a nonseizure event
C(e) =

z(e) = (1 − λ) × median{F (e − 1) · · · F (e − B)}
+λ × z(e − 1)

Fig. 4. Block diagram of the Texas Instruments MSP430 microcontroller and
NORDIC Semiconductor nRF24L01+ wireless transmitter connections. The
data selection algorithm, data packaging, and encryption are carried out by the
microcontroller.

N


DFn (e)

(7)

n =1



(4)

where B is the number of epochs preceding the current epoch
that is used to estimate background activity, λ is a decay constant, and z(e − 1) is the background estimate calculated for
the previous epoch. The maximum transient or ramp-up time of
the background estimate has been selected as 2 min to ensure
that z(e) has reached the steady state when analyzing seizures
in the test database (the earliest time of seizure commencement
from the start of recording was found to be 2 min). During
the transient phase, the median is calculated within all available epochs using λ = 0.92 to ensure that the normalization
estimate z(e) reaches the same range of values as the feature
F (e). In the steady state λ = 0.99 such that the effect of any

S(e) =

Seizure,

if C(e) ≥ 4

Nonseizure,

otherwise.

(8)

C. Hardware Implementation
The algorithm is implemented on Texas Instruments
MSP430F5438A microcontroller [37] and uses Nordic Semiconductor nRF24L01 + transceiver [38] for wireless transmission of data. Both components were selected for their ultralowpower consumption. The hardware connection diagram in Fig. 4
shows the microcontroller connected to the wireless transceiver
using serial peripheral interface (SPI). In the figure, two pins in
the SPI bus are used for full duplex communication. The third

IMTIAZ et al.: PERFORMANCE-POWER CONSUMPTION TRADEOFF IN WEARABLE EPILEPSY MONITORING SYSTEMS

pin provides clock signal from the microcontroller (master) to
the transceiver (slave) for synchronous data transfer. The two
control pins, CE and CSN are used to enable the nRF2401 +
chip and activate the SPI communication, respectively. The IRQ
pin is an interrupt request input that notifies the microcontroller
whenever data transmission is complete and when new data is
received. The master clock frequency of the microcontroller is
selected such that epochs from all the channels can be processed
completely before the start of next epoch.
Each channel-specific processing stage starts with a high-pass
filter (see Fig. 3). This filtering operation is performed on the
microcontroller with the following transfer function:
y[k] = 0.9975x[k] − 0.9975x[k − 1] + 0.9950y[k − 1] (9)
where y[k] is the filtered output, and x[k] is the raw input.
The filter coefficients are represented as 16-bit signed fixed
point numbers (Q15 format), thus using simple integer arithmetic operations. Multiplication is performed on the MSP430
using the dedicated MPY32 hardware multiplier in fractional
mode with two 16-bit operands as inputs.
The next stage is a third-order Bessel LPF that has been
realized as a cascade of a first-order filter followed by a secondorder section with the following transfer functions:
u[k] = 0.1000y[k] + 0.1000y[k − 1] + 0.7423u[k − 1] (10)
v[k] = 0.1000u[k] + 0.1999u[k − 1] + 0.0999u[k − 2]
+1.5452v[k − 1] − 0.6283v[k − 2].

(11)

The output of the filter, v[k], is multiplied by a constant gain of
0.2679. The LPF coefficients and gain are represented in Q4.28
format (32 bits with 4 integer bits and 28 fractional bits) for
increased accuracy. The filtered signal that goes downstream for
further calculation is also kept in this format. It was empirically
determined that 4 integer bits were sufficient to represent the
maximum number produced in the algorithm in most cases. In
a rare case where an unusually large number would appear after
computation, the number of integer bits would increase while
sacrificing some fractional bits.
The filtered signal v[k] is down-sampled to 20 Hz (factor of
10). This step reduces the arithmetic computations performed
downstream when calculating the line length, thereby saving
processing cycles and consequently power. The next step is
the computation of line length. This is the sum of absolute
differences between the samples in an epoch, and hence, it is a
simple operation to implement in the microcontroller. A variable
to store line length is initialized to zero at the start of a new
epoch. Each time a new filtered sample arrives, the difference
between the new sample and the previous sample is calculated.
The absolute value of this difference is then added to the line
length variable which gets updated. The value at the end of
epoch is then the required feature.
To calculate the normalization estimate in (4), the median
of previous B data points is required. In the previous section,
B was set to 60 to cover a duration of 2 min. However, at the
implementation stage, 59 epochs were used to determine the
median instead of 60. This is because finding the median from
an even number of samples requires averaging the two middle

1023

values. Using the closest odd number smaller than 60 allows
saving some processing cycles without affecting the algorithm
output. The median is implemented on the microcontroller using
linked lists based on Phil Ekstrom’s method [39] with a sorting
complexity of N . When a new value of feature F (e) is available,
it is inserted at the appropriate position in an already sorted list,
and the oldest value is removed at the same time. The data in
the list do not need to be shifted, and only the pointers of the
neighboring elements in the list need to be updated, when a new
element is added or an existing element is removed. Since the list
is always sorted, the median is trivially the middle element of the
list (average of two middle elements in a list with even number
of elements). The transient and steady-state values of λ and
(1 − λ) in (4) are stored in Q15 format on the microcontroller.
Instead of calculating the normalized feature A(e) in (5) and
then comparing against the threshold, the equivalent operation
in (12) is performed to check for seizure detection on the microcontroller. This allows using the hardware multiplier instead
of a costly division operation. A detection flag is set for each
channel whenever the condition in (12) is true. The detection
flags are summed and checked for seizure detection as in (8)
F (e) ≥ z(e) × β.

(12)

Since 2 s of EEG data are used to compute the feature and
subsequently checked against the threshold for seizure event,
this data need to be stored for transmission in case of a positive detection. For this reason, 2 s of unfiltered EEG is stored
in the microcontroller RAM. The on-chip memory sets an upper bound on the amount of data that may be buffered and,
therefore, the number of channels that may be processed by the
microcontroller. For the MSP430F5438A, this works out to be
12 channels sampled at 200 Hz and is also the reason for using
12 channels in this study. When an epoch is deemed to be a
nonseizure event, the detection flag is set to zero, and all the
EEG data buffered for transmission are cleared.
D. Wireless Transmission and Encryption
To guarantee security of patient data according to the U.K.
Data Protection Act 1998 [40] and NHS Code of Practice [41],
EEG data should be transmitted wirelessly in encrypted form.
The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), issued by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, is one of the most
popular and widely used encryption technique that encrypts data
in blocks of 128 bits, and cipher key size of 128, 192, or 256 bits.
In this study, when a seizure epoch is detected by the data selection algorithm, data from all 12 channels are encrypted using the
AES-128 standard (128-bit cipher key) prior to transmission.
The encrypted data are then transmitted using a nRF24L01
+ transceiver, powered at 2 V, with the transmit power set to 0
dBm and over-the-air data rate of 2 Mbps. One seizure epoch
of 2 s, sampled at 200 Hz, will generate 9600 bytes of data
across 12 channels. The transmitter will only need to be switched
ON when there is encrypted data ready for transmission. The
transceiver uses Nordic Shockburst protocol for transmission
with a payload size of 32 bytes in each round and an additional

1024

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

five bytes for preamble, address and cyclic redundancy check
(CRC).
E. Performance Assessment Criteria
The performance of the algorithm and its hardware implementation are assessed with the following metrics: sensitivity
to identify epileptic seizures, specificity (ability to reject nonseizure data), and power saving of the overall head-mounted
system. Each of these metrics will be described in detail below:
1) Sensitivity is a measure of the fraction of expertly marked
seizure epochs and events that has been correctly identified by the algorithm. Two variants of sensitivity are
determined: epoch sensitivity and event sensitivity.
For epoch sensitivity, the ground truth is taken to be the
total number of epochs enclosing all the seizure events
marked by experts. For example, a 10-s seizure event will
have five 2-s seizure epochs. The average epoch sensitivity
is calculated as
N
epT Pn
1 
× 100%
N n =1 epT Pn + epF Nn
(13)
where epT Pn is the number of true positives (correctly
identified seizure epochs) in record n, epF Nn is the number of false negatives (incorrectly rejected seizure epochs)
in record n, and N is the number of total seizure containing records present in the test database.
The epoch sensitivity does not reflect on the actual fraction of seizure events correctly identified but instead it
measures the fraction of total seizure duration. Thus, the
fraction of expert marked seizure events correctly identified, event sensitivity, is sometimes reported in addition
to this metric.
For event sensitivity, the ground truth is the total number
of seizure events expertly marked in the test database. The
average event sensitivity is calculated as

Epoch Sensitivity =

N
evT Pn
1 
× 100%
N n =1 evT Pn + evF Nn
(14)
where evT Pn and epF Nn are the number of true positives
(correctly identified seizure event) and false negatives (incorrectly rejected seizure event) in record n, while N is
the total number of records in the database. Here, an event
is considered to be a true positive if there is an overlap of
at least one epoch (2 s) between the detected event and
the corresponding seizure event in the ground truth.
2) Specificity is the fraction of nonseizure epochs correctly
rejected. It is calculated as

on a patient, the duration of seizure data is mostly insignificant in comparison to the duration of nonseizure
(normal EEG data), and thus, the specificity of the algorithm in such cases is equal to the achieved data reduction.
If seizure duration is considered, the total data reduction would be marginally less than the specificity of the
algorithm.
3) Power saving: The sensitivity and specificity of the algorithm must be traded off with the power consumption of
the algorithm hardware implementation as high sensitivity and specificity can be achieved if the algorithm used
more computationally complex signal-processing techniques but the hardware implementation of such methods
would generally require higher power consumption. Thus,
the power consumption, or more importantly, the power
saving, achieved by introducing the data selection algorithm in the wearable EEG system should be quantified.
The power consumption for continuous wireless transmission can be measured, and the data reduction/compression
C at a specific threshold β is known. Thus, the power consumption of continuous and discontinuous transmission
can be calculated as in (1).

III. RESULTS
In this section, the accuracy of the algorithm is first evaluated
by determining the number of true seizure events present in the
reduced data. The power consumption of the algorithm is then
determined in its idle, processing, and transmission stages. This
is used to evaluate its overall average power consumption. Using
these, a power-performance curve is plotted to demonstrate how
much power savings can be achieved due to data reduction at
different compression ratios and the consequent degradation in
algorithm’s detection performance due to reduced data being
transmitted.

Event Sensitivity =

Specificity =

N
epT Nn
1 
× 100% (15)
N n =1 epT Nn + epF Pn

where epT Nn is the number of true negatives (correctly
rejected nonseizure epochs), epF Pn is the number of false
positives (incorrectly detected nonseizure epochs), and N
is the total number of tests. When the algorithm is tested

A. Data Selection Accuracy
The accuracy of the algorithm at identifying seizure EEG and
rejecting normal brain activity is shown in Fig. 5. In the figure,
the sensitivity-data reduction tradeoff can be seen, where high
sensitivity can be achieved if larger amount of data is transmitted an vice versa. The fraction of seizure events detected, as
given by event sensitivity, is consistently better than the fraction of seizure duration detected for transmission (shown by
epoch sensitivity) for the same amount of data transmitted. All
seizure events are detected (100% event sensitivity), when 65%
of seizure epochs are selected for transmission amongst 22%
of background data. For 80% of seizure epochs to be correctly
identified for transmission, about 51% of background data need
to be transmitted.
The percentage of data transmitted at each sensitivity/threshold β can be used to determine the power consumption
of the algorithm and wireless transmission, which will be discussed next.

IMTIAZ et al.: PERFORMANCE-POWER CONSUMPTION TRADEOFF IN WEARABLE EPILEPSY MONITORING SYSTEMS

Fig. 5. Performance-power consumption tradeoff shown with sensitivity–
specificity curve.

Fig. 6. Performance-power consumption tradeoff shown with power consumption of the combined algorithm and wireless transmission for each sensitivity.

B. Power Consumption
To determine the power consumption of the microcontroller
and wireless transmitter system, it is necessary to mention the
three distinct modes in which the system operates, and the current drawn by the system during them:
1) Idle: Both microcontroller and transceiver are not used
and, thus, are in low-power idle mode. The current drawn
in idle mode is iidle = 0.03 mA.
2) Processing: The microcontroller is performing certain operations such as filtering, line length computation, encryption, etc., while the transceiver is in idle mode. The current
drawn is ipro c = 4.20 mA.

1025

Fig. 7. Current draw in different operation modes. Only a portion of algorithm
period is shown followed by data transmission of 160 bytes (32 bytes during
each of the five transmission rounds).

3) Transmission: Microcontroller and transceiver are both
operating in active mode. The current drawn in this mode
is itran = 10.96 mA.
The current drawn in each mode of operation is shown in
Fig. 7 which illustrates the current drawn while the microcontroller processes input EEG data in 2-s epochs, then transmits
the analyzed data if it is a candidate seizure event, and finally,
when both the microcontroller and transmitter are in idle mode
until the next 2-s EEG epoch should be analyzed. As shown
in Fig. 7, the highest current is drawn during transmission, and
thus, minimizing the time spent in transmission mode and maximizing the time spent in the idle mode will reduce the overall
power consumption.
Subsequently, the measured current at any instance in time
would be the current drawn at one of the three modes of operation. The average current drawn over time, Iavg , can be calculated by measuring the fraction of time spent in each mode of
operation:
Iavg = iidle × tidle + ipro c × tpro c + itran × ttran .

(16)

The time spent in a mode of operation has been determined for
the computations of a single epoch of 2-s duration.
The average power consumption is then the average current multiplied by the supply voltage (2 V). Using (16), the
power consumption of continuous transmission (encryption and
transmission of all data) and discontinuous transmission (data
selection algorithm, encryption, and transmission) has been
determined:
1) Continuous transmission: For 12-channel 16-bit input
EEG sampled at 200 Hz to be transmitted in 2-s sections,
the average current was 1.4 mA. The power consumption for encrypting and transmitting all the EEG data was
2.8 mW.
2) Discontinuous transmission: The microcontroller implementation of the data selection algorithm analyzing the

1026

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

same 12 channels of EEG data required 1.7 mW. Using
this, the power consumption for encryption and transmission can now be calculated at different points of the
sensitivity-data transmitted curve in Fig. 6.
C. Performance-Power Consumption Tradeoff
Fig. 5 shows the tradeoff between sensitivity of detecting
epileptic seizures versus the specificity of rejecting nonseizure
data sections. For the same set of sensitivity and threshold values, Fig. 6 illustrates the total power consumption for discontinuous transmission. From Fig. 6, it is possible to determine the
maximum and minimum power consumption. If no data are selected for transmission, the algorithm will have 0% sensitivity,
and the total power consumption will be equal to the power consumption of the algorithm (1.7 mW). If all the data are selected
for transmission, the algorithm will achieve 100% sensitivity,
and the total power consumption will be equal to the power
consumption of the algorithm plus the power consumption of
continuous transmission, which adds up to 4.5 mW.
In Fig. 6, a tradeoff limit has been plotted as a dot–dash vertical line at 2.8 mW (the power consumption for continuous
transmission). This illustrates the maximum sensitivity-data reduction that can be achieved by the algorithm without the total
power consumption of discontinuous transmission exceeding
the power consumption of continuous transmission. In other
words, sensitivity values that are on left-hand side of the tradeoff limit will lead to power reduction through discontinuous
transmission while the performance on right-hand side of the
tradeoff limit will lead to an overall increase in power consumption. From Figs. 5 and 6, an overall power saving can be
obtained, if data transmission is less than or equal to 40%, which
in turn corresponds to event sensitivity up to 100% but epoch
sensitivity only up to 75%.
Ideally, a medical practitioner will decide on the threshold
(β) such that at least a minimum level of sensitivity is achieved.
For the sake of analysis, let us assume that over 90% of seizure
events must be detected with at least 50% duration selected for
recording. In this case, the closest threshold would be selected
to give 94.12% event sensitivity (missing only two events) with
54.04% of seizure duration selected for transmission in addition
to 9.98% of nonseizure data. This corresponds to a power consumption of 2 mW for the 12-channel algorithm with discontinuous encrypted data transmission, which is a 29% reduction in
power consumption in comparison to continuous transmission
or raw data.
IV. DISCUSSION
The data selection algorithm implemented here showed a discernible reduction in power consumption through discontinuous
transmission. This reduction in power consumption translates
to an equivalent increase in the lifetime of a battery-powered
portable EEG system. Alternatively, a battery with lower energy
capacity (and thus lower weight and volume) can be selected to
allow the system to operate for the same lifetime. In portable
EEG systems, the battery dominates the weight and volume of
the entire system and thus selecting a lower energy capacity,

lighter, smaller battery would significantly reduce its weight
and volume making it more comfortable for the patient to wear.
The data selection approach used here has two main advantages. The first one is reduction in specialist analysis time. Taking the same analysis point as above, a neurologist will be able
to view 54.04% of seizure duration of 32 out of 34 seizure events
(94.12% event sensitivity) but will only unnecessarily analyze
9.98% of nonseizure data. Since seizure duration is significantly
less than nonseizure duration, the time taken by the neurologist
to analyze the discontinuous recording would be approximately
a tenth of the time taken to analyze a continuous EEG recording, saving time for the neurologist. Alternatively, the patient
could be monitored for a longer duration without an increase
in analysis time for the neurologist. The second advantage of
data selection is a reduction in power consumption at the wireless base station since the power consumption of the receiver
is also proportional to the amount of data received. Data reduction will allow the receiver to be turned ON only when data
is available for transmission. Thus, for truly portable systems
where the wireless base station (such as a mobile phone) is also
carried by the patient during monitoring, the power reduction
at the head-mounted transmitter will be matched at the portable
receiver.
A further benefit of this method, as opposed to automated
diagnostic systems, is that it maintains the crucial role of the
doctor in diagnosing a patient while reducing the time taken
for the doctor to analyze the recording. Although an obvious
disadvantage is that it adds a slight delay in obtaining diagnostic results in contrast to online seizure detection systems where
the result is instantaneous (without doctor’s involvement). However, online seizure detectors use sophisticated signal processing
and classification methods. This adds computational complexity
increasing power consumption and reducing battery lifetime.
Although the reduction in data (and subsequently power) is
advantageous and since it saves analysis time of medical practitioners, there is a possibility of losing important information
using the data selection approach. Ideally, there should be no
loss of data when it is being reduced however that is practically
impossible. Therefore, a tradeoff must be found to reduce data
and power consumption up to a point where this reduction does
not lead to considerable loss of information.
There are other ways of reducing power consumption including the use of flash memory to save sections of data rather that
transmitting them. In [42], we showed that saving the data on
a NAND flash consumes less power than transmitting using the
Nordic transmitter used here. Furthermore, wireless transmission may also lead to packet losses requiring multiple retransmission of data. Nevertheless, wireless transmission is more
comfortable to the user, allows the capability of real-time analysis and assistance.
It should be noted that the algorithm utilized in this study is a
first prototype developed to demonstrate the performance-power
consumption tradeoff in wearable epilepsy monitoring system.
Thus, the data selection accuracy or power consumption of the
algorithm may be improved through the use of another algorithm
evaluated using the same methods utilized in this study or an
alternative hardware implementation (for example, in analog or

IMTIAZ et al.: PERFORMANCE-POWER CONSUMPTION TRADEOFF IN WEARABLE EPILEPSY MONITORING SYSTEMS

digital ASIC). Furthermore, the algorithm implemented in this
paper was designed specifically to detect seizure events and not
to predict their occurrence or termination. To detect other seizure
features, different low-power algorithms can be developed. The
methods of data selection proposed in this paper would still be
applicable for any alternative implementation.
Furthermore, these results are obviously linked to the choice
of algorithm. This algorithm was designed having the power
constraint as a requirement, so it is relatively low complexity, and consequently, its implementation was expected to require low power at the cost of accuracy. Different algorithms
might lead to different power/accuracy tradeoff points. In the
microcontroller implementation of the algorithm discussed previously, it is also interesting to note that the current drawn by
the microcontroller during processing time is less than half the
current drawn during transmission. Thus, it may be possible to
achieve better data selection accuracy and more power reduction
by adding more signal-processing staging (and thus increasing
the computational complexity of the algorithm) provided it reduces the amount of data transmitted by more than twice the
increase in power consumption of the microcontroller.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a new EEG data selection algorithm together with its implementation on a low-power microcontroller
with AES-128 encryption and wireless transmission. It demonstrates how data reduction can be utilized to reduce the power
consumption of wireless transmission and subsequently of the
overall EEG system. The data selection algorithm proposed here
selected 94.12% of seizure events and 54.04% of total seizure
duration for transmission, in addition to only 9.98% of normal brain activity. Utilizing this data selection algorithm to selectively transmit candidate seizure sections would allow 29%
reduction in power consumption of the EEG system, thus increasing the battery lifetime proportionally. Additionally, the
discontinous EEG recording would reduce the analysis time for
the neurologist to a tenth of the time taken to analyze the continuous recording, while not significantly altering the final electroclinical diagnosis of the patient. The paper also discusses the
tradeoffs between the data selection accuracy of the algorithm
and the power consumption of wireless transmission, where
higher accuracy can be achieved if higher power consumption is
tolerated, and the potential for increased power saving through
alternative hardware implementation. This study proves that
online data selection algorithms designed for low power consumption can be utilized to reduce the power consumption of
wireless battery-powered EEG systems while aiding clinical
diagnosis through discontinuous recording of candidate epileptiform EEG.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Sisodiya, “Etiology and management of refractory epilepsies,” Nat.
Clin. Pract. Neurol., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 320–330, 2007.
[2] M. Black and D. Graham, “Sudden death in epilepsy,” Curr. Diag. Pathol.,
vol. 8, pp. 365–372, 2002.

1027

[3] D. Smith, B. A. Defalla, and D. W. Chadwick, “The misdiagnosis of
epilepsy and the management of refractory epilepsy in a specialist clinic,”
QJM, vol. 92, pp. 15–23, 1999.
[4] S. Noachtar and J. Rémi, “The role of EEG in epilepsy: A critical review,”
Epilepsy Behav., vol. 15, pp. 22–33, 2009.
[5] A. J. Casson, D. C. Yates, S. J. M. Smith, J. S. Duncan, and E. RodriguezVillegas, “Wearable electroencephalography,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 44–56, May/Jun. 2010.
[6] J. Gotman, “Automatic detection of seizures and spikes,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 130–140, 1999.
[7] A. J. Casson and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Data reduction techniques to
facilitate wireless and long term AEEG epilepsy monitoring,” in Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Neural Eng., Kohala Coast, HI, USA, May
2007, pp. 298–301.
[8] H. Daou and F. Labeau, “Dynamic dictionary for combined EEG compression and seizure detection,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 247–256, Jan. 2014.
[9] J. Tolbert, P. Kabali, S. Brar, and S. Mukhopadhyay, “An accuracy aware
low power wireless EEG unit with information content based adaptive
data compression,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Minneapolis,
MN, USA, Sep. 2009, pp. 5417–5420.
[10] L. Kuhlmann, A. Burkitt, M. Cook, K. Fuller, D. Grayden, L. Seiderer,
and I. Mareels, “Seizure detection using seizure probability estimation:
Comparison of features used to detect seizures,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol.
37, pp. 2129–2145, 2009.
[11] L. Logesparan, A. J. Casson, and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Optimal features
for online seizure detection,” Med. Bio. Eng. Comput., vol. 50, no. 7,
pp. 659–669, 2012.
[12] E. Glassman and J. V. Guttag, “Reducing the number of channels for
an ambulatory patient-specific EEG-based epileptic seizure detector by
applying recursive feature elimination,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2006, pp. 2175–2178.
[13] S. Faul, “Dynamic channel selection to reduce computational burden in
seizure detection,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Buenos Aires,
Argentina, Sep. 2010, pp. 6365–6368.
[14] H. Qu and J. Gotman, “A patient-specific algorithm for the detection of
seizure onset in long-term EEG monitoring: possible use as a warning
device,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 115–122, Feb.
1997.
[15] I. Osorio, M. G. Frei, and S. B. Wilkinson, “Real-time automated detection
and quantitative analysis of seizures and short-term prediction of clinical
onset,” Epilepsia, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 615–627, 1998.
[16] M. Saab and J. Gotman, “A system to detect the onset of epileptic seizures
in scalp EEG,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 427–442, 2005.
[17] R. Meier, H. Dittrich, A. Schulze-Bonhage, and A. Aertsen, “Detecting epileptic seizures in long-term human EEG: A new approach to
automatic online and real-time detection and classification of polymorphic seizure patterns,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 25, pp. 119–131,
2008.
[18] A. S. Zandi, M. Javidan, G. A. Dumont, and R. Tafreshi, “Automated
real-time epileptic seizure detection in scalp EEG recordings using an
algorithm based on wavelet packet transform,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1639–1651, Jul. 2010.
[19] K. M. Kelly, D. S. Shiau, R. T. Kern, J. H. Chien, M. C. K. Yang, K.
A. Yandora, J. P. Valeriano, J. J. Halford, and J. C. Sackellares, “Assessment of a scalp EEG-based automated seizure detection system,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 121, no. 11, pp. 1832–1843, 2010.
[20] A. Shoeb, A. Kharbouch, J. Soegaard, S. Schachter, and J. Guttag, “A
machine-learning algorithm for detecting seizure termination in scalp
EEG,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 22, Supplement 1, pp. S36–S43, 2011.
[21] S. B. Wilson, M. L. Scheuer, R. G. Emerson, and A. J. Gabor, “Seizure
detection: Evaluation of the Reveal algorithm,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 115, no. 10, pp. 2280–2291, 2004.
[22] S. Ghosh-Dastidar, H. Adeli, and N. Dadmehr, “Mixed-band waveletchaos-neural network methodology for epilepsy and epileptic seizure detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 1545–1551, Sep.
2007.
[23] V. Srinivasan, C. Eswaran, and N. Sriraam, “Approximate entropybased epileptic EEG detection using artificial neural networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 288–295, May
2007.
[24] A. T. Tzallas, M. G. Tsipouras, and D. I. Fotiadis, “Epileptic seizure
detection in EEGs using time-frequency analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 703–710, Sep. 2009.

1028

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

[25] Q. Yuan, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, and J. Wang, “Epileptic seizure detection with
linear and nonlinear features,” Epilesy Behav., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 415–421,
2012.
[26] S. Alam and M. Bhuiyan, “Detection of seizure and epilepsy using higher
order statistics in the EMD domain,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 312–318, Mar. 2013.
[27] M. Niknazar, S. Mousavi, B. Vosoughi Vahdat, and M. Sayyah, “A
new framework based on recurrence quantification analysis for epileptic seizure detection,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 572–578, May 2013.
[28] R. Hopfengärtner, B. S. Kasper, W. Graf, S. Gollwitzer, G. Kreiselmeyer,
H. Stefan, and H. Hamer, “Automatic seizure detection in long-term scalp
EEG using an adaptive thresholding technique: A validation study for
clinical routine,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 125, pp. 1346–1352, 2014.
[29] R. A. B. Badawy, N. Pillay, N. Jetté, S. Wiebe, and P. Federico, “A
blinded comparison of continuous versus sampled review of video-EEG
monitoring data,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 6, pp. 1086–1090,
2011.
[30] M. Z. Koubeissi and T. U. Syed, “Inpatient video-EEG monitoring: How
much shall we review?” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 122, no. 6, pp. 1065–
1066, 2011.
[31] R. F. Yazicioglu, P. Merken, R. Puers, and C. Van Hoof, “A 200 μW
eight-channel EEG acquisition ASIC for ambulatory EEG systems,” IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 3025–3038, Dec. 2008.
[32] W. De Clercq, A. Vergult, B. Vanrumste, W. Van Paesschen, and S. Van
Huffel, “Canonical correlation analysis applied to remove muscle artifacts from the electroencephalogram,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53,
no. 12, pp. 2583–2587, Nov. 2006.
[33] A. Vergult, W. De Clercq, A. Palmini, B. Vanrumste, P. Dupont, S. Van
Huffel, and W. Van Paesschen, “Improving the interpretation of ictal
scalp EEG: BSS–CCA algorithm for muscle artifact removal,” Epilepsia,
vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 950–958, 2007.
[34] R. Esteller, J. Echauz, T. Tcheng, B. Litt, and B. Pless, “Line length: An
efficient feature for seizure onset detection,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Istanbul, Turkey, Oct. 2001, pp. 1707–1710.
[35] M. R. Nuwer, G. Comi, R. Emerson, A. Fuglsang-Frederiksen, J.-M. Gurit,
H. Hinrichs, A. Ikeda, F. Jose C. Luccas, and P. Rappelsburger, “IFCN
standards for digital recording of clinical EEG,” Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 259–261, 1998.
[36] L. Logesparan, A. J. Casson, and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Assessing the
impact of signal normalization: Preliminary results on epileptic seizure
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Boston, MA, USA, 2011,
pp. 1439–1442.
[37] Texas Instruments. (2013). MSP430 ultra-low power 16-bit microcontrollers. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.com/msp430/
[38] Nordic Semiconductor. (2013). [Online]. Available: http://www.
nordicsemi.com/
[39] P. Ekstrom. (2000). Running median better than average. [Online].
Available:
http://www.eetindia.co.in/STATIC/PDF/200011/EEIOL_
2000NOV03_EMS_EDA_TA.pdf
[40] U.K. (1998). Data protection act 1998. [Online]. Available: http://
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/contents
[41] Department of Health. (2003). Confidentiality: NHS code of practice. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
confidentiality-nhs-code-of-practice
[42] S. A. Imtiaz, A. J. Casson, and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, “Compression in
wearable sensor nodes: Impacts of node topology,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1080–1090, Apr. 2014.

Syed Anas Imtiaz (S’07) received the B.Eng. degree from the National University of Sciences and
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2008, and the
M.Sc. degree with distinction in integrated circuit design from Imperial College London, London, U.K.,
in 2009. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in low-power circuits and systems at Imperial
College London.
His research interests include signal processing,
algorithms and mixed-signal circuit design of lowpower and wearable EEG systems for use in sleep
medicine and epilepsy monitoring.

Lojini Logesparan (S’10) received the B.Eng. degree in electrical and electronic engineering and the
Ph.D. degree from Imperial College London, London, U.K., in 2007 and 2013, respectively. She concentrated on algorithm and circuit design for online
EEG data reduction while working toward the Ph.D.
degree.
She is currently with Schlumberger, West Sussex,
U.K., creating new signal processing algorithms for
use in the oil and gas industry.

Esther Rodriguez-Villegas (SM’08) received the
graduate degree from the Department of Physics,
University of Seville, Seville, Spain, in 1996, where
she received the Ph.D. degree in 2002.
She is currently a Reader in Low Power Electronics with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, U.K., where she specializes in ultralow-power
electronic circuits and systems for truly wearable
physiological monitoring. She is the author of more
than 100 peer-reviewed papers and a book on FGMOS transistors which was published by the Institution of Engineering and
Technology in 2006.
Dr. Rodriguez-Villegas has been a Member of technical committees in several international conferences such as the IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems, the IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems, and the IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems. In 2010,
she organized a mini-symposium on truly wearable medical devices at the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Conference. In 2009, she received the
Complutense Young Award for Science and Technology, and an IET innovation
award.

