2948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Remote Detection of Photoplethysmographic Systolic
and Diastolic Peaks Using a Digital Camera
Daniel McDuff∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Sarah Gontarek, and Rosalind W. Picard, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We present a new method for measuring photoplethysmogram signals remotely using ambient light and a digital camera that allows for accurate recovery of the waveform
morphology (from a distance of 3 m). In particular, we show
that the peak-to-peak time between the systolic peak and diastolic
peak/inflection can be automatically recovered using the secondorder derivative of the remotely measured waveform. We compare
measurements from the face with those captured using a contact
fingertip sensor and show high agreement in peak and interval
timings. Furthermore, we show that results can be significantly
improved using orange, green, and cyan color channels compared
to the tradition red, green, and blue channel combination. The
absolute error in interbeat intervals was 26 ms and the absolute
error in mean systolic–diastolic peak-to-peak times was 12 ms.
The mean systolic–diastolic peak-to-peak times measured using the
contact sensor and the camera were highly correlated, ρ = 0.94
(p < 0.001). The results were obtained with a camera frame-rate of
only 30 Hz. This technology has significant potential for advancing
healthcare.
Index Terms—Blood volume pulse, heart rate variability, morphology, remote.

I. INTRODUCTION
HOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHY (PPG) is a low-cost and
noninvasive method of measuring the cardiovascular blood
volume pulse (BVP) via light transmitted through, or reflected
from, the human body [1]. There are many clinical applications
for PPG and it can reveal significant information about health
and risk of cardiovascular diseases [2].
The peripheral pulse wave, as detected via PPG, characteristically exhibits systolic and diastolic peaks. The systolic peak is
a result of the direct pressure wave traveling from the left ventricle to the periphery of the body; the diastolic peak (or inflection)
is a result of reflections of the pressure wave by arteries of the
lower body [3]. Fig. 1 shows an example of a pulse waveform
(black line) with the systolic and diastolic peaks labeled. The
systolic–diastolic peak-to-peak time (SD-PPT) is defined as the
time between successive systolic and diastolic peaks/inflections.
Takazawa et al. [4] evaluated the second derivative of the
PPG waveform and found that it had a characteristic shape

P

Manuscript received March 25, 2014; revised June 11, 2014; accepted July 7,
2014. Date of publication July 24, 2014; date of current version November 18,
2014. This work was supported by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Media Member consortium. The work of D. McDuff was supported by an NEC
fellowship. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. McDuff is with the Media Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: djmcduff@mit.edu).
S. Gontarek and R. W. Picard are with the Media Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: sgontare@mit.
edu; picard@media.mit.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2340991

Fig. 1. SD-PPT is calculated as the time between the systolic and diastolic
peaks within the PPG signal. IBI is calculated as the time between systolic
peaks. Calculating the second derivative of the PPG waveform can be highly
beneficial in recovering the locations of the peaks.

that aids in its interpretation. We use this approach to reveal
diastolic inflections in cases where there is no observable diastolic peak within the BVP waveform. We compare the PPG
waveforms and second-order derivatives measured using a contact sensor and a digital camera. Fig. 1 shows an example of
the typical second-order derivative shape of a BVP waveform
(grey line).
Traditionally, PPG measurements have been captured using
a contact sensor with dedicated light source. However, recent
work has shown that heart rate, respiration rate, and heart rate
variability (HRV) parameters can be extracted from PPG signals
measured using a digital camera [5]–[7]. Motion compensation
is possible when motion artifacts are problematic [8]. However,
beyond accurate beat detection, it has not been clear whether
the morphology of the PPG signal could be accurately captured
using such approaches. In this paper, we show that accurate
waveform morphology can be recovered automatically from the
human face using ambient light and a digital camera at a distance
of 3 m.
The main contribution of this paper is to present an automated algorithm for extracting the BVP waveform and systolic
and diastolic peaks from videos of the human face and show
that these have a high degree of agreement with contact sensor
measurements. In the remainder of the paper, we will explain
the automated approach, data collection, validation experiments,
and the results.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MCDUFF et al.: REMOTE DETECTION OF PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHIC SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC PEAKS USING A DIGITAL CAMERA

2949

Fig. 2. (a) Experimental setup. Contact measurements of the BVP were collected using a finger sensor. Camera, placed 3 m from the participant, was used to
capture videos images at 30 frames/s, 960 × 720 resolution. (b) Overview of the automated method used to recover the systolic and diastolic peaks from videos
of a human face. 1) Facial landmarks are detected (using [9]) and the skin ROI segmented (excluding the region around the eyes), 2) spatial average of each color
channel in the ROI over time calculated, 3) source signals, calculated using independent component analysis (JADE implementation), are filtered, 4) the channel
with the estimated strongest BVP signal selected and inverted (if necessary), 5) BVP signal interpolated to 256 Hz and systolic peaks detected, and 6) second-order
derivative of the BVP waveform is calculated, interpolated to 256 Hz, and used to locate the diastolic inflection point.

II. METHODS
A. Extraction of the BVP From Video
We use an automated method for recovering the BVP waveform from the recorded videos similar to that presented by
McDuff et al. [7]. Fig. 2(b) shows an overview of the approach.
The videos, recorded from a digital single lens reflex (DSLR)
camera (at 30 frames/s, 960 × 720 resolution), were exported in
an uncompressed format. The physiological and video recordings were analyzed offline using custom software written in
MATLAB (The Mathworks, Inc.). A facial landmark detector
[9] was used to find the x- and y-coordinates of points on the face
in each frame of the video. These were used to define a region
of interest (ROI). We selected the full width between the outer
eye corners (w) and a height twice the width (w above the eye
corners to w below the eye corners) as a box encompassing the
ROI. We exclude pixels within a region around the eyes, which
is of width w and height w/2. The average ROI size was less than
25% of the frame. A spatial average of the color channel pixel
values within the resulting ROI were calculated for each frame
to form raw signals x1 (t), x2 (t), . . . , xN (t), respectively, (where N
is the number of channels). The raw traces were detrended using
a technique based on a smoothness priors approach [10]. The
resulting signals were normalized by subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard deviation. We then apply independent
component analysis (ICA) (see JADE implementation [11]) to
recover source signals from the observations, maximizing the
non-Gaussianity within the sources. Each of the source signals
was band-pass-filtered (hamming window filter with low- and
high-frequency cutoffs at 45 beats per minute (bpm) (0.75 Hz)
and 270 bpm (4.5 Hz), respectively). To select the appropriate source signal, we calculated the normalized fast Fourier
transform of each source and chose the source signal with the
greatest frequency peak within the range 45–270 bpm. The
source was also scaled by −1, if necessary, using the approach
in [7].
B. Systolic and Diastolic Peak Detection
Systolic peak times can be detected accurately from the BVP
waveform as they are maxima within the signal. To do so, the
estimated BVP signal was interpolated with a cubic spline func-

Fig. 3. Examples of (a) clean and (b) noisy contact sensor signals. The affected
region is highlighted. For comparison with the remote method, it was important
that the systolic and diastolic peaks in the contact measures could be visually
verified since there is no clinically approved ground-truth method for automatic
detection of PPG systolic or diastolic peaks.

tion at a sampling frequency of 256 Hz. We used a custom peak
detection algorithm with a moving time window of length 0.25 s
to locate the peaks. To avoid artifacts (such as motion or ectopic
beats), peaks intervals were filtered using the noncausal of variable threshold algorithm [12] with a tolerance of 30%. These
parameters have been verified in prior work [6], [7].
However, the diastolic peaks (or inflections) are much more
difficult to locate as they are not always maxima (and even if
they are the systolic peaks are generally much bigger). In order
to automatically find the diastolic peaks, we first compute the

2950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 4. BVP and BVP second-order derivatives measured using a contact finger sensor (red) and a digital camera (blue). (a) BVP waveforms with more prominent
dicrotic notch and (b) corresponding second-order derivatives and estimation of diastolic peak locations. (c) BVP waveforms with less prominent dicrotic notch
and (d) corresponding second-order derivatives and estimation of diastolic peak locations.

second-order derivatives of the BVP waveforms for both the
contact and remote PPG measurements. These were computed
by performing the MATLAB diff function twice on each of the
signals. The outputs are smoothed using a three-point moving
average filter. Fig. 4 shows examples of the BVP waveforms and
the second-order derivatives for two of the subjects for a 5.5-s
window. Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows an example with quite clear
diastolic peaks and Fig. 4(c) and (d) shows another example
with less obvious diastolic inflections.
In most cases, the largest minima within the second-order
derivative correspond to the systolic peaks and the minima following these typically correspond to the diastolic
peaks/inflections. We use the locations of the systolic peaks
as detected above and perform peak detection on the inverted
second-order derivative waveform using a custom peak detection function, in which a point is considered a peak if it is a local
maxima and is greater than the preceding value by at least 1%
of the total signal amplitude. The timing of the diastolic peak
is located as the timing of the minima following the systolic
peak in each pulse cycle. The SD-PPTs are then calculated for
each beat. As the SD-PPTs are relatively stationary (compared
to interbeat intervals (IBIs)) within each 2-min session, we class
estimates that fall beyond one standard deviation from the mean
as outliers and do not include these in our estimates of the final
mean SD-PPT.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Design
Camera: The camera used for recording the video sequences
was a DSLR camera with a Zuiko 50-mm lens. The lens power
will have an impact on the accuracy of the measurements that
can be made at a given distance. The camera has sensors for
capturing five color bands, which includes the typical three
color band sensors (red, green, and blue (RGB)) and also cyan

and orange frequency band sensors (ROGCB). Specifically, the
camera’s CMOS sensor has pixels for detecting light in the
orange and cyan frequency bands as well as pixels for detecting
light in the RGB bands. In the experiments described below, we
tested the performance of different color band combinations.
The camera sensitivity profile and sensor layout can be found in
[7] and information about the demosaicking in [13]. The changes
to the CMOS sensor would not make such a sensor dramatically
more expensive than a standard DSLR camera sensor.
Contact measurements: Although there are no international
standards for the measurement of PPG, the most commonly
used approach is to use a contact device with a dedicated light
source and sensor [1]. Thus, for comparison, we collected contact PPG measurements to validate the remote physiological
measurements. The contact PPG signal was recorded using an
FDA-approved sensor (Flexcomp Infiniti by Thought Technologies, Inc.) on the left index finger. Documentation for the contact sensor is available online [14]. As there is no ground truth
measurement of PPG for comparison of measurements with the
remote method, we visually verified the systolic and diastolic
peak detection for the contact signals.
B. Protocol
All experiments were conducted indoors with a varying
amount of sunlight and indoor illumination. Participants were
seated 3 m from the camera and the data were recorded on a
laptop (Toshiba running Windows 7). Our experiments included
14 healthy participants of both genders (eight females), different
ages (18–35) and skin color. During the experiment, participants
were asked to face the camera while the videos were recorded.
Fig. 2(a) shows the experimental setup. Two-minute recordings
of the participants were taken, the contact measurements and
video sequences were synchronized. Our study was approved
by the Institutional Review Board of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

MCDUFF et al.: REMOTE DETECTION OF PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHIC SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC PEAKS USING A DIGITAL CAMERA

Two recordings were taken for each participant, one at rest
and one during a cognitive task. In all cases, the cognitive task
was performed after the measurements at rest
Measurements at rest: Participants were asked to sit still, look
toward the camera, and relax. The video and contact recordings
were captured for 2 min.
Measurements during cognitive task: Participants were asked
to perform a mental arithmetic test silently. Starting with the
number 4000, they were required to subtract 7, then subtract 7
again, and so on, as quickly as possible. The video and contact
recordings were captured for 2 min. The participants started
the task immediately after the recordings were started. Nearly,
all the participants reported this task to be significantly more
stressful than the rest period.
C. Quantifying Morphological Parameters
In order to assess the accuracy of the remote waveform morphology relative to the contact measurement, we defined the
following characteristics of the pulse wave. A summary of the
parameters can be seen in Fig. 1.
Interbeat intervals: Defined as the intervals between successive systolic peaks.
Systolic–diastolic peak-to-peak times: Defined as the time
between the systolic and diastolic peak for each pulse wave.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using the data collected in the experiments described in
Section III-B, we tested the performance of our approach for
automatically detecting systolic and diastolic peaks. For three
participants, the contact sensor measurements were noisy and
had a number of unverifiable systolic and diastolic peaks. If we
could not visually verify the peaks within the waveforms, we
did not use the sessions for the comparison with the camera
method here. This highlights some of the challenges associated
with contact sensor measurements. Fig. 3 shows two examples
of noisy contact measurements. Notice that the shape of the
waveforms changes significantly in the affected region and the
systolic and diastolic peaks/inflections cannot be verified. The
noise within the signals is most likely to be due to movement of
the fingers.
A. Morphology Statistics
Table I shows the mean and standard deviations of the IBIs
and the SD-PPTs, measured using the contact sensor, for the
rest and stress cases. As we would expect the standard deviation
of the IBIs with each session is much greater than the standard
deviation of the SD-PPTs. We would not expect the SD-PPTs
to vary a lot within a session or for an individual between tasks
as this is a result of the time taken for the reflected pulse wave
to return from the lower limbs and is not controlled by the
autonomic nervous system (ANS). However, there is variation
in mean SD-PPT between individuals, as much as 60 ms. The
mean standard deviation of the IBIs was close to 50 ms for
both tasks and there was a significant difference in the relative
high-and low-frequency (LF) power components in the HRV

2951

TABLE I
MEAN (AND STANDARD DEVIATION) OF IBIS AND SD-PPTS FOR EACH
OF THE 11 PARTICIPANTS DURING THE REST AND STRESS TASKS
IBIs (s)

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11
Mean

SD-PPTs (s)

Rest

Stress

Rest

Stress

0.99 (0.038)
0.97 (0.040)
0.84 (0.045)
0.85 (0.064)
0.83 (0.037)
0.91 (0.059)
0.90 (0.058)
1.00 (0.070)
0.75 (0.046)
0.91 (0.046)
0.82 (0.057)
0.89 (0.051)

0.95 (0.047)
0.99 (0.049)
0.76 (0.060)
0.89 (0.061)
0.79 (0.031)
0.87 (0.055)
0.87 (0.036)
0.75 (0.046)
0.75 (0.046)
0.81 (0.046)
0.85 (0.045)
0.84 (0.047)

0.29 (0.006)
0.30 (0.009)
0.29 (0.007)
0.32 (0.015)
0.31 (0.010)
0.33 (0.010)
0.29 (0.009)
0.34 (0.011)
0.28 (0.004)
0.29 (0.025)
0.32 (0.009)
0.31 (0.011)

0.28 (0.007)
0.32 (0.027)
0.30 (0.024)
0.32 (0.013)
0.30 (0.008)
0.32 (0.012)
0.31 (0.007)
0.28 (0.004)
0.28 (0.005)
0.30 (0.010)
0.31 (0.006)
0.30 (0.011)

frequency spectra between tasks. The HRV frequency spectrum
is the frequency spectrum of the IBI time series. The LF and
high-frequency (HF) powers of the HRV were calculated as
the area under the PSD curve corresponding to 0.04–0.15 and
0.15–0.4 Hz, respectively. LF/HF power ratio was significantly
higher during the stress task (1.66) than the rest task (0.84). This
is expected as HRV is influenced by both the sympathetic and
parasympathetic branches of the ANS.
B. Validation of Remote Measurement of Morphology
Excluding the data from the noisy contact measurements
leaves 22 2-min sessions from 11 participants. Fig. 4 shows
samples of the BVP signals calculated from the face using
the digital camera (blue lines) and the second-order derivatives
of these signals. There are clear minima in the second-order
derivatives that correspond to the diastolic peaks (or inflections). The maxima immediately preceding these corresponds
to the dicrotic notch. In some cases, the inflections are visible in the BVP waveform. However, in other cases, the inflections are only obvious by looking at the second-order derivative
(see Fig. 4(c) and (d) in particular). In some cases [see Fig. 4(d)],
the second-order derivatives have additional waves—perhaps
due to artifacts within the detected BVP waveform.
Although we would not expect the timings of the diastolic
peaks to be identical at the finger and on the face (due to the
reflected wave being different at different parts of the body), it
is likely that there would be a high degree of agreement. Fig. 4
compares the BVP waveforms and second-order derivatives for
the contact finger measurements (red lines) and the camera measurements (blue lines). The timings of peaks within the contact
and remotely measured BVP waveforms and derivatives are very
similar. The diastolic and systolic peak heights are similar but
not always identical, this may be in part due to the difference
in the magnitude of the waves observed at different parts of the
body.
The top row of Fig. 5 shows the plots of the systolic peak intervals (the same as the IBIs) measured using the contact sensor
and the camera method for three subjects. The bottom row of

2952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. (Top row) Systolic peak intervals (IBIs) measured using a contact sensor (red), the camera green channel (green), and the camera OGC combination (blue)
for three subjects over 2 min. (Bottom row) SD-PPT measured using a contact sensor (red), the camera green channel (green), and the camera OGC combination
(blue) for three subjects over 2 min. (a) Example in which the OGC combination performed very well and much better than the green channel, especially in IBI
estimation, (b) example in which the OGC combination performed very well and much better than the green channel, especially in SD-PPT estimation, and (c)
example where both the green and OGC channel camera methods performed relatively poorly in the estimation of SD-PPTs.

TABLE II
MEAN % ABSOLUTE ERROR AND ABSOLUTE ERROR BETWEEN THE CONTACT
AND REMOTELY MEASURED MORPHOLOGY PARAMETERS FOR ALL
22 SESSIONS FROM 11 PARTICIPANTS
Channels
G
IBIs
Mean SD-PPT

∗

% Ab. Error
Ab. Error (s)
% Ab. Error
Ab. Error (s)

∗

5.12
0.045∗
5.47
0.016

RGB

OGC

8.72
0.076
5.79
0.017

∗∗

3.10
0.026∗ ∗
4.11
0.012

ROGCB
3.10∗ ∗
0.026∗ ∗
4.13
0.013

Significantly lower error than RGB (p < 0.05).
Significantly lower error than both G and RGB (p < 0.05).

∗∗

Fig. 5 shows the SD-PPTs measured using the contact sensor
and the camera method for the same three subjects. We compare
the measurements using the camera green channel alone and
the orange, green, and cyan (OGC) channel combination. For
these examples, we can see extremely close agreement between the measurements from the camera and the contact sensor over a 2-min period using the OGC channel combination.
Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows an example in which the OGC channel
combination performed well; using the green channel alone,
the measurements are less accurate. Fig. 5(c) shows an example in which the green and OGC channels both performed
quite well in estimating the IBIs but poorly in estimating the
SD-PPTs.
Table II shows the mean percentage absolute error and the
mean absolute error between the contact and remotely measured systolic peak intervals for all 22 sessions. Table II also
shows the percentage absolute error and mean absolute error
between the contact and remotely measured mean SD-PPT. We
compare the results calculated using just the green channel (G),
RGB channels, OGC channels, and all channels (ROGCB). The
absolute error between the contact and remotely measured IBIs
using OGC is 0.026 s (this represents only 3% error). The errors
between the contact and remotely measured mean SD-PPTs are
also small, 0.012 s absolute error, using OGC channels (this rep-

Fig. 6. Mean SD-PPT measured using the remote method and the camera for
the 11 participants and 22 sessions (correlation: 0.94, p < 0.001).

resents 4% error in SD-PPT timing). The accurate estimation of
systolic and diastolic peak locations is particularly good considering that the sampling rate of the video was only 30 Hz. The
SD-PPTs are much more challenging to calculate than the IBIs
as the diastolic peaks/inflections are more subtle—often a peak
is not present. These results support those reported previously
in [7]; the OGC channel combination significantly outperforms
the green and RGB channels for measurement of physiological parameters (here, the significances were computed using
two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests). The OGC channels
performs equivalently to the ROGCB combination. Again, this
suggests that there is no added benefit of the red and blue
channels.
Fig. 6 shows the scatter plot of the mean SD-PPT for each
of the 22 sessions measured using the contact sensor and
the camera method. There is a strong correlation (ρ = 0.94,
p < 0.001). The SD-PPTs measured using the camera are
typically slightly longer than those measured using the finger
sensor.

MCDUFF et al.: REMOTE DETECTION OF PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHIC SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC PEAKS USING A DIGITAL CAMERA

TABLE III
MEAN % ABSOLUTE ERROR AND ABSOLUTE ERROR BETWEEN CONTACT
AND REMOTE MEASURES OF MORPHOLOGY PARAMETERS FOR ALL
11 PARTICIPANTS DURING THE REST AND COGNITIVE STRESS TASKS
Task

IBIs
Mean SD-PPT

% Ab. Error
Ab. Error (s)
% Ab. Error
Ab. Error (s)

Rest

Cog. Stress

3.11
0.027
4.60
0.014

3.10
0.025
3.62
0.011

C. Comparison of Accuracy During Rest and Cognitive Task
Table III shows the performance of the method (using the
OGC channels) during the rest and the stress task separately.
The results show that the performance was comparable for both
tasks. The error in IBIs for the rest task was 3.11% and for the
cognitive stress task was 3.10%. The error in mean SD-PPT for
the rest task was 4.60% and for the cognitive stress task was
3.62%. As the mean SD-PPTs are not significantly different
during each of the tasks, it is reasonable that the performance of
the automatic detection would be similar. The IBI measurements
were accurate enough to measure the difference in IBI intervals
between the two tasks.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented a new automated method for detection of
the systolic and diastolic peaks of a PPG waveform captured
remotely using a digital camera. Thus, we can automatically
capture the peak-to-peak times, which are useful in measuring
aspects of cardiac health. We have shown that the second-order
derivative of the camera PPG waveform reveals the diastolic
peak (or inflection) even if it does not appear to be visible in the
original PPG waveform.
We compare the measurements of diastolic and systolic peak
times measured remotely from the face with those measured
from a contact fingertip sensor. The results show that there
is high agreement in the peak-to-peak time and the IBIs. The
best performance was obtained with a combination of green,
orange, and cyan color bands from the camera. The correlation
between the mean SD-PPT measured from the contact sensor
and the remote method was 0.94 (p < 0.01). The accuracy of
the predictions did not vary significantly during a restful and
cognitively stressing task. Using a combination of the OGC
channels yields significantly better (p < 0.01) results than using
just the green signal or the traditional RGB combination.
The waveform morphology captured using ambient light and
a remote camera is susceptible to motion artifacts. Although
in the data we present here the participants were free to move,
they were seated and not talking—therefore relatively stationary.
Future work should consider how the estimates of peak times
are degraded in the presence of rigid head motions. In addition,
we plan to apply the technique to videos of individuals from a
broader range of ages in order to investigate whether the effect

2953

of aging on the waveform morphology can be recovered using
these techniques.
Defining the operational envelope of remote PPG measurement using digital cameras is important and there will be a
tradeoff between the camera lens power and distance at which
measurements can be made with a similar accuracy. All analysis
was performed offline; we leave a real-time implementation for
future work.
Morphological parameters from the PPG could have the potential to predict arterial stiffness (AS), which is an early sign
of atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) [15]. Properties of
the waveform can be used as a measure of small and medium
AS due to the relationship between arterial elasticity and the
reflection of the PPG signal. Also, with age, the distance between the diastolic point and the systolic point decreases. Future
work will investigate whether the relative amplitude of the systolic and diastolic peaks can be accurately recovered using this
method.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Allen, “Photoplethysmography and its application in clinical physiological measurement,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. R1–R39, 2007.
[2] J. Allen, C. P. Oates, T. A. Lees, and A. Murray, “Photoplethysmography
detection of lower limb peripheral arterial occlusive disease: A comparison
of pulse timing, amplitude and shape characteristics,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 811–821, 2005.
[3] A. M. Brumfield and M. E. Andrew, “Digital pulse contour analysis: Investigating age-dependent indices of arterial compliance,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 599–608, 2005.
[4] K. Takazawa, N. Tanaka, M. Fujita, O. Matsuoka, T. Saiki, M. Aikawa,
S. Tamura, and C. Ibukiyama, “Assessment of vasoactive agents and vascular aging by the second derivative of photoplethysmogram waveform,”
Hypertension, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 365–370, 1998.
[5] M.-Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard, “Non-contact, automated
cardiac pulse measurements using video imaging and blind source separation,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 10 762–10 774, 2010.
[6] M.-Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard, “Advancements in noncontact, multiparameter physiological measurements using a webcam,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 7–11, Jan. 2011.
[7] D. McDuff, S. Gontarek, and R. Picard, “Improvements in remote cardiopulmonary measurement using a five band digital camera,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 9, 2014.
[8] Y. Sun, S. Hu, V. Azorin-Peris, S. Greenwald, J. Chambers, and
Y. Zhu, “Motion-compensated noncontact imaging photoplethysmography to monitor cardiorespiratory status during exercise,” J. Biomed. Opt.,
vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 077 010–077 010, 2011.
[9] B. Martinez, M. F. Valstar, X. Binefa, and M. Pantic, “Local evidence aggregation for regression-based facial point detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1149–1163, May 2013.
[10] M. P. Tarvainen, P. O. Ranta-aho, and P. A. Karjalainen, “An advanced detrending method with application to HRV analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 172–175, Feb. 2002.
[11] J.-F. Cardoso and A. Souloumiac, “Blind beamforming for non-gaussian
signals,” in Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., F Radar Signal Process., vol. 140,
no. 6, pp. 362–370, Dec. 1993.
[12] J. Vila, F. Palacios, J. Presedo, M. Fernández-Delgado, P. Felix, and
S. Barro, “Time-frequency analysis of heart-rate variability,” IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 119–126, Sep./Oct. 1997.
[13] Y. Monno, M. Tanaka, and M. Okutomi, “Multispectral demosaicking
using guided filter,” in Proc. IS&T/SPIE Electron. Imag. Int. Soc. Opt.
Photon., 2012, pp. 82 990O-1–82 990O-7.
[14] T. Technology. Flexcomp infiniti hardware manual. (2003). [Online].
Available: http://www.thoughttechnology.com/pdf/manuals/SA7560%
20rev.%204 %20FlexComp%20Infiniti%20User%20Manual%20(2).pdf
[15] J. J. Oliver and D. J. Webb, “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness
and risk of atherosclerotic events,” Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, Vasc.
Biol., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 554–566, 2003.

2954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 61, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Daniel McDuff (S’09) received the Bachelor’s (with
first-class honors) and Master’s degree in engineering from Cambridge University, Cambridge, U.K.
He received the Ph.D. degree in media arts and sciences from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Massachusetts, MA, USA, while working at
the MIT Media Lab.
His research interests include computer vision and
machine learning to enable the automated recognition
of affect. His research interests also include technology for remote measurement of physiology.

Sarah Gontarek is an electrical engineering and
computer science student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA,
and a political science student at Wellesley College.
Her research interests include signal processing,
neuroscience, and machine learning. She is currently
with the Affective Computing Group in the Media
Lab, MIT, working on biomedical applications for
common digital communications technology.

Rosalind W. Picard (M’81–SM’00–F’05) received
the Sc.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA.
She is a Professor of Media Arts and Sciences at
the MIT Media Lab, Founder and Director of the Affective Computing Group at the MIT Media Lab. She
is also a Cofounder of Affectiva, Inc. and Empatica,
Inc. Her current research interests include the development of technology to help people comfortably
and respectfully measure and communicate affective
information, as well as on the development of models of affect that improve
decision-making and learning.

