1718

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Designing Robust and Reliable Timestamps
for Remote Patient Monitoring
Malcolm Clarke, Senior Member, IEEE, Paul Schluter, Member, IEEE, Barry Reinhold, Member, IEEE,
and Brian Reinhold, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Having timestamps that are robust and reliable is essential for remote patient monitoring in order for patient data to
have context and to be correlated with other data. However, unlike
hospital systems for which guidelines on timestamps are currently
provided by HL7 and IHE, remote patient monitoring platforms
are: operated in environments where it can be difficult to synchronize with reliable time sources; include devices with simple or
no clock; and may store data spanning significant periods before
able to upload. Existing guidelines prove inadequate. This paper
analyzes the requirements and the operating scenarios of remote
patient monitoring platforms and defines a framework to convey
information on the conditions under which observations were made
by the device and forwarded by the gateway in order for data to
be managed appropriately and to include both reference to local
time and an underlying continuous reference timeline. We define
the timestamp formats of HL7 to denote the different conditions
of operation and describe extensions to the existing definition of
the HL7 timestamp to differentiate between time local to GMT
(+0000) and universal coordinated time or network time protocol time where no geographic time zone is implied (−0000). We
further describe how timestamps from devices having only simple
or no clocks might be managed reliably by a gateway to provide
timestamps that are referenced to local time and an underlying continuous reference timeline. We extend the HL7 message to include
information to permit a subsequent receiver of the data to understand the quality of the timestamp and how it has been translated.
We present evaluation from deploying a platform for 12 months.
Index Terms—Remote patient monitoring, telehealth, timestamps, time standards.

I. INTRODUCTION
EMOTE patient monitoring platforms are typically widely
deployed to patients to collect and forward observations
over significant periods of time. Platforms will include a wide
variety of devices to monitor physiological (e.g., blood pressure, weight, glucose, SpO2 ) and environmental (e.g., motion,
temperature) parameters. Typically end devices are simple, low
cost and battery operated and they connect to the gateway using
low-power, short-range wireless communications. Such devices
may have no internal clock, or the internal clock is not or cannot
be synchronized to an external time source. Gateways typically

R

Manuscript received March 27, 2014; revised June 18, 2014; accepted July
22, 2014. Date of publication July 28, 2014; date of current version September
1, 2015.
M. Clarke is with the Computer Science Department, Brunel University,
Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, U.K. (e-mail: malcolm.clarke@brunel.ac.uk).
P. Schluter is with GE Healthcare, Life Care Solutions, Milwaukee, WI 53223
USA (e-mail: paul.schluter@med.ge.com).
B. B. Reinhold and B. Reinhold are with Lamprey Networks, Inc.,
Durham, NH 03824 USA (e-mail: bbr@lampreynetworks.com; brianreinhold@
lampreynetworks.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2343632

will use wide area communication technology such as GPRS to
transmit data and synchronize their internal clock to an external
source, such as the time provided by the mobile (cell) phone
network or network time protocol (NTP) [1].
There is an expectation that the gateway will translate the
timestamps from each device to the local time of the patient
to provide context and ensure that observations from multiple
devices can be compared and combined. This includes having
the correct local time to allow interpretation of blood glucose
measurements with separately recorded carbohydrate intake and
exercise for the diabetic patient, or comparison of physiological data with environmental information to correlate health and
behavioral changes as in [2]. It ideally should also provide a
reference to an underlying continuous time base to support correlation between data from multiple sources that may have been
recorded at different locations, such as Holter ECG recordings
that are correlated with drug data in FDA trials. Each of these
applications will have its own consideration of the accuracy of
timestamps. Although remote patient monitoring applications
may tolerate an error in synchronization of minutes, other applications such as hospital procedures may require a greater
accuracy in synchronization. As tolerance on synchronization
cannot be defined uniquely, the error will need to be specified
in the message.
Platforms can be used to monitor patients for significant periods, so aspects of Time Zone (TZ) and Daylight Saving Time
(DST) must be taken into account when translating to qualified
time that includes both the local time and TZ offset relative
to the underlying continuous time base. Management of time
stamps may be further complicated if devices store observations
that span time changes, and whether the device changes its time
or not. For example, a simple weighing scale may have readings
stored due to loss of communication with the gateway and will
not change its clock due to DST, whereas a blood glucose meter
will have its clock changed. Each of these scenarios needs to be
considered in order for all observations to be handled correctly.
HL7 [3] and IHE [4] have produced guidelines for management of timestamps. However these were developed with the
expectation that devices are typically located within the health
care enterprise, where networks and devices are managed by
professional staff, including central management of TZ and
DST information.
In a practical remote patient monitoring platform, the ideal
conditions of the health care enterprise do not apply. The limitations must be identified and a protocol developed to support working in such environments and this protocol must indicate the conditions under which the platform is operating.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/

CLARKE et al.: DESIGNING ROBUST AND RELIABLE TIMESTAMPS FOR REMOTE PATIENT MONITORING

Furthermore, the protocol must allow devices to continue to
operate in any adverse conditions that may prevail. Such conditions will include the gateway being unable to acquire accurate
time as not all mobile (cell) phone networks provide network
time on registration to the network, and the NTP server may not
be accessible. In some circumstances, it may be more important
to send the data than have the correct timestamp. In such cases,
the data will be sent, but we ensure that the reliability of the
timestamp is indicated in the message.
There are currently no guidelines for timestamp management
in remote patient monitoring platforms that cover all conditions
of working. This paper analyzes the requirements and the operating scenarios of a remote patient monitoring platform and
defines a framework to convey information on the conditions under which observations were made by the device and forwarded
by the gateway. This information will include reference to the
internal time of the device and to local time and an underlying
continuous reference timeline of the gateway in order for data
to be managed appropriately. Furthermore, because the current
definition of the HL7 timestamp does not differentiate between
time local to GMT (+0000) or universal coordinated time (UTC)
or NTP time where no geographic TZ is implied (−0000), we
propose an extension to handle these separate cases.1
An important requirement of the platform must be support
for very simple devices that have only a simple or no clock. In
these cases, the timestamp of any observation must be translated
by the gateway from the internal time of the device to provide
a timestamp that is referenced to a single consistent and accurate time base. UTC is the preferred choice to facilitate accurate
correlation and processing. Ideally, the timestamps should also
include the local time (as an offset from UTC) of the location
where the observations were made to facilitate correlation with
records maintained by the patient and caregivers. There is the
further requirement that the observation should include information to convey the quality of the timestamp and how it was
translated by the gateway. These requirements are satisfied by
including information on clock status and a coincident timestamp to provide the correlation between the respective clocks of
the device and gateway. The proposals of this paper are being
incorporated into the draft guidelines of the Personal Connected
Health Alliance (formerly the Continua Health Alliance) [5].
II. GATEWAY OPERATING CONDITIONS AND TIMESTAMPS
The operating conditions that affect the clock and timestamps
of the gateway are: synchronization with an external time source
such as NTP; knowledge of local time (TZ); and knowledge of
local DST rules [6]. Table I summarizes the six distinct modes of
operation that arise from valid combinations of these conditions
and must be supported and conveyed through the timestamp
format and further information in the message.

1719

TABLE I
GATEWAY OPERATING CONDITIONS
Mode

A
B
C
D
E
F
∗
∗

Gateway clock operating condition
UTC/NTP

Local

DST

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Whenever local time and its offset to UTC is known (whether
synchronized to UTC/NTP or not), all timestamps for a gateway
operating in one of these modes (A, B, D, and E) will include the
time offset in the form ±ZZZZ, where ±ZZZZ denotes the offset
from UTC. If the gateway is only synchronized to UTC/NTP (by
an external time source such as NTP) and the local time offset
is unknown (mode C), then the gateway will include the time
offset in the form −0000 to denote the timestamp is UTC. If the
gateway is not synchronized to UTC and the local time offset
is also unknown (mode F), then no TZ offset (TZ) is included.
We refer to these forms of timestamp with and without the TZ
as “qualified time” and “unqualified time,” respectively.
We assume that if DST rules are known, local time must also
be known, so that the final two modes are deemed invalid and
map to the corresponding mode with local time known.
A. Qualified Time
A “qualified time” expresses a unique time point along the
UTC timescale, which is the primary time standard by which
the world regulates clocks and time.
Qualified time is expressed as an HL7 V2 “DTM” data type
and must include the TZ offset, expressed either as ±ZZZZ
(HHMM) if the civil TZ offset is known or −0000 if UTC time
(e.g., derived from NTP) is known but the actual civil TZ offset
is not. The full form of the HL7 timestamp is as follows:
YYYYMMDDHHMMSS[.S[S[S[S]]]]±ZZZZ
if civil time zone offset ±ZZZZ is known.
YYYYMMDDHHMMSS[.S[S[S[S]]]]−0000
if UTC time is known but civil time zone is not.
B. Unqualified Local Time
In unqualified local time, the TZ offset is omitted: the civil
TZ offset and UTC time are both unknown:
YYYYMMDDHHMMSS[.S[S[S[S]]]]
The use of these timestamp formats for each operating mode
is summarized in Table II.
III. DEVICE OPERATING CONDITIONS AND TIMESTAMPS

1 UTC

is the primary time standard by which the world regulates clocks and
time. It is one of several closely related successors to Greenwich Mean Time
(GMT). The NTP is used on the public Internet and local area networks to
synchronize participating computers to within a few milliseconds of UTC after
an adjustment for leap seconds is made.

Devices used in remote patient monitoring platforms have a
variety of forms and capabilities of internal clock. These capabilities include: time of day clock that is not synchronized;
simple time of day clock (local time) that is synchronized; time

1720

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE II
GATEWAY TIMESTAMP FOR OPERATING CONDITIONS
Mode

A
B
C
D
E
F

Gateway timestamp
TZ
±ZZZZ
±ZZZZ
−0000
±ZZZZ
±ZZZZ
none

of day clock (UTC and local time) that is synchronized; relative
time clock (monotonic count); and no clock.
A. Clock Types
For the purposes of this paper, we have adopted the definition of clock types from IEEE 11073-20601 [7]. This standard
defines four types of clock:
1) Absolute Time: Conveys only local time information of
the device, that is, it is the equivalent of unqualified local time
and carries no information about the civil TZ offset or relationship with UTC. Although it is termed “absolute time,” there is
no requirement that it is synchronized with the local time of
the user.
2) Base-Offset Time: This time representation is defined to
have an underlying monotonic increasing count component that
is the base time that may be aligned with UTC/NTP, together
with an offset component that provides an indication of the local
time of the device with respect to the base time. Base-offset time
is the equivalent of qualified time.
3) Relative Time: This time representation is defined as an
underlying monotonic increasing count that is of limited period
and so will exhibit frequent rollover, typically in the period of
days. Its count value is not relative to any external time source.
4) High-Resolution Relative Time: This time representation
is defined as an underlying monotonic increasing count but has
an extended period and so will not normally rollover. Typical
period is over 100 years. It provides greater resolution than
relative time. Its count value is not relative to any external time
source.
B. Store and Forward
Although primarily designed to support translation of timestamps of data transmitted in real time, the framework supports
translation of timestamps of data that have been stored in a
device for later transmission (“store and forward”). Generally,
there is no distinction; however, clock changes occurring in
the device and/or gateway require specific handling when data
occurring before the clock change is sent.
1) Device Changes Time: The IEEE 11073-20601 protocol
provides for notification that the clock in a device has been
changed and the effect that this change has on the data stored
before the clock change. This information may be used by the
gateway to perform the correct translation of timestamps and to

Fig. 1.

Typical gateway clock status in HL7 OBX.

construct the appropriate coincident timestamp for each set of
observations, before and after the time change.
2) Gateway Changes Time: If the gateway changes time for
DST but the device does not, then it is necessary for the gateway
to determine and apply the correct translation that applies. This
task is accomplished by inspecting each timestamp to determine
if it is before or after the DST change. This inspection is only
possible if the gateway has the rules for DST. If a gateway does
not have DST rules (mode B), then the same translation will be
applied to all timestamps irrespective of the DST change.
Note that the coincident timestamp provides the information
on the translation that has been applied to all timestamps in
that OBR, and so the original device timestamp can always
be reconstructed.
C. Clock Status
Information on the status of the device and gateway clocks is
essential to provide assurance on the reliability of the devices.
We propose that this information may be provided through the
HL7 OBX with a CWE data type. The OBX can report the value
of the respective time attribute for time status (synchronized or
not), synchronization protocol, and the NM data type for the
accuracy (defined as cumulative clock drift) of the device clock.
The reporting of this information is shown in the example of
Fig. 1.
In the example of Fig. 1, the gateway is synchronized to NTP
and has acquired information so that it can implement correct
DST rules. It is operating in mode A. A full list of nomenclature
codes is available in [7].
D. Coincident Timestamp
In order to perform the timestamp translation, the gateway
must determine the notion of internal time from the device and
reference this notion of time against its own notion of time for a
coincident time instant. The difference between these two time
instants is applied to each observation timestamp to perform
the translation of the timestamp from the device timeline to
the gateway timeline. We refer to these two time instants as the
coincident timestamp, and it is sent in every HL7 message when
translation has been applied for reference and audit purposes. A

CLARKE et al.: DESIGNING ROBUST AND RELIABLE TIMESTAMPS FOR REMOTE PATIENT MONITORING

1721

TABLE III
COINCIDENT TIMESTAMP FORM AND TIME STATUS
Case

1
2
3

Fig. 2.

Typical coincident timestamp in HL7 OBX.

receiver of any HL7 message is able to reconstruct the original
timestamp of the device by subtraction. We propose a form
of HL7 OBX that conveys this information where we use a
“DTM observation” that includes the type of time format used
by the device (using IEEE 11073 nomenclature [7]), placing
the device notion of time as a timestamp in OBX-5, and the
coincident gateway notion of time in OBX-14. Each is provided
as a qualified time where possible, otherwise as unqualified
time. Fig. 2 provides an example of a coincident timestamp
for a device with absolute time correct for local time (and thus
unqualified) and with the gateway synchronized to GMT (and
thus qualified).
IV. TIMESTAMP TRANSLATION
Consideration of the operating condition and form of clock
of the device leads to three cases of timestamp translation that
must be supported by the gateway.
A. Case 1: Gateway Translates Device Timestamps
1) Internal Clock Not Synchronized: If a device has any type
of internal clock that is not synchronized to an external time reference, then the gateway must translate all incoming timestamps
to its notion of time and provide a coincident timestamp pair
and gateway time status.
2) Absolute Time: Translation will be required for all timestamps that use absolute time irrespective of synchronization as,
in addition to a time translation due to any difference in notions of time, an absolute timestamp will require translation to
qualified time (local and UTC).
3) Relative Time: If a device provides timestamps having
relative or high-resolution relative time, the gateway must translate incoming timestamps to its notion of time and provide a
coincident timestamp pair and gateway time status.

AHD Action

Translate device timestamps
Do not translate device timestamps
Provide timestamp on behalf of device

Status
AHD

Device

M
O
M

O
M
O

OBX-5

OBX-14

∗

T(∗)
X
X

X
X

O—Optional.
M—Mandatory.
X—Not present.
∗
—In original form of the device.
T(∗) —Translated form for coincident time in the gateway.

C. Case 3: Gateway Provides Timestamp on Behalf of Device
If a device does not supply a timestamp with an observation,
then the gateway must provide a timestamp on behalf of the
device. The form of the timestamp will depend on the current
operating conditions of the gateway. No coincident timestamp
is given; however, gateway time status is given.
D. Coincident Timestamp Format
The coincident timestamp, with an example shown in Fig. 2,
is in the form of a HL7 OBX with the type of the time attribute
in OBX-3 as one of IEEE 11073 nomenclature codes to denote
the timestamp format as one of MDC_ATTR_TIME_{ABS,
BO, REL, REL_HI_RES}[7]. The observed value in OBX-5 is
the notion of time of the device and the coincident time of the
gateway is in OBX-14.
The form of the coincident timestamp will depend on the
translation and on the current operating conditions of the device
and gateway. A summary of the form and requirement for status
depending on case is given in Table III.
In OBX-5, the ∗ refers to the original timestamp format of the
device and T(∗) in OBX-14 refers to its coincident time in the
gateway in qualified time format. When relative time is being
used, OBX-18 may specify the unique identity of the time base
being used to synchronize devices and gateway such as might
be provided by BlueTooth.
E. Device Timestamp Format
The format of device timestamps will depend on the device time type, the operating condition of the device, and the
operating condition of the gateway. The format of the translated timestamp is summarized in Table IV, where ∗ refers
to the original form of the device and T(∗) refers to the
translated timestamp.

B. Case 2: Gateway Does Not Translate Device Timestamps
If a device has an internal clock that is synchronized to an
external reference and the device provides qualified time (baseoffset), then the gateway will have no need to translate the
timestamp on behalf of the device. The form of the timestamp for
the observation will depend on the current operating conditions
of the device. No coincident timestamp is given and gateway
time status is not required. Device time status is required.

V. TIME SYNCHRONIZATION EXAMPLE
In this example (see Fig. 3), a blood pressure observation
(systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure) for a patient in
Los Angeles taken at 09:10:05 on 8 Jan. 2010 is sent from a
PAN device which had an internal time of 18:08:26 1 Jan. 1900
at 14:03:45 on 4 Jan. 2010 (shown by the coincident timestamp
in line 9). The gateway supports DST rules (denoted by the

1722

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE IV
DEVICE TIMESTAMP FORMAT
Case

Device timestamps
Absolute (no TZ)

A
B
C
D
E
F

Fig. 3.

Base-Offset (±TZ)

T(∗) ±ZZZZ else ∗ ±ZZZZ
∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ else ∗ ±ZZZZ
∗
T( ) −0000 else ∗ −0000
∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ else ∗ ±ZZZZ
∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ else ∗ ±ZZZZ
∗

∗

∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ
(∗ )

±ZZZZ or
±ZZZZ or T ±ZZZZ
∗
∗
±ZZZZ or T( ) −0000
∗
∗
±ZZZZ or T( ) ±ZZZZ
∗
∗
±ZZZZ or T( ) ±ZZZZ
∗
±ZZZZ
∗

Hi-res/Relative
∗

T( ) ±ZZZZ
∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ
∗
T( ) −0000
∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ
∗
T( ) ±ZZZZ
∗
T( )

Example time synchronization.

time capability information in line 4) and is synchronized by
NTP (denoted by the synchronization protocol in line 5) and
so is operating as mode A. The time of transmission from the
gateway is given in line 1. The BP observation and its timestamp
are given in line 8, and the difference between the components
of the coincident timestamp has been added to the original. The
components of the BP are given in lines 10–12. As the device
is not synchronized to an external time reference, the gateway
translates the timestamp for a device with absolute time (case 1).
As the gateway is operating in mode A, a qualified timestamp
is given in line 8.
VI. RESULTS
The framework has been developed, deployed, and evaluated
in two remote patient monitoring projects (inCasa and Reaction)

over a period of two years. Purpose-designed gateways based on
the ZigBee Health Care Profile [8] for in home communication
and embedded GPRS modules for WAN communication have
been developed to implement all the features discussed in this
paper. All devices implement the IEEE 11073-20601 protocol
[7] and the gateway uses IHE-PCD01 [4] for the WAN interface
and follows the Continua Alliance Design Guidelines [5].
In the early deployment, we observed that the UK GSM networks provided network time updates on every registration to
the network and these updates were sufficient to provide reliable
time to the gateway. GSM network time (NITZ) provides full
information on local time, UTC and whether DST is in effect
[9]. It also provided regular updates so that the gateway would
change in a timely manner with DST. However, we then noticed
that gateways were not sending correct timestamps for significant periods after initial power on and it was traced to UK GSM
networks no longer providing network time update on registration. Investigation shows that this gap in timestamp provision
is also the case for European GSM networks. In response, we
implemented NTP on our gateways and use the mobile country
code to determine the TZ and DST rules that must be applied.
This approach works well for all countries that have a single TZ
and has become our preferred method of setting the operating
conditions as this approach allows us to operate as mode A.
In countries with more than one TZ, we have to rely on GSM
network time updates, unless information is made available for
correct TZ and DST to be set. Information can include position
from GPS or GSM cell location, but mapping location data to
TZ and DST rules is complex in countries such as USA. Alternatively, the gateway may be preregistered with the information,
but this solution precludes relocation and simple deployment.
However, GSM network time updates do not provide information on DST rules, and the gateway must operate as mode B.
We have tested our gateway throughout the world to evaluate the approach. Our evaluation from testing in six European countries (UK, Germany, Slovenia, Sweden, Denmark, and
Belgium) confirms that European GSM networks do not provide
GSM network time updates on registration and is an unreliable
approach for time synchronization. Using NTP and the country
code has proven reliable. However, our evaluation of operating
with GSM networks in the US and in Asia (Taiwan and Hong
Kong) confirms that network time updates are provided on every
registration.
Gateways using forms of communication other than GSM
will need other sources of information to determine TZ and
DST rules. Information might include IP address, position information from GPS, local radio or preregistration.
We encountered frequent problems when there were DST
changes for devices having absolute time and that did not change
their clock. Initially, the source of this problem was traced to the
fact that GSM was not providing timely network time updates
and there would be a limited period when we would observe
incorrectly translated timestamps. We therefore implemented
DST rules on the gateway to change its clock at the appropriate
time and correct all incoming timestamps. However, this approach left us with a problem with devices that could store
observations and later send them if observations spanned a

CLARKE et al.: DESIGNING ROBUST AND RELIABLE TIMESTAMPS FOR REMOTE PATIENT MONITORING

DST change. In our simplistic implementation, the current DST
setting was applied to all incoming timestamps, including those
before the DST change. These were then incorrect. In response,
we added inspection of all incoming timestamps to determine
their DST period and apply the appropriate translation.
We remain left with the problem of devices on which the user
can set the time and has stored data. Although we can determine
the current notion of time of the device and translate for incorrect
setting of the time of the device, we cannot determine if the user
should have changed the time for some measurements, such as
when they have traveled to other TZs.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have developed a framework to provide robust and reliable management of timestamps in remote patient monitoring
platforms. The framework provides high reliability of accurate
timestamps when operating conditions allow, but supports ability to report the confidence of timestamps under other operating
conditions. The platform supports the typical devices with simple clocks used in such monitoring platforms and can provide
accurate qualified timestamps to the electronic patient record.
Evaluation of the platform has demonstrated validity of the
framework under the many non ideal operating conditions when
deployed with real patients.

1723

REFERENCES
[1] RFC 3339. (2014, Feb. 19). Date and Time on the Internet: Timestamps.
[2] M. Clarke, “The need for an integrated approach to remote monitoring of
physiological data and activity data,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 159–160, Apr. 2014.
[3] HL7 Messaging Standard Version 2.6. (2014, Feb. 19). [Online]. Available:
http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?product_id =
145
[4] Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise IHE Patient Care Device (PCD),
Technical Framework Volume 2. (2014, Feb. 19). [Online]. Available: http://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/PCD/IHE_PCD_TF_
Vol2.pdf
[5] Continua Health Alliance Design Guidelines. (2014, Feb. 2).
[Online]. Available: http://www.continuaalliance.org/ products/designguidelines
[6] “IANA—Time Zone Database.” (2014, Jun. 18). [Online]. Available:
http://www.iana.org/time-zones
[7] “Health informatics—Personal health device communication—Application
profile—Optimized exchange protocol,” ISO/IEEE 11073-20601:2010,
2013.
[8] ZigBee Health Care Profile. (2014, Jun. 18). [Online]. Available:
http://zigbee.org/Standards/ ZigBeeHealthCare/Over-view.aspx
[9] Digital cellular telecommunications system (Phase 2+); Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); LTE; AT command set
for User Equipment (UE) (3GPP TS 27.007 version 11.8.0 Release
11). (2014, Jun. 6). [Online]. Available: http://www.etsi.org/deliver/
etsi_ts/127000_127099/127007/11.08.00_60/ts_127007v110800p.pdf

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

