188

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Aligned PVDF-TrFE Nanofibers With High-Density
PVDF Nanofibers and PVDF Core–Shell Structures
for Endovascular Pressure Sensing
Tushar Sharma∗ , Sahil Naik, Jewel Langevine, Brijesh Gill, and John X. J. Zhang

Abstract—Nanostructures
of
polyvinyledenedifluoridetetrafluoroethylene (PVDF-TrFE), a semicrystalline polymer with
high piezoelectricity, results in significant enhancement of crystallinity and better device performance as sensors, actuators, and
energy harvesters. Using electrospinning of PVDF to manufacture
nanofibers, we demonstrate a new method to pattern high-density,
highly aligned nanofibers. To further boost the charge transfer
from such a bundle of nanofibers, we fabricated novel core–shell
structures. Finally, we developed pressure sensors utilizing these
fiber structures for endovascular applications. The sensors were
tested in vitro under simulated physiological conditions. We
observed significant improvements using core–shell electrospun
fibers (4.5 times gain in signal intensity, 4000 μV/mmHg sensitivity) over PVDF nanofibers (280 μV/mmHg). The preliminary
results showed that core–shell fiber-based devices exhibit nearly
40-fold higher sensitivity, compared to the thin-film structures
demonstrated earlier.

Fig. 1. Smart catheters with nanofiber-based pressure sensors. (a) Placement
of pressure sensors on either side of balloon on a catheter; (b) highly aligned
nanofibers-based pressure sensor; (c) core–shell fiber showing the sandwiched
layers of piezoelectric polymer.

Index Terms—Core–shell, catheter, nanofibers, polyvinyledenedifluoride-tetrafluoroethylene (PVDF-TrFE), pressure sensor.

I. INTRODUCTION
INIMALLY invasive surgeries have emerged as the cornerstone for the diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular diseases. Minimally invasive surgeries typically employ
catheters, which still rely on fluid-filled lumen coupled with
an external transducer, for endovascular pressure measurements
[2]–[4]. Such fluid-filled catheters have inherent inaccuracies
related to resonance in the system. The resonance is a function
of the length and diameter of the tubing and the frequency of the
waveform being measured, which is typically the heart rate for
intravascular systems [5]. There has been great effort dedicated

M

Manuscript received August 23, 2013; revised May 26, 2014; accepted July
19, 2014. Date of publication July 30, 2014; date of current version December
18, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ T. Sharma was with Biomedical Engineering Department, Center for
Nano and Molecular Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712 USA. He is now with Intel Corporation , Hillsboro, OR 97124 USA
(e-mail: tusharsharma@utexas.edu).
S. Naik and J. Langevine are with Biomedical Engineering Department, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA (e-mail:
sahil.naik@utexas.edu; jewel.Langevine@utexas.edu).
B. Gill is with the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX 77026 USA (e-mail: billy@empowerment.com).
J. X. J. Zhang was with Biomedical Engineering Department, Center for
Nano and Molecular Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712 USA. He is now with, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755 USA
(e-mail: john.zhang@dartmouth.edu).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2344052

to the development of silicon microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) based pressures sensors [6], [7]. Though MEMS pressure sensors currently dominate the market for greater-thanatmospheric-pressure measurement systems, they have had limited success in the minimally invasive catheter-based pressure
sensing arena. With the increasing demands of quality and reliable data in real time, development of such “smart catheters”
integrated with compact, flexible, and high-performance pressure sensors with proven biocompatibilities are critical.
Flexible piezoelectric materials are emerging as a promising solution for developing a new class of pressure sensors
mounted on a single catheter [see Fig. 1(a)] with desirable form
factors, sensitivities and locations for measurements. The use of
piezoceramics, such as ZnO and PZT, has been limited due to
concerns of biocompatibility and brittleness, but piezoelectric
polymers have shown tremendous growth as the key materials
for biosensors [1], [8]–[16]. Polyvinyledenedifluoride (PVDF)
has been conventionally drawn in to films either by melt casting
or solvent casting. However, nanostructures made out of PVDF
showed enhanced piezoelectricity [17], [18]. Previously, we reported the fabrication of 1-μm-thick film and showed enhanced
sensing capabilities compared to thicker films [1], [8]. In this
study, we report further enhancement in the sensing capabilities
by employing high density of highly aligned nanofiber-based
structures [see Fig. 1(b)].
To fabricate regular PVDF and PVDF core–shell nanofibers
on a substrate, we employ and optimize the technique of electrospinning in this study. Electrospinning is a process through
which nanofibers are produced under the influence of an electric

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SHARMA et al.: ALIGNED PVDF-TRFE NANOFIBERS WITH HIGH-DENSITY PVDF NANOFIBERS AND PVDF CORE–SHELL STRUCTURES

field (see Figure S1a, available in the online supplementary
material). Previously, it has been shown that the higher strain
gradients and higher electromechanical coupling coefficients associated with nanofibers can result in significantly higher signal
output compared to PVDF thin films [12]. However, most of
the studies involved testing of few microfibers only [17], [19].
Increasing the density of aligned fibers is crucial for enhancing
sensor performance, which has been a hindrance in the field of
electrospinning. This challenge is mainly due to the difficulty
in fabricating high density of highly aligned electrospun fibers
[20]–[23]. Here, we analyze and present a way to electrospin
high density of highly aligned nanofibers [see Fig. 1(b)].
Aligned-nanofiber-based devices tap into the high electromechanical coupling coefficients to generate higher signal output. Therefore, fabrication of high density of highly aligned
nanofibers can help further increase the signal output. However,
aligned-nanofiber-based sensors call for extra steps to prevent
the effect of stray electrostatic charges interfering with device
signals. Further, most of the usable charge is lost due to the
high internal resistance of the PVDF polymer. Therefore, using
aligned nanofibers is not the most ideal scenario.
In order to circumvent the aforementioned problem, we also
report fabrication of core–shell fibers [see Fig. 1(c)]. The core
of this fiber is composed of conductive polymer (PEDOT:PSS),
acting as one of the electrodes. The shell, comprising PVDFtetrafluoroethylene (PVDF-TrFE), was co-electrospun with the
conductive core polymer to fabricate core–shell fibers. After
successful patterning of core–shell structures, a thin film of
metal was deposited to form the external electrode. High sensitivity can be expected from these devices due to a larger surface
area being in contact with the PVDF polymer. To the best of our
knowledge, application of core–shell fibers for sensing application has not been explored. Development of versatile sensors
that use core–shell structures can profoundly revolutionize the
pressure sensing application in catheter development.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
A. Electrospinning for High Density of Highly
Aligned Nanofibers
Electrospinning is the most popular way to produce ultrathin
polymeric nanofibers [24]–[28]. The process involves subjecting a polymer solution held at the needle tip by its surface
tension, to an electric field. The high electric fields involved
in electrospinning results in substantial charge accumulation to
be able to overcome the surface tension. As the intensity of
the electric field increases, the solution at the tip of the needle
elongates to result into a conical shape known as the Taylor’s
cone [24]–[26], [29]. As the electric field is further increased,
the electric field reaches a critical value at which the repulsive
electric force overcomes the surface tension force, resulting in a
jet of solution that gets deposited on the ground collector plate.
In the electrospinning of polymer solutions, a number of parameters are known to affect the physical properties of the fibers,
including the fiber shape, diameter, surface morphology, and
porosity [17].

189

1) Setup: The electrospinning setup consisted of a solutionfilled syringe on a syringe pump whose needle was connected to
an external high voltage (see Figure S1, available in the online
supplementary material). Across the tip of the needle, a collector
plate or electrode was placed at a certain distance, which was
connected to the ground of the external high voltage supply.
Figure S1b (available in the online supplementary material)
shows the actual setup used for electrospinning of fibers in this
study with a copper plate (ground collector) placed 7 cm away
from the needle tip inside an acrylic box. The acrylic box was
used to prevent electrostatic charging of the surroundings.
2) Parameter Optimization: There are multiple variables in
an electrospinning setup that need to be optimized in order
to fabricate uniform fibers. Details on optimized variables for
electrospinning of PVDF solution has been discussed elsewhere
[30]. In brief, PVDF concentration of 5%–20% (w/v) was used.
Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) was used as the primary solvent for
electrospinning of PVDF nanofibers. Preliminary fabrication of
nanofibers was done on ground copper plate as the electrode (see
Fig. 3). Mesh (stainless steel) electrodes offered better control
over the fiber orientation [30]. A voltage gradient of 1–3 kV/cm
was used with the needle tip–collector distance being greater
than 7 cm.
3) Rotating Drum Electrodes: Most of the studies on aligned
nanofibers have reported the use of a rotating drum so far [20],
[23], [25]. Conventionally, the entire rotating drum would be
grounded and the nanofibers would be deposited on the drum
in an aligned fashion because of the high rotating speeds of the
drum. In this study, we initially started with such a rotating drum
setup by grounding the entire rotating drum. However, lack of
capability to fabricate high density of aligned nanofibers led up
to optimize the rotating drum geometry.
The present version of the rotating drum setup is shown in
Figure S2 (available in the online supplementary material). The
drum itself is constructed out of an ABS-like plastic, using
a laser sintering machine. The diameter of the rotating drum is
1.2 in (30.5 mm), and the length of the drum was 3.5 in (89 mm).
Grounded copper wires (3-mm diameter) were connected to the
ground wire, which was passed through the hollow shaft and
connected to external ground near the rotating motor holder.
The entire assembly, comprising motor holder and the rotating
drum holder, was also fabricated using the same laser sintering machine. The dc motor powering the rotating drum was
controlled through an external power supply and the rotational
speed could be controlled in the range of 0–4000 r/min. Typically, a Kapton film was rolled over the rotating drum assembly
for the patterning of aligned nanofibers.
B. Core–Shell Electrospinning Process
To electrospin core–shell nanofibers, the solution dispensing
mechanism was altered slightly, such that it allowed concomitant flow of two solutions with the shell solution encapsulating
the core solution, as shown in Fig. 2. Figure S3 (available in
the online supplementary material) shows the schematic of the
modified setup and a photograph of the actual setup.
For core–shell electrospinning, the needle-in-needle assembly was optimized such that the inner needle was perfectly

190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 2. Schematic of the core–shell electrospinning setup along with the rotating drum (front view).

aligned, concentrically to the outer needle. Further, the whole
two-needle assembly was made airtight to avoid any leakages and evaporation of PVDF solvent. The tip of inner needle was slightly protruding from the tip of the outer needle. The core and shell solutions were kept at flow rates
of 1 and 3 mL/h, respectively. The core solution was prepared by mixing 1.6 g of (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, 2% in water, Sigma
Aldrich) with 0.2 g of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) in 5 g of
dimethylformamide (DMF). Rhodamine B (0.1%, w/v, Sigma
Aldrich) dye was added for fluorescence. The shell solution
contained 14% (w/v) of PVDF-TrFE powder (70:30) dissolved
in DMF-MEK (25:75). 1-Pyrenebutyric acid (0.2%, w/v, Sigma
Aldrich) dye was added to the shell solution for fluorescence
imaging.
To measure the resistance of the core-material that was used
to fabricate core–shell structure, we employed a simple testing
setup. Two silver wires (1.5 mm diameter, 99.99% pure, Alfa
Aesar) were wrapped around a glass slide, separated by a gap of
1 cm. This glass slide was pressed against the testing sample on
another glass slide. The two silver wires were then connected to
an external digital multimeter to measure the sample resistance,
and the sample conductivity was calculated using the following:
1
Rtw
where S is the conductivity of the samples (in S/cm), l is the
separation between silver wires (1 cm), t is the thickness of
sample, w is the width of sample, and R is the resistance of the
sample (in ohms).
S=

C. Device Assembly
The devices had a functional surface area of 10 × 4 mm2 ,
as shown in Figure S6a (available in the online supplementary
material). To fabricate flexible devices, metal electrodes were
patterned on Kapton (polyimide) film. A copper (350 nm) metal
electrode was deposited using photoresist lift-off followed by
e-beam deposition. The patterned Kapton film was wrapped
around the rotating drum setup and nanofibers were directly
electrospun on top. In order to connect the PVDF shell material to the other electrode, copper metal was e-beam deposited
from top (350 nm) using a hard shadow mask. Electrical wires
were connected to the electrode pads using silver paint. The
devices were spin coated with UV curable epoxy (NOA 89) for

Fig. 3. (a) Photograph and SEM images showing patterned nanofibers in
aligned and random orientations; and (b) SEM image of a high-density, highly
aligned fiber sample fabricated using the rotating drum setup for 45 min.

external passivation. After device assembly, the devices were
placed either in the fluid testing chamber or the vascular testing model for further testing. The detailed protocols for device
testing and the associated circuitry are reported elsewhere [1],
[31]. The results obtained from PVDF sensors were compared
against commercial pressure sensor (Freescale semiconductors,
MPX2300DT1), fitted in the same testing setup.
III. RESULTS
A. Highly Aligned Nanofibers
Figure S2 (available in the online supplementary material)
shows the rotating drum setup in the holder, and Fig. 3 shows
the images of the fabricated nanofibers. Electrospinning of fibers
for 20 min yielded aligned fibers with an average diameter of
737 ± 75 nm [see Fig. 3(a)].
It was generally found that the highly aligned nanofibers
stretch in the area between the two ground copper wires. The
portion of substrate directly above the copper wires was found
to have randomly oriented nanofibers [see Fig. 3(a)]. A similar
effect has also been reported before [22].
To fabricate a high density of highly aligned nanofibers, electrospinning was carried out for longer time duration (45 min).
The results, as shown in Fig. 3(b), indicates high density of
highly aligned nanofibers with an average diameter of 963 ±
86 nm. For all subsequent experiments, electrospinning was
carried out for 45 min.
For a better understanding behind the high alignment of the
fibers using rotating drum assembly, we quantified the fiber
alignment based on the protocol described in [32]. Since the described protocol was for quantification of fiber alignment from
optical microscopy images, we altered the protocol that it was
more suitable for SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) images and takes into account the variations in illumination and
charging effects. The modified protocol is shown in Figure S4
(available in the online supplementary material). In order to
process the images using this protocol, we used ImageJ (NIH)
along with the Oval profile intensity plug-in. In this study, we
did not rotate the fast Fourier transform (FFT) image by 90° to
account for the shift in angle. The oval profile plug-in allowed
plotting the total sum of gray pixel intensities along the blue line
(see Figure S4, available in the online supplementary material)
for a sweeping angle of 0–360°.

SHARMA et al.: ALIGNED PVDF-TRFE NANOFIBERS WITH HIGH-DENSITY PVDF NANOFIBERS AND PVDF CORE–SHELL STRUCTURES

Fig. 4. Characterization of nanofiber alignment, using plots of oval profile
intensity for (a) aligned and random portion of fibers electrospun at 3500 r/min;
(b) aligned (PVDF) and random (dashed) portion of fibers at different speeds
of rotating drum; (c) FTIR spectrum of electrospun PVDF nanofibers; and
(d) characterization of crystallinity, using weight-normalized DSC curves for
aligned and randomly oriented nanofibers patterned on Kapton substrate.

Using the aforementioned technique, we studied the effect
of fiber alignment due to variation in rotating drum speeds (for
3.3, 245, 487, and 3500 r/min). Figure S5 (available in the
online supplementary material) shows the SEM images obtained
from different parts of the rotating drum for varying speeds of
the drum. All the fiber alignment studies were carried out for
20 min using 14% (w/v) PVDF solution in MEK. From the
SEM images in Figure S5, we observe that with the increase in
speed of the rotating drum, the density of fibers that are aligned
increases correspondingly. Whereas the density of the fibers
deposited directly above the ground copper wires (randomly
oriented fibers) decreases for increasing rotating drum speeds.
Each SEM figure was processed as per the method described in
Figure S4 (available in the online supplementary material) and
the corresponding two-dimensional (2-D) FFT images obtained
for each SEM image has been presented in Figure S5 (available
in the online supplementary material).
Results of using oval intensity plot on the 2-D FFT images
have been summarized in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 compares the FFT
value (gray pixel intensity summation) as a function of the angle
sweep. All the curves were normalized to the lowest FFT value
in the intensity plot. The individual plots were shifted for ease
of comparison.
From Fig. 4(a), we notice that aligned fiber intensity plots
has two peaks in a 0°–360° intensity plot. Presence of two
peaks, separated by an angle of 180° indicates aligned fibers,
represented by the periodicity in the 2-D FFT plots [32].
On the other hand, randomly oriented nanofibers are expected
to show four peaks over the same range of 0–360° intensity plot
[32]. From Fig. 4(a), we clearly see this trend. Further, the
presence of two dominant peaks is a good indication of highly
aligned nanofibers. Increase in the drum rotation speed results
in better alignment of nanofibers. Furthermore, it was found that

191

the amplitude of the intensities of randomly oriented nanofibers
was much lower compared to those of aligned nanofibers. This
difference in the amplitude could be easily used as key parameter to distinguish between aligned and randomly oriented
nanofibers. On similar lines, Fig. 4(b) shows that as the rotating
drum speed is increased, the fibers tend to align better, indicated by the diminishing amplitude of the peaks and emerging
prominence of two peaks at higher rotation speeds. However, the
randomly oriented nanofibers [see dashed curves in Fig. 4(b)]
do not show appreciable change in nanofiber orientation.
Fig. 4(c) shows the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum obtained from electrospun fibers on a 4-in silicon wafer
coated with copper. Coated silicon wafer was used as the substrate because grazing angle incidence in reflectance mode was
used for spectroscopy. The FTIR spectrum was obtained for
eight different spots on the wafer in grazing angle incidence
mode and then averaged to obtain the curve shown in Fig. 4(c).
A quick comparison of the FTIR spectrum of electrospun fibers
with previously reported FTIR curves [1], [8] indicates the presence of high beta crystal phase in nanofibers.
Fig. 4(d) shows the DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry) curves obtained for nanofiber samples. Highly aligned
nanofibers (14%, w/v, PVDF/MEK) were patterned on fluoropolymer substrate (ACLAR, Electron microscopy sciences)
as detachment of fibers was much more easily compared to
fibers electrospun on Kapton film. From Fig. 4(d), we infer that
the aligned nanofibers show slightly higher crystallinity compared to randomly oriented nanofibers. However, the increase
in crystallinity was insignificant.
B. Core-Shell Nanofibers
For the sensor applications of the core–shell nanofiber structure, it is crucial to design and fabricate a conductive core acting
as one of the electrode. Gold nanoparticles have been used for
fabrication of conductive nanofibers [33]. We initially employed
the use of silver nanoparticles (20–40 nm, Alfa Aesar) mixed
with poly(methyl methacrylate (PMMA, 15% w/v) in DMF as
the solvent. However, the resistance of fibers electrospun using
silver nanoparticles was very high (greater than megaohms).
In place of metallic nanoparticles as additives, conductive
polymers offered a better alternative. Some of the common conducting polymers include polyaniline (PANI) and PEDOT:PSS.
PANI, by itself, is very conductive but grainy, which can easily
clog the electrospinning needle. Filtered PANI, however, is not
as conductive even when doped with CSA (10-camphorsulfonic
acid) or prepared in m-cresol as the primary solvent (see
Table S1, available in the online supplementary material). From
Table S1 (available in the online supplementary material), we
found that PEDOT:PSS in water gives similar conductivity,
comparable to PANI doped with CSA in m-cresol solution (unfiltered). Further, PEDOT solution was not grainy like PANI,
making it suitable for electrospinning.
For imaging of the core–shell fibers fabricated, we employed
TEM imaging. Fig. 5 shows the TEM images of all the core–
shell fibers electrospun directly on the rotating drum setup. TEM
imaging was highly suitable for imaging of core–shell fibers of

192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 6. FTIR spectrum obtained from CSEFs, in comparison with that of
spin-coated PEDOT-PVP mixture and PEDOT film, randomly oriented PVDF
nanofibers, and a layer of PVDF spin coated on top of PEDOT-PVP layer.

Fig. 5. CSEFs. (a) and (b) TEM images. (c) and (d) Confocal laser fluorescence microscopy images. Labeling: Rhodamine B for the core (PEDOT) and
Fluram for the shell (PVDF).

couple hundred nanometers thickness. The darker core is visible
in most of the fibers.
However, TEM could not be used to image fibers thicker than
500 nm. For thicker fibers, confocal imaging using selectively
dyed materials was used to visualize core–shell fibers. Table S2
(available in the online supplementary material) summarizes the
various fluorescent dyes and their characteristics, used in this
study.
The best dye combination was observed with Rhodamine B
(core) and 1-pyrenebutyric acid or Fluram (shell). Fig. 5 shows
confocal laser fluorescence microscopy images of core–shell
fibers electrospun directly on to a rotating drum assembly for
patterning highly aligned core–shell fibers. From the images, we
observe good percentage of core–shell fibers present, shown by
simultaneous fluorescence of Fluram and Rhodamine B. Better core–shell fibers were observed either by: 1) electrospinning without dyes and with MEK as the only shell solvent (see
Figure S3, available in the online supplementary material), or
2) electrospinning larger diameter fibers (see Figure S3, available in the online supplementary material).
FTIR spectroscopy was used to detect presence of PEDOT
and PVP in core–shell electrospun fiber (CSEF). While a PVDF
spin-coated layer on top of a PEDOT layer shows presence
of PEDOT (see Fig. 6), core–shell fiber spectrum was similar
to electropsun PVDF fiber mat (indicated by arrows pointing
to beta phase wavenumbers). FTIR spectrum of CSEF mat at
various incident points yielded the same spectrum, indicating
that the PEDOT core fiber was very thin for sufficient absorption
of signal. This was also a good indicator of presence of core–
shell fibers, in place of formation of co-spun fibers or splitting
of Taylor’s cone leading to electrospinning of just PEDOT fibers
on the surface.

C. Device Setup
Figure S6 (available in the online supplementary material)
shows the various stages in the device assembly. The opencircuit resistance of the final devices was found to higher than
1 GΩ (measurable limit of the digital multimeter). In order
to connect the conductive core to the electrode collector, silver paint was used along the length of the electrode (see Figure S6b, available in the online supplementary material). Silver paint contains organic polar solvents, which help dissolve
the PVDF-TrFE coating and establish a conductive connection
to the core PEDOT-PVP fiber. Control experiments were done
where both the electrodes were covered with silver paint to
short circuit the devices and the resistance of the devices fell
to 1.5 MΩ, which also happened to be the resistance of a bulk
(spin-coated) PEDOT-PVP film (1 cm length). This is an indication of good connectivity of the core fiber with the electrode
pad.
Following the connection of the core using silver paint
and shell using copper, the resistance between the two electrodes was found to be greater than 1 GΩ, indicating good
isolation of core–shell electrodes and corresponding electrical
connections.
D. Testing Results
Figure S7 (available in the online supplementary material)
compares the performance of random nanofiber-based devices
alongside the performance of aligned nanofiber-based devices.
Both the sensitivity plots show the device performance at 30 dB.
From the sensitivity plots, we notice that aligned-nanofiberbased devices show higher sensitivity (280 μV/mmHg) compared to the random nanofiber-based devices (65 μV/mmHg)
at 30 dB of amplification at the charge amplifier. Further, the
aligned-nanofiber-based devices showed better linearity, indicated by the higher residual sum of squares value.

SHARMA et al.: ALIGNED PVDF-TRFE NANOFIBERS WITH HIGH-DENSITY PVDF NANOFIBERS AND PVDF CORE–SHELL STRUCTURES

193

fiber diameters for CSEFs tested in this study were 1 μm (see
Figure S8, available in the online supplementary material).
IV. DISCUSSIONS

Fig. 7. Performance of CSEF-based sensor mounted on the catheter.
(a) Schematic of the smart catheter prototype; (b) performance of a CSEF
device mounted on catheter surface compared against the commercial pressure
sensor; (c) response obtained from CSEF-based sensors on catheters upon inflation and subsequent deflation of a balloon on catheter, compared against no
signal received from the commercial pressure sensor.

For catheter assembly, a commercial aortic occlusion catheter
was used for testing (10Fr gauge, Coda Aortic Catheter, Cook
Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA). A pair of 40-gauge insulated
magnetic wires was used to make connections to the device
electrode pad. The electrical wires were wrapped around the
catheter surface or passed through the internal lumen space of
the catheter [see Fig. 7(a)]. The electrical connection was made
using silver paint. The whole joint was insulated using UVcurable epoxy.
Fig. 7 shows a comparison between the commercial pressure
sensor and high quality response obtained from the CSEF-based
sensors that were mounted on a catheter. Fig. 7 shows the raw
signal obtained from the PVDF sensor without any amplification. From Fig. 7, PVDF sensor showed good correlation with
water pressure inside the testing chamber. The PVDF sensor
was sensitive enough to detect balloon deflation as well, which
was not detected by the commercial pressure sensor. The average response time of the PVDF sensors (0.26 s) was found to be
five times faster than the commercial pressure sensor (1.30 s)
when evaluated for the 0%–100% pressure change. Fig. 7(c)
shows the same device response obtained when the balloon was
inflated and deflated.
Only the CSEF-based sensor was capable of detecting the
pressure variations due to the changes in balloon condition and
any change in the system went unnoticed by the commercial
pressure sensor. This was due to the shorter response time of
the PVDF sensor, whereas instantaneous pressure changes go
unnoticed by the commercial pressure sensor.
Fig. 7 shows the performance of CSEF-based devices plotted
at 0 dB. The core–shell-based devices showed high sensitivity (4 mV/mmHg) along with high linearity (R−value = 0.99)
over the required pressure range of 0–300 mmHg. The average

As reported before [30], PVDF concentration has the highest impact on the fiber diameter, as compared to the solution
flow rate or needle gauge diameter. Further, using the meshbased current collector electrode, high density of nanofibers
can be easily achieved by increasing the electrospinning time.
It was difficult to obtain highly aligned nanofibers, however.
Rotating-drum assembly resulted in high density of highly
aligned nanofibers [30].
In order to find out the variability between different samples
of highly aligned electropsun fibers, three different electrospinning samples were analyzed for fiber alignment and diameter
distribution. All the variables, including electrospinning time,
voltage gradient, and drum rotation speed, were maintained constant. Figure S9 (available in the online supplementary material)
summarizes the fiber distribution over the three different samples fabricated. We observed similar fiber diameters and fiber
count distribution for two of the three different samples electrospun. Therefore, it is possible to control fiber diameters reliably
over large number of samples by keeping the electropsinning
variables constant.
The aligned-nanofiber-based devices showed higher sensitivity (280 μV/mmHg, scaled to 40 dB) compared to the thin-filmbased devices (99 μV/mmHg at 40 dB [1]) while at the same
time using only half the piezoelectric material (estimated from
the average fiber diameter and surface fiber density). This high
sensitivity was also capable of detecting minor fluctuations in
the flow rates (see Figure S10, available in the online supplementary material), where the commercial pressure sensor failed
to show any minor pressure variations. Figure S11 (available
in the online supplementary material) indicates that the signal was obtained due to the piezoelectricity of the nanofibers,
rather than external electrostatic charges. Preliminary studies
showed insignificant impact on the sensor sensitivities due to
temperature variations (see Figure S12, available in the online
supplementary material).
For the electrospinning of core–shell fibers, switching from
the horizontal electrospinning to vertical setup aided in the ease
of electrospinning and formation of a good Taylor’s cone with
the help of gravity. Increasing the electrospinning distance also
helped in formation of thinner, complete fibers. Electrospinning
at shorter distance (<10 cm) did not allow all the solvent to
evaporate and resulted in formation of flatter fibers. However,
the Taylor’s cone would solidify quickly, leading to discontinuous electrospinning of CSEF. Therefore, the shell solvent was
changed from purely MEK based to a mixture of MEK and DMF
(75:25 ratio). Addition of DMF to the solvent mixture increased
the effective boiling point and allowed more time for the PVDF
to remain in dissolved state. These series of optimizations enabled fabrication of core–shell fibers with good consistency and
controlled patterning.
In order to have PVDF polymer as the shell for CSEF, polymers that were soluble in organic solvent were used. Hence,

194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

of significantly boosted device sensitivity by virtue of higher
flexibility and lower material consumption. We also developed
CSEFs with a conductive core. PVDF-TrFE is an extremely
robust material with suitable biocompatibility for sensing applications. A series of pressure sensor prototypes were developed based on the nanofibers and characterized in fluid-filled
chambers. We observed significant improvements using CSEFs
(4.5× gain, 4000 μV/mmHg sensitivity) over PVDF nanofibers
(280 μV/mmHg). Flexible nanofibers has shown great promises
for the realizations of more robust, reliable, flexible pressure
sensors on catheters to revolutionize the field of minimally invasive surgeries.
REFERENCES

Fig. 8. Sensitivities of various sensors based on CSEFs, aligned PVDF
nanofibers, and thin-film PVDF sensors fabricated in this study.

PMMA and PVP were used as the suitable polymers for forming core materials. However, in order to successfully fabricate
pressure sensors from core–shell nanofibers, it is necessary to
have a conductive core that is capable of transferring the charge
generated from PVDF-TrFE to the terminal conducting electrode. PEDOT-based core fibers were promising for such an application. PEDOT was found to be more conductive compared
to PANI (see Table S1, available in the online supplementary
material) and was more readily electrospinable as PEDOT did
not have granular structure like PANI. An important test was to
ensure that the signal obtained from CSEF-based devices was
due to the piezoelectricity from the samples, rather than the
instrumentation. Figure S13 (available in the online supplementary material) indicated a strong presence of piezoelectricity
from core–shell electrospun nanofibers, observed by change in
device polarity on swapping of electrode connections.
The core–shell-based devices showed good performance that
was 4.5 times higher than the aligned nanofiber-based devices
(see Fig. 8). Fig. 8 summarizes the performance comparison
of the various transducer designs fabricated in this study. We
clearly see 8.8 times higher signal output from nanofiber-based
devices than from the thin-film-based devices, which in the same
range of electromechanical efficiency enhancement as reported
previously for nanofibers versus thin-film-based devices [17].
The noise from the sensors can be further reduced by an additional thin metallic film that prevents the effect of any external
electrostatic charges.
V. CONCLUSION
In summary, we successfully demonstrated that patterning of
high density, highly aligned PVDF-TrFE nanofibers is possible using a high-speed rotating drum. We validated the alignment of the fibers quantitatively using 2-D FFT of the SEM
images. We also demonstrated the ability to fabricate highly
aligned nanofibers with crystallinity similar to those of thin films
we developed previously [1], [8], with additional advantages

[1] T. Sharma, T. K. Aroom, S. Naik, B. Gill, and J.X.J. Zhang, “Flexible thinfilm PVDF-TrFE based pressure sensor for smart catheter applications,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., pp. 1–8, 2012.
[2] Å. Kjällquist, N. Lundberg, and U. Ponten, “Respiratory and cardiovascular changes during rapid spontaneous variations of ventricular fluid
pressure in patients with intracranial hypertension,” Acta Neurol. Scand.,
vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 291–317, 1964.
[3] N. Lundberg, “Continuous recording and control of ventricular fluid pressure in neurosurgical practice,” Acta Psychiatr. Scand., vol. 36, no. 149,
p. 1, 1960.
[4] J. Miller and J. Pickard, “Intracranial volume/pressure studies in patients
with head injury. injury,” vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 265–269, 1974.
[5] K.D. Wise and J. B. Angell, “An IC piezoresistive pressure sensor for
biomedical instrumentation.,” IEEE Trans Biomed Eng., vol. 2, pp. 101–
109, 1973.
[6] R. C. Ostrup, T. G. Luerssen, L. F. Marshall, and M. H. Zornow, “Continuous monitoring of intracranial pressure with a miniaturized fiber optic
device,” J. Neurosurgery, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 206–209, 1987.
[7] J. S. Crutchfield, R. K. Narayan, C. S. Robertson, and L. H. Michael, “Evaluation of a fiber optic intracranial pressure monitor,” J. Neurosurgery, vol.
72, no. 3 pp. 482–487, 1990.
[8] T. Sharma, S. S. Je, B. Gill, and J. X. J. Zhang, “Patterning piezoelectric
thin film PVDF–TrFE based pressure sensor for catheter application,”
Sens. Actuators A: Phys., vol. 177, pp. 87–92, 2012.
[9] C. Li, P. M. Wu, S. Lee, A. Gorton, M. J. Schulz, and C. H. Ahn, “Flexible
dome and bump shape piezoelectric tactile sensors using PVDF-TrFE
copolymer,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 334–341, 2008.
[10] D. R. Bacon, “Characteristics of a PVDF membrane hydrophone for use
in the range 1–100 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Sonics Ultrason., vol. SU-29,
no. 1, pp. 18–25, Jan. 1982.
[11] P. E. Bloomfield, F. Castro, and R. Goeller, “The design, processing,
evaluation and characterization of pyroelectric PVDF copolymer/silicon
MOSFET detector arrays,” in Proc. 9th IEEE Int. Symp. Appl. Ferroelectr.,
1991, pp. 725–728.
[12] J. Chang and L. Lin, “Large array electrospun PVDF nanogenerators on
a flexible substrate,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Solid-State Sens. Actuators
Microsyst. Conf. (TRANSDUCERS), 2011, pp. 747–750.
[13] J. Dargahi, “A piezoelectric tactile sensor with three sensing elements for
robotic, endoscopic and prosthetic applications,” Sens. Actuators A: Phys.,
vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 23–30, 2000.
[14] S. Kärki and J. Lekkala, “A new method to measure heart rate with EMFi
and PVDF materials,” J. Med. Eng. Technol., vol. 33, no. 7 pp. 551–558,
2009.
[15] R. G. Kolkman, E. Hondebrink, W. Steenbergen, and F. F. Mul, “In vivo
photoacoustic imaging of blood vessels using an extreme-narrow aperture
sensor,” IEEE J. Select Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 343–
346, Mar./Apr. 2003.
[16] A. V. Shirinov and W. K. Schomburg, “Pressure sensor from a PVDF
film,” Sens. Actuators A: Phys., vol. 142, no. 1, pp. 48–55, 2008.
[17] C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y. K. Fuh and L. Lin “Direct-write piezoelectric polymeric nanogenerator with high energy conversion efficiency,”
Nano Lett., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 726–731, 2010.
[18] I. Clausen, S. T. Moe, L. G. W. Tvedt, A. Vogl, and D. T. Wang, “A
miniaturized pressure sensor with inherent biofouling protection designed
for in vivo applications,” in Proc. IEEE. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Annu. Int.
Conf., 2011, pp. 1880–1883.

SHARMA et al.: ALIGNED PVDF-TRFE NANOFIBERS WITH HIGH-DENSITY PVDF NANOFIBERS AND PVDF CORE–SHELL STRUCTURES

[19] B. J. Hansen, Y. Liu, R. Yang, and Z. L. Wang, “Hybrid nanogenerator
for concurrently harvesting biomechanical and biochemical energy,” ACS
Nano, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 3647–3652, 2010.
[20] P. Katta, M. Alessandro, R. D. Ramsier, and G. G. Chase “Continuous
electrospinning of aligned polymer nanofibers onto a wire drum collector,”
Nano Lett., vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 2215–2218, 2004.
[21] R. Tan, T. McClure, C. K. Lin, D. Jea, F. Dabiri, T. Massey, and J. Schmidt,
“Development of a fully implantable wireless pressure monitoring system,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 259–264, 2009.
[22] C. Peng et al., “A wireless and batteryless 130 mg 300 μW 10 b implantable blood-pressure-sensing microsystem for real-time genetically
engineered mice monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf.
Digest Tech. Papers., 2009, pp. 428–429.
[23] W. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, “A review on electrospinning design and
nanofibre assemblies,” Nanotechnology, vol. 17, no. 14, p. R89, 2006.
[24] J. Doshi and D. H. Reneker, “Electrospinning process and applications of
electrospun fibers,” J. Electrostatics, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 151–160, 1995.
[25] Z. M. Huang, Y. Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki, and S. Ramakrishna, “A review on
polymer nanofibers by electrospinning and their applications in nanocomposites,” Composites Sci. Technol., vol. 63, no. 15, pp. 2223–2253, 2003.
[26] D. Li and Y. Xia, “Electrospinning of nanofibers: Reinventing the wheel?”
Adv. Mater., vol. 16, no. 14, pp. 1151–1170, 2004.
[27] J. Rafique, J. Yu, J. Yu, G. Fang, K. W. Wong, Z. Zheng, H. C. Ong and
W. M. Lau., “Electrospinning highly aligned long polymer nanofibers on
large scale by using a tip collector,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 91, no. 6, pp.
063126-1–063126-3, 2007.
[28] S. H. Tan, R. Inai, M. Kotaki, and S. Ramakrishna, “Systematic parameter
study for ultra-fine fiber fabrication via electrospinning process,” Polymer,
vol. 46, no. 16, pp. 6128–6134, 2005.
[29] D. H. Reneker and I. Chun, “Nanometre diameter fibres of polymer, produced by electrospinning,” Nanotechnology, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 216, 1999.
[30] J. L. T. Sharma, S. Naik, K. Aroom, B. Gill, and J. X. J. Zhang,
“Aligned electrospun PVDF-TrFE nanofibers for flexible pressure sensors
on catheter,” presented at the 17th Int. Conf. Solid-State Sens., Actuators
Microsyst., Barcelona, Spain, 2013.
[31] T. Sharma, S. S. Je, B. Gill, and J. X. J. Zhang, “Patterning piezoelectric
thin film PVDF–TrFE based pressure sensor for catheter application,”
Sens. Actuators A: Phys., vol. 177, no. 0, pp. 87–92, 2012.
[32] C. E. Ayres, B. S. Jha, H. Meredith, J. R. Bowman, G. L. Bowlin, S. C.
Henderson, and D. G. Simpso, “Measuring fiber alignment in electrospun
scaffolds: A user’s guide to the 2D fast Fourier transform approach,” J.
Biomater. Sci. Polymer Edition, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 603–621, 2008.
[33] G. M. Kim, A. Wutzler, H. J. Radusch, G. H. Michler, P. Simon, R.
A. Sperling, and W. J. Parak, “One-dimensional arrangement of gold
nanoparticles by electrospinning,” Chem. Mater., vol. 17, no. 20, pp. 4949–
4957, 2005.

Tushar Sharma received the B.Tech. degree in
biotechnology from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India, in 2008, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from
the University of Texas at Austin, USA, in 2010 and
2012.
He is currently with Intel Corporation, Hillsboro,
OR, USA.
Dr. Tushar is the recipient of the following awards
and honors Bhagyalakshmi and Krishna Iyengar
award, special research grant, and Idea to Product—
Texas and Global round winners.

195

Sahil Naik will be graduating from The University of
Texas at Austin in May 2015 with a B.S. in Biomedical Engineering (Honors) and B.B.A. in Business
Honors/Science and Technology Management.

Jewel Langevine is currently in the process of completing her bachelor’s degree in Biomedical Engineering at The University of Texas at Austin in
Austin, Texas, USA. She holds an associate’s degree in Physical Science from San Jacinto College in
Houston, Texas, USA. Jewel is completing a Business Foundations Certificate through the McCombs
School of Business and an Elements of Computing
Certificate from The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Computer Science.

Brijesh Gill received the M.D. degree from The University of Alabama School of Medicine, Birmingham,
AL, and the B.S. degree from Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA.
He is currently a Trauma Surgeon and Associate
Professor of Surgery at the University of Texas (UT)
Health Medical School in Houston, USA. His current
research interests include medical devices, cellular
therapy, and tissue engineering.

John X. J. Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA.
Dr. Zhang is a Professor at Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, NH, an Ivy League
institution. Before joining Dartmouth, he was an Associate Professor with tenure in the Department of
Biomedical Engineering at the University of Texas
of Austin (UT Austin). He received his Ph.D. in
Electrical Engineering from Stanford University and
was a Research Scientist in Systems Biology at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Zhang’s research focuses on exploring
bio-inspired nanomaterials, scale-dependent biophysics, and nanofabrication
technology, towards developing new diagnostic devices and methods on probing complex cellular processes and biological networks critical to development
and diseases.

