IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

979

Mimo Pillow—An Intelligent Cushion Designed
With Maternal Heart Beat Vibrations
for Comforting Newborn Infants
Wei Chen, Senior Member, IEEE, Sidarto Bambang Oetomo, Daniel Tetteroo, Frank Versteegh, Thelxi Mamagkaki,
Mariana Serras Pereira, Lindy Janssen, and Andrea van Meurs

Abstract—Premature infants are subject to numerous interventions ranging from a simple diaper change to surgery while residing
in neonatal intensive care units. These neonates often suffer from
pain, distress, and discomfort during the first weeks of their lives.
Although pharmacological pain treatment often is available, it cannot always be applied to relieve a neonate from pain or discomfort.
This paper describes a nonpharmacological solution, called Mimo,
which provides comfort through mediation of a parent’s physiological features to the distressed neonate via an intelligent pillow
system embedded with sensing and actuating functions. We present
the design, the implementation, and the evaluation of the prototype. Clinical tests at Máxima Medical Center in the Netherlands
show that among the nine of ten infants who showed discomfort
following diaper change, a shorter recovery time to baseline skin
conductance analgesimeter values could be measured when the
maternal heartbeat vibration in the Mimo was switched ON and
in seven of these ten a shorter crying time was measured.
Index Terms—Bonding, comforting solution, heartbeat, preterm
neonates, user-centered design.

Manuscript received October 21, 2013; revised May 23, 2014 and July 17,
2014; accepted July 26, 2014. Date of publication August 18, 2014; date of
current version May 7, 2015.
W. Chen and D. Tetteroo are with the Department of Industrial Design,
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(e-mail: w.chen@tue.nl; d.tetteroo@tue.nl).
S. B. Oetomo is with the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Máxima Medical Center, 5500 MB Veldhoven, The Netherlands, and also
with the Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology,
5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl).
F. Versteegh was with the PDEng Program on User System Interaction, Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ
Eindhoven, The Netherlands. He is now with DSW Zorgverzekeraar, 3119 XT
Schiedam (e-mail: profiler@gmail.com).
T. Mamagkaki was with the PDEng Program on User System Interaction,
Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612
AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands. He is now with SAS Scandinavian Airlines,
19587 Stockholm, Sweden (e-mail: thelxi@gmail.com)
M. S. Pereira was with the PDEng Program on User System Interaction,
Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ
Eindhoven, The Netherlands. She is now with the Tilburg Center for Cognition
and Communication, Tilburg University, 5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands
(e-mail: m.serraspereira@uvt.nl).
L. Janssen was with the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Máxima Medical Center, 5500 MB Veldhoven, The Netherlands. She is
now with the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit of the Radboud UMC, 6500 HC
Nijmegen, The Netherlands (e-mail: lindy.janssen@radboudumc.nl).
A. van Meurs was with the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of
Pediatrics, Máxima Medical Center, 5500 MB Veldhoven, The Netherlands.
She is now with the University of Utrecht, 3512 JE Utrecht, The Netherlands
(e-mail: a.vanmeurs@students.uu.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2349153

I. INTRODUCTION
ABIES that are born after a pregnancy lasting 37 weeks
or less are typically considered premature. Critically ill
neonates are a special group of patients that consist of premature infants who may suffer from diseases that are mainly caused
by immaturity of their organs, and full term infants, who become
severely ill during or immediately after birth. Critically ill newborn infants are normally admitted to a neonatal intensive care
unit (NICU) for treatment by neonatologists and specialized
nurses. Survival of the preterm neonates is unfortunately reliant
on many painful medical interventions. These interventions include, but are not limited to: heel punctures, venepunctures, and
in- or detubations [1]. The attachment and removal of sensors
required for measuring physiological signals can also be unpleasant, stressful, and painful [2]. Although pain treatment is
given in some of these cases, a large proportion (50%) [1], [3]
of the interventions are performed without any form of pain
treatment.
Simple procedures and environmental factors are also possible sources of pain and discomfort to preterm neonates. Nociception is the term used to refer to the neural processes of
encoding and processing painful stimuli. In preterm neonates,
this nociceptional system is not yet fully developed. A possible
consequence of this not-fully developed nociceptional system
is that stimuli such as sound and light, which are normally
not considered painful to a human being, may be perceived as
painful by the preterm neonate [4]. Injuries, but also clinical
procedures, will result in more widespread sensitivity to pain
[5]. The stay of a preterm infant in the incubator is negatively
influenced by stress (excessive light and noise) and painful procedures [6]. Exposure to repetitive pain, stress, and discomfort
in premature infants is associated with cognitive and neuro developmental impairments [7]. The consequences of untreated
procedural pain in neonates can be both severe and long term.
It is believed that exposing preterm neonates to pain negatively
affects their ability to cope with pain and stress in later childhood [5], [8]. There is growing awareness that pain following a
painful procedure should be treated appropriately and adequate
soothing by parents or nurses is advocated.
Neonates show many different responses to pain and stress.
These responses can be of both physiological and behavioral nature, and can be used to detect discomfort of a neonate. Physiological responses include an increased heart and respiratory rate,
increased or decreased blood pressure, decreased oxygen saturation, vagal tone, and skin temperature. Behavioral responses
are even more varied. Examples include vocalizations like crying and whimpering, facial expressions like grimacing with eyes

B

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

980

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

squeezed shut or a stretched open mouth, and body movements
like finger and toe splaying and trunk arching [5], [9]. It is worth
noting that a change in any of these responses does not always
imply that the neonate is experiencing stress or discomfort. Several pain-scoring systems (such as PIPP [10] and Comfort-NEO
[11]) have been developed to aggregate the behavioral signs,
providing a reliable and structured tool for pain measurement.
The past two decades have seen an increase in interest in
neonatal pain treatment [8]. Pharmacological solutions remain
popular and are the most used method for pain treatment. Nonpharmacological methods of providing comfort and pain relief
do exist and some have proven to be effective. The most popular techniques include: nonnutritive sucking, offering a sweet
solution, facilitated tucking, and skin-to-skin care (SSC).
Nonnutritive sucking was one of the first nonpharmacological
comforting techniques to be studied and refers to offering a
pacifier for the neonate to suck on [12]. A sucrose solution can
be provided as an extra means of comfort during more painful
procedures. A syringe is used to gently squeeze some sucrose
on the inside of the neonate’s cheek. A pacifier is offered after
the delivery of the sucrose, distracting the infant with something
sweet to suck on [13].
During facilitated tucking, the caregiver holds one hand on
the baby’s head and another one on the feet or body, depending
on what is feasible at that moment [14]. Similar techniques are
containment and swaddling [15]. The aim of all these techniques
is to restrict the movement space for the neonate and to maintain
it in a position similar to in utero.
One of the most successful comforting techniques is SSC,
otherwise known as kangaroo mother care (KMC) [16]. During
SSC, the mother and infant are wrapped in cloth together, with
the infant held to the bare chest of the mother. One downside
of this comforting technique is that the neonate needs to be
taken out of the incubator, which can be stressful to the child.
Some neonates are unable to receive this particular kind of care,
because their medical condition does not allow them to be taken
out of the incubator.
Other comforting techniques include presenting the neonate
with an audible heartbeat [17] or music [18] and aromatherapy [19]. If possible, breastfeeding can also be used as a nonpharmacological comforting technique, although its effect was
demonstrated on term neonates [20].
The majority of these comforting techniques have in common
that a parent or nurse needs to be present to provide the desired
care. Although the sole presence of parents might be comforting
to a neonate, most parents are unable to be with their child
continuously. The same holds for nurses, as they often have
multiple neonates to care for. A comforting solution that does
not require the continued presence of a parent or nurse is thus a
design path worth exploring.
The Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e) has started
a ten-year project on perinatology research in cooperation with
the Máxima Medical Center (MMC) in the Netherlands. The
goal of this project is to improve the wellbeing for the pregnant
woman and her child before, during, and after delivery [21]–
[23]. Research results that have been reported from this project
area, for example, a smart jacket for neonates integrated with
textile sensors [24], [25], a power supply based on contactless
energy transfer [26], blood oxygen saturation monitoring for

neonates using a reflectance pulse oximeter [27], [28], neonatal
temperature monitoring [29], textile mat design [30], data transmission [31], [32], and a device to support cardiopulmonary
resuscitation of neonates [33].
This paper presents a new concept and design for comforting
preterm neonates, which aims at comforting preterm neonates
by mimicking selected features of the baby’s mother or father
and making the features available to the baby when the parents cannot be present themselves. We were inspired by the
fact that KMC is beneficial for newborn infants. Apart from the
skin to skin contact and maternal scent, one of the features of
KMC is the exposure to the maternal heart beat [34]. Doheny
et al. [35] reported that exposure to biological maternal sounds
improves cardiorespiratory regulation in extremely preterm infants. Although the effect of a mother’s heartbeat versus any
other heartbeat has not been shown, it is beneficial to use a
parental heartbeat. Empowering parents to play an active role
in their child’s incubation process is very important [36]. By
letting parents “donate” their heartbeat to the child, they feel
that they can contribute to the child’s wellbeing which is an
important factor in the parent child bonding process [37], [38].
The concept, called Mimo, is a comforting solution through an
intelligent pillow system embedded with sensing and actuating
functions that provides neonates with an experience similar to
being held by their parents. The following sections will present
the concept in more detail, and describe the implementation and
evaluation of the prototype at the MMC in the Netherlands.
II. DESIGN CONCEPT
The concept for the proposed comforting solution was based
on findings from the literature and the user studies performed at
NICU.
A. User Studies
An essential first step in the development of a new, nonpharmacological pain treatment is the recognition and evaluation
of the status-quo. We apply user-centered design (UCD) during the industrial design process and based on the outcome of
user research define system requirements and make decision
on technological directions. In UCD, the end-user is constantly
involved in the design process. In this case, medical staff and
parents can be valuable sources of information, in effect, becoming the voice of the neonates. Interviews with medical staff
and observations at a NICU facility have been performed in order to gain better insight on the conditions and treatments given
at a NICU.
Neonates can be comforted in two ways: by providing an
active comforting treatment or by taking away sources of discomfort. Some hospitals [e.g., the Maternity District Hospital
“Helena Venizelou” (GR)] have a very strict policy that focuses
on the latter. The fragile neonates are taken out of the incubator
only for medical treatments. The care policy focuses on limiting
external stimuli to the neonates as much as possible. Noise and
light levels are reduced to absolute minimum and parents can
visit their babies during fixed visiting hours. Other hospitals
[e.g., MMC in Veldhoven (NL) and the Maastricht University
Medical Centre (NL)] are less strict and emphasize on the value

CHEN et al.: MIMO PILLOW—AN INTELLIGENT CUSHION DESIGNED WITH MATERNAL HEART BEAT VIBRATIONS

of parent–child bonding as a source of active comfort. Therefore, they allow parents to visit their baby in the NICU at any
given time. These hospitals also encourage the parents to take
part in their child’s care, by changing diapers or bottle feeding.
This kind of involvement also helps the parents who often feel
that they cannot help their fragile baby during the stay at the
NICU. These hospitals encourage KMC as a means of comfort
and bonding. Nurses and parents from these hospitals stated that
infants are the most relaxed during KMC.
Although it is clear that parents can play an important role
in the comfort of their child, they cannot be present at all times
to provide this comfort. In all hospitals, some more than others,
there are situations in which alternative means of comforting are
required. Therefore, it seems appropriate that a new comforting
solution would focus on providing a neonate with the same
feeling of comfort that parents would provide, even when the
parents cannot be physically present.
B. Concept
Based on the literature review, the aforementioned user studies and a brainstorm, a concept for a novel solution of comforting
preterm neonates was proposed. This concept, called Mimo, is
a comforting solution that provides neonates with an experience
similar to being held by their parents.
Since neonates show less stress signs when they are in contact
with their parents and held to their chest, which seems to be one
of the most pleasant experiences for a preterm neonate, Mimo
aims at providing a comforting solution with qualities similar
to those of being held to a parent’s chest, available especially
when the parent cannot provide the comfort himself or herself.
This concept might not only increase the general comfort level,
but it can also contribute to the bonding between parent and
infant. Mimo gives parents the chance to record their personal
features such as heartbeat, smell, and temperature, which can be
mediated to the child when it is in need of comfort. When the
concept is fully realized, the child might experience a feeling
as the parents were close to them, even when the parents are
not physically there. One of Mimo’s basic characteristics is its
ease of use, which enables parents to record their physiological
features without guidance.
III. PROTOTYPE
The initial prototype of Mimo was designed to mediate the
parent’s heartbeat by means of vibrations, much like a pulse.
One of the basic characteristics of the concept is that Mimo
should be easy to set up and use, so that parents could record
their physiological data on their own, without the guidance of a
nurse for example. Then, the nurse needs only to switch ON and
activate Mimo when comforting is needed. Moreover, the Mimo
prototype features a pillow-like device to convey the heartbeat,
which can replace the regular pillows that are used in incubators,
thus, sustaining the neonate’s environment and avoiding extra
special equipment that would load the incubator. This prototype
was designed to be comfortable and ergonomic for a premature
neonate, but also washable and clinically safe to meet hospital
standards.
Options for reproducing heartbeats both in terms of sensing
and output/actuation have already been explored [17]. However,

Fig. 1.

981

Prototype with the Mimo recorder (left) and the Mimo pillow (right).

we strived to develop a system that would be very easy to use
without the need for medical personnel assisting in the process.
The photoplethysmogram (PPG) sensor is noninvasive and easy
to use by the parents. Moreover, the main objective of our research is to develop a device that would provide comfort both
to the child and the parents by empowering parents to make
active contribution even when they are not present to their baby.
Therefore, we designed the system to measure PPG signals and
play heart beat vibrations to comfort the baby. A study on an
intelligent baby carriage with a PPG system and heart beat vibration feedback has been reported in [39] with preliminary
experimental evaluation of only one child. In our study, we run
clinical tests to investigate the effectiveness of Mimo.
The Mimo prototype (see Fig. 1) consists of two parts:
1) A recording unit (Mimo recorder), for registration of the
parent’s heartbeat.
2) A pillow-like object (Mimo pillow), for transmitting the
parent’s heartbeat to the neonate.
A. Mimo Recorder
The Mimo recorder is a white cubical box that allows parents
of preterm neonates to make a recording of their heartbeat.
A heartbeat photoplethysmograph (PPG) sensor as well as a
connection cable are attached to the side of the box. The front of
the box features a number of LEDs displaying the status of the
recording process and a button to initiate the recording process.
1) Sensor: The heartbeat sensor that is used in the prototype
is a PPG sensor, which is an optical sensor that measures a
person’s pulse. An infra-red LED on one side of the sensor shines
through the finger onto a photosensitive sensor at the other side
of the finger. The amount of blood that flows through the finger
influences the amount of light that reaches the sensor, hence,
providing information about the person’s pulse. Although there
are other ways to record a heartbeat (such as electrocardiogram
sensors), the PPG sensor provides a quick and easy way to record
a heartbeat for this application.
2) Electronics: An overview of the circuitry inside the Mimo
recorder can be found in Fig. 2. The heart of the Mimo recorder is
an Arduino Uno microcomputer, powered by a 9-V battery. The
Arduino handles almost the complete recording process, ranging
from sensing and storage to transmission of the heartbeat to the
pillow. It was deliberately chosen to use a battery rather than a
fixed power supply, to provide maximum flexibility to parents
in their choice of a recording location.

982

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.

Circuit diagram of the electronics in the Mimo recorder.

Circuit diagram of the electronics in the Mimo pillow.

Fig. 4. (a) Mother records her heart beat at NICU using the Mimo recorder.
(b) Baby with the Mimo pillow during the test.

3) User Interface: The user interface of the Mimo recorder
was designed to be as simple as possible, so that parents can
perform the complete recording process themselves. Four LEDs
provide feedback to the parents about the status of the heartbeat
recording. One light shows whether the device is switched ON,
another light indicates whether the sensor is properly attached,
and the two remaining lights indicate whether the recording
has not started yet (lights OFF), is currently in progress (lights
blinking) or has finished (lights ON).
In order to record their heartbeat, parents first need to attach
the sensor to their finger or earlobe. Once the sensor indicator
confirms that the sensor has been properly attached, the parent
can press the recording button and wait for the status lights to
light steady. Then the pillow can be connected to the recording
unit and the heartbeat will be transferred to the pillow.

of the pillow. Other efforts to ensure that electronics are not
felt by the neonate have been made by using a specialized flat
model racing battery as power supply, a tiny vibration motor to
mediate the heartbeat vibrations, and by using a tiny control to
switch ON or OFF the electronics. A detailed overview of the
electronic circuit is provided in Fig. 3.
2) User Interface: The heartbeat data that has been recorded
with the Mimo recorder can be transferred to the Mimo pillow by connecting the connection cables of both devices. Once
the heartbeat data has been transferred to the pillow, it is immediately ready for use. The recorded heartbeat data is stored
in the microcomputer in the Mimo pillow and is played back
continuously, as long as the device is switched ON.

B. Mimo Pillow

To test the viability of the design, clinical tests were carried
out at Máxima Medical Center in the Netherlands. The objective is to assess the effects of the Mimo system on newborn
infants following a discomforting procedure. We hypothesized
that sensing of the maternal heart beat by the infant could offer
additional consolation and hence reduce the crying time following a discomforting procedure. An analysis of risks was performed before applying the prototype to the NICU. The safety
of the Mimo prototype system was analyzed by clinical physicists and the ethical commission of the MMC approved the
experiments.

The Mimo pillow is the part of the prototype that stays with
the neonate. It is a boomerang-shaped pillow that is filled with
polymer beads and contains a pouch that accommodates the
electronics. The polymer beads that are used for the filling act
as support and ensure both softness for the neonate as well as
stability that allow the pillow to be shaped around the neonate’s
body. The form of the pillow was determined through an iterative
design process—Inspired by the design of the “Frederick T.
Frog” pillow by Philips [40], and matured through discussions
with medical staff. The materials were chosen on the basis of
their suitability for the NICU environment (safe, easy to clean,
comfortable for the child).
1) Electronics: Much like the Mimo recorder, the Mimo pillow is controlled by an Arduino Mini microcomputer. This Arduino version is much smaller and flatter than the one used in
the Mimo recorder, such that it is hardly felt from the outside

IV. CLINICAL TESTS AND EVALUATION

A. Method
First, the heartbeats of the neonates’ mothers were recorded
with the Mimo recorder. The signal was uploaded to the Mimo
pillow and after switching on the rhythmic vibrations can be felt
at the surface of the pillow. The Mimo pillow was placed on the

CHEN et al.: MIMO PILLOW—AN INTELLIGENT CUSHION DESIGNED WITH MATERNAL HEART BEAT VIBRATIONS

983

TABLE I
EFFECTS OF THE MIMO PILLOW ON NEWBORN INFANTS FOLLOWING A DISCOMFORTING PROCEDURE
Infant #

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Gest. age (wk)

34 +
34 +
34 +
37 +
35 +
35 +
34 +
32 +
35 +
33 +

5
5
5
4
3
0
3
6
0
4

Post natal age (days)

13
1
3
11
2
11
3
30
12
12

chest of the infants after their diaper change before their feeding,
a moment of discomfort where most baby’s cry. Fig. 4 shows that
a mother records her heart beat at NICU using the Mimo recorder
and a baby with the Mimo pillow during one test. To rule out any
effects of consolation by the pillow without heart beat vibrations,
we tested the pillow both with the vibrations switched ON and
the vibrations switched OFF during two subsequential diaper
changes.
We conducted a pilot study in late preterm infants that were
admitted at the medium care ward of Máxima Medical Center.
Patients were randomly assigned to 1) comforting with the pillow with vibrations switched ON, followed by comforting with
the vibrations switched OFF and 2) comforting with the vibrations switched OFF, followed by comforting with the pillow
with vibrations switched ON. The change in comfort level following placement of the pillow on the infants chest was assessed
by video recording of the facial expressions to measure crying
time and by the measurement of recovery time to baseline values using the skin conductance analgesimeter (SCA) [41]. The
mean baseline SCA value was measured for each baby when
he or she was in a calm condition before the diaper change.
During the diaper change, the SCA values increased due to the
discomfort of neonates. The recovery time was calculated by
measuring the duration of time after the diaper change for the
SCA values returning to the baseline SCA value. The observer
(AvM) was unaware of the vibrations in the Mimo pillow being
switched ON or OFF.
B. Results
19 infants with a gestational age between 32 + 7 and 36 + 6
weeks enrolled in the study. Nine infants did not show any sign
of discomfort after the diaper change and obviously did not
show any change in study parameters following placement of
the Mimo pillow on the chest of the infants. The results of the
other ten infants that cried after the diaper change are shown in
Table I.
In this study, we show that nine of ten infants that showed
discomfort following diaper change, a shorter recovery time
to baseline SCA values could be measured when the maternal
heartbeat vibration in the Mimo was switched ON. In seven
of these ten, a shorter crying time was measured. Differences
between mimo-OFF and mimo-ON have been tested by the
Wilcoxon Rank Sum test yielding a p-value of 0.037 in recovery

Recovery time to baseline
SCA value (sec)
Mimo ON
Mimo OFF
2
6
2
10
6
32
2
64
26
6

8
14
6
> 300
12
4
4
112
146
16

Crying time
(sec)
Mimo ON

Mimo OFF

19
23
11
38
34
36
18
63
55
31

228
44
37
279
49
36
31
34
52
58

time and 0.086 in crying time, respectively. The results indicate
that preterm infants can benefit from the Mimo pillow during and
following stressful procedures. The device seems to be a simple,
effective, and safe intervention for pain in newborn infants.

V. DISCUSSION
The Mimo concept consists of two parts: a recording unit and
a technologically enhanced pillow. The recording unit is used to
record physiological data (such as heartbeat, breathing rhythm,
parental smell, and body temperature) from a parent. This data
can then be transferred to the pillow, which includes technology
that enables it to “replay” the recorded data to the neonate. The
current prototype achieves a part of the functions of the original
concept, as it focuses only on the recording and playback of a
parent’s heartbeat. In the future study, the complete functions for
more sensing and actuating modalities (e.g., breathing rhythm,
parental smell, and body temperature) will be developed. Further developments also include miniaturization of circuits and
electronics and a flash disk or wireless module (e.g., bluetooth)
to store/transfer the mother heart beat data to the pillow.
The parent–child bonding is loose for the NICU patients because of the separation of neonates from their parents. The use
of Mimo is expected to comfort the neonates on one hand and
in the meanwhile to comfort parents and help them feel much
closer to their babies. We carried out preliminary interviews
with parents at MMC and online by demonstrating them the use
of Mimo. The feedback from parents show that Mimo plays a
positive role in comforting parents and attaining parental role
by helping them feel much closer to their babies and feel that
they are always there to support their babies.
More clinical tests will be carried out in the future study
to compare Mimo with other neonatal pain treatments (e.g.,
sucking or swaddling) and compare the effectiveness of parental
heart beat with any other heart beat in order to further investigate
the analgesic effect of the heartbeat of mother.
The crying time was assessed by observation on the babies’
facial expression. Because the participants are premature infants and their facial expression is not as well developed as the
facial expression of a term infant, the physiological measure
of recovery time to baseline SCA value is more reliable than
observation. More physiological data, such as ECG, EEG, and
heart rate variability, and behavioral data of the neonates could

984

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

also be measured for the purpose of multimodal assessment and
statistical analysis.
Furthermore, the current design is only a prototype for tests
and demonstration purposes. To develop the solution to a readyto-market product, strict product design process and clinical
safety evaluation of the reliability of the complete system are
needed.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents the design, implementation, and evaluation of a new nonpharmacological comforting solution for
preterm neonates. The concept, named Mimo, aims at comforting a neonate by providing the baby with a feeling similar to that
of being close to a parent. An intelligent pillow system was proposed and implemented with embedding sensing and actuating
functions for the transfer of maternal heart beat into the pillow
and playing the pulsation to the neonate. The prototype was
tested on premature babies at MMC in the Netherlands. Among
the nine of ten infants who showed discomfort following diaper
change, a shorter recovery time to baseline SCA values could
be measured when the maternal heartbeat vibration in the Mimo
was switched ON and in seven of these ten a shorter crying time
was measured. Thus, this device has potential to be a simple,
effective, and safe intervention for comforting newborn infants.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Osagiator, the Senior
NICU Nurse of Máxima Medical Center in the Netherlands, as
well as the parents and neonates who participated in this study.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Carbajal, “Nonpharmacological treatment of neonatal pain,” in Neonatal Pain, G. Buonocore and C. Bellieni, Eds. Milan, Italy: Springer, 2008,
pp. 83–97.
[2] D. Barker and N. Rutter, “Exposure to invasive procedures in neonatal
intensive care unit admissions,” Archives Disease Childhood, vol. 72,
pp. F47–F48, 1995.
[3] C. C. Johnston, F. Filion, M. Campbell-Yeo, C. Goulet, L. Bell, K. McNaughton, J. Byron, M. Aita, G. A. Finley, and C.-D. Walker, “Kangaroo
mother care diminishes pain from heel lance in very preterm neonates: A
crossover trial,” BMC Pediatrics, vol. 8, p. 13, 2008.
[4] K. Anand, “Consensus statement for the prevention and management of
pain in the newborn,” Archives Pediatrics Adolescent Med., vol. 155,
pp. 173–180, 2001.
[5] M. I. Levene, “Minimizing the discomfort of neonatal intensive care,”
Current Paediatrics, vol. 13, pp. 196–200, 2003.
[6] A. T. Bhutta and K. J. Anand, “Vulnerability of the developing brain:
Neuronal mechanisms,” Clin. Perinatol., vol. 29, pp. 357–372, 2002.
[7] R. E. Grunau et al., “Neonatal pain, parenting stress and interaction, in
relation to cognitive and motor development at 8 and 18 months in preterm
infants,” Pain, vol. 143, pp. 138–146, 2009.
[8] C. C. Johnston et al., “Pain in neonates is different,” Pain, vol. 152,
pp. S65–S73, 2011.
[9] D. Ballweg, “Neonatal and pediatric pain management: Standards and
application,” Paediatrics Child Health, vol. 18, pp. S61–S66, 2008.
[10] B. Stevens et al., “Premature infant pain profile: Development and initial
validation,” Clin. J. Pain, vol. 12, pp. 13–22, 1996.
[11] M. van Dijk et al., “Taking up the challenge of measuring prolonged pain in
(premature) neonates: The COMFORTneo scale seems promising,” Clin.
J. Pain, vol. 25, pp. 607–616, 2009.
[12] S.-Y. P. K. Shiao et al., “Meta-analysis of the effects of nonnutritive
sucking on heart rate and peripheral oxygenation: Research from the past
30 years,” Issues Comprehensive Pediatric Nursing, vol. 20, pp. 11–24,
1997.

[13] B. Stevens, J. Yamada, and A. Ohlsson , “Sucrose for analgesia in newborn
infants undergoing painful procedures,” Cochrane Database Systematic
Rev., vol. 1, 2013.
[14] A. Axelin et al., “‘Facilitated tucking by parents’ in pain management of
preterm infants—A randomized crossover trial,” Early Human Develop.,
vol. 82, pp. 241–247, 2006.
[15] C.-M. Huang et al., “Comparison of pain responses of premature infants
to the heelstick between containment and swaddling,” J. Nursing Res.,
vol. 12, pp. 31–35, 2004.
[16] T. C. Castral et al., “The effects of skin-to-skin contact during acute pain
in preterm newborns,” Eur. J. Pain, vol. 12, pp. 464–471, 2008.
[17] H. Kurihara et al., “Behavioral and adrenocortical responses to stress in
neonates and the stabilizing effects of maternal heartbeat on them,” Early
Human Develop., vol. 46, pp. 117–127, 1996.
[18] M. Butt and B. Kisilevsky, “Music modulates behavior of premature infants following heel lance,” Can. J. Nursing Res., vol. 31, pp. 17–39,
2000.
[19] R. M. Sullivan and P. Toubas, “Clinical usefulness of maternal odor in
newborns: Soothing and feeding preparatory responses,” Biol. Neonate,
vol. 74, pp. 402–408, 1998.
[20] R. Carbajal, S. Veerapen, S. Couderc, M. Jugie, and Y. Ville, “Analgesic
effect of breast feeding in term neonates: Randomized controlled trial,”
BMJ: Brit. Med. J., vol. 326, p. 13, 2003.
[21] W. Chen et al., “Neonatal monitoring: Current practice and future trends,”
in Handbook of Research on Developments in E-Health and Telemedicine:
Technological and Social Perspectives. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global,
2010, pp. 939–961.
[22] W. Chen et al., Neonatal Monitoring Technologies: Design for Integrated
Solutions. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2012.
[23] W. Chen et al., “Sensor integration for perinatology research,” Int. J. Sens.
Netw., vol. 9, pp. 38–49, 2011.
[24] S. Bouwstra et al., “Smart jacket design for neonatal monitoring with
wearable sensors,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body
Sens. Netw., 2009, pp. 162–167.
[25] F. P. Landete et al., “Context aware sensing for health monitoring,” in
Proc. 34th Annu. Int. IEEE EMBS Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 1294–1297.
[26] W. Chen et al., “A design of power supply for neonatal monitoring with
wearable sensors,” J. Ambient Intell. Smart Environ., vol. 1, pp. 185–196,
2009.
[27] W. Chen et al., “Non-invasive blood oxygen saturation monitoring for
neonates using reflectance pulse oximeter,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test
Eur. Conf. Exhib., 2010, pp. 1530–1535.
[28] D. Potuzakova et al., “Innovative design for monitoring of neonates using
reflectance pulse oximeter,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Intell. Environ., 2011,
pp. 200–205.
[29] W. Chen et al., “Monitoring body temperature of newborn infants at
neonatal intensive care units using wearable sensors,” in Proc. 5th Int.
Conf. Body Area Netw., 2010, pp. 188–194.
[30] R. van Donselaar and W. Chen, “Design of a smart textile mat to
study pressure distribution on multiple foam material configurations,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Appl. Sci. Biomed. Commun. Technol., 2011,
p. 129.
[31] W. Chen et al., “Wireless transmission design for health monitoring at
neonatal intensive care units,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Appl. Sci. Biomed.
Commun. Technol., 2009, pp. 1–6.
[32] W. Chen et al., “Design of wireless sensor system for neonatal monitoring,”
in Proc. 4th IFIP Int. Conf. New Technol., Mobility Security, 2011, pp.
1–5.
[33] W. Chen et al., “Rhythm of life aid (ROLA): An integrated sensor system
for supporting medical staff during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
of newborn infants,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no.
6, pp. 1468–1474, Nov. 2010.
[34] L. Gray, L. Watt, and E. M. Blass, “Skin-to-skin contact is analgesic in
healthy newborns,” Pediatrics, vol. 105, p. e14, 2000.
[35] L. Doheny et al., “Exposure to biological maternal sounds improves cardiorespiratory regulation in extremely preterm infants,” J. Maternal-Fetal
Neonatal Med., vol. 25, pp. 1591–1594, 2012.
[36] P. W. Fowlie and H. McHaffie, “ABC of preterm birth: Supporting parents
in the neonatal unit,” BMJ: Brit. Med. J., vol. 329, p. 1336, 2004.
[37] L. Fegran et al., “A comparison of mothers’ and fathers’ experiences of
the attachment process in a neonatal intensive care unit,” J. Clin. Nursing,
vol. 17, pp. 810–816, 2008.
[38] M. Bialoskurski et al., “The nature of attachment in a neonatal intensive
care unit,” J. Perinatal Neonatal Nursing, vol. 13, pp. 66–77, 1999.

CHEN et al.: MIMO PILLOW—AN INTELLIGENT CUSHION DESIGNED WITH MATERNAL HEART BEAT VIBRATIONS

[39] T. Kawashima, “Study on intelligent baby carriage with power assist system and comfortable basket,” J. Mech. Sci. Technol., vol. 23, pp. 974–979,
2009.
[40] F. T. Frog. (2013). [Online]. Available: http://www.healthcare.philips.
com/main/products/mother_and_child_care/post_natal_care/nicu/sleep_
and_positioning/freddy
[41] H. Storm, “Skin conductance and the stress response from heel stick in
preterm infants,” Archives Disease Childhood, vol. 83, pp. F143–F147,
2000.

Wei Chen (M’07–SM’12) received the B. Eng. degree in 1999 and the M. Eng. degree in 2002 in
telecommunication systems and smart sensor systems
from the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, China. She
received the Ph.D. degree on performance monitoring and impairment mitigation for optical communication systems, in 2007, from the Department of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
She worked at Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent,
Stuttgart, Germany, as an Intern in 2005 and she was a Research Assistant in
2007 at the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, University of
Melbourne. Since July 2007, she has been an Assistant Professor at the Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, where she also served as the Chair of the Theme Health Care
from 2009 to 2013. Her research interests include medical monitoring system
design, patient health monitoring, wireless body area networks, smart sensor
systems, ambient intelligence, and smart environments.

Sidarto Bambang Oetomo received the Medical
Doctor degree in 1979 from the Faculty of Medicine,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, and specialized in pediatrics. He registered as a
Pediatrician in 1983 and subsequently specialized in
neonatology at the same institution. He received the
Ph.D. degree in 1988 on the treatment of surfactant
deficiency in preterm infants.
He was the Research Fellow at the Perinatal
Research Laboratory, Harbor UCLA, Torrance, CA,
USA, from 1988 to 1989. In 1996, he was appointed
as the Professor of pediatrics and neonatology at the University of Groningen.
The focus on his research was on neonatal lung disease, surfactant treatments,
and inflammation. In 2003, he accepted the position of Consultant in neonatology at the Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven, The Netherlands. He was
appointed as a Professor at the Faculty of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, in 2007. His main research interests include the field of
ambient intelligence and monitoring of vital functions of newborn infants using
nonobtrusive technologies.
Dr. Oetomo is a Member of the Dutch Pediatric Society, the European Society for Pediatric Research, and the American Society of Pediatric Research.

Daniel Tetteroo received the M.Sc. degree in human
media interaction from the University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 2010, and the PDEng
degree on user system interaction from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands, in 2012.
He currently works as a Ph.D. Researcher at the
Eindhoven University of Technology on the application of end-user development principles in the domain of physical rehabilitation. He has done research
on various topics, ranging from child–computer interaction and mobile interaction to design for neonatal care units.

985

Frank Versteegh received the M.Sc. degree in 2010
from Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands,
where he specialized in applied cognitive psychology. He received the PDEng degree on user system
interaction from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2012.
He has done an internship at the National
Aerospace Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, in 2008, and worked on a UX research project
at Alcatel-Lucent, Antwerp, Belgium. His main research interests include human–computer interaction,
interaction design, and user experience research.
He is currently a user Interface Designer at DSW Zorgverzekeraar.

Thelxi Mamagkaki received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees in computer engineering and informatics in
2010 from the Polytechnic School, University of Patras, Patras, Greece. She received the PDEng degree
on user system interaction from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
She has worked on designing the interaction and
user experience of diverse systems, from web and mobile applications to healthcare, focusing on neonatal
care and pregnancy monitoring. Her main research
interests include human–computer interaction, interaction design, and user experience.
She is currently interaction and UX Design Engineer at SAS Scandinavian
Airlines.

Mariana Serras Pereira received a master in Clinical Psychology from the Instituto Superior de Psicologia Aplicada in Lisbon, Portgual.
She is currently working as a Ph.D. Researcher
at Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands,
where she is focusing on how people express deception in nonverbal communication. In addition,
for the last two and a half years, she has worked
and developed herself as user researcher and interaction designer, which allows her to apply her
psychology background while learning to create
product-driven solutions to improve people’s life. She is passionate about understanding human behavior, and in finding and developing concrete solutions
that contribute to improve people’s life.

Lindy Janssen received the Medical Doctor degree
from the Faculty of Medicine, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, in 2011.
She did a research internship in 2008 at the Department of Audiology and Neurootology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. She started working at the Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven, The
Netherlands. In 2012, she worked at the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit of the Radboud UMC, Nijmegen.
In 2013, she got accepted for the specialization of
pediatrics.
She is a Member of the Dutch Pediatric Society.

Andrea van Meurs received the Bachelor Medical
degree in 2011 and is expected to receive the Medical
Doctor degree from the Faculty of Medicine, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, in 2014. In
2012, she completed the Senior Residency Program
from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit of the Maxima
Medical Centre, Veldhoven, The Netherlands.
She is currently a medical student at the University
of Utrecht. The focus on her residency program was
on premature infants suffering from pain and distress
during the neonatal period. Her current and future
focus will be on perinatology.

