264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Motion Artifacts in Capacitive ECG Measurements:
Reducing the Combined Effect of DC Voltages and
Capacitance Changes Using an Injection Signal
A. Serteyn∗ , R. Vullings, M. Meftah, and J. W. M. Bergmans, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Capacitive electrodes are a promising alternative to
the conventional adhesive electrodes for ECG measurements. They
provide more comfort to the patient when integrated in everyday
objects (e.g., beds or seats) for long-term monitoring. However, the
application of capacitive sensors is limited by their high sensitivity
to motion artifacts. For example, motion at the body–electrode
interface causes variations of the coupling capacitance which, in
the presence of a dc voltage across the coupling capacitor, create
strong artifacts in the measurements. The origin, relevance, and
reduction of this specific and important type of artifacts are studied
here. An injection signal is exploited to track the variations of the
coupling capacitance in real time. This information is then used by
an identification scheme to estimate the artifacts and subtract them
from the measurements. The method was evaluated in simulations,
lab environments, and in a real-life recording on an adult’s chest.
For the type of artifact under study, a strong artifact reduction
ranging from 40 dB for simulated data to 9 dB for a given reallife recording was achieved. The proposed method is automated,
does not require any knowledge about the measurement system
parameters, and provides an online estimate for the dc voltage
across the coupling capacitor.
Index Terms—Capacitive electrocardiography (ECG), injection
signal, insulated electrodes, modeling, motion artifacts.

I. INTRODUCTION
NTRODUCED by Lopez and Richardson in 1967 [1] and
further developed in the last decade, capacitive sensors allow
biopotential recordings through insulating materials, e.g., clothing. Since no direct skin contact is needed, capacitive sensors
can be integrated in everyday objects, such as beds for longterm unobtrusive monitoring [2] or cars for assisted driving [3].
Recently, capacitive sensors were evaluated for electrocardiographic (ECG) recordings in clinical settings [4], [5].
In the recording of biopotentials with capacitive sensors, interferences due to environmental electrical fields and motion
artifacts are problematic and need to be addressed before capacitive sensors can be used in clinical routine. In this paper,
we describe our solution to reduce one major type of artifacts:

Fig. 1. Capacitive biopotential measurement system composed of a patient’s
body and a capacitive sensor. The electrode is capacitively coupled to the patient
via an insulator, e.g., an air gap. An active guard protects the high-impedance
sensor from environmental electromagnetic interferences. A known voltage
V i is applied from the sensor ground to track the variations of the coupling
capacitance.

the one due to the combination of body–electrode impedance
variations and a dc voltage across the body–electrode interface.

I

A. Capacitive Measurement System

Manuscript received July 22, 2013; revised June 3, 2014; accepted July 19,
2014. Date of publication August 15, 2014; date of current version December 18, 2014. This work was supported by Agentshap-NL. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ A. Serteyn is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
a.a.m.serteyn@tue.nl).
R. Vullings and J. W. M. Bergmans are with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(e-mail: r.vullings@tue.nl; j.w.m.bergmans@tue.nl).
M. Meftah is with the Patient Care Solutions Group, Philips Research, 5656
AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: mohammed.meftah@philips.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2348178

The design of electronics for capacitive sensors has been
studied for more than 45 years but remains challenging [6].
To record biopotentials, an electrode is coupled to the patient’s
body via a capacitance on the order of a few picofarads and
connected to a very high-input-impedance amplifier (>1 TΩ).
The electrode and the amplifier together define a capacitive
sensor. The coupling of the capacitive sensor to the body defines
a capacitive measurement system, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
In order to limit interferences and allow a reliable and robust
measurement, different hardware designs have been proposed in
the literature. For example, active guarding and neutralization
are commonly implemented to keep the bias resistance Ri very
high and the input capacitance Ci as low as possible [7], [8].
A driven-right-leg circuit (DRL) can also be used to reduce
common-mode interferences [7]. In this paper, we consider the
basic form of capacitive sensor, without neutralization or DRL,
but with an injection signal emitted from the sensor ground
terminal as in Fig. 1.
The coupling capacitance depends on the dielectric property
of the material at the body–electrode interface. This material can
range from an air gap to a thin cotton cloth that can be more or

II. BACKGROUND

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SERTEYN et al.: MOTION ARTIFACTS IN CAPACITIVE ECG MEASUREMENTS

less compressed depending on the body–electrode distance. The
body–electrode interface can also be a combination of different
materials, e.g., a waterproof mattress cover and a cotton bed
sheet. In this study, we assume the body–electrode interface
to be an air gap to avoid triboelectric effects [9] and be able to
focus on one source of artifacts. However, a real-life experiment
with a cotton layer is also performed to highlight the challenges
related to more complex body–electrode interfaces.
B. Sources of Artifacts
Three main sources of artifacts for capacitive ECG measurements were identified in the literature: the environmental electromagnetic interferences associated with a poor common-mode
rejection ratio of the system [3], [9], the local triboelectric effect at the body–electrode interface [9], and the variation of the
coupling capacitor under dc voltage [10], [11]. All three types
of artifacts can dominate the others, depending on the measurement conditions (patient grounding, amount of body motion,
type of materials at the body–electrode interface, etc.). This
paper aims to study and reduce the third type of artifacts.
The dc voltage across the coupling capacitor has different origins. It comes in part from the dc bias current of the amplifier,
from electrodermal dc voltages (skin potential), and from the
accumulation of static charges (e.g., by the triboelectric effect)
on the body surface and in the capacitive sensor. In the presence
of this dc voltage, any variation of the capacitance due to motion
creates artifacts in the measured signal. We focus thus on artifacts coming from capacitance variations of a charged capacitor.
These artifacts are sometimes referred to as microphonics in the
literature. Since the dc voltage is mainly created by triboelectric
effects, microphonics are sometimes confused with triboelectric
artifacts. Microphonics consist in a charge flow due to vibration,
while the triboelectric effect consist in a charge generation due
to friction. These two effects are often combined: A static charge
is generated (creating a transient artifact in the signal) and then
modulated by the motion (creating an artifact correlated with the
motion) until it discharges or adds to a newly generated charge.
C. Prior Work
A theoretical model to study the artifacts generated by variations of the charged coupling capacitor was proposed by Ottenbacher and Heuer in [12]. To undo the artifacts, they solved the
inverse system equation. Their method showed promising results in simulation [12] and controlled bench experiments [13].
However, exact knowledge of all the model parameters (system components and dc voltage across the coupling capacitor)
is required. This knowledge is often not available, limiting the
applicability of this approach for artifact reduction (AR).
Another method for reducing the artifact due to a varying
and charged coupling capacitor was recently tested by Eilebrecht et al. in [14]. They used 3-D acceleration signals and
combined them to estimate the artifact via a classic adaptive
filtering scheme. Their method has the limitation that it requires an additional sensor (an accelerometer) that must be synchronized with the capacitive sensor. Besides, whether or not
the accelerometer signal can lead to a good estimation of the

265

artifact has not been studied. Their method is also not automated
since the combination of the accelerometer signals that leads to
the best rejection of artifacts is selected manually.
As an alternative to accelerometer signals, other signals that
correlate with the motion at the body–electrode interface and
could potentially be used for artifacts reduction were mentioned,
but not exploited, in the literature. A first suggestion was to use
an auxiliary capacitive sensor to track changes in the coupling
impedance [15]. A second suggestion was to use an injection
signal for continuous impedance measurement [5], [16]. This
technique is already used in conventional ECG measurement
systems with gel or dry electrodes, e.g., in [17]. However, it has
only recently been proposed for ECG measurement systems with
capacitively coupled electrodes. In these recent investigations,
an injection signal is used for channel selection [18], respiration observation [19], artifact localization [20], or impedance
measurement in static conditions [21], but not for AR or ECG
reconstruction. The first time an injection signal was actually
tested for AR in capacitive measurements was in our preliminary
work in [22]. The adaptive filter that was used did not exploit
any knowledge about the system model. The method showed
promising results; however, the optimal learning rate and length
of the adaptive filter were obtained heuristically.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
We propose to use a time-invariant filter approximation, an
injection signal, and a parameter optimization scheme to estimate and reduce motion artifacts caused by variations of the
charged coupling capacitor. In addition to AR, our method provides an indication of the variations of the coupling capacitance
as well as an estimate of the dc voltage across the coupling capacitor. The method is fully automated and does not require any
knowledge about the system component values. The method is
designed to perform AR on a single-sensor basis. Hence, no
sensor array or auxiliary sensor is needed.
The paper starts with an analysis of the motion artifact
based on a model of the capacitive measurement system in
Section IV. The main components of the motion artifact are
further studied in Sections V and VI in terms of their impact
on the ECG measurement in the best- and worst-case scenarios.
Section VII describes our method to estimate and reduce the
dominant component of the motion artifact. First, a simplified
model for the motion artifact is derived from the system model
using a time-invariant filter approximation (see Section VII-A).
Then, an injection signal and a sliding-window optimization
are used to estimate the parameters of the artifact model (see
Sections VII-B and VII-C). Finally, the estimated artifact is subtracted from the ECG measurement. In Section VIII, we then
consider a by-product of our AR method: the dc voltage estimate. To conclude, the results of the AR in simulation, in a lab
bench setup as well as in a real-life scenario are presented and
discussed in Section IX.
IV. MODEL OF THE CAPACITIVE SYSTEM
A capacitive sensor measures the displacement current caused
by electrical fields on the body surface. The body surface and

266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
MODEL PARAMETERS USED FOR THE SIMULATION
Parameter

Fig. 2. Equivalent circuit of a capacitive measurement system, adapted from
[12]. The dc voltage V d and the time variations of the coupling capacitance
C c (t) cause an artifact in V o (t). A high-frequent signal V i (t) is injected to
track the time variations of C c (t).

the electrode are insulated from each other and act as the two
plates of a capacitor. In these conditions, no galvanic contact
between the electrode and the body is required, and the body–
electrode interface is modeled by a simple capacitor. The capacitance Cc (t) of this capacitor is inversely proportional to the
distance between the capacitor plates and proportional to the
area of the plates. Accordingly, Cc varies over time with any
motion that occurs at the body–electrode interface.
The equivalent circuit of a biopotential sensor that is capacitively coupled to a body is shown in Fig. 2. This circuit was first
proposed in [12]. We adapted it here to include a voltage source
Vi (t) that represents a known high-frequent sinusoidal signal
injected from the sensor ground and used to gauge the time
variations of Cc (t). The high input impedance of the amplifier
in the capacitive sensor, together with the bias resistance of the
amplifier and some parasitic capacitances (from pads, traces,
etc.), is modeled by a resistance Ri in parallel to a capacitance
Ci , both assumed to be time-invariant. The voltage Vb (t) stands
for the biopotential to be measured, e.g., an electrocardiogram.
The voltage Vd represents the dc voltage across Cc (t). Finally,
Vo (t) is the voltage at the output of the measurement system.
Note that this model assumes a galvanic (resistive) grounding
of the patient body.
The time-domain behavior of the capacitive measurement
system can be mathematically described by
(Ci + Cc )

 1
dVo
dCc 
+
Vo
+
dt
Ri
dt
=

d(Cc Vb ) d(Cc Vd )
dVi
Vi
+
+
+ Ci
Ri
dt
dt
dt

where Cc , Vo , Vi , and Vb are time varying. This equation was,
on the one hand, implemented in Simulink (The MathWorks,
Inc.) using the parameters of Table I and, on the other hand,
solved analytically using standard techniques for differential
equations with time-varying coefficients [23]. The analytical
solution aims to gain insight into the system behavior, allowing
a system approximation as well as the design of a dedicated
method for AR. The implementation in Simulink is used to
generate data to test our AR method.
In the simplifying case, where Vi = 0 and with the initial
condition t0 → −∞, we found analytically that [22]
Vo (t) = s(t) + a(t)

(1)

Total input resistance
Total input capacitance
Coupling capacitance
DC voltage across C c
Injection signal
Biopotential (ECG)

Symbol

Value

Frequency band

Ri
Ci
Cc
Vd
Vi
Vb

∼ 50 GΩ
∼ 3 pF
[0.5 8] pF
[−1 1] V
100 m V p p
1.3 m V p p

0
0
[0 20] Hz
[0 0.5] Hz
1 kHz
[0.5 40] Hz

Fig. 3. Model of a capacitive measurement system. The output signal V o (t) is
the sum of two terms: s(t), a distorted version of the biopotential of interest V b ,
and a(t), an additive artifact due to the time variations of C c (t) in the presence
of a dc voltage V d . The differentiator dd t. and the dynamic low-pass filter of
impulse response f (t, u) form together an HP filter.

where
1
s(t) =
Ci + Cc (t)
Vd
a(t) =
Ci + Cc (t)



t

−∞



t

−∞

with
f (t, u) = e−

t
u

d(Cc Vb )
f (t, u)du
du

(2)

dCc
f (t, u)du
du

(3)

k (s)ds

(4)

and
k(t) =

1
.
Ri (Ci + Cc (t))

(5)

According to (2), the signal of interest Vb (t) is dynamically highpass (HP) filtered by the system, providing a distorted version
s(t) of Vb (t). According to (1) and (3), the output Vo (t) further
contains an unwanted additive artifact a(t), proportional to Vd .
This model of Vo (t) is schematically represented in Fig. 3.
The model parameters Ri , Ci , and Cc (t) represent physical
electrical components. Their typical values are listed in Table I.
The total input impedance of the amplifier (Ri  Ci ) depends on
the circuit construction and is given here for our measurement
system. The lower value of Cc (0.5 pF) corresponds to a distance
of 3.5 mm between the body and electrode surfaces, for an
electrode area of 2 cm2 and an air gap as insulating layer. We
assume that above 3.5 mm (i.e., below 0.5 pF), the sensor is not
coupled to the body. As for the upper bound, 8 pF corresponds to
a cotton layer (r = 1.3) of 0.3-mm thickness as insulating layer.
Using an impedance-analyzer (Agilent 4294A), we measured a
coupling capacitance of 4.2 pF for one layer of polyurethane and
two layers of cotton as body–electrode interface, which further

SERTEYN et al.: MOTION ARTIFACTS IN CAPACITIVE ECG MEASUREMENTS

justifies the chosen Cc values. The frequency content of Cc (t)
ranges from 0 to 20 Hz. This frequency band was chosen in
order to cover motion artifacts due to breathing (0.1–2 Hz) and
body movement (0–10 Hz), but also due to ballistocardiographic
vibrations (0–20 Hz) [19] and, to a certain extent, artifacts due to
transient movement, e.g., a step load of the sensor. The voltage
Vd across Cc is assumed to be constant (dc). However, the
impact of a drift or slow variations of this voltage up to 0.5 Hz
will be discussed in Section VIII, which explains the [0 0.5]
Hz bandwidth in Table I. The signal Vi has an amplitude of
100 mVpp to ensure a patient leakage current always smaller
than 50 μA. The ECG bandwidth was limited to 0.5–40 Hz,
which is the typical bandwidth of patient monitors in the socalled Monitoring Mode. Choosing this bandwidth also allows
us to avoid 50- and 60-Hz interferences and be able to better
isolate the one type of artifact under study. Taking a larger
bandwidth for Vb (t) will have no impact on our AR method as
soon as the common-mode interferences such as 50 and 60 Hz
are cancelled beforehand, e.g., using a notch filter or a DRL
circuit.
V. DISTORTIONS OF THE BIOPOTENTIAL
Equation (1) shows that the output signal Vo (t) has two
components. This section focuses on the first component: the
distorted signal s(t), as described in (2). Distortions not only
consist of an amplitude modulation of the signal of interest Vb (t)
but also of a dynamic filtering of Vb (t). Within the range of values and frequency bands of the model parameters of Table I,
several scenarios can be analyzed and simulated.
A. Best-Case Scenario
The best-case scenario, that is when there is the least amount
of distortions, occurs when the coupling capacitance is constant,
i.e., there is no motion at the body–electrode interface. In this
case, (1) becomes
Vo (t) = s0 (t)
where
s0 (t) =

Cc
Ci + Cc



t

−∞

dVb −k (t−u )
e
du.
du

The measured signal in the absence of motion s0 (t) is thus a
first-order HP version of Vb scaled by the time-invariant factor
Cc
C i +C c . In the absence of motion, the sensor may thus be described by a linear time invariant (LTI) HP filter with frequency
response
H0 (jω) =

jω
Cc
Ci + Cc jω + k0

(6)

where k0 = R i (C 1i +C c ) is the angular cutoff frequency. To ensure that the cutoff frequency of the HP filter remains below
the frequency band of Vb (t), specific designs of the bias circuit
were studied in the literature to make Ri sufficiently high [6],
[7], [24]. With the parameter values of Table I, the cutoff frequency of our system varies between 0.3 and 0.9 Hz. The sensor
may thus filter out some of the very low-frequency components

267

Fig. 4. Two examples of ECG distortions. When the coupling capacitance
C c (t) varies at a frequency of 0.2 Hz between its extreme values, which could
represent breathing motion, we obtain the distorted signal s1 (t). When C c (t)
varies at a frequency of 17 Hz, which is one of the dominant frequencies in the
ECG, we obtain s2 (t).

of the measured ECG. However, this will not have an impact
on the detection of the R-peaks needed to determine the heart
rate since most of their spectral energy is contained in the 10–
30 Hz range [25]. Note that the impact of Cc on the measured
signal amplitude (scaling effect) is minimal when the scaling
c
in (6) is close to 1. Efforts have thus been made in
factor C iC+C
c
the literature toward reducing the input capacitance Ci , e.g., by
implementing a neutralization circuit [7].
B. Worst-Case Scenario
In the worst-case scenario, motion at the body–electrode interface makes Cc (t) vary between its minimal and maximal values,
further distorting the biopotential measurement. Two examples
of worst-case scenarios, for a 0.2- and 17-Hz motion, are illustrated in Fig. 4. In both cases, the third R-peak experiences
the worst-case distortions. The other R-peaks are displayed for
comparison purpose. The signal s1 (t) in Fig. 4 shows that the
signal attenuation is the strongest when the value of Cc (t) is
the smallest, that is when there is no proper capacitive coupling
at the body–electrode interface. The signal s2 (t) shows that a
high-frequency distance change at the body–electrode interface
occurring exactly at the same time as an R-peak of the ECG
signal can alter the R-peak shape, however not entirely mask it.
Therefore, given the parameters of Table I, the distortions are
not expected to prevent a proper R-peak detection, even in the
worst-case scenario.
VI. ADDITIVE ARTIFACT IN THE
BIOPOTENTIAL MEASUREMENT
This section focuses on the second component of Vo (t): the
additive artifact a(t). This artifact, as described in (3), is directly
proportional to the dc voltage Vd and is present only when
motion occurs at the body–electrode interface.
A. Best-Case Scenario
The best-case scenario is encountered when there is no dc
voltage (Vd = 0) or when there is no motion (Cc is constant over

268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 6. Approximation of the additive artifact. Step 1: the model of the artifact
is simplified: the dynamic HP filter is approximated by an LTI HP filter.

Fig. 5. Model of the capacitive measurement system, adapted from Fig. 3 and
with a focus on the additive artifact a(t).

A. Step 1: Simplification of the Artifact Model Via an LTI
Approximation of the Dynamic Filter

time). In these two cases, the additive artifact is not present:
Vo (t) = s(t)

and estimate them based on the injection signal Vi (t). The three
steps leading to an estimate of a(t) are detailed hereafter.

(7)

and the measurement is affected by the distortions only.
B. Worst-Case Scenario
In practice, the dc voltage Vd across Cc (t) can be hundreds
of millivolts or even several volts, depending mainly on the
amount of static charge on the body surface or on the textile
layers at the body–electrode interface. Since the artifact a(t) is
directly proportional to Vd , in the worst-case scenario, a(t) will
completely mask the measured biopotential (see Fig. 9 for an
illustration) and may even lead to clipping of the system. Suppressing the additive artifact is therefore a more urgent problem
than correcting for the signal distortions.
The impact of a(t) on the biopotential measurement was
simulated and evaluated with the amplitude of a(t) as quality
metric. We find that a Vd value as small as 0.6 mV is already
critical. Indeed, for Vd = 0.6 mV and Cc varying between its
extreme values, a(t) has an amplitude of 0.7 mV peak-to-peak,
which is similar to the one of the R-peaks when measured on
the chest of an adult. In this case, any peak in the motion artifact
could be misinterpreted as an R-peak of the ECG and could
introduce errors in the R-peak detection and related heart rate
computation.
Reducing the additive artifact due to the dc voltage Vd in
combination with motion is the focus of this paper. The goal is to
recover key features of the ECG signal, i.e., the R-peaks, in order
to allow an accurate instantaneous heart rate computation or R–
R-interval time series extraction. When the addictive artifact is
entirely removed, the R-peaks become visible again, although
the signal distortions remain.
VII. ADDITIVE ARTIFACT ESTIMATION AND SUBTRACTION
To reduce the additive artifact a(t), we propose to first estimate it as accurately as possible and then subtract it from
Vo (t). To estimate a(t), we use our model of the capacitive
measurement system. As previously shown in Fig. 3 and in (3),
a(t) is created from an input signal Vd Cc (t) that is dynami1
. By rearranging
cally HP filtered and then scaled by C i +C
c (t)
this succession of events, we obtain the model for a(t) given in
Fig. 5. Since, in practice, the dynamic HP filter as well as the
model parameters are not known, we propose to approximate

We first approximate the time-varying HP filter of Fig. 5 by
an LTI HP filter with impulse response h(t), transfer function
ω
H(jω) = K j+j
ω , and angular cutoff frequency K. In these conditions, the artifact a(t) can be approximated by
a(t) ∼
= ati (t) =

Vd
(Cc (t) ∗ h(t))
Ci + Cc (t)

where ∗ indicates the convolution operation. This expression is
schematically illustrated in Fig. 6.
B. Step 2: Estimation of the Time-Varying Model Parameters
via a Demodulation of the Injection Signal
is not a priori
The time-varying model parameter CCc (t)
i
known. To be able to track it, we inject a known sinusoidal
signal Vi (t) in the system. The voltage Vi (t), when applied
from the sensor ground as in Figs. 1 and 2, is transferred to the
output of the capacitive measurement system according to
1 + Ci Ri jω
Vo (jω)
=
.
Vi (jω)
1 + (Cc + Ci )Ri jω
At sufficiently high frequencies (large ω), this transfer function
reduces to a real-valued gain
Ci
Vo (t)
= g(t) =
.
Vi (t)
Ci + Cc (t)

(8)

In this case, any variation of Cc (t) will instantaneously affect
the contribution of Vi (t) in the output signal Vo (t) via the gain
g(t). We measure g(t) directly by demodulating Vo (t) at the
frequency of Vi (t). A frequency of 1 kHz for Vi (t) is chosen
because, at 1 kHz, the imaginary part of VVoi is less than 0.1% of
its real part (phase shift below 0.3◦ ), so the assumption that the
transfer function VVoi is real holds.
The time-varying gain g(t) as defined in (7) represents one
of the two time-varying parameters in the model of Fig. 6. The
other time-varying parameter is obtained from g(t) according
to
1 − g(t)
Cc (t)
.
=
Ci
g(t)

(9)

With the use of the injection signal, the scheme for the artifact
approximation given in Fig. 6 is adapted as in Fig. 7.

SERTEYN et al.: MOTION ARTIFACTS IN CAPACITIVE ECG MEASUREMENTS

269

optimization more efficient. The choice of the block length is
discussed in Section VIII-B.
VIII. Vd ESTIMATE
Fig. 7. Approximation of the additive artifact. Step 2: the time-varying parameters of the model are estimated, as in (7) and (8), using the amplitude
modulation g(t) of the 1-kHz injection signal V i (t).

Our AR scheme provides, as by-product, an estimate for the
dc voltage Vd .
A. Time Variations of Vd
The dc voltage Vd models, among other things, the static
charge across the coupling capacitor Cc . In real measurements,
this voltage may, on the one hand, drift over time due to a slow
discharge of the static charge on the body and, on the other hand,
vary in an unknown manner with motion or friction at the body–
electrode interface because of the triboelectric effect. From the
equivalent circuit in Fig. 2, we see that Vd and the ECG signal
Vb (t) cannot be distinguished as soon as their frequency band
overlap. The voltage Vd can thus be allowed to vary up to 0.5 Hz
in case we are interested in the full ECG shape (Vb ∈ [0.5 40]
Hz) and up to 10 Hz in case we are interested in the R-peaks for
instantaneous heart rate computation [25].
B. Choice of Window Length for the Parameters Estimation

Fig. 8. Identification scheme for the reduction of the additive artifact. An
estimate ã(t) + D̃ for a(t) + D is provided and then subtracted from V o (t).
The computation of ã(t) is based on an LTI approximation, an injection signal,
and a block least-squares parameters estimation.

C. Step 3: Estimation of the Constant Model Parameters via a
Block Least-Squares Minimization
The constant (or slowly varying) model parameter Vd as well
as the time-invariant cutoff frequency K of the filter H(jω)
remain to be estimated. In practice, an offset D is also present
in Vo (t) due to offsets of the operational amplifier and must also
be estimated.
We want to estimate the scaling factor Vd , the parameter
K, and the offset D such that they provide the least-squares
is
estimate ã(t) + D̃ of a(t) + D. If the motion signal CCc (t)
i
uncorrelated with the signal of interest s(t), the least-squares
estimate is obtained when the power of the error e(t) = s(t) +
a(t) + D − ã(t) − D̃ is minimal. The process is represented by
the parameters estimation box in Fig. 8.
The parameters estimation is performed by a block leastsquares minimization. Since e(t) depends linearly on Ṽd and
D̃, the optimum values of Ṽd and D̃ can be computed directly
by setting the partial derivatives of the power of e(t) to zero
and solving the system of two equations with two unknowns.
Regarding the parameter K, all values ranging from 1.8 rad [for
Cc = 8 pF in (5)] to 6 rad (for Cc = 0.5 pF) are tested. For
each different value of K̃, the parameter estimates Ṽd and D̃
are recomputed. The set of parameters minimizing the power of
e(t) is selected. Since the power of e(t) as a function of K is
observed to be convex, a simple gradient descent algorithm can
be used instead of scanning through all K values to make the

The parameters Vd , D, and K are estimated via a block leastsquares approach. The block, or window, is sliding in steps of
0.1 s to provide a smooth estimate of the parameters. The final
estimates of a(t) and s(t) are taken at the center of the window
resulting in a latency of half the window length (WL).
The WL should be small enough such that the estimation
scheme can track variations of the parameters, e.g., a drift in
Vd or a change of body position affecting the mean value of
Cc and therefore K. The WL should also be large enough such
that it does not track and suppress the variations of the signal
of interest, i.e., the ECG represented by s(t) in Fig. 8. The WL
should thus be larger than the smallest period in the ECG, that is
2 s if the frequency band is [0.5 40] Hz and 0.1 s if the frequency
band is reduced to [10 30] Hz for R-peak detection. We chose
here a WL of 2 s. The parameters can be tracked if they vary
with a period well beyond the WL, e.g., Vd can vary up to about
0.1 Hz for a window of 2 s and up to about 2 Hz for a window
of 0.1 s. The tradeoff regarding the WL is
0.5
1
< WL <
.
min freq of ECG
max freq of Vd
A proper Vd estimation and tracking can only be done when
there is motion at the body–electrode interface, that is when
Cc varies at frequencies higher than those of Vd . In static or
slowly varying conditions, both the motion Cc and the voltage
Vd are out of the ECG band and do not impact the biopotential
measurement.
C. Alternative Artifact Reduction Using a Feedback Loop
The Vd value, when estimated in real time, can be subtracted
at the input of the amplifier of the capacitive sensor (see Fig. 1).
As a result, the voltage across the coupling capacitor is reduced
together with the amplitude of a(t). The output signal becomes

270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 9. Example of AR on simulated data. From top to bottom: the variations
of the coupling capacitance C c (t); the corrupted signal V o (t) at the output of
the capacitive measurement system for V d = 5 mV; the processed signal after
AR e(t); and the gold standard s(t), which is the output signal in the absence
of additive artifact.

Vo

fb (t)

= s(t) + afb (t), where
afb (t) =

 t
dCc
Vd − V˜d
f (t, u) du.
Ci + Cc (t) −∞ du

This idea of using a feedback loop to reduce the dc voltage
across Cc and the related artifact was proposed earlier in [26].
This method of Vd compensation prevents clipping of the system
and acts directly at the source of the artifact. In this feedback
scheme, the estimate of Vd should be taken at the end of the
sliding window resulting in a slightly less accurate estimate but
no loop latency that would hamper tracking.
IX. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Artifact Reduction on Simulated Data
A chirp motion is chosen to illustrate the performance of
our AR method over the whole range of motion frequencies
([0 20] Hz). Some step motion is also simulated to evaluate
our method in extreme conditions (first graph of Fig. 9). The
output signal Vo (t) (second graph of Fig. 9) is so corrupted by
the motion artifact that the R-peaks of the ECG are no longer
visible. After AR with a 2-s processing window, the ECG signal
and its characteristic R-peaks become clearly visible as shown
in the third graph of Fig. 9. If our method would work perfectly
and thus would entirely remove the additive artifact from Vo (t),
we would obtain the signal s(t) in the last graph of Fig. 9. This
signal only contains distortions due to variations of Cc (t) and
reducing the signal distortions is not the focus of this paper. The
signal s(t) is thus our gold standard. In this specific example, the
Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the gold standard s(t)
and our processed signal e(t) equals 0.72 due to a remaining
additive artifact, especially marked for low-frequency motion.
B. Performance Evaluation
To quantify our method’s performance, we compute the
signal-to-artifact ratio (S/A) before and after applying our AR
method. The difference between these two S/A in dB determines

Fig. 10. AR on simulated data as a function of the frequency of the motion
C c (t) and the dc voltage V d . The S/A before and after AR is represented by the
dashed and solid lines, respectively. In (a), V d = 5 mV. In (b), C c (t) varies at
10 Hz.

the amount of AR. The S/A as defined here compares the root
mean square (RMS) amplitude of the artifact with the average
amplitude of an R-peak in the signal of interest s(t):
 mean(Rpeak amplitude) 
.
S/A = 20 log
RMS(artifact amplitude)
An S/A lower than 0 dB means that the mean artifact amplitude
is higher than the one of the R-peaks. An S/A higher than 6 dB is
expected to allow a proper R-peak detection since the amplitude
of the R-peak will be, in average, twice the one of the artifact.
As for the ECG shape, the lowest acceptable S/A depends on
the application.
We study our method’s performance for different artifact amplitudes and frequency contents. The amplitude of the artifact
is directly proportional to Vd , and the frequency content of the
artifact is closely related to the frequency content of Cc (t). We
thus evaluate our method by making the parameters Vd and
Cc (t) vary between their extreme limit values (as defined in
Table I) and computing the S/A before and after AR. Two resulting graphs are shown in Fig. 10. The first one indicates
the influence of the motion frequency on our method’s performance when Vd equals 5 mV. The second graph indicates the
performance as a function of the artifact amplitude for Cc (t)
oscillating between 0.5 and 8 pF at a fixed frequency of 10 Hz.
In both graphs, the S/A before and after AR is represented by
the dashed and solid lines, respectively. An AR up to 47 dB
is possible, depending on the conditions. For Vd = 5 mV and
Cc (t) varying at 10 Hz, our method provides an AR of 39 dB.
Fig. 10(a) shows that the amount of AR increases with the
frequency of the artifact. This effect appears to come from the
LTI approximation of the dynamic filter: the LTI filter makes
a frequency-dependent phase-shift error that decreases with increasing frequency. In this figure, we can also see that the artifact
amplitude before AR (dashed line) is attenuated at frequencies
below 1 Hz due to the HP characteristic of the capacitive sensor.
Fig. 10(b) shows that the amount of AR increases with the
amplitude of the artifact and becomes constant for high amplitude artifacts. The limitation for small artifact amplitudes is due
to the influence of the signal s(t) in the parameters estimation
loop. Indeed, for small artifact amplitudes, the amplitude of s(t)

SERTEYN et al.: MOTION ARTIFACTS IN CAPACITIVE ECG MEASUREMENTS

271

Fig. 11. Lab data acquisition setup. The metal plate and the shaker represent,
respectively, the body surface and the body motion. The metal plate is coupled
to the capacitive sensor via an air gap. A known 1-kHz signal V i (t), injected
from the sensor ground terminal, is used to track the distance variations between
the metal plate and the capacitive sensor.

becomes significant, and since s(t) is not a white signal, the estimate ã(t) of the artifact a(t) in Fig. 8 is not optimal, leading
to a remaining additive artifact in e(t). As for the constant AR,
it implies an estimation error that increases linearly with the
artifact amplitude. This effect comes from the phase-shift error
of the LTI filter that results in a shift between a(t) and ã(t)
and thus in an estimation error a(t) − ã(t) that is proportional
to the amplitude of a(t). A 10-Hz motion was chosen as study
case because it represents the lowest, hence the most difficult,
frequency to be removed when the goal is R-peak detection
only. It appears from Fig. 10(b) that a proper R-peak detection
(S/A > 6 dB) is possible with initial artifacts having an S/A of
−35 dB or more before AR, i.e., artifacts’ amplitudes up to 56
times bigger than the R-peak amplitude.

Fig. 12. Example of AR on lab data for a chirp motion. The R-peaks of the
ECG signal are masked by the artifact in V o (t). After AR with a 2-s window,
the R-peaks become detectable in e(t).

C. Vd Estimate
The Vd estimate is a by-product of our AR scheme. It is
estimated automatically during the artifact estimation process.
The accuracy of the Vd estimate is regarded here for its potential
use in a feedback loop as described in Section VIII-C or in a
reconstruction scheme as in [13]. The Vd estimate accuracy has
been observed to increase with the frequency of the artifact. In
the extreme case when there is no motion, i.e., at 0 Hz, there is
no additive artifact, and Vd cannot be estimated as discussed in
Section VIII-B. This suggests that an accurate and continuous
Vd estimation, and thus compensation in a feedback loop, would
be optimal in the presence of high-frequency vibrations at the
body–electrode interface. A vibrating probe could be used to
provide a continuous and subtle high-frequency variation of
Cc (t) out of the ECG band [26].
D. Artifact Reduction on Lab Data
A lab experiment is set up as described in Fig. 11 to validate
our AR method experimentally. A periodic artificial ECG signal
Vb (t) is applied on a metal plate. This plate and the electrode of
the capacitive sensor are separated by an air gap and form the
coupling capacitor Cc . Variations of Cc (t) are generated by a
shaker modulating the distance between the metal plate and the
sensor. The values of the system parameters (Ri , Ci , Cc , and
Vd ) are unknown. The output signal Vo is sampled at 8 kHz and
filtered with a 40-Hz low-pass Butterworth filter.
To compare our lab results with our simulation results, a chirp
motion covering the full ECG frequency range is generated by
the shaker. Since the exact capacitance Cc (t) is unknown, the

Fig. 13. Example of AR on lab data for a random motion. A 2-s processing
window gives e1 (t) and a 0.2-s window gives e2 (t).

signal g(t), which is the amplitude modulation of the injection
signal as defined in (7), is chosen to illustrate the amount of
capacitance changes in Fig. 12. The resulting signals before
and after AR, Vo (t) and e(t), are also shown in Fig. 12. The
artifact amplitude is in average reduced by 29 dB, which is
consistent with our simulation results in Fig. 10. This degree
of suppression can also be directly compared to our results
obtained in [22] where a reduction of 20 dB was achieved on the
same dataset.
Fig. 13 shows the AR performance for a random motion.
The capacitance changes at the body–electrode interface, whose
amount is represented by g(t), lead to the corrupted output signal
Vo (t). From this signal, processing windows of 2 and 0.2 s are
used to obtain e1 (t) and e2 (t). In static conditions, at seconds 5
and 18, the shape of the ECG is not altered in e1 (t), as guaranteed
by the 2-s WL discussed in Section VIII-B. At seconds 10 to 15,
the high-frequency artifact is largely reduced, and the R-peaks
become detectable again in both e1 (t) and e2 (t). At seconds
23 to 26, the low-frequency artifacts were reduced by some
9 dB in e1 (t) but not entirely removed. In e2 (t), we observe the
HP effect obtained when choosing a short processing window
of 0.2 s.

272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 14. Real-life data acquisition setup. The electrode is capacitively coupled
to the body via the combination of an air gap and a cotton layer. The conductive
foam is connected to the system active guard.

E. Artifact Reduction on Real-Life Data
The method is also tested in real-life conditions. A unipolar
ECG is measured on the chest of a male adult. The right wrist
is connected to the system ground via a 100-kΩ resistance for
safety. A voltage Vi (t) of 1 V peak-to-peak and 1 kHz is applied
on the sensor side. In this way, the maximum current that could
flow through the patient’s body in case of a malfunctioning
sensor is limited to a safe 10 μA. The choice for the amplitude
of Vi (t) results from a tradeoff between the patient safety and
a high signal-to-noise ratio in g(t). The patient is wearing a
tight-fitting cotton T-shirt of about 1-mm thickness. The sensor
is positioned under the left nipple and maintained against the
chest by an elastic strap. A ring of conductive foam, connected to
the sensor active guard, surrounds the sensor and makes contact
with the body via the cotton layer as illustrated in Fig. 14. The
motion artifact is created by manually and repeatedly pressing
the sensor against the patient’s body.
An example of a resulting recording is shown in Fig. 15.
The R-peaks of the ECG can be seen in Vo (t) at seconds 2 to
8 when there is no motion. Our method provides an estimate
Ṽd for the dc voltage only when there are sufficient changes of
the coupling capacitance, i.e., Ṽd is not given when there is no
artifact, as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 15. Consequently,
Ṽd can be used directly to identify the signal segments corrupted
by the motion artifact. After processing Vo (t) with a 2-s window,
the artifact is reduced in e(t) by some 18 dB at second 11 but a
transient remains at second 8.5. In average, the RMS amplitude
of the artifact is reduced by 9 dB. Despite a strong amplitude
reduction, the artifact is not entirely removed, and the R-peaks
do not become clearly visible.
A first reason for the remaining artifact is that the proposed
method is based on a simplified model of the system and has
its own limits, especially for low-frequency and low-amplitude
artifacts as discussed previously in Section IX-B. A second reason is that, due to the thermal noise present in the measurement
system, the signal-to-noise-ratio of g(t) is limited (tiny amplitude variations of Cc (t) cannot be tracked accurately), which
leads to a noisy artifact estimate. Finally, it is highly probable that the artifact in this real-life recording originates, in part,
from the other two main sources of artifact which are mentioned
in Section II-B and which are outside the scope of this paper.
Indeed, the remaining artifact could be partially due to tiny currents (fast variations of Vd ) created by the triboelectric effect
at the skin–cotton interface. Also, the remaining artifact, and
particularly the transient observed at second 8.5, can be due to
the electromagnetic interference created by the motion of the
hand (needed to repeatedly apply pressure on the sensor) in the
vicinity of the sensor.

Fig. 15. Example of AR on the ECG recorded from a human chest. g(t)
indicates the amount of capacitance changes at the body–electrode interface.
V o (t) is the recorded ECG. After processing with a 2-s window, a cleaner ECG
e(t) and a dc voltage estimate Ṽ d are obtained.

X. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We developed a method to reduce motion artifacts generated by the combination of body–electrode capacitance variations and a dc voltage across the body–electrode interface. The
method is based on an injection signal, a model of the system,
and an identification scheme.
When the body–electrode interface is an air gap, any variation of the charged coupling capacitance generates two problems
simultaneously: a distortion of the measured signal and an additive artifact. The additive artifact tends to be very large and
must be dealt with, while the distortion tends to be modest and
will not hamper R-peak detection. We showed that an injection
signal can be used as a basis to estimate the additive artifact and
that a strong AR can be achieved in simulation as well as in a
lab setup.
Although the method was designed for an air gap as body–
electrode interface, we showed that our method also works to
a certain extent in real-life conditions with a cotton layer as
body–electrode interface. In these conditions, static charges are
generated during motion due to rubbing of the fabric against the
skin (triboelectric effect). In cases where the artifact under study
(microphonics) dominates the triboelectric artifact, as expected
in applications where the sensors are embedded in a seat or
medical device [4] and more or less pressed against the body,
our proposed scheme can accurately estimate a significant part
of the artifact. In cases where the triboelectric artifact dominates,

SERTEYN et al.: MOTION ARTIFACTS IN CAPACITIVE ECG MEASUREMENTS

as expected in ambulatory scenarios and for sensors embedded
in clothing, Vd will change over time at frequencies that might
be in the ECG band. When there are sufficiently high-frequent
changes of the coupling capacitance, our method allows to track
Vd (t) and can hence be used for future studies on the origin and
effect of triboelectricity in capacitive measurements. The value
of array processing techniques for reducing both microphonic
and triboelectric artifacts in an array of capacitive sensors will
also be part of future studies.
We showed that the artifact under study is proportional to
the dc voltage Vd . Therefore, limiting Vd , e.g., by a proper
choice of material at the body–electrode interface [9], an active
driven grid allowing a faster discharge [9] and/or a Vd compensation scheme, will always help in reducing motion artifacts.
We showed also that our method can be used to localize, automatically and in an online manner, motion artifacts in real-life
ECG measurements, which is a very practical step toward more
reliable capacitive ECG measurements.
Besides AR and artifact localization, our method provides
knowledge of the model parameters such as the variations of
C c (t)
C i and the dc voltage Vd . The combination of our parameter
estimation scheme with the inverse system equations of Heuer
et al. [13] could be used not only to remove the additive artifact
but also to correct for signal distortions, leading to a high-fidelity
ECG reconstruction.
In summary, this paper provides a comprehensive study on
distortions, microphonics, and the impact of static charges in
capacitive ECG measurement, which is a great step toward a
better understanding of the origins of motion artifacts in capacitive recordings as well as the challenges and opportunities
related to their removal.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank G. Janssen, N. Lambert, and
A. Fazzi for their precious insights.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Richardson, “The insulated electrode: A pasteless electrocardiographic
technique,” in Proc. 20th Annu. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol., 1967, vol. 9, p.
15.7.
[2] Y. G. Lim, K. K. Kim, and K. S. Park, “ECG recording on a bed during
sleep without direct skin-contact,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54,
no. 4, pp. 718–725, Apr. 2007.
[3] M. Walter, B. Eilebrecht, T. Wartzek, and S. Leonhardt, “The smart car
seat: personalized monitoring of vital signs in automotive applications,”
Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 707–715, 2011.
[4] M. Weil, M. Oehler, M. Schilling, and L. Maier, “First clinical evaluation of a novel capacitive ECG system in patients with acute myocardial
infarction,” Clinical Res. Cardiol., vol. 101, pp. 165–174, 2012.
[5] M. Czaplik, B. Eilebrecht, R. Walocha, M. Walter, P. Schauerte,
S. Leonhardt, and R. Rossaint, “The reliability and accuracy of a noncontact electrocardiograph system for screening purposes,” Anesthesia
Analgesia, vol. 114, no. 2, pp. 322–327, 2012.
[6] Y. Chi, T.-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact
biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 3, pp. 106–119, Oct. 2010.

273

[7] E. Spinelli and M. Haberman, “Insulating electrodes: A review on biopotential front ends for dielectric skin-electrode interfaces,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 31, no. 10, p. S183, 2010.
[8] H. Prance, “Sensor developments for electrophysiological monitoring in
healthcare,” Appl. Biomed. Eng., 2011.
[9] T. Wartzek, T. Lammersen, B. Eilebrecht, M. Walter, and S. Leonhardt,
“Triboelectricity in capacitive biopotential measurements,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1268–1277, May 2011.
[10] J. Webster, “Interference and motion artifact in biopotentials,” in Proc.
IEEE Region 6th Conf. Rec., May 1977, pp. 53–64.
[11] O. Casas and R. Pallas-Areny, “Electrostatic interference in contactless
biopotential measurements,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc.,, 2007, pp. 2655 –2658.
[12] J. Ottenbacher and S. Heuer, “Motion artefacts in capacitively coupled
ECG electrodes,” in Proc. World Congr. Med. Phys. Biomed. Eng., 2010,
vol. 25/4, pp. 1059–1062.
[13] S. Heuer, D. Martinez, S. Fuhrhop, and J. Ottenbacher, “Motion artefact
correction for capacitive ECG measurement,” in Proc. Biomed. Circuits
Syst. Conf., 2009, pp. 113–116.
[14] B. Eilebrecht, T. Wartzek, J. Willkomm, A. Schommartz, M. Walter, and
S. Leonhardt, “Motion artifact removal from capacitive ECG measurements by means of adaptive filtering,” in Proc. 5th Eur. Conf. Int. Fed.
Med. Biol. Eng., 2012, vol. 37, pp. 902–905.
[15] B. Yin, M. Meftah, and T. J. Ikkink, “Compensation of motion artifacts
in capacitive measurement of electrophysiological signals,” U.S. Patent
20 110 137 200, 2011.
[16] K. Mueller, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, and M. Schilling, “Sensor system and methods for the capacitive measurement of electromagnetic signals having a biological origin,” U.S. Patent 8 193 821,
2012.
[17] D. Buxi, S. Kim, N. Van Helleputte, M. Altini, J. Wijsman, R. Yazicioglu,
J. Penders, and C. Van Hoof, “Correlation between electrode-tissue
impedance and motion artifact in biopotential recordings,” IEEE Sens.
J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 3373 –3383, Dec. 2012.
[18] T. Wartzek, H. Weber, M. Walter, B. Eilebrecht, and S. Leonhardt, “Automatic electrode selection in unobtrusive capacitive ECG measurements,”
in Proc. IEEE Comput.-Based Med. Syst., 2012, pp. 1–4.
[19] P. Luna-Lozano and R. Pallas-Areny, “Microphonics in biopotential measurements with capacitive electrodes,” in Proc. 32th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3487–3490.
[20] S. Heuer, S. Chiriac, M. Kirst, A. Gharbi, and W. Stork, “Signal quality
assessment for capacitive ECG monitoring systems using body-sensorimpedance,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Bioinspired Syst. Signal Process., 2011,
pp. 454–458.
[21] B. Eilebrecht, J. Willkomm, A. Pohl, T. Wartzek, and S. Leonhardt,
“Impedance measurement system for determination of capacitive electrode coupling,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 5,
pp. 682–689, Oct. 2013.
[22] A. Serteyn, R. Vullings, M. Meftah, and J. W. M. Bergmans, “Using an
injection signal to reduce motion artifacts in capacitive ECG measurements,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 4795–4798.
[23] T. Apostol, Calculus, vol. 1: One-Variable Calculus with An Introduction
to Linear Algebra. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1967.
[24] E. Spinelli, M. Haberman, P. Garca, and F. Guerrero, “A capacitive electrode with fast recovery feature,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 33, no. 8, p. 1277,
2012.
[25] S. Abboud and D. Sadeh, “Spectral analysis of the fetal electrocardiogram,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 409–415, 1989.
[26] J. Veen, M. Meftah, N. Lambert, B. M. De Boer, B. Feddes, L. Gourmelon,
R. Rietman, and S. A. Husen, “Electro-physiological measurement with
reduced motion artifacts,” U.S. Patent 20 120 116 198, 2012.

Authors’, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

