248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

High-Resolution Mesoscopic Fluorescence Molecular
Tomography Based on Compressive Sensing
Fugang Yang, Member, IEEE, Mehmet S. Ozturk, Lingling Zhao, Wenxiang Cong, Ge Wang, Fellow, IEEE,
and Xavier Intes∗

Abstract—Mesoscopic fluorescence molecular tomography
(MFMT) is new imaging modality aiming at 3-D imaging of molecular probes in a few millimeter thick biological samples with
high-spatial resolution. In this paper, we develop a compressive
sensing-based reconstruction method with l1 -norm regularization
for MFMT with the goal of improving spatial resolution and stability of the optical inverse problem. Three-dimensional numerical
simulations of anatomically accurate microvasculature and real
data obtained from phantom experiments are employed to evaluate the merits of the proposed method. Experimental results show
that the proposed method can achieve 80 μm spatial resolution for
a biological sample of 3 mm thickness and more accurate quantifications of concentrations and locations for the fluorophore distribution than those of the conventional methods.
Index Terms—Bioprinting, compressive sensing (CS), fluorescence imaging, image reconstruction, laminar optical tomography
(LOT), l1 -norm regularization, mesoscopic fluorescence molecular
tomography (MFMT), molecular imaging, Monte Carlo (MC).

I. INTRODUCTION
ESOSCOPIC fluorescence molecular tomography
(MFMT), also known as laminar optical tomography
(LOT), has been developed to perform depth-resolved functional and molecular imaging at the spatial junction between
microscopic and macroscopic imaging. This novel optical imaging modality that operates in the mesoscopic regime combines
the advantages of diffuse optical tomography (DOT) image reconstruction and a microscopy-based setup to allow noncontact
imaging of large areas. MFMT (or LOT) is a subsurface imaging technique that relies on an optical inverse problem to generate depth-resolved 3-D images of highly scattering tissues at

M

Manuscript received January 7, 2014; revised May 15, 2014 and July 22,
2014; accepted July 31, 2014. Date of publication August 15, 2014; date of
current version December 18, 2014. This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation under Grant CBET-1263455, International Cooperation Program for Excellent Lectures of 2011 by SDPED, Project of Shandong
Province Higher Educational Science and Technology Program under Grants
J13LN06, Postdoctoral Science Foundation of Shandong Province under Grant
201203016, and National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants
61173173 and 61272430. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
F. Yang is with the Shandong Institute of Business and Technology, Yantai
264005, China, and is also with the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: drfelixyoung@
gmail.com).
M. S. Ozturk, L. Zhao, W. Cong, and G. Wang are with the Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180,
USA (e-mail: linglingzhao0121@gmail.com; congw@rip.edu; wangg@rpi.
edu).
∗ X. Intes is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: intesx@rpi.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2347284

depths of several millimeters and with high sensitivity [1]–[3].
Although MFMT can achieve reconstructions with higher resolution compared to DOT, it still faces the same challenges as
DOT, such as, recovering the depth and size of the biomarkers
with accuracy. In MFMT, the number of measurements available
is often much smaller than the number of unknown 3-D image
elements, which may result in the nonuniqueness of the solution. Moreover, the inverse solution may be more unstable when
higher resolution performances are sought (high frequencies in
the image space). As in all ill-conditioned diffusion-based inverse problem, the noise in the measurements data may induce
large artifacts in the reconstructed image. Furthermore, it becomes harder to obtain accurate reconstructions of fluorophore
biodistribution at deeper locations due to exponential decay of
light intensities with depth and limited volume probed in reflectance geometry [4].
Recently, the emerging field of compressive sensing (CS)
has shown that sparse signals, which have a small number of
nonzero entries, can be recovered from far fewer samples or
measurements than those required by the traditional Shannon–
Nyquist sampling theorem. The CS theory has been generalized
to recover sparse signals in general bases from limited number
of measurement data. The CS framework has been utilized to
solve the inverse problems of optical tomography [5]. For fluorescence tomographic imaging, it has been reported that sparse
fluorophore concentration can be reconstructed by solving an l1 norm constraint optimization problem. Alternative optimization
methods proposed in [6] and [7] are shown to offer improved
performance relative to l1 -norm. It is demonstrated in these
contributions that more accurate signal reconstruction can be
achieved by solving an l1 -norm-based minimization problem.
However, reconstruction algorithms selection is highly problem dependent. To our knowledge, CS-based reconstruction
methods have not yet been applied to optical tomography in the
mesoscopic regime. In this paper, we propose a CS-based reconstruction method to solve the optical inverse problem in MFMT.
In such applications, the fluorophore distribution is often concentrated within a small spatial region, where the fluorophore
concentrations have large amplitudes, whereas in the background region, the fluorophore concentrations are nonexistent
or close to zero. In this case, the objective function is extremely
sparse in the imaging domain, and, hence, very amenable to CS
methods. Herein, the proposed method introduces an l1 -norm
regularization to constrain the solution to a sparsity subspace,
suppressing the background noise, and expressing the true distributions of fluorophore concentrations, allowing for an accurate
and stable image formation process. We apply this CS-based

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YANG et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION MESOSCOPIC FLUORESCENCE MOLECULAR TOMOGRAPHY BASED ON COMPRESSIVE SENSING

reconstruction approach to an in silico vascular bed phantom and
real multimodal experimental data. In the following section, we
describe our MFMT imaging system and image reconstruction
algorithm. In the third section, we report our realistic numerical simulation results and physical phantom experiments with
microCT coregistration. In the last section, we discuss relevant
issues and conclude this paper.

249

We provide briefly the main salient points of this formulation
later.
The 3-D distribution of the fluorophore’s effective quantum
yield η(r) can be obtained by solving an integral equation relating the fluorescence signals at time t and η(r):

W (rs , rd , r, t)η(r)dr
(1)
UF (rs , rd , t) =
Ω

II. METHOD
A. Imaging Platform
Herein, we employed an MFMT imaging system that has
been reported in detail in [3] and used to image bioprinted tissues [8] and to retrieve the 3-D distribution of a photosensitizer
in skin cancer prior to PDT treatment [9]. Briefly, the system
is an ultrafast multiwavelength MFMT platform using raster
scanning of a laser beam and descanned detection of the optical signals by seven offset detectors. The system acquires data
over a maximum imaging area of 8 mm × 5.5 mm at 7.5 Hz
(<150 ms/frame) in reflectance geometry. The laser beam is
raster scanned using a resonant galvo mirror for ultrafast acquisitions. The fluorescence backscattered signal is imaged on a
4 × 8 avalanche photodiode detector array (S8550, Hamamatsu)
from which seven elements are employed. The detectors are
evenly linearly distributed from 800 to 3900 μm away from the
source. The total number of measurements acquired is dependent on the imaged area and is 107 520 measurements (15 360
different positions ×7 detectors measurements for each source
position) for the maximum imaging area.
B. Monte Carlo (MC)-Based Inverse Problem
To implement image reconstruction of fluorophore distribution, a numerical model is required to simulate photon propagation in the biological sample. The diffusion approximation (DA)
with Robin-type boundary condition [10] is the most widely
used as a photon propagation model because of its high computational efficiency. However, it is well established that it only
works well in weakly absorbing and highly scattering media
and breaks down at near sources and across boundaries. So, the
DA model is not suitable to simulate photon propagation in the
mesoscopic regime. The MC is the gold standard to simulate
light propagation in turbid media as it can accurately simulate
photon propagation without the aforementioned limitations of
the DA. With the development of a high performance computing
technique, MC simulation in a graphics processing unit (GPU)
environment can be 1000 times faster than those performed on
a single standard central processing unit (CPU) [11], [12], enabling the use of MC techniques for DOT on a personal computer
[13], [14]. Herein, a GPU-based MC code has been employed
to compute the forward problem using an adjoint formulation
for computational efficiency (a few minutes) [15]. This code is
also employed to generate the in silico phantom experiments. In
all computations herein, 106 photons were employed for good
statistical sampling of the volume imaged at all optodes spacing. To simulate fluorescence light emission in diffuse medium
using MC, we follow the formulation described in detail in [13].

where UF (rs , rd , t) is the fluorescence detected by a detector
located at rd at t resulting from an excitation at the source rs at
t0 = 0, the integration domain Ω is defined as the entire imaging
volume, and W (rs , rd , r, t), referred to as the weight function
or Jacobian, describes how sensitive a change in η(r) will result
in a change in UF (rs , rd , t). There are a few MC-based methods to calculate W. Herein, we employed the forward-adjoint
MC method to produce Jacobians [15] for computational efficiency. In the method, W is computed by convolving the Green’s
functions and the lifetime decay of fluorophore:
 t
t
t −t 
e− τ dt ∫ Gx (rs , r, t − t )
W (rs , rd , r, t) =
0

0

∗G (r, rd , t )dt
m



(2)

where Gx and Gm are the time-dependent Green’s functions
calculated by MC simulations at excitation and emission wavelength, respectively [10], and τ is the lifetime of the fluorophore.
As customary done in FMT and MFMT, the optical properties
at the excitation and emission wavelengths are considered similar herein. Moreover, as our datasets are time independent, the
formulation of (2) is integrated over time to match our data type.
The system of linear equations representing the measurements
detected at different positions and time can then be solved to
obtain η(r).
In practices, (2) should be discretized to perform numerical computation. First, the ROI Ω is discretized into voxels (or
tetrahedrons). The size of cubic element is related to the spatial
resolution of image reconstruction. Each element ei is a potential source of fluorescence, which is linearly related to the fluorophore’s effective quantum yield η(r). By tracing excitation and
fluorescence photon propagation in the sample using MC, we
can compute a system matrix A (also called sensitivity matrix or
Jacobian) to describe the relation between the fluorophore effective quantum yield in every 3-D image element (e1 , e2 , . . . , en )
and measurement data. The linear equation system describing
the relationship between measured photon numbers for each
optode combination and the fluorophore bio-distribution is then
Y = AX + v

(3)

where Y is a vector of the photon fluence rate with noise v
measured at each detector element for each scanning position,
X a vector of unknown fluorophore concentration at each voxel
element, and A is the Jacobian. The task of MFMT consists in
reconstructing the unknown fluorophore parameter distribution
X based on the linear equation system (3) from the measured
data Y.
A is generated for a chosen measurement setup following the
formulation provided in [16]. Herein, all parameters, such as

250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

assigned optical parameters, the position and separation of light
source and detectors, source radius, width of the detector spot
detection, mimic our current LOT optical system [3] applied to
vascular bioprinted tissue imaging [8]. For our in silico experiments, based on simulated local distribution of fluorophores, we
can generate measurement data Y via MC simulations. Noise
can be added post hoc to the generated measurements to replicate specific acquisition settings. Herein, we employ a white
Gaussian noise and define the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as
follows:

(s2 + s22 + . . . + s2m )/m
(4)
SNR =  21
(n1 + n22 + . . . + n2m )/m
where s1 , s2 , . . . , sm and n1 , n2 , . . . , nm are the entries of measurements matrix and additional noise, respectively. m is the
number of measurements.
C. CS-Based Reconstruction
The key concept behind CS-based reconstructions is to exploit
the prior knowledge that a large number of the unknown coefficients are close to or equal to zero (sparse and compressible). In
optical molecular imaging applications, fluorophore probes are
often engineered to specifically target cells/receptors of a preferred type and accumulate locally, forming a focal distribution
of fluorophore concentrations. Hence, in such applications in
which the image space is populated by relatively few significant
pixels with nonzero values in image space, the CS-framework
provides enhanced reconstruction performances [17], [18]. Besides sparsity in the image space, it is required that the CS matrix
fulfils the incoherence property and that the reconstruction be
performed via a solver that enhances sparsity, such as the l1 norm. To demonstrate the incoherence property of our problem,
we employed the same methodology as described in [17].
If the transform point spread function is a natural tool to
measure incoherence [19], it is hard to judge the incoherence
when most of the inner products are tiny. Here, we employed
the cumulative coherence function (CCF) to evaluate coherence
between the transformation matrix T and Jacobian matrix A:

Ak Tj
(5)
CCF (m) = max maxΩ
k

where m denotes the order of the CCF and Ω is the set of
all possible subsets of m columns selected from the Jacobian.
Furthermore, k ranges over a specific subset of Ω at a given
order and j defines columns of the transformation matrix for
all possible subsets. It has been shown that a slowly increasing
CCF versus order m signifies incoherence [17]. The CCF of
the CS matrix (AT) of the Jacobian and transformation basis
(Fourier basis) was calculated for an order of up to 16. The
slowly increasing trend of CCF curve, shown in Fig. 1, confirms
the incoherence property of the CS matrix AT [17].
For the reconstruction of sparse objective function, CS techniques can achieve high-quality image reconstruction from far
fewer measurements than that required by Nyquist sampling.
As one type of CS-based reconstruction strategy, the l0 -norm
regularization can ensure sparsest image reconstruction. The re-

Fig. 1. CCF between Jacobian (A) and the discrete Fourier transform (T) for
several orders (m = 1 − 16).

stricted isometry property can guarantee the equivalence of the
solutions from the l1 and l0 minimization procedures. However,
the l0 -minimization is an NP (non-deterministic polynomial)hard problem that is almost impossible to solve. Thankfully, the
l1 norm, which is a quantitative index to measure the sparsity of
a signal, is a convex function which approximates the l0 norm
well [20]–[24]. Hence, we can formulate the inverse problem as
the following linearly constrained minimization:
min||AX − Y||22 + λ||X||1

(6)

where the variable is X ∈ Rn , A ∈ Rm ×n , and Y ∈ Rm , and
m and n are the number of measurements and unknowns, respectively. λ is a regularization parameter with the l1 -norm solution giving preference to a sparse spatial distribution. The
l1 -regularized problem (6) can be transformed to a convex
quadratic program, with linear inequality constraints,
n
min||AX − Y||22 +
λui
i=1

subject to − ui ≤ xi ≤ ui i = 1, 2, . . . , n,

(7)

where the variable u ∈ Rn .
The objective function of optimization (6) is convex but not
differentiable. This problem can be transformed to an unconstraint optimization using interior-point methods. The preconditioned conjugate gradients (CG) algorithm is used to compute
the search direction for the truncated Newton iterations to solve
this optimization problem [25].
D. Objective Quantitative Performance Measure
In this investigation, besides subjective assessment of the performances of the CS approach based on visual inspection, we
also employed a quantitative metric for objective evaluation.
We first evaluated the mean square error (MSE) between the
real fluorophore yield and the reconstructed image over the entire image domain [4]–[6]. Let Xtrue = {xitrue |i = 1, 2, . . . , k}
and Xrecon = {xirecon |i = 1, 2, . . . , k} be the original and reconstruction signal, respectively. The proposed quality index is
defined as follows:
k
||Xtrue − Xrecon ||2
.
(8)
SM SE =
i=1 total voxels of reconstruction

YANG et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION MESOSCOPIC FLUORESCENCE MOLECULAR TOMOGRAPHY BASED ON COMPRESSIVE SENSING

251

Fig. 3. Synthetic measurements for the vascular model of Fig. 2. Each pixel
corresponds to a source position for a specific detector offset with the vascular
model embedded at depth of (a) 0.5 mm and of (b) 3 mm (SNR of 60). The
colorbar represents the spatial contrast distribution acquired by each individual
detector (ΔR) normalized to the overall dynamical range of measurements (R).
Fig. 2. Vascular tree model. (a) Three-dimensional visualization with maximum projection on the bounding planes. (b) XY view. The dimensions of three
components of the vascular tree are 0.4 mm × 2.8 mm × 0.4 mm, 0.7 mm ×
0.3 mm × 0.3 mm, and 0.5 mm × 0.2 mm × 0.2 mm, respectively, for the
main tree, bigger off shoot, and smaller off shoot. (c) yz-slices of the sensitivity
matrix; seven detectors are placed along y-axis on the volume surface.

The dynamic range of SM SE is [0, +). The best value 0 is
achieved if and only if Xtrue = Xrecon for all i = 1, 2, . . . , k,
and k is the total number of voxels in fluorophore concentrations.
Hence, a smaller SM SE reflects higher reconstruction fidelity.
E. Experimental Models
In silico models were designed to assess the performances
of the proposed method in terms of spatial resolution, depthdependent performances, and robustness to noise. First, a simple
regular model representing a bioprinted vascular tree with main
trunk and two off-shoots was employed. The different diameters
of the vascular tree components are 400, 300, and 200 μm, as
shown in Fig. 2. The fluorophore concentrations are assumed
to be homogeneous over the vessel as shown in Fig. 2(a)–(b)
with effective quantum yield equal to 1. The simulated imaging
domain is a 2 mm × 5 mm surface area with a depth (Fig. 2(c)).
We assume a homogeneous scattering coefficient (μs = 5 cm−1 )
and endogenous absorption coefficient (μa = 0.02 cm−1 ) over
the domain. The Henyey–Greenstein phase function was used
for all computation herein with g = 0.9. These parameters replicate the optical properties of the collagen scaffold employed in
our bioprinting application at collagen density of ∼3 mg/mL [3].
The vascular tree was placed at six different depths, 0.5,
1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 mm, to test the impact of depth on
reconstruction fidelity. We discretized the imaging domain according to the desired resolution. For example, we discretized
the imaging domain into 10 × 25 × 15 voxels when considering a 200 μm discretization, leading to a Jacobian of size 1750
(250 source positions, seven detectors) by 3750. To investigate

higher resolutions, we simulated also 100 and 80 μm discretizations. Examples of typical measurements for the 7000 source
positions and for individual detectors are provided in Fig. 3.
Then, two vasculature networks modeled after in vivo data
obtained via two-photon microscopy were employed to simulate more realistic configuration of complex vascular networks
in 3-D. To simulate an anatomically accurate vascular bed, we
rescaled and cropped part of a microvessel network obtained
from two-photon microscopy of a rat somatosensory cortex obtained from [26], as shown in Fig. 7(a). The segmented vessels
were simulated to be labeled with fluorophore as reported in [8].
The fluorophore concentrations are assumed to be homogeneous
over the vessel as shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c). The size of the
image domain and discretization was identical to the previous
in silico models.
Finally, the CS method is employed to reconstruct real phantom data and compared to a high-resolution anatomical imaging
modality, in this case, microCT (Scanco Medical Viva CT40).
Two sealed glass capillaries (douter = 1 mm, dinner = 0.61 mm)
containing 5 μM of NIR-664-iodoacetamide (λex = 664 nm,
λem = 689 nm; Sigma-Aldrich) in methanol were positioned

in a 3-mm-thick collagen (9 mg/mL; μa = 0.08 cm−1 ; μs =
−1
5 cm ) scaffold at two different depths in an orthogonal fashion. The phantom was imaged over a 5.5 mm × 8 mm area using
our MFMT system (15 360 source positions-7 detectors measurements at each source position: 107 520 total measurements).
Under microCT, the collagen phantom with glass capillaries was
visualized with a field of view of 32.8 mm2 at 16 μm voxel size.
In all cases, both visual results and SM SE indexes are given
to evaluate the performance of the proposed inverse methodology in different scenarios. For the purpose of comparison, we
also give the reconstruction results by commonly used iterative
regularization methods, least square QR factorization (LSQR)
and CG. In order to get optimal results for l1 -norm, LSQR
and CG methods, we employ the L-curve method to find the

252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

iterative number and regularization parameter λ when residual
norm tends to a least value [7].
III. RESULT
A. MC Computation and Reconstructions
All computations were carried out to generate the Jacobians
and synthetic measurements were performed under less than
5 min in a desktop computer (CPU: Intel Core i7-3820 QuadCore 3.60 GHz 10 MB Intel Smart Cache, GPU: NVIDIA Kepler K20M). Similarly, reconstructions were performed in a less
than 5 min on the aforementioned computer. For instance, reconstructions based on the CS method for a 2 mm × 5 mm × 3 mm
volume with 80 μm voxel size were completed in 285 s
(4 min 45 s).
B. Different Depths of Fluorophore Concentrations
Fig. 4(g) shows the calculated SM SE from reconstructions
performed using the three inverse methods at six different depth
locations (from 0.5 to 3 mm with interval 0.5 mm). The CS
method far outperforms its counterparts at every depth investigated (four order in magnitude between SM SE values). For
instance, a visual comparison between reconstructions based on
the different inversion algorithms employed and for a 2 mm
depth location is proposed in Fig. 4(a)–(f). The reconstructed
image obtained via CS provides an accurate anatomical description of the simulated vascular tree whereas both CG and
LSQR do not recover the three components of the vascular tree
distinctly.
Moreover, the retrieved quantum yield distribution is far more
homogeneous with accurate values in the small components
of the vascular tree when using the CS method conversely
to the two common inverse solvers. As for the CS method,
its reconstruction performance also deteriorates with the depth
increasing, shown as in Fig. 4(h). However, the reconstruction
quality degrades at a slower rate for CS-based reconstructions
than the other two methods when depth increases; see Fig. 4(i)
and (j).
C. Reconstruction at Different Discretization Levels
The effect of discretization on performances of CS-based
reconstruction for MFMT was investigated by discretizing the
imaging domain at three different resolutions: 200, 100, and
80 μm. We tested these three kinds of discretization resolutions
for three different depth locations of the vascular tree: 1, 2, and
3 mm deep. Fig. 5(a)–(f) depicts the reconstructions results of
CS with different resolutions at the depth of 2 mm (200, 100,
and 80 μm, respectively). Fig. 5(g)–(i) shows the SM SE indexes
at different depths for these three different imaging domains
(1, 2, and 3 mm, respectively) and the three inversion methods
employed. Fig. 5(j) reports the reconstruction quality versus
depth for the CS method at the 3 voxel resolutions. In all cases,
accurate reconstructions were obtained with reconstructions at
80 μm providing the most homogenous effective quantum yield
estimation within the vascular tree.

Fig. 4. Reconstruction results at different depths. (a)–(c) Reconstruction results were presented for CG, LSQR, and CS at depth of 2 mm. (d)–(f) Cross
section of (a)–(c); colorbars represent the quantum efficiency (η(r)). (g) Reconstruction results of three methods at six different depths. (h) Reconstruction
results of CS at six different depths. (i) and (j) Three-dimensional rendering of
the reconstructions for CS at 0.5 and 2.8 mm, respectively (voxel size of 100 μm
and no noise added in the measurements).

D. Reconstruction of Different Levels of Noise
Ten different levels of Gaussian-distributed electronic noise
were added to the synthetic measurements, with SNR ranging
from 100 to 10 (evenly spaced), to evaluate the robustness of the
proposed reconstruction method. Fig. 6 shows the SM SE versus
SNR for all the ten different levels of noise and at three different
depth locations. The SM SE of CS methods becomes significantly larger when SNR decreases below 40, which indicates
that reconstruction performance of the method is also sensitive
to noise. Though, despite this decrease in reconstruction quality as the SNR decreases, CS still outperforms CG and LSQR

YANG et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION MESOSCOPIC FLUORESCENCE MOLECULAR TOMOGRAPHY BASED ON COMPRESSIVE SENSING

Fig. 5. Reconstruction performance for 3 voxel sizes at three different depths:
(a)–(c) CS reconstruction results at depth of 2 mm with voxel sizes of 200, 100,
and 80 μm, respectively. (d)–(f) Cross section of (a)–(c). Colorbars represent the
quantum efficiency (η(r)). (g)–(i) CG, LSQR, and CS reconstruction results of
three different resolutions at depth of 1, 2, and 3 mm with different discretization
levels. (j) Reconstruction result of CS with 3 voxel sizes.

methods for all the levels of noise simulated herein. Moreover,
with the depth increasing, the reconstruction quality of CG and
LSQR becomes worse drastically.
E. Synthetic Model
To mimic more closely real applications, a complex vascular network was simulated based on the segmentation of the
real volumetric data depicted in Fig. 7(a). Two vascular beds
were simulated, vascular beds with complex 3-D and depth
distributions [see Fig. 7(b) and (c)]. Fig. 7(d)–(i) displays the
reconstructed images of the vasculature using the different inversion techniques mentioned previously with a discretization
of 100 μm. As can be seen from Fig. 7(d) and (g), the results
of CG tend to be heavily surface weighted whereas LSQR provides more accurate reconstructions but is able to reconstruct
only the lager segment of the vascular bed and failed to recover
the most complex distributions, as shown in Fig. 7(e) and (h).

253

Fig. 6. Reconstruction performance for ten levels of additional noise at three
different depths. (a)–(c) Reconstruction results of three methods at depth of
1 mm with SNR of 40. (d)–(f) SM S E of the three methods reconstruction results
at depth of 1, 2, and 3 mm with ten levels of noise. (g) SM S E of CS reconstruction
results at depth of 1, 2, and 3 mm with ten levels of noise.

Conversely, the CS reconstructions provide accurate rendering
of the simulated networks, as shown in Fig. 7(f) and (i). In both
cases, the structures of the vascular beds were retrieved with
high fidelity at all depths.
F. Vascular Structure Mimicking in a Collagen Scaffold
and Validation
The reconstructions employing experimental data are provided in Fig. 8. The experimental data were acquired from a
collagen sample, which hosted two orthogonal capillaries. The
dye filled capillaries place beneath the surface and ∼1 mm
apart in depth. Prior to reconstruction, background data were
subtracted from fluorescence data similarly to the procedure
described in [27]. Examples of fluorescence, background, and
subtracted data are provided in Fig. 8(f) and (g). The contrastto-noise ratio was estimated to be >1000, owing to very small
noise standard deviation (∼5). Two reconstruction methods, CG
[8] and l1 -norm, were used to solve the optical inverse problem
using the subtracted dataset and reconstructions are provided
in Fig. 8(c) and (b), respectively. Fig. 8(d), (e), (h), and (i)

254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 7. Reconstruction results for complex vasculature by three regularization
methods. (a) Raw data were represented in 3-D. (b) and (c) Raw data were segmented for two different sets of vascular channels, T1 and T2. (d)–(f) Segmented
vessel, T1, was reconstructed by CG, LSQR, and CS, respectively. (g)–(i) Segmented vessel, T2, reconstructed by CG, LSQR, and CS, respectively (no noise
added in the vascular network model).

demonstrates the overlaid image of CS and CG reconstructions with microCT. The slices were taken along the y-axis. In
both cases, the two capillaries were individually reconstructed at
their exact locations. However, the CS-based approach provided
more accurate results with better shape over the whole length of
the capillaries and more homogenous fluorescence distribution
conversely to CG. Also, we defined a coregistration ratio (the
number of voxel inside or outside tube reconstructed divided by
the total number of voxel in tube) to assess the reconstruction
performance of CS for experimental data by counting the total
number of voxels in the optical reconstructions that are located
inside and outside of the ground-truth location of each tube as
estimated by microCT. The values of these coregistration ratios
are provided in Table I. The CS method provides better volumetric registration than CG for both tubes with an agreement at
least up to 92% between CS-based optical reconstruction and
microCT versus only 76% in the best case scenario for CG (see
Table I and Fig. 8).
IV. DISCUSSION
Herein, we have investigated the performances of CS-based
reconstruction versus commonly employed methods (CG and
LSQR) when performing mesoscopic fluorescence tomography.

Fig. 8. Experimental validation of CS reconstruction results in a collagen
scaffold compared with microCT and CG methods. (a) Ground truth for localizations of glass wall of two capillaries in the collagen scaffold obtained from a
microCT scanner. (b) and (c) Reconstruction results of CS and CG, respectively.
(d) and (e) Merged 3-D images of (b) and (c) with (a). (f) Raw data and line
profile for fluorescence (blue), background (green), and subtracted (red) data,
respectively. (g) Line profiles from two sets of data: left and right profiles. Upper
figure shows the left profile for fluorescence (blue square), background (solid
green), and subtraction (red circle). Lower figure follows the same convention
for right region. (h) and (i) Overlaid reconstruction of CS and CG merged with
microCT, respectively, at three different slices along y-axis.

In all cases investigated, both in silico and experimental, the
CS-based reconstruction outperformed their counterparts both
in terms of retrieving the structure of the inclusions with high
fidelity but also in recovering quantitatively the biodistribution
of the relative quantum yield. The CS approach demonstrated
higher resolution performances (as expected), more accurate
quantification (homogeneity), and more robust against noise.
These results suggest that CS-based reconstruction techniques
are very suitable for fluorescence tomographic imaging in the
mesoscopic regime as the image domain is generally sparse.
As long as optimal regularization parameters are established via
techniques such as the L-curve, the l1 -norm is a robust technique
that can be implemented easily without much penalty in terms

YANG et al.: HIGH-RESOLUTION MESOSCOPIC FLUORESCENCE MOLECULAR TOMOGRAPHY BASED ON COMPRESSIVE SENSING

TABLE I
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON BETWEEN CS AND CG RECONSTRUCTION
RESULTS
Coregistration ratio

MircoCT (ground truth)
Inside voxels
Outside voxels

CS for upper
tube

CG for upper
tube

98%
94%
16%

98%
76%
22%

CS for bottom CG for bottom
tube
tube
98%
92%
19%

98%
71%
30%

of computation time. Applied to imaging of sparse fluorescence
signal, resolution to the scale of the element of volume (voxel)
can be attained. This is very significant for numerous applications that require imaging deep thick tissue at a high resolution.
However, as one refines the discretization of the image space,
the size of the inverse problem becomes the most challenging
part due to the sheer size of the matrices/vectors to be manipulated. Massively parallel implementation or matrix reduction
based on CS techniques can be employed to solve this issue.
This will be investigated in subsequent studies to attempt to
identify what the optimal resolution attainable for MFMT is.
Note that such resolution is system dependent. In our current
implementation, we collect data from only seven detectors. We
are currently integrating a new detection module that will allow acquiring 64 × 64 measurements at each source position.
Increasing the spatial density of the measurements is also expected to contribute to better reconstructions performances.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, based on the sparsity of the fluorophore distribution in the image domain, we have proposed image reconstruction methods with CS framework to solve the MFMT inverse
problem. The proposed method was compared with the conventional method, such as CG and LSQR methods by a synthetic
model of microvessel network in different voxel sizes (200, 100,
and 80 μm). Simulations and experimental results demonstrate
that the CS-based method yields higher fidelity reconstructions
of vascular bed with better resolution and improved image reconstruction stability for MFMT. We plan to employ this technique to assess the maturation process of printed vasculature
in tissue constructs [8] as well as in vivo imaging during PDT
treatments [9].
REFERENCES
[1] E. M. C. Hillman, D. A. Boas, A. M. Dale, and A. K. Dunn, “Laminar
optical tomography: Demonstration of millimeter-scale depth-resolved
imaging in turbid media,” Opt. Lett., vol. 29, no. 14, pp. 1650–1652, Jul.
2004.
[2] S. Yuan, Q. Li, J. Jiang, A. Cable, and Y. Chen, “Three-dimensional
coregistered optical coherence tomography and line-scanning fluorescence
laminar optical tomography,” Opt. Lett., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 1615–1617,
Jun. 2009.
[3] L. Zhao, V. K. Lee, S.-S. Yoo, G. Dai, and X. Intes, “The integration
of 3-D cell printing and mesoscopic fluorescence molecular tomography of vascular constructs within thick hydrogel scaffolds,” Biomaterials,
vol. 33, no. 21, pp. 5325–5332, Jul. 2012.
[4] O. Lee, J. M. Kim, Y. Bresler, and J. C. Ye, “Compressive diffuse optical
tomography: Noniterative exact reconstruction using joint sparsity,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1129–1142, May 2011.

255

[5] J. C. Ye, S. Y. Lee, and Y. Bresler, “Exact reconstruction formula for
diffuse optical tomography using simultaneous sparse representation,” in
Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., Paris, France, 2008, pp. 1621–
1624.
[6] R. Chartrand, “Exact reconstruction of sparse signals via nonconvex minimization,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 707–710, Oct.
2007.
[7] R. Chartrand, “Iteratively reweighted algorithms for compressive sensing,”
presented at the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2008, no. 3, pp. 1–4.
[8] M. Ozturk, L. Zhao, V. Lee, G. Dai, and X. Intes, “Mesoscopic fluorescence molecular tomography of reporter genes in bio printed thick tissue,”
J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 100501–100503, 2013.
[9] M. S. Ozturk, D. Rohrbach, U. Sunar, and X. Intes, “Mesoscopic fluorescence tomography of photosensitizer (HPPH) 3D biodistribution skin
cancer for PDT with,” Acad. Radiol., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 271–280, 2014.
[10] S. R. Arridge, “Optical tomography in medical imaging,” Inverse Problems, vol. 15, pp. 41–93, 1999.
[11] Q. Fang and D. A. Boas, “Monte Carlo simulation of photon migration
in 3D turbid media accelerated by graphics processing units,” Opt. Exp.,
vol. 17, no. 22, pp. 20178–20190, 2009.
[12] E. Alerstam, T. Svensson, and S. A. Engels, “Parallel computing with
graphics processing units for high-speed Monte Carlo simulation of photon
migration,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 0605041–0605043, 2008.
[13] J. Chen, V. Venugopal, and X. Intes, “Monte Carlo based method for
fluorescence tomographic imaging with lifetime multiplexing using time
gates,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 871–886, 2011.
[14] J. Chen, Q. Fang, and X. Intes, “Mesh-based Monte Carlo method in timedomain wide-field fluorescence molecular tomography,” J. Biomed. Opt.,
vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 106009–106012, 2012.
[15] J. Chen and X. Intes, “Comparison of Monte Carlo methods for fluorescence molecular tomography-computational efficiency,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 5788–5798, Oct. 2011.
[16] J. Chen and X. Intes, “Time-gated perturbation Monte Carlo for whole
body functional imaging in small animals,” Opt. Exp., vol. 17, no. 22,
pp. 19566–19579, Oct. 2009.
[17] M. Suzen, A. Giannoula, and T. Durduran, “Compressed sensing in diffuse
optical tomography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, pp. 23676–23690, Jul. 2010.
[18] O. Lee, J. M. Kim, Y. Bresler, and J. C. Ye, “Compressive diffuse optical
tomography: Noniterative exact reconstruction using joint sparsity,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1129–1142, Mar. 2011.
[19] M. Lustig, D. Donoho, and J. M. Pauly, “Sparse MRI: The application of
compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 58,
pp. 1182–1195, Oct. 2007.
[20] P. Boÿll and M. Zibulevsky, “Underdetermined blind source separation
using sparse representations,” Signal Process., vol. 81, pp. 2353–2362,
Jun. 2001.
[21] M. Zibulevsky and Y. Y. Zeevi, “Extraction of a source from multichannel
data using sparse decomposition,” Neurocomputing, vol. 49, nos. 1–4,
pp. 163–173, Dec. 2002.
[22] A. Ossadtchi and S. Kadambe, “Over-complete blind source separation
by applying sparse decomposition and information theoretic based probabilistic approach,” presented at the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Proceedings, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA, 2001, pp. 2801–2804.
[23] S. S. Chen, D. L. Donoho, and M. A. Saunders, “Atomic decomposition
by basis pursuit,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 33–61, Jan.
1998.
[24] C. Silva, J. C. Maltez, E. Trindade, A. Arriaga, and E. Ducla-Soares, “Evaluation of L1 and L2 minimum norm performances on EEG localizations,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 115, no. 7, pp. 1657–1668, Jul. 2004.
[25] S. J. Kin, K. Koh, M. Lustig, S. Boyd, and D. Gorinevsky, “An interiorpoint method for large-scale l1 -regularized least squares,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Signal Process., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 606–617, Dec. 2007.
[26] Q. Fang, S. Sakadzić, L. Ruvinskaya, A. Devor, A. M. Dale, and D. A.
Boas, “Oxygen advection and diffusion in a three- dimensional vascular
anatomical network,” Opt. Exp., vol. 16, no. 22, pp. 17530–17541, Oct.
2008.
[27] B. Yuan, S. A. Burgess, A. Iranmahboob, M. B. Bouchard, N. Lehrer,
C. Bordier, and E. M. C. Hillman, “A system for high-resolution depthresolved optical imaging of fluorescence and absorption contrast,” Rev.
Sci. Instrum., vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 43706–43711, 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

