IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. , JANUARY 2015

241

Ultrasound Current Source Density Imaging
of the Cardiac Activation Wave Using
a Clinical Cardiac Catheter
Yexian Qin, Qian Li, Pier Ingram, Christy Barber, Zhonglin Liu, and Russell S. Witte∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Ultrasound current source density imaging (UCSDI),
based on the acoustoelectric (AE) effect, is a noninvasive method
for mapping electrical current in 4-D (space + time). This technique
potentially overcomes limitations with conventional electrical mapping procedures typically used during treatment of sustained
arrhythmias. However, the weak AE signal associated with the electrocardiogram is a major challenge for advancing this technology.
In this study, we examined the effects of the electrode configuration
and ultrasound frequency on the magnitude of the AE signal and
quality of UCSDI using a rabbit Langendorff heart preparation.
The AE signal was much stronger at 0.5 MHz (2.99 μV/MPa) than
1.0 MHz (0.42 μV/MPa). Also, a clinical lasso catheter placed on
the epicardium exhibited excellent sensitivity without penetrating
the tissue. We also present, for the first time, 3-D cardiac activation maps of the live rabbit heart using only one pair of recording
electrodes. Activation maps were used to calculate the cardiac conduction velocity for atrial (1.31 m/s) and apical (0.67 m/s) pacing.
This study demonstrated that UCSDI is potentially capable of realtime 3-D cardiac activation wave mapping, which would greatly
facilitate ablation procedures for treatment of arrhythmias.
Index Terms—Acoustoelectric, cardiac activation, cardiac arrhythmia, cardiac mapping, electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG).

I. BACKGROUND AND THEORY
USTAINED cardiac arrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation,
affect more than four million Americans each year. In their
most serious form, arrhythmias can be debilitating, life threatening, and require aggressive treatment. Radio frequency (RF)
ablation remains the primary choice for treatment for drugresistant arrhythmia with approximately 100,000 procedures
performed annually in the U.S. [1]. Cryoablation has also been
used in place of RF cauterization without improvement in the
outcome to therapy [2].

S

Manuscript received May 17, 2014; revised July 21, 2014; accepted July 26,
2014. Date of publication August 7, 2014; date of current version December 18,
2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Y. Qin, P. Ingram, C. Barber, and Z. Liu are with the Department of
Medical Imaging, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724 USA (e-mail:
yexian@gmail.com; pier.ingram@gmail.com; cbarber@email.arizona.edu;
zliu@email.arizona.edu).
Q. Li is with the College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: qli@optics.arizona.edu).
∗ R. S. Witte is with the Department of Medical Imaging, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724 USA and also with the College of Optical Sciences,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA (e-mail: rwitte@email.arizona.edu).
This paper contains supplemental material available online at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 8 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2345771

Catheter ablation involves electroanatomical mapping
(EAM), which exploits magnetic or electric sensors to track
the position of the catheter inside the heart. As the catheter
is steered through the chambers with the aid of fluoroscopy,
electrophysiological (EP) maps of the heart are produced. This
procedure typically lasts for several hours before a complete
map is generated, and the target region for ablation is identified.
Because the EP map is generated over many cardiac cycles, the
anatomical registration is often inaccurate, leading to a variety
of artifacts and errors [3], [4]. One problem relates to the use of
fluoroscopy, which uses ionizing radiation. Because fluoroscopy
is inherently a 2-D modality, this can lead to registration errors.
Misalignment between the cardiac anatomy and the EP mapping often results in multiple ablation regions until the arrhythmia is successfully arrested. It is clear, despite the technological
achievements, there is considerable room for improving the process by reducing the number of erroneous ablations, accelerating the mapping procedure, and possibly targeting those who
suffer from nonsustained arrhythmias, like ventricular tachycardia, which are currently untreatable with existing mapping and
ablation methods.
In an effort to overcome limitations with existing EP mapping,
this study examines ultrasound current source density imaging
(UCSDI) as a tool that potentially facilitates and enhances mapping biopotentials in the heart. UCSDI is based on the acoustoelectric (AE) effect [5], an interaction between pressure and
resistivity, which can be described as
Δρ
= −KΔP
ρ0

(1)

where Δρ is the resistivity change of the tissue, ρ0 is the direct
current resistivity, ΔP is the ultrasonic pressure, and K is the
AE interaction constant. Equation (1) indicates that a change
in local pressure induces a modulation of resistivity with the
conversion efficiency determined by K, which is approximately
0.04%/MPa in rabbit cardiac tissue [6]. The AE effect was first
reported by Fox [7] and others have used it to study electrolytes
in solution [8]–[11]. In recent years, interest has shifted to
biomedical applications, including cancer detection [12], neural
imaging [5], and cardiac mapping [13]. We also demonstrated
detection and imaging of cardiac current in the live rabbit heart
using intramuscular and intracardiac electrodes [14], [15].
For UCSDI, the AE effect modulates a tissue’s resistivity near
the focal region of the ultrasound beam. When current passes
through tissue, the local change in resistivity induces a current
modulation, detectable as a voltage across two electrodes. Based

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. , JANUARY 2015

on (1), the AE signal at different positions can be described as
[13]

(JiL · JI )ρ0
ViAE (x1 , y1 , t) = −KP0
z
b(x − x1 , y − y1 , z)a(t − )dxdydz
c

(2)

where ViAE is the AE signal detected by recording lead i
with lead field JiL = JiL (x, y, z), distributed current source
JI = JI (x, y, z), electric resistivity ρ0 = ρ0 (x, y, z), ultrasound beam pattern b(x, y, z), pressure pulse amplitude P0 , and
ultrasound pulse waveform a(t) (see [13] for the full derivation). A volume image proportional to the local current density
distribution is generated as the ultrasound beam is swept across
the sample. Note that according to (2), the size of the ultrasound
focus and, therefore, the integration volume for UCSDI is highly
dependent on the ultrasound wavelength [15].
There are several advantages of UCSDI compared to conventional electrical mapping. First, the detected electrical signal is
confined to the focal region of the ultrasound beam. The spatial
resolution is, therefore, similar to the dimensions of the ultrasound focal spot, typically on the order of a millimeter. Second,
it is also possible to generate volume images of a time-varying
current field using as few as one single electrode with a distant reference [16]. Another important advantage of UCSDI is
that it can be readily combined, in real time, with pulse echo
ultrasound to produce electrical maps coregistered with cardiac
anatomy and motion.
One potential drawback of UCSDI for EAM is that the technique requires detecting a small signal close to background
noise. However, according to (2), both the ultrasound and electrode parameters affect the sensitivity and spatial resolution of
UCSDI. Consequently, this study will further examine the effects of the ultrasound frequency and electrode recording configuration on the AE signal using a live rabbit heart preparation.
We will also demonstrate for the first time 2-D and 3-D mapping of the cardiac activation wave using a pair of recording
electrodes on a clinical lasso catheter placed on the epicardium.
These are important steps toward optimizing UCSDI and translating this technology to patients for fast EP mapping during
ablation treatment for arrhythmias.
II. INSTRUMENTS AND METHODS
A. Langendorff Isolated Rabbit Heart
All procedures were in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Arizona.
This study describes results from five adult New Zealand white
rabbits, which were anaesthetized (ketamine and xylazine) and
heparinized. Immediately following euthanasia (BeuthanasiaD), the hearts were quickly excised, cannulated, and mounted
to a Langendorff perfusion system (Radnoti 120103EZ) with a
flow controlled retroperfusion of Kreb–Henseleit (K-H) buffer,
as shown in Fig. 1. The K-H buffer (NaCl, 117 mM; KCl, 4 mM;
MgSO4 , 1.2 mM; KH2 PO4 , 1.1 mM; glucose, 5 mM; NaHCO3 ,
25 mM; and CaCl2 , 2.6 mM) was placed in a reservoir, oxygenated with a mixture of 95% O2 and 5% CO2 , pH balanced

Fig. 1. Langendorff setup for UCSDI of the live rabbit heart and schematic
diagram of the data acquisition (DAQ) system. The heart was perfused with
37 ◦ C K-H buffer by Radnoti 120103EZ perfusion system. The ultrasound
transducer (US xducer) was immersed in the 38 ◦ C water tank underneath the
heart and driven by a pulse/receiver (T/R). Recording electrodes were placed in
or on the heart to detect both high frequency AE signals and low frequency (LF)
electrocardiography (ECG) signals. HPF and LPF are the high- and low-pass
filters for separating the AE and ECG signals. The high-frequency AE signal
and pulse echo (PE) were recorded by an NI high-speed digitizer (HF); the
standard LF ECG was recorded by a multifunction DAQ card.

to 7.44 and maintained at 37 ◦ C. 2,3-Butanedione monoxime
(BDM), an electromechanical decoupler, was optionally added
to the buffer solution to limit motion of the heart while preserving electrical conduction. The buffer solution was driven by a
peristaltic pump (Masterflex L/S, 7518-60, Cole Palmer) from
the reservoir through a bubble trap to the cannulated heart.
B. Experimental Setup
The experimental setup is shown on the right side of Fig. 1.
The cannulated heart was placed inside a custom plastic chamber with the left ventricle (LV) facing down on top of a thin
acoustic window made of Mylar. The chamber was coupled to a
large water tank that contained a focused ultrasound transducer.
The tank was maintained at 38 ◦ C to provide a physiologic
environment for the heart.
The heart was paced with a pair of platinum needle electrodes
(Grass Technologies) either at the right atrium (RA) or LV. The
pacing signal was a 1-V rectangular pulse with a duration of
1 ms emitted by a function generator (Agilent 33220A). The
pacing rate was set slightly above the intrinsic rate, typically
2.5–4 Hz.
Three electrical recording schemes were employed to detect
signals from the right ventricle (RV): 1) two intramuscular tungsten needle electrodes inserted into the myocardium parallel to
the long axis of the heart; 2) a pair of platinum disk electrodes
(diameter = 2 mm) on a custom 18 element epicardial grid array
(Ad-Tech Medical Instrument Corp.) placed on the epicardium;
and 3) a pair of stainless steel electrodes on a 7F clinical cardiac
catheter (Bioscience Webster Lasso) placed on the epicardium.

QIN et al.: ULTRASOUND CURRENT SOURCE DENSITY IMAGING OF THE CARDIAC ACTIVATION WAVE

243

Fig. 2. Timing diagram of heart pacing, ultrasound pulsing, ECG recording,
and AE signal acquisition. The heart was paced at 3 Hz or above its intrinsic rate.
Each US trigger caused the waveform generator to produce a chirp excitation
to the ultrasound transducer. The repetition rate of the ultrasound triggers (2
kHz) determined the sampling rate of the cardiac activation sequence. The low
frequency-ECG was recorded simultaneously on the same electrodes.

The electrodes detected both the AE signal and the low frequency ECG signal (separable by high- and low-pass filters, as
displayed in Fig. 1, right).
Two single-element focused ultrasound transducers were used
for the experiments, including one with a center frequency of
0.5 MHz (Olympus Panametrics-NDT V389, f = 54.6 mm, dia
= 38 mm) and the other at 1.0 MHz (Olympus PanametricsNDT A392S, f = 63.5 mm, dia = 38 mm). The transducer was
attached to a programmable stepper motor (Velmex Inc.), which
controlled the position of the ultrasound beam.
C. Data Acquisition
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the AE and ECG signals were detected
simultaneously and separated by high- and low-pass filters.
One branch went through the high-pass filter (cutoff frequency
= 100 kHz for the 0.5-MHz transducer, and 470 kHz for the
1-MHz transducer), preserving the AE signals modulated by
the ultrasound beam. The AE signal was then differentially amplified (LeCroy DA 1855A) by 20 dB and collected on a digitizer
card (National Instruments PXI 5105, sampling rate = 10 MHz,
“HF” in Fig. 1) with another 40-dB gain. The other branch went
through a low-pass filter (cutoff frequency = 100 kHz), preserving only the ECG signal, which was then amplified by 20 dB and
collected on a multifunctional DAQ card (National Instruments
PXI 6289, sampling rate = 20 kHz, “LF” in Fig. 1).
The experimental timing was also controlled by the multifunctional DAQ card, which generated two triggers: 1) the
pacing trigger to the function generator (Agilent 33220A) for
stimulating the heart, and 2) a 2-kHz burst trigger to another
function generator (Keithley 3390), which sent out a frequencyencoded excitation signal (chirp) for pulsing the ultrasound
transducer. Chirp excitation has been shown to be superior to
short pulse excitation for detecting the AE signal [15]. The chirp
signals used for this study had 20-μs duration, 1.0-MHz center
frequency, and 0.54-MHz bandwidth for the 1-MHz transducer
and 0.5-MHz center frequency and 0.27-MHz bandwidth for the
0.5-MHz transducer. The first ultrasound trigger for each cardiac
cycle coincided with the pacing trigger, as shown in Fig. 2.
At each ultrasound trigger, the digitizer card (PXI 5105) acquired an RF trace (i.e., the AE signal), as displayed at the
bottom of Fig. 2. The AE signal is typically strongest during

Fig. 3. Color M-mode UCSDI and ECG signal reconstruction. (top-left) measured low frequency ECG signal (ECGL F );(middle-left) color M-mode UCSDI
image formed from the baseband AE signal, the horizontal axis represents slow
time in millisecond (ms) starting from the pacing signal; the vertical axis represents the depth in millimeter (mm) from the ultrasound transducer element;
(bottom-left) Envelope of the AE signals at three different time points (72, 90,
and 100 ms); (right) ECGA E at three different depths (48, 57, 66 mm) denoted
by the horizontal green dashed lines in the color M-mode image. The depth
values refer to the position relative to the ultrasound transducer at the origin.

the R-wave of the cardiac cycle. Meanwhile, a pulse receiver
(Olympus 5077PR) captured the pulse echo signals, which were
simultaneously acquired with the HF acquisition system.
The AE signals presented in Fig. 2 correspond to different
time points during the cardiac cycle at a single location of the
ultrasound transducer. Each of these traces is called an A-line.
An M-mode image comprises a sequence of A-lines acquired
at consecutive time points during the cardiac cycle (see Fig. 3).
B-mode images comprise a collection of A-lines acquired along
a line perpendicular to the ultrasound beam. Volume UCSDI is
formed by collecting A-lines at different positions in the heart.
D. Signal Processing
To preserve the spatial resolution from ultrasound frequency
coded excitation, a pulse compression algorithm was applied to
both the AE and PE signals [15]. Each A-line was then filtered
by a band-pass filter to reduce noise.The pass band was 0.3–
0.8 MHz for the 0.5-MHz transducer and 0.5–1.2 MHz for the
1-MHz transducer. A band-pass filter (10–85 Hz) was further
applied to the M-mode data matrix along the physiologic-time
axis. Finally, each AE signal was demodulated and low-pass
filtered to obtain the baseband signal. This produced a color
M-mode with color and intensity indicating the direction and
strength of the current density field, as shown in Fig. 3 (middle
left). The vertical traces (see Fig. 3, bottom left) of the M-mode
image represent the baseband AE signals at corresponding time
points during the cardiac cycle, while the horizontal traces (see
Fig. 3, right) represent the AE derived ECG signals (ECGAE )
at different depths in the path of the ultrasound pulse. The same
filter was also applied to the conventional ECG (see Fig. 3, top
left) so that it could be compared directly to the ECGAE signals.

244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. , JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4. Intramuscular UCSDI of live rabbit hearts using two different focused ultrasound transducers (1.0 and 0.5 MHz) and tungsten needle electrodes. (a)
Rabbit heart in Langendorff chamber with two recording electrodes (R1 and R2 ) and a pair of pacing electrodes (S), which paced the heart at the RA at 3 Hz.
The ultrasound transducer was located below the heart and focused at the RV wall; (b) and (c) filtered AE signals at the ECGL F peak times of 105 and 92 ms,
respectively; (d) and (e) overlay of the M-mode UCSDI (color) and PE (gray) images; (f) and (g) describe the ECGA E signals (green) at the depth of 74 and 57
mm, respectively, with the ECGL F (black) as a reference. The two columns describe data collected at two different ultrasound frequencies.

Activation times were determined from the delay between the
pacing pulse and the peak of the ECG envelope.
III. RESULTS
The effect of the electrode configuration and ultrasound frequency on the AE signal and UCSDI are investigated in the next
two sections using the custom Langendorff setup for mapping
the live rabbit heart.

echo signal from the LV and RV walls occurred at different
depths. The superimposed UCSDI and pulse echo images indicate that the source of the measured cardiac current is at the RV
wall. A horizontal line at the maximum AE amplitude denotes
the ECGAE signal. This was compared with the simultaneously
measured low frequency ECGLF signal, as depicted in Fig. 4(f)
and (g). The ECGAE signals from UCSDI are consistent with
the ECGLF , although the location of the source of the two signals are different (i.e., UCSDI depends on the location of the
US beam).

A. UCSDI: Intramuscular Recording
Fig. 4 presents UCSDI results at two different ultrasound
frequencies using needle recording electrodes. The same procedure was followed for two rabbit hearts, except that one was
imaged with the 1.0-MHz transducer (3.4 MPa peak pressure)
and the other at 0.5 MHz (0.7 MPa peak pressure). The geometric positions of the heart, recording and pacing electrodes,
and the ultrasound transducer are illustrated in Fig. 4(a). For
the 1.0- and 0.5-MHz transducers, the amplitudes of the filtered
AE signals were 1.4 and 2.1 μV, respectively [see Fig. 4(b)
and (c)]. After normalizing for pressure, the AE amplitude detected by the 0.5-MHz transducer was 3.0 μV/MPa. However,
for the 1-MHz transducer, the AE amplitude was 0.41 μV/MPa,
approximately seven times smaller than that of the 0.5-MHz
transducer. It is also clear in the color M-mode UCSDI images
[see Fig. 4(d) and (e)] that the 1-MHz transducer demonstrated
better spatial resolution than the 0.5-MHz transducer. The full
width at half maximum along the depth direction (ultrasound
axial direction) was 3.19 and 6.21 mm, respectively, reflecting
both the spatial resolution and dimensions of the current source
through the wall of the RV. The tradeoff between sensitivity and
resolution is consistent with our earlier phantom and simulation work [15]. The M-mode pulse echo images [gray in Fig
4(d) and (e)] also indicate the location of the LV and RV walls.
Since the two transducers have different focal lengths, the pulse

B. UCSDI: Epicardial Recording
We next evaluated UCSDI for epicardial recording using
a planar array of disc electrodes, and also, a clinical cardiac
catheter containing stainless steel electrodes.
For the electrode grid recording, two disc electrodes near
the apex were selected to record the AE and ECGLF signals.
The peak AE signal with this configuration was 0.52 μV or
0.74 μV/MPa or approximately 25% of that measured with
intramuscular electrodes.
Next, the clinical catheter was placed on the epicardium and
exhibited much better sensitivity than the disc electrodes. Fig. 5
depicts the rabbit heart and the catheter position, as well as an Mmode image and sample ECG signals. The peak AE amplitude
was 1.7 μV or 2.4 μV/MPa, which is comparable to using the
intramuscular electrodes. This experiment included pacing at
either the RA or apical region. The results depicted in Fig. 5
were produced with RA pacing and the ultrasound transducer at
a fixed location. The ECGAE and ECGLF signals [see Fig. 5(c)]
in this example were acquired simultaneously. This is consistent
with the location of the ultrasound focal spot near recording
electrode R2 .
The effect of the ultrasound frequency on the AE signal was
further examined in the same heart using epicardial recording
from the catheter. Scans were performed at 0.5 and 1 MHz

QIN et al.: ULTRASOUND CURRENT SOURCE DENSITY IMAGING OF THE CARDIAC ACTIVATION WAVE

245

Fig. 5. Epicardial UCSDI of the live rabbit heart using the 0.5-MHz transducer
and the lasso cardiac catheter. (a) Rabbit heart with catheter and recording
electrodes R1 and R2 . (b) M-mode pulse echo image (gray) superimposed on a
color M-mode UCSDI. (c) ECGL F (black) and ECGA E (green) signals during
cardiac cycle. The ECGA E signal is taken at the RV wall at the depth of 66.7
mm relative to the transducer origin.
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF ULTRASOUND PARAMETERS AND SENSITIVITY
FOR DETECTING THE AE SIGNAL
Intramuscular

US frequency (MHz)
Peak pressure (MPa)
US intensity (W/cm2 )
Axial resolution (mm)
Lateral resolution (mm)
AE (pk, μV)
AE/Pressure (μV/MPa)
ECG (pk, mV)
AE/ECG (×10 −3 )
Noise (RMS, μV)
SNR (dB)

Needle
1.0
0.5
3.4
0.7
0.85
0.18
1.6
3.1
2.5
4.2
1.40
2.09
0.42
2.99
16.6
9.4
0.08
0.22
0.10
0.10
22.9
26.4

Epicardial
Disc
0.5
0.7
0.18
3.1
4.2
0.52
0.74
3.4
0.15
0.07
17.4

Catheter
0.5
1.0
0.7
3.4
0.18
0.85
3.1
1.6
4.2
2.5
1.70
1.14
2.43
0.34
11.9
9.6
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.11
24.6
20.3

using the same experimental setup and rabbit heart. The peak
AE amplitudes were 1.67 and 1.14 μV for the 0.5- and 1.0-MHz
transducers, respectively. When normalized by the ultrasound
pressure, the peak AE amplitudes were 2.39 μV/MPa (at 0.5
MHz) and 0.34 μV/MPa (at 1.0 MHz) or a ratio of 7.0.
Performance results for each experiment and recording scenario are summarized in Table I.
C. Cardiac Activation Mapping Using UCSDI
and the Clinical Cardiac Catheter
Results suggest that UCSDI provides additional spatial and
temporal information for mapping the cardiac activation wave.
As described in background and theory, the ECGLF does not
have the same temporal profile as the ECGAE signal, which
depends on the location of the ultrasound beam in the heart.
To explore this further in the live rabbit heart and map cardiac
activation with UCSDI, we scanned the ultrasound transducer to
produce B-mode (2-D) and volume (3-D) images during the cardiac cycle using a setup similar to Fig. 5(a). The total scan length
for B-mode imaging was 14 mm with 1-mm steps. The white
arrow in Fig. 6(a) indicates the scan region and direction. A su-

Fig. 6. (a) Top view (xy plane) of the rabbit heart, recording electrodes, and
B-mode scanning range and direction. The scan size is 14 mm with 1 mm steps.
Each image represents an average of 50 consecutive cardiac cycles at each scan
point. (b) Superposition of the pulse echo B-mode image (grayscale) and UCSDI
(hot colors) in yz plane. Pulse echo images are generated from the echo of the
ultrasound pulse, while the UCSDI maps are produced from the AE signal at
the peak envelope of the ECGL F (t = 139 ms). The vertical axis (depth) is
the same as for the M-mode images. The horizontal axis represents the lateral
scan position in millimeters. The images are interpolated and displayed on a dB
scale (35 dB for pulse echo and 10 dB for UCSDI). (c) Activation map inside
the dashed green box from (b) with stimulation at the SA node. Colors denote
the arrival time (in ms) of the peak envelope of the ECGA E signal at each
position. Gray pixels represent ECGA E signals below a threshold of 40% of
the maximum AE signal. (d) Activation map for a second scan with stimulation
near the apex.

perimposed B-mode pulse-echo image (grayscale) and UCSDI
image (hot colors) are displayed in Fig. 6(b). The pulse echo
image clearly displays the RV and LV walls of the heart along
with the hypoechoic interior of the ventricles. The largest AE
signals were observed near recording electrode R2 due to the
strong lead field at this location.
In addition to measuring the spatial pattern of the ECG,
we also examined current propagation over time as a possible
method to track reentry loops or other conduction abnormalities.
Activation times were determined from the delay between the
pacing pulse and the peak of the ECGAE envelope at each pixel,
producing a 2-D activation map from a B-mode UCSDI dataset.
Fig. 6(c) displays the cardiac activation map over the region of
interest depicted in Fig. 6(b). Red indicates the arrival of the
ECG occurred later. From this map, we can clearly visualize
cardiac activation from base to apex, a pattern consistent with
atrial pacing.
The activation map indicates that the local activation time
varied from 132 to 140 ms in the scan region (137.5±1.3 ms).
However, the distribution of activation times based on the standard ECGLF was much narrower, ranging from 135.9 to 136.9
ms (136.4±0.3 ms). The variability of activation times based on
the ECGLF was less than for the ECGAE . This was expected
because only the ECGAE signal depends on the location of the

246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. , JANUARY 2015

Fig. 8. (a) Superposition of pulse echo (gray) B-mode image and cardiac
activation map (color) at y = 1 mm position; Images at different x and y
positions can be viewed in the movie UCSDI_ActvMap_with_PE_3D.avi. (b)
Two horizontal slices of the 3-D activation map at a depth of 59 and 66 mm. (c)
ECGL F signals from two pairs of electrodes. The electrodes were marked in
Fig. 7 as #1, #4, and #5. The blue dotted curve is the ECGL F signal measured
using electrodes #4 and #1 in differential mode; the red solid curve is the ECGL F
signal measured using electrodes #5 and #1.

Fig. 7. Volume activation maps produced by an XY scan of the ultrasound
beam. (Upper left) Rabbit heart, catheter position, recording electrodes, and
scan area. (Upper right) ECGL F signal [ms, mV]; (bottom) UCSDI images
(color) superimposed with pulse-echo images (gray) during the cardiac cycle.
The UCSDI image are generated from the maximum intensity projection of the
AE signal in the z (depth) direction. These data are part of a 4-D (volume + time)
pattern that are presented as a UCSDI movie (UCSDI_AE_PE_MIP_XY.avi).
The UCSDI maps reveal the magnitude of the current density at different locations and times.

ultrasound beam in the heart. Therefore, the range of activation
times of the ECGAE during the scan were expected to have a
larger variation than the fixed ECGLF signal. This result illustrates that the spatial and temporal pattern of the ECG can be
obtained by scanning an ultrasound beam to different locations
heart, while recording the AE interaction signal on a single pair
of electrodes.
Fig. 6(d) presents a second activation map from the same
heart as Fig. 6(c) but with apical pacing, which should activate
the myocardium from apex to base. The average peak time of the
ECGAE signals was 59 ms, which occurred much earlier than
that for atrial pacing (132 ms). This was expected because apical
pacing bypassed the normal delay through the atrioventricular
node. The average conduction velocity for apical pacing was
0.67 ± 0.06 m/s compared to 1.31 ± 0.20 m/s for atrial pacing.
In addition to B-mode UCSDI, we also performed a C-scan
along the x- and y-axes to produce 3-D activation maps during
RA pacing. The scan area was 13 mm (x) by 15 mm (y). A
sequence of UCSDI images (xy lateral planes) during the cardiac cycle (A-H) at the RV wall are illustrated in Fig. 7. These
maps reveal the cardiac activation pattern captured by UCSDI
using the ECGLF as a reference. The strongest AE signals were
observed from time point “C” to “G,” which was consistent with
the strongest activation times of the ECGLF .
Based on the data described in Fig. 7, 3-D activation maps
were generated and displayed in Fig. 8. The vertical cross section

of the activation map superimposed with the pulse echo image
[see Fig. 8(a)] confirmed that the detected activation region was
located at the RV wall. The red and blue regions correspond to
regions near recording electrodes #1 and #4, respectively. Lateral (XY) slices at different depths [see Fig. 8(b)] help visualize
the 3-D cardiac activation. These images indicate that the AE
signal near electrode #4 occurred earlier than the region near
electrode #1.
To verify this activation pattern, we used the simultaneously
recorded ECGLF signal from another pair of electrodes (#5 and
#1 marked in Fig. 7), denoted as ECGLF,E5E1 . The latency of
the two ECGLF signals is compared in Fig. 8(c). The earlier
arrival of the ECGLF from electrode #5 is consistent with the
activation pattern displayed in Fig. 8(a) and (b).
IV. DISCUSSION
This study compared different ultrasound frequencies and
electrode configurations for mapping the live rabbit heart with
UCSDI. According to Table I, intramuscular recording at 0.5
MHz produced the best sensitivity for detecting the AE signal
(3.0 μV/MPa). This was likely due to invasive electrodes placed
directly in the myocardium and their strong lead fields directly in
the path of the cardiac current flow. The unshielded and flexible
disc array, on the other hand, exhibited the poorest sensitivity
(0.74 μV/MPa). The difficulty maintaining firm contact with the
epicardium may have contributed to lower sensitivity and higher
background noise. This was further supported by the weaker
ECGLF signal captured by the disc electrodes. Meanwhile, the
shielded catheter electrodes placed on the epicardium provided
an excellent balance between invasiveness (surface recording)
and detection sensitivity (2.4 μV/MPa).
We also examined the effect of the ultrasound frequency on
the sensitivity and resolution of UCSDI. The sensitivity at 0.5
MHz was seven times larger than that at 1 MHz (3.0 μV/MPa
versus 0.41 μV/MPa). This is likely due to the greater integration
volume at the focal zone of the 0.5-MHz transducer (approximately eight times as a first-order approximation). On the other
hand, the 1-MHz transducer demonstrated a better spatial resolution than the 0.5-MHz transducer indicated by the smaller

QIN et al.: ULTRASOUND CURRENT SOURCE DENSITY IMAGING OF THE CARDIAC ACTIVATION WAVE

axial spot size of the current densities in the RV wall (3.19
versus 6.21 mm). This further illustrates the tradeoff between
spatial resolution and sensitivity for UCSDI.
The recording electrode lead field is also a key factor that
affects the amplitude of the AE signal. This has been more
thoroughly explored in our previous work [13], [16], [17]. In
general, to optimize detection of the AE signal, the recording
electrodes should be configured so that the lead field is parallel
to the propagation of electrical current. However, the cardiac
activation time (or activation map) is largely unaffected by the
orientation of the lead field as long as there is sufficient sensitivity to detect the AE signal. The dependence of UCSDI on
the lead field can be reduced or eliminated by recording with
multiple leads (i.e., more than two electrodes).
Fig. 6(b) displayed a current density image at the peak of the
ECGLF superimposed on the B-mode pulse echo image, highlighting the LV and RV walls of the heart. The integration of
UCSDI with standard echocardiography is a potentially powerful combination for EAM during treatment of arrhythmias.
Based on the same dataset, activation maps were generated
from atrial and apical pacing and a single pair of differential
recording electrodes. Overall, the latencies of the peak ECGAE
were highly correlated with those of the ECGLF . However, the
ECGAE exhibited a higher variability of latencies due to the
sampling at different locations in the heart by scanning the ultrasound beam. The spatial information provided by UCSDI
revealed current propagation from base to apex with atrial pacing, and propagation in the reverse direction with apical pacing,
as well as a shorter average latency (59 versus 132 ms). The
maps [see Fig. 6(c) and (d)] further indicated slight variations
of the ECG activation times between the epicardium and the endocardium, consistent with another isolated rabbit heart study
[18]. Normally, EP information related to transmural propagation would have required separate contact electrodes placed on
the epicardium and endocardium, but UCSDI was able to capture depth information as the ultrasound pulse passed from the
RV endocardium to the epicardium.
This study has demonstrated that UCSDI in principle can effectively localize the ECG signal and map the cardiac activation
wave. While real-time M-mode imaging was possible with the
described system, B-mode and volume imaging depended on
slow mechanical scanning of the US xducer. A 2-D B-mode image including 50 averages of the cardiac cycle required less than
5 min. The acquisition time could be dramatically improved using electronic scanning of the ultrasound beam, similar to what
is used in standard echocardiography. Also, because the ECG
precedes the mechanical contraction, cardiac motion is less of
a concern for UCSDI. This study also employed the electromechanical decoupler BDM to help reduce cardiac motion and
maintain the same reference frame over multiple cardiac cycles,
which was important for 2-D and 3-D imaging.

247

ping of the cardiac activation wave were also demonstrated
using UCSDI with a clinical cardiac catheter. Finally, coregistered pulse echo ultrasound images helped identify the LV and
RV walls, providing an important anatomical reference for the
current density maps. Intracardiac echocardiography combined
with real-time UCSDI holds great promise for rapid and accurate cardiac mapping prior to ablation therapy for sustained and
unsustained arrhythmias.
REFERENCES
[1] S. W. Huang, “Preface,” in Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation of Cardiac
Arrhythmias: Basic Concepts and Clinical Applications, S. K. S. Huang
and D. J. Wilber, Eds., Armonk, NY, USA: Futura Publishing Company,
Inc., 2000.
[2] M. Schmidt, U. Dorwarth, D. Andresen, J. Brachmann, K. H. Kuck,
M. Kuniss, T. Lewalter, S. Spitzer, S. Willems, J. Senges, C. Jnger, and
E. Hoffmann, “Cryoballoon versus RF ablation in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: Results from the German ablation registry,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2013.
[3] A. Gupta and A. Maheshwari, “Cardiac mapping: Utility or futility,” Indian Pacing Electrophysiol. J., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 20–32, 2002.
[4] D. Bhakta and J. M. Miller, “Principles of electroanatomic mapping,”
Indian Pacing Electrophysiol. J., vol. 8 no. 1, pp. 32–50, 2008.
[5] R. Witte, R. Olafsson, S.-W. Huang, and M. O’Donnell, “Imaging current
flow in lobster nerve cord using the acoustoelectric effect,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 90, pp. 163902-1–163902-3, 2007.
[6] Q. Li, R. Olafsson, P. Ingram, Z. Wang, and R. Witte, “Measuring the
acoustoelectric interaction constant using ultrasound current source density imaging,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 19, pp. 5929–5941, 2012.
[7] F. Fox, K. Herzfeld, and G. Rock, “The effect of ultrasonic waves on the
conductivity of salt solutions,” Phys. Rev., vol. 70, pp. 329–339, 1946.
[8] J. Jossinet, B. Lavandier, and D. Cathignol, “The phenomenology of
acousto-electric interaction signal in aqueous solutions of electrolytes,”
Ultrasonics, vol. 36, pp. 607–613, 1998.
[9] J. Jossinet, B. Lavandier, and D. Cathignol, “Impedance modulation by
pulsed ultrasound,” Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 873, pp. 396–407, 1999.
[10] B. Lavandier, J. Jossinet, and D. Cathignol, “Quantitative assessment of
ultrasound-induced resistance change in saline solution,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 150–155, 2000.
[11] B. Lavandier, J. Jossinet, and D. Cathignol, “Experimental measurement
of the acousto-electric interaction signal in saline solution,” Ultrasonics,
vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 929–936, 2000.
[12] H. Zhang and L. Wang, “Acousto-electric tomography,” Proc. SPIE,
vol. 5320, pp. 145–149, 2004.
[13] R. Olafsson, R. Witte, S.-W. Huang, and M. O’Donnell, “Ultrasound
current source density imaging,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no.
7, pp. 1840–1848, Jul. 2008.
[14] R. Olafsson, R. Witte, C. Jia, S.-W. Huang, K. Kang, and M. O’Donnell,
“Cardiac activation mapping using ultrasound current source density imaging (UCSDI),” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 56,
no. 3, pp. 565–574, Mar. 2009.
[15] Y. Qin, Z. Wang, P. Ingram, Q. Li, and R. S. Witte, “Optimizing frequency
and pulse shape for ultrasound current source density imaging,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 59 no. 10, pp. 2149–
2155, Oct. 2012.
[16] Z. Wang, R. Olafsson, P. Ingram, Q. Li, Y. Qin, and R. S. Witte, “Fourdimensional ultrasound current source density imaging of a dipole field,”
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 99, no. 11, pp. 113701–1137013, 2011.
[17] Z. Wang and R. S. Witte, “Simulation-based validation for fourdimensional multi-channel ultrasound current source density imaging,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 61 no. 3, pp. 420–
427, Mar. 2014.
[18] R. Wolk, K. A. Kane, S. M. Cobbe, M. N. Hicks, “Regional electrophysiological effects of hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia and hyponatraemia
in isolated rabbit hearts in normal and ischaemic conditions,” Cardiovasc.
Res., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 492–501, 1998.

V. CONCLUSION
This study provided a baseline for detecting the AE signal in the rabbit heart using different recording configurations
and ultrasound frequencies. Two-dimensional and volume map-

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

