256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Novel Active Comb-Shaped Dry Electrode for EEG
Measurement in Hairy Site
Yan-Jun Huang, Chung-Yu Wu, Fellow, IEEE, Alice May-Kuen Wong, and Bor-Shyh Lin∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Electroencephalography (EEG) is an important
biopotential, and has been widely applied in clinical applications.
The conventional EEG electrode with conductive gels is usually
used for measuring EEG. However, the use of conductive gel also
encounters with the issue of drying and hardening. Recently, many
dry EEG electrodes based on different conductive materials and
techniques were proposed to solve the previous issue. However,
measuring EEG in the hairy site is still a difficult challenge. In
this study, a novel active comb-shaped dry electrode was proposed
to measure EEG in hairy site. Different form other comb-shaped
or spike-shaped dry electrodes, it can provide more excellent performance of avoiding the signal attenuation, phase distortion, and
the reduction of common mode rejection ratio. Even under walking motion, it can effectively acquire EEG in hairy site. Finally,
the experiments for alpha rhythm and steady-state visually evoked
potential were also tested to validate the proposed electrode.
Index Terms—Conductive gels, dry electrode, electroencephalography (EEG), hairy site, signal attenuation.

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) is an electrical
signal generated by brain neuron activity, and has been
widely applied in clinical applications. In general, the conventional Ag/AgCl EEG electrode with conductive gels (wet electrode) is used to measure EEG signal. However, the use of conductive gel encounters with the issue of drying and hardening
for long-term EEG measurement.
Recently, many dry EEG electrodes were proposed to improve
the previous issue. Based on microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) technique, several MEMS-based dry electrodes were
developed [1]–[3]. However, the measurement of MEMS-based
dry electrodes is usually a semi-invasive approach, and their
manufacture cost is relatively expensive. Based on the technique

E

Manuscript received May 4, 2014; revised June 24, 2014, and July 24, 2014;
accepted August 5, 2014. Date of publication August 15, 2014; date of current
version December 18, 2014. This work was supported by the National Science
Council of R.O.C under Contract NSC 102-2221-E-009-065. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
Y.-J. Huang is with the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics, National 0, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: askalice.cop01g@gmail.com).
C.-Y. Wu is with the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao
Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: peterwu@mail.nctu.edu.tw).
A. M.-K. Wong is with the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Chang Gung Medical Foundation, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan (e-mail:
walice@adm.cgmh.org.tw).
∗ B.-S. Lin is with the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: borshyhlin@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2347318

of capacitance electrode, Lin et al. proposed a noncontact electrode to measure biopotentials [4]. Different conductive materials, such as conductive rubber, fabric, polymer foam, etc., were
also used for dry electrodes [5]–[8]. Baba and Burke investigated the properties of conductive carbon-based electrodes,
and applied in long-term electrocardiogram (ECG) recording
[7]. However, the skin–electrode interface impedance for these
conductive-material electrodes is still higher than that of the wet
electrode, and may result in the phase shift due to the capacitor characteristic of the skin–electrode interface [7]. Moreover,
measuring EEG in hairy site for these electrodes is still a difficult
challenge due to the obstacle of the hair layer. Unless separating
the hair layer, these dry electrodes cannot contact with the skin
well, in particular, under motion.
In order to solve the issue of measuring EEG in hairy site,
several spike-shaped or comb-shaped dry electrodes were proposed. Sellers et al. proposed a hybrid biosensor with small fingers to measure EEG [9]. These small fingers are small enough
to pass through the hair layer to contact with the skin. The company of g.tec also proposed a spike-shaped active dry electrode
(g.SAHARA) for EEG measurement [10]. Here, an active electrode circuit was connected to the spike-shaped dry electrode.
For the general active electrode circuit, a capacitor was usually
series connected to the input node of the operational amplifier
to eliminate dc offset, and this may contribute to the effect of
phase distortion [7]. Toyama proposed a metal-pin electrode
with spring load [11] to measure EEG. Although the previously
mentioned dry electrodes can increase the skin–electrode contact area in hairy site, their skin–electrode interface impedances
are still relatively higher than that of the wet electrode. A higher
pressure via some specific mechanical design has to be applied in these electrodes to reduce the skin–electrode interface
impedance, and this pressure may also cause the discomfort of
the user.
In order to improve the previous issue, an active comb-shaped
dry electrode (active CSDE) was proposed to measure EEG in
hairy site. Here, a comb-shaped dry electrode was designed
to separate the hair layer, and an active circuit was designed
to reduce the signal attenuation and phase shift, and avoid the
reduction of common mode rejection ratio (CMRR). Different
from the general active electrode, a high input-impedance bias
current path was used in the input node of the active circuit to
protect against the parasitic voltage and ensure the operational
amplifier working in the active region. By using the design of
the active circuit, the proposed active CSDE can effectively
measure EEG without applying a higher pressure. Finally, the
active CSDE was validated by the alpha rhythm and steady-state
visually evoked potential (SSVEP) experiments.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HUANG et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE COMB-SHAPED DRY ELECTRODE FOR EEG MEASUREMENT IN HAIRY SITE

Fig. 2.

257

(a) Basic scheme, and (b) photograph of active CSDE.

the wet electrode, but it may slightly reduce after a long-term
measurement due to that sweat moistens the skin [12].
Fig. 1. Models of skin–electrode interface for (a) conventional EEG electrode
with conductive gels, and (b) dry electrode.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Model of Skin–Electrode Interface
The skin–electrode interface models of the wet electrode and
the dry electrode are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively.
For the wet electrode, conductive gel is applied to polarize the
Ag/AgCl electrodes and transfer signal from the outer stratum
corneum layer to a highly ion-conductive layer. Therefore, the
impedance of the stratum corneum layer can be effectively reduced to avoid the signal attenuation. In Fig. 1(a), Vh denotes
the half-potential of the electrode, and Ce and Re represent the
double-layer interface between conductive gel and the electrode,
and their charge transfer resistance, respectively. The conductive gel layer between the skin and the electrode can be viewed
as a resistance Rg , and closely connects to the stratum corneum
layer in series. And the equivalent circuit model of the stratum
corneum layer can be viewed as a reduced resistance Rsc connected to a capacitor Csc in parallel [12]. Inner dermis can be
viewed as a resistance Rd .
For dry electrode, there is lack of the conductive gel layer,
and the electrode has to contact with the skin directly. However,
the dry electrode is difficult to completely and perfectly contact
with the skin due to that the electrode surface and the skin
are not smooth enough. Therefore, the skin–electrode interface
of dry electrode contains a resistance Rs and a capacitor Cs
characteristic [8], [13]. And the whole impedance of the skin–
electrode interface of dry electrode is usually larger than that of

B. Design of Active CSDE
The basic scheme and photograph of the proposed active
CSDE are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. It mainly
consists of a comb-shaped dry electrode and an active circuit.
Here, the comb-shaped dry electrode made of copper was designed to contact the skin through the hair layer. The high conductive characteristic of copper can reduce the signal attenuation
of biopotential and minimize the intrinsic noise of the electrode.
The skin–electrode interface impedance of the metal electrode
without conductive gel is usually large, and the high and varying skin–electrode interface impedance will result in the signal
attenuation, and the reduction of CMRR. In this study, an active
circuit was designed to reduce the influence of the varying and
high skin–electrode interface impedance. Here, an operational
amplifier in unit-gain configuration, which can provide an ultrahigh input impedance, was used in the active circuit. And
a high input-impedance bias current path Rbia , connected to a
reference voltage Vref , was also applied in the input terminal
of the active circuit to protect against the parasitic voltage and
ensure the operational amplifier working in the active region.
The impedance of the bias current path has to be high enough
to avoid signal attenuation. Therefore, the parallel connection
of two reverse low leakage diodes was used as the bias current
path. Finally, an active guard circuit surrounded all the components to reduce the static charges between output node and input
node [14], [15].
C. Equivalent Model of Active CSDE
The equivalent model of the active CSDE is shown in Fig. 3.
Here, the symbol Vs denotes the biopotential source of human

258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Then, the power density of input-referred noise voltage can
be written as
|Zs Zi + Zi Zg + Zs Zg |2 2
Vn ,rm s + |Zs |2 In2 ,rm s
|Zg Zi |2
(4)
where Viref ,n rm s denotes the root-mean-square (RMS) of inputreferred noise voltage and Vn ,rm s , In ,rm s denote the RMS form
of Vn and In , respectively. From (4), the increase of the equivalent input impedance Zi is an efficient way to reduce noise.
The other way for noise reduction is to reduce the impedance
of skin–electrode interface Zs , i.e., Rs decreases, or Cs
increases.
Overall, the increase of Ri and Cs , and the decrease of Rs ,
Ci , and Cg can provide a better gain response and reduce noise
simultaneously. The characteristics of Ci and Ri are decided
by the selection of the specifications of the used operational
amplifier and the used diodes. Therefore, in this study, the operational amplifier (LMP7702, Texas Instruments, U.S.), which
can provide an ultrahigh input impedance (R > 1 TΩ) and a
small equivalent capacitor (C = 25 pF), was used in the active
circuit. Moreover, the parallel connection of two reverse low
leakage diodes was used as the bias current path, and it can also
increase Ri effectively. In order to reduce Rs , the electrode has
to attach to the skin closely to obtain better signal quality. However, in practice, this is impracticable due to the discomfort of
the use. The increase of the contact area of the dry electrode can
also reduce Rs and increase Cs simultaneously to reduce the
impedance of skin–electrode interface. Cg can also be reduced
by a well shielding layout.
The use of the active circuit can avoid signal attenuation and
phase distortion, and the reduction of CMRR effectively. By selecting the suitable operational amplifier and low leakage diodes
used in the active circuit, it can provide higher Ri to avoid signal
attenuation and the influence of the next stage circuit. Moreover, from the previous two skin–electrode models, the phase
shift may be caused from two time constant contributed by the
capacitor characteristic [7]. The influence of phase shift can be
reduced by adjusting the single pole high-pass filter contributed
from Cs and Ri . Therefore, providing an ultrahigh Ri can provide a lower cut-off frequency of the single pole high-pass filter
to reduce the phase shift. Motion artifact will easily result in
the large variation of the skin–electrode interface impedance,
and then causes the mismatch of two skin–electrode interface
impedances [16]. This will also seriously reduce CMRR to affect the measured signal quality. The use of the active circuit
can reduce dc offset current effectively due to the low input current of the used operational amplifier. When the bias current of
the used operational amplifier is less than 25 pA, it can tolerate
10 MΩ skin–electrode impedance variance [17]. Therefore, by
using the active circuit, it can avoid the reduction of CMRR effectively. Moreover, the use of grounding circuit can effectively
suppress the common-mode signal to improve CMRR.
Next, the output noise generated by the used operational
amplifier was also investigated. The power density of the total output noise voltage Vo,noise of the active CSDE can be
2
Viref
,n rm s =

Fig. 3.

Equivalent model of active CSDE.

body. Cs and Rs are the resistance and capacitor of the skin–
electrode interface, respectively, and the equivalent impedance
of Cs and Rs is expressed as Zs . Here, Av is the gain of the
operational amplifier used in the active circuit, and Ri denotes
the equivalent input resistance of the input resistance Ropi of
the used operational amplifier connected to Rbia in parallel.
And Ci is the input capacitor of the used operational amplifier.
The total equivalent impedance of Ropi , Rbia , and Ci is expressed as Zi . Let Vn and In denote the total voltage noise and
thermal current noise of the electrode, respectively. Cg denotes
the parasitic capacitor between input node and shield layer, and
the impedance of Cg was expressed as Zg . Vo is the output of the
used operational amplifier. The overall source-to-output voltage
gain can be expressed as
G(s) =

Zi
.
Zs + Zi + Zi Zs (1 − Av )sCg

(1)

Rs
Ri
and 1+sR
, reHere, Zs and Zi can rewritten as 1+sR
s Cs
i Ci
spectively. Therefore, the overall source-to-output voltage gain
can be rewritten as

G(s) =

Ri (sRs Cs + 1)
.
sRs Ri [Cs + Ci + (1 − Av )Cg ] + Ri + Rs

(2)

From (2), it shows that some parameters will affect the overall
source-to-output voltage gain. For low-frequency biopotential
source, the overall source-to-output voltage gain is mainly affected by Rs and Ri . The increase of Ri and the decrease of
Rs can provide a better gain response, and reduce the signal
attenuation effectively. For high-frequency biopotential source,
the overall source-to-output voltage gain is mainly affected by
Ci , Cg , and Cs , in particular, Cg . The decrease of Ci and Cg can
reduce leaking current, and the increase of Cs can effectively
reduce the equivalent impedance of skin–electrode interface.
For the noise analysis of the active CSDE, the input-referred
noise voltage Viref ,noise denotes the equivalent input noise
voltage referred to input node, and it can be expressed as
Viref ,noise =

Zs Zi + Zi Zg + Zs Zg
Vn + Zs In .
Zg Zi

(3)

HUANG et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE COMB-SHAPED DRY ELECTRODE FOR EEG MEASUREMENT IN HAIRY SITE

Fig. 4. Equivalent skin–electrode interface impedance corresponding different
frequencies.

expressed as
2
Vo,noise

=




Vn2

Zg + Zs || Zi
Zg

259

Fig. 5. Power spectrum density of noise under different skin–electrode contact
conditions.



2
+ In (Zs || Zi )

2

.

(5)

From the noise model in Fig. 3, it shows that most of the total
output noise voltage related to the used operational amplifier is
mainly contributed from Rs . Noise figure F is defined as the
signal-to-noise ratio of the output noise power of a device to
the attributable noise of a portion in the input termination [18].
Therefore, the noise figure of Rs can be written as
F =

2
Vo,noise
SN Rinput
Rs
V 2 Rs
=
=1+
+ n
SN Routput
4kT Ri
Ri
4kT


1
1
×
+
.
Zg2
|Zi || Zs |2

(6)

Under the assumption of that the electrode completely contacts with the skin, the parameters of skin–electrode interface
will be close to these of the skin (Cs = 10 nF, Rs = 10 MΩ
[12]). The parameters in the used operational amplifier are
listed as follows: Ci = 25 pF, Ri = 1 TΩ, Cg = 5 pF, Vn =
90 nV/Hz1/2 and ω = 2π10 rad/s [19], [20]. Here, ω is the
angular frequency, and was set to 10 Hz corresponding to the
EEG frequency band of interest. From (6), the noise figure F is
only about 0.000086 dB in 10 Hz. Therefore, it shows that the
influence of the used operational amplifier on noise is exactly
very small.
III. RESULTS
A. Electrical Specifications of Active CSDE
Fig. 4 shows the skin–electrode interface impedances of the
wet electrode, active CSDE, and passive CSDE (a comb-shaped
dry electrode without the active circuit) corresponding to different frequencies. In this experiment, a sine wave with 1 peakto-peak voltage (Vpp ), which sweeps from 1 Hz to 100 kHz,
was used as the signal source for test, and the electrodes were
placed on the upper arm. It shows that the skin–electrode interface impedance of the active CSDE is similar to that of the wet
electrode. Obviously, in the low frequency (<10 000 Hz), the
skin–electrode interface impedance of passive CSDE is obviously larger than that of other two electrodes. Next, the intrinsic
noise of the active CSDE was investigated. In this experiment, a
resistance was connected with the ground and the input terminal.
Fig. 5 shows the power spectral density of noise under different

Fig. 6. (a) Performance comparison of avoiding signal attenuation, and
(b) coherence analysis for different types of EEG electrodes.

contact conditions. Here, the resistances of 0 Ω and 10 MΩ
were used to simulate the good and poor skin–electrode contact
conditions, respectively. Under the good contact condition, the
low-frequency part of noise obviously is contributed by flicker
noise [21]. Under the poor contact condition, the low-frequency
part of noise is similar to that of the good contact condition, but
much more thermal noise and shot noise [22] was generated.
Moreover, the noise spectrum under the poor contact condition
is slight higher than that of the good contact condition, and
presents an obvious peak around 60 Hz.
B. Performance for Avoiding Signal Attenuation
and CMRR Reduction
Fig. 6 (a) and (b) shows the performance comparison of avoiding signal attenuation for different electrodes, and their coherence analysis, respectively. According to the international 10–
20 EEG system, three pairs of different electrodes were placed
around the forehead (F10) and hairy sites (Oz) as the reference and primary input, respectively. A wireless EEG module
with the gain of 5000 times [23], [24] was used to acquire and
amplify EEG signal. These electrodes were placed as close to
each other as possible. It shows that the wet electrode and the
proposed active CSDE can provide better signal quality, but the
signal attenuation and distortion for the passive CSDE are obviously serious. The correlation between the wet electrode and the
proposed active CSDE is about 96%. The coherences between

260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of avoiding reduction of CMRR for different
types of EEG electrodes.

EEG obtained by the wet and the active CSDE corresponding to
different frequencies are more stable and higher than that of the
passive CSDE. Therefore, the active CSDE can exactly reduce
the phase distortion.
Next, the performance of avoiding the CMRR reduction for
different electrodes was investigated. In this experiment, an adjustable head band was used to control the skin–electrode contact condition to generate the source impedance mismatch. The
reference input electrodes were applied in a constant pressure
to maintain a constant skin–electrode contact condition. A head
band was adjusted to apply different pressures on the primary
input electrodes to control different skin–electrode contact conditions. Fig. 7 shows the EEG signals obtained by different
electrodes under the good and poor contact conditions. It shows
that, under the good skin–electrode contact condition (about
40 mmHg), the signal quality of the active CSDE is similar
to that of the wet electrode. The signal quality of the passive
CSDE is poor and the influence of the power line interference
on EEG is serious, although the skin–electrode contact condition is good. Compared with the signal quality of the wet EEG
electrode, the signal quality of the active CSDE presents very
slight distortion under the poor skin–electrode contact condition (about 7 mmHg). However, the EEG signal measured by
the passive CSDE presents serious distortion, and was contaminated seriously by the power-line interference. Fig. 8 shows the
comparison of EEG spectra measured from different subjects
with different hair thicknesses. The signal-to-noise ratios of alpha rhythm to power line noise for the thick and thin hair layers
are 6.94 and 7.83 dB, respectively. It shows that, for the active
CSDE, the influence of the hair thickness on the signal quality
is unobvious when the electrode can contact with the skin well.
Next, the performance of measuring EEG under motion for
the active CSDE was tested. Here, different motion levels, walking (low motion) and heavily nod head (heavy motion), were
tested. Fig. 9 shows the EEG signals obtained by different electrodes under different motion levels. It shows that the signal
quality of the active CSDE is similar to that of the wet electrode
when the participant walked. The influence of the low motion on
the signal quality is small. When the participant nodded his/her
head heavily, the signal quality of the active CSDE is still similar
to that of the wet electrode. However, the influence of the heavy

Fig. 8. Comparison of EEG spectra obtained from different subjects with
different hair thicknesses.

Fig. 9. Comparison of EEG signals obtained by different types of electrodes
under different motion levels.

motion on the signal quality for both of the wet electrode and
active CSDE was exactly obvious.
Finally, the simple questionnaire for the comfort of using the
active CSDE with different pressures (below 10 mmHg, 10–
50 mmHg, and over 100 mmHg) has been tested. A total of
15 participants attended this test. It shows that using the active
CSDE with the pressure of below 10 mmHg is acceptable for
86.7% of participants. And most of participants felt painful or
uncomfortable when the pressure is over 100 mmHg.
C. Alpha Rhythm and SSVEP Experiments
In this section, alpha rhythm and SSVEP experiments were
tested. For the alpha rhythm experiment, the participant was
asked to open his/her eyes for a while and then close his/her
eyes. Fig. 10 shows the EEG signals and spectra obtained by the
wet electrode and the active CSDE, and their coherence analysis
in this experiment. The different electrodes were placed around
the location of Oz as the primary input. It shows that both of
EEG spectra of the wet electrode and the active CSDE present
peaks around about 8–12 Hz. And the coherences of EEG signals
obtained by the previous electrodes corresponding to different
frequencies are high. Therefore, the feature of alpha rhythm for
closing eyes can be measured effectively by the active CSDE.

HUANG et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE COMB-SHAPED DRY ELECTRODE FOR EEG MEASUREMENT IN HAIRY SITE

Fig. 10. Comparison of EEG signals and spectra obtained by wet electrode
and active CSDE in alpha rhythm experiment, and their coherence analysis.

Fig. 11.

Raw EEG signals and their EEG spectra for SSVEP experiment.

Next, the SSVEP experiment was tested. SSVEP is a natural physiological feedback signal of the brain corresponding to
an external visual stimulus. When his/her eyes receive a visual
stimulus with a specific frequency, the brain will transform the
signals from the excited retina into EEG signal with the same
frequency. In this experiment, a white light LED module was
used as the source of the visual stimulus, and the flashing frequency of the LED was set from 9 to 15 Hz. The LED module
was placed 40 cm in front of the participant. The primary input
electrode was also placed on the location of Oz. Fig. 11 shows
the results of measuring SSVEP corresponding to the external
visual stimulus with different frequencies. The electrodes were
placed around the location of Oz as the primary input. From
the experimental results, it shows that the EEG spectra corresponding to the flashing frequency of the visual stimulus are
obviously larger than other frequencies. Therefore, the feature
of SSVEP can be measured effectively by the active CSDE.
IV. DISCUSSION
Several dry EEG electrodes have been proposed in previous
studies. Gaetano et al. proposed a conductive rubber electrode

261

to provide a good skin–electrode contact condition [5]. The
diameter of the proposed rubber electrode is 8 mm. The electrode impedance is about 100 Ω, and its input referred noise in
10 Hz is 10 μV. Alpha, rhythm and mu rhythm can be measured
by using the conductive rubber electrode. Jung et al. proposed
CNT/PDMS-based electrodes with different sizes (their diameters are 20, 30, and 40 mm, respectively) [6]. They also indicated
that the skin–electrode impedance was affected by the thickness
and size of the electrode. However, separating hair is necessary
to avoid the influence of the hair layer on EEG measurement.
Therefore, these electrodes may be impracticable and inconvenient for measuring EEG in hairy site.
Griss et al. proposed a MEMS-based spiked electrode, and its
size was between 2 and 3.75 cm2 [1]. Its electrode impedance
was between 16 and 87 Ω in 0.6 Hz. The spiked electrode is
semi-invasive electrode and has to precisely control the spike
length within the stratum germinativum layer. Ng et al. proposed
a microspike EEG electrode with vacuum casting [25]. The
microspike EEG electrode is also a semi-invasive electrode. The
spike length of the previous electrodes has to be longer than the
thickness of the hairy layer to contact with the skin, and they
also have the risk of spike break to cause the skin irritation.
Moreover, the manufacture cost of the previous electrodes is
also expensive.
Toyama et al. proposed a passive comb-shaped dry electrode to measure EEG in hairy site [11]. The shape of the
passive comb-shaped dry electrode can effectively avoid the
influence of the hair. And the spring in the back end of this
electrode can provide a suitable pressure to improve the skin–
electrode contact condition. The higher pressure can maintain
better skin–electrode contact condition, but it also easily causes
the uncomfort of the user. A spike-shaped active dry electrode
(g.SAHARA) was also proposed for EEG measurement [10].
Here, an active electrode circuit was connected to the dry electrode. However, a capacitor was usually series connected to the
input node of the active circuit to eliminate dc offset, and this
may also contribute to the effect of phase distortion.
In this study, an active CSDE was proposed to measure EEG
in hairy site. The diameter of the proposed active CSDE is only
15 mm to provide a better spatial resolution. From the results
in Fig. 4, it shows that the equivalent skin–electrode interface
impedance of the active CSDE is similar to that of the wet
electrode, and is far smaller than that of the passive CSDE.
The skin–electrode interface impedance is estimated from the
signal attenuation of the source signal which passes through a
known impedance and the unknown impedance that wants to
be estimated. Therefore, the ability of avoiding signal attenuation of the active CSDE, due to its ultrahigh input impedance,
results in the present of low equivalent skin–electrode interface
impedance. From the results in Figs. 6 and 7, it shows that the
performance of the active CSDE for avoiding signal attenuation
and the reduction of CMRR is better than that of the passive
CSDE. This can be explained by that the used active circuit can
tolerate offset current to avoid the reduction of CMRR to reduce
the influence of environment noise. The influence of the skin–
electrode contact condition for the active CSDE is obviously
smaller than that of the passive CSDE. The results in Figs. 5,

262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

7, and 8 also indicated that the issue of the contact condition
is exactly an important factor for signal quality. When the active CSDE can contact with the skin well, the influence of the
hair length on the signal quality is unobvious. From the results
in Fig. 9, it shows that the influence of motion artifact on the
signal quality is difficult to avoid, but the signal quality is still
acceptable due to its better ability of avoiding the reduction
of CMRR. In order to solve the issue of the motion artifact,
a specific mechanical design to maintain a good skin electrode
contact condition should be necessary. Finally, the alpha rhythm
and SSVEP experiments were also tested. From the experimental results in Figs. 10 and 11, it indicated that the features of
alpha rhythm and SSVEP can be exactly measured by using the
proposed active CSDE.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, a novel active CSDE was proposed. By the design of the active circuit and the comb-shaped electrode, the proposed active CSDE can effectively measure EEG in hairy site.
Different from MEMS-based dry electrodes that need the complex and expensive manufacture procedure, the structure and
manufacture procedure of the proposed active CSDE is simple,
and it is suitable for mass-production. The experimental results
show that the performances of avoiding the signal attenuation
and the reduction of CMRR for the proposed active CSDE are
excellent. The equivalent skin–electrode interface impedance,
which is a frequency-dependent function, of the active CSDE is
close to that of the wet electrode, and is far smaller than that of
the passive CSDE when the frequency is lower than 10 000 Hz.
The results also indicated that the skin–electrode contact condition is also an important factor to the EEG signal quality. Finally,
the experimental results show that the proposed active CSDE
can exactly extract the features of alpha rhythm and SSVEP, and
can be applied in the development of wearable brain computer
interface applications in the future.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Griss, P. Enoksson, H. K. Tolvanen-Laakso, P. Merilainen, S. Ollmar,
and G. Stemme, “Micromachined electrodes for biopotential measurements,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 10, pp. 10–16, 2001.
[2] P. Griss, H. K. Tolvanen-Laakso, P. Merilainen, and G. Stemme, “Characterization of micromachined spiked biopotential electrodes,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 597–604, Jun. 2002.
[3] C. W. Chang, L. W. Ko, F. C. Lin, T. P. Su, T. P. Jung, C. T. Lin, and
J. C. Chiou, “Drowsiness monitoring with EEG-based MEMS biosensing technologies,” GeroPsych: J. Gerontopsychol. Geriatric Psychiatry,
vol. 23, pp. 107–113, 2010.
[4] B. S. Lin, W. Chou, H. Y. Wang, Y. J. Huang, and J. S. Pan, “Development
of novel non-contact electrodes for mobile electrocardiogram monitoring
system,” IEEE J. Translational Eng. Health Med, vol. 1, art. 2700108,
2013.
[5] G. Gargiulo, R. A. Calvo, P. Bifulco, M. Cesarelli, C. Jin, A. Mohamed, and
A. van Schaik, “A new EEG recording system for passive dry electrodes,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121, pp. 686–693, 2010.
[6] H.-C. Jung, J.-H. Moon, D.-H. Baek, J.-H. Lee, Y.-Y. Choi, J.-S. Hong,
and S.-H. Lee, “CNT/PDMS composite flexible dry electrodes for longterm ECG monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5,
pp. 1472–1479, May 2012.
[7] A. Baba and M. J. Burke, “Measurement of the electrical properties of
ungelled ECG electrodes,” Int. J. Biol. Biomed. Eng., vol. 2, pp. 89–97,
2008.

[8] C. T. Lin, L. D. Liao, Y. H. Liu, I. J. Wang, B. S. Lin, and J. Y. Chang,
“Novel dry polymer foam electrodes for long-term EEG measurement,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1200–1207, May 2011.
[9] E. W. Sellers, P. Turner, W. A. Sarnacki, T. McManus, T. M. Vaughan,
and R. Matthews, “A novel dry electrode for brain-computer interface,”
Human-Comput. Interaction, vol. 5611, pp. 623–631, 2009.
[10] g.tec company, “g.SAHARA active dry EEG electrode system,”
[Online]. Available: http://www.gtec.at/Products/Electrodes-and-Sensors/
g.SAHARA-Specs-Features, 2014.
[11] S. Toyama, K. Takano, and K. Kansaku, “A non-adhesive solid-gel electrode for a non-invasive brain–machine interface,” Frontiers Neurol.,
vol. 3, pp. 1–8, 2012.
[12] Y. M. Chi, J. Tzyy-Ping, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and noncontact biopotential electrodes: Methodological review,” IEEE Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 3, no. 2010, pp. 106–119, Dec. 2010.
[13] L. Beckmann, C. Neuhaus, G. Medrano, N. Jungbecker, M. Walter, T.
Gries, and S. Leonhardt, “Characterization of textile electrodes and conductors using standardized measurement setups,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 31,
pp. 233–247, 2010.
[14] S. Nishimura, Y. Tomita, and T. Horiuchi, “Clinical application of an active electrode using an operational amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 1096–1099, Oct. 1992.
[15] M. Oehler, V. Ling, K. Melhorn, and M. Schilling, “A multichannel
portable ECG system with capacitive sensors,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29,
pp. 783–93, 2008.
[16] T. Degen and H. Jackel, “Continuous monitoring of electrode–skin
impedance mismatch during bioelectric recordings,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1711–1715, Jun. 2008.
[17] W. H. Ko, “Active electrodes for EEG and evoked potential,” in Proc. 20th
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 4, 1998, pp. 2221–2224.
[18] H. T. Friis, “Noise figures of radio receivers,” Proc. IRE, vol. 32,
pp. 419–422, 1944.
[19] Y. M. Chi, C. Maier, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Ultra-high input impedance,
low noise integrated amplifier for noncontact biopotential sensing,” IEEE
J. Emerging Sel. Topics Circuits Syst., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 526–535,
Dec. 2011.
[20] Texas Instruments. (Sep. 2005). “LMP7701/LMP7702/LMP7704 Precision, CMOS Input, RRIO, wide supply range amplifiers,” LMP7701
datasheet, SNOSAI9H.
[21] C. Jimmin, A. A. Abidi, and C. R. Viswanathan, “Flicker noise in CMOS
transistors from subthreshold to strong inversion at various temperatures,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 1965–1971,
Nov. 1994.
[22] R. Sarpeshkar, T. Delbruck, and C. A. Mead, “White noise in MOS transistors and resistors,” IEEE Circuits Devices Mag., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 23–29,
Nov. 1993.
[23] C. T. Lin, C. J. Chang, B. S. Lin, S. H. Hung, C. F. Chao, and I. J. Wang,
“A real-time wireless brain computer interface system for drowsiness
detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 214–222,
Aug. 2010.
[24] C.-T. Lin, B.-S. Lin, F.-C. Lin, and C.-J. Chang, “Brain computer interfacebased smart living environmental auto-adjustment control system in UPnP
home networking,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 363–370, Jun. 2014,
doi: 10.1109/JSYST.2012.2192756.
[25] W. C. Ng, H. L. Seet, K. S. Lee, N. Ning, W. X. Tai, M. Sutedja, J. Y.
Fuh, and X. P. Li, “Micro-spike EEG electrode and the vacuum-casting
technology for mass production,” J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 209,
pp. 4434–4438, 2009.

Yan-Jun Huang received the B.S. degree from
National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,
in 2012, and is currently working toward the Master’s
degree in the Institute of Imaging and Biomedical
Photonics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.
His research interests are in the areas of biomedical circuits and systems and biosensor.

HUANG et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE COMB-SHAPED DRY ELECTRODE FOR EEG MEASUREMENT IN HAIRY SITE

Chung-Yu Wu (F’98) received the Ph.D. degree in
electronics engineering from National Chiao Tung
University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1980.
Since 1980, he has been a Consultant to high-tech
industries and research organizations and has built
up strong research collaborations with them. From
1980 to 1983, he was an Associate Professor with
NCTU, where, since 1987, he has been a Professor. From 1991 to 1995, he served as the Director
of the Division of Engineering and Applied Science,
National Science Council (NSC), Taiwan. From 1996
to 1998, he was named the Centennial Honorary Chair Professor of NCTU and,
from 2007 to 2011, he served as the President of NCTU. He is currently a
Chair Professor of NCTU, the Director General of National Program on Nano
Technology, Taiwan, and the Director of Biomedical Electronics Translational
Research Center. He has authored or coauthored more than 300 technical papers in international journals and conferences. He holds 38 patents, including
19 U.S. patents. His research interests include biomedical electronic devices
and systems, intelligent bioinspired vision sensor systems, and nanoelectronic
circuits and systems for RF/microwave communication.
Dr. Wu is a member of Eta Kappa Nu and Phi Tau Phi. He received the 1998
IEEE Fellow Award and a 2000 Third Millennium Medal. He also received the
numerous research awards presented by the Ministry of Education, NSC, and
professional foundations in Taiwan.

Alice May-Kuen Wong graduated from National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, and received her
rehabilitation residency training in National Taiwan
University Hospital.
She is the Superintendent of Tao-yuan branch Hospital in Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and chaired
the long-term care facilities of Chang Gung System.
She is currently also the Chairman of Physical and
Rehabilitation Medicine Academy Taiwan. She has
been working in rehabilitation for more than 35 years.
She also acts a teaching post at the Institute of
Rehabilitation Science, Chang Gung University as a Professor. Her main clinical and academic interests include physical medicine and rehabilitation, geriatric rehabilitation and long-term care, pediatric rehabilitation, acupuncture and
rehabilitation engineer. Recently, she participated in studies regarding stroke
rehabilitation, motor control in elderly, and application of Tai Chi sport in elderly people with Alzheimer’s disease.

263

Bor-Shyh Lin (M’02) received the B.S. degree from
National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu,
Taiwan, in 1997, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1999
and 2006, respectively, both in electrical engineering.
He is currently an Associate Professor of the
Institute of Imaging and Biomedical Photonics,
NCTU. His research interests are in the areas of
biomedical circuits and systems, and biomedical
signal processing.

