82

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Home Telemonitoring of Vital Signs—Technical
Challenges and Future Directions
Branko G. Celler, Fellow, IEEE, and Ross S. Sparks

Abstract—The telemonitoring of vital signs from the home is
an essential element of telehealth services for the management
of patients with chronic conditions, such as congestive heart failure (CHF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), diabetes, or poorly controlled hypertension. Telehealth is now being
deployed widely in both rural and urban settings, and in this paper,
we discuss the contribution made by biomedical instrumentation,
user interfaces, and automated risk stratification algorithms in developing a clinical diagnostic quality longitudinal health record at
home. We identify technical challenges in the acquisition of highquality biometric signals from unsupervised patients at home, identify new technical solutions and user interfaces, and propose new
measurement modalities and signal processing techniques for increasing the quality and value of vital signs monitoring at home.
We also discuss use of vital signs data for the automated risk stratification of patients, so that clinical resources can be targeted to
those most at risk of unscheduled admission to hospital. New research is also proposed to integrate primary care, hospital, personal
genomic, and telehealth electronic health records, and apply predictive analytics and data mining for enhancing clinical decision
support.
Index Terms—Telehealth, vital signs, biomedical instrumentation, biomedical signal processing, medical expert systems.

I. INTRODUCTION
ELEHEALTH is the use of electronic information and
telecommunications technologies to support long-distance
clinical health care, patient and professional health-related education, public health, and health administration. Video consultation is one element of telehealth service delivery that is the
most developed in Australia, because Government and funding
agencies are most comfortable funding face-to-face provider–
patient interactions. Many of the benefits and cost effectiveness
associated with telehealth however, arise exactly from the alternative model, asynchronous home telemonitoring of vital signs
promoting greater patient self-management.
While particularly useful in addressing issues of equity and
access for populations in rural and remote areas, telehealth is
being increasingly used in urban settings to better manage patients with complex chronic conditions such as congestive heart

T

Manuscript received March 26, 2014; revised June 3, 2014; accepted August
15, 2014. Date of publication August 22, 2014; date of current version December
30, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Telehealth Pilots Program
(ITA 274/1112) of the Australian Commonwealth Government.
The authors are with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO), Digital Productivity and Services (DP&S) Flagship, at
Marsfield and North Ryde, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (e-mail: branko.
celler@csiro.au; ross.sparks@csiru.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2351413

failure (CHF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
diabetes, and morbid hypertension (HT). Telehealth is also used
in palliative and end-of-life care, in the management of cystic fibrosis, cancer, and numerous other conditions. Telehealth
technologies, however, can also be used in general practice,
community health centers, and community nursing setting to
better manage patient flows, optimize clinician time, and triage
patients before they see a clinician.
A. Economic Drivers for Telehealth
In industrialized nations, approximately 70–78% of healthcare budgets are spent on the management of chronic disease or
its exacerbations [1]–[3].
As the population ages, the burden of chronic disease increases. Around 80% of GP consultations relate to chronic disease [4]. Patients with a chronic disease or complications use
over 60% of hospital bed days and two-thirds of patients admitted as medical emergencies have exacerbation of chronic
disease or have chronic disease [4]. For patients with more
than one condition, costs are six times higher than those with
only one [4]. Some people are highly intensive users of services (10% of inpatients account for 55% of inpatient days) or
very intensive users (5% of inpatients account for 40% of bed
days) [4].
The Whole System Demonstrator (WSD) Programme of the
UK Department of Health provided the following Headline
Findings [5]:
1) 15% reduction in A&E visits;
2) 20% reduction in emergency admissions;
3) 14% reduction in elective admissions;
4) 14% reduction in bed days;
5) 8% reduction in tariff costs;
6) 45% reduction in mortality rates.
In the US the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) introduced a national home telehealth program, Care Coordination/Home Telehealth (CCHT) [6]. Its purpose was to coordinate the care of veteran patients with chronic conditions and
avoid their unnecessary admission to long-term institutional
care. Between 2003 and 2007, the census figure (point prevalence) for VHA CCHT patients increased from 2000 to 31 570
(1500% growth). CCHT is now a routine NIC service provided
by VHA to support veteran patients with chronic conditions
as they age. Routine analysis of data obtained for quality and
performance purposes from a cohort of 17 025 CCHT patients
shows the benefits of a 25% reduction in numbers of bed days
of care, 19% reduction in numbers of hospital admissions, and
mean satisfaction score rating of 86% after enrollment into the
program.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CELLER AND SPARKS: HOME TELEMONITORING OF VITAL SIGNS—TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

B. Telehealth in Australia
Australia’s universal health care scheme, Medicare was introduced in 1975 and guarantees all citizens access to a wide range
of health services at little to no cost. State and Federal Governments fund approximately 70% of all healthcare costs and
share responsibility for the delivery of healthcare services, with
the Federal government responsible for primary care and aged
care and State Governments broadly responsible for funding
hospitals.
Total health expenditure in Australia has trebled in the last
25 years and is now $140.2b pa, or 9.5% of GDP [1]. Hospitals
doctors and medicines dominate our national health spending
profile data with costs for dental, hospital, and medical services
rising at almost three times the consumer price index (CPI) over
the last decade [1].
In Australia, there are over one million individuals aged over
65 with three or more chronic conditions, which lead to multiple
unscheduled admissions to hospital [1]. Since hospital costs are
the most rapidly growing component of health care expenditure,
it is not surprising that at-home telemonitoring is being increasingly recognized as one of the most effective ways of reducing
unscheduled admissions to hospital [7].
However, large-scale deployment of telehealth services continues to suffer legislative, funding, and policy roadblocks. The
Australian Federal–State system has made it difficult to implement policy and funding frameworks that align those that pay
and those that benefit from large-scale deployment of telehealth
services.
C. Clinical Benefits and Health Outcomes of Telehealth
There are many clinical benefits associated with remote patient monitoring with a large range of chronic conditions [8].
These include, (i) an increase in mean survival time in a sample of 387 diabetic patients who undertook daily monitoring
of vital signs [9], (ii) a significant improvement in glycemic
control in diabetic patients who transmitted blood glucose and
blood pressure data to a telehealth nurse [10], (iii) a 71% reduction in emergency room (ER) admissions in respiratory patients who had oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry
and monitored daily [11], (iv) a reduction in the number of
hospital readmissions in patients with angina [12], (v) significant improvements in health-related quality of life, a decrease
in mortality in COPD patients using home monitoring [13],
(vi) a 43% reduction in hospitalizations, a 68% reduction in bed
days of care in cardiac patients who transmitted daily ECG and
blood pressure data [14], and (vii) a 50% reduction in the risk of
heart-failure-related readmission, and 55% reduction in cardiovascular mortality in chronic heart failure patients monitored at
home [15].
Significant benefits of at-home telemonitoring are also evident for patients following complex cardiac interventions. These
include reduced office visits and earlier detection of clinical
anomalies such atrial arrhythmias in patients with implantable
cardiac devices who were monitored remotely using automated, wireless technology [16], faster detection of clinically
actionable events in patients with cardiac pacemakers [17], a
significant decrease (45%) in the need for in-patient hospital

83

evaluation in 1339 patients with implanted cardiac defibrillators who were remotely monitored [18] and reduced time to
clinical decision in a large group (n = 2000) of patients with
implantable cardiac devices who were monitored using wireless
telemetry devices and alerts [17], detection of a far greater number of clinical or device-related events than during scheduled
office visits in patients with implantable cardiac devices [18],
earlier detection of clinically relevant events, most of which occurred within a month of follow-up in patients with implantable
cardiac devices [19], and a 50% reduction in mortality in a
large sample (n = 69 556) of patients with implantable cardiac
devices, including cardiac defibrillators [20].

II. REGULATORY CHARACTERISTICS
OF TELEMONITORING SYSTEMS
The regulation and listing of medical devices are the responsibilities of individual national authorities who generally align
their standards to either the European Medical Device Directives
(MDD 93/42/EEC) or to the USA FDA or both.
Medical devices are defined as articles that are used for a
medical purpose and are typically instruments, intended for use
in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease. Medical devices
are classified as Class I, II, and III, with regulatory control
increasing as the class number increases.
The device classification regulation defines the regulatory requirements for a general device type. Most home telemonitoring
devices and systems are generally classified as Class II and require Premarket Notification 510(k) in the US and CE marking
in the EU.
An important distinction must be made for telemonitoring
systems, which include a tablet computer communicating with
one or more Bluetooth-enabled medical devices. If a tablet computer collects data from a medical device and transfers that data
without altering it any way to a third party, it’s not a medical
device.
If the device applies any form of processing to the data, or
alters it any way, that may present a risk of corrupting the
data, then the tablet device becomes a medical device. For such
systems not only do the individual medical instruments need to
be approved medical devices, the overall system must be tested
and registered as a medical device.
Because of the plethora of medical apps now available in the
market for mobile phone and tablet applications, the FDA released an advisory document [21] on September 23, 2013, titled
Mobile Medical Applications. Guidance for Industry and Food
and Drug Administration Staff. It states that when Mobile apps
are marketed, promoted, or intended for use in the diagnosis
of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, or otherwise meet the definition
of medical device, FDA intends to exercise enforcement discretion. Accordingly, only a very small fraction of the more than
97, 000 apps available for download from major app stores, will
be of interest to the FDA as the vast majority are not classified
as medical instruments and carry minimal risks to consumers or
patients [22].

84

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

It is clear from this document that mobile apps that transform
a mobile platform into a regulated medical device are mobile
medical apps. As an example, mobile apps that use a sensor
or lead that is connected to a mobile platform to measure and
display the electrical signal produced by the heart (electrocardiograph or ECG) are regulated medical devices.
An example of these class of medical instruments is
the Alivecor cardiac monitor (http://www.alivecor.com/home),
which received FDA approval in November 2012 as a Class
II device. This device is essentially a separate single-channel
ECG instrument that clips on to an iPhone. It records a singlechannel electrocardiogram and communicates with the iPhone
via frequency-modulated ultrasound. Once the ECG is recorded
on the iPhone, it can be displayed, stored, and transferred to a
cloud server for further analysis and clinical review.
Today, just over a hundred mobile medical apps have received
clearance from the FDA with the majority being classified as
Class I or Class II devices [23].
All apps are affected by a patchwork of polices related to
medical licensure, privacy and security protection, and malpractice liability [24] that are beyond the scope of this paper.
Other regulatory requirements relate to privacy protection of the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
as well as Quality Management, ISO 13485:2003, Medical
devices–Quality management systems–Requirements for regulatory purposes (2003) as well as specific regulations covering
individual measurement modalities, for example, IEC 606012-51 First edition 2003-02 Medical electrical equipment—Part
2-51: Particular requirements for safety, including essential
performance of recording and analyzing single-channel and
multichannel electrocardiographs, or ANSI/AAMI/IEC 80601–
2–30:2009 Medical electrical equipment—Part 2-30: Particular
requirements for the basic safety and essential performance of
automated noninvasive sphygmomanometers or ANSI/AAMI
SP10:2002/A1:2003 Manual, electronic, or automated
sphygmomanometers.

Irrespective of whether telemonitoring systems are delivered
via a medical app on a mobile phone or tablet, they commonly use a dedicated display for patient prompting, questionnaire delivery, scheduling of measurements, and data display.
Some may have multilingual capability and voice prompting
for use by the visually impaired. Display capability may be integrated with the bioinstrumentation unit or be via commercial
tablets connecting to a range of medical devices via Bluetooth
wireless.
Modular medical devices may commonly include noninvasive
blood pressure (NIBP) monitors, pulse oximeters, glucometers,
thermometers, and weight scales. Much more rarely, spirometers or peak flow measurement devices, single-lead ECG, and
electronic stethoscopes may also be available.
Despite the increasing popularity of tablet-based monitoring
systems, dedicated integrated telemonitoring devices incorporating a number of vital signs monitoring devices have numerous advantages. These include mains power (no batteries to replace!), dedicated user design and functionality optimized to the
cognitive and physical capabilities of the user, and the ability to
obtain and maintain regulatory approval for a single integrated
device.
Disadvantages include reduced mobility and reduced flexibility in choosing only those vital signs most relevant to the
patient’s chronic condition. Dedicated telehealth monitoring
systems may also find it difficult to take advantage of rapidly
evolving processor, graphics, and connectivity capability typical
of high-volume low-cost consumer devices, resulting in design
“lock-in” because of the high cost of changes in design and
limited production volumes.
There are over 40 major international manufacturers of telemonitoring systems, not all necessarily available in every country. Selecting a telehealth monitoring system can thus be a challenging task as there are no guidelines to determine features and
performance most relevant to the application.
IV. CLINICAL TRIAL DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY SELECTION

III. COMMON CHARACTERISTICS
OF TELEMONITORING SYSTEMS
Telemonitoring systems are generally designed to monitor
chronically ill patients at home, identify an exacerbation of
their condition, and orchestrate the most appropriate response
to avoid unnecessary hospitalization. Although there are many
applications of wearable or mobile computing emerging, these
are finding more ready acceptance either in health and fitness
applications and are rarely used for the management of chronic
disease because of significant challenges of compliance and
adherence.
Of possibly greater relevance to the monitoring of the critically ill at home are unobtrusive systems, which monitor the
interaction of the individual within their environment using lowcost wireless sensors to monitor mobility, use of services in
the bathroom, kitchen, and bedroom as well as to track activities of daily living (ADL). This identifies changes health status
[25]–[32].

The CSIRO Telehealth Project, Home Monitoring of Chronic
Disease in Aged Care funded by the Australian Government
provides a useful case study for consideration of clinical trial
design and technology selection. This trial is a multisite, multistate project exploring the impact of introducing home telemonitoring on six existing models of care for the management
of chronic disease in the community. The clinical design of this
trial has been previously reported [33] and only a summary is
provided in this paper.
The trial design is a Before and After Intervention Control
(BACI) design [34] with 25 test patients and 50 case matched
control patients at each site. The only difference between the
test patient and their control patients is the home telemonitoring. In the statistical sense, these two groups are correlated
by the matching process. Each site was designed to have a
power of 0.8 and a specific type I error probability of α = 0.05
(two-sided test).
Clinical eligibility for the trial takes a novel population health
approach requiring at least two unscheduled admissions to

CELLER AND SPARKS: HOME TELEMONITORING OF VITAL SIGNS—TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

hospital in the previous year or at least four (4) unplanned acute
hospital admissions over the previous five years, with one or
more of the following chronic conditions:
1) COPD [J41–J44, J47, and J20 (only with secondary diagnosis of J41, J42, J43, J44, J47)];
2) coronary artery disease (CAD, I20–I25) and hypertensive
diseases (I10–I15, I11.9);
3) CHF (I11.0, I50, J81);
4) diabetes (E10–E14);
5) asthma (J45).
The trial is designed to explore multiple endpoints. In addition to healthcare outcomes such as number of hospital admissions and length of stay, the trial will explore the relative
socioeconomic benefits of home telemonitoring in the context
of a number of existing service models for the management
of chronic disease in the community. In addition, patient and
clinician acceptance of home telemonitoring, as well the requirements for changes in workplace culture and organizational
change management, will be explored.
This clinical trial is particularly data rich as it combines data
recorded daily from the telemonitoring system with point of entry and exit questionnaires as well as medical and pharmaceutical data stored in the Department of Human Services Medicare
databases [35]. Hospital data are obtained from data recorded
as part of the Health Roundtable, which collects, analyzes, and
publishes information comparing organizations to identify ways
to improve operational practices in the Australian national health
system (see https://www.healthroundtable.org/JoinUs.aspx).

85

Fig. 1. Multifunction at-home telemonitoring unit (CMU) selected for the
CSIRO home monitoring of chronic disease trial.

A. Selection of Telemonitoring Technology
An independent panel, not including either author, was established to select the technology provider for the trial. A shortlist
of five suppliers operating in the Australian market was selected and each was independently assessed against a number of
criteria.
The panel selected Telemedcare Pty Ltd as the technology
provider, an Australian Company spun out of the University of
NSW and operating in Australia and the UK since 2006. Although the company now has regulatory approval for a tablet
solution with Bluetooth-connected medical instruments, the fact
that many patients on the trial would likely have multiple comorbidities led to the choice of the integrated clinical monitoring
unit (CMU) shown later. Unique features of the TMC telemonitoring unit included NIBP measurement combining auscultatory
and oscillometric, techniques, medical grade spirometry (forced
and relaxed), single-lead ECG using dry contact surface electrodes, and integrated video conferencing. Options also exist for
the selection of Bluetooth-connected thermometers, glucometers, and weight scales.
A unique feature of the TMC telemonitoring system is that
the raw signals from which all measurements are derived are
displayed in real time on the patient monitor during the measurement hence promoting better measurement technique and
more reliable measurements. These unique characteristics will
now be explored in greater detail with reference to the challenges
of unsupervised collection of vital signs in the home.

Fig. 2.

Clinically significant changes in waveform morphology over time.

B. ECG Signal Recording and Analysis
The ECG is recorded by clasping the Ag/AgCl-plated electrodes shown in Fig. 1, with the right-hand thumb making contact with the upper electrode, acting as driven electrode to reduce
common mode noise. This essentially records the equivalent to
Lead I of the 12-lead ECG. The signal is recorded over a bandwidth of 0.05–100 Hz and is then processed to give an overall
linear phase response from 0.5–40 Hz. Linear phase response
is essential to maintain signal fidelity in the region of the QRS
signal and ST segment. Notch filters are available to remove any
residual mains power frequency noise.
The CMU currently records the single-lead ECG and measures the HR, which is displayed as HR ± SD, with a standard
deviation (SD) of greater than 20% indicative of the presence of
cardiac arrhythmia.
Of greater clinical value at this time, however, are the changes
in waveform morphometry and rhythm over time that can be
easily observed by clinicians as is shown in the ECG traces
in Fig. 2.
While morphometric analysis of single-lead ECGs is challenging, the availability of single-lead ECG traces may permit
the extraction of key clinical parameters such as QRS height and

86

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Illustration of artifact detection using the algorithm described in [37].
The single-lead ECG shown was acquired using the TMC CMU device. The
region of signal that the algorithm marked as containing artifact is illustrated.
This artifact was primarily caused by movement at the hand/electrode interface.
Also shown are the automatically determined QRS locations for the remaining
segment of ECG.

Fig. 4. Example of BP record free of noise, artifact, or arrhythmia. Pressure
traces are calibrated in mmHg. Korotkoff sounds are displayed in arbitrary units
of root mean square energy using a Hamming window of 50 ms width.

widths, PR, RR, and QT and QTc intervals, as well as arrhythmia
classification based on the RR interval signal.
It is certainly possible to identify a normal rhythm, premature ventricular contractions (PVCs), ventricular flutter, or fibrillation as well as six different rhythm disturbances such as
ventricular bigeminy, ventricular trigeminy, ventricular couplet,
ventricular tachycardia, ventricular flutter/fibrillation, and heart
block [36] from the RR interval.
Unsupervised recording of ECG signals at home without the
use of leads and specialized electrodes can often prove challenging due to poor measurement techniques, high levels of
baseline drift, excessive mains frequency noise, high levels of
EMG activity, or patient tremor, as shown in Fig. 3. We have
addressed these issues in a number of previous papers [37]–[39]
and demonstrated that even with severely corrupted data it is
possible to identify and extract portions of the rhythm strip,
which are suitable for analysis.
C. Noninvasive Blood Pressure Measurements
The noninvasive measurement of blood pressure is a significantly more complex problem. Traditionally, the gold reference
standard for noninvasive human blood pressure determination is

by sphygmomanometry [40]. The cuff is inflated to a level above
arterial pressure (as indicated by obliteration of the pulse) and
as the cuff is gradually deflated, the pressure is noted at which
sounds produced by the arterial pulse waves (Korotkoff sounds)
appear and disappear again as flow through the artery resumes.
The pressure at which the sounds first appear (onset of Phase
I) corresponds to the systolic pressure. The onset of Phase V,
where the sounds disappear is generally used to define the diastolic pressure in adults.
Many automated devices are available to measure blood
pressure by both auscultatory and oscillometric techniques but
most NIBP monitors used for at-home telemonitoring are based
on oscillometric techniques where the systolic and diastolic
pressures are empirically determined, based on the mean arterial pressure, by reading the value of the cuff pressure when
the oscillation amplitude is at some fraction of its maximum
amplitude.
This method is employed in most automated NIBP devices
[41] but is incapable of highly accurate BP estimation [42],
[43], particularly in the presence of noise or cardiac arrhythmia
and is not always appropriate for use in clinical applications,
such as managing HT [42], [43]. NIBP using the auscultatory
method is more accurate than NIBP using the oscillometric
method [41], [43] and for these reasons the TMC CMU uses
a combined oscillometric and auscultatory method designed
to be tolerant to the effects of movement artifact or cardiac
arrhythmia.
A typical NIBP record free of movement artifact or cardiac
arrhythmia is shown in Fig. 4.
Cardiac arrhythmias, however, are frequent in the elderly population, perhaps secondary to an increased prevalence of HT
and CAD, as well as age-related changes of the ventricular and
atrial myocardium and pacemaker tissue and conduction pathways [44]. Both ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias as
well as atrial fibrillation (AF) are common in those ࣙ65 and increase significantly with age and the presence of cardiovascular
disease.
AF was diagnosed in 4.8% of women and in 6.2% of men
at the baseline examination and increased to 9.1% in both men
and women with clinical cardiovascular disease [45].
Ventricular arrhythmias may be seen in 70%–80% of population over the age of 60 years. The frequency of PVCs is
often high, and complex forms are common in this age group,
although they are often asymptomatic. Studies have reported
that 70%–95% of patients with heart failure have ventricular arrhythmias and 20%–80% have ventricular tachycardia
(VT) [46].
In the context of at-home telemonitoring of patients with
chronic disease, it is curious that the performance standards
required of automated NIBP devices as defined by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation
[47], the British Hypertension Society [48], and ISO 810602 (2009), only apply to less stringent condition that the records
do not contain any movement artifact, arrhythmia, or other
interference.
One of the greatest limitations of the use of the oscillatory
method occurs when the patient has an arrhythmia and therefore

CELLER AND SPARKS: HOME TELEMONITORING OF VITAL SIGNS—TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

87

a large variation in BP from beat to beat. An example of the effect
of arrhythmia is shown in Fig. 5.
V. RISK STRATIFICATION AND DECISION SUPPORT
IN TELEHEALTH
As at home telemonintoring becomes an increasingly routine
method of managing chronic disease in the community, automated risk stratification and decision support will become of
critical importance to effectively monitor and triage potentially
tens of thousands of patients. Automated assessment of signal
quality and reliability is therefore essential if clinicians are to
have confidence in the longitudinal data that is being collected
from the home.
In previous sections, we have identified how unsupervised
recordings of ECG and blood pressure at home can be compromised by mains frequency noise, baseline wander, movement
artifact, and signal amplitude, and in other papers [37]–[39],
we have proposed a number of signal processing techniques to
identify noise corruption and either reject the record or to mask
out the corrupted sections and continue with the analysis.
This essential quality control step is not possible if the traces
are not recorded, as is predominantly the case at present with
most home telemonitoring systems and devices, and as a consequence, there cannot be any way of retrospectively assessing
the quality of the data being recorded.

Fig. 5. Example of BP record corrupted by cardiac arrhythmia. Algorithmic
detection of systolic and diastolic pressures from the oscillometric envelope
of ΔPressure is clearly impossible. Pressure traces are calibrated in mmHg.
Korotkoff sounds are displayed in arbitrary units of root mean square energy
using a Hamming window of 50 ms duration.

A. Decision Support Systems in Home Telehealth
A recent review of decision support for home telehealth [49]
identifies the limited development in this field over the last
decade and concludes that the primary drawback of current systems is the missing integration of decision support system (DSS)
in current health information systems architectures, including
interfaces and the lack of formalization and customization of
medical knowledge and a lack of intelligent algorithms to interpret data from multiple sources.
Recent work by Basilakis et al. [50]–[52] presents an advanced DSS architecture that integrates vital signs data with
medications and patient questionnaire data. This data architecture employs several different technologies for data preprocessing and subsequent analysis, followed by a rule-based module
using the JBoss production rule engine. Established clinical
guidelines then serve as the basis for the production rules that
are then formalized using XML.
An important consideration in the development of DSSs is
that implementation will almost inevitably lead to a reclassification of the telemonitoring system as Class III, thus imposing
significant addition regulatory burden on the manufacturer. As
a consequence, it is often strategically more sound to provide
sophisticated data analytics and statistical analyses, which can
be used by clinicians to identify changes in health status.
B. Risk Stratification and Data Analytics in Home Telehealth
An important objective of the CSIRO telemonitoring trial
is to develop statistical techniques for identifying changes in
patients’ health status, initially from vital signs data alone, so

Fig. 6. The boxes below the variable plot flag significant changes in pair-wise
correlations. Empty boxes with blue boundary indicate no change. Green boxes
indicates variables are less correlated and red boxes more correlated.

that the clinical care coordinator can risk stratify patients on
the basis of need and orchestrate in a timely fashion the most
appropriate response to avoid unnecessary hospitalization.
Daily monitoring of patients in our trial involves measuring
on a daily basis, systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood
pressure (DBP), body temperature (Temp), heart rate (HR), body
weight (BW), pulse oximetry (SpO2 ), forced expiratory volume
in one second (FEV1 ), peak expiratory flow (PEF), and forced
vital capacity (FVC).
Testing whether a patient health status has changed from
some baseline therefore involves a multivariate assessment of
whether the locations of the measures have changed from the
baseline mean values. This typically involves a Hotelling’s T2
test for the measures based on the assumption that these are
normally distributed [53]. There are nonparametric alternatives
to this test, but here the normal assumption is reasonable.
These changes can be visually monitored using the dynamic
biplot [54] as shown in Fig. 5. A biplot aims to represent both the
observations and variables of a matrix of multivariate data on the
same plot. It is an enhanced scatterplot of the first two principal
components of a set of multivariate data with the horizontal axis,

88

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

plot does so assuming that there is a step change rather than a
continuous change in level as in the trend plot.
The step change in the variance of the measures plot provides
a measure of the uncertainty in the level of the measurement. Uncertainty here is both the small day-to-day movements in level
of a measure and the inability to reproduce the same measurement if the same entity is measured again. This tests whether the
uncertainty in measures has increased/decreased significantly.
These three plots provide a statistically robust way of identifying significant changes in trends and in variance and can be
used to identify both changes in health status as well as poor
measurement technique.
These statistical plots are not necessarily visible to clinicians who are flagged changes in patient status using a simple
overview traffic light plot as shown in Fig. 8.
The overview plot provides an example of the information
matrix on a particular day for a sample of ten patients, none
of which are recording their blood glucose levels. In the plot
shown earlier, for example, statistically significant changes in
DBP, SpO2, FVC, and PEF were observed for patient 1.
VI. FUTURE WORK
Fig. 7. Trend plot for body temperature for one patient. Red dotted lines show
confidence limits from baseline measures. Black dots are moving average of
measurements.

the first principal component, and the vertical axis, the second
principal component. Together, these represent around 70% of
the variation in the observations in Fig. 6.
In the observation plot, points that are close together correspond to observations that have similar scores on the two
principal components plotted. On the variable plot, the vectors
are drawn from the origin of the plot in a way that makes their
direction and length interpretable.
That is, the vector is aligned with the direction that is most
strongly related to the vector’s variation. Changes in the pattern
of points in the observation plot and in the lengths and relative
orientations of the vectors in the variable plot will yield information about changes in the location, variance, and correlation
structure of the observations.
The boxes below the variable plot flag significant changes in
pair-wise correlations. Empty boxes with blue boundary indicate
no change. Green boxes indicates variables are less correlated
and red boxes more correlated.
Although dynamic biplots display all the information needed
by the clinical care coordinator, they may be too difficult for nonstatisticians to interpret, and a number of alternative and more
conventional methods are also being explored and tested in the
field. An example of individual trend plots for body temperature
is shown in Fig. 7.
Two additional plots are available but are not shown here.
The change point and magnitude for level plot identifies a step
change in the trend of the measures. The step change trend plot
confirms what the trend plot indicates, but the change point

The application of biomedical signal analysis, statistical data
analysis, predictive analytics, and decision support to telehealth
data collected at home in unsupervised settings has to-date received relatively little attention in the scientific literature [37]–
[39], [55]–[58]. This research is essential if clinicians are to become confident of the quality of the data being collected and are
to be assisted in the complex task of identifying early changes in
patients’ health status and orchestrating an optimal and timely
clinical response to avoid unnecessary hospitalization.
Identifying statistically significant changes in vital signs
recorded is only the first step in this process. Clinical decision
support will need to be developed to identify reliably clinically
significant changes in daily records of patient data.
As patient databases increase in size and quality, new data
analytic research will be needed to find biomarkers that identify
exacerbation in health status in advance of clinically significant
changes. For example, small subclinical changes in body temperature, heart rate, and lung function may be able to effectively
predict the imminent development of a chest infection in some
patients.
In the CSIRO National Trial, data collected from all 150 test
patients in the trial is being used to improve the early identification of exacerbation in patients’ health status, based on statistically robust methods. These data are also being used to build
models to forecast the risk of hospitalization for each patient for
the next month based on past history of treatments, hospitalizations, medications, doctor visits, and longitudinal records of at
home measurements of vital signs.
These models will attempt to forecast risk for the next month
and hence help the nurse care coordinator plan hospital avoidance interventions, whenever possible. At the beginning of each
month, the nurse care coordinator will be assisted to design a
care plan for the next months. Weekly updates of the model
will be used to assess whether any change to the current plan

CELLER AND SPARKS: HOME TELEMONITORING OF VITAL SIGNS—TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

is needed based on changes in the forecast risk as new data are
received.
This is still a work in progress and is waiting for the availability of the complete historical patient medical record to progress
this research task.
VII. CONCLUSION
At-home telemonitoring for the management of chronic disease is making an increasingly important contribution to improving healthcare outcomes and reducing costs in the context of aging populations and the increasing burden of chronic
disease [5]–[15]. In this paper, we have briefly described the
research protocol for the CSIRO National Telehealth Project
“Home Monitoring of Chronic Disease in Aged Care” and identified the key technical performance characteristics of at-home
telemonitoring systems and the regulatory systems under which
they must be licensed.
We present a case for the importance of collecting highquality verifiable data in the home and identify mains frequency
noise, movement artifact, and cardiac arrhythmias as major contributors to the unreliability of numerical data collected from a
range of instruments.
Until data collected from unsupervised recordings in the home
can be demonstrated to be comparable in quality and reliability
to data collected in the hospital or GP surgery, clinicians will
continue to view at home telehealth management of chronically
ill patients with reasonable suspicion.
International performance standards for automated BP monitors permit errors >15 mmHg for 5% of the time. Putting this
into a clinical context, an error of 10 mmHg could potentially
lead to the misclassification of 100 000 adults in the UK in
terms of their BP status [41]. International standards for NIBP
monitors are also silent on their accuracy and performance in
the presence of ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias as
well as AF, which are common in those ࣙ65 and increase significantly with age and the presence of cardiovascular disease.
In the absence of formal technical standards covering the performance and classification of automated monitoring systems
in unsupervised at home settings, we suggest that the recording
of vital sign traces is essential, as the trained clinical operator can immediately review the graphical data as shown in
Figs. 2–5, identify an error in measurement, and use their clinical judgment to edit the automated measurement.
In addition to the potential impact of erroneous or poorquality measurement on the safe and effective management of
chronically ill patients at home, the reliability and quality of
any DSS that may be dependent on these data would also be in
question.
We conclude with the view that the quality and reliability of
at-home telemonitoring systems for the management of chronic
disease are critically important and warrant further research as
well as the attention of regulatory agencies.
As the quality and volume of telehealth data increase, there
is also scope for the application of predictive analytics and
data mining to identify when in the patient’s disease life cycle
at-home telemonitoring provides the best return on investment

89

(ROI) and which vital signs and questionnaire data provide the
best predictive value [58].
The diagnostic and predictive value of at-home telehealth data
would be further enhanced by linking these datasets to primary
care and hospital electronic patient records as well as pathology, biochemistry, and whole genome data. The development
of these large linked datasets and the application of predictive
analytics and data mining for clinical decision support show
great potential and warrant further research.

REFERENCES
[1] AIHW 2013, Health Expenditure Australia 2011–12, Health and Welfare Expenditure Series no. 50, Cat. no. HWE 59, Canberra, Australia, (2013). [Online]. Available at: http://www.aihw.gov.au/publicationdetail/?id=60129544658
[2] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Chronic diseases. The power
to prevent, the call to control. At a glance Dec. 17, 2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag/pdf/
chronic.pdf
[3] G. Anderson and J. Horvath, “The growing burden of chronic disease in America,” Public Health Rep., vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 263–270,
May/Jun. 2004.
[4] UK Department of Health. (2004, May). Chronic disease management: A compendium of information [Online]. Available:
http://www.natpact.info/uploads/Chronic%20Care%20Compendium.pdf
[5] A. Steventon, M. Bardsley, J. Billings, J. Dixon, H. Doll, S. Hirani, M.
Cartwright, L. Rixon, M. Knapp, C. Henderson, A. Rogers, R. Fitzpatrick,
J. Hendy, and S. Newman, “Effect of telehealth on use of secondary
care and mortality: Findings from the whole system demonstrator cluster
randomised trial,” BMJ, vol. 344, p. e3874, 2012.
[6] A. Darkins, P. Ryan, R. Kobb, L. Foster, E. Edmonson, B. Wakefield,
and A. E. Lancaster, “Care coordination/home telehealth: The systematic
implementation of health informatics, home telehealth, and disease management to support the care of veteran patients with chronic conditions,”
Telemedicine e-Health, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 1118–1126, 2008.
[7] A. Brettle, T. Brown, N. Hardiker, J. Radcliffe, and C. Smith. Telehealth.
The effects on clinical outcomes, cost effectiveness and the patient experience: A systematic overview of the literature [Online]. Available:
http://usir.salford.ac.uk/29392/4/Telehealth_v8_.pdf
[8] Medical Technology Association of Australia. (2012, May). A telehealth strategy for Australia: Supporting patients in the community [Online]. Available: http://mtaa.org.au/docs/position-papers/supporting-atelehealth-strategy-for-australia-release-version-may-2012.pdf?sfvrsn=0
[9] N. R. Chumbler, H. C. Chuang, S. S. Wu, X. Wang, R. Kobb, D. Haggstrom, and H. Jia, “Mortality risk for diabetes patients in a care coordination, home-telehealth programme,” J. Telemedicine Telecare, vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 98–101, 2009.
[10] R. A. Stone, R. H. Rao, M. A. Sevick, C. Cheng, L. J. Hough, D. S.
Macpherson, C. M. Franko, R. A. Anglin, D. S. Obrosky, and F. R. Derubertis, “Active care management supported by home telemonitoring in
veterans with type 2 diabetes: The DiaTel randomized controlled trial,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 478–484, 2010.
[11] M. Vitacca, L. Bianchi, A. Guerra, C. Fracchia, A. Spanevello, B. Balbi,
and S. Scalvini, “Tele-assistance in chronic respiratory failure patients: A
randomised clinical trial,” Eur. Respiratory J., vol. 33, pp. 411–418, 2009.
[12] A. K. Woodend, H. Sherrard, M. Fraser, L. Stuewe, T. Cheung, and C.
Struthers, “Telehome monitoring in patients with cardiac disease who
are at high risk of readmission,” Heart Lung, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 36–45,
2008.
[13] P. Koff, R. N. Freitag, S. S. James, R. L. Keith, C. Kveton, S. Carwin, T. J. Stelzner, D. W. Brand, D. P. Ritzwoller, A. L. Beck, N. F.
Voelkel, and R. W. Vandivier, “Proactive integrated care reduces critical
care and improves quality of life in COPD,” Eur. Respiratory J., vol. 34,
no. Suppl. 53, p. 75s, 2009.
[14] M. Goernig, T. Doede, B. Brehm, H. R. Figulla, and U. Leder, “Ambulatory disease management in cardiac patients: 12 month follow-up of home
R
care telemedicine in thuringia by the management program zertiva
,”
Physikatische Medizin, Rehabilitationsmedizin, Kurortmedizin, vol. 19,
pp. 9–13, 2009.

90

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[15] A. Giordano, S. Scalvini, E. Zanelli, U. Corrà, G. L. Longobardi, V. A.
Ricci, P. Baiardi, and F. Glisenti, “Multicenter randomised trial on homebased telemanagement to prevent hospital readmission of patients with
chronic heart failure,” Int. J. Cardiol., vol. 131, pp. 192–199, 2009.
[16] P. Mabo, Ed., “Home monitoring for pacemaker follow-up: Results of
randomized COMPAS trial,” presented at the Session Pacing and ICDs.
Cardiostim, Nice, France, 2010.
[17] G. Crossley, A. Boyle, H. Vitense, L. Sherfesse, and R. H. Mead, “Trial
design of the clinical evaluation of remote notification to reduce time
to clinical decision: The Clinical evaluation Of remote NotificatioN to
rEduCe Time to clinical decision (CONNECT) study,” Amer. Heart J.,
vol. 156, pp. 840–846, 2008.
[18] N. Varma, A. E. Epstein, A. Irimpen, R. Schweikert, and C. Love for the
TRUST Investigators, “Efficacy and safety of automatic remote monitoring for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for follow-up. The Lumos-T
safely reduces routine office device follow-up (TRUST) trial,” Circulation,
vol. 122, pp. 325–332, 2010.
[19] J. C. Nielsen, H. Kottkamp, M. Zabel, E. Aliot, U. Kreutzer, A. Bauer,
A. Schuchert, H. Neuser, B. Schumacher, H. Schmidinger, G. Stix, J.
Clémenty, D. Danilovic, and G. Hindricks, “Automatic home monitoring of implantable cardioverter defibrillators,” Europace, vol. 10, no. 6,
pp. 729–735, 2008.
[20] L. A. Saxon, D. L. Hayes, R. Gilliam, P. A. Heidenreich, J. Day, M. Seth,
T. E. Meyer, P. W. Jones, and J. P. Boehmer, “Long-term outcome after
ICD and CRT implantation and influence of remote device follow-up. The
ALTITUDE survival study,” Circulation, vol. 122, no. 2359–2367, 2010.
[21] US. Food and Drug Administration. (2013). Guidance for industry and food and drug administration staff [Online]. Available:
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationand
Guidance/GuidanceDocuments/UCM263366.pdf
[22] A. Edney. (2013, Sep. 26). FDA regulators eye medical apps
for medical devices. Bloomberg Businessweek [Online]. Available: http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-09-26/fda-regulatorseye-medical-apps-for-mobile-devices
[23] B. Dolan. (2013). 103 FDA regulated mobile medical apps. Mobihealthnews [Online]. Available: http://mobihealthnews.com/27645/analysis103-fda-regulated-mobile-medical-apps/
[24] Y. T. Yang and R. D. Silverman, “Mobile health applications: The patchwork of legal and liability issues suggests strategies to improve oversight,”
Health Affairs, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 222–227
[25] B. G. Celler, W. Earnshaw, E. D. Ilsar, L. Betbeder-Matibet, M. Harris,
R. Clark, T. Hesketh, and N. H. Lovell, “Remote monitoring of health
status of the elderly at home. A multidisciplinary project on aging at
the University of New South Wales,” Int. J. Biomed. Comput., vol. 40,
pp. 147–155, 1995
[26] K. Wild, L. Boise, J. Lundell, and A. Foucek, “Unobtrusive in-home
monitoring of cognitive and physical health: Reactions and perceptions of
older adults,” J. Appl. Gerontol, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 181–200, 2008.
[27] J. A. Kaye, S. A. Maxwell, N. Mattek, T. L. Hayes, H. Dodge, M. Pavel, H.
B. Jimison, K. Wild, L. Boise, and T. A. Zitzelberger, “Intelligent systems
for assessing aging changes: Home-based, unobtrusive, and continuous
assessment of aging,” J. Gerontol B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci., vol. 66B,
no. Suppl. 1, pp. i180–i190, Jul. 2011.
[28] Q. Zhang, M. Karunanithi, R. Rana, and J. Liu, “Determination of activities of daily living of independent living older people using environmentally placed sensors,” in Proc. IEEE EMBS, 35th Annu. Int. Conf.
Osaka, Japan, 3–7 July, 2013, pp. 7044–7047. [Online]. Available at:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6611180
[29] L. Clifton, D. A. Clifton, M. A. F. Pimentel, P. J. Watkinson, and L.
Tarassenko, “Predictive monitoring of mobile patients by combining clinical observations with data from wearable sensors,” J. Biomed. Health
Inform., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 722–730, 2014.
[30] A. K. Triantafyllidis, V. G. Koutkias, I. Chouvarda, and N. Maglaveras, “A
pervasive health system integrating patient monitoring, status logging, and
social sharing,” J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 2168–2194,
2013.
[31] A. J. Jara, M. A. Zamora-Izquierdo, and A. F. Skarmeta, “Interconnection
framework for mhealth and remote monitoring based on the internet of
things,” J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 47–65, 2013.
[32] G. Z. Yang, Body Sensor Networks, 2nd ed. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 2014.
[33] B. G. Celler, L. Alem, S. Nepal, M. Varnfield, R. Sparks, J. Li, S. McBride,
and R. Jayasena. Design of a multi-site multi-state clinical trial of home
monitoring of chronic disease in the community. presented at Successes Failures in Telehealth 2013 [Online]. Available: http://www.

[34]
[35]

[36]
[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]
[50]
[51]

[52]

[53]
[54]
[55]

icebergevents.com/uploads/File/2013-SFT/Tuesday/Connaught%20Room
/Celler,%20Branko.pdf
E. P. Smith, “BACI design,” in Encyclopedia of Environmetrics. Hoboken,
NJ, USA: Wiley, 2006. doi: 10.1002/9780470057339.vab001
S. J. Nepal, J. Jang-Jaccard, B. G. Celler, B. Yan, and L. Alem, “Data
architecture for telehealth services research: A case study of home telemonitoring,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Collab. Comput.: Netw., Appl. Worksharing (Collaboratecom 2013), pp. 458–467.
M. G. Tsipouras, D. I. Fotiadis, and D. Sideris, “An arrhythmia classification system based on the RR-interval signal,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 33,
pp. 237–250, 2005.
S. J. Redmond, N. H. Lovell, J. Basilakis, and B. G. Celler, “ECG quality
measures in telecare monitoring,” presented at the 30th Annu. Int. IEEE
EMBS Conf., Vancouver, BC, Canada, Aug. 20–24, 2008.
S. J. Redmond, Y. I. Ee, J. Basilakis, B. G. Celler, and N. H. Lovell, “ECG
recording and rhythm analysis for distributed health care environments,”
in Distributed Diagnosis and Home Healthcare, R. U. Acharya ans
T. Tamura, Eds. Valencia, CA, USA: American Scientific 2010, pp. 4–
22.
S. J. Redmond, Y. Xie, D. Chang, J. Basilakis, and N. H. Lovell, “Electrocardiogram signal quality measures for unsupervised telehealth environments,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 33, pp. 1517–1533, 2012.
D. Perloff, C. Grim, J. Flack, E. D. Frohlich, M. Hill, M. McDonald, and
B. Z. Morgenstern, “Human blood pressure determination by sphygmomanometry,” Circulation, vol. 88, pp. 2460–2470, 1993.
K. G. Ng and C. F. Small, “Survey of automated non-invasive blood
pressure monitors,” J. Clin. Eng., vol. 19, pp. 452–475, 1994.
A. Steven and S. A. Yarows, “Accuracy of the homedics BPA-300, a home
blood pressure monitor using the auscultatory method,” Blood Pressure
Monitoring, vol. 12, pp. 339–343, 2007.
H. Skirton, W. Chamberlain, C. Lawson, H. Ryan, and E. Young, “A
systematic review of variability and reliability of manual and automated
blood pressure readings,” J. Clin. Nursing, vol. 20, pp. 602–614, 2011.
A. K. Gupta, A. Maheshwari, D. D. Tresch, and R. K. Thakur, “Cardiac arrhythmias in the elderly,” Cardiac Electrophysiol. Rev., vol. 6,
pp. 120–128, 2002.
C. D. Furberg, B. M. Psaty, T. A. Manolio, J. M. Gardin, V. E. Smith,
and P. M. Rautaharju, “Prevalence of atrial fibrillation in elderly subjects
(The Cardiovascular Health Study),” Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 74, no. 3,
pp. 236–241, Aug. 1, 1994.
J. R. Wilson, J. S. Schwartz, M. S. Sutton, N. Ferraro, L. N. Horowitz, N.
Reichek, and M. E. Josephson, “Prognosis in severe heart failure: Relation
to hemodynamic measurements and ventricular ectopic activity,” J. Amer.
Coll. Cardiol., vol. 2, pp. 403–410, 1983.
ANSI/AAMI/IEC 80601-2-30:2009 & A1:2013. “Particular requirements for basic safety and essential performance of automated type non-invasive sphygmomanometers and Amendment
1.” Med. elect. equip.-Part 2-30: (2013). [Online]. Available at:
http://my.aami.org/store/detail.aspx?id=601230
E. O’Brien, J. Petrie, W. A. Littler M. deSwiet, P. L. Padfield, D. G.
Altman, M. Bland, A. Coats and N. Atkins “The British hypertension
society protocol for the evaluation of blood pressure measuring devices,”
J. Hypertens., vol. 11, pp. s43–s62, 1993.
M. Marschollek, “Decision support at home (DS@HOME)—System
architectures and requirements,” BMC Med. Inform. Decision Making,
vol. 12, pp. 43–50, 2012.
J. Basilakis, N. H. Lovell, and B. G. Celler, “A decision support architecture for telecare patient management of chronic and complex disease,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, pp. 4335–4338.
N. H. Lovell, S. J. Redmond, J. Basilakis, M. S. Mohktar, J. A. Sukor,
and B. G. Celler, “The application of decision support systems in home
telecare,” in Distributed Diagnosis and Home Healthcare, R. U. Acharya
and T. Tamura, Eds. Valencia, CA, USA: American Scientific 2008.
J. Basilakis, N. H. Lovell, S. J. Redmond, and B. G. Celler, “Design
of a decision-support architecture for management of remotely monitored patients,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5,
pp. 1216–1226, Sep. 2010.
H. Hotelling “The generalization of Student’s ratio,” Ann. Math. Statist.,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 360–378, 1931.
R. Sparks, A. Adolphson, and A. Phatak, “Multivariate process monitoring using the dynamic biplot,” Int. Statist. Rev., vol. 65/3, pp. 325–349,
Dec. 1997.
R. Ghosh, J. Heit, and S. Srinivasan, “Telehealth at scale: The need for
interoperability and analytics, MIXHS ‘11,” in Proc. First Int. Workshop
Manage. Interop. Complexity Health Syst., 2012, pp. 63–66.

CELLER AND SPARKS: HOME TELEMONITORING OF VITAL SIGNS—TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

[56] H. Chen and C. H. Chung, “Analytics for change management,” Int. J.
Inform. Syst. Change Manage, vol. 6, no. 1, 2012
[57] L. Peyton, A. Mouttham, K. A. Ali, A. Baarah, and T. M. Hussein, “Real-time analytics and quality of care,” in Handbook of Systems and Complexity in Health, J. P. Sturmberg and C. M. Martin, Eds. Springer Science and Business Media, Jan. 9, 2013, ch. 30,
pp. 495–519. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4998-0
[58] J. op Den Buijs, “Using predictive modeling to improve telehealth ROI,”
presented at the Amer. Telemed. Assoc. Meeting, Baltimore, MD, USA,
May. 17–20, 2014.

Branko G. Celler (M’80–SM’02–F’04) received the
B.Sc. degree in physics and computer science in 1969,
the B.E.E. degree in control in 1977, and the Ph.D. in
biomedical engineering in 1978 from the University
of New South Wales, Kensington, 2052, New South
Wales, Australia.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine (1978–1980) before returning to
Australia to take up an academic position at the University of marsfield, New South Wales (NSW), Australia. He established and led the Biomedical Systems
Laboratory within the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications (1981–2006), was a Full Professor (in 1998), and was the Head of School
(1998–2006). Since 2012, he has been a Senior Principal Scientist at CSIRO,
Clayton South, VIC, Australia, where he is the Director of the CSIRO National
Telehealth Trial. He is an Emeritus Professor at the University of NSW. His
current research interests include biomedical instrumentation and signal processing, bioinformatics, and decision support systems as applied to telehealth
systems for the management of chronic disease in the home and the community.
Prof. Celler is a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science
and Engineering, a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Engineers, and a Foundation Fellow of the Australian College of Health Informatics.

91

Ross S. Sparks was born in Zimbabwe, in 1952.
He received the B.Sc. (Hons.) and M.Sc. degrees in
statistics from the University of South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa, and the Ph.D. degree in statistics
from the University of Natal, Durban, South Africa,
in 1984.
From 1978 to 1983, he was a Lecturer with the
University of Natal; from 1983 to 1988, he was a
Senior Lecturer at the University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, South Africa from 1988 to 1991, he
was a Lecturer/Senior Lecturer at the University of
Wollongong NSW, Australia. Since 1991, he has been with CSIRO, Clayton
South, VIC, Australia, where he is currently a Principal Scientist at the laboratories North Ryde, NSW, Australia. He is the author of three book chapters,
and more than 60 referred journal articles. His current research interests include
multivariate analysis, statistical process monitoring, time series analysis, and
big data analytics.

