IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

1459

Temporal Changes of Diffusion Patterns in Mild
Traumatic Brain Injury via Group-Based
Semi-blind Source Separation
Min Jing, T. Martin McGinnity, Senior Member, IEEE, Sonya Coleman, Member, IEEE, Armin Fuchs,
and J. A. Scott Kelso

Abstract—Despite the emerging applications of diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) to mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), very few
investigations have been reported related to temporal changes in
quantitative diffusion patterns, which may help to assess recovery
from head injury and the long term impact associated with cognitive and behavioral impairments caused by mTBI. Most existing
methods are focused on detection of mTBI affected regions rather
than quantification of temporal changes following head injury. Furthermore, most methods rely on large data samples as required for
statistical analysis and, thus, are less suitable for individual case
studies. In this paper, we introduce an approach based on spatial group independent component analysis (GICA), in which the
diffusion scalar maps from an individual mTBI subject and the
average of a group of controls are arranged according to their
data collection time points. In addition, we propose a constrained
GICA (CGICA) model by introducing the prior information into
the GICA decomposition process, thus taking available knowledge
of mTBI into account. The proposed method is evaluated based on
DTI data collected from American football players including eight
controls and three mTBI subjects (at three time points post injury).
The results show that common spatial patterns within the diffusion
maps were extracted as spatially independent components (ICs) by
GICA. The temporal change of diffusion patterns during recovery
is revealed by the time course of the selected IC. The results also
demonstrate that the temporal change can be further influenced
by incorporating the prior knowledge of mTBI (if available) based
on the proposed CGICA model. Although a small sample of mTBI
subjects is studied, as a proof of concept, the preliminary results
provide promising insight for applications of DTI to study recovery
from mTBI and may have potential for individual case studies in
practice.
Index Terms—Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), group independent component analysis (GICA), longitudinal study, mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), semi-blind source separation.
Manuscript received March 5, 2014; revised June 20, 2014; accepted August
1, 2014. Date of publication August 26, 2014; date of current version July 23,
2015. This work was supported in part by the Centre of Excellence in Intelligent Systems Project, funded by InvestNI and the N.I. Integrated Development
Agency. The work of Dr. A. Fuchs and Dr. J. A. Scott Kelso was also supported
by NIMH Grant MH080838.
M. Jing and S. Coleman are with the Intelligent Systems Research Centre,
School of Computing and Intelligent Systems, University of Ulster, Londonderry BT48 7JL, U.K. (e-mail: m.jing@ulster.ac.uk; sa.coleman@ulster.ac.uk).
T. M. McGinnity is with the School of Science and Technology, Nottingham
Trent University, Nottingham NG1 4BU, U.K. (e-mail: martin.mcginnity@ntu.
ac.uk).
A. Fuchs and J. A. S. Kelso are with the Human Brain and Behavior Laboratory, Center for Complex Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431 USA (e-mail: fuchs@ccs.fau.edu; kelso@
ccs.fau.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2352119

I. INTRODUCTION
NE of the most common pathologies in mild traumatic
brain injury (mTBI) is diffuse axonal injury due to the
traumatic shearing forces acting on the brain during head injury [1], [2]. Although TBI has been studied by using different
neuroimaging techniques, the disruption of the diffusion pattern in white matter (WM) caused by mild head injury in most
cases is too subtle to be detected using conventional tools such
as Computed Tomography (CT) and structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [3],[4]. However, recent studies have
demonstrated that diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) [5], which
is based on quantification of the displacement distribution of
water molecules within the brain, has advantages over CT and
structural MRI for detecting abnormalities in WM due to mTBI
[2], [6]–[8].
In most clinical studies, the detection of abnormalities in
WM relies on the quantitative comparison of diffusion-based
measurements between control and mTBI groups via statistical
analysis. Commonly used metrics to measure diffusion patterns
are based on the eigenvalues derived from the diffusion tensor
model [5], from which scalar maps are derived such as fractional
anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD),
and transverse diffusivity (TD).
Apart from comparing the intensity of diffusion measurements, some newly developed techniques are also utilized in
this study of TBI. For example, using quantitative tractography, the pathways frequently damaged in TBI are found within
the frontal and temporal regions [8], [9]. The microstructural
integrity of these tracts also relate to behavioral and cognitive
measurements [7], [10]. Other techniques such as measures of
connectivity based on graph theory [11], voxel based analysis
[12], tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) [13], and diffusion
kurtosis [14] have been reported in DTI studies of mTBI.
Despite promising progress, there is a lack of longitudinal
DTI studies, i.e., the study for the same mTBI subject over the
period of recovery [15]–[18], which may help clarify long-term
cognitive and behavioral impairments after mTBI and potential
path of recovery. An effective approach to quantify subtle temporal changes within the diffusion measurements would also be
useful. Most existing methods are designed for cross-sectional
studies (i.e., group comparison via statistics), which aim to detect mTBI related regions rather than quantify temporal change.
Furthermore, these methods require reasonably large data samples for statistical analysis, which means they are not suitable

O

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1460

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

for small data cases, such as follow-up studies of a single-mTBI
subject.
The objective of the present study is to develop an effective approach for longitudinal DTI study on mTBI by employing group-based spatial independent component analysis
(GICA)[19]. The proposed approach is not only able to reveal
temporal changes of diffusion patterns during recovery from
mTBI, but also has the potential to be applied to individual case
studies.
The technique like ICA [20] has been widely applied to electroencephalography (EEG) [21] and functional MRI (fMRI)
data analysis [22], [23], in which the data mixture is decomposed into a number of statistically independent components
(ICs). Recently, a limited number of papers have reported the
application of ICA in DTI area. For example, the raw DWI
images were separated into ICs related to noise, eddy current
effects, and fibre tracts [24]. The inner brain connectivity was
investigated by employing a joint ICA to decompose the FA
maps and fMRI data [25]. In [26] and [27], the orientation
of complex crossing fibres was reconstructed by decomposing
DTI data from multiple voxels. Alternatively, a single-channel
ICA [28] was incorporated with spherical deconvolution [29]
to enhance the performance of the fibre orientation distribution
function reconstruction for DTI data acquired in normal clinical
studies. Apart from DTI image data, ICA was also used to segment the thalamus by decomposition of the fibre tracts obtained
from probabilistic tractography [30].
Group ICA [19] enables multisubject/multisession fMRI data
to be analyzed simultaneously and efficiently, since the common
temporal or spatial patterns can be separated in a batch process
rather than running an analysis for each individual case. A detailed review of various forms of GICA and its applications to
fMRI analysis can be found in [31]. The application of GICA to
DTI analysis has been reported in recent studies, for example,
to separate and cluster dominant fibre tracts [30] and to obtain
function-related regions of interest (ROI) in order to study associated regional connectivity by fibre tract analysis [32], [33].
Extraction of features from fMRI and diffusion FA maps has
also used a joint GICA approach [34]. Such studies are mainly
focused on group analysis of fibre tracts and spatial maps, and
have yet to fully exploit the advantages of time course information provided by GICA. Furthermore, they are not suitable for
individual case studies.
The contribution of this paper is summarized as following.
First, unlike most existing methods which focus on the study
spatial change of mTBI, we propose a novel approach to study
the temporal changes in diffusion patterns of mTBI by exploiting
the information from the time course returned by GICA [19]. In
this study, GICA decomposes a data array formed by a group
of diffusion scalar maps, which are specifically concatenated
according to data collection time points, namely from normal
conditions to post injury. After GICA, temporal changes can be
revealed by studying the common diffusion patterns represented
by the dominant spatial ICs and the corresponding evolution in
time. Second, we extend GICA by incorporating a constraint into
the source separation process, which enables prior information
(such as clinical assessment for mTBI subjects if available)

to be taken into account. Third, unlike approaches based on
statistical analysis (such as ROI-based methods), which need
the large numbers of data from both control and mTBI subjects,
the proposed method has the potential to be applied to individual
case studies by concatenating grouped control and individual
mTBI subject data. This may add value to clinical practice, as in
real life a large group of data for mTBI may not be available, plus
group comparison may not reflect the changes in an individual
subject.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the proposed
GICA model for the mTBI study is described in detail, together
with a constrained GICA (CGICA) model and algorithm. Details of subjects and image acquisitions are given in Section III.
Experimental results are presented in Section IV, in which
the performance of ROI-based analysis and GICA/CGICA is
compared. Discussion and conclusion follow in Sections V
and VI.
II. METHODS
A. Background: Spatial ICA for fMRI
First, we recall the spatial ICA model for fMRI analysis proposed by McKeown et al. [23]. In this model, the brain areas
executing different tasks are assumed to be spatially independent. Each of these areas can be considered as a spatial IC
associated with a time course. The relationship between spatial
ICA and conventional temporal ICA has been discussed in [35].
For spatial ICA, the rows of the data matrix represent the time
points and the columns are the voxels after brain extraction, in
which the spatial dimension is higher than the temporal dimension because the number of brain voxels being much greater
than the number of time points reflecting the scans.
The spatial ICA has been extended to a group-based method
referred to as GICA [19], where the ICA is applied to multisubject or multisession fMRI analysis by concatenating a number of
fMRI datasets according to their temporal or spatial order. The
way to construct the grouped data array depends on the unique
components contained within the group data and the features
of interest (more details can be found in [31]). After building
the data array, the standard ICA algorithm is used to extract
common temporal or spatial patterns within the group.
B. Group Spatial ICA for DTI
In this study, we adopt the GICA model to study the temporal
change of DTI patterns during the recovery of mTBI. The objectives are to investigate the evolution of diffusion patterns from
normal to the period of postinjury by studying the dominant
spatial ICs and their corresponding time courses, and to explore
the potential of applying the proposed approach to individual
case studies.
In the proposed method, GICA is applied to decompose a
group of DTI FA maps based on the data from healthy and mTBI
subjects. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the data matrix is constructed
based on the temporal concatenation (according to the time
points of data collection), in which data representing the normal
condition are followed by data collected at 24 h, one week, and

JING et al.: TEMPORAL CHANGES OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS IN MTBI VIA GROUP-BASED SEMIBLIND SOURCE SEPARATION

Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed GICA model for decomposition of a group
of diffusion FA maps formed by healthy and mTBI subjects.

two weeks post head injury. Given a GICA model formed as
X = AS

(1)

(note that the noise is considered as a source signal and included
in the model), where X is an M × V matrix formed by groups
of FA maps, M is the number of groups, and V is the number
of brain voxels involved in the analysis; S is an N × V matrix
representing estimated spatial ICs and N is the number of ICs
(N ≤ M ); A is a M × N mixing matrix. Each column of A
represents the time course of the corresponding spatial IC map.
The estimated spatial ICs Ŝ (denoted by Y) can be obtained
from Y = WX, where W is an N × M unmixing matrix to
be estimated by GICA and W is the pseudoinverse of A, i.e.,
W = A† .
Based on the GICA model, the grouped maps are decomposed
into a number of spatial ICs and their associated time courses.
The IC representing the common spatial pattern is separated
from noise/artifacts and other unknown spatial components.
Each time course (column of mixing matrix) represents the
contribution of the corresponding spatial IC within the grouped
data matrix, thereby reflecting temporal changes of the diffusion
patterns post head injury.
In the proposed method, the normal group is formed by taking
the mean of the FA maps from control subjects, followed by three
post head injury FA maps from an individual mTBI subject (as
in Fig. 1). The reason for this is because one objective of this
research was to find a solution for individual case study. The
data matrix formed by this way results in a simple 4 × V matrix
and the model becomes a standard spatial ICA.
Note the proposed framework slightly differs from most existing GICA applications in which data from all subjects are
concatenated. As reviewed in [31], there are various implementations of group ICA and one of them is to average the data
prior to performing ICA. In addition, we propose this model
as a novel application of group-based ICA, depending on the
research purpose and data, the proposed model can be extended
to include all subjects from each group in the future. Therefore,
we refer to the proposed model as GICA.
Another important point is that most spatial ICA applications
aim to study detailed spatiotemporal changes at some specific
connections in certain regions of brain, but this is not the primary
objective of this research. Instead, we are mainly interested in

1461

Fig. 2. Block diagram illustrating the generation of sources, the whitening
process, the GICA model together with the process of incorporating the reference as a constraint (see text for details). Note that noise is considered as a
source signal and included in the model [Eq. (1)].

temporal changes of the common spatial pattern during recovery.
Therefore, we only focus on the dominant IC (representing the
common spatial patterns) and ignore the remaining ICs (even
though they may point to other mTBI affected regions). More
about the spatial ICs and detection of mTBI related regions is
given in Section V.
C. CGICA Model
In this study, we extend the above GICA model to a constrained version GICA denoted as CGICA, (hence a semiblind
source separation). The advantages of a constrained ICA model
have been explored for EEG [21] and fMRI analysis [36]–[39],
where the performance of ICA may be improved by incorporating prior information (defined as a reference) into the separation
process. For example, in [37], a predefined stimulus was applied
as the reference signal in the temporal ICA model. By minimizing the distance between the output and the reference signal,
the IC closest to the reference can be selected. In [38], a semiblind spatial ICA was employed by using the design matrix from
the general linear model, the columns of the mixing matrix are
constrained according to their closeness to the design matrix. In
[36], the EEG signals simultaneously recorded with fMRI were
imposed onto a spatial ICA model as a temporal constraint to
improve detection of epileptic seizure components from fMRI.
In this study, we employed a temporally constrained spatial ICA model [36] into the GICA model. This step not only
enhances the separation performance but, more importantly, it
enables incorporation of the available/prior information about
the mTBI subject into the process. This may provide additional
value for clinical practice as the available quantitative results
from clinical assessment can be included within the GICA process, thereby supporting diagnostic decision making.
A block diagram of the proposed CGICA model is given in
Fig. 2. The source signals s(i) are first mixed by an unknown
mixing matrix A; the mixed signals and noise n(i) are recorded
at sensors as x(i). Then, the observed data are preprocessed by
removing the mean and prewhitening (by performing principal
component analysis). The whitened data z(i) have unit variance.
A reference signal is constructed based on the observed data or
prior information and included in the separation by a designed
function F. The constrained factor yr (i) is then involved in the
adaptive learning algorithm to update the unmixing matrix W

1462

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

until the optimal solution is obtained. Details of the CGICA
algorithm devolvement are given next.
D. Constrained Algorithm Development
1) Learning Rules: In this study, the Infomax (informationmaximization) algorithm was used for DTI analysis[40], [28],
[26], [30]. Infomax maximizes the output entropy, which is
closely related to the maximum likelihood estimation. To maximize the log-likelihood, the natural gradient learning method
can be applied as given in [41]
∂H(y, W) T
W W = [I − ϕ(y)yT ]W
(2)
∂W
where I is the identity matrix and ϕ(y) is a nonlinear function.
The adaptive learning rule can be written as
W ∝

W(k + 1) = W(k) − η(k)[I − ϕ(y(k))y(k) ]W(k)
T

(3)

where k is the iteration number and η(k) is the learning rate.
The constraint is introduced to the above learning rule by
W(k + 1) = W(k) − η(k)[I − ϕ(y(k))y(k)T
−αΛ(k)]W(k)

(4)

where α is the adjustment factor based on the stability of the
algorithm, which was determined empirically by examining the
algorithm convergence. Λ = diag{Λii }, i = 1, . . . , M is a diagonal matrix to constrain the update of the weight by a reference
signal u
Λ(k) = diag(cor(F (W(k)), u))

(5)

where cor(·) denotes the correlation, u is the reference that can
be constructed based on prior information, and the function F
can be defined as
F = [W(k)]−1
i .

(6)

By introducing a constraint into the original learning algorithm,
W is not only updated based on the Infomax principle, but also
influenced by the information from the reference u.
In practice, if available, the reference can be defined by prior
knowledge or clinical assessment obtained from a mTBI subject, as long as such prior information can be quantified and
connected to the same data collection time points, i.e., the assessment results for one mTBI subject collected at 24 h, one
week, and two weeks post injury. In this study, because such
clinical information is not available, we use the mean FA values
from the ROI-based analysis as the reference to evaluate the
performance of CGICA. The details of reference selection and
performance comparison between GICA and CGICA are given
in Section IV and discussed in Sections V and VI.
III. MATERIALS
A. Subjects
The DTI data used in this study were selected from a larger
dataset previously used in a study on the risks and effects of
mTBI in college football players[16]. The subjects participated
in this study were healthy, undergraduate, male intercollegiate

football players, and aged between 19–23 years old (median age
20 years). The participants played in field positions associated
with a high risk of concussion, such as quarterback and running
back, among others. All subjects reported being right handed.
Informed consent was obtained according to the regulations of
the ethical review board of Florida Atlantic University and University MRI Diagnostic Imaging Center. For the players who
had concussions, as defined by the guidelines of the American
Academy of Neurology [42], there was no loss of consciousness and their conventional scans showed no abnormalities. The
dataset for this study includes eight controls and three mTBI
subjects. Each mTBI subject was scanned within 24 h following
the injury with follow-ups after one and two weeks.
B. Image Acquisitions and Preprocessing
The original data collected from the college football players
included structural MRI, fMRI, and DTI. But for the present
study only the DTI data were available. More details for other
type of image acquisitions can be found in [43]. All DTI data
were acquired by a 3T Signa scanner (GE Medical Systems,
Milwaukee, WI, USA). Each set of data consists of 26 volumes,
which includes the acquisitions from 25 gradient directions and
one without any gradient field. Each volume contains 35 slices,
each slice with dimension 256 × 256, field of view 24 cm, voxel
size 0.9375 × 0.9375 × 3 mm3 , echo time 60 ms, and repetition
time 2000 ms. The b-value was 1000 s/mm2 .
Preprocessing of raw DTI image data was carried out using
the FMRIB’s diffusion toolbox in FSL software [44]. First, the
effects of head movement and eddy currents were corrected
and a brain mask was created. Data from the extracted brains
were then fitted to the diffusion tensor model and diffusion FA
maps were obtained. To accommodate the differences between
individual brain structures, all maps obtained from the native
space were registered to a standard space template before group
analysis. The nonlinearly registration was executed by using the
FNIRT tool in FSL. The alignment of FA is recommended via
the use of an FMRIB58FA template, which is a high-resolution
FA image based on the average of 58 well-aligned good quality
FA images obtained from healthy male and female subjects aged
between 20 and 50 years. The resolution of the FMRIB58FA
image is 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 , which is the same as the MNI152
standard space.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
The overall experimental design is given in Fig. 3, which
shows the group data arrangement, image data preprocessing,
together with the ROI-based analysis, and GICA and CGICA
analysis. In the literature, the commonly used methods for studying temporal changes in DTI for mTBI are ROI-based analysis,
in which the averaged DTI scalar maps from different groups
are compared. Therefore, a ROI-based analysis of FA maps was
performed first, and the changes of FA from ROI were used to
compare to those from GICA/CGICA. Three ROIs were defined
and mean and standard error (se) of FA maps within the ROIs
were calculated. The GICA/CGICA analyses were applied to

JING et al.: TEMPORAL CHANGES OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS IN MTBI VIA GROUP-BASED SEMIBLIND SOURCE SEPARATION

1463

Fig. 3. Illustration of overall experimental design and data analysis. First, raw DTI data containing a group of normal and mTBI subjects are concatenated
according to the time points of data collection. After preprocessing, the FA maps are obtained by fitting DTI data to the diffusion tensor model. Then, all FA maps
are nonlinearly aligned and registered to the standard MNI152 space. The ROI analysis is performed in three predefined ROIs. The GICA and CGICA are applied,
and the dominant spatial ICs are selected. The temporal changes of diffusion patterns are studied based on the time courses and spatial IC maps.

each individual mTBI subject separately and the results of the
average performance evaluated.
The GICA/CGICA-based analysis consists of the following
steps: 1) arrange the group image data according to the data
collection time points as described in the method section. The
data matrix was formed by one map from the normal condition
(averaged FA maps from five controls) and three maps from
the same individual mTBI subject post injury; 2) extract signals
within the brain by applying the whole brain (WB) mask; 3)
determine the number of ICs. In this study, because there were
only four groups, we set the number of ICs as four; 4) select
an appropriate ICA algorithm. The Infomax algorithm [41] was
used in accordance with previous DTI studies [28], [40], [26];
5) identify the dominant spatial IC from the outputs by visual
inspection and measure the correlation between ICs and the
averaged FA maps from controls; 6) examine the time courses
of selected IC and compare the trend with those from ROI based
analysis; and 7) apply CGICA and compare the performances
to GICA. In this study, we used the MATLAB software GIFT
[19] for group DTI data analysis. The CGICA algorithm was
developed in MATLAB separately and then embedded in GIFT.
(Note the GIFT software is mainly designed for fMRI data
analysis, which applies a default process to smooth the trend of
fMRI time courses. This default setting was turned OFF as we
aimed to obtain the original time courses.)

A. Simulation
To demonstrate the proposed method, a simulation experiment was carried out using the standard template FMRIB58FA
map from FSL. A data matrix was formed by three FA images:
the original FMRIB58FA, and the same FA map added by the
zero-mean Gaussian noise with variance of 0.01 and 0.1, respectively. Based on this arrangement, the dominant IC from GICA
is expected to be similar to FMRIB58FA and its time course
should reflect its contribution within original data matrix (according to the noise level). The three FA maps are considered as
the source images for GICA as shown in Fig. 4. The IC maps are
given in Fig. 5, which is clearly shown that IC3 is the dominant
component. The correlation between three IC maps with FMRIB58FA are (a) 0.43, (b) 0.23, and (c) 0.84, respectively. The
time course (z-score) of IC3 is shown in Fig. 6. As expected, the
time course reflects the weights of IC3 within the original FA
data matrix, showing the highest value in the first source (S1)
(noise free) and smallest in the third source image (S3) (noise
variance of 0.1).
B. Temporal Changes via ROI-Based Analysis
1) Defining ROIs: Drawing a ROI manually for an individual
map is not only time consuming but can also induce additional
errors. Therefore in this study, global ROIs were applied to the

1464

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 4. Three source images (a) FMRIB58FA map (S1) and the same FA map
plus zero mean Gaussian noise with variance of (b) 0.01 (S2) and (c) 0.1 (S3).

Fig. 5. Three IC maps from GICA in which IC3 has the highest correlation
with FMRIB58FA and is selected as the dominant IC.

Fig. 7. Three predefined ROIs. (a) WB. (b) WM. (c) Mean FA-SK overlaid
on an FA map.

2) Results: The results of mean and standard error of FA
maps in three predefined ROIs are given in Fig. 8. The right
column shows the results from each subject (voxel-wise mean);
the left column is the group-wised mean. The t-tests were applied
to investigate statistical differences between the control groups
and mTBI. It can be seen that in all three ROIs, the mean of
FA is observed to increase within 24h post injury, then starts to
decrease within the following two weeks. The overall trends are
consistent with those previously reported in [16], in which the
same datasets were studied.
In addition, as expected, the trend is more appreciable within
SK than from the other two ROIs [see Fig. 8 (a)]. Statistical results also show that the ROI of SK provides improved sensitivity
compared to the other two ROIs, indicated by a p-value < 0.01
from the groups of mTBI-24 h and mTBI-1W. This is because
SK is more focused on the centre of the WM and, thus, is more
sensitive to subtle changes caused by the head injury.
C. Temporal Change via GICA

Fig. 6. Time course of selected IC maps after GICA, which reflects the weights
of dominant IC within the original data matrix.

images that were well aligned to the standard template. Three
ROIs were used: WB, WM, and the mean FA skeleton (SK).
The WB mask was created by the brain extraction tool in FSL
[44]. The WM mask can be obtained by setting a threshold for
the FA maps, a value between 0.15 and 0.25 is commonly used
in the literature. Apart from the commonly used ROI of WB
and WM, we introduced the ROI of SK created by the TBSS
tool in FSL [45]: all subjects’ FA data were projected onto
an alignment-invariant tract of the mean FA-SK. By applying
the SK mask, analysis can be performed within the centre of
WM tracts, which further reduces the random effects caused by
misalignment. Fig. 7 shows the three predefined ROIs, in which
(c) shows the region of SK (threshold F A > 0.25) overlaid on
top of a standard FA template. It can be seen that the major tracts
are well aligned to the relevant parts of the WM.

1) Control Versus mTBI: The results of GICA based on the
mean of control FA and three FA maps from one mTBI subject
are shown in Fig. 9, in which four spatial IC maps were converted
to z-scores (threshold z > 1.0) and overlaid on a standard FA
template. Fig. 10 shows the same slice selected from these four
spatial ICs. The time courses corresponding to each spatial IC
are given in Fig. 11. It is observed that IC3 clearly shows the
spatial pattern of WM being extracted by GICA. Among all ICs,
IC3 also had the highest correlation with the averaged control
maps. Therefore, IC3 was selected and its time course studied.
The rest spatial ICs appear to be randomly distributed spatial
patterns, which may be due to the noise, MRI artifacts and other
unknown spatial changes possibly related to head injury. Unlike
IC3, it is not easy to interpret the remaining ICs unless further
knowledge about the spatial components or temporal change of
mTBI is available. For example, an expert may notice that both
IC1 and IC3 show some significant clusters in corpus callosum,
which may indicate the regions affected by mTBI. As shown in
Fig. 11 the time course of IC1 presents a similar trend as that
from IC3, but those from IC2 and IC4 appear to be different.
However, further validation whether the IC1 is related to mTBI
regions is challenging and far from straightforward. Because
the primary objective of this paper is not to study the spatial
changes, but to reveal the temporal change of the normal spatial

JING et al.: TEMPORAL CHANGES OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS IN MTBI VIA GROUP-BASED SEMIBLIND SOURCE SEPARATION

1465

Fig. 8. ROI-based results of FA maps within three predefined ROIs. SK, WM, and WB. Left: the group-wise mean and standard error of FA (*indicates p-value
< 0.01); Right: the voxel-wise mean and standard error of FA from all subjects, including five controls in gray colour and three mTBI subjects shown in blue, red,
and green, respectively.

pattern, we only focus on the dominant spatial IC and not the
rest ICs. More details are given in Section V.
The proposed method was applied to individual mTBI subject separately, the results of time courses of selected IC from
all three mTBI subjects are given in Fig. 12(a) and (b), which
contain averaged and individual results, respectively. Note that it
is the trend rather than the actual value that is of interest, because
the time course is normalized by the z-score. In Fig. 12(a), it is
notable that the averaged time course increases at 24h post injury, then decreases during the following two weeks. This trend
agrees with that observed from the ROI analysis particularly the
results within the ROI of SK in Fig. 8(a). In Fig. 12(b), the trends
from each mTBI subject are also consistent with those from the
ROI of SK as Fig. 8(b). Furthermore, because the time course

is scaled by the z-score, temporal changes are more evident
compared to the ROI-based results.
The results of the trend from GICA are similar to those from
ROI analysis. It is worth to reemphasizing that the advantage
of the proposed method is that GICA was applied to individual
subject, unlike ROI analysis that is based on the group comparison. The results show that the time course from an individual can
reflect a similar trend based on group-based ROI analysis, which
suggest the potential to be applied to individual case studies.
2) Control Versus Control: For further validation, we also
applied the proposed method using three additional control FA
maps (referred as Con7, Con8, and Con9 in Fig. 13). The hypothesis behind this is that if a certain trend can be observed for
the mTBI case, then it may show different trend for the control

1466

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 11.

Results of time courses corresponding to the spatial IC maps in Fig. 9.

Fig. 9. Four panels (a)–(d) illustrate the results of spatial ICs obtained from
GICA. The desired component (IC3) (c) can be easily identified by visual
inspection as it clearly shows the spatial pattern of WM.

Fig. 10. Same slice is selected from four spatial IC maps obtained from GICA,
in which the third IC clearly shows the spatial pattern of WM.

case. The results are given in Fig. 13, which shows both the
time course of the selected IC and the mean FA from ROI-SK
(also normalized by z-score). It can be seen that, once again,
the trend of the time course matches that from ROI-SK. Furthermore, compared to the time course from the mTBI subjects
(showing a trend of decreasing in Fig. 12), the trend from the
control subjects appears to be more random, which may indicate
intersubject variability.
D. Temporal Changes via CGICA
For the constrained ICA approaches, the selection of reference is usually based on the prior knowledge about the desired
components. In this study, the reference may be defined by prior
knowledge based on clinical assessment obtained from a mTBI
subjects. But since such information is not available, we use the
mean FA values from ROI-SK as the reference to demonstrate
and evaluate the performance of CGICA.

Fig. 12. Results of time courses of selected spatial ICs normalized by z-score.
(a) Mean and standard error of time course from three mTBI subjects. (b) Time
course from each mTBI subject. The trends revealed by time course analysis
agree with those from ROI of SK [shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b)].

JING et al.: TEMPORAL CHANGES OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS IN MTBI VIA GROUP-BASED SEMIBLIND SOURCE SEPARATION

1467

Fig. 13. Results of time courses of selected spatial IC based on three control
FA maps and the mean FA within the ROI-SK (z-score).

TABLE I
CORRELATION OF THE TRENDS FROM GICA/CGICA AND REFERENCE

GICA
CGICA

mTBI-1

mTBI-2

mTBI-3

0.9366
0.9752

0.7311
0.8497

0.9908
1.000

1) The correlation between the time courses from
GICA/CGICA and the reference is given in Table I. It
can be seen that for all three mTBI subjects, the CGICA
shows a higher correlation to the reference than GICA due
to incorporate reference as constraint. The results validate
the constrained algorithm and demonstrate the advantage
of the proposed CGICA, that the outcomes of temporal
changes can be influenced by the reference.
2) To further examine the properties of temporal change
in the time course results [in Fig. 12(b)], distances between the normal condition and each time point postinjury were calculated. The normalized results (by z-score)
for each mTBI subject from ROI/GICA/CGICA are plotted in Fig. 14. It can be seen that there is good agreement between the GICA/CGICA time courses and those
from ROI-SK, which demonstrates that the time courses
from GICA/CGICA reflect the temporal changes. In addition, because the ROI-SK was applied as the reference,
the trends after CGICA are closer to ROI-SK compared
to GICA. This agrees with the results of the correlation
analysis shown in Table I, which again validate the performance of CGICA.
3) To test whether the CGICA results are statistically superior to those obtained using the GICA approach in terms
of agreement with the reference ROI-SK, the distances between the GICA/CGICA and reference at each time point
were calculated denoted as Dist1 and Dist2 in Table II,
respectively. These data were then subjected to a paired
t-test. As seen in Table II, again, the distances to reference were consistently smaller for the CGICA method
(p < 0.005). All evaluation results validate the performance of the proposed CGICA method.

Fig. 14. Results of trends along time points for three mTBI subjects, presented
by normalized distance between normal and mTBI. (a) mTBI-1. (b) mTBI-2.
(c) mTBI-3.

V. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel framework via a groupbased spatial ICA to investigate the temporal evolution of WM
integrity presented by diffusion FA maps during recovery from

1468

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF TREND FROM GICA/CGICA WITH ROI-SK

mTBI-1

mTBI-2

mTBI-3

ROI-SK

GICA

CGICA

Dist1

Dist2

0.6164
0.5374
−1.1538
−0.9762
1.0222
−0.0459
1.1545
−0.5936
−0.5609

0.9194
0.1453
−1.0647
−0.2930
1.1138
−0.8208
1.1414
−0.7221
−0.4193

0.8170
0.2982
−1.1152
−0.5044
1.1517
−0.6474
1.1546
−0.5924
−0.5622

0.3030
0.3921
0.0891
0.6832
0.0916
0.7748
0.01315
0.1285
0.1416

0.2006
0.2393
0.0386
0.4718
0.1296
0.6014
0.00002
0.0013
0.0013

∗ p-value = 0.0048; t = 3.8628.

mild brain traumatic injury. The GICA extracts the common spatial patterns from control and mTBI group maps as a dominant
spatial IC and the corresponding time courses reveal temporal
changes postinjury. Although a small sample of mTBI subjects
is studied, as a proof of concept, the preliminary results provide
promising insight for applications of DTI to study recovery from
mTBI.
In addition, we have proposed a novel constrained model
which enables the prior information to be incorporated into
the GICA process. The proposed CGICA model provides additional values for clinical practice. By employing the constrained
model, the valuable clinical assessment outcomes for mTBI
subjects can be included within the GICA process, thereby enhancing the outcomes interfered from clinical findings. In this
study, the trend from ROI-based analysis was used as a reference
for comparison purposes because no prior clinical information
being available. Nevertheless, the results justify the inclusion of
the constraint.
1) Spatial ICs Versus mTBI Region Detection by TBSS: Detection of mTBI affected regions is one of the important questions for treating and managing mTBI in clinics. Therefore, it is
of interest to study whether the spatial ICs may relate to mTBI.
However, it is a challenging task due to ambiguity within the
ICA-based method itself and limited datasets. Here, we list some
points for further discussion.
Recall for ICA based approaches, the data mixture is decomposed into a number of statistically independent components
and estimated mixing matrix. Because ICA produces a number
of ICs, identification of the desired IC requires prior knowledge
or additional information. Such as for the fMRI case, the stimuli for designed events can be used to correlate the ICA time
courses, thereby helping to determine the event related activated
regions found by spatial ICs [37]. Or with help from clinical experts, the spatial IC related to head movement artifacts or brain
dysfunction may be identified by visual inspection. In this study,
we can determine the dominant IC by comparing to the control
maps, then find its corresponding time courses related to mTBI
temporal changes.
However, similar to fMRI case, it is difficult to identify the
remaining ICs from DTI due to lack of additional information,
either for mTBI related regions or temporal changes. There are
several approaches we have attempted or suggested for future

Fig. 15. Results of TBSS showing voxelwise statistics (corrected p-value)
images (control < mTBI) overlaid on a standard FA template based on the same
data shown in Fig. 9.

work. Using the example shown in Figs. 9 and 11, we tried
to check whether IC1 maybe related to mTBI. 1) Visual inspection. As explained above, an expert may notice the similar
spatial patterns from IC1 and IC3 (in Fig. 9) and its time course
shows similar trend as that from IC3. 2) If the temporal change
for mTBI subjects is known in advance, i.e., be means of some
clinical assessment, such information can then be used to correlate to the time course of IC1 which may help to determine
if IC1 is related to mTBI. Unfortunately, such information is
not available for this study. 3) A more technical approach is to
compare the results from the method based on TBSS from FSL
[45], currently a popular method for group DTI data analysis.
For comparison, we used the same mTBI subjects and controls
as in Fig. 9 for TBSS. The process for TBSS can be found from
[45]. The results from TBSS are voxelwise statistics on the
skeletonized FA as shown in Fig. 15, which is a threshold-free
cluster enhancement (TFCE) corrected p-value image (1 − p)
(for multiple comparisons across space), highlights the regions
of control < patient. We obtained a mask by setting a threshold
of 0.9, then calculated the correlation between this p-value image and each IC within the mask. The results from IC1 to IC4 are
0.46, 0.43, 0.68, and 0.36, respectively. IC1 and IC3 have higher
correlation than those from IC2 and IC4, which may link to the
observation found in their spacial patterns. However, due to the
limit data, this attempt was just to demonstrate the concept of a
possible approach. Further investigation and validation need to
be conducted by much larger datasets.
It is necessary to point out that there are differences between
spatial IC maps and detection of mTBI related regions. Although some spatial ICs may contain subtle information related
to mTBI, they do not provide the specific mTBI related regions
as TBSS does. To detect abnormal regions, TBSS relies on
large datasets for statistical analysis. However, it is not effective
for studying temporal changes of diffusion measurements, nor
is it especially suitable for individual case studies. Compared
to TBSS, the proposed approach is focused on extracting the
common spatial pattern, rather than detection of abnormalities
within the brain, because the abnormalities caused by mild head

JING et al.: TEMPORAL CHANGES OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS IN MTBI VIA GROUP-BASED SEMIBLIND SOURCE SEPARATION

injury are often too subtle to detect, especially for the small
number of datasets available from individual cases.
2) Physiological Aspect: The mechanism of axonal damage causing changes in diffusion measurements is still not well
established. Depending on the type of the injury, time of data
collection post injury and regions selected for analysis, different changes in diffusion patterns have been reported [9]. For
example, comparing mTBI subjects to controls, reduced FA and
increased MD have been reported in regions of the frontal and
temporal lobes and the corpus callosum [2], [6], [18], [46]–
[48]. Increased FA and decreased AD have also been observed
(based on WB analysis) for adolescent cases [12], [49]. In addition, studies have reported increased FA for mild TBI in football
players [15], [16] and in other scenarios [17], [50], [51] . The
physiological mechanisms behind the differences among individual mTBI subjects are a topic of great interest but are beyond
the scope of the present study. Rather, the focus of this work
was to investigate the temporal changes revealed by the proposed method.
There are other aspects maybe worth further study. For example, one may interest to examine whether the FA is a manifestation of subtle generalized cerebral edema. Since if there
is no concomitant volume change in overall brain, then the FA
changes maybe specific to white matter pathology and not a
whole brain response. Since the related structural MR scans
were not available for this study, we were unable to carry out
such study but can consider it in the future work. (We thank an
anonymous reviewer for bringing this point to our attention.)
3) Others: In the proposed method, FA maps from averaged
controls and mTBI subjects were concatenated to form a data
matrix to feed the group ICA model. As suggested for group
brain image data analysis [31], the standard procedure of nonlinear registration was applied to align all maps from native
space to a higher resolution standard template using FSL [44].
However, bias or errors may still exist due to limitations in the
registration methods.
Ideally, data would be acquired from the same subject, before
and after the head injury; however, this is hard to obtain in a
real life situation. Therefore, in this study we used an averaged
control map as the baseline to represent the normal condition,
which is also relevant to real clinical practice.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a novel framework that exploits
group-based ICA in a longitudinal DTI study aimed at revealing
the temporal changes of diffusion patterns during recovery from
mTBI. After decomposition of temporally concatenated diffusion FA maps, the common spatial pattern within the grouped
maps can be extracted and the temporal evolution of recovery
revealed by studying the selected spatial IC and its corresponding time course. In addition, by introducing a CGICA model,
valuable information from clinical assessment can be included
within the GICA process. The proposed CGICA model fully
utilizes the information contained from both spatial and time
course components, thereby not only providing an effective way
to quantify possible temporal changes in longitudinal studies of

1469

mTBI, but also demonstrating the potential for individual case
studies in a variety of practical applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Steinberg from the University of MRI Diagnostic Imaging Center for providing the
data and the anonymous reviewers for valuable comments to
improve the scientific quality of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] J. H. Adams, D. I. Graham, L. S. Murray and G. Scott, “Diffuse axonal
injury due to nonmissile head injury in humans: An analysis of 45 cases,”
Ann. Neurol., vol. 12, pp. 557–563, 1982.
[2] K. Arfanakis, V. M. Haughton, J. D. Carew, B. P. Rogers, R. J. Dempsey,
and M. E. Meyerand, “Diffusion tensor MR imaging in diffuse axonal
injury,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 23, pp. 794–802, 2002.
[3] H. G. Belanger, R. D. Vanderploeg, G. Curtiss, and D. L. Warden, “Recent
neuroimaging techniques in mild traumatic brain injury,” J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 5–20, 2007.
[4] E. D. Bigler and J. J. Bazarian, “Diffusion tensor imaging: A biomarker
for mild traumatic brain injury?” Neurology, vol. 74, pp. 626–627, 2010.
[5] P. J. Basser, J. Mattiello, and D. Le Bihan ,“MR diffusion tensor spectroscopy and imaging,” J. Biophys., vol. 66, pp. 259–267, 1994.
[6] C. Lo, K. Shifteh, T. Gold, J. A. Bello, and M. L. Lipton, “Diffusion
tensor imaging abnormalities in patients with mild traumatic brain injury
and neurocognitive impairment,” J. Comput. Assisted Tomogr., vol. 33,
no. 2, pp. 293–297, 2009.
[7] S. N. Niogi, P. Mukherjee, J. Ghajar, C. Johnson, R. A. Kolster, and
R. Sarkar, “Extent of microstructural white matter injury in postconcussive syndrome correlates with impaired cognitive reaction time: A 3T
diffusion tensor imaging study of mild traumatic brain injury,” Amer.
J. Neuroradiol., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 967–973, 2008.
[8] D. R. Rutgers, P. Fillard, G. Paradot, M. Tadie, P. Lasjaunias, and
D. Ducreux, “Diffusion tensor imaging characteristics of the corpus callosum in mild, moderate, and severe traumatic brain injury,”
Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1730–1735, 2008.
[9] M. Singh, J. Jeong, D. Hwang, W. Sungkarat, and P. Gruen, “Novel diffusion tensor imaging methodology to detect and quantify injured regions
and affected brain pathways in traumatic brain injury,” Magn. Reson.
Imag., vol. 28, pp. 22–40, 2010.
[10] S. N. Niogi and P. Mukherjee, “Diffusion tensor imaging of mild traumatic
brain injury,” J. Head Trauma Rehabil., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 241–55, 2010.
[11] A. Kuceyeski, J. Maruta, S. N. Niogi, J. Ghajar, and A. Raj, “The generation and validation of white matter connectivity importance maps,”
NeuroImage, vol. 58, pp. 109–121, 2011.
[12] Z. Chu, E. A. Wilde, J. V. Hunter, S. R. McCauley, E. D. Bigler,
M. Troyanskaya, R. Yallampalli, J. M. Chia, and H. S. Levin, “Voxelbased analysis of diffusion tensor imaging in mild traumatic brain injury
in adolescents,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 340–346, 2010.
[13] K. M. Kinnunen, R. Greenwood, J. H. Powell, R. Leech, P. C. Hawkins,
V. Bonnelle, M. C. Patel, S. J. Counsell, and D. J. Sharp, “White matter
damage and cognitive impairment after traumatic brain injury,” Brain,
vol. 134, pp. 449–463, 2011.
[14] J. Zhuo, S. Xu, J. L. Proctor, R. J. Mullins, J. Z. Simon, G. Fiskum,
and R. P. Gullapalli, “Diffusion kurtosis as an in vivo imaging marker
for reactive astrogliosis in traumatic brain injury,” NeuroImage, vol. 59,
no. 1, pp. 467–477, 2012.
[15] A. Fuchs, K. J. Jantzen, and J. A. S. Kelso, “Diffusion tensor imaging
analysis of sequential scans in mild traumatic brain injuries,” in Proc.
38th Annu. Meet. Soc. Neurosci., 2008, p. 398.1/VV3.
[16] A. Hotiu, “Diffusion tensor imaging in mild traumatic brain injuries,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Phys., Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton,
FL, USA, 2010.
[17] A. R. Mayer, J. Ling, M. V. Mannell, C. Gasparovic, J. P. Phillips,
D. Doezema, R. Reichard, and R. A. Yeo, “A prospective diffusion tensor
imaging study in mild traumatic brain injury,” Neurology, vol. 74, no. 8,
pp. 643–650, 2010.
[18] A. Sidaros, A. W. Engberg, K. Sidaros, M. G. Liptrot, M. Herning,
P. Petersen, O. B. Paulson, T. L. Jernigan, and E. Rostrup, “Diffusion
tensor imaging during recovery from severe traumatic brain injury and
relation to clinical outcome: A longitudinal study,” Brain, vol. 131, no. 2,
pp. 559–572, 2008.

1470

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

[19] V. D. Calhoun, T. Adali, G. D. Pearlson, and J. J. Pekar, “A method for
making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent
component analysis,” Human Brain Mapping vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 140–151,
2001.
[20] A. Hyvärinen, J. Karhunen and E. Oja, “Independent Component Analysis,” New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[21] S. Sanei and J. Chambers, EEG Signal Processing. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, 2007.
[22] D. Dong, J. A. S. Kelso and F. L. Steinberg, “Spatiotemporal decorrelated
activity patterns in functional MRI data during real and imagined motor
tasks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 49, pp. 227–239, 2002.
[23] M. J. McKeown, S. Makeig, G. G. Brown, T. P. Jung, S. S. Kindermann, A.
J. Bell, and T. J. Sejnowski, “Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation
into independent spatial components,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 160–188, 1998.
[24] K. Arfanakis, D. Cordes, V. M. Haughton, J. D. Carew, and M. E.
Meyerand, “Independent component analysis applied to diffusion tensor,”
MRI. Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 47, pp. 354–363, 2002.
[25] A. R. Franco, J. Ling, A. Caprihan, V. D. Calhoun, R. E. Jung,
G. L. Heileman, and A. R. Mayer, “Multimodal and multi-tissue measures of connectivity revealed by joint independent component analysis,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 986–997,
Dec. 2008.
[26] S. Kim, J. Jeong, and M. Singh, “Estimation of multiple fiber orientations from diffusion tensor MRI using independent component
analysis,” IEEE Tran. Nuclear Sci., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 266–273,
Feb. 2005.
[27] M. Singh and C. W. Wong, “Independent component analysis-based multifiber streamline tractography of the human brain,” Magn. Reson. Med.,
vol. 64, pp. 1676–1684, 2010.
[28] M. Jing, T. M. McGinnity, S. Coleman, H. Zhang, A. Fuchs, and S. Kelso,
“Enhancement of fibre orientation distribution reconstruction in diffusion
weighted imaging by single channel blind source separation,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 363–373, 2012.
[29] J. Tournier, F. Calamante, D. G. Gadian, and A. Connelly, “Direct estimation of the fiber orientation density function from diffusion-weighted MRI
data using spherical deconvolution,” NeuroImage, vol. 23, pp. 1176–1185,
2004.
[30] J. O’Muircheartaigh, C. Vollmar, C. Traynor, G. J. Barker, V. Kumari,
M. R. Symms, P. Thompson, J. S. Duncan, M. J. Koepp, and M. P. Richardsona, “Clustering probabilistic tractograms using independent component
analysis applied to the thalamus,” NeuroImage, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 2020–
2032, 2011.
[31] V. D. Calhoun, J. Liu, and T. Adali, “A review of group ICA for fMRI
data and ICA for joint inference of imaging, genetic, and ERP data,”
NeuroImage, vol. 45, pp. s163–s172, 2009.
[32] K. Supekar, L. Q. Uddin, K. Prater, H. Amin, M. D. Greicius, and
V. Menon, “Development of functional and structural connectivity within
the default mode network in young children,” NeuroImage, vol. 52, no. 1,
pp. 290–301, 2010.
[33] W. Liao, Z. Zhang, Z. Pan, D. Mantini, J. Ding, X. Duan, C. Luo,
Z. Wang, Q. Tan, G. Lu, and H. Chen, “Default mode network abnormalities in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: A study combining fMRI and
DTI,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 883–895, 2011.
[34] J. Sui, G. T. A. Pearlson, K. A. Kiehl, A. Caprihan, J. Liu, J. Yamamoto,
and V. D. Calhoun, “Discriminating schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
by fusing FMRI and DTI in a multimodal CCA+ joint ICA model,” NeuroImage, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 839–855, 2011.
[35] V. D. Calhoun, T. Adali, G. D. Pearlson, and J. J. Pekar, “Spatial and
temporal independent component analysis of functional MRI data containing a pair of task-related waveforms,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 13,
pp. 43–53, 2001.
[36] M. Jing and S. Sanei, “Simultaneous EEG-fMRI analysis with application
to detection of seizure signal sources,” in Recent Advances in Signal
Processing. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2009, pp. 441–458.
[37] W. Lu and J. C. Rajapakse “Approach and applications of constrained ICA,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 203–212,
Jan. 2005.
[38] V. D. Calhoun, T. Adali, M. Stevens, K. A. Kiehl, and J. Pekar, “Semiblind ICA of fMRI: A method for utilizing hypothesis-derived time
courses in a spatial ICA analysis,” NeuroImage, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 527–
538, 2005.
[39] J. V. Stone, J. Porrill, N. R. Porter, and I. D. Wilkinson, “Spatiotemporal
independent component analysis of event-related FMRI data using skewed
probability density functions,” NeuroImage, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 407–421,
2002.

[40] M. Jing, T. M. McGinnity, S. Coleman, H. Zhang, “Incorporating
ICA to Q-ball imaging for diffusion orientation distribution reconstruction,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., pp. 2706–2709,
2010.
[41] A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski, “An information-maximization approach
to blind separation and blind deconvolution,” Neural Comput., vol. 7,
pp. 1129–1159, 1995.
[42] American Academy of Neurology, “Practice parameters—The management of concussion in sports (summary statement),” Neurology, vol. 48,
pp. 581–585, 1997.
[43] K. J. Jantzen, B. Anderson, F. L. Steinberg, and J. A. S. Kelso, “A
prospective functional MR imaging study of mild traumatic brain injury in college football players,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 25, pp. 738–
745, 2004.
[44] S. M. Smith, M. Jenkinson, M. W. Woolrich, C. F. Beckmann, T. E. J.
Behrens, H. Johansen-Berg, P. R. Bannister, M. De Luca, I. Drobnjak,
D. E. Flitney, R. Niazy, J. Saunders, J. Vickers, Y. Zhang, N. De Stefano,
J. M. Brady, and P. M. Matthews, “Advances in functional and structural
MR image analysis and implementation as FSL,” NeuroImage, vol. 23,
pp. 208–219, 2004.
[45] S. M. Smith, M. Jenkinson, H. Johansen-Berg, D. Rueckert, T. E. Nichols,
C. E. Mackay, K. E. Watkins, O. Ciccarelli, M. Z. Cader, P. M. Matthews,
and T. E. J. Behrens, “Tract-based spatial statistics: Voxelwise analysis of multi-subject diffusion data,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, pp. 1487–
1505, 2006.
[46] M. Inglese, S. Markani, G. Johnson, B. A. Cohen, J. A. Silver, O. Gonen,
and R. I. Grossman, “Diffuse axonal injury in mild traumatic brain injury:
A diffusion tensor imaging study,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 103, pp. 298–303,
2005.
[47] M. F. Kraus, T. Susmaras, B. P. Caughlin, C. J. Walker, J. A. Sweeney, and
D. M. Little, “White matter integrity and cognition in chronic traumatic
brain injury: A diffusion tensor imaging study,” Brain, vol. 130, no. 10,
pp. 2508–2519, 2007.
[48] L. Miles, R. I. Grossman, G. Johnson, J. S. Babb, L. Diller, and
M. Inglese, “Short-term DTI predictors of cognitive dysfunction in
mild traumatic brain injury,” Brain Injury, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 115–122,
2008.
[49] E. A. Wilde, S. R. McCauley, J. V. Hunter, E. D. Bigler, Z. Chu,
Z. J. Wang, G. R. Hanten, M. Troyanskaya, R. Yallampalli, X. Li,
J. Chia, and H. S. Levin, “Diffusion tensor imaging of acute mild traumatic brain injury in adolescents,” Neurology, vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 948–
955, 2008.
[50] A. S. Field, K. Hasan, B. J. Jellison, K. Arfanakis, and A. L. Alexander,
“Diffusion tensor imaging in an infant with traumatic brain swelling,”
Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 24, pp. 1461–1464, 2003.
[51] J. J. Bazarian, J. Zhong, B. Blythe, T. Zhu, V. Kavcic, and D. Peterson,
“Diffusion tensor imaging detects clinically important axonal damage
after mild traumatic brain injury: A pilot study,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 24,
pp. 1447–1459, 2007.

Min Jing received the M.Sc. degree in digital signal processing with distinction from King’s College
London, London, U.K., in 2004. She then received
the Doctorate degree in biomedical signal processing
from the Centre of Digital Signal Processing, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, U.K., in 2008.
She is currently a Research Associate in Intelligent
Systems Research Centre, University of Ulster. Her
PhD research involved investigation of predictability of epileptic seizure by fusion of EEG and fMRI.
Her current research interests include research and
development of advanced signal processing techniques for neuroimaging data
analysis, image/video processing, and visual content based social media data
analysis.

JING et al.: TEMPORAL CHANGES OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS IN MTBI VIA GROUP-BASED SEMIBLIND SOURCE SEPARATION

T. Martin McGinnity (M’83–SM’09) received the
First Class (Hons.) degree in physics and the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Durham, Durham,
U.K., in 1975 and 1979, respectively.
He is currently the Dean of Science and Technology at Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham,
U.K., and was formerly the Professor of Intelligent
Systems Engineering and the Director of the Intelligent Systems Research Centre within the Faculty of
Computing and Engineering, University of Ulster. He
was a Director of the University of Ulsters technology
transfer company, Innovation Ulster, and a spin out Company Flex Language
Services. He is the author or coauthor of approximately 300 research papers
and has attracted more than 24 million in research funding. His current research
interests include computational intelligence, and in particular on computational
systems which explore and model biological signal processing, specifically in
relation to cognitive robotics and computation neuroscience.
Dr. McGinnity received the Senior Distinguished Research Fellowship and
the Distinguished Learning Support Fellowship by the University of Ulster in
recognition of his contribution to teaching and research. He is a Fellow of the
Institution of Engineering and Technology and is a Chartered Engineer.

Sonya Coleman (M’11) received the B.Sc.(Hons.)
degree in mathematics, statistics, and computing and
the Ph.D. degree in mathematics from the University of Ulster, Londonderry, U.K., in 1999 and 2003,
respectively.
She is currently a Reader in the School of Computing and Intelligent System, University of Ulster.
She has more than 60 publications primarily in the
field of mathematical image processing, and much of
the recent research undertaken by her was supported
by funding from EPSRC award EP/C006283/11, the
Nuffield Foundation, and the Leverhulme Trust.
Dr. Coleman received the Distinguished Research Fellowship by the University of Ulster in recognition of her contribution research in 2009.

Armin Fuchs was born in Nürtingen, Germany, in
1959. He received the Diploma and the Ph.D. degrees
in theoretical physics from the University of Stuttgart,
Stuttgart, Germany, in 1985 and 1990, repectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor of Physics
and Complex Systems and Brain Sciences at Florida
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA. His research interests include data analysis for noninvasive
brain imaging methods and modeling using nonlinear
dynamical systems.

1471

J. A. Scott Kelso was born in Derry, Northern
Ireland. He was educated at Foyle College, Londonderry, Northern Ireland, and trained originally as a
Teacher at Stranmillis University College, Belfast,
U.K., graduating with Hons. in 1969. He received
an undergraduate degree from the University of
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, in 1972, and the M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI, USA, in 1973 and 1975, respectively,
where he studied neural mechanisms underlying the
coordination and control of movement.
From 1976 to 1978, he was an Assistant Professor and the Director of the
Motor Behavior Laboratory, University of Iowa. Between 1978 and 1985, he
was a Senior Research Scientist at Haskins Laboratories, Yale University, an
Associate Professor in 1978, and a Professor of psychology and biobehavioral
sciences at the University of Connecticut (unit of behavioural genetics)in 1982.
Since 1985, he has been the Glenwood and Martha Creech Eminent Scholar
Chair in science at Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA, where he
founded and directed the first Center for Complex Systems and Brain Sciences
in the U.S. For more than 20 years, he led a NIH-funded National Training
Program in this new interdisciplinary field. In 2009, he was appointed as a
Visiting Professor of computational neuroscience at the Intelligent Systems
Research Centre, University of Ulster Magee Campus, Derry, U.K., where he
helps to guide a small team of Researchers. He has held Guest Professorships in
Lyons, France, in 1983, Stuttgart, Germany, in 1984, Moscow, Russia, in 1986,
Marseille, France, in 2000, and Belo Horizonte, Brasil, in 2011, and was a
Fellow of The Neurosciences Research Institute in La Jolla, CA (1997). He is
the author of more than 300 research articles in disciplines that span neuroscience, psychology, physiology, biology, and physics. His books include Dynamic Patterns: the Self-Organization of Brain and Behavior (Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press,1995/1997), Coordination Dynamics (with V. K. Jirsa, Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2004), and The Complementary Nature (with D. A. Engstrm,
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006/2008). For most of his scientific career,
he has used a combination of brain imaging, behavioral methods, and theoretical
modeling to understand how human beings (and human brains)—individually
and together—coordinate behavior on multiple levels, from the cellular to the
social. He is considered a pioneer in the field of coordination dynamics, a
theoretical and empirical framework geared to uncovering the principles, and
mechanisms of functional coordination in living things. A recent invited piece
”Coordination Dynamics” is published by Springer in their Encyclopedia of
Complexity and System Science in 2009.
Dr. Kelso is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, the American Psychological Association, and the American Physical
Society. He received the numerous awards including the MERIT, Senior Scientist, and Director’s Innovation Awards from the National Institutes of Health,
the Distinguished Alumni Research Achievement Award from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and the Docteur Honoris Causa degree from the Republic
of France and the University of Toulouse (est. 1228). In December 2007, he was
honored to be named Pierre de Fermat Laureate and he received the Bernstein
Prize from the International Society of Motor Control in 2011.

