284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Active Contour-Based Cell Segmentation During
Freezing and Its Application in Cryopreservation
Pengxiang Wu1 , Jingru Yi1 , Gang Zhao∗ , Member, IEEE, Zhangjin Huang∗ , Member, IEEE,
Bensheng Qiu, Member, IEEE, and Dayong Gao

Abstract—Water permeability of the plasma membrane plays an
important role in making optimal cryopreservation protocols for
different types of cells. To quantify water permeability effectively,
automated cell volume segmentation during freezing is necessary.
Unfortunately, there exists so far no efficient and accurate segmentation method to handle this kind of image processing task gracefully. The existence of extracellular ice and variable background
present significant challenges for most traditional segmentation algorithms. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to reliably
extract cells from the extracellular ice, which attaches to or surrounds cells. Our method operates on temporal image sequences
and is composed of two steps. First, for each image from the sequence, a greedy search strategy is employed to track approximate
locations of cells in motion. Second, we utilize a localized competitive active contour model to obtain the contour of each cell. Based
on the first step’s result, the initial contour for level set evolution
can be determined appropriately, thus considerably easing the pain
of initialization for an active contour model. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed method is efficient and effective in
segmenting cells during freezing.
Index Terms—Active contour, cryopreservation, extracellular
ice, image segmentation.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

RYOPRESERVATION is a way to achieve long-term
banking of living materials; and it is extensively applied

Manuscript received May 13, 2014; revised July 4, 2014; accepted August
15, 2014. Date of publication August 21, 2014; date of current version December 18, 2014. This work was supported in parts by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Nos. 51476160, 51276179), the National Basic
Research Program of China (973 Program) under Grant 2010CB732604, the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2100230009,
WK0110000030), the National Science and Technology Major Project of China
(No. 2009ZX01028-002-003-005), and the 111 Project (No. B07033). Pengxiang Wu and Jingru Yi contributed equally to the work. 1 Indicates their equal
contribution. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
1 P. Wu is with Centre for Biomedical Engineering, School of Information
Science and Technology, and is also with School of Computer Science and
Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027,
China (e-mail: wpx3821@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
1 J. Yi, B. Qiu, and D. Gao are with the Centre for Biomedical Engineering,
School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China (e-mail: yijingru@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
bqiu@ustc.edu.cn; dayong@u.washington.edu).
∗ G. Zhao is with Centre for Biomedical Engineering, School of Information
Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei
230027, China (e-mail: zhaog@ustc.edu.cn).
∗ Z. Huang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, and also
with USTC-Loongson Joint Laboratory, Institute of Advanced Technology, and
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Computing and Communication Software
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China (e-mail:
zhuang@ustc.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2350011

in tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, and assisted reproduction [1], [2]. During cryopreservation, cryoinjury that would
cause cellular damage tends to occur easily due to inappropriate
freezing protocols [3], [4]. To minimize cryoinjury, an intrinsic
property of cells called water permeability has to be studied,
which plays an important role in predicting freezing response of
a certain kind of cell and giving insights in developing optimal
cryopreservation protocols [5]–[7]. For this reason, freezing experiments are needed. In these experiments, cells are suspended
into cryopreservation solutions [8], [9]. Then, with the decreasing of temperature, ice precipitates from extracellular solution;
and water dehydration of the cell induced by increased osmotic
gradient occurs. To study the subzero cell water permeability,
the cell volume variation caused by dehydration during freezing must be worked out, which can be obtained indirectly from
cell’s projected area under the cryomicroscope [8], [10]. As
for the calculation of the projected area, it can be easily done
by cell segmentation. However, the existence of the extracellular ice and variable background make it quite a difficult task
to automatically extract the target cell. Therefore, traditionally
researchers have to manually segment the cells [34], [35], a procedure that is inaccurate and unreasonably time consuming. The
objective of this paper is to present an efficient and effective cell
segmentation method, thereby relieving the burden of manual
work.
Cell segmentation has received considerable attention for
many years. However, there is currently few work on segmenting cells during freezing for cryopreservation. One attempt ever
made by Spindler et al. in [10] was to apply the Hough transformation and region growing method for such cell segmentation.
However, this method failed to extract the whole cell but only
obtained the inner region of the cell, which is inaccurate for
the measurement of the projected cell area. In fact, such kinds
of traditional methods can hardly be adequate for this image
segmentation task, which is complicated for many reasons. To
be specific, first, the existence of extracellular ice, which encapsulates or attaches to cells, presents a great challenge to peel off
the objects from the background (see Fig. 1). Second, weak image contrast at cell boundaries, significant shape deformations
of cells, and large variations of global and local intensity all
together make such segmentation quite a difficult task. Third,
to make segmentation accurate, it is also needed to consider
the occlusion and adhesion between cells. Finally, cell tracking must be carried out in order to cope with the drift of cells
caused by forming ice fronts and motions of the microscope. In
a word, this image segmentation task is far from easy, and most
traditional methods are not sufficiently powerful to handle the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WU et al.: ACTIVE CONTOUR-BASED CELL SEGMENTATION DURING FREEZING AND ITS APPLICATION IN CRYOPRESERVATION

Fig. 1. Cell and background variation during the freezing. (a) Initial status
of cells. (b)–(d) At the beginning of freezing process, extracellular ice starts
to grow and cells dehydrate gradually. (e) With the temperature decreasing
continuously, extracellular ice tends to disappear and the outer contours of cells
become darker. (f) Finally, cells become smaller and adhere to each other. Note
that during freezing, local and global intensity vary and cells drift a lot.

various factors discussed earlier. Therefore, there is a need for
more advanced methods so as to conduct the cell segmentation
gracefully.
Recently, active contour model is being widely used in image segmentation and the results are impressive. This model,
first developed by Kass et al. [11], is a curve evolution-based
approach, in which image feature-based energy functional is
defined. Minimizing the energy drives the curve to move toward
nearby image feature, thus generating desired segmentation results [12]–[14]. Since its invention, active contour model has
developed a lot and posed far-reaching impact on image segmentation.
There are two main categories for active contour: edge-based
and region-based. For edge-based active contour, its basic idea is
to utilize a local gradient-based edge detector to identify object
boundaries [13], [15], [16]. In many applications, this model
is adequate to conduct the segmentation. One major drawback
associated with this model is that the curve has a tendency to
get stuck in local minima of energy functional, thus rendering
this model sensitive to noise and initialization. In addition, when
the boundaries are weak, edge-based active contour may leak
through true object boundaries easily. To overcome these limitations, region-based active contour was introduced. This model
was inspired by the region-competition work of Zhu et al. [17]
and has undergone great development since its invention. In
contrast to the edge-based model, the region-based curve evolution method defines energy functional based on region statistics rather than local gradients [18]–[20]. This strategy makes
region-based approaches less sensitive to image noise and more
robust against initial curve placement when compared to edgebased models. However, despite these advantages, region-based
models are usually not ideal for segmenting heterogeneous objects due to the global constraints, which are unable to delineate
the targets exactly. By contrast, edge-based flow is free from
global constraints and has a better chance of detecting edges
along the object boundary.

285

To exploit the strengths of both models and avoid their drawbacks, many attempts have been made in the literature. Recently,
the notion of unsupervised or supervised statistical models (e.g.,
fuzzy clustering, Gaussian mixture model, and maximum likelihood) is being widely incorporated into active contour to enhance the object feature description [21]–[23]. Such kinds of
hybrid models have achieved great success in certain areas,
such as MRI image segmentation, and outperform other previous active contour models to some extent. However, these
models usually have more complex formulations, and therefore,
are more difficult to implement. Besides, they tend to be problem
specific and cannot be easily generalized to many other segmentation tasks. Moreover, for supervised model, an off-line training
process is essential, which is time consuming and would need
large amount of manual work. Another type of hybrid model
is to combine the edge- and region-based model directly based
on some sophisticated strategies. In [24], Paragios et al. proposed a linear combination of region-based probability active
contour with the classical edge-based model to exploit the benefits of both models. Similarly, Chakraborty et al. [25] applied a
game theory strategy to combine region- and edge-based models. The corresponding curve evolution of these methods did
show certain desirable properties. However, they suffer from
the choice of linear weighting factor and are not robust enough
for many other applications. In this paper, we utilize the framework proposed by Lankton et al. [26] to hybridize region- and
edge-based active contour. The output mixture model shares the
benefits of both approaches with small drawbacks. Experimental results show that this model is sufficiently powerful in cell
segmentation during freezing despite its simplicity.
For segmentation task in which temporal information is incorporated to observe the variation of objects, a good practice is
to conduct the segmentation based on image sequence. Cell segmentation during the freezing process is just this case. For this
reason, cell tracking is needed. In the literature, various techniques have been reported for cell tracking. In [27] and [28], a
mean-shift approach is employed to adaptively track the targets.
However, in our case, these methods may fail to work due to
interference of the extracellular ice and changes of cell morphology. In [29], Ray et al. utilized a constrained active contour
for target tracking. Despite its powerfulness, this method appears too complex for our freezing cell tracking. In [30], Goobi
et al. studied the tracking performance of various cell trackers,
which, however, are not suitable for our task. In this paper, we
propose a simple but effective enough greedy search strategy for
our cell tracking. This method works well regardless of various
interferences.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the details of our proposed method. In Section III,
experimental results and corresponding discussion are offered.
Our work is summarized in Sections IV.
II. METHOD
There are two main modules in our segmentation method.
They are cell tracker based on greedy search and localized
region-based active contour with competitive ability.

286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

A. Cell Tracking Using Greedy Search
For cell tracking in image sequence, the detection result from
previous frame (except for the first frame of a sequence) will be
utilized to find the approximate location of cells in next frame.
Once this is done, the subsequent cell segmentation can be
performed. In our proposed method, a greedy search strategy is
employed to find the approximate location. This strategy makes
full use of the fact that cells in two consecutive frames are
partially overlapped. As long as the detected contour of one cell
from previous frame touches the cell’s real boundary in current
image, the greedy search is able to drive this contour to move
toward the center of target cell. As a result, the cell in current
image is surrounded closely by the contour from previous frame.
Fig. 2 shows an example of greedy search tracking.
Greedy search starts with calculating the total grayscale of
area enclosed by initial contour [e.g., the white dashed circle in
Fig. 2(b)]. Then, it tentatively moves this initial contour a small
step in four different directions, i.e., the horizontal and vertical
two directions, respectively. Once this is done, four new total
grayscales of areas located at different positions are obtained
and their minimum is figured out. If this minimum value is less
than the initial total grayscale, the corresponding direction is
chosen to be the real moving direction, and thereby, the position
of current contour gets updated. This process is repeated until
termination condition (e.g., all the new total grayscales from
four different directions are greater than the current value) is
met. The skeleton of greedy search is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Greedy Search Tracking
Input: Initial contour C
Output: Final position P of input contour
1: P ← initial position of C
2: iniTotal ← initial total grayscale of area enclosed by C
3: loop
4: do move C tentatively to its four neighbor positions
5: do calculate four corresponding total grayscales of areas
and store the results in TGS
6: min ← the minimum of TGS
7: if min < iniTotal then
8:
iniTotal ← min
9:
P ← the corresponding position of min
10:
do move contour C to position P
11: else
12:
exit
13: end if
14: end loop
This greedy search method is robust for our cell tracking
during freezing process. Since the overall grayscale of one cell
is lower than background, and the relative position drift of cells
in two consecutive images is small, the greedy search is always
able to find the local optimum, which is also a global optimum. In
general, the greedy search behaves like climbing a hill, and then,
landing the contour on the center area of hilltop [see Fig. 2(c)].
In this way, the target cell is tracked. Comparing with other cell

Fig. 2. Illustration of the greedy search procedure. (a) Segmentation result
(i.e., the white contour) from previous frame. (b) Greedy search drives the initial
contour to move toward the center of target cell in current frame. Note that the
initial contour (the white dashed circle) is derived from previous segmentation
result. (c) Greedy search tracking behaves like climbing a hill, which is located
at the center area of a cell.

tracking algorithms, our greedy search method is simple but
efficient, and easy to implement.
B. Localized Region-Based Active Contour
Once the cell tracking is done, a localized region-based
active contour model is applied subsequently to segment the
freezing cells. This localized model possesses many attractive
qualities and is obtained by incorporating a well-known regionbased active contour [19] into a localizing framework [26]. The
region-based active contour and localizing framework are briefly
discussed as follows. After introducing these essential backgrounds, a derivation of localized active contour is given.
1) Region-Based Model: In this paper, the region-based active contour we prefer is the one proposed by Yezzi et al. [19]
due to its simplicity and high performance on average. This
model defines the region energy as follows [19]:
1
E = − (u − v)2
2

(1)

where u and v are the average intensities inside and outside the evolution curve. Minimizing this energy will lead to
the maximum difference between u and v, which indicates that
the curve has separated foreground and background regions
since these two regions should have maximally different mean
intensities. The corresponding gradient flow for this energy is as
follows [19]:


I −u I −v
∂C
= (u − v)
+
N
(2)
∂t
Au
Av
where I is the grayscale image, Au and Av denote the interior and exterior area of evolution curve C, respectively, and N
denotes the outward unit normal of C.
This gradient flow has many attractive properties [19]. However, since it is a global constraint model after all, it suffers
from several limitations, which render it powerless in some situations (see Section I). For this reason, we employ a localizing

WU et al.: ACTIVE CONTOUR-BASED CELL SEGMENTATION DURING FREEZING AND ITS APPLICATION IN CRYOPRESERVATION

framework introduced by Lankton et al. [26] to enhance the
performance of aforementioned region-based active contour.
2) Localizing Framework: As for the localizing framework,
it describes the foreground and background in terms of small
local regions, and thereby, only local energies are needed for
guiding the active contour motion. In this way, global constraints
are removed and active contour is localized. The localized active
contour model shares both the benefits of edge- and region-based
models without worrying much about their drawbacks.
Specifically, within this framework, each point along the
curve is considered separately and its corresponding local neighborhoods are split into local interior and local exterior by the
evolution curve. These two separate local regions are modeled
well by their local statistics, respectively. In this way, a local
energy is defined, and minimizing (or maximizing) this energy
will drive the point to move in its own local region accordingly.
All these local energies along the curve together constitute the
localized active contour.
The localizing framework is given as follows [26]:


δφ(x)
B(x, y) · F (I(y), φ(y))dydx
E(φ) =
Ωx


+λ

Ωy

δφ(x) ∇φ(x) dx

(3)

Ωx

where I denotes a given image defined on the domain Ω, x and y
are independent spatial variables each representing a single point
in Ω, F is a local internal energy measure, which is derived from
the region-based model, λ and φ are weighted factor and level
set function, respectively, and δ is the smoothed Dirac delta
function.
⎧
	



⎪
⎨ 1 1 + cos πφ(x)
, |φ(x)| ≤ ε
ε
δε (φ(x)) = 2ε
(4)
⎪
⎩ 0,
|φ(x)| > ε.
B is a characteristic function used for masking local regions [26]

1, x − y < r
B(x, y) =
(5)
0,
otherwise
where r is the radius of ball-shaped local regions. This function
will be 1 when point y is within the ball centered at x, and be 0
otherwise.
The energy functional (3) can be minimized (or maximized)
by solving the following gradient flow [26]:

∂φ
(x) = δφ(x)
B(x, y) · ∇φ(y ) F (I(y), φ(y))dy
∂t
Ωy


∇φ(x)
+ λδφ(x) div
(6)
|∇φ(x)|
where (·) and div (·) are the gradient operator and divergence operator, respectively. Note that the second term on the
right-hand side in (3) and (6) is a geometric penalty, which is
commonly used in the region-based active contour model to
regularize the gradient flow.
3) Derivation of Localized Region-Based Active Contour:
With this localizing framework available, all we need to do now
is put the region-based energy (2) into this framework. For this

287

purpose, we derive the essential internal energy F from (1) as
follows:
1
(7)
F = − (ux − vx )2
2
where ux and vx are the localized versions of global mean
intensities, u and v.

Ω y B(x, y) · Hφ(y) · I(y)dy

ux =
(8)
Ω y B(x, y) · Hφ(y)dy

Ω y B(x, y) · (1 − Hφ(y)) · I(y)dy

vx =
(9)
Ω y B(x, y) · (1 − Hφ(y))dy
where Hφ(y) is the smoothed Heaviside function.
Hε (φ(x))
⎧
0,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ 


= 1 1 + φ(x) + 1 sin πφ(x)
,
⎪
⎪
2
ε
π
ε
⎪
⎩
1,

φ(x) > ε
|φ(x)| ≤ ε (10)
φ(x) < −ε.

Then, by taking the gradient of F, we further obtain:


I − ux
I − vx
+
∇F = −(ux − vx )
Au
Av

(11)

where Au and Av are the areas of local interior and local exterior
regions defined by

B(x, y) · Hφ(y) dy
(12)
Au =
Ωy

Av =



B(x, y) · (1 − Hφ (y)) dy.

(13)

Ωy

Finally, by inserting F into (6), we obtain the final evolution
equation for the localized version of an active contour model
(2) as

∂φ
(x) = δφ(x)
B(x, y) · ∇F dy
∂t
Ωy


∇φ(x)
+ λδφ(x)div
.
(14)
|∇φ(x)|
The energy of this localized active contour achieves its optimum when ux and vx are maximally different at every x along
the curve. In this way, the foreground and background regions
are separated. Since this localized model is free from global
constraints, it is capable of separating locally heterogeneous regions. This ability is desirable for our freezing cell segmentation
since the outer contours of cells would become nonhomogeneous during freezing process. Therefore, to a large extent the
localizing of region-based active contour guarantees an accurate
segmentation.
C. Incorporating Competitive Ability into Active Contour
Despite the advantages discussed previously, localized active
contour alone is not sufficient to achieve correct segmentation
in some situations. For instance, in some cases, two or more
cells drift and adhere to each other due to the forming ice fronts

288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

and flowing water [see Fig. 1(e)]; as a result, the active contour
fails to segment only the target cell but also extracts undesirable
regions, which belong to other cells. The reason for this failure is
the interference of adjacent cells. To cope with this problem, we
incorporate competitive ability into the localized active contour.
The competitive ability allows multiple objects to be segmented simultaneously and correctly without being distracted
by each other, and therefore, it is quite suitable for our localized
active contour. In our case, a simple but effective competing
algorithm introduced by Lankton et al. [26] is employed to endow the localized active contour with competitive ability for
touching cells segmentation.
According to [26], a standard single level set evolution equation can be expressed as follows:
∂φ
= δφ(Fa + Fr )
∂t

(15)

where Fa is the advance force, which is positive and tries to
move the curve outward along its normal direction, and Fr is
the retreat force, which is negative and attempts to push the
curve inward along its normal direction. Based on this idea, we
can rewrite the evolution equation (14) in terms of Fa and Fr as
follows:



I − vx
B(x, y) · −(ux − vx ) ·
dy
Av
Ωy


∇φ(x)
λ
div
+
(16)
2
|∇φ(x)|




I − ux
B(x, y) · −(ux − vx ) ·
dy
Fr =
Au
Ωy


∇φ(x)
λ
div
+
.
(17)
2
|∇φ(x)|


Fa =

Then, by taking the competing scheme proposed in [26], we
can transform the original level set evolution equation (14) into
an equivalent one but with competitive ability
⎛
⎞
∂φi
= δφi ⎝ max (Fa i , −Fr j ) + min (Fr i , −Fa j )⎠ .
∂t
δ φ j (x)> 0
δ φ j (x)> 0
j = i

j = i

(18)
Note that gradient flow (18) is for the ith level set function
and it assumes that there are n evolution curves competing with
each other.
The transformed active contour (18) works well when dealing
with the inappropriate segmentation problem discussed earlier.
With this competitive ability, when current contour is segmenting its target cell, it will be compared to all adjacent contours
in terms of advance force and retreat force. In this way, a contour tends to defend its own region belonging to the object cell
and not intrude into the regions of other cells. Thereby cells
get segmented correctly. Note that when no other contour is at
the vicinity of current contour, the current contour behaves in
accordance with gradient flow (14).

D. Implementation of Level Set Evolution
For numerical implementation of gradient flow (18), we take
two steps to speed up the computation.
First, the update of level set function φ is computed only in a
narrow band around the zero level set.
Second, a reaction diffusion term [31] is added into (18) to
regularize the iterations of level set evolving without reinitialization, which is considerably time consuming and may bring
many unexpected results. After adding diffusion term, we have
following iterative equation:
φn +1 = φn + Δt1 · F (φn ) + Δt2 · Δφn

(19)

where Δt1 and Δt2 are time steps, and in practice, we could
simply set Δt1 = 1 and Δt2 = 0.05; Δ(·) is the Laplacian operator, and F (φn ) is the force term represented by the right-hand
side of gradient flow (18).
With these two steps, the computational cost of a level set
evolving is greatly reduced. Moreover, due to the intrinsic advantages of diffusion term [31], the results of computation are
pretty accurate even if we are taking a narrow band implementation. In this sense, we make our cell segmentation method
efficient and effective.
E. Summary
To summarize, the freezing cell segmentation method discussed previously consists of the following steps:
1) Initialization: The initialization of our cell segmentation
is completed by segmenting the first frame in an image
sequence. This segmentation can be easily done by any effective traditional method (e.g., watershed or region growing) due to the clear contours of cells and no interference
of the extracellular ice.
2) Cell tracking: The segmentation results from previous
frame serve as initial placement of contours for cell tracking. Then, greedy search is employed to find the approximate locations of object cells in the current frame.
3) Segmentation: The search results from step 2 are input into
the active contour model as the initial contours. To avoid
the leakage problem in some cases, we could enlarge the
initial contours a little bit. Afterwards, the segmentation
is carried out.
4) Determine the termination: If all the images in a sequence
have been processed, stop the segmentation and exit. Otherwise, go to step 2.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Preparation of Cell Images
The cells we used in our experiment were HeLa cells, which
were obtained from Prof. L. Wen (University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China) as a gift. The preparation
of our sample cells consisted of following steps. First, the HeLa
cells were cultured in a flask contained 90% DMEM (Hyclone,
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) and 10% FBS (Hyclone,
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). This flask was then placed
in an incubator (MCO-5AC, SANYO, Japan) as to keep the
cells growing. Second, the cells were detached from the flask

WU et al.: ACTIVE CONTOUR-BASED CELL SEGMENTATION DURING FREEZING AND ITS APPLICATION IN CRYOPRESERVATION

289

Fig. 3. Segmentation results of representative groups of cells. (a) Cells are seriously surrounded by the extracellular ice and adhere to each other due to their
drift. (b) Boundary of the cell is weak while the edge of the ice is comparatively strong. (c) Cells become blurred and their intensities vary sharply as cells gradually
dehydrate and diminish in size. In each group of cells, the upper row is the input images and the lower row is the segmentation results.

using 20% trypsin (Biosharp, Biosharp Co., Ltd, China) at up to
90% convergence. Finally, with 5 min of centrifugation (100 ×
g), cells were resuspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
solution (292 mOsm). Thereby, the sample was produced.
The subsequent freezing experiments were conducted with
the aid of a microscope (BX53, Olympus; Japan) with a
50 × objective and a cryostage (FDCS196, Linkam Scientific
Instruments Ltd., U.K.). A Qimaging MicroPublisher 5.0 RTV
CCD camera (Survey, BC, Canada) was utilized for real-time
monitoring and recording of experimental processes.
The freezing process in our experiment was as follows. First,
10-μL cell suspensions were pipetted on the center of the cov-

erslip on the cryostage, whose temperature was controlled by
the program. Then, another coverslip was gently put on the
cell suspensions. Afterwards, the freezing process started and
the cell sample was cooled to −1 °C at 10 °C/min. Once the
ice seeding was achieved, the cell sample was warmed up to
−0.5 °C at the same rate and stayed for 3 min. Note that this ice
seeding step was used to reduce the supercooling degree of the
cell suspensions. Moreover, although the freezing point of the
PBS solution was about −0.53 °C, 3 min of equilibrium was not
enough for the extracellular ice to melt completely; as a result,
the sizes of the extracellular ice were comparable to those of
cells. Once this warming up procedure was completed, cooling

290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4. Segmentation results with different methods: our method, GAC [13], Yezzi et al. [19], and Spindler et al. [10]. (a) Edge-based GAC model fails to extract
the cell contour correctly and leaks through the cell boundary, whereas the region-based model proposed by Yezzi et al. works comparatively well. (b) Leakage
problem occurs for the region-based model, whereas the GAC model performs as expected. Among all of the compared results, our method consistently segments
the cells correctly and performs best. By contrast, the traditional approach employed by Spindler et al. fails to extract the cell boundary at all and performs worst.

rates of 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, and 15 °C/min were employed,
respectively, to study the transmembrane water transport of the
cell samples at temperatures ranging from −0.5 °C to −30 °C.
The resolution of our cell images produced from freezing
experiments is 1360 × 768 pixels with 96 dpi. The length of
each image sequence is around 50 to 65 frames. For each image
sequence, since the cell shape changes rapidly and ice grows
quickly during −0.5 °C −10 °C, we extract from video 2 to
5 frames per degree centigrade in this temperature range as
to record the freezing process accurately. Similarly, we extract
about 1 frame per degree centigrade during −10 °C – −30 °C
as the cells deform quite a little and ice gradually disappears in
this interval.
B. Segmentation Results
In this section, we present several cell segmentation results
to illustrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed

method. First, three representative groups of cells were segmented using our method as shown in Fig. 3. Second, to further
analyze the performance our method, we then compare it with
three other competing methods. In the experiments, we set the
parameters of our method to λ = 0.9, r = 5, and ε = 1.5.
In Fig. 3, several segmentation results are demonstrated. The
cells in Fig. 3(a) are the same as those in Fig. 1. As is shown,
these cells are seriously surrounded by the extracellular ice and
adhere to each other due to their drift. However, despite such
difficulty of segmentation, our proposed method is capable of
extracting the cells correctly [see the second row of Fig. 3(a)].
Notice that the last image of the second row in Fig. 3(a) demonstrates that the competitive ability of active contour works well.
To further prove the robustness of our method, another two
groups of cells are segmented in Fig. 3(b) and (c). In Fig. 3(b),
the boundary of the cell is weak, while the edge of the extracellular ice is comparatively strong [see the third image of the

WU et al.: ACTIVE CONTOUR-BASED CELL SEGMENTATION DURING FREEZING AND ITS APPLICATION IN CRYOPRESERVATION

first row in Fig. 3(b)]. As a result, this contrast may render many
segmentation methods powerless to recognize the real boundary
of the cell correctly. In Fig. 3(c), as the cells gradually dehydrate
and diminish in size, they become blurred and their intensities
vary sharply. These kinds of inhomogeneity and variance of intensity really present great challenges for conventional active
contour models to deal with. However, as is shown in Fig. 3,
even in such situations, our segmentation method still works as
expected.
In Fig. 4, comparisons of our segmentation strategy over
three other competing methods are carried out. Since our segmentation model evolves from edge- and region-based active
contour, to validate its strengths we compare it with the wellknown edge-based geodesic active contour (GAC) model [13]
and the region-based active contour proposed by Yezzi et al.
[19]. Moreover, to demonstrate the powerlessness of traditional
approaches, we also make a comparison between the method
developed by Spindler et al. [10] and ours. Note that all these
three methods are incorporated into our cell tracking framework
and operate on image sequences.
As is illustrated in Fig. 4, our method performs best among
all these methods. By contrast, the simple traditional technique
employed by Spindler et al. fails to extract the cell contours at all
and performs worst. The edge-based GAC model and regionbased model achieve much better results than the traditional
method but are still less competitive than ours. In Fig. 4(a), the
GAC model is unable to segment target cells and the leakage
problem occurs, whereas our method and the region-based approach succeed in extracting cells gracefully. In Fig. 4(b), the
leakage problem turns up abruptly for the region-based model,
however, by contrast, our method and the GAC method perform
the segmentation task in a stable way. In practice, leakage problem tends to occur easily for the edge-based model when the
shape and intensity of cells change greatly, the boundaries of
cells are weak, or one cell is tightly close to another. As for the
region-based model, it is quite sensitive to the intensity inside
cells. If interior intensities of cells are highly nonhomogeneous,
region-based active contour may leak through cell boundaries
easily. However, since our method shares both the advantages
of edge- and region-based active contour, it is capable of segmenting cells in various situations with more flexibility and
adaptability. As is shown in Fig. 4, compared to other methods, our method performs in a stable and accurate manner. Note
that even though in some situations the edge- and region-based
methods perform similarly in comparison with our approach,
their segmentation results are still less perfect than ours.
For our method, the average time consumed for segmenting
one cell in an image is 0.55 s (the program was run with Intel
(R) Core (TM) i5-3210M and 4GB RAM on Windows 7). In this
sense, we can draw the conclusion that our method is efficient.
C. Performance Evaluation of Segmentation
To quantitatively evaluate the performance of the proposed
method, we take the manual cell segmentation results as the gold
standard to which the computer-aided segmentation results are
compared. In our study, boundary error metrics and area error

291

metrics [32], [33] are employed to measure the discrepancy
between automated and manual delineations of cell contours.
The boundary error metrics used in our study are the Hausdorff distance and the mean absolute distance. Let M and A
denote the manually delineated boundary and automatic segmentation result, respectively. For each point p on boundary A,
the distance to the closest point in M is defined as follows:
d(p, M ) = min p − pM 
p M ∈M

(20)

where pM is a point on boundary M, and ║·║ denotes the 2-D
Euclidean distance. Given that, the Hausdorff distance is defined
as the maximum d(p, M) over the whole boundary A, and the
mean absolute distance is the average of d(p, M). While the
Hausdorff distance measures the worst possible disagreement
between the two outlines, the mean absolute distance estimates
the disagreement averaged over the two boundaries [33].
For area error metrics, three commonly used measures are
employed in our study to find the difference between manual
and automatically delineated areas. These three measures are
false positive (FP) volume fraction, false negative (FN) volume
fraction, and true positive (TP) volume fraction [33].
FP =

|Aa ∪ Am − Am |
Am

(21)

FN =

|Aa ∪ Am − Aa |
Am

(22)

TP =

|Aa ∩ Am |
Am

(23)

where Am refers to the area of the cell determined by the manual
segmentation, and Aa is the area of the cell determined by our
segmentation method.  and  denote intersection and union
operations, respectively.
In our study, each kind of freezing experiment at certain cooling rate contains thousands of cells to be segmented. Therefore,
it is impractical to evaluate the boundary error and area error of
all the segmented cells one by one. For each kind of freezing experiment, we randomly selected 20 cells at the beginning, which
were then frozen for study. As a result, throughout the image
sequences, there were more than 1000 cells to be segmented. In
this way, the segmentation performance can be evaluated in an
accurate manner based on such sufficiently large masses of cells.
Again, to better demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
we compare it with three other competing methods mentioned
earlier.
For all methods, the means of the errors for all the segmented
cells in our dataset are listed in Table I, where the manual results
are regarded as ground truth. From Table I, we find that the proposed method has a considerably high performance in the cell
segmentation during freezing. By contrast, traditional approach
performs quite poorly and is not suitable for our cell segmentation task. The edge- and region-based methods achieve similar
results as ours but are still less competitive. Actually, in practice,
the region- and edge-based methods perform well in many situations. However, due to their intrinsic deficiency, they tend to fail
to extract the cell contours correctly in quite a few cases. Note

292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
EVALUATION OF SEGMENTATION RESULTS WITH DIFFERENT METHODS (MEANS ± STANDARD DEVIATION)
Cooling Rate

Cases

Method

Hausdorff Distance

Mean Absolute Distance

False Positive

False Negative

True Positive

5 °C/min

1092

Our method
GAC [13]
Yezzi et al. [19]
Spindler et al. [10]

2.0013 ± 1.0667
3.6481 ± 3.5560
3.6819 ± 2.4548
13.7609 ± 3.7873

0.6291 ± 0.2211
0.9398 ± 0.7259
1.2061 ± 0.6850
8.5911 ± 1.8535

0.0113 ± 0.0204
0.0298 ± 0.0527
0.0400 ± 0.0547
0.0138 ± 0.0525

0.0461 ± 0.0187
0.0541 ± 0.0368
0.0725 ± 0.0585
0.6855 ± 0.1220

0.9539 ± 0.0187
0.9459 ± 0.0368
0.9275 ± 0.0585
0.3145 ± 0.1220

10 °C/min

1082

Our method
GAC [13]
Yezzi et al. [19]
Spindler et al. [10]

2.0573 ± 1.0642
3.3973 ± 2.6141
4.2358 ± 3.9290
13.2511 ± 3.6402

0.6293 ± 0.2336
0.9030 ± 0.6048
1.2553 ± 1.0054
8.0297 ± 1.5554

0.0074 ± 0.0120
0.0183 ± 0.0272
0.0584 ± 0.0834
0.0151 ± 0.0662

0.0485 ± 0.0225
0.0631 ± 0.0492
0.0501 ± 0.0473
0.6488 ± 0.1259

0.9515 ± 0.0225
0.9369 ± 0.0492
0.9499 ± 0.0474
0.3512 ± 0.1259

15 °C/min

1147

Our method
GAC [13]
Yezzi et al. [19]
Spindler et al. [10]

1.9029 ± 1.1007
3.5344 ± 2.8699
3.5255 ± 2.8616
13.3139 ± 3.7975

0.5713 ± 0.2197
0.8841 ± 0.6250
1.0809 ± 0.7413
7.7924 ± 2.0980

0.0089 ± 0.0165
0.0203 ± 0.0292
0.0502 ± 0.0463
0.0139 ± 0.0648

0.0389 ± 0.0186
0.0547 ± 0.0512
0.0408 ± 0.0553
0.6018 ± 0.1475

0.9611 ± 0.0186
0.9453 ± 0.0512
0.9592 ± 0.0553
0.3982 ± 0.1475

that Table I also shows that all three competing methods have
comparatively high standard deviations, indicating that they are
not robust and stable. In fact, for region- and edge-based active
contours, one set parameters are not adequate to perform various
cell segmentation tasks. Their parameters need to be adjusted
frequently in order to make them operate as expected, a work
which is difficult and time consuming. However, in comparison, our method is free from this suffering and performs in a
relatively robust and stable manner. Overall, thanks to the localizing framework, our method performs well and outperforms
other methods.
It is worth noting that, to make localized active contour work
well, the size of the ball-shaped local region [i.e., parameter r
in (5)] for each contour point should be determined reasonably
based on the scale or resolution of the objects of interest. For
instance, when attempting to capture objects that are very large
in size, a large local region should be used. By contrast, a small
size of local region is useful if the objects are small. In our cell
segmentation case, this size parameter had better be set between
3 and 15 in order to extract the cell contours correctly. Overall,
the localized level set method is not sensitive to the setting of this
parameter but we should also keep in mind that this parameter
should be in reasonable range.
D. Water Transport Model Matching
In this section, water transport model matching was carried
out to further validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.
For this purpose, the cell areas measured in pixels were obtained
from cell segmentation. Then, these areas were further converted
into real cell areas measured in square micrometers. From these
areas, the normalized cell volumes were figured out. We then
fitted the normalized cell volumes with the following water
transport model [8]:
	


ΔHf
Lp ART
1
1
dVC
= −
·
−
dT
Bνw
R
TR
T


VC − Vb − Vs
(24)
− ln
(VC − Vb − Vs ) + φs ns νw
	



1
EL p 1
−
Lp = Lpg exp −
(25)
R
T
TR

Fig. 5. Combined-fitting results of normalized cell volumes from different
groups of freezing experiments. Symbols indicate the averaged cell volume
data. Solid lines indicate the model combined-fitting results (R2 is 0.9935).
Error bars represent the standard error of mean (SEM). n denotes the number of
cells. The L p g and E L p derived from combined-fitting are 0.3329 μm/min/atm
and 34.781 kcal/mol, respectively.

where Lpg is the hydraulic conductivity of the cell plasma membrane at the reference temperature (273.15 K), EL p is the activation energy for water transport across the plasma membrane
of cells, Vc is the cell volume, T is the temperature, and B is
the cooling rate. Note that the cell volume in this model is the
average of all cell volumes.
The fitting method we adopted here was combined fitting
[8], [9], i.e., fitting the three groups of averaged volumes from
different freezing experiments simultaneously to obtain only
one pair of Lpg and EL p (see Fig. 5). In this way, we not only
excluded the group difference of the cells, but also eliminated
the influence of cooling rates factor, thereby making our fitting
results more credible. From Fig. 5, we observe a good matching
of our data with the water transport model. Most of the points
fall onto the fitted curve and the R2 is high with 0.9935. Note that
the cell volumes exhibit an especially high conformity during
the equilibrium range (−10 °C – −30 °C).

WU et al.: ACTIVE CONTOUR-BASED CELL SEGMENTATION DURING FREEZING AND ITS APPLICATION IN CRYOPRESERVATION

293

The good model matching results discussed earlier indicated
that our cell segmentation results were sufficiently accurate
since inaccurate segmentation usually leads to bad matching
results. Therefore, we again proved the effectiveness of our proposed method.
E. Discussion
1) Advantages of Our Method: We have demonstrated the
effectiveness and efficiency of our cell segmentation method.
As for the effectiveness, it benefits from greedy search tracking,
localizing framework, and competitive ability of active contour.
As for the efficiency, there are three main factors contributing to the speed of segmentation. First, greedy search tracking.
This cell tracking strategy always attempts to find the local optima, which needs only small calculation. Besides, since the
approximate cell location obtained from greedy search is usually close to the object, the number of iterations needed for
active contour evolution is small, thereby rendering cell segmentation efficient. Second, narrowband implementation. This
strategy speeds up the computation by considering only the
essential data and eliminating the unimportant data. Third, reaction diffusion. This simple diffusion term makes the level set
evolve without reinitialization, thus saving a large amount of
time.
Another attractive quality of our method is simplicity. As is
shown, the algorithm is simple, and thus, easy to understand
and implement. This feature makes our method desirable for
practical applications.
It is worth noting that, although our proposed framework
is originally designed to conduct the cell segmentation during
freezing, it can be easily generalized to other applications (e.g.,
object tracking and other kinds of cell segmentation) with little
or no modification. In this framework, the greedy search strategy
plays an important role since it makes object tracking possible
and provides initial contours for the following active contour to
refine. Note that the greedy search strategy discussed earlier is
not necessarily limited to the grayscale information, and other
kinds of statistics (e.g., histogram) would also be utilized to
meet various demands of applications. As for the competitive
localized active contour, it is responsible for capturing the true
outlines of objects. The greedy track strategy and active contour
together make our framework applicable to various applications,
including tracking and segmentation. Also note that, if no tracking of objects is needed but only segmentation is required in
some certain applications, active contour alone is enough.
2) Deficiency: Despite its benefits, our method still has some
minor drawbacks. In a few cases, due to the tightly surrounded
extracellular ice, the active contour may be interfered and fails to
segment the cell correctly. Additionally, when the cell boundary
is too weak to recognize, the leakage problem would occur easily. Fig. 6 demonstrates some of these failure cases. In Fig. 6(a)
and (b), the tightly surrounded extracellular ice appears so much
like the true cell boundary that it is considerably difficult for active contour to separate the cell boundary from ice. In Fig. 6(c)
and (d), the cell boundary is so weak that active contour fails to
distinguish the true cell contour. However, since such kinds of

Fig. 6. Some failure cases of segmentation. Top row: input images. Middle
row: ground truth. Bottom row: segmentation results of our method. (a) and (b)
Active contour is seriously interfered by extracellular ice and fails to segment
cells correctly. (c) and (d) Since the cell boundaries are too weak to recognize,
the leakage problem occurs.

problems are rare and only cause minor errors of segmentation,
they overall have very little impact on the measurement of water
permeability.
3) Future Work: In the future, further improvement of our
method will be conducted to overcome the drawbacks discussed
earlier. As for the leakage problem, it is caused by the weak
intensity difference between cell boundary and background.
Therefore, according to the recent development trend of image
processing, probabilistic models (e.g., Gaussian mixture model)
combined with certain image enhancement techniques should
be promising in addressing this problem. By contrast, the ice
interference problem seems more complex. In such cases, the
ice is so close to the cell and so similar to the cell boundary
in texture that unlike in general situations (see Fig. 3), the traction force from other parts of active contour is not large enough
to pull that certain parts of active contour, which are blocked
by the extracellular ice, through the ice edges. As a result, the
active contour converges at the ice edges. However, given that
our method performs on image sequences and in one sequence
many previous images before the failure frame are free from serious ice interference, if we could utilize the information (e.g.,
contour position) from these previous images, we would get rid
of the ice interference successfully. Therefore, to remedy such
failure, we suggest incorporating statistical model (e.g., conditional random fields) into our method and making full use of the
information from previous frames in one sequence.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have presented an active contour-based method for cell
segmentation during the freezing process. In this method, a simple but effective greedy search is employed for the cell tracking;
and the competitive ability is incorporated into the localized
active contour to enhance the segmentation power. We have validated our approach through segmenting several representative

294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

groups of cells and comparing it with three other competing
methods. Moreover, the results of the water transport model fitting further demonstrated the good performance of our method
in practice. In a word, our method has successfully solved the
freezing cell segmentation problem, thereby relieving the burden
of the manual work. With this method, the study of cryopreservation would get accelerated considerably.

REFERENCES
[1] J. O. M. Karlsson and M. Toner, “Long-term storage of tissues by cryopreservation: Critical issues,” Biomaterials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 243–256,
Feb. 1996.
[2] X. M. He, A. Fowler, and M. Toner, “Water activity and mobility in
solutions of glycerol and small molecular weight sugars: Implication for
cryo- and lyopreservation,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 100, no. 7, pp. Art. no.
074702, Oct. 1, 2006.
[3] C. Y. Yang, Y. H. F. Yeh, P. T. Lee, and T. T. Lin, “Effect of cooling rate
and cryoprotectant concentration on intracellular ice formation of small
abalone (haliotis diversicolor) eggs,” Cryobiology, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 7–16,
Aug. 2013.
[4] S. Thirumala, J. M. Forman, W. T. Monroe, and R. V. Devireddy, “Freezing
and post-thaw apoptotic behaviour of cells in the presence of palmitoyl
nanogold particles,” Nanotechnology, vol. 18, no. 19, pp. Art. no. 195104,
May 16, 2007.
[5] J. O. M. Karlsson, “Effects of solution composition on the theoretical
prediction of ice nucleation kinetics and thermodynamics,” Cryobiology,
vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 43–51, Feb. 2010.
[6] M. Toner, E. G. Cravalho, and M. Karel, “Thermodynamics and kinetics
of intracellular ice formation during freezing of biological cells,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 1582–1593, Feb. 1, 1990.
[7] M. Toner, E. G. Cravalho, and D. R. Armant, “Water transport and estimated transmembrane potential during freezing of mouse oocytes,” J.
Membrane Biol., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 261–272, May 1990.
[8] G. Yang, M. Veres, G. Szalai, A. L. Zhang, L. X. Xu, and X. M. He,
“Biotransport phenomena in freezing mammalian oocytes,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 580–591, Jan. 2011.
[9] M. S. Berrada and J. C. Bischof, “Evaluation of freezing effects on human microvascular-endothelial cells (HMEC),” Cryoletters, vol. 22, no. 6,
pp. 353–366, Nov./Dec. 2001.
[10] R. Spindler, B. Rosenhahn, N. Hofmann, and B. Glasmacher, “Video
analysis of osmotic cell response during cryopreservation,” Cryobiology,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 250–260, Jun. 2012.
[11] M. Kass, A. Witkin, and D. Terzopoulos, “Snakes: Active contour models,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 321–331, 1987.
[12] V. Caselles, F. Catte, T. Coll, and F. Dibos, “A geometric model for active
contours in image-processing,” Numer. Math., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 1–31,
Oct. 1993.
[13] V. Caselles, R. Kimmel, and G. Sapiro, “Geodesic active contours,” Int. J.
Comput. Vis., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 61–79, Feb./Mar. 1997.
[14] P. D. Giamberardino, D. Iacoviello, J. M. R. S. Tavares, and R. M. N.
Jorge, Computational Modelling of Objects Represented in Images iii:
Fundamentals, Methods and Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC
Press, 2012.
[15] R. Malladi, J. A. Sethian, and B. C. Vemuri, “Shape modeling with front
propagation: A level set approach,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 158–175, Feb. 1995.
[16] A. Vasilevskiy and K. Siddiqi, “Flux maximizing geometric flows,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1565–1578,
Dec. 2002.
[17] S. C. Zhu and A. Yuille, “Region competition: Unifying snakes, region growing, and Bayes/MDL for multiband image segmentation,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 884–900, Sep. 1996.
[18] T. F. Chan and L. A. Vese, “Active contours without edges,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 266–277, Feb. 2001.
[19] A. Yezzi, A. Tsai, and A. Willsky, “A fully global approach to image
segmentation via coupled curve evolution equations,” J. Visual Commun.
Imag. Represent., vol. 13, no. 1–2, pp. 195–216, Mar.-Jun. 2002.
[20] M. Rousson and R. Deriche, “A variational framework for active and
adaptative segmentation of vector valued images,” in Proc. Workshop
Motion Video Comput., 2002, pp. 56–61.

[21] B. N. Li, C. K. Chui, S. Chang, and S. H. Ong, “Integrating spatial
fuzzy clustering with level set methods for automated medical image
segmentation,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2011.
[22] Y. F. Shang, A. Markova, R. Deklerck, E. Nyssen, X. Yang, and J. de
Mey, “Liver segmentation by an active contour model with embedded
Gaussian mixture model based classifiers,” Opt., Photon., Digital Technol.
Multimedia Appl., vol. 7723, pp. Art. no. 772313, 2010.
[23] H. Fatakdawala, J. Xu, A. Basavanhally, G. Bhanot, S. Ganesan, M. Feldman, J. E. Tomaszewski, and A. Madabhushi, “Expectation-maximizationdriven geodesic active contour with overlap resolution (EMAGACOR):
Application to lymphocyte segmentation on breast cancer histopathology,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1676–1689, Jul. 2010.
[24] N. Paragios and R. Deriche, “Coupled geodesic active regions for image
segmentation: A level set approach,” in Proc. 6th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2000, pp. 224–240.
[25] A. Chakraborty and J. S. Duncan, “Game-theoretic integration for image
segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 12–30, Jan. 1999.
[26] S. Lankton and A. Tannenbaum, “Localizing region-based active contours,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2029–2039,
Nov. 2008.
[27] O. Debeir, P. Van Ham, R. Kiss, and C. Decaestecker, “Tracking of migrating cells under phase-contrast video microscopy with combined meanshift processes,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 697–711,
Jun. 2005.
[28] X. D. Yang, H. Q. Li, and X. B. Zhou, “Nuclei segmentation using markercontrolled watershed, tracking using mean-shift, and kalman filter in timelapse microscopy,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53,
no. 11, pp. 2405–2414, Nov. 2006.
[29] N. Ray, S. T. Acton, and K. Ley, “Tracking leukocytes in vivo with shape
and size constrained active contours,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21,
no. 10, pp. 1222–1235, Oct. 2002.
[30] A. P. Goobic, M. E. Welser, S. T. Acton, and K. Ley, “Biomedical application of target tracking in clutter,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. Asilomar Conf.
Signals, Syst. Comput., 2001, vol. 1, pp. 88–92.
[31] K. H. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. H. Song, and D. Zhang, “Reinitialization-free
level set evolution via reaction diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 258–271, Jan. 2013.
[32] K. Z. Mao, P. Zhao, and P. H. Tan, “Supervised learning-based cell image
segmentation for p53 immunohistochemistry,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1153–1163, Jun. 2006.
[33] A. Madabhushi and D. N. Metaxas, “Combining low-, high-level and
empirical domain knowledge for automated segmentation of ultrasonic
breast lesions,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 155–169,
Feb. 2003.
[34] J. Yi, X. M. Liang, G. Zhao, and X. He, “An improved model for
nucleation-limited ice formation in living cells during freezing,” PloS
one, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. Art. no. e98132, May 2014.
[35] Y. P. Xu, G. Zhao, X. M. Zhou, W. P. Ding, Z. Q. Shu, and D. Y. Gao,
“Biotransport and intracellular ice formation phenomena in freezing human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T),” Cryobiology, vol. 68, no. 2,
pp. 294–302, Apr. 2014.
Pengxiang Wu received the B.E. degree in computer
science from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in
2012. He is currently working toward the M.E. degree
at School of Computer Science, University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
His current research interests include computer
graphics, computer vision, and machine learning.

Jingru Yi received the B. E. degree from the Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China, in 2012. She is currently working
toward the M.E. degree at School of Information
Science and Technology, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China.
Her current research interests include cryopreservation, mass and heat transfer.

WU et al.: ACTIVE CONTOUR-BASED CELL SEGMENTATION DURING FREEZING AND ITS APPLICATION IN CRYOPRESERVATION

Gang Zhao (M’13) received the Ph.D. degree in
power engineering and engineering thermophysics
from the University of Science and Technology of
China (USTC), Hefei, China, in June 2004.
He was a Postdoctoral Researcher at the USTC
from July 2004 to September 2006, and a Japan
Society for Promotion of Science Research Fellow
from July 2008 to October 2010. Since April 2011,
he has been a Professor at Biomedical Engineering Research Center, USTC. He has published more
than 70 full-length journal papers and he holds more
than 15 China Patents. His research interests include cryobiology, biomicro/nanofluidics, and biomedical microsystems.
Dr. Zhao is a Member of the Society for Cryobiology, American Society
of Mechanical Engineers, and Biophysical Society. His research has been supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities from the Ministry of Education of
The People’s Republic of China. He received the CAREER Award for Young
Teachers of USTC in 2013.

Zhangjin Huang (M’12) received the B.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in computational mathematics from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC),
Hefei, China, in 1999 and 2005, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the
School of Computer Science and Technology, USTC.
His current research interests include computer
graphics and image processing.

Bensheng Qiu (M’13) received the Bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from the College of
Electronic Engineering, the Master’s degree in acoustic engineering from Northwestern Polytechnology
University, Fremont, CA, USA, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer science from the Hefei University of
Technology, Hefei, China, in 1987, 1990, and 1995,
respectively.
From 1997 to 2001, he worked as an Associate
Professor of radiology at the PLA General Hospital.
From 2001 to 2005, he worked at the Department of
Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. From 2006 to 2012,
he was an Assistant Professor at the University of Washington. He is currently
a Professor and Vice Chairman of the Department of Electronic Science and
Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, and the
Director of Medical Imaging Center, University of Science and Technology of
China.
Dr. Qiu has conducted many projects on MRI-guided gene/stem cell therapy and interventions, including NIH, RSNA, NSF, National Basic Research
Program of China and Royal research grants, and received many awards from
the Radiology Society of North America, American Heart Association, and the
International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine. His current research
interests include MRI and biomolecular interventions.

295

Dayong Gao received the Bachelor degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 1983,
and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering and
biomedical engineering from Concordia University,
Montreal, QC, Canada, in 1991.
He is currently a Full Professor of mechanical
engineering and bioengineering, and Director of the
Center for Cryo-Biomedical Engineering and Artificial Organs, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
USA. He is also the Distinguished Chair Professor
(Adjunct Position) at the University of Science and Technology of China. Prior
to joining the faculty of University of Washington, he was a Baxter Healthcare Chair of Engineering and Alumni Professor of the University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA. He has published more than 200 journal full papers and
more than 300 chapters/manuscripts in scientific books (17 books) or conference proceedings, covering the following areas: cryo-biomedical engineering,
fundamental cryobiology, biopreservation, artificial organs (artificial kidney and
liver), and bioinstruments (biosensors and bioMEMS).
Dr. Gao received numerous awards/grants, as well as have been serving
international scientific societies/associations and organizing/chairing scientific
conferences worldwide.

