IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

323

Saturation of the Right-Leg Drive Amplifier
in Low-Voltage ECG Monitors
Daniel K. Freeman∗ , Ronald D. Gatzke, Georgios Mallas, Yu Chen, and Chris J. Brouse

Abstract—Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring is a critical tool
in patient care, but its utility is often balanced with frustration from
clinicians who are constantly distracted by false alarms. This has
motivated the need to readdress the major factors that contribute
to ECG noise with the goal of reducing false alarms. In this study,
we describe a previously unreported phenomenon in which ECG
noise can result from an unintended interaction between two systems: 1) the dc lead-off circuitry that is used to detect whether
electrodes fall off the patient; and 2) the right-leg drive (RLD) system that is responsible for reducing ac common-mode noise that
couples into the body. Using a circuit model to study this interaction, we found that in the presence of a dc lead-off system, even
moderate increases in the right-leg skin–electrode resistance can
cause the RLD amplifier to saturate. Such saturation can produce
ECG noise because the RLD amplifier will no longer be capable of
attenuating ac common-mode noise on the body. RLD saturation
is particularly a problem for modern ECG monitors that use lowvoltage supply levels. For example, for a 12-lead ECG and a 2 V
power supply, saturation will occur when the right-leg electrode
resistance reaches only 2 MΩ. We discuss several design solutions
that can be used in low-voltage monitors to avoid RLD saturation.
Index Terms—Electrocardiogram (ECG), electrode impedance,
lead-off, right-leg drive (RLD).

I. INTRODUCTION
LECTROCARDIOGRAM (ECG) monitors are ubiquitous
in modern clinical environments, and their ability to convey reliable, low-noise signals is fundamental to patient monitoring. Because electrical noise can couple into the ECG and interfere with clinical monitoring, there has been significant effort
over many decades to understand the origin of such noise [1].
This issue has been given renewed attention due to the fact that
ECG noise can trigger false alarms, contributing to the growing
problem of “alarm fatigue” [2]. It has been estimated that over
80% of all alarms from patient monitors are false positive, and
these excessive alarms can cause clinicians to be distracted from
their work and become desensitized to alarms in general, ultimately increasing the number of treatment errors [2], [3], [17].
We hypothesized that ECG monitors being designed today have
to contend with a source of ECG noise that was not present even

Fig. 1. Illustration of the circuit model that we used to represent a typical ECG
system. The body is coupled capacitively to the power mains (V C M ) through
capacitor C C M . The skin–electrode interface of each electrode is represented
by a parallel resistor and capacitor. The RLD system works by averaging the
voltages from the primary electrodes (V R A , V L A , V L L ) to produce the Wilson
voltage (V W ), which is then applied to the inverting input of the RLD amplifier.
The dc lead-off system works by pulling current (Ise n se ) through each lead and
monitoring the dc voltage on each electrode. The precordial leads are present
for the ten-electrode tests but not the four-electrode tests.

E

Manuscript received April 30, 2014; accepted August 17, 2014. Date of publication August 28, 2014; date of current version December 18, 2014. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ D. K. Freeman is with the Department of Algorithms, Dräger Medical Systems, Inc., Andover, MA 01810 USA (e-mail: danielkfreeman@gmail.com).
R. D. Gatzke is with Gatzke Technologies, Lexington, MA 02421 USA
(e-mail: ron@gatzketech.com).
G. Mallas, Y. Chen, and C. J. Brouse are with the Department of Algorithms,
Dräger Medical Systems Inc., Andover, MA 01810 USA (e-mail: Georgios.
Mallas@draeger.com; Yu.Chen@draeger.com; Chris.Brouse@draeger.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2351611

a decade ago. Specifically, there have been recent changes in the
semiconductor industry in which the voltage supply levels used
to power integrated circuits are much lower than in years past.
These lower supply voltages could potentially cause amplifiers
in the ECG front-end circuitry to saturate, producing noise on
the ECG. To test this hypothesis, we built a circuit model of an
analog ECG front-end. We found that, indeed, such saturation
can occur as a result of the unintended interaction between two
separate circuits: 1) the right-leg drive (RLD) circuitry that suppresses ac common-mode noise on the body [4], [5]; and 2) the
dc lead-off system that detects when any electrodes have fallen
off of the patient.
To understand how this interaction occurs, it is necessary to
first understand how these two systems work in isolation. The
RLD system was first introduced into commercial monitors in
the 1960s, and it was designed to address the most prominent
ECG noise source, that of the mains power (50 Hz in Europe,
60 Hz in the United States). This noise couples into the body
through parasitic capacitance to the mains, producing a large ac
voltage on the body that is common to all electrodes, hence serving as a source of common-mode noise in the ECG (see Fig. 1).
The RLD system works by taking the average voltage appearing on the primary electrodes (right-arm (RA), left-arm (LA),

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

left-leg (LL)), inverting this signal, and then applying this voltage to the right-leg (RL) electrode to effectively cancel out the
ac common-mode noise source on the body [4], [5]. The amplifier that is responsible for driving the inverted signal back into
the RL electrode is referred to as the RLD amplifier.
Designers of ECG front-end circuitry must ensure that the
RLD amplifier does not saturate on its output during normal
operation, or else the RLD system will not function properly.
Up until recently, this has not been a major problem because
the entire ECG front-end circuitry was typically powered with
high voltages (e.g., ±5–10 V), and therefore the RLD amplifier
had little chance of saturating on its output. But because modern
electronics have moved toward lower supply voltages, the RLD
amplifier is more susceptible to saturation; for example, if the
RLD amplifier is powered with +3 V, then any attempt to exceed
+3 V on its output will cause saturation, at which point the
common-mode rejection of the system will immediately drop,
and noise can appear on the ECG.
While the RLD system works to cancel out ac commonmode noise on the body, there is another independent system at
work in the monitor that is used to detect if the skin–electrode
contact has become poor or if the electrodes have fallen off the
patient. This so-called dc lead-off system consists of a current
source or pull-down resistor attached to the input of each lead,
causing a constant dc current to flow through each electrode
at all times (see Fig. 1). If an electrode is no longer in solid
contact with the skin, this causes the skin–electrode resistance
to be increased. This increase will be detected by the dc lead-off
system because a dc voltage will appear across the electrode
as the skin–electrode resistance increases. If this dc voltage
exceeds some threshold, then a message alerts the clinician that
an electrode is no longer attached securely to the patient.
One of the unintended side-effects of the dc lead-off system
is that it can cause a significant dc voltage to appear on the RLD
amplifier output. This is because the sum total of the dc current
that is drawn by each of the leads is supplied from the RLD
amplifier. For example, if the RA, LA, and LL electrodes are
each drawing 100 nA for dc lead-off, this means that the RLD
amplifier is sourcing 300 nA. This can cause a dc voltage to
appear on the output of the RLD amplifier, particularly when
the RL skin–electrode resistance becomes high. For example,
if the RL electrode has a resistance of 3 MΩ and there is a
300 nA current flowing through this electrode, then there will
be a voltage drop of 0.9 V across the RL electrode (i.e., VRL −
VBo dy = 0.9 V). Since the RLD system clamps the body voltage
very close to ground (VBo dy ∼ 0 V), there will be 0.9 V dc on the
output of the RLD amplifier, thereby contributing to saturation.
The possibility that RLD saturation can contribute to ECG
noise seen clinically has not been investigated. This has motivated the need for a deeper understanding of what causes RLD
saturation and whether or not it can occur in a typical clinical
environment. Using a circuit model of an ECG front-end, we
explored the relationship between the RLD system, electrode
impedance, ac line noise coupling into the body, and dc lead-off
current. Our goal was to determine whether saturation could
occur under conditions of realistic skin–electrode impedances,
and if so, whether this saturation was due primarily to ac or

dc on the amplifier output. Understanding the conditions under
which the RLD system saturates is critically important for the
next generation of ECG monitors that will rely on low-voltage
integrated circuits as an analog front-end.
II. METHODS
To study RLD saturation, we used the circuit model shown in
Fig. 1. Each electrode is modeled as a parallel resistor and capacitor that represents the skin–electrode interface [5], [6]. For
example, the RL electrode is made up of a resistance RRL , representing the skin resistance, and capacitor CRL , representing
the skin capacitance. The nominal skin–electrode impedance
used in the model was defined by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation: approximately 50 kΩ
for skin resistance and 50 nF for skin capacitance [7]. However,
it is well understood that the impedance can vary over time
through a number of factors, such as electrode gel drying out,
skin moisture level, or loss of secure contact with the skin. For
our simulations, we considered the worst case electrode to be
10 MΩ in parallel with 3 nF (see Section IV for the origin of
these values). The RA, LA, and LL electrodes, together with the
RL electrode, make up the four-electrode test case. Also, to test
the commonly used 12-lead ECG (using ten total electrodes), we
added six chest leads, each having a skin–electrode impedance
of RP and CP .
Since the resistance to current flow inside the body is relatively small when compared to the skin–electrode resistance
[5], [6], the inside of the body was represented by a single voltage, VBo dy . We derived our model for the coupling of the mains
power to the body from the standards set forth by the International Electrotechnical Commission, including a voltage source
of 10 V root-mean-square (rms) [28.3 V peak-to-peak (p-p)] in
series with a 200 pF capacitor [8]. This is represented in Fig. 1
by the voltage source, VCM , and capacitor, CCM . Although the
mains power is referenced to earth ground, the electronics inside
the monitor have a separate signal ground that is isolated from
earth ground for safety reasons, as represented by the shaded
triangles in Fig. 1. The signal ground within the monitor has
some stray capacitance to earth ground, represented by Cg . This
capacitance is generally on the order of tens or hundreds of picofarads. For simplicity, we set Cg = CCM = 200 pF. Because
signal ground is capacitively coupled to earth ground, any ac
voltage on the body with respect to earth will cause current to
flow back through the leads, into the monitor, and back to earth
ground. Note that this model applies for ECG monitors that are
plugged into the mains for power as well as those running on battery power; the only difference between these two cases is that
the capacitance Cg will likely be smaller for battery powered
systems since the front-end electronics will be more isolated
from earth ground, although some finite capacitance will still
exist even under battery power.
The RLD system is commonly used in ECG monitors to improve common-mode rejection. The RLD is a feedback system that works by first taking the average of the RA, LA,
and LL voltages, referred to as the Wilson voltage (VW =
[VRA + VLA + VLL ]/3). The Wilson voltage is then applied to

FREEMAN et al.: SATURATION OF THE RIGHT-LEG DRIVE AMPLIFIER IN LOW-VOLTAGE ECG MONITORS

the inverting input of the RLD amplifier. This amplifier then
will drive the voltage VRL to whatever value is necessary to
make the Wilson voltage equal to signal ground. The intent
of this design is that the RLD amplifier will reduce the amplitude of ac voltages on the body (VBo dy ) with respect to
signal ground, thereby greatly improving the common-mode
rejection of the overall system. The power supply to the RLD
amplifier is represented by ±Vsupply ; note that the RLD amplifier output voltage cannot exceed the power supply levels
(VRL < +Vsupply and VRL > −Vsupply ), or else saturation will
occur. The dc lead-off system consists of several current sources
(Isense ) that draw a constant dc current from each lead to signal
ground. For the simulations, Isense was set to be 100 nA dc,
unless otherwise noted.
Simulations were performed in LTSpice. Line frequency is
60 Hz in the United States and 50 Hz in Europe, but we found no
appreciable difference in the results when VCM was varied from
50 to 60 Hz. Therefore, results are shown for VCM set to 55 Hz
(sinusoidal). The RLD amplifier was configured to have an open
loop gain of 105 , and a gain bandwidth product of 700 kHz. The
default solver in LTSpice was used in all cases.
To support our simulation results, we collected data from a
custom-made ECG analog front-end based on the circuit diagram shown in Fig. 1. The “patient” was represented by an RC
network where each electrode was modeled as a parallel resistor and capacitor. To reproduce a full 12-lead ECG, we used ten
total electrodes. Line noise was introduced into the “patient” by
applying a 55 Hz, 10 V rms sinusoid into body node through a
coupling capacitor of 200 pF (as represented by CCM in Fig. 1).
This 55 Hz signal was generated by a Wavetek function generator (Model 148A). Note that this signal was generated with
respect to earth ground, while all electronics within the ECG
front-end were referenced to signal ground that was isolated
from earth through an isolation transformer. For our system, the
parasitic capacitance Cg was measured to be 160 pF. Current
sources were used to generate a sense current of Isense = 75 nA.
The power supplies (±Vsupply ) were set to ±2.5 V.
All electrodes were set to 50 kΩ in parallel with 50 nF with
two exceptions: 1) the RA electrode was set to zero impedance
(RRA = 0 W) in order to introduce some imbalance in electrode impedance on Lead I. This is the standard method used to
measure common-mode rejection of an ECG front-end, allowing
some of the common-mode signal on the body to be converted to
differential noise on the input of the Lead I amplifier, thus reproducing real clinical scenarios in which the electrode impedances
will not be perfectly matched. 2) To test the effect of poor RL
electrode contact on the RLD system performance, we set CRL
to 5 nF and we varied RRL from 0 to 6 MΩ.
We took two series of measurements. First, we measured
the dc level on the RLD amplifier output (VRL ) using a handheld multimeter (Fluke 179). To avoid loading down the signal,
a 1 GΩ resistor was placed in between VRL and the positive
input terminal of the meter. The negative terminal was connected to signal ground of the front-end circuitry. Since the
input impedance of the scope is 10 MΩ, the signal displayed
on the meter is divided down 100:1. The second measurement
was that of Lead I (VRA − VLA ), which was obtained using a
differential amplifier (see Fig. 1), followed by a bandpass filter

325

Fig. 2. Examining the interaction between the dc lead-off system and the RLD
system. Using a four-electrode ECG with V C M = 0, all electrodes were set to a
resistance of 50 kΩ and the resistance of either (a) RA or (b) RL electrode was
increased, and the voltage on the RA, RL, and LA is measured. The same test
was then repeated for the case where (c, d) all electrodes were initially set to a
resistance of 1 MΩ.

with a passband of 0.05–330 Hz (not shown). This signal was
then digitized by an analog-to-digital converter with a sampling
rate of 2 ksps.
III. RESULTS
A. Effects of DC Lead-Off on RLD Amplifier Saturation
In our first set of tests, we consider the case where there is no
ac input (VCM = 0), allowing us to examine the dc effects of the
lead-off current sources on the RLD amplifier output (VRL ). All
capacitors can be ignored for this test since only dc is considered.
Using a four-electrode configuration, we set the resistance of all
electrodes to be 50 kΩ. We then varied the resistance of the
RA electrode and we see that increases in RRA cause the RA
electrode voltage, VRA , to be pulled negative [see Fig. 2(a)].
This is the intended behavior of the lead-off system; a negative
voltage on VRA indicates that the RA electrode resistance has
increased relative to baseline.
However, there are secondary effects to consider as well.
Because VRA has decreased, this has caused a decrease in the
Wilson voltage VW , and any changes in Wilson voltage are
counteracted by the RLD system. Specifically, the RLD amplifier will increase VRL in order to clamp the Wilson voltage to
ground [see Fig. 2(a)]. Since the dc level of VRL is increased,
there is the concern that the RLD amplifier could become saturated on its output. However, in this example, the increase in
VRL is quite modest and therefore will have little effect on the
saturation of the RLD amplifier. For example, even when RRA
reaches 10 MΩ, the RLD output voltage, VRL , is still relatively
small (<0.5 V).
Next, the same test was repeated except we looked at the
effects of varying the RL electrode resistance RRL . This causes
no appreciable change in the RA and LA electrode voltages
(VRA and VLA ) [see Fig. 2(b)] because the negative feedback

326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

a number of factors in practice that will limit the designer from
decreasing the sense current too low (see Section IV).
Since we have removed the dc from our analysis (VCM = 0),
we can derive some circuit equations for the system. We are most
interested in the RLD amplifier output voltage, and therefore
we will express VRL in terms of other circuit parameters. Using
Ohm’s law on the RL electrode, we have
VRL − VBo dy = IRL × RRL
Fig. 3. (a) Effect of varying the number of electrodes from 4 to 10. The
RL resistance R R L was increased and the RLD amplifier output voltage V R L
was measured. (b) Magnitude of the sense current was varied for the case
where R R L = 1 MΩ and V R L was measured. More electrodes and higher
sense current greatly increase the tendency for RLD saturation. For panel (a),
Ise n se was set to 100 nA, while for panel (b), R R L was set to 1 MΩ.

of the RLD system is holding these signals at signal ground
potential. However, increasing RRL causes a dramatic increase
in the RL electrode voltage VRL . This suggests that increases in
RRL could cause the RLD amplifier to become saturated. For
example, if Vsupply = 1.5 V, this would suggest that the RLD
amplifier will saturate when the RL resistance is about 5–6 MΩ.
We also considered the case where all of the electrodes had
a baseline resistance of 1 MΩ, and then RRA or RRL was increased [see Fig. 2(c) and (d)]. This represents a case where
either poor quality electrodes are used or a patient has particularly dry skin. There was a slight vertical shift in the curves when
all electrodes were set to 1 MΩ as compared to 50 kΩ [compare
Fig. 2(a), (b) to Fig. 2(c), (d)], but the effect was modest, and
will not have a significant effect on RLD amplifier saturation.
In the simulations described thus far, we considered ECGs
that use four electrodes. Now, we look at the effect of adding six
precordial leads, as is used with a full 12-lead ECG (ten electrodes total) [see Fig. 3(a)]. In this case, increasing RRL has a
much more pronounced effect on VRL because the current flowing through the RL electrode is the summation of the dc lead-off
currents from nine leads (IRL = 100 nA × 9 = 900 nA). This
means that for the ten-electrode configuration, VRL is now very
sensitive to changes in RRL , and as a result, the RLD amplifier
may saturate even when the RL electrode is at a relatively low
impedance. For example, if the RLD amplifier were powered
with Vsupply = 1.5 V, then the amplifier would saturate when
RRL is only 1–2 MΩ. This level of impedance is fairly common
in clinical environments (see Section IV), suggesting that lowvoltage ECG systems will be susceptible to noisy ECGs when
operated with a full 12-leads.
Up to this point, the lead-off sense current has been set to
100 nA, but this value can be varied by the circuit designer. To
examine how the magnitude of the sense current affects RLD
saturation, we varied Isense from 0 to 200 nA [see Fig. 3(b)].
For this test, RRL was set to 1 MΩ to mimic the effect of a high
impedance electrode. There is a clear effect: the larger the sense
current, the larger the deviation in VRL , and therefore the more
tendency there is for the RLD amplifier to saturate. The obvious
way to avoid RLD saturation is to simply use a low enough sense
current that saturation never occurs, but unfortunately there are

(1)

where IRL is the current flowing from the RLD amplifier into
the body. Since all the electrodes other than RL are drawing
current that is equal to Isense , we know that
IRL = (N − 1) × Isense

(2)

where N is the total number of electrodes. If all electrodes have
a relatively low impedance, then we can approximate the body
voltage as being equal to the Wilson voltage, and since the
Wilson voltage is clamped at 0 V (relative to signal ground), all
of the electrode voltages are also clamped at 0 V:
VBo dy = VW = VRA = VLA = VLL = 0 V.

(3)

Note that (3) holds only as long as the RLD amplifier is not
saturated because it is the RLD system that clamps the Wilson
voltage at 0 V. Now, we can express (1) as follows:
VRL = (N − 1) × Isense × RRL .

(4)

This equation tells us that if the primary electrodes
impedances (RRA , RLA , RLL ) are much smaller than RRL , then
both VBo dy and VW are driven to 0 V, and the RLD amplifier
output voltage VRL is proportional to the number of electrodes
(N), the sense current Isense , and the resistance of the RL electrode RRL . This equation describes the slope of the curves in
Figs. 2(a), (b) and 3(a), (b).
B. Effect of AC Common-Mode Input on RLD
Amplifier Saturation
Thus far, we have shown that the RLD amplifier can saturate
as a result of the dc lead-off system. However, the RLD amplifier also puts out an ac signal that will combine with the dc
output to further increase the chance of saturation. To determine
how much this ac signal will contribute to saturation, we applied a common-mode signal (VCM = 10 V rms) under various
electrode conditions.
All of the electrode impedances were set to 50 kΩ in parallel
with 50 nF. Two different conditions of RA electrode resistance
were tested: RRA = 50 kΩ and RRA = 10 MΩ. In both cases,
VRL has an ac signal on it at 55 Hz [see Fig. 4(a)], and this is
expected since the RLD system, by design, is intended to output
an ac signal at line frequency to attenuate the common-mode
voltage on the body. However, it is interesting that this p-p ac
voltage is only 0.1 V, which is much smaller than the 0.35 V
dc shift seen when RRA was increased from 50 kΩ to 10 MΩ.
We repeated this test for the ten-electrode configuration [see
Fig. 4(b)], and in both cases the ac contribution to RLD amplifier
saturation was significantly smaller than the dc contribution.

FREEMAN et al.: SATURATION OF THE RIGHT-LEG DRIVE AMPLIFIER IN LOW-VOLTAGE ECG MONITORS

Fig. 4. RLD amplifier output voltage (V R L ) was measured when an ac
common-mode signal was coupled into the body (V C M = 10 V rms). Measurements were made for the case where R R A was set to 50 and 10 MΩ, and
this was repeated for (a) four-electrode and (b) ten-electrode configurations. The
same test was repeated for the case where (c, d) R R L was varied. Increasing
R R A or R R L caused a shift in dc level, but no change in ac amplitude.

The reason that the ac voltage dropped across the RL electrode
is relatively small can be understood by basic circuit analysis
of the model. The current flowing from the voltage source VCM
into the monitor flows back to earth ground by passing through
two 200 pF capacitors in series, giving a total capacitance of
100 pF. At 55 Hz, a capacitance of 100 pF gives an impedance
of –j29 MΩ. This current also flows through the RL electrode
capacitance, which at 50 nF gives a much lower impedance
of –j58 kΩ. This means that the 10 V rms is divided between
29 MΩ and 50 kΩ, giving only 17 mV rms (or 48 mV p-p)
dropped across the RL electrode capacitance. These calculations
are consistent with the simulation results in Fig. 4.
Next, we tested two different conditions of RL electrode resistance: RRL = 50 kΩ and RRL = 10 MΩ, and this was done
both for four-electrodes [see Fig. 4(c)] and ten-electrodes [see
Fig. 4(d)]. In this case, the ac signal is barely distinguishable
when compared to the dramatic shift in dc voltage that is caused
by the dc lead-off system [note the difference in scales between
Fig. 4(a), (b) versus (c), (d)]. This suggests that varying the
resistive component of RL electrode impedance has a dramatic
effect on the dc component of the RLD amplifier output, but
very little effect on the ac component.
We then tested the effect of the capacitive component of electrode impedance on the ac signal. We considered both the bestcase scenario with a large skin–electrode capacitance (200 nF),
as well as the worst-case scenario where the skin–electrode contact is poor, giving a low capacitance (3 nF). This was tested
for three different values of RRL (50 kΩ, 1 MΩ, 10 MΩ). We
see that the ac component of VRL is very small when the electrode resistance is low (50 kΩ) [see Fig. 5(a)]. However, when
the electrode resistance is high, the ac signal can become quite
large, but only when the capacitance is very low [see Fig. 5(b)

327

Fig. 5. Effect of varying RL skin capacitance C R L on the ac amplitude of V R L
was tested for two cases: good electrode contact (200 nF) and poor electrode
contact (3 nF). This test was repeated for across three different conditions of RL
electrode resistance R R L : (a) 50 kΩ, (b) 1 MΩ, and (c) 10 MΩ. (d) Summary
plot was made by measuring the p-p response of V R L for a range of C R L values.
All data shown are for the four-electrode configuration.

and (c)]. In this case, the ac signal may cause the RLD amplifier
to saturate. For example, if Vsupply = 3.5 V, then we can see
in Fig. 5(c) that the amplifier will not saturate for the high skin
capacitance case, but there will be significant saturation for the
low capacitance case as a result of the ac signals.
To summarize how the ac response VRL can affect RLD saturation, we measured the p-p of response over a wide range
of skin–electrode capacitances of the RL electrode, CRL [see
Fig. 5(d)]. Notice that when the skin–electrode capacitance gets
below about 20 nF, there is a dramatic increase in the amplitude
of VRL , but only when the skin–electrode resistance is relatively
high. The reason that CRL has little effect when RRL is low is
that total impedance of a parallel RC combination will be defined by whichever component is lower in impedance: RRL or
CRL . For example, at a frequency of 55 Hz, a skin capacitance
of 3 nF will impose an impedance of –j965 kΩ. Therefore, if
the resistance, RRL , is «965 kΩ, then the capacitor will be negligible because it is effectively shorted out. It is not until RRL
becomes comparable in magnitude to 965 kΩ that the total electrode impedance becomes very high. This, in turn, will cause a
significant ac drop across the RL electrode, producing large ac
fluctuations in VRL .
Finally, we consider how the amplitude of the commonmode signal VCM will influence RLD saturation. The typical
model for this common-mode signal consists of a 10 V rms
source (28.3 V p-p), but this amplitude can vary across different clinical environments. To account for this, we considered the case where VCM is two times larger than the standard
model (VCM = 20 V rms). We simulated four different combinations of RRL and CRL , taking into account that increases in
skin–electrode resistance tend to be associated with decreases in

328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 6. Effect of increasing common-mode input amplitude was tested for
V C M = 10 and 20 V rms using a ten-electrode configuration. The resistance
R R L and capacitance C R L of the RL electrode took on four different combinations to mimic real-life conditions in which a poor electrode has increased R R L
but decreased C R L . The nominal electrode impedance is (a) 50 kΩ//50 nF,
and (b)–(d) electrode becomes increasingly higher in impedance. All other
electrodes had an impedance of 50 kΩ//50 nF. Notice the scale is different in
panel (d).

skin–electrode capacitance. The ten-electrode configuration was
used and all electrodes other than RL were set to 50 kΩ//50 nF.
Notice that for the cases shown in Fig. 6(a)–(c), the ac magnitude of VRL is very small compared to the dc output, and this
is true even when VCM is set to an abnormally high value of
20 V rms. Even when the RL impedance becomes exceptionally
poor (10 MΩ in parallel with 3 nF) and the ac amplitude reaches
nearly 3 V p-p, it is still the dc component that dominates the
VRL output [see Fig. 6(d)]. This suggests that the primary factor that drives RLD amplifier saturation will be dc rather than
ac, and this is true even for exceptionally large common-mode
inputs (large VCM ) with low electrode capacitance (low CRL ).
C. Verifying the Simulation Results With Laboratory Testing
To illustrate how RLD amplifier saturation can cause a sudden
and large increase in noise on the ECG, we conducted a series of
experiments using a custom-made ECG analog front-end based
on the model shown in Fig. 1 (see Section II). The voltage supply
levels were set to ±2.5 V and the sense current amplitude was
set to 75 nA; these were chosen to mimic realistic values that
modern commercial monitors might use.
In the first set of experiments, we measured the dc voltage on
the output of the RLD amplifier (VRL ) in response to increases in
the dc resistance of the RL electrode RRL [see Fig. 7(a)]. As the
model predicted, the RLD output voltage increases in response
to increases in RL electrode resistance [compare Figs. 3(a) to
7(a)]. Importantly, the output of the RLD amplifier saturates
when the RL impedance becomes sufficiently high. This causes
VRL to plateau near the positive power supply rail of the ampli-

Fig. 7. (a) Effect of R R L on the dc output level of the RLD amplifier was
measured. The RLD amplifier saturated when R R L = 3.4 MΩ. (b) Lead I was
recorded for a range of RL impedances, illustrating that the saturation of the RLD
amplifier causes a sudden increase in ECG noise. (c) and (d) Example of an ECG
with and without the RLD amplifier saturated. These noise levels were derived
from panel (b) for the cases of (c) R R L = 1.5 MΩ and (d) R R L = 3.4 MΩ.
The noise waveforms were scaled down by a factor of 10 to account for any
notch filtering at line frequency that might be applied in software.

fier for RRL ≥ 3.4 MΩ. At this point, the RLD amplifier is no
longer capable of attenuating the ac common-mode noise on the
body, and therefore we hypothesized that the noise on the ECG
lead voltages would suddenly increase for RRL ≥ 3.4 MΩ.
To test this hypothesis, we conducted a second set of experiments in which Lead I was recorded for different values of RRL
[see Fig. 7(b)]. We found that for values of RRL in which the
RLD amplifier was not saturated, Lead I has very little signal
at 55 Hz, indicating good common-mode rejection of the RLD
system. For example, when RRL = 1.5 MΩ, the signal on Lead
I has a p-p amplitude of 0.26 mV as compared to the commonmode signal p-p amplitude of VCM = 28.3 V. Therefore, the
common-mode rejection ratio of the system is equal to


28.3 V
CMRR = 20 × log10
= 100.7 dB.
0.26 mV
Increasing the RL impedance to RRL = 2.7 MΩ caused the
noise on Lead I to increase to 0.36 mV p-p, giving a CMRR
of 97.9 dB. However, when RRL = 3.4 MΩ, the RLD amplifier
is saturated, and the signal on Lead I increased dramatically to
6.7 mV p-p. This results in a CMRR of 72.5 dB. This means
that increasing the RL electrode resistance from 2.7 to 3.4 MΩ
caused the CMRR to drop by a remarkable 25.4 dB. Further
increases in RRL did not cause any further increase in the amplitude of the noise on Lead I (data not shown).
These experimental results confirm what the simulations have
suggested that increases in RRL coupled with the use of dc leadoff system can saturate the RLD amplifier and produce significant ECG noise. To illustrate how this noise would appear on a
typical patient monitor, we took the noise waveforms displayed

FREEMAN et al.: SATURATION OF THE RIGHT-LEG DRIVE AMPLIFIER IN LOW-VOLTAGE ECG MONITORS

in Fig 7(b) and added them to a clean ECG waveform [see
Fig. 7(c) and (d)] obtained from a patient simulator. In practice,
it is common to use a notch filter in software to attenuate any signal at line frequency (50/60 Hz). To account for this, we divided
the noise down by a factor of 10 to mimic a 20 dB attenuation by
such a filter. The waveforms in Fig. 7(d) illustrate that when the
RLD amplifier saturates, line noise will appear as a fat baseline
and make the ECG unusable for diagnostic purposes.
IV. DISCUSSION
We developed a circuit model of an ECG front-end to describe the interaction between the RLD system, the dc lead-off
system, electrode impedance, and the ac common-mode signal
that couples into the body through the power mains. We found
that the primary cause of RLD saturation is the dc lead-off system. This is because the RLD amplifier has to source all of
the dc current that is pulled by the individual leads, causing a
relatively large dc current to flow at all times through the RL
electrode. This can cause the RLD amplifier to saturate even
under common conditions. For example, with a 12-lead ECG
using a 100 nA sense current, we found that saturation would
occur when the RL electrode resistance was only 1–2 MΩ, while
a four-electrode ECG would saturate at 4–5 MΩ [see Fig. 3(a)].
Given our finding that RLD saturation can occur when the
skin–electrode resistance is on the order of 1–5 MΩ, it is important to understand how often such impedances will be observed
clinically. Many studies have looked at the range of electrode
impedances for various skin types and electrode composition.
Unfortunately, these studies often measure the ac impedance
using sinusoidal test waveforms while we are interested in the
dc resistance of the skin–electrode impedance. But, since the
skin capacitance is a relatively high impedance at low frequencies, we can infer the skin–electrode simply by looking at the
impedance at low frequencies (1–5 Hz). For example, at 1 Hz, a
skin–electrode capacitance of 50 nF has an impedance magnitude of 3.2 MΩ, and therefore the impedance is dominated by the
skin–electrode resistance, as long as the resistance is «3.2 MΩ.
For example, these studies have found that if the electrodes remain in solid contact with the skin, then the electrode resistance
is on the order of tens or hundreds of kilohms, but rarely do
they exceed 1 MΩ [9]–[12]. In fact, electrode impedance often decreases slightly over time because the electrolyte diffuses
conductive ions (Cl− ) into the skin, decreasing skin resistance
[12], [13].
However, under real clinical conditions, electrodes usually do
not remain in solid contact with the skin, and it is common for
electrodes to become dislodged and make only superficial contact with the skin. If the electrode is physically lifted up off of
the skin due to pulling of the cables or if there is hair between the
electrode and the skin, then the contact area between the gel and
the skin becomes very small, thereby increasing the impedance.
Under these conditions, the skin–electrode resistance will frequently be greater than 1 MΩ [14]. Furthermore, if an electrode
is lifted up off the skin and exposed to air, the gel can dry
out and cause the impedance to increase dramatically, reaching
over 20 MΩ in some cases [15]. Because it is fairly common

329

for electrodes to be pulled by the cables and make only superficial contact with the skin, we anticipate that skin–electrode
resistances of several megohms do occur often in real clinical
environments. As a result, we expect that RLD saturation will
occur often and this will produce frequent observations of ECG
noise in low-voltage monitors.
How can we utilize the information described so far to design
an ECG system that uses low-voltage power that will not saturate
the RLD amplifier? We offer three possibilities; first, one option
is to simply power the RLD amplifier off a higher supply voltage
than the rest of the front-end circuitry. This would allow the RLD
output voltage to swing as high as necessary during cases of high
electrode impedance. This solution is not ideal because having a
separate power supply voltage for the RLD system would require
more components, and it would necessitate careful design so
that all outputs of the RLD amplifier (e.g., switches, buffers)
can handle this higher voltage input. Furthermore, while it is
possible to have two separate power supply voltages when the
front-end is constructed with discrete components, it may not
work with ASICs that integrate all of the front-end circuitry.
A second possible design solution to avoid RLD saturation is
to simply lower the sense current Isense . For example, we used
a nominal sense current of 100 nA, but as Fig. 3(b) shows, reducing sense current will greatly reduce the dc current supplied
by the RLD amplifier, thereby reducing the voltage levels on
its output. However, there will be a limit on how low the sense
current can be reduced. If the current is too low, then other
sources of error will appear, such as leakage current across the
surface of the printed circuit board, leakage current through any
reverse biased diodes that may be present, or input bias current
of the amplifiers. This is particularly a problem if pull-down
resistors are used instead of real current sources because the
current amplitude will decrease as the skin–electrode resistance
decreases.
A third possible design solution to avoid RLD saturation is
to use an ac-based lead-off system rather than a dc lead-off system. An ac-based method has been proposed in several forms
and basically involves the continuous application of some highfrequency ac signal to each electrode. The frequency of this signal is chosen to be beyond the passband of the ECG (0–150 Hz)
so as to not interfere with monitoring [16]. While dc lead-off
only provides information on the skin–electrode resistance, ac
lead-off the benefit of measuring the total skin impedance, including the combination of resistance and capacitance of the
skin. However, the challenge with this approach is that the ac
stimulation can interfere with other functions of the monitor,
such as measuring respiration via impedance pneumography.
Likewise, many ECG monitors have the ability to detect and remove pacer artifacts, and this functionality could interfere with
an ac lead-off as well.
Each of the solutions described earlier have pros and cons,
and the best solution will depend on the particular design specifications of the user. In order to ensure that the RLD system
does not saturate under normal operating conditions, it is critically important that the designer understands how the RLD
system interacts with the dc lead-off system and the RL electrode resistance. The problem we describe here will become

330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

even more serious in the coming years as ECG monitors continue to move toward fully integrated ECG front-ends that are
lower cost and lower voltage than traditional front-ends built
with discrete components.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the many engineers at Dräger
who contributed to this work, including C. Lall, Z. Zhang,
M. El-Ghouch, T. Gay, D. Qin, D. Mauer, and C. Kelly.
REFERENCES
[1] D. S. Warner and M. A. Warner, “Equipment-related electrocardiographic
artifacts: Causes, characteristics, consequences, and correction,” Anesthesiology, vol. 108, pp. 138–148, 2008.
[2] M. Cvach, “Monitor alarm fatigue: An integrative review,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol., vol. 46, pp. 268–277, Jul./Aug. 2012.
[3] ECRI Institute, “Top 10 health technology hazards for 2014,” Health
Devices, vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 1–16, 2013.
[4] B. B. Winter and J. G. Webster, “Driven-right-leg circuit design,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-30, no. 1, pp. 62–66, Jan. 1983.
[5] M. R. Neuman, “Biopotential amplifiers,” in Medical Instrumentation:
Application and Design, J. G. Webster, Ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
1998, ch. 6, pp. 256–258.
[6] R. D. Gatzke, “The electrode: A measurement systems viewpoint,” in
Biomedical Electrode Technology, H. A. Miller and D. C. Harrison, Eds.
New York, NY, USA: Academic, 1974
[7] Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI),
Diagnostic Electrocardiographic Devices, Section 3.2.11, 2000.
[8] International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) (2011). Medical Electrical Equipment—Part 2–25: Particular Requirements for the Basic Safety
and Essential Performance of Electrocardiographs, Edition 2.0.
[9] J. Rosell, J. Colominas, P. Riu, R. Pallas-Areny, and J. G. Webster, “Skin
impedance from 1 Hz to 1 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35,
no. 8, pp. 649–651, Aug. 1988.
[10] A. Searle and L. Kirkup, “A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulating
bioelectric recording electrodes,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 21, pp. 271–283,
2000.
[11] M. S. Spach, R. C. Barr, J. W. Havstad, and E. C. Long , “Skin-electrode
impedance and its effect on recording cardiac potentials,” Circulation,
vol. 34, pp. 649–656, 1966.
[12] I. Zepada-Carapia, A. Marquez-Espinoza, and C. Alvarado-Serrano,
“Measurement of skin-electrode impedance for a 12-lead electrocardiogram,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Elect. Electron. Eng., 2005, pp. 193–195.
[13] W. H. Olson, D. R. Schmincke, and B. L. Henley, “Time and frequency
dependence of disposable ECG electrode-skin impedance,” Med. Instrum.,
vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 269–272, 1979.
[14] A. Gruetzmann, S. Hansen, and J. Muller, “Novel dry electrodes for ECG
monitoring,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, pp. 1375–1390, 2007.
[15] S. R. Wiese, P. Anheier, R. D. Connemara, A. T. Mollner, T. F. Neils, J. A.
Kahn, and J. G. Webster, “Electrocardiographic motion artifact versus
electrode impedance,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 136–
139, Jan. 2005.
[16] S. Luo and P. Johnston, “A review of electrocardiogram filtering,” J.
Electrocardiol., vol. 43, pp. 486–496, 2010.
[17] W.-K. Chen, Linear Networks and Systems. Belmont, CA, USA:
Wadsworth, 1993, pp. 123–135.
Daniel K. Freeman received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from Boston University, Boston, MA, USA, in 2003 and 2008, respectively, followed by postdoctoral fellowships at
MIT and Harvard Medical School.
He performed research for eight years in the areas
of retinal electrophysiology and neural stimulation.
His current research focus is medical electronics, including analog front-end design for multiparameter
patient monitors. He holds the title of Senior Algorithm Engineer with Dräger Medical Systems, Inc.,
Andover, MA. He has authored numerous articles that have appeared in neuroscience and engineering journals.

Ronald D. Gatzke received the B.S.E.E. degree
in electrical engineering from the Case Institute of
Technology, Cleveland, OH, USA, and the M.S.E.E.
degree from Northeastern University, Boston, MA,
USA.
He was with Hewlett-Packard where he was involved in the area of medical electronics, including electro-physiology measurement and ultrasound
imaging systems for 32 years. Assignments/titles included Project Engineer, Project Manager, and Engineer Scientist. He then was with Maxim Integrated
Products where he was involved in the area of integrated circuits for communications systems, with emphasis on high performance data converters (ADCs and
DACs) and high performance RF devices. He held the title of a Senior Scientist.
He is currently a Consultant in the area of medical electronics applications.
He has authored multiple applications articles for various RF communication
journals, presented numerous seminars on ultrasound imaging and cellular communications applications, and authored ten patents.

Georgios Mallas was born in Athens, Greece. He
received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering
from the Technical Educational Institute of Athens,
Athens, in 2006, the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Imperial College, London, U.K., in
2008, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA, in
2013.
He is currently with Dräger Medical Systems, Inc.,
Andover, MA, holding a Senior Algorithm Engineer
position. His current research interests include signal processing methods for physiological signals and patient monitoring alarm
management.

Yu Chen received the B.S. degree in biomedical and
electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering and instrumentation from Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
He did biomedical engineering postdoctoral training at the University of Joseph Fourier, Grenoble,
France, and University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN. He was a Research and Development Manager with Medical Graphics Corporation, St Paul,
MN, where he was involved on noninvasive cardiorespiratory diagnostic systems and related software applications. He is currently
the Manager of signal acquisition and processing in patient monitoring division
of Dräger Medical Systems, Inc., Andover, MA, USA. He has extensive experience of physiological measurement, biomedical signal processing, algorithm
development, technology evaluation, intellectual property development, and
clinical trials.

Chris J. Brouse was born in Sudbury, ON, Canada.
He received the B.S. degree in computer engineering
from the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, in 2004,
and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from
the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, in 2007, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering.
He is currently a Senior Algorithm Engineer
at Dräger Medical Systems, Inc., Andover, MA,
USA. His specialties include physiological measurement, digital signal processing, and software systems
architecture.

