IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

303

A Novel Scheme for Nanoparticle Steering in Blood
Vessels Using a Functionalized Magnetic Field
Mohammad Dadkhah Tehrani, Jong-Hwan Yoon, Myeong Ok Kim, and Jungwon Yoon∗

Abstract—Magnetic drug targeting is a drug delivery approach
in which therapeutic magnetizable particles are injected, generally
into blood vessels, and magnets are then used to guide and concentrate them in the diseased target organ. Although many analytical,
simulation, and experimental studies on capturing schemes for
drug targeting have been conducted, there are few studies on delivering the nanoparticles to the target region. Furthermore, the
sticking phenomenon of particles to vessels walls near the injection point, and far from the target region, has not been addressed
sufficiently. In this paper, the sticking issue and its relationship
to nanoparticle steering are investigated in detail using numerical
simulations. For wide ranges of blood vessel size, blood velocity,
particle size, and applied magnetic field, three coefficient numbers
are uniquely generalized: vessel elongation, normal exit time, and
force rate. With respect these new parameters, we investigated
particle distribution trends for a Y-shaped channel and computed
ratios of correctly guided particles and particles remaining in the
vessel. We found that the sticking of particles to vessels occurred
because of low blood flow velocity near the vessel walls, which is the
main reason for low targeting efficiency when using a constant magnetic gradient. To reduce the sticking ratio of nanoparticles, we propose a novel field function scheme that uses a simple time-varying
function to separate the particles from the walls and guide them
to the target point. The capabilities of the proposed scheme were
examined by several simulations of both Y-shaped channels and
realistic three-dimensional (3-D) model channels extracted from
brain vessels. The results showed a significant decrease in particle
adherence to walls during the delivery stage and confirmed the
effectiveness of the proposed magnetic field function method for
steering nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery.
Index Terms—Blood vessel, drug delivery, magnetic drug targeting, magnetic field, magnetic nanoparticle, particle distribution.

Manuscript received April 25, 2014; revised July 23, 2014; accepted August
12, 2014. Date of publication August 22, 2014; date of current version December
18, 2014. This work was supported by the Pioneer Research Center Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea, Ministry of Science, ICT
and Future Planning under Grant 2012-0009524, and in part by NRF under
Grant 2012R1A2A2A01047344. Myeong Ok Kim contributed equally to this
work as corresponding author. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. D. Tehrani is with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Pioneer Research Center for Controlling Dementia by Converging
Technology, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Korea (e-mail:
m.dadkhaht@gnu.ac.kr).
J.-H. Yoon is with the School of Mechanical and Automotive
Engineering, Daegu University, Kyeongsan 712-714, Korea (e-mail:
jhyoon@daegu.ac.kr).
M. O. Kim is with the Department of Biology and Applied of Life
Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Korea (e-mail:
mokim@gnu.ac.kr).
∗ J. Yoon is with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and ReCAPT, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Korea (e-mail: jwyoon
@gnu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2351234

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETIC drug targeting (MDT) refers to adding drugs
to magnetizable particles and then applying magnetic
fields to concentrate them at disease locations, such as solid
tumors, regions of infection, or blood clots [1], [2]. Typically,
the particles are injected into a vein or artery and then circulate
throughout the vasculature as the applied magnetic field is used
to guide and capture them at target locations. The drug dosage
and administration rate should result in temporal and spatial
drug concentrations that are below the toxic level and above
the level of minimal therapeutic effect. The normal systemic
circulation of the blood will distribute the drug throughout the
body and so systemic toxicity may occur in organs to which the
drug is not targeted. Magnetic drug targeting allows the drug
dosage to be increased significantly while avoiding side effects
in healthy tissues.
The potential applications of nanoparticles as therapeutic
and diagnostic agents in medicine are vast. Key properties
of nanocarriers include biocompatibility, solubility, stability,
metabolic stability, and cellular permeability [3]. Some nanoparticles also exhibit unique optical properties, making them suitable not only for therapeutic use but also for bioimaging applications. Furthermore, nanoparticles are capable of delivering
drugs to brain cells that are difficult to reach using larger carriers. Indeed, some nanoparticles can cross the blood–brain barrier
(BBB) and reach brain cells [4], [5]. Magnetic nanoparticles are
the drug carriers in magnetic field-based drug delivery systems.
They have been used in a broad range of biomedical applications. For diagnostic purposes, they have been tested clinically
in humans for characterizing lymph node status in patients with
breast cancer [6], lung cancer [7], endometrial cancer, and cervical cancer [8]. Recently, scientists have started to use magnetic
nanoparticles conjugated with drug molecules and biomolecules
for drug delivery purposes [9], [10]. Magnetic nanocapsules can
be guided with magnetic forces within the vasculature and concentrated at a localized target in a tissue.
Magnetic drug targeting can be divided into two phases. First,
injecting and guiding the particles to a region near the target
point, and second, capturing the particles [2]. In some diseases,
such as skin tumors and rectal and prostate cancers, it is possible
to inject the particles in a region near the tumor or the cancer,
thus achieving the first phase immediately. However, in many
diseases such as brain tumors, direct injection of the particles
near the target point would be dangerous and is avoided. In
such circumstances, the efficiency of the first phase significantly
affects the drug concentration in the target area.
Recently, much of the research on MDT has focused on
the capture and retention of magnetic nanoparticles [11]–[16].

M

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

The retention of superparamagnetic nanoparticles under the influence of a high-gradient magnetic field was investigated by
Gleich et al. [11]. Cherry et al. [12] developed a physicsbased model of a general magnetic drug targeting system to
determine the effect of drug particle size, blood flow velocity,
and magnetic field gradient strength on the efficiency of holding particles stationary in a laminar blood flow in a mediumsized artery. It was found that particle retention rate increased
with increasing particle diameter and magnetic field gradient strength and decreased with increasing bulk flow velocity. David et al. presented a combined theoretical and in vitro
modeling approach for predicting the magnetic capture and retention of magnetic nanoparticles in vivo [13]. Furthermore,
the behaviors of magnetic particles in blood vessels and surrounding tissues were analyzed comprehensively, using physical first principles and a sophisticated vessel-membrane-tissue
(VMT) numerical solver in [14], and simulations of magnetic capturing of drug carriers in the brain vascular system
in [15].
Although there has been much research on capturing nanoparticles generally, few reports address guiding the particles to target points. Most of the studies that deal with particle routes
have used MRI-based drug delivery and closed-loop control for
microrobots [17]–[22]. Since the volume of magnetic materials
would be too low in the blood vessels for effective directional
pulling force to be induced considering the limit in generating
magnetic gradient fields, effective navigation of the particles
with diameter of smaller than a few tens of micrometers inside
the MRI is still difficult task if whole-body interventions are
performed. Furthermore, these guiding schemes cannot be applied directly to magnetic nanoparticles because it is difficult
to determine adequate magnitudes and directions of gradient
magnetic fields for many nanoparticles and is difficult to obtain
real-time positional feedback for the particles.
Recently, some researchers have attempted to investigate
nanoparticle behavior and possible issues during the guiding
phase inside the blood vessel [23]–[25]. In [26], we showed
that the sticking of particles to vessel walls is an issue in the
transport of the particles toward the target region. Although adherence of the particles to walls is the main goal in the target
region and capturing phase, it is not desirable in the delivery
stage and leads to low transport efficiency. In [23], the sticking and concentration of particles near a Y-shaped channel was
reported. Likewise, in [24] and [25], the adherence of nanoparticles to vessels with a constant magnetic field was examined
experimentally and through simulation, respectively. In [24],
although sticking was reduced slightly by changing the shape
of the magnet, this is not a general solution because the study
focused only on the special case of particles sticking at the injection site. In [25], the steering efficiency in the special case of
a two-dimensional (2-D) Y-shaped channel was increased using
the aggregation properties of the particles and a special magnetic field. The authors claimed that the best steering strategy
was to generate aggregations, the angle of attack of which was
orthogonal to the fluid flow. However, aggregations orthogonal to the flow may result in clogging of the branches, which
is clearly not desirable in drug delivery. To date, sticking of

magnetic nanoparticles in blood vessels and the effects on steering efficiency have not been investigated.
In this paper, the sticking issue of magnetic nanoparticles
with a constant magnetic field and its relationship to steering in
targeted drug delivery was investigated systematically using numerical simulations to better understand steering efficiency. For
this purpose, particle distributions inside the three-dimensional
(3-D) Y-shaped channel were analyzed for possible applications in both the delivering and capturing phases. Furthermore,
to solve the sticking issue and to increase the steering efficiency
of nanoparticles, we propose a novel field function (FF) scheme,
in which a simple direction-varying magnetic gradient, instead
of a constant-direction magnetic gradient, is used to release the
particles that adhere to walls and then effectively guide them
to the target point. The functionality and capabilities of this approach were evaluated in detail with several simulations. The
outcomes showed the effectiveness of the proposed FF scheme
for targeted drug delivery, which can significantly reduce the
sticking ratio of nanoparticles inside blood vessels and enhance
the steering efficiency.
II. SIMULATION MODEL
For the numerical method used in this research, the simulation
model and its parameters are described in this section. Most of
the simulation parameters presented here are used consistently
throughout the paper. Any changes in these parameters will be
mentioned in subsequent sections.
A. Theory
1) Magnetophoresis: Magnetic nanoparticles experience a
force in a nonuniform magnetic field, known as magnetophoresis (MAP), which is generated from the difference in the permeability of the nanoparticles and the surrounding medium [27].
Considering the nanoparticle as a homogeneous sphere with radius R and net magnetic polarization M suspended in a magnetically linear fluid of permeability μ1 and subjected to a magnetic
intensity H, then the effective magnetic moment of the sphere
is calculated as


μ0 − μ1
μ0
H+
M
(1)
Meﬀ = 4πR3
μ0 + 2μ1
μ0 + 2μ1
where μ0 = 4π × 10−7 N/A2 is the permeability of free space.
For a magnetically linear particle of permeability μ2 , we have
M = χH

(2)

where χ = μ2 /μ0 − 1 is the susceptibility of the particle. In this
special case, the effective moment simplifies to:
Meﬀ = 4πR3

μ2 − μ1
H.
μ2 + 2μ1

(3)

The magnetophoretic force (FM AP ) depends on the gradient of the magnetic intensity (∇H) and the effective magnetic
dipole moment (Meﬀ ) of the particles. It can be expressed as
FM AP = μ1 Meﬀ ∇H.

(4)

TEHRANI et al.: NOVEL SCHEME FOR NANOPARTICLE STEERING IN BLOOD VESSELS USING A FUNCTIONALIZED MAGNETIC FIELD

305

Combining this expression (4) with (3) for effective moment,
the magnetophoretic force for a linear magnetizable spherical
particle in a nonuniform magnetic field may be written as
FM AP = 2πμ1 R3

μ2 − μ1
∇H2 .
μ2 + 2μ1

(5)

Note that
(H · ∇)H =

1
∇H2 .
2

(6)

Magnetizable materials exhibit strong nonlinear behavior,
such as paramagnetism and ferromagnetism, which cannot be
ignored when modeling the electromechanics of magnetic particles. Materials with nonlinear magnetic properties can be divided into hard and soft materials. For both, magnetization is
related to the magnetic intensity, although for hard materials, it
also depends on the history of magnetization, which is termed
hysteresis. The principal manifestation of nonlinearity in magnetic materials is saturation, which limits the magnitude of the
magnetization vector to a finite value, Msat . The influence of
saturation on the effective moment of a particle is evident.
Consider a spherical ferromagnetic particle immersed in a
linear magnetizable fluid of permeability μ1 and assume that
the particle magnetization is a nonlinear function of the field.
Then, (1) and (4) may be used to obtain the MAP force


2μ0
3 μ0 − μ1
2
∇H +
M(H) · ∇H .
FM AP = 2πμ1 R
μ0 + 2μ1
μ0 + 2μ1
(7)
If the permeability of the medium surrounding the particles
satisfies the relation μ0 ∼
= μ1 , then the MAP force simplifies to
FM AP =

4
πμ1 R3 M(H) · ∇H.
3

(8)

If the particle is magnetically soft and the magnetic field is
strong, then the particle will saturate so that M(H) → Msat ,
which changes the equation to
FM AP =

4
πμ1 R3 Msat .∇H.
3

(9)

2) Particle Trajectories: Using Newton’s law, the trajectory
of a particle in a fluid caused by the total force F can be described
as
mp

dVp
=F
dt

(10)

where mp and Vp are the mass and velocity of the particle,
respectively. There are many forces acting on particles moving
in blood vessels, including hydrodynamic drag, inertia, buoyancy, gravity, and particle–particle interactions. However, only
the major forces are considered: the hydrodynamic drag and
magnetophoretic force. Our model ignores inertia, buoyancy,
gravitational, and particle–particle interaction forces because
they are several orders of magnitude weaker than the magnetic
force. Thus, the total force on a particle may be expressed as
F = FM AP + Fdrag .

(11)

Fig. 1. Simple Y-shaped channel used as a general shape for the vessel model
in the simulations.

TABLE I
MODELING PARAMETERS
Parameter

Value

Unit

Blood density
Blood viscosity
Air relative permeability
Blood relative permeability
Blood temperature

1050
0.004
1
1
293.15

kg/m3
Pa·s
–
–
K

The hydrodynamic drag forces (Fdrag ) is given by Stoke’s
law as
Fdrag = −6πηR(Vp − Vf )

(12)

where η is the fluid viscosity, R is the particle radius, Vp is the
particle velocity, and Vf is the fluid velocity. From (8) to (12),
we can obtain
mp

4
dVp
= πμ0 R3 M(H) · ∇H − 6πηR(Vp − Vf ). (13)
dt
3

By solving (13), the trajectory of the particles can be calculated.
B. Simulation Description
As a general shape for vessel bifurcation, a simple Y-shaped
channel was used here as a vessel model for simulation (see
Fig. 1). The Y-shaped channel consists of one inlet for entering
blood flow and particles and two outlet channels. The diameter
of the channel in all paths was assumed to be identical, denoted
as dv . The blood flow was considered to be steady creeping flow,
which was supposed to flow into the channel from the inlet and
to exit the channel from the outlets. Fluid modeling parameters
were selected to be similar to blood behavior [28] and the surrounding environment was assumed to be air. The blood flow
inside the channels was simulated as a steady state laminar flow
and its velocity profile was calculated using the CFD module
of COMSOL. The blood flow drag force was considered in the
simulation. The particles were assumed to be spherical magnetite particles with a diameter of dp , a density of 6450 kg/m3 ,
and saturation magnetization of Msat = 106 kA/m, [29]. Other
modeling parameters for the model are presented in Table I. The
model was created in 3-D and meshed automatically.

306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 2. (a) Magnetic field gradient in the Y-shaped channel (kA/m). (b) Fluid flow profile in the Y-shaped channel (mm/s). (c) Particle trajectories for 100
particles. Colors show the particles velocity (mm/s).

time could be traced using its coordinates (xp , yp ), as follows:
⎧

0 ≤ yp → Correct outlet
⎨
0 ≤ xp →
0 ≥ yp → Incorrect outlet
. (14)
⎩
0 ≥ xp → Remain n channel
The second assumption was to neglect magnetic particle-toparticle interactions. The mathematical complexity of particleto-particle interactions requires models that are beyond the
scope of this paper and commercial magnetic nanoparticles are
currently available without aggregations.
Trajectories of several nanoparticles released at random positions on the inlet surface of the channel were computed and
investigated to examine the performance of the particle guiding. The moving path of particles, due to magnetophoretic and
drag forces, was tracked using the particle-tracking module of
COMSOL and numbers of particles entering into each outlet
channel and the number of the particles remaining in the inlet channel were counted for each sample time. The simulation time period (Ts ), which was varied for each simulation
parameter, calculated using (15), and particles positions were
computed at a rate of 100 samples per simulation. In (15)
Nc = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, Dc = 0.7 is the inlet channel length and
vf is the average velocity of blood flow at the inlet
Fig. 3.

Steering efficiency variation versus modeling coefficients.

Ts =

The maximum value of the magnetic field gradient applied to
the channel, and denoted as Hg , was chosen based on the average
magnitude that our proposed actuation system can generate [30]
and, thus, the values are realistic and reachable. Magnetic field
direction was designed to be perpendicular to the channel in
such a way that particles were attracted to the top outlet. For
simplicity, the channel toward which the particles were guided
is defined here as the “correct” outlet and other outlet as the
“incorrect” outlet. The particles that reach neither outlet are
considered to be particles remaining inside the channel.
Some assumptions were made to simplify the model. First,
it was assumed that the outlet into which a particle would be
steered is determined according to its final position only. If we
assume the center of the Cartesian coordinate system at the
bifurcation origin (see Fig. 1), the status of each particle at any

5Lv
.
vf

(15)

Fig. 2 shows the simulation results for a sample Y-shaped
channel in which Lv , vf , dv , dp , and Hg were 10 mm,10 mm/s,
0.25 mm, 900 nm, and 35 MA/m2 , respectively. The magnetic
field profile, designed to direct the particles to the correct outlet, is shown in Fig. 2(a). Fig. 2(b). illustrates the computed
blood flow velocity profile inside the channel that shows low
velocity near the walls and higher velocity in the center of the
channel. The particle trajectories of 100 magnetic nanoparticles
were subjected to the magnetic field presented and parabolic
blood flow is shown in Fig. 2(c), clearly demonstrating how the
particles are distributed within the channel. A high proportion
of the particles was directed to the desired outlet; however, a
few entered the undesired outlet. Some particles, however, did
not reach either outlet, but remained inside the inlet channel.
Most of these particles that had not exited were adhered to the
wall, due to the magnetic force and the low blood flow velocity

TEHRANI et al.: NOVEL SCHEME FOR NANOPARTICLE STEERING IN BLOOD VESSELS USING A FUNCTIONALIZED MAGNETIC FIELD

near the walls. These phenomena will be discussed in detail in
the next section.
III. INVESTIGATION OF THE STICKING ISSUE IN A Y-SHAPED
CHANNEL
To investigate the effect of the sticking issue on drug delivery
performance, the distribution of particles inside the Y-shaped
channel was considered as a reference. Higher efficiency is correlated with a larger percentage of the particles reaching the
correct outlet, which is indirectly related to the number of particles that remain in the channel and stick to the walls. To better
investigate the particle distribution in different situations, three
new coefficients were defined, based on the geometric, environmental, and simulation parameters. The relationship between
vessel length and vessel diameter is referred to as the “vessel
elongation ratio,” which indicates how long the vessel is compared with its diameter
Rv e =

Lv
dv

(16)

where Lv and dv are the length and diameter of the vessel,
respectively. To introduce blood fluid velocity into the simulations, a new parameter, “Normal exit time,” was defined as
Tn =

Lv
vf

(17)

where vf is the average velocity of blood flow inside the vessel. This parameter represents the time a particle needs to move
along a straight channel of length Lv with speed vf . The magnetophoretic force magnitude is another parameter influencing
the particle guiding efficiency. To relate this parameter to the
magnetic field gradient Hg and particle diameter dp , based on
the magnetophoretic force equation, the “force rate” parameter
was defined
R f = Hg d p 3 .

(18)

In our simulations, the magnitude of the magnetic field gradient was kept fixed at 35 MA/m2 (which is realistic [30]) and the
force rate was varied by changing the particle’s diameter from
700 to 1000 nm in 100-nm steps. The vessel length was fixed at
10 mm and other simulation parameters were chosen based on
the average values of these parameters for blood vessels in the
brain [31]. The considered ranges and steps for the simulation
parameters were as follows:
lv = 10 mm
Hg = 35 MA/m2
vf = {2.5, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100} mm/s
dv = {0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1} mm
dp = {700, 800, 900, 1000} nm.

(19)

Based on these values and using (16)–(18), the range and steps
of the presented coefficients considered in subsequent simulations were as follows:
Rv e = {10, 20, 40, 100}
Tn = {0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 1, 2, 4} s
Rf = {12.01, 17.92, 25.52, 35} pA · m.

(20)

307

A separate simulation was performed for each combination
of these coefficient values and the particle positions were computed at a final simulation time of Ts = 5Tn for all of them.
The results are illustrated and compared in Fig. 3. Results are
presented for each simulation circumstance by three types of
percentage values—correct, incorrect, and remaining—that refer to the proportions particles based on (14). It should be noted
that vessel elongation ratio Rv e starts with the sequence of 10,
20, 40, 100 with respect to force rate Rf . Because all of the particles are divided into the three groups mentioned, the sum of the
three values for each case should be 100%. As is clear, although
a magnetic field was applied to the channels, the proportion of
correctly guided particles was rarely above 50%; in some situations, the value was zero. The variation in the percentage of the
particles reaching each outlet, as well as the percentage of those
that remained in the channel, could explain the sticking issue in
the steering of particles. The results indicate that large numbers
of particles remained in the channel, with a high sticking ratio.
The percentage of remaining particles increased with increases
in each of the vessel elongation ratio, normal exit time, and force
rate.
The main causes of these trends may be explained as follows.
Particles inside the channels are attracted to regions near the
walls by the magnetic field that was designed to guide the particles to the correct outlet of the channel. As shown in Fig. 2(b),
the velocity of the fluid flow close to the walls is lower than at
other positions inside the vessel and consequently the drag force
on the particles in these regions is weak. As a result, the particles
move very slowly or the friction force between the channel inner
surface and the particles may overcome the flow drag force, and
thus they stick to the wall and remain in the channel.
The results in Fig. 3 can be used also for investigation of capture efficiency. The results show that if a constant magnetic field
is used to capture the particles inside the Y-shaped channel, in
special cases, it is possible to capture all the particles. Furthermore, it shows that, generally, the capture efficiency is related
to our proposed coefficients and variation in these coefficients
can change the capturing efficiency, in good agreement with a
previous report [14].
IV. FIELD FUNCTIONS
As shown in Section III, the efficiency of magnetic particle
guiding inside the vessel by a constant-direction magnetic field
was low, due mainly to particles sticking to vessel walls. Thus,
if the particles could be returned to the central region of the
vessel, the number of the particles remaining in the vessel would
decrease and would so the number of particles reaching the
correct outlet would increase. This is the main concept in our
FF. The FF is a unitless multiplier function that varies by time,
which defines how to change the magnetic field gradient over
time with the following constraints:
∀t − 1 ≤ FF(t) ≤ 1.

(21)

If we suppose that ∇Hf as is a functionalized magnetic field
gradient, we have:
∇Hf = FF(t).∇H.

(22)

308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4. Comparison of several FFs on the distribution of magnetic particles subjected to the functionalized magnetic field inside a simple Y-shaped channel. In
each section, the top graph shows the FF diagram and the lower graph shows the distribution plot (percentages).

Here, ∇H is the predefined constant magnetic field, designed
to direct the particle to the correct outlet, and therefore, its direction does not change. This definition implies that the functionalized gradient is always parallel to the predefined gradient
field and the FF just can change its magnitude and sign. Using
this definition and (9), the functionalized force on the particles
is defined as follows:


4
4
3
3
Ff = πμ1 R Msat · ∇Hf = FF(t) πμ1 R Msat .∇H .
3
3
(23)
Consequently, FF can be used as a simple scalar function that
defines the force magnitude and direction in a more applicable
way. When the FF is positive, this means that the force applied is
in a direction that directs particles to the correct outlet and when
it is negative, the force applied guides particles to the incorrect
outlet.
A constant magnetic field attracts the particle in one direction only. Fig. 4(a) shows the particle distribution inside a simple
Y-shaped channel subjected to the constant magnetic field. Here,
the vessel elongation ratio, normal time, and force rate were set
at 40, 1 s, and 17.9 pA.m, respectively. The other simulation parameters were identical to those in the simulations in Section II.
The corresponding FF diagram is illustrated in the figure, showing that FF is always +1 for a constant magnetic field. It is clear
the percentage of the particles guided to the correct outlet is less
than 50% for this particular circumstance. The greatest variation
in the particle distribution diagram appeared in the time between
1 and 2 s and, after that, the diagram is stable, due to the sticking
of particles to the vessel walls.
In Fig. 4(b), a different FF is used, which showed good improvement in guidance efficiency. The simulation time period

is divided into two equal parts. In the first, the FF is +1 and in
the second, it is −1. Thus, in the former half, the particles are
directed toward the correct exit but in the latter half, they are
attracted in the reverse direction. Changing the magnetic field
direction, and correspondingly the force direction on particles,
leads to detachment of the particles from vessel walls and their
movement toward the center of the channel, accordingly increasing the guidance efficiency. The particle distribution graph in
Fig. 4(b). supports this. At the end of the time period, almost all
of the particles leave the vessel, through the correct or incorrect
outlet. However, this requires more than four times the normal
exit time to achieve. To assess the possibility of decreasing this
elapsed time, other functions were examined; these results are
presented in Fig. 4(c)–(f). These are all rectangular functions
with various frequencies, but with a constant duty cycle of 50%.
In Fig. 4(c), the rectangular FF with frequency of 0.3 Hz raised
the efficiency to 71% in ∼3 s and 89% in ∼3.5 s. Increasing the
function frequency to 0.4 Hz improved the efficiency in 3 s to
80% but reduced the efficiency slightly to 84% for a time period
of 3.5 s [see Fig. 4(d)]. These values changed to 76% and 52%
for the 3-s period and 88% and 63% for the 3.5-s period, respectively, for FFs with a frequency of 0.5 Hz [see Fig. 4(e)] and
0.6 Hz [see Fig. 4(f)]. The extended comparison is presented in
Table II.
These results show that even using a simple FF, the numbers of
particles remaining in the vessel can be decreased significantly
and the efficiency can be increased considerably. Furthermore,
the results show that it is possible to identify a function that optimizes both efficiency and response time. Further investigation
is needed to characterize the optimum function. In the following
section, however, to simplify the investigation, we used only a
rectangular function with various frequencies of the FF.

TEHRANI et al.: NOVEL SCHEME FOR NANOPARTICLE STEERING IN BLOOD VESSELS USING A FUNCTIONALIZED MAGNETIC FIELD

309

TABLE II
EFFICIENCY COMPARISONS OF THE FIELD FUNCTIONS PLOTTED IN FIG. 4 WITH
DIFFERENT FREQUENCIES FOR VARIOUS TIME PERIODS
Field Function
Frequency (Hz)
(see Fig. 5)
0 (a)
0.2 (b)
0.3 (c)
0.4 (d)
0.5 (e)
0.6 (f)

Time Period (s)
2

3

4

5

41.5%
41.5%
43.2%
50.4%
46.2%
43.4%

42.1%
46.4%
71.2%
80.1%
76.4%
51.8%

42.2%
83.6%
90.7%
85.2%
89.5%
65.5%

42.6%
92.8%
91.1%
86.7%
90.2%
67.5%

Fig. 6.

Particle distribution in Y-shaped channels after applying the FF.

be calculated
P =

Fig. 5.

Characteristics of the FF used in the simulations.

V. EFFICIENCY EVALUATIONS OF FIELD FUNCTIONS
The use of a FF to improve the efficiency of particle guidance
in a special model channel was demonstrated in the last section.
In this section, to confirm the method, its effectiveness was
investigated in several channels with varying properties. In the
first part, the channels are of a simple Y-shaped and, in the
second part, a model of a real blood vessel is examined.

Tf
1
=
.
f
Hc

Duty cycle is another parameter of the FF, defined as 0 ≤
Dc ≤ 1. By this definition, the portion of the period in which
the function is positive in relation to the portion in which the
function is negative equals to Dc /(1 − Dc ). To consider a realistic response situation for an electromagnetic actuation system,
rise and fall times of the function were assumed to be 5% of the
period (0.05P).
Because the optimum FF is not yet clear, to obtain a better estimation of the FF’s effects on steering performance, we
applied several FFs on each combination of the steering parameters (Rv e , Tn , Rf ) by changing the FF parameters with the
following constraint:
Nc = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5},

A. Y-Shaped Channel
In Section II, particle distributions due to a constant magnetic field and blood flow inside several Y-shaped channels with
various dimensions were investigated and discussed. Particle
trajectory simulations of the same channels under identical conditions, but subjected to a functionalized magnetic field, were
carried out and changes in the particle distribution were computed for each case.
A simple rectangular function was used for the FF in this
section. The general characteristics of the FFs used in the simulations are shown in Fig. 5. In this figure, Tf is the total simulation time that was considered for steering and equals 5Tn for
all simulations. If we assume Nc is the number of cycles in the
simulation time, the period (P), and frequency (f) of the FF can

(24)

Dc = 0.7.

(25)

Although the duty cycle of the function may affect the guidance results, the Dc was fixed to 0.7 for simulation simplicity;
this value showed good results under most conditions. However,
a complete investigation is needed to optimize the value, which
is beyond the scope of this study.
For each combination of Rv e , Tn and Rf presented in (20),
five individual simulations were carried out with the different
numbers of cycle in (25). Subsequently, the percentage of particles reaching the correct outlet was computed for each simulation and the highest was selected among cases from the different cycles for comparison. Fig. 6 shows the three percentage values—correct, incorrect, and remaining in the channel
(with the same definitions as in Fig. 3)—for all selected simulations after applying FFs. Compared with the values reported

310

Fig. 7.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Variation in the FF frequency.

in Fig. 3, it is clear that all the “correct” bars were greater
than 50%, meaning that the guidance efficiency was improved
in all cases. In contrast, the values of “incorrect” decreased in
most cases. This reduction is directly related to normal time and
force rate and indirectly to vessel elongation ratio. The values of
“remain” however, significantly decreased in all circumstances
and reached to less than 5% for most cases. This trend implies
that the FF has good effect on reduction of sticking particle
in almost any channel with any size. As we discussed before,
decrease in remained particles in channels lead to increase in
number of the particles that reach to correct outlet. The trends
in Fig. 6 approve this claim. Therefore, for circumstances with
high normal time, where previously had highest rate of remained
particles, improvement in correct particles are highest after
using FF.
Furthermore, the trends seen for increases in vessel elongation
ratio, normal exit time, and force rate, increased the efficiency of
particle guiding, which is the reverse of the trends in efficiency
in Fig. 3. Thus, the largest improvements in efficiency after
using the FF were in the cases that had the worst efficiency
previously.
Fig. 7 shows the variation in number of cycles in FF that
resulted in the best performance for each simulation case in
Fig. 6. For cases where several numbers of cycles lead to the
same performance, the average is presented. This figure shows
how the FF frequency affected the performance of steering and
could be useful for the selection of frequencies for future studies.
Although the results fluctuate, some trends are clear and can
be explained. The variation is more expected in channels with
low normal exit times since in these channels the sticking issue
is less significant compared to channels with higher normal exit
times and therefore the FF has less impact on the results. However, as a general trend, in bars with low exit normal time, low
numbers of cycles are more efficient but in contrast, for high
normal exit times the higher numbers of cycles are better. Furthermore, the best numbers of cycles for FFs are directly related
to vessel elongation ratio. Increase in force rate also leads to
increase in number of cycles in most cases. It should be mentioned that in our simulation, we limited the number of cycles

Fig. 8. Final 3-D model of real a vessel from the brain. Some of the geometric
characteristics in terms of the size and shape of the vessels are presented.

to five at maximum for reducing simulation complexity, and
therefore, these results may not be the final optimum numbers
and for some cases the higher numbers than five could be more
beneficial. However, it is enough to see the effect of number
of cycles on guidance performances and within five numbers
of cycles, the guidance efficiency is enough high as shown in
Fig. 6.
B. Realistic Channel
A simulation was designed to investigate the FF effect in a
realistic channel. A specific vessel in the human brain was selected for this and the vessel geometry was extracted using MRI
images with a special procedure [32]. Based on the extracted
information, a 3-D model of the vessel was created with CAD
software and was imported to COMSOL for particle trajectory
simulations. The final 3-D model of the channel with some of the
geometric characteristics that were used for modeling is shown
in Fig. 8.
This channel consists of one inlet for blood flow and particles
and six outlets. The blood flows into the channel from the inlet
and to exit the channel from the outlets. The diameters of the
channel in all paths varied. Thus, the velocity profile would vary
in each section. The average velocities of blood in the inlet and
outlets were selected and adjusted based on realistic values for
blood vessels of similar sizes [31]; subsequently, the velocity at
other points was computed using the CFD module of COMSOL.
Other simulation parameters were as used in previous sections.
Fig. 9(a) shows the calculated blood flow velocity profile for
several section views inside the channel.
In the first simulation, 1000 particles of radius 450 nm, distributed uniformly on the inlet surface, were released into the
channel and their trajectories due to drag force alone were captured for 20 s and the particles that reached each outlet were

TEHRANI et al.: NOVEL SCHEME FOR NANOPARTICLE STEERING IN BLOOD VESSELS USING A FUNCTIONALIZED MAGNETIC FIELD

311

Fig. 9. Simulation results for the realistic model. Numbers near outlets in (b) to (f) show the numbers of particles that reached those outlets. The red circles
indicate the targeted outlets. (a) Fluid velocity profile inside the vessel in several section views. (b) Particle distribution due to drag force with no magnetic field.
(c) Particle distribution due to drag force and constant magnetic field in the x direction. (d) Particle distribution due to drag force and constant magnetic field
in the -x direction. (e) Particle distribution due to drag force and functionalized magnetic field in the x direction. (f) Particle distribution due to drag force and
functionalized magnetic field in the -x direction.

enumerated. These results are presented in Fig. 9(b) in which
the numbers near the outlets show the numbers of particles that
reached the outlets. Additionally, the number of particles that
remained in the channel after this time period is provided in the
figure. This figure indicates how the particles would distribute
normally in the channel when there is no magnetic field and can
be used for base comparisons. In the next simulations, the channel was subjected to a constant high-gradient magnetic field in
the positive [see Fig. 9(c)] and negative [see Fig. 9(d)] x-axis
directions, separately. The former guided particles to outlet 1
and the latter targeted outlet 5, both indicated in the figures with
red circles. Compared with the numbers of particles reaching
all of the outlets [see Fig. 9(b)], fewer particles were delivered
using the constant magnetic field: 17.1% and 18.6% decreases
in guidance efficiency, respectively. This reduction was seen not
only in the number of particles arriving at the targeted outlets
but also in the numbers of particles arriving at all other outlets,
meaning that the total number of particles reaching any outlet
was reduced. It is clear in the figures that many particles remained in the vessels, adhered to the walls: 40.2% and 41.6%
of all the particles for the positive x-axis [see Fig. 9(c)] and
negative x-axis directions, respectively.
In the final simulations, functionalized magnetic fields of the
same magnitude and direction were applied to the vessel to
assess the effectiveness of the FF on a model of a real vessel.
Rectangular FFs with Nc from 1 to 5 and Dc = 67% were
used for these simulations to identify the greatest increase in
efficiency. Fig. 9(e) and (f) shows the particle distributions due
to the functionalized magnetic fields.
Compared with the constant magnetic field result, these results showed 17.3% and 7% increases in overall guidance efficiency for targeting out1 and out5, achieved by FFs with Nc = 1

TABLE III
VARIATIONS IN PARTICLE DISTRIBUTION FOR MAGNETIC GRADIENT IN THE
POSITIVE X-AXIS DIRECTION WITH VARIOUS NUMBERS OF CYCLES
Nc

Reaching to Outlets

Remained
in Channel

0
1
1.5
2
3
4

1

2

3

4

5

6

194
367
357
333
287
276

82
93
95
95
100
107

35
43
44
48
50
50

257
349
344
351
331
313

30
51
53
59
71
95

0
5
10
7
4
7

402
92
97
107
157
152

and Nc = 4, respectively, meaning 89.1% and 50% improvements in the efficiencies, respectively. Similar improvements
also occurred for other outlets, reflecting the decrease in the
number of particles remaining in the channel. The simulations
showed that only 9.2% and 17.4% of the particles remained in
the channel after using the FF, decreases of ∼77.1% and 58.1%
in the remaining particle numbers, respectively, versus using the
constant magnetic field. These results show the value of the proposed FF concept for improving the magnetic particle guidance
efficiency in vessels.
The variation in the number of particles arriving at each outlet
as well as the number of particles remaining in the vessel for both
cases of the positive x-axis [see Fig. 9(c)] and negative x-axis direction and for all values of Nc are presented in Tables III and IV.
These tables show the effect of frequency on the distribution of
particles in the channel. It should be noted that all the numbers
of cycles for the FF gave better results compared to the constant
magnetic field with Nc = 0.

312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE IV
VARIATIONS IN PARTICLE DISTRIBUTION FOR MAGNETIC GRADIENT IN THE
NEGATIVE X-AXIS DIRECTION WITH VARIOUS NUMBERS OF CYCLES
Nc

Reaching to Outlets

Remained
in Channel

0
1
2
3
4
5

1

2

3

4

5

6

87
99
101
111
127
141

104
138
137
130
120
116

31
48
51
50
48
41

223
283
291
302
318
346

140
178
190
203
210
189

0
1
6
10
3
4

415
253
224
194
174
163

The main reason for efficiency differences between two models is related to asymmetry of the realistic channel. The diameter
and flow velocity of each branch of the bifurcations are also different, which can significantly affect the particle distribution
in channel. Furthermore, the real channel is in curve shape and
therefore the magnetic field is not always perpendicular to channel that leads to change in the direction of the applied force on
particles. The efficiency is higher in the case of the Y shape,
whose the magnetic field direction is perpendicular to channel.
However, for both cases, we can clearly observe that the FF can
greatly improve the guidance efficiency of magnetic nanoparticles compared to a constant magnetic field.
VI. CONCLUSION
The sticking problem for magnetic nanoparticles subject to a
gradient magnetic field is an important topic that helps to better understand the sticking issue in MDT. The distribution of
magnetic nanoparticles subjected to a constant magnetic field
in Y-shaped channels, as a model of blood vessels, was investigated using numerical methods and commercially available
software. Theory, modeling descriptions, and simulation results
were investigated and presented. The results showed that the
efficiency of the steering method was relatively low using a
constant magnetic field, due to particles adhering to the channel
walls, causing them to remain in the channel. However, these
results suggested that any method of reducing the number of
stuck particles would be useful for particle delivery and would
effectively increase the guiding efficiency. To this end, this paper presents a FF method that could be used as a solution to the
sticking issue in vessels during steering steps.
The FF was defined and investigated using simulations. It was
shown that the frequency of the FF had a major effect on the
particle distribution. In this paper, the rectangular function was
used as the FF for simplicity of the simulations and an explanation of the method. However, other shapes of the function can
be investigated for better performances in future studies.
The effectiveness of the FF for particle guiding was confirmed
in several simulations of particle trajectories subjected to a functionalized magnetic field inside both Y-shaped channels and a
realistic blood vessel shape channel. For Y-shaped channels, the
suggested FF allowed an increase in vessel elongation ratio, normal exit time, and force rate, improving the efficiency of particle

guidance, showing opposite trends in efficiency versus the constant magnetic gradient. Similarly, for a realistic blood channel,
the guidance efficiency was high at every branch and for every
numbers of cycles of the FF. All of these results demonstrated
that this method could be effective for targeted drug delivery.
Our simulation model was mainly designed for nanoparticles
and we investigated the effect of the sticking issue on nanoparticles steering. It should be noted that the force rate coefficient
can provide analysis results for a wide range of particles diameters with respect to applied magnetic field. But, it does not mean
that our results can cover a wide range of particle sizes from the
microdimensions of the microparticles to the nanodimensions
of the single domain superparamagnetic particles. The nanoparticles smaller than 500 nm need to be analyzed using Molecular
Dynamic tools with molecular and atomic scales [17] and as the
size of the particles increases to micrometer sizes, some forces
that are neglected in the trajectory modeling of nanoparticles
due to their small effects like inertia, buoyancy, gravity, and
particle–particle interactions should be considered for simulation. In addition, it should be mentioned that high-frequency
modulation of the gradient field is practically difficult due to
technological issues, even though our results only deal with
low-frequency modulation with the rise and fall times consideration of duty cycles for realistic implementation. High-frequency
modulation would decrease the duty cycle and consequently effective force induced. Heating issue of the coils due to such
modulation is also a real concern that should be considered in
clinical applications.
For realistic magnetic nanoparticle guidance in in vivo experiments, the exact 3-D blood map of each patient should be extracted using an imaging modality, such as MRI. Subsequently,
multiparticle guidance schemes at different bifurcations of blood
vessels should be considered further and investigated as well as
finding an optimum FF shape. Our future work will include
practical experiments on targeted drug delivery in the mouse
brain using a FF and will study the sticking and steering effects
to encapsulation of a large number of magnetic nanoparticles
in a biodegradable matrix to yield the maximum targeting efficacy as well as developing a multiscale simulation framework
of MDT.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Bar, R. S. Herbst, and A. Onn, “Targeted drug delivery strategies to treat
lung metastasis,” Expert Opin. Drug Deliv., vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 1003–1016,
Oct. 2009.
[2] V. P. Torchilin, “Passive and active drug targeting: Drug delivery to tumors
as an example,” Handb. Exp. Pharmacol., vol. 197, pp. 3–53, Jan. 2010.
[3] M. E. Davis, Z. Chen, and D. M. Shin, “Nanoparticle therapeutics: An
emerging treatment modality for cancer,” Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov., vol. 7,
pp. 771–782, 2008.
[4] H. Fischer, R. Gottschlich, and A. Seelig, “Blood–brain barrier permeation: Molecular parameters governing passive diffusion,” J. Membr. Biol.,
vol. 165, pp. 201–211, 1998.
[5] A. BÈduneau, P. Saulnier, and J. P. Benoit, “Active targeting of brain
tumors using nanocarriers,” Biomaterials., vol. 28, pp. 4947–4967,
2007.
[6] S. C. A. Michel, T. M. Keller, J. M. Fröhlich, D. Fink, R. Caduff,
B. Seifert, B. Marincek, and R. A. Kubik-Huch, “Preoperative breast
cancer staging: MR imaging of the axilla with ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide enhancement,” Radiology., vol. 225, no. 2, pp. 527–536,
Nov. 2002.

TEHRANI et al.: NOVEL SCHEME FOR NANOPARTICLE STEERING IN BLOOD VESSELS USING A FUNCTIONALIZED MAGNETIC FIELD

[7] B. C. Nguyen, W. Stanford, B. H. Thompson, N. P. Rossi, K. H. Kernstine,
J. A. Kern, R. A. Robinson, J. K. Amorosa, J. F. Mammone, and
E. K. Outwater, “Multicenter clinical trial of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide in the evaluation of mediastinal lymph nodes in patients
with primary lung carcinoma,” J. Magn. Reson. Imaging, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 468–473, Sep. 1999.
[8] A. G. Rockall, S. A. Sohaib, M. G. Harisinghani, S. A. Babar, N. Singh,
A. R. Jeyarajah, D. H. Oram, I. J. Jacobs, J. H. Shepherd, and R. H. Reznek,
“Diagnostic performance of nanoparticle-enhanced magnetic resonance
imaging in the diagnosis of lymph node metastases in patients with
endometrial and cervical cancer,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 2813–2821, Apr. 2005.
[9] Q. A. Pankhurst, N. K. T. Thanh, S. K. Jones, and J. Dobson, “Progress in
applications of magnetic nanoparticles in biomedicine,” J. Phys. D.: Appl.
Phys., vol. 36, no. 13, pp. 167–181, Nov. 2003.
[10] M. Arruebo, R. Fernandez-Pacheco, M. R. Ibarra, and J. Santamaria,
“Review: Magnetic nanoparticles for drug delivery,” Nano Today., vol. 2,
pp. 22–32, 2007.
[11] B. Gleich, N. Hellwig, H. Bridell, R. Jurgons, C. Seliger, C. Alexiou,
B. Wolf, and T. Weyh, “Design and evaluation of magnetic fields for
nanoparticle drug targeting in cancer,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 164–170, Mar. 2007.
[12] E. M. Cherry, P. G. Maxim, and J. K. Eaton, “Particle size, magnetic
field, and blood velocity effects on particle retention in magnetic drug
targeting,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 1, p. 175, 2010.
[13] A. E. David, A. J. Cole, B. Chertok, Y. S. Park, and V. C. Yang,
“A combined theoretical and in vitro modeling approach for predicting
the magnetic capture and retention of magnetic nanoparticles in vivo,”
J. Control. Release, vol. 152, no. 1, pp. 67–75, May 2011.
[14] A. Nacev, C. Beni, O. Bruno, and B. Shapiro, “The behaviors of ferromagnetic nano-particles in and around blood vessels under applied magnetic fields,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 323, no. 6, pp. 651–668,
Mar. 2011.
[15] S. Kenjereš and B. W. Righolt, “Simulations of magnetic capturing of
drug carriers in the brain vascular system,” Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow,
vol. 35, pp. 68–75, Jun. 2012.
[16] Q. Cao, X. Han, and L. Li, “Numerical analysis of magnetic nanoparticle transport in microfluidic systems under the influence of permanent
magnets,” J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., vol. 45, no. 46, p. 465001, Nov. 2012.
[17] P. Vartholomeos, M. Fruchard, A. Ferreira, and C. Mavroidis, “MRIguided nanorobotic systems for therapeutic and diagnostic applications,”
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 157–184, Aug. 2011.
[18] J.-B. Mathieu and S. Martel, “Magnetic microparticle steering within
the constraints of an MRI system: Proof of concept of a novel targeting
approach,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 9, pp. 801–808, 2007.
[19] S. Martel, O. Felfoul, J.-B. Mathieu, A. Chanu, S. Tamaz, M. Mohammadi,
M. Mankiewicz, and N. Tabatabaei, “MRI-based medical nanorobotic
platform for the control of magnetic nanoparticles and flagellated bacteria
for target interventions in human capillaries,” Int. J. Robot. Res. vol. 28,
no. 9, pp. 1169–1182, Sep. 2009.
[20] P. Pouponneau, J.-C. Leroux, G. Soulez, L. Gaboury, and S. Martel, “Coencapsulation of magnetic nanoparticles and doxorubicin into biodegradable microcarriers for deep tissue targeting by vascular MRI navigation,”
Biomaterials vol. 32, no. 13, pp. 3481–3486, May 2011.
[21] K. Belharet, D. Folio, and A. Ferreira, “Simulation and planning of a
magnetically actuated microrobot navigating in the arteries,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 994–1001, Apr. 2013.
[22] L. Arcese, M. Fruchard, and A. Ferreira, “Endovascular magnetically
guided robots: Navigation modeling and optimization,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 977–987, Apr. 2012.
[23] M. Larimi, A. Ramiar, and A. Ranjbar, “Numerical simulation of magnetic
nanoparticles targeting in a bifurcation vessel,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater.,
vol. 362, pp. 58–71, Aug. 2014.
[24] B. Chertok, A. E. David, and V. C. Yang, “Brain tumor targeting of magnetic nanoparticles for potential drug delivery: Effect of administration
route and magnetic field topography,” J. Control. Release, vol. 155, no. 3,
pp. 393–399, Nov. 2011.
[25] P. Vartholomeos and C. Mavroidis, “In silico studies of magnetic microparticle aggregations in fluid environments for MRI-guided drug delivery,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3028–3038, Nov. 2012.
[26] M. D. Tehrani and J. Yoon, “Statistical investigation of efficiency of the
nanomagnetic particle steering in blood vessels,” in Proc. 7th IEEE Int.
Conf. Nano/Molecular Med. Eng., 2013, pp. 36–40.
[27] T. B. Jones, Dielectrophoresis and Magnetophoresis, Electromechanics of
Particles. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995, pp. 34–82.

313

[28] S. Einav and D. Elad, “Physical and flow properties of blood,” in Biomedical Engineering and Design Handbook, (Access Engineering), vol. 1,
M. Kutz, Ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 2009, pp. 3.1–3.25.
[29] H. Cao, G. Huang, S. Xuan, Q. Wu, F. Gu, and C. Li, “Synthesis and
characterization of carbon-coated iron core/shell nanostructures,” J. Alloys
Compd., vol. 448, no. 1–2, pp. 272–276, Jan. 2008.
[30] M. D. Tehrani, M. O. Kim, and J. Yoon, “A novel electromagnetic actuation
system for magnetic nanoparticle guidance in blood vessels,” IEEE Trans.
Magn., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1–12, Jul. 2014.
[31] P. I. Aaronson, J. P. T. Ward, and M. J. Connolly, The Cardiovascular
System at a Glance, 4th ed. New York, NY: Wiley, 2012, p. 136.
[32] S. Hassan and J. Yoon, “A hybrid approach for vessel enhancement and
fast level set segmentation based 3D blood vessel extraction using MRI
brain image,” in Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Conf. Nano/Molecular Med. Eng.,
2013, pp. 77–82.

Mohammad Dadkhah Tehrani received the B.Sc.
degree in mechanical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Esfahan, Iran, in 2005, and
the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, in
2007 and 2012, respectively.
In 2013, he joined the School of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea, as a Research Associate. His
current research interests include electromagnetics
and electrostatics sensors and actuators and magnetic
drug targeting devices.

Jong-Hwan Yoon received the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH),
Korea, in 2003. He was a Senior Researcher in Doosan Heavy Industries &
Construction. In 2004, he joined the School of Mechanical and Automotive and
Engineering, Daegu University, Kyeongsan, Korea, where he is currently as an
Associate Professor. His current research interests include computational fluid
modeling, flow measurement and flow control. Also he published more than 20
peer-reviewed journal articles and patents.

Myeong Ok Kim received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Biology,
Gyeongsang National University (GNU), Gyeongnam, Korea, in 1994.
She was a PST Doctor in the Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea,
from 1995 to 1996. She was a Visting Researcher at the Neurological Primate
Research Center, Oregon University, from 1999 to 2000. In 1998, she joined
the School of Natural Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea,
where she is currentlyt a Full Professor of Biology and Applied Life Science.
Her current research interests include screening the compound, which has neuroprotective effects on neurodegenerative disorder such as Alzheimer’s disease.
She has authored or coauthored more than 100 peer-reviewed journal articles
and patents.

Jungwon Yoon received the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Mechatronics, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Kwangju, Korea, in
2005.
He was a Senior Researcher in Electronics
Telecommunication Research Institute (ETRI), Daejeon, Korea. From 2001 to 2002, he was a Visiting
Researcher at Virtual Reality Lab, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA, and was a Visiting Fellow
at Functional and Applied Biomechanics Section, Rehabiliation Medicine of Department, Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, from 2010 to 2011. In 2005,
he joined the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Korea, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His current research interests include bio-nano robot control, virtual reality
haptic devices, and rehabilitation robots. He has authored or coauthored more
than 40 peer-reviewed journal articles and patents.

