IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

1647

The Progression of Muscle Fatigue During Exercise
Estimation With the Aid of High-Frequency
Component Parameters Derived From Ensemble
Empirical Mode Decomposition
Shing-Hong Liu, Kang-Ming Chang, and Da-Chuan Cheng

Abstract—Muscle fatigue is often monitored via the median frequency derived from the surface electromyography (sEMG) power
spectrum during isometric contractions. The power spectrum of
sEMG shifting toward lower frequencies can be used to quantify
the electromanifestation of muscle fatigue. The dynamic sEMG
belongs to a nonstationary signal, which will be affected by the
electrode moving, the shift of the muscle, and the change of innervation zone. The goal of this study is to find a more sensitive and
stable method in order to sense the progression of muscle fatigue in
the local muscle during exercise in healthy people. Five male and
five female volunteers participated. Each subject was asked to run
on a multifunctional pedaled elliptical trainer for about 30 min,
twice a week, and was recorded a total of six times. Three decomposed methods, discrete wavelet transform (DWT), empirical mode
decomposition (EMD), and ensemble EMD (EEMD), were used to
sense the progression of muscle fatigue. They compared with each
other. Although the highest frequency components of sEMG by
DWT, EMD, and EEMD have the better performance to sense the
progression of muscle fatigue than the raw sEMG, the EEMD has
the best performance to reduce nonstationary characteristics and
noise of the dynamic sEMG.
Index Terms—Discrete wavelet transform (DWT), empirical
mode decomposition (EMD), ensemble EMD (EEMD), median frequency (MF), muscle fatigue.

I. INTRODUCTION
EOPLE use sport equipment to train their body for health
improvement. The sports equipment includes the treadmill, elliptical trainer, and bike. Moreover, isokinetic exercise

P

Manuscript received May 19, 2013; revised August 21, 2013; accepted
October 14, 2013. Date of current version September 2, 2014. This work was
supported in part by the National Science Council of Taiwan under Grants NSC
102–2221-E-324 -004 and NSC 102–2221-E-468–003. (Correspondig author:
K.-M. Chang.)
S.-H. Liu is with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Chaoyang University of Technology, Taichung 41354, Taiwan (e-mail:
shliu@cyut.edu.tw).
K.-M. Chang is with the Department of Photonics and Communication Engineering, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan. He is also with Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan (e-mail: changkm@asia.edu.tw).
D.-C. Cheng is with the Department of Biomedical Imaging and Radiological
Science, China Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan (e-mail: dccheng@
mail.cmu.edu.tw).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2013.2286408

using these equipment has been widely applied for functional
rehabilitation and assessment [1], [2], as isokinetic tests have
been proven helpful in acquiring a better comprehension of
the biomechanics in the lower limb muscles during dynamic
contractions [3], [4]. However, how to develop an appropriate exercise is an important issue in healthy and pathological
subjects.
Muscle fatigue is defined as a loss of the required or expected
force from a muscle, and has been an attractive research issue
for a long time. The nature of muscle fatigue and its relation to
muscle activity have been studied [5]. It is well known that the
power spectrum of the surface electromyography (sEMG) is toward the lower frequency during a sustained muscle contraction.
At this time, the spectral parameters, such as the mean frequency
(MNF) and the median frequency (MF), are the electrical manifestation of localized muscle fatigue [6], [7]. According to most
reports that studied muscle fatigue, the changes in muscle fiber
propagation velocity and the firing rate of muscle fibers could
affect the sEMG power spectrum [8]–[12]. In an isometric and
sustained muscle contraction, the sEMG may be assumed as a
wide-sense stationary signal, and thus, its power spectrum could
be obtained using common spectral estimation techniques. Although the activity of sustained muscle contraction is often satisfactory in rehabilitation medicine and ergonomics, the exercises
are often the dynamic most of the time. In this case, signals
are nonstationary, and therefore, appropriate spectral estimation
techniques are required.
In many studies, the sEMG has been considered a realization of a nonstationary stochastic process [11], and the shift of
the innervation zone always happens during a dynamic contraction [12]. Therefore, Molinari et al. [13], [14] proposed signal
processing methods to assess the spectral changes of sEMG due
to fatigue during dynamic contraction. Dingwell et al. [15] quantified both localized muscle fatigue and movement kinematics
change over time during exhaustive cycling. Tscharner [16] used
the wavelet analyses to estimate the sEMG parameters during
a mildly fatiguing exercise on a cycle ergometer. In these research groups, they always used the measurement system of
multiple channels and the complex analyzed method to quantify
the electrical manifestations of muscle fatigue for the pathological subjects. However, using a single-channel sEMG and a
nonstationary signal process to sense the progression of muscle
fatigue for the exercise of health people could be easily applied in health care. Some nonlinear approaches are also very

2168-2194 © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1648

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

attractive methods to evaluate muscle fatigue on sEMG, such as
Lempel–Ziv complexity measure [17] and Fuzzy approximate
entropy [18]. González-Izal et al. have reviewed the linear and
nonlinear sEMG models for estimating muscle fatigue [19].
Recently, a useful nonstationary and nonlinear signal processing technique, known as empirical mode decomposition (EMD),
has been proposed. EMD was introduced by Huang, and has
been widely used for nonlinear signal analysis [20]. The principle of EMD is based on a decomposition derived from the data,
and is useful in the analysis of nonlinear and nonstationary timeseries signals. With an iterative decomposition of signals, EMD
separates the full signal into ordered elements with frequencies
ranging from high to low in each intrinsic mode function (IMF)
level. The filter bank-like property of EMD has been widely
applied in biomedical signal analysis [21], [22]. The decomposed IMFs were further extracted with the power or entropy
approach to analyze the nonstationary biosignals for noise reduction and for feature extraction. Srhoj et al. have extracted the
MF from selected IMFs of sEMG recorded over the quadriceps
muscles during cyclic dynamic contractions [23]. Their results
showed that HHT-derived spectral and linear regression parameters were consistent and more reliable than those obtained with
the short-time Fourier transform and the wavelet transform.
The newly developed ensemble EMD (EEMD) has improved
the mode mixing effect of adjacent IMF functions, which is the
main disadvantage of EMD [24]. Mode mixing indicates that
oscillations of different time scales coexist in a given IMF or
that oscillations with the same time scale have been assigned to
different IMFs. The procedure of the EEMD is to add statistically zero-mean noise into the signal with sufficient trials, and
the ensemble IMF is estimated by the summation of the IMF
from each trial of the same level.
The goal of this study is not to quantify the myoelectric manifestation of muscle fatigue. Our goal is to find a more sensitive
and stable method to sense the progression of muscle fatigue
in the local muscle during exercise in healthy people. We used
a self-designed wireless apparatus to record the sEMG signal
of the vastus lateralis in the left leg of each volunteer. There
were ten healthy volunteers who joined this experiment; they
ran in a multifunctional pedaled elliptical trainer. Each subject
performed six experiments in three weeks. We hypothesized that
healthy subjects run a fixed speed with different loads in muscle activity as fatigue progressed. We also hypothesized that
its spectral parameters will have a significant change during
the dynamic contraction when the decomposed signal of sEMG
reduced the nonstationary characteristics and noise.
II. METHODS
A. Wireless Measurement Apparatus
A wireless measurement apparatus was developed by the authors at a size of 5.7 cm × 4.3 cm, with the distance of the
electrodes 3.6 cm, as shown in Fig. 1. The gain of the device
is 1000. A two-order high-pass filter was used to reduce the
baseline with a cutoff frequency of 30 Hz. A two-order low-pass
filter was used as the antialiasing filter with a cutoff frequency of
1000 Hz. This device is based on the microcontroller MSP430-

Fig. 1. Real photo of the wireless measurement apparatus: (a) the front view
and (b) the back view.
TABLE I
SUBJECT CHARACTERISTICS

Fig. 2. Illustration of the wireless measurement apparatus worn on the left
vastus lateralis.

F5342 as the core structure, which has a 12-bit analog-to-digital
converter with a sampling rate of 2000 Hz. The digital EMG
signal is transferred by a Bluetooth chip to a remote server.
A visual basic-based interface system was used to display and
store the digital EMG data in real time.
B. Subjects and EMG Recording
There were ten volunteers involved (five male and five female), with ages ranging from 19 to 27 years. Their information
is listed in Table I. The participants were required to run in a
multifunctional pedaled elliptical trainer (Johnson E8000). We
measured the vastus lateralis of the left leg, as shown in Fig. 2.
According to [25], EMG studies on the trapezius, vastus medialis, and lateralis muscles dips and plateau regions related to
the presence of innervation zone. Thus, we avoided the belly
position and shifted the electrodes to a higher position. The
surface electrodes used for the EMG recording were Ag/AgCl
with a 10-mm diameter on self-adhesive supports. The electrode arrangement ensured negligible crosstalk between adjacent muscles. The positions of the electrodes for each subject
were recorded, and the electrodes were placed at the same position in the subsequent experiments.

LIU et al.: PROGRESSION OF MUSCLE FATIGUE DURING EXERCISE ESTIMATION

1649

C. Experimental Procedure
The muscle fatigue experiment is based on the following
procedures.
Step 1: The subjects are required to wear the wireless sEMG
device. Alcohol is used to clean the surface, and electrolytic gel is smeared on the electrodes to decrease
the contact impedance. Athletic tape is used to fix
the apparatus, and thus, avoid movement of the electrodes. Before data collection, a consent form was
signed by each subject.
Step 2: There are three load levels in the multifunctional pedaled elliptical trainer, L2, L4 and L6, with L2 being
light and L6 being heavy. The speed range of L2 is
55–60 steps per minute (SPM) for males and 50–55
SPM for females. The speed range of L4 is 60–70
SPM for males and 55–65 SPM for females. The subjects are required to run at their maximum speed until
exhaustion for L6, which has a faster speed range
than L4. The speed range is 80–100 SPM for males
and 70–90 SPM for females. A 10-min session is required for both L2 and L4. In the pre-experiment, the
subjects tested the speed range and chose the most appropriate speeds for the L2 and L4 levels, separately.
These speeds were recorded for every participant. In
the experiments, the subjects ran at their self-selected
speeds during the experimental procedure.
Step 3: In order to avoid the training phenomenon, each subject was only recorded twice a week at the same time,
and the rest time must be more than two days. There
were a total of six recording times for each subject.
Fig. 3. (a) Flowchart of EMD decomposition. (b) Flowchart of EEMD
decomposition.

D. EMD and EEMD Algorithm
The EMD algorithm used in this study comprised the following steps [20] and demonstrated in Fig. 3(a).
Step 1: Extrema (maxima and minima) of the signal, x(t), are
identified.
Step 2: Upper and lower envelopes of the extreme point are
developed.
Step 3: Mean function of the upper and lower envelopes, m(t).
Step 4: Difference signal d(t) = x(t)–m(t).
Step 5: If d(t) becomes a zero-mean process, then the iteration stops, and d(t) is a first IMF (IMF1), called c1 (t);
otherwise, go to Step 1 and replace x(t) with d(t).
Step 6: Residue signal r(t) = x(t)−c1 (t).
Step 7: Replace x(t) with r(t) and repeat the procedure from
Steps 1 to 6 to obtain the second IMF (IMF 2), called
c2 (t). To obtain cn (t), continue Steps 1 to 6 after n iterations. The process is stopped when the final residual
signal r(t) is obtained as a monotonic function.
Now, the original signal can be represented as follows:
x (t) =

n


ci (t) + r(t).

i=1

Often, we can regard r(t) as cn +1 (t).

(1)

The EEMD algorithm is as follows [24], and demonstrated in
Fig. 3(b).
Step 1: The white noise series n(t) was added to the targeted
signal x(t), and x1 (t) = x(t)+n(t).
Step 2: Decompose x1 (t) by the standard EMD procedure.
Step 3: Repeat Steps 1 and 2 until the preset number of trial
has been completed. Each repeated time was added to
the white noise series of the same power at each time
for the EMD calculation. The new IMF combination
cij (t) is achieved, where i is the iteration number and
j is the IMF scale.
Step 4: Estimate the mean (ensemble) of the final IMF of the
decompositions as the desired output:
cj EEMD (t) =

nt


cij (t)

(2)

i=1

where nt denotes the total number of trials. In this
study, the EMD and EEMD decompositions were estimated using the visual signal software. The number of
trials is 100, and the added noise power is 14 dB. The
order of the IMF is 20 and 21 for EMD and EEMD,

1650

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

respectively. The calculated EMD- and EEMD-based
IMFs were used for further muscle fatigue analysis in
Matlab R2010.
E. Discrete Wavelet Analysis
Assuming the raw sEMG signal is x[n], the discrete wavelet
transform (DWT) decomposition involves the following filtering
process:
Aj [n] =

∞


Aj −1 [k] ·h [2n − k]

(3)

Aj −1 [k] ·g [2n − k]

(4)

k =−∞

Dj [n] =

∞

k =−∞

where A0 [n] = x[n] and Aj [n] and Dj [n] indicate the coarse and
detailed sequences, respectively, after the jth decomposition.
The variable h[n] represents the half-band low-pass filter, and
g[n] represents the half-band high-pass filter. The original signal
is decomposed from the high-frequency component to the lowfrequency component as a combination of Aj [n] and Dj [n].
For example, if the decomposition level is 5 (j = 5), then the
original signal can be represented as follows:
x[n] = D1 [n] + D2 [n] + D3 [n] + D4 [n] + D5 [n] + A5 [n].
(5)
F. Muscle Signal Processing
MNF and MF provide some basic information about the spectrum of signal and its time. But, MF estimates have been shown
which are less affected by additive noise and more affect by fatigue [26]. Therefore, we used the MF to sense the progression of
muscle fatigue in the local muscle during exercise. Because we
have used the hardware filters to reduce the noise, the recorded
sEMG or the decomposed signals are directly divided into segments, and fast Fourier transform was used to get the power
spectrum density p(f ) of a segment. A segment window size is
30 s, and a step size is 15 s. Each segment’s MF is extracted from
the power spectrum density. The MF is defined as the frequency
at which the accumulated spectrum energy is half of the total
spectrum energy, as shown in the following equation:

0

MF



∞

1
p (f ) df =
p (f ) df =
2
MF



∞

p (f ) df .

(6)

0

A further linear regression analysis is applied to the MF distribution during the entire exercise in order to quantify manifestations of muscle fatigue. The linear regression equation is
defined as follows:
y = Ax + b

(7)

where y is estimated as the MF, x is the time interval, A is the
regression slope, and b is the bias. The slope of distribution MF
represents the sensitivity for sensing the progression of muscle
fatigue. The greater the sensitivity, the smaller the slope [27].

We also used the correlation coefficient (R) to represent the
consistency of methods in the progression of muscle fatigue,
which is defined as follows:
n
i=1 (xi − x) (yi − y)

(8)
R = 
n
2
n
2
(x
−
x)
(y
−
y)
i
i
i=1
i=1
where x̄ and ȳ are the averages of x and y, respectively.
G. Statistics
In this study, the SIGMAPLOT software package was used to
conduct the data analysis. Descriptive statistics were applied to
subjects’ personal information and muscle fatigue parameters
(regression slope, A, and correlation coefficient, R). The data
were represented as the mean (standard deviation). Statistical
testing of the muscle fatigue parameters obtained from the raw
data and the different decomposition methods was performed
using t-tests. The significance level for the p-value was set at
0.05.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 4 shows the measured sEMG signal (left column) and
their spectrum (right column) at the beginning 10 s of three load
levels: (a) the load level is L2; (b) the load level is L4; and (c)
the load level is L6. Some artificial noises happen at 400 and
800 Hz, which could be interfered by the digital hardware of
this apparatus.
DWT, EMD, and EEMD were used to decompose the sEMG
signal. The lower IMF and the lower wavelet detail function both
correspond to higher frequency components. The sEMG signal
of Fig. 4(c) was decomposed by the DWT, and its decomposed
signals, D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 , (left column), and their spectrum (right
column) are shown in Fig. 5. The decomposed results of EMD
and EEMD for the same sEMG signal are shown in Figs. 6
and 7. We only show the first-four IMFs (left column) and their
spectrums (right column) to compare the difference with the raw
sEMG signal and the decomposed signals of DWT.
Table II shows the analysis results of one experiment for the
raw data and the decomposed signals of the other methods for
the entire 30-min experiment. The MF slope of the raw sEMG
is –0.012 Hz/s. For the DWT decomposition, the absolute MF
slope of the first detail component is significantly larger than
the rest of the decomposition (D1, slope = 0.03 Hz/s). This
is also true for EMD and EEMD: the absolute MF slope of
the first IMF is significantly larger than that of the other IMFs
(IMF1 of EMD, slope = 0.049 Hz/s; IMF1 of EEMD, slope =
0.074 Hz/s). In the following analysis, only the D1 component
of the DWT and the IMF1 component of the EMD and EEMD
were chosen for further MF estimation and regression analysis.
The absolute MF slope of the raw data and the highest frequency
components of the three methods is EEMD (0.074 Hz/s) > EMD
(0.049 Hz/s) > DWT (0.030 Hz/s) > raw EMG (0.012 Hz/s).
The MF distributions of the raw data, the D1 component of the
DWT, and the IMF1 components of the EMD and the EEMD
are shown in Fig. 8.

LIU et al.: PROGRESSION OF MUSCLE FATIGUE DURING EXERCISE ESTIMATION

Fig. 4.

1651

(Left column) sEMG signal and (right column) their spectrum under three load levels: (a) level L2, (b) level L4, and (c) level L6.

In Table III, the MF slope of the IMF1 component of the
EEMD method is significantly different for the raw sEMG signal
and the other decomposed methods. The ranges of the absolute
MF slope value are EEMD > EMD > DWT > raw sEMG during
the three loading levels and the entire exercise. Table IV shows
the statistical results of the MF slope of raw data, DWT, EMD,
and EEMD at the six measurements. In every measurement, the
mean value of the absolute MF slope is also EEMD > EMD >
DWT > raw sEMG during the entire exercise. We also used the
coefficient of variation, CoV, to show the repeatability of the
different methods. Table V shows the statistical results of the
slope CoV in the three loading levels and the entire exercise.
Although the slope CoV of the EEMD was not significantly
different for the raw sEMG signal and the other decomposed

methods, the mean and standard deviation were smallest during
the entire exercise.
Table VI shows the statistical results of the MF correlation
coefficient in the three loading levels and the entire exercise.
The MF correlation coefficient for the EEMD method was only
significantly different for the raw sEMG signal and the EMD
method during the entire exercise. However, the mean of MF
correlation coefficient of the EEMD is larger than that of the
raw sEMG signal and the other decomposed methods during
the entire exercise. Table VII shows the statistical results of
correlation coefficient CoV in the three loading levels and the
entire exercise. The mean and standard deviation of correlation
coefficient CoV of the EEMD are all smallest during the entire
exercise.

1652

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 5. (Left column) Decomposed sEMG signal and (right column) their spectrum under L6 load by the DWT, (a) D1 signal, (b) D2 signal, (c) D3 signal, and
(4) D4 signal.

LIU et al.: PROGRESSION OF MUSCLE FATIGUE DURING EXERCISE ESTIMATION

1653

Fig. 6. (Left column) Decomposed sEMG signal and (right column) their spectrum under L6 load by the EMD, (a) IMF1 signal, (b) IMF2 signal, (c) IMF3
signal, and (4) IMF4 signal.

1654

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

Fig. 7. (Left column) Decomposed sEMG signal and (right column) their spectrum under the L6 load by the EEMD, (a) IMF1 signal, (b) IMF2 signal, (c) IMF3
signal, and (4) IMF4 signal.

IV. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
Many other factors affect the results in case of dynamic contractions. One of the main problems is that the sEMG signal may
suddenly change their spectral properties when it has the high

nonstationarity characteristics. Therefore, some studies used
time–frequency analysis methods, such as the short-time Fourier
transform [28], the continuous wavelet transform [29], and
Choi–Williams distribution (CWD) [13], [14], [30], to evaluate

LIU et al.: PROGRESSION OF MUSCLE FATIGUE DURING EXERCISE ESTIMATION

Fig. 8.

1655

MF distributions of the raw data, the D1 component of the DWT, and the IMF1 components of the EMD and EEMD.

TABLE II
TYPICAL REGRESSION RESULTS FOR THE RAW DATA AND THE DECOMPOSED
SIGNALS OF THE DWT, EMD, AND EEMD FOR ONE SUBJECT

TABLE III
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF THE MF SLOPE OF THE RAW DATA AND THE
DECOMPOSITION METHODS WITHIN THE THREE LEVELS
AND FOR THE ENTIRE EXPERIMENT

muscle fatigue. The studied results of Bonato showed that the
CWD was the most suitable method to represent the nonstationary EMG signal during dynamic contraction. However, the
use of the CWD requires careful selection of the parameters in
the kernel. Moreover, the signal-to-noise ratio also is a critical
problem in these analyses, which limits the upper frequency
when calculating for the time-dependent mean or MF [31].
Although electrical manifestation of muscle fatigue could be
represented by many parameters during a continuous dynamic
contraction, these analyzing methods all have to adjust their

1656

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

TABLE IV
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF THE MF SLOPE OF THE RAW DATA AND THE
DECOMPOSITION METHODS DURING THE ENTIRE EXERCISE
AT THE SIX MEASUREMENTS

TABLE V
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF THE SLOPE COV OF THE RAW DATA AND THE
DECOMPOSITION METHODS WITHIN THE THREE LEVELS
AND FOR THE ENTIRE EXPERIMENT

TABLE VI
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF THE MF CORRELATION COEFFICIENT OF THE RAW
DATA AND THE DECOMPOSITION METHODS WITHIN THE THREE
LEVELS AND FOR THE ENTIRE EXPERIMENT

TABLE VII
STATISTICAL RESULTS OF THE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT COV OF THE RAW
DATA AND THE DECOMPOSITION METHODS WITHIN THE THREE
LEVELS AND FOR THE ENTIRE EXPERIMENT

parameters on a case-by-case basis. Moreover, monitoring the
electrical manifestations of muscle fatigue during the dynamic
contraction is better useful than the static contraction in the real
life. Therefore, in this study, the goal was not to quantify the
electrical manifestation of muscle fatigue. Our goal is to find
a more sensitive and stable method to sense the progression of
muscle fatigue in the local muscle during the exercise.
Also, the frequency range of sEMG is defined within 100
to 500 Hz in an isometric contraction. In this study, because
we considered the nonstationary characteristics of the dynamic
sEMG, we increased the measured bandwidth for the decomposed analyses. The sampling rate was raised to 2000 Hz. Moreover, because the maximum speed of the experiment is about
100 SPM, the artifact noises, produced by electrode movement,
the shift of muscle, and the change of innovation zone, all belong to the low-frequency component [32]. In Fig. 4, the lowfrequency energy of the raw sEMG is significantly larger than
the high-frequency energy. We used the decomposed methods
to filter the low-frequency component of the raw sEMG signal.
The highest frequency components to sense the progression of
muscle fatigue have a better sensitivity than the raw sEMG in
Table III.
In these decomposed methods, EMD acted as a filter bank,
and there was no strict bandwidth restriction with the IMF. The
frequency range of each IMF level is adaptive, depending on the
raw signal content. Therefore, in Fig. 6, the IMF1 of EMD also
has the low-frequency energy. Comparing the IMF components
of the same level, EEMD is more concentrated and has bandlimited components. With the iterative EMD computation, the
average of each IMF scale yielded a sharper band transition than
a single EMD-derived IMF. The transition band overlap between
adjacent IMFs is reduced. EEMD acts as a higher order filter
with the same filter specification as EMD with a lower filter
order. IMF mode mixing reduction is the major advantage of
EEMD over EMD. Thus, in Table II, the average MF of the
IMF1 component of EEMD is larger than that of the EMD, and
the MF slope of the IMF1 of EEMD is sharper than that of the
EMD.
The DWT decomposition is based on the successive filtering
of the symmetric half-band high-pass and low-pass filters. The
frequency range of the more detailed component is nearly twice
that of the adjacent less detailed component. In Table II, although
the MF of the D1 component of DWT is largest than the IMF1
component of EMD and EEMD, the absolute MF slope of the
IMF1 component of EEMD is largest during the entire exercise.
In Table III, the absolute MF slope of the IMF1 component of
EEMD is also largest and has the significant difference with the
raw sEMG signal and the highest frequency component of DWT
and EMD.
Because the subjects easily stepped the elliptical trainer during level L2, the signal-to-noise ratio of sEMG signal is lower
than the other levels. Thus, in Table III, all absolute MF slopes
in level L2 are larger than those of level L4. However, the slope
CoVs in level L2 is larger than the level L4 in Table V. The subjects hardly stepped on the elliptical trainer during level L6. The
signal-to noise ratio of the sEMG signal is larger than the other
levels. The absolute MF slopes in level L6 are largest. These

LIU et al.: PROGRESSION OF MUSCLE FATIGUE DURING EXERCISE ESTIMATION

results show that the signal-to-noise ratio of the sEMG signal
during the dynamic contraction will affect the manifestation of
muscle fatigue [32].
In Table VI, although the correlation coefficient of the MF1
of EEMD only has the significant difference for the raw sEMG
signal and EMD during the entire exercise, its value is largest in
levels L2, L4, and the entire exercise. However, in level L6, this
phenomenon is not true. The reason for this is that the subjects
may be running their maximum in level L6 until they cannot run.
Thus, the difference of every subject is very large. However, if
the entire exercise was considered, the IMF1 of EEMD has the
better consistency for sensing the progression of muscle fatigue.
In the repeatable test, the means and standard deviations of
the absolute slope and correlation coefficient CoVs of the MF of
the IMF1 of the EEMD method all are the smallest values than
the raw sEMG signal and the other decomposed methods during
the entire exercise. That is, the MF of the IMF1 of the EEMD
method sensed the progression of muscle fatigue being more
stable than with the raw sEMG signal and the highest frequency
components of other decomposed methods.
Finally, we had done two hypotheses in Section I. The first
hypothesis was that healthy subjects run a fixed speed with the
different loads in muscle activity as fatigue progressed. In Fig. 8,
we see that the MF of the raw data, the D1 component of the
DWT, and the IMF1 components of the EMD and the EEMD all
shift to the lower frequency. This result proved our first hypothesis. Our second hypothesis was that the spectral parameters of
sEMG have a significant change during the dynamic contraction
when the decomposed signal of sEMG reduced the nonstationary characteristics and noise. In Table III, the absolute MF slope
of the highest frequency component of DWT, EMD, and EEMD
are all larger than the raw sEMG during the three loading levels and the entire exercise. This result also proved our second
hypothesis.
The fact that the EMG spectrum scales toward the lower frequencies as muscle contraction is sustained is very well known.
Therefore, it is clear that the upper frequencies are the most
important to quantify muscle fatigue. In this study, we used the
DWT, EMD, and EEMD to decompose the raw sEMG. The results show that the highest frequency component of the sEMG
signal for sensing the progression of muscle fatigue has higher
sensitivity and consistency than the raw sEMG signal or the lowfrequency component of the sEMG signal. The performance of
the highest frequency component by the EEMD method is better
than the DWT and EMD methods.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Kaikkonen, A. Natri, M. Pasanen, K. Latvala, P. Kannus, and M. Jarvinen, “Isokinetic muscle performance after surgery of the lateral ligaments
of the ankle,” Int. J. Sports Med., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 173–178, Apr. 1999.
[2] T. Mittlmeier, A. Weiler, T. Sohn, L. Kleinhans, S. Mollbach, G. Duda, and
N. P. Sudkamp, “Novel award second prize paper: Functional monitoring
during rehabilitation following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction,”
Clin. Biomech., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 576–584, Oct. 1999.
[3] A. Beelen and A. J. Sargeant, “Effect of fatigue on maximal power output
at different contraction velocities in humans,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 71,
no. 6, pp. 2332–2337, Dec. 1991.
[4] A. St Clair Gibson, M. I. Lambert, J. J. Durandt, N. Scales, and T. D.
Noakes, “Quadriceps and hamstrings peak torque ratio changes in persons

1657

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

with chronic anterior cruciate ligament deficiency,” J. Orthop. Sports
Phys. Ther., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 418–427, Jul. 2000.
S. L. Morris and G. T. Allison, “Effects of abdominal muscle fatigue
on anticipatory postural adjustments associated with arm raising,” Gait
Posture, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 342–348, Nov. 2006.
L. R. Brody, M. T. Pollock, S. H. Roy, C. J. De Luca, and B. Celli,
“pH-induced effects on median frequency and conduction velocity of the
myoelectric signal,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 1878–1885, Nov.
1991.
C. J. De Luca, “Myoelectrical manifestations of localized muscular fatigue
in humans,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 251–279, 1984.
R. Merletti, M. Knaflitz, and C. J. De Luca, “Myoelectric manifestations
of fatigue in voluntary and electrically elicited contractions,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 1810–1820, Nov. 1990.
E. A. Froese and M. E. Houston, “Torque-velocity characteristics and
muscle fiber type in human vastus lateralis,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 59,
no. 2, pp. 309–314, Aug. 1985.
E. J. Kupa, S. H. Roy, S. C. Kandarian, and C. J. De Luca, “Effects of
muscle fiber type and size on EMG median frequency and conduction
velocity,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 23–32, Jul. 1995.
J. V. Basmajian and C. J. DeLuca, Muscles Alive: Their Functions Revealed by Electromyography. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
1985, p. 561.
D. Farina, R. Merletti, M. Nazzaro, and I. Caruso, “Effect of joint angle
on EMG variables in leg and thigh muscles,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.,
vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 62–71, Nov./Dec. 2001.
F. Molinari, M. Knaflitz, P. Bonato, and M. V. Actis, “Electrical manifestations of muscle fatigue during concentric and eccentric isokinetic knee
flexion-extension movements,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 7,
pp. 1309–1316, Jul. 2006.
M. Knaflitz and F. Molinari, “Assessment of muscle fatigue during biking,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 17–23,
Mar. 2003.
J. B. Dingwell, J. E. Joubert, F. Diefenthaeler, and J. D. Trinity,
J. E. Joubert, F. Diefenthaeler et al., “Changes in muscle activity and
kinematics of highly trained cyclists during fatigue,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2666–2674, Nov. 2008.
V. von Tscharner, “Time-frequency and principal-component methods for
the analysis of EMGs recorded during a mildly fatiguing exercise on a
cycle ergometer,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 479–492,
Dec. 2002.
M. Talebinejad, A. D. Chan, and A. Miri, “A Lempel–Ziv complexity
measure for muscle fatigue estimation,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 236–241, Apr. 2011.
H. B. Xie, J. Y. Guo, and Y. P. Zheng, “Fuzzy approximate entropy analysis of chaotic and natural complex systems: Detecting muscle fatigue using
electromyography signals,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1483–
1496, Apr. 2010.
M. Gonzalez-Izal, A. Malanda, E. Gorostiaga, and M. Izquierdo, “Electromyographic models to assess muscle fatigue,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 501–512, Aug. 2012.
N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng, N.-C.
Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition
and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series
analysis,” Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 454, no. 1971, pp. 903–996, 1998.
M. Hassan, S. Boudaoud, J. Terrien, B. Karlsson, and C. Marque, “Combination of canonical correlation analysis and empirical mode decomposition applied to denoising the labor electrohysterogram,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2441–2447, Sep. 2011.
A. Karagiannis and P. Constantinou, “Noise-assisted data processing with
empirical mode decomposition in biomedical signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 11–18, Jan. 2011.
V. Srhoj-Egekher, M. Cifrek, and V. Medved, “The application of Hilbert–
Huang transform in the analysis of muscle fatigue during cyclic dynamic
contractions,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 659–669, Jun.
2011.
W. Zhaohua, E. Norden, and Huang, “Ensemble empirical mode decomposition: a noise-assisted data analysis method,” Adv. Adaptive Data
Anal., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 2009.
A. Rainoldi, M. Nazzaro, R. Merletti, D. Farina, I. Caruso, and S. Gaudenti,
“Geometrical factors in surface EMG of the vastus medialis and lateralis
muscles,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 327–336, Oct.
2000.
F. B. Stulen and C. J. DeLuca, “Frequency parameters of the myoelectric
signal as a measure of muscle conduction velocity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. BE-28, no. 7, pp. 515–523, Jul. 1981.

1658

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 18, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2014

[27] H. Xie and Z. Wang, “Mean frequency derived via Hilbert–Huang transform with application to fatigue EMG signal analysis,” Comput. Methods
Programs Biomed., vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 114–120, May 2006.
[28] B. Hannaford and S. Lehman, “Short time fourier analysis of the electromyogram: Fast movements and constant contraction,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BE-33, no. 12, pp. 1173–1181, Dec. 1986.
[29] S. Karlsson and B. Gerdle, “Mean frequency and signal amplitude of the
surface EMG of the quadriceps muscles increase with increasing torque—
A study using the continuous wavelet transform,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 131–140, Apr. 2001.
[30] G. Gagliati and M. Knaflitz, “Analysis of myoelectric signals recorded
during dynamic contractions,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 15, no. 6,
pp. 102–111, 1996.
[31] P. Bonato, S. H. Roy, M. Knaflitz, and C. J. De Luca, “Time-frequency
parameters of the surface myoelectric signal for assessing muscle fatigue
during cyclic dynamic contractions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48,
no. 7, pp. 745–753, Jul. 2001.
[32] R. Merletti and P. Parker, Electromyography: Physiology, Engineering,
and Noninvasive Applications. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004.

Shing-Hong Liu received the B.S. degree in
electronic engineering from Feng-Jia University,
Taizhon, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1990, the M.S. degree
in biomedical engineering from the National ChengKung University, Tainan, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1992,
and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Control Engineering, National Chiao-Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2002.
August 1994, he has been a Lecturer in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yuanpei University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, and is an Associate Professor from
2002 to 2008. Now, he is an Professor in the Department of Computer Science
and Information Engineering, Chaoyang University of Technology. His current
research interests are digital signal processing, fuzzy control and designing
biomedical instrument.

Kang-Ming Chang received the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Electrical and Control Engineering, National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2005.
He was an Assistant Professor from 2005 to 2011
in the Department of Photonics and Communication Engineering, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.
Now, he is an Associate Professor from 2011. His
current research interests include biomedical signal
processing, especially on stress reduction related issue, either by HRV and brain activity.

Da-Chuan Cheng received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Chinese Culture University,
Taiwan, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical
engineering from National Cheng Kung University,
Taiwan.
He was a post doctorat at the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Westfaelische Wilhelms University Muenster, Germany. Since 2011,
he is an Associate Professor at the Department of
Biomedical Imaging and Radiological Science of the
China Medical University, Taiwan. His research interests include medical image processing and pattern recognition.

