438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Mechanically Stimulated Contraction of Engineered
Cardiac Constructs Using a Microcantilever
Peter A. Galie, Fitzroy J. Byfield, Christopher S. Chen, J. Yasha Kresh, and Paul A. Janmey∗

Abstract—The beating heart undergoes cyclic mechanical and
electrical activity during systole and diastole. The interaction between mechanical stimulation and propagation of the depolarization wavefront is important for understanding not just normal
sinus rhythm, but also mechanically induced cardiac arrhythmia.
This study presents a new platform to study mechanoelectrical coupling in a 3-D in vitro model of the myocardium. Cardiomyocytes
and cardiac fibroblasts are seeded within extracellular matrix proteins and form constructs constrained by microfabricated tissue
gauges that provide in situ measurement of contractile function.
The microcantilever of an atomic force microscope is indented into
the construct at varying magnitudes and frequencies to cause a coordinated contraction. The results indicate that changes in indentation depth and frequency do not significantly affect the magnitude
of contraction, but increasing indentation frequency significantly
increases the contractile velocity. Overall, this study demonstrates
the validity of this platform as a means to study mechanoelectrical coupling in a 3-D setting, and to investigate the mechanism
underlying mechanically stimulated contraction.
Index Terms—Atomic force microscopy, cardiomyocyte, mechanoelectrical coupling.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE application of active mechanical stimulation like
stretch to a cardiomyocyte can cause local depolarization,
which leads to intracellular calcium release and contraction of
the cell [1]–[3]. The process of mechanoelectrical coupling in
cardiomyocytes has been extensively studied in vitro because
of its implications for induction and termination of cardiac arrhythmias [4], [5]. To explore this phenomenon in vitro, previous studies have observed the electrical depolarization of single
cells or monolayers plated on a 2-D substrate and exposed to
either an applied force [6], [7] or fluid shear stress [8]. However,
this configuration cannot mimic several aspects of the in vivo

T

Manuscript received January 2, 2014; revised July 3, 2014; accepted August
14, 2014. Date of publication September 15, 2014; date of current version
January 16, 2015. The work of P. A. Galie was supported by National Institutes
of Health under a T32 Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Training Grant. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
P. A. Galie and F. J. Byfield are with the Institute for Medicine and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail:
peter.a.galie@gmail.com; fbyfield@mail.med.upenn.edu).
C. S. Chen is with the Biomedical Engineering Department, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA (e-mail: chencs@bu.edu).
J. Y. Kresh is with the Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, Drexel University,
Philadelphia, PA 19102 USA (e-mail: JYasha.Kresh@DrexelMed.edu).
∗ P. A. Janmey is with the Institute for Medicine and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: janmey@mail.
med.upenn.edu).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, provided by the authors (File size: 19MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2357778

myocardium, not least of which is the three-dimensionality of
native tissue.
Microscale tissue gauges provide a platform to study cardiomyocytes in a 3-D environment [9]–[11]. Mixtures of cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts isolated from neonatal rat hearts
are combined with solubilized matrix and centrifuged into
800 × 400 μm wells containing two flexible posts made from
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) posts (referred to hereafter as
microTUGs). After matrix polymerization and cell-mediated
contraction, the mixtures form microscale constructs that are
suspended between the PDMS posts. The formed constructs
exhibit in vivo-like myofibrillar assembly and cell alignment.
The force exerted by the contraction of the tissues can be measured in situ by observing the deflection of the PDMS posts.
The system is a microscale adaptation of a previously described
mesoscale cardiac tissue setup [12].
Traditionally, constructs within this system are stimulated by
the application of an electric field to induce contraction. However, we have found that contraction of the constructs can also be
instigated by indentation with the microcantilever of an atomic
force microscope (AFM). AFM has been used extensively to
measure the stiffness of cells and tissues in vitro [13]–[16], in
addition to mechanically perturbing biological samples [17],
[18]. Combining the tissue gauge platform with AFM creates a
system capable of recapitulating the mechanoelectrical coupling
of cardiomyocytes in a 3-D setting. The system also has the advantage of creating multiple samples for each condition since
each substrate contains >100 wells, so that multiple tissues can
be tested in each substrate with the rate limiting step being the
use of AFM to perform the indentation. This study establishes
this platform as a means to effectively study both mechanoelectrical coupling by measuring the effect of indentation magnitude
and frequency on the response of the constructs.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
MicroTUG substrates were constructed using soft lithography. Briefly, SU-8 photoresist (MicroChem) was spun onto silicon wafers, exposed, and developed to create the geometry of
the posts within the wells. PDMS (Dow-Corning) stamps were
cast off the silicon masters, and then used to generate the PDMS
microTUGs used for the experiments. A complete description
of microTUG fabrication can be found in [9]. To generate the
constructs, 750 000 cells of the suspension isolated from the
ventricles of 2–3 day old Sprague-Daley rats were seeded in a
1 mg/mL salmon fibrin (Reagent Proteins, Pfenix, Inc.) gel supplemented with 0.25 mg/mL bovine collagen type I. Constructs
were fed daily with M199 medium supplemented with 10%
chick embryo extract and 0.1% antibiotic antimycotic solution.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GALIE et al.: MECHANICALLY STIMULATED CONTRACTION OF ENGINEERED CARDIAC CONSTRUCTS USING A MICROCANTILEVER

The solution contains 75 μM streptomycin, a known inhibitor
of stretch-activated channels. However, we found no significant
difference in construct response to 1 Hz indentation with and
without the presence of streptomycin.
At day 5, the microTUG substrates were transferred to the
AFM setup, consisting of a Bioscope AFM (Bruker) probe fitted to an inverted microscope with a heated stage. A 3.5-μm
diameter bead was fixed to the probe tip and lowered into contact with 1 mL of medium bathing the microTUG substrate, and
the stage was kept at 37 °C. Measurements were made within
one hour after removing the substrate from the incubator, since
CO2 level was not controlled. Only nonspontaneously contracting constructs were targeted for mechanical stimulation (about
10–20% of the constructs spontaneously beat at 5 days in culture). Once contact was made with the construct, the indentation depth and frequency were set and the construct contractions
were measured using a camera attached to the inverted microscope. The frame rate was set to 11 frames/s, and at least one
full contraction was required for a successful measurement. To
quantify the deflection of the microTUG posts, ImageJ was used
to measure the displacement of the post during construct beating. Contraction velocity was calculated by dividing the post
displacement during contraction by the time to peak.
After testing, the microTUG substrates were fixed in 3.7%
paraformaldehyde, permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100, and
stained with Texas Red phalloidin (1:50), DAPI (1:1000), and a
primary antibody for alpha-actinin (1:100). Data are presented
as mean ± standard deviation for n = 3 tissues, and contraction magnitude and speed values were compared using one-way
ANOVA and Tukey’s post-hoc test with statistical significance
accepted for p < 0.05.
III. RESULTS
A schematic of the testing configuration can be found in
Fig. 1(a). The cell-seeded hydrogel (pink) is suspended between the two posts (blue) within the 400 × 800 μm microTUG
substrate wells (gray), and the AFM probe (black) is lowered
to the top surface of the construct. The dimensions of the post
are shown in Fig. 1(b). The post has a 190 μm head that the
contracting fibroblasts wrap around to anchor the construct.
A bright-field image from the high-speed camera is shown in
Fig. 1(c). The AFM tip (triangular shape) is placed over the
center of the construct, which is attached to the opposing TUG
posts. Fig. 1(d) shows a construct stained for nuclei (blue),
actin (red), and alpha-actinin (green). The stain demonstrates
self-organization of the cell-seeded constructs. Alpha-actinin
concentrated in the z-disks of the sarcomeres distinguishes the
cardiomyocytes from fibroblasts (since actin is present in both
cell types). Fibroblasts are present in the outer edges of the construct, while cardiomyocytes are located primarily in the center.
Therefore, the AFM probe makes contact on or near the centerline of the construct for all measurements to assure that the tip
is not indenting an area devoid of cardiomyocytes.
Mechanical stimulation was implemented by displacing the
base on the AFM cantilever at a constant rate for a specified
distance and then immediately retracting the probe at the same

439

Fig. 1. (a) TUG schematic indicating the position of the AFM probe as it contacts the microtissue. (b) Postdimensions. (c) Bright-field image of the construct
just prior to contact with the AFM probe (scale bar = 50 μm). (d) Construct
stained with Texas Red phalloidin (red), DAPI (blue), and alpha-actinin (green).
Scale bar = 20 μm.

rate to form an indentation ramp. Each indentation cycle had a
period of 100 ms. Indentations of the sample by the bead attached to the AFM probe using a ramp size greater than 0.5 μm
were found to induce a net contraction of the construct. Assuming the construct has a resting elastic modulus of 5 kPa [19], a
0.5 μm indentation corresponds to a normal force of approximately 3.9 nN. Having discovered that indenting with the AFM
tip causes a coordinated contraction of the construct, we sought
to determine if the indentation depth and frequency affected the
resultant contraction force of the tissue. We modulated the indentation depth by setting the ramp size of the AFM tip to 1, 2,
and 3 μm. The ramp size does not exactly match the indentation
depth of the probe because the construct causes deflection of
the probe tip relative to the probe head, and actual indentation
depths were not measured due to the pacing of the AFM probe
during testing. Using the spring constant of the cantilever and
a Hertz model for contact with a substrate of elastic moduli
ranging from 1 to 5 kPa, we calculated the indentation depth
for a given ramp size (Supplementary Fig. 1) and found that at
least 80% of the ramp size translated to construct indentation.
Three AFM indentation frequencies were chosen (0.5, 1, and
2 Hz), resulting in a total of nine testing conditions. For control
experiments, nonstimulated spontaneously contracting tissues
were analyzed.
Fig. 2(a) shows the averaged peak force exerted by the constructs, calculated from measurements of the TUG post displacement and a spring constant of 0.45 μN/μm [10] for the
three indentation lengths and frequencies. The data indicate that

440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 3. (a) Averaged traces of force generated by constructs stimulated by
1 μm indentations at different frequencies and by spontaneously contracting
constructs. (∗ denotes p < 0.05 compared to constructs stimulated by 2 Hz
frequency.) (b) Time to peak, 20% relaxation, and 80% relaxation (relative to
time to peak) for the average traces plotted in (a). (∗ denotes p < 0.05 compared
to 1 and 0.5 Hz frequency, ∗∗ denotes p < 0.05 compared to AFM-stimulated
constructs.)

Fig. 2. (a) Peak force as a function of indentation ramp size of the AFM
probe. (b) Contraction speed as a function of ramp size. (∗ denotes p < 0.05).
(c) Example traces of constructs stimulated by 2, 1, and 0.5 Hz. The timing of
indentation is represented by a dotted gray line.

ramp size has no significant effect on the resultant contraction
force magnitude. The varying ramp sizes and frequencies all induced an approximately 10-μm displacement of both of the TUG
posts, corresponding to a peak force of between 4 and 5 μN.
These values are within the range of force values reported using
electrical stimulation (4–8 μN) [10]. We also measured the contractile velocity to determine if indentation depth and frequency
had any effect on the velocity at which the constructs contract.
Fig. 2(b) shows that ramp size did not significantly affect contraction velocity. However, an indentation frequency of 2 Hz
induced a significantly higher contraction velocity compared to
constructs stimulated at 0.5 Hz. Interestingly, the frequency of
the AFM-stimulated contraction events did not mirror the frequency of the indentation, but rather remained approximately
at 1 Hz. Therefore, after the initial contraction, the indentation
was not synchronous with the initiation of a contraction event.
This is evident in Fig. 2(c), which exhibits the force exerted by
tissues stimulated with three indentation frequencies.
Fig. 3(a) compares averaged force–time traces of constructs
stimulated by a 1 μm ramp size at 0.5, 1, and 2 Hz with constructs
undergoing spontaneous contractions. The traces were averaged
over several periods and at least three different tissues to create a

representative waveform of the construct contraction. The figure
illustrates that indentation frequency has a significant effect on
the contraction and relaxation dynamics. Constructs stimulated
by 2 Hz indentations display a shorter contraction period than
0.5 and 1 Hz. Interestingly, spontaneously contracting constructs
display the shortest contraction period. Although in contrast
to the indentation-driven contractions, the spontaneous beating
did not occur at a consistent frequency. The waveforms are
quantified in Fig. 3(b) by plotting the time to peak, time to
20% relaxation, and time to 80% relaxation (relative to time
to peak). The time to peak is significantly shorter in constructs
stimulated by 2 Hz indentations compared to 1 and 0.5 Hz.
The spontaneously contracting constructs exhibit significantly
different times to peak compared to all the indentation-induced
contracting constructs, suggesting a quicker depolarization.
We next determined whether sustained indentations were necessary for continuous contractions. Because the contraction frequency is steady at approximately 1 Hz, the indentations are not
necessarily in phase with the contractions after the initial stimulation. Moreover, we sought to determine whether a given ramp
size could continue to stimulate a coordinated contraction, or if
the construct would develop tolerance and require higher indentation depths over time. Fig. 4 shows an example waveform of a
tissue stimulated with 1-μm ramp sizes at a frequency of 1 Hz.
AFM indentation is started, stopped, and then restarted. The
figure shows that once the AFM stimulation is turned off (between 4 and 8 s), coordinated contractions abruptly terminate.
Supplemental Video 1 illustrates the effect of pausing AFM

GALIE et al.: MECHANICALLY STIMULATED CONTRACTION OF ENGINEERED CARDIAC CONSTRUCTS USING A MICROCANTILEVER

441

in anisotropic conditions like ectopic foci. Although the setup
used for this study was limited to frame rates of about 10 Hz,
combining a higher frame rate camera with a voltage sensitive
or calcium dye would allow for tracking of the depolarization
and repolarization wavefronts. Changes could be made to the
construct composition, stiffness, cell alignment, and other parameters to study their effect on how the depolarization wavefront propagates in response to changes in preload, afterload,
and inotropy.
Fig. 4. Force trace of a construct stimulated by 1-μm, 1 Hz indentations for
two distinct cycles. Indentations are applied between 0.5 and 3.5 s, and 8 and
10 s.

indentation. In between indentation cycles, several cells within
the construct contracted (as evidenced by the 1 μN force peaks).
However, there was no coordinated contraction during this time.
For all the constructs tested, continuous AFM stimulation was
required to sustain the contractile events. The longest period
tested was 3 min.
IV. DISCUSSION
The method described in this study provides a novel means
to elucidate the mechanoelectrical coupling of cardiomyocytes
in a 3-D environment. Previous studies have shown that both
active [6], [7] and passive [20], [21] mechanical stimulation can
modulate the contractile dynamics of cardiomyocytes. However,
previous studies were conducted on 2-D surfaces coated with
extracellular matrix proteins, which is not as representative of
the in vivo composition of the myocardium. The microTUG
system provides a platform to study cardiomyocytes in a 3-D
environment, and incorporation of AFM allows for controlled
mechanical stimulation of these constructs. Additionally, the
microTUG system allows for direct quantification of contraction
velocity and force magnitude, which are defining properties of
striated muscle.
AFM ramp sizes more than 0.5 μm were found to induce
coordinated contraction events at approximately 1 Hz, regardless of the indentation frequency (within a range from 0.5 to
2 Hz). Modulating indentation depth and frequency did not significantly affect the peak force exerted by the constructs. These
results imply that the mechanism underlying the mechanically
induced contraction is not affected by the extent of the probe indentation, once a certain threshold required for contraction has
been surpassed. The contraction velocity was also unaffected
by indentation depth, but increased significantly with indentation frequency. Therefore, even though the resultant contraction
force is unaffected by ramp size or frequency, the time to peak
of the contraction can be controlled by the frequency of the
microcantilever.
Beyond providing a platform for exploring mechanoelectrical
coupling of cardiomyocytes in 3-D, the capability for mechanical point stimulation has additional benefits. Current stimulation techniques for microTUGs involve globally applied electric
[9], [10] or magnetic [11] fields. Point stimulation provides the
means to track the propagation of depolarization wavefronts

V. CONCLUSION
This study demonstrates the ability of AFM indentations to
stimulate coordinated contractions of in vitro cardiac microtissues. Further research is required to determine the mechanism
underlying this effect. Importantly, the system provides a means
to investigate clinically relevant conditions such as the induction
and termination of ventricular arrhythmias by acute mechanical
stimulation, precordial impact, and mechanical pacing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
P. A. Galie thanks R. Alvarez and A. Mu for their assistance
in isolating the cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts.
REFERENCES
[1] M. R. Franz, R. Cima, D. Wang, D. Profitt, and R. Kurz, “Electrophysiological effects of myocardial stretch and mechanical determinants of
stretch-activated arrhythmias,” Circulation, vol. 86, pp. 968–978, 1992.
[2] G. P. Stacy, R. L. Jobe, L .K. Taylor, and D. E. Hansen, “Stretch-induced
depolarization’s as a trigger of arrhythmias in isolated canine left ventricles,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 263, pp. H613–H621, 1992.
[3] P. Tavi, M. Laine, and M. Weckstrom, “Effect of gadolinium on stretchinduced changes in contraction and intracellularly recorded action- and
afterpotentials of rat isolated atrium,” Brit. J. Physiol., vol. 118, no. 2,
pp. 407–413, 1996.
[4] P. Kohl, A. D. Nesbitt, P. J. Cooper, and M. Lei, “Sudden cardiac death
by commotio cordis: Role of mechano-electric feedback,” Cardiovascular
Res., vol. 50, pp. 280–289, 2001.
[5] D. Y. Kim, E. White, and D. A. Saint, “Increased mechanically-induced
ectopy in the hypertrophied heart,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 110,
no. 2/3, pp. 331–339, 2012.
[6] A. Kamkin, I. Kiseleva, K. D. Wagner, and H. Scholz, “Mechano-electric
feedback in the heart: Evidence from intracellular microelectrode recordings on multicellular preparations and single cells from healthy and diseased tissue,” in Mechanosensitivity in Cells and Tissues, A. Kamkin and
I. Kiseleva, Eds. Moscow, Russia: Academia, 2005.
[7] H. H. Vandenburgh, R. Solerssi, J. Shansky, J. W. Adams, S. A. Henderson,
and J. Lemaire, “Response of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes to repetitive
mechanical stimulation in vitro,” Ann. New York Acad. Sci., vol. 752, pp.
19–29, 1995.
[8] C. R. Kong, N. Bursac, and L. Tung, “Mechanoelectrical excitation by
fluid jets in monolayers of cultured cardiac myocytes,” J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 98, no. 6, pp. 2328–2336, 2005.
[9] W. R. Legant, A. Pathak, M. T. Yang, V. S. Deshpande, R. M. McMeeking,
and C. S. Chen, “Microfabricated tissue gauges to measure and manipulate
forces from 3D microtissues,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 106, no. 25,
pp. 10097–10102, 2009.
[10] T. Boudou, W. R. Legant, A. Mu et al., “A microfabricated platform to
measure and manipulate the mechanics of engineered cardiac microtissues,” Tissue Eng. Part A, vol. 18, no. 9/10, pp. 910–919, 2011.
[11] R. Zhao, T. Boudou, W. G. Wang, C. S. Chen, and D. H. Reich, “Decoupling cell and matrix mechanics in engineered microtissues using magnetically actuated microcantilevers,” Adv. Mater., vol. 25, pp. 1699–1705,
2013.
[12] E. J. Lee et al., “Engineered cardiac tissues for in vitro assessment of
contractile function and repair mechanisms,” in Proc. 28th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 849–852.

442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

[13] M. Radmacher, “Measuring the elastic properties of biological samples
with the AFM,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 47–57,
Mar./Apr. 1997.
[14] E. U. Azeloglu and K. D. Costa, “Dynamic AFM elastography reveals
phase dependent mechanical heterogeneity of beating cardiac myocytes,”
in Proc. 31st Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 7180–
7183.
[15] J. Solon, I. Levental, K. Sengupta, P. C. Georges, and P. A. Janmey,
“Fibroblast adaptation and stiffness matching to soft elastic substrates,”
Biophys. J., vol. 93, no. 12, pp. 4453–4461, 2007.
[16] K. D. Costa, “Imaging and probing cell mechanical properties with the
atomic force microscope,” Methods Mol. Biol., vol. 319, pp. 331–361,
2006.
[17] M. G. Langer, A. Koitschev, H. Haase, U. Rexhausen, J. K. H. Hörber,
and J. P. Ruppersberg, “Mechanical stimulation of individual stereocilia of
living cochlear hair cells by atomic force microscopy,” Ultramicroscopy,
vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 269–278, 2000.
[18] G. T. Charras, P. P. Lehenkari, and M. A. Horton, “Atomic force microscopy can be used to mechanically stimulate osteoblasts and evaluate
cellular strain distributions,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 85–95,
2001.

[19] H. Wang, A. A. Svoronos, T. Boudou, M. S. Sakar, J. Y. Schell, J. R.
Morgan, C. S. Chen, and V. B. Shenoy, “Necking and failure of constrained 3D microtissues induced by cellular tension,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci., vol. 110, no. 52, pp. 20932–20928, 2013.
[20] P. A. Galie, N. Khalid, K. E. Carnahan, M. V. Westfall, and J. P. Stegemann,
“Substrate stiffness affects sarcomere and costamere structure and electrophysiological function of isolated adult cardiomyocytes,” Cardiovascular
Pathol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 219–227, 2012.
[21] A. Chopra, M. E. Murray, F. J. Byfield, M. G. Mendez et al., “Augmentation of integrin-mediated mechanotransduction by hyaluronic acid,”
Biomaterials, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 71–82, 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

