1514

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Red Blood Cell Cluster Separation From Digital
Images for Use in Sickle Cell Disease
Manuel González-Hidalgo, F. A. Guerrero-Peña, S. Herold-Garcı́a, Antoni Jaume-i-Capó,
and P. D. Marrero-Fernández

Abstract—The study of cell morphology is an important aspect
of the diagnosis of some diseases, such as sickle cell disease, because
red blood cell deformation is caused by these diseases. Due to the
elongated shape of the erythrocyte, ellipse adjustment and concave
point detection are applied widely to images of peripheral blood
samples, including during the detection of cells that are partially
occluded in the clusters generated by the sample preparation process. In the present study, we propose a method for the analysis
of the shape of erythrocytes in peripheral blood smear samples of
sickle cell disease, which uses ellipse adjustments and a new algorithm for detecting notable points. Furthermore, we apply a set of
constraints that allow the elimination of significant image preprocessing steps proposed in previous studies. We used three types of
images to validate our method: artificial images, which were automatically generated in a random manner using a computer code;
real images from peripheral blood smear sample images that contained normal and elongated erythrocytes; and synthetic images
generated from real isolated cells. Using the proposed method, the
efficiency of detecting the two types of objects in the three image
types exceeded 99.00%, 98.00%, and 99.35%, respectively. These
efficiency levels were superior to the results obtained with previously proposed methods using the same database, which is available
at http://erythrocytesidb.uib.es/. This method can be extended to
clusters of several cells and it requires no user inputs.
Index Terms—Blood cell morphology counting, cell cluster separation, concave point detection, ellipse fitting, overlapped cell
splitting.

I. INTRODUCTION
ELL morphology is a crucial aspect of many biological
processes, and it has direct implications for human health.
In particular, analyzing this characteristic of blood cells can help
to provide important information that facilitates the diagnosis
of some diseases or pathologies, such as drepanocytic (or sickle
cell) anemia, a hemolytic anemia transmitted via autosomal recessive inheritance and variable, habitually serious, intensity.

C

Manuscript received March 20, 2014; revised July 9, 2014 and August 12,
2014; accepted September 2, 2014. Date of publication September 8, 2014;
date of current version July 23, 2015. This work was supported in part by the
Projects MAEC-AECID A2/037538/11, 28/2011 (Balearic Island competitive
groups funds) granted by the Government of the Baleric Islands and TIN1235427 with feder support.
M. González-Hidalgo and A. Jaume-i-Capó are with the Computer Graphics,
Vision and Artificial Intelligence Group, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of the Balearic Islands, 07122 Palma de Mallorca,
Spain (e-mail: manuel.gonzalez@uib.es; antoni.jaume@uib.es).
F. A. Guerrero-Peña, S. Herold-Garcı́a, and P. D. Marrero-Fernández are
with the Department of Matematicas, Universidad de Oriente, Santiago de
Cuba 90500, Cuba (e-mail: fguerrero@csd.uo.edu.cu; silena@csd.uo.edu.cu;
pedro@csd.uo.edu.cu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2356402

This disease deforms red blood cells, erythrocytes, by affecting the hemoglobin polymerization process of deoxygenated
molecules with hemoglobin S (dHbS). The dHbS polymers and
the erythrocyte membrane distort the cell to form a drepanocyte,
the shape of which varies according to the mechanism of
polymerization.
A method for evaluating the clinical state of a patient involves
counting the different types of erythrocytes based on their variable morphology: normal (discocytes), sickle (drepanocytes), or
other deformations. This type of quantitative assessment entails
several problems, such as the variability of the criteria used between specialists and the difficulty of establishing an evaluation
standard. Automated kits (red blood cell counters) are available
but many laboratories perform these studies manually based on
microscopic observations, which is a difficult and error-prone
process that requires specialized staff and considerable periods
of time.
In previous studies, digital images were analyzed quantitatively to study and classify erythrocytes, especially drepanocytes
[1]–[4], based on several characteristics, including the area,
hemoglobin content (integrated optical density), central pallor, circularity, elongation, ellipticity, specularity, and form factor. In these studies, the samples were prepared by placing a
fixed volume of blood on a thin plate, which was then covered with a cover glass. These studies demonstrated that this
method is relatively rapid and reproducible for several patients,
as well as being superior to human inspections to determine cell
classifications.
Additional studies of peripheral blood smear samples have
been conducted. In this type of study, blood samples were collected, laid on a plate, and spread by dragging another plate
across the sample at 45◦ , before chemical stains were applied
to the sample. This technique has been used to study malaria
[5], [6], leukocytes (using deformable models) [7], [8], and erythrocytes via the development of a very time-efficient method
[9], [10], but no morphological studies were conducted. Erythrocytes were studied [11] using three shape descriptors and
images that were previously binarized by obtaining contours
from previously established templates. In other studies, all of
the cells in the blood were differentially counted [12].
Peripheral blood smear samples that are analyzed by microscopy always include overlapped or clustered cells, and the
sample preparation process can affect the quantity of overlapping erythrocytes in the images studied. Clinical laboratories
typically prepare blood samples for microscopy analysis using
the dragging technique. Using this technique, more cell groups
are apparent in the samples due to the spreading process. In the

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GONZÁLEZ-HIDALGO et al.: RED BLOOD CELL CLUSTER SEPARATION FROM DIGITAL IMAGES FOR USE IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE

studies mentioned above, the experiments did not consider cells
that were occluded or overlapped during sample preparation
because adequately determining the cell types in an automated
manner is quite difficult when considering only part of the cell
contour (the entire cell contour is not visible). However, knowing the precise number of each type of cell, including those
in cell clusters, is preferable for the automated morphological
classification of erythrocytes in a blood sample.
The cell clusters in peripheral blood smear samples have been
analyzed in previous studies and several techniques have been
developed to analyze normal or circular erythrocytes. For example, Qi et al.[13], [14] proposed a two-step algorithm. In
the first step, the initial points were detected in the regions of
cells based on the gradient of the image and its magnitude by
applying a single road voting algorithm, followed by clustering based on the average displacement (mean-shift clustering).
The detected were initialized an interactive algorithm, which
was based on level sets, and the algorithm detected the contours
of every cell. The authors tested images of normal blood. To
detect cells, Nguyen et al. [15] proposed that the central point
of every cell should be determined from a new image, where
this image was obtained using a transformation based on the
Euclidean distance. Points in the mid-range distance were considered to be part of the cell and this distance was determined
from cells that were not hidden. Cells in clusters were detected
based on their circular shape, but the method could not be applied to deformed cells. Huang [16] used an algorithm based on
mathematical morphology, based on processing openings and
closings, which was followed by a watershed segmentation algorithm that could separate clusters of normal erythrocytes represented using four-connectivity and eight-connectivity. However, this method did not consider cell deformations. Sharif et al.
[17] obtained a complete differential count using a color conversion and a watershed transform to segment the nucleus of the
leukocytes, where morphological operations eliminated small
elements, such as platelets, and another watershed transformation separated the occluded cells. However, the results were
not good when the overlapped area was large and this method
could not be applied to deformed cells. Dı́az et al. [18] proposed
an original method for the quantification and classification of
erythrocytes in stained thin films of blood infected with Plasmodium falciparum. This method comprised three main phases
with a two-step classification process, which identified infected
erythrocytes and differentiated the infection stage. Berge et al.
[19] counted erythrocytes infected by malaria using morphological operations and iterative thresholding. This procedure was
followed by Delaunay’s calculation of the curvature and triangulation to separate the touching cells, thereby verifying the
restrictions between the lane markings obtained.
Song and Wang [20] proposed the segmentation of red blood
cell clusters by detecting concave points in the contour, which
indicated the overlapping areas of objects. This process verified
the restrictions on the lane markings obtained, which did not
always guarantee suitable segmentation in the presence of the
association types determined. Images were preprocessed using
mathematical morphology and thresholding techniques, where
mathematical morphology formed the basis of the concave point

1515

detection method. For each identified potential cluster object,
a skeleton [21] was calculated, and the minimum distance between every point in the contour and the skeleton was obtained.
Using the complete distance histogram, the valleys and minimal
points were selected, which represented the points of interest,
where the division lines were drawn. When two points were
considered to be a valid division line during a repetition, these
points were eliminated from the remaining points to be analyzed; thus, subsequent divisions using these two points that
could be valid were not considered. This method had two drawbacks: the rejection of valid lines and the acceptance of incorrect
lines. The efficiency of this method was 87.00% for normal cell
clusters, but it was not appropriate for cell shape deformations,
which could be elongated, because the shortest distance from
the boundary to the skeleton could not correspond to a concave
point on the edge in the case of elongated or elliptical objects;
see Fig. 6(a) for an example.
Most of these techniques are not applicable to relatively elliptically shaped cells. For these cells, the concave points are usually detected and elliptical adjustments are applied using these
concave points to analyze erythrocytes. Kothari et al. [22] proposed a semiautomatic method for segmenting cells that touch or
overlap. This method required user interaction to determine the
starting points before executing the k-means algorithm to identify the borders of the cells. An efficient algorithm was applied
to these borders to detect the concave points used to identify the
valid division lines and ellipses, which were then employed to
detect the hidden cells. Similar to a previous study [20], in the
proposed iterative process, the previously employed points were
not used with the remaining points to generate or check new division lines. Therefore, this method shared the same disadvantage,
while it also required a large amount of image preprocessing.
This method could not be applied to peripheral blood samples
images, but it was used in studies of biological samples images
from four different types of cancer. The efficiency of this method
was 86.72%, whereas that of the others ranged between 91.00%
and 95.02%. Bai et al. [23] and Zhang et al. [24] used a similar
method for detecting overlapped cells and sprouts in the nuclei
of cells, respectively, without much elongation, but they were
not suitable for analyzing digital images in sickle cell disease
because the cells can be very elongated in this case.
In this study, we propose an automatic method for determining the cell types inside a cellular cluster in peripheral blood
smear samples by using a new method to efficiently detect concave points. Our method uses ellipse matching to detect circular
and elliptical objects in cellular clusters of normal and elongated erythrocytes. Constraints are proposed to guarantee the
efficient detection of normal and elongated cells inside clusters. To compare the new constraints proposed in this study
with previously proposed methods [20] and [22], we performed
experiments using circular and ellipse adjustment with real images of peripheral blood smear sample images that contained
two and three overlapping erythrocytes, as well as using artificial and synthetic images of two or three overlapped circular
and elongated objects. The details of these types of images are
provided in Section III-A. In contrast to previous methods, the
concave points that generate a valid separation are not removed

1516

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 1. Examples of clusters of overlapped cells: (a) and (d) artificial images of
cluster; (b) and (e) clusters in real images; (c) and (f) contours of the real clusters;
(b) and (e) obtained using the level set method with automatic initialization.

in subsequent iterations of our proposed method; therefore, all
possible combinations are permitted in each iteration to facilitate
an adequate level of segmentation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we describe the proposed method for the efficient
detection of objects in clusters. In Section III, the experimental environment is specified and we describe the database used
in the results and discussion section. This section provides a
discussion of the results obtained after applying the proposed
method to synthetic and real images of clusters of objects. Finally, we give our conclusions.
II. METHOD FOR THE EFFICIENT DETECTION
OF OBJECTS IN CLUSTERS
In this section, we describe the proposed method and explain
its advantages compared with previous approaches.
As noted in Section I, the aim of our method is to detect the
shape of erythrocytes in digital images of peripheral blood smear
samples of sickle cell disease. Thus, the first step is to detect the
cells and clusters of overlapping cells that appear in digital images of peripheral blood samples, where a segmentation method
is applied. A good review of segmentation methods in medical
and biological image analysis can be found in [25]. The borders
of the analyzed objects are obtained using level sets [26] using
an efficient automatic initialization method [27] based on the
grayscale intensities in the image. This segmentation method
can handle the noise in the image and effectively detect contours without prior processing. These methods also eliminate
the internal holes that can be detected due to the composition
of the erythrocytes. These holes are more frequent at the center
in normal erythrocytes. Fig. 1 shows examples of clusters of
overlapping cells in several types of images. In the real images,
the cluster contour obtained using the level sets method with
automatic initialization is also shown. After the cluster contours
have been obtained, the algorithms used for concave point detection and for detecting objects in each cluster are applied. If
the study uses overlapping circular objects, we propose the use
of a circumference adjustment algorithm. However, if the study

Fig. 2.

Summary of the overall method.

uses overlapping objects that are generally elliptical in shape,
which is the case in our study, we propose the use of an ellipse
adjustment algorithm. Fig. 2 shows the overall process used for
classifying the cells that appear in a digital image of sickle cell
disease.
A. Detection of Points of Interest
This method is based on the previously proposed concept of
k-curvature [28] for determining points of interest. We propose
a new method for determining these points of interest by considering the changes in curvature, both vertically and horizontally,
in the contour that represents the cluster. For the k-curvature
calculation, (1) and (2) define the k-slope in both directions and
they consider the slope of the vertical direction my as the inverse
of the slope mx . Equations (3) and (4) define the k-curvatures
in each direction [see Fig. 3(a) and (b)]
mx (i, k) =

yi − yi + k
xi − xi + k

(1)

my (i, k) =

xi − xi + k
1
=
mx (i, k)
yi − yi + k

(2)

cx (i, k) = mx (i, k) − mx (i − k, k)

(3)

cy (i, k) = my (i, k) − my (i − k, k)

(4)

where for a contour of length n, xi , and yi are the coordinates
of the point i, i ∈ [1, n], and k is the analyzed k-neighbor of i
for the k-curvature.
The new method calculates the product of the absolute values
of the k-curvature in the horizontal and vertical directions (see
Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively)
c(i, k) = |cx (i, k)| · |cy (i, k)|.

(5)

The resulting signal reaches the highest values in the zones,
where the curvature is also high in the x- and y-directions and
the values tend to decrease in the remaining zones. The resulting
signal is shown in Fig. 3(c).
A threshold (sT) is established for filtering the new signal, which conveniently softens the curve and eliminates false

GONZÁLEZ-HIDALGO et al.: RED BLOOD CELL CLUSTER SEPARATION FROM DIGITAL IMAGES FOR USE IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE

1517

Fig. 5. Detecting points of interest using the proposed algorithm: concave (•)
and convex (◦). (a) In a generated object. (b) In a cluster with an ellipse and a
circle.

Fig. 3. Examples of k-curvature graphs as functions of the contour length.
(a) x k-curvature graph, (b) y k-curvature graph, (c) k-curvature product, and
(d) k-curvature product binarization.

Fig. 6. (a) Points of interest detected using the algorithm given in [20].
(b) Points of interest detected using the proposed method.

Fig. 4.

Point differentiation: (a) Convex. (b) Concave.

concave points that correspond to contour noise concavities. All
of the values that exceed the threshold are fixed to 1, which generates small point sequences that correspond to the contour and
that have k-curvature values over the threshold [see Fig. 3(d)],
where the middle point of these small point sequences is taken
as a point of interest.
To determine whether the point is concave or convex, their
neighbors in the k positions to the right and left are taken and the
middle of the line formed between the neighbors is considered.
If this midpoint is interior to the region, the point of interest
represents a convexity, but otherwise it represents a concavity
(see Fig. 4).
This method facilitates the efficient detection of concave
points in the contour and it almost completely avoids the points
that correspond to contour noise concavities, or details of the
contour (see Fig. 5). As shown in Fig. 5, this method allows
the concave points of interest to be obtained in an efficient manner, which affects the subsequent performance of the algorithms

used to detect objects in a cluster. Excessive numbers of concave points lead to incorrect object recognition in the methods
proposed later.
The algorithm proposed in this study for detecting points
of interest performs better than the previously proposed method
[20] because our method can determine appropriate points of interest for elongated objects, which contrasts with [20] in the case
of elongated objects because the concave points are obtained by
considering the minimum distance to the skeleton, where the
previous method may determine points on the contour that are
not really concave. In Fig. 6(a), the points of interest A, B,
C, and D are determined as concave points using the method
proposed in [20]. Fig. 6(b) shows the concave points, E and F ,
obtained using our proposed method.
B. Circumference Adjustment
To determine the quantity of cells in the cluster, the previous
method [20] drew division lines but this is not the best description of the circular shape of the objects. In the present study, we
propose the use of circumference adjustment for detection when
analyzing circular objects. During this adjustment, after the concave points are detected, the arches are taken between the pairs
of concave adjacent points and the circumference is found with
the best fit to this arch. Moreover, in contrast to the methods proposed by [20] and [22], we do not exclude the examined adjacent

1518

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

points of the contour between the two concave points. The least
squares adjustment requires a parametric model that relates the
data obtained to the data predictors using one or more coefficients. The result of the adjustment process is an estimate of the
coefficients of the model. Given certain points, the method tries
to fit the best ellipse using the general equation of the ellipse,
which has the following expression:
ax2 + bxy + cy 2 + dx + ey + f = 0

(6)

where ac > 0. A system of equations with five unknown variables is given
Fig. 7. (a) Objects where the radius is detected correctly and (b) object with
an incorrectly detected radius. The first constraint avoids the situation shown
in (b).

S=

n


((ax2i + bxi yi + cyi2 + dxi + eyi ) + f )2

(7)

i=1

for which the matrix representation is
S = (XA + F )t (XA + F )

(8)

where A is the parameter vector, F is a constant vector, which
elements are all equal to f , and X is a matrix that depends on
the set of segmentation points {(xi , yi )}ni=1 .
From (8), we have
Fig. 8.

S = At X t XA + 2F t XA + N f 2

Second constraint: two circles related to the same object.

concave points from further processing. Therefore, all possible
combinations are analyzed to detect valid existing objects.
Constraints are applied to analyze the cases, where several
of the circumferences obtained have a smaller or larger radius
than the average object radius [because this is possible if the
arch between a pair of adjacent concave points is too small, as
shown in Fig. 7(b)] or for the same object in Fig. 8. Let CO be a
circumference and O its center. The constraints are as follows.
1) radius(CO ) ≤ τc1 and radius(CO ) ≥ τc2 : This restriction
guarantees that the circumference obtained approaches
the average object-to-segment ratio.
2) disti = j (Oi , Oj ) < τc3 , where Ok is the center of circumference k, and τc3 is a threshold that controls the minimum distance between two circumference centers, which
considers that the two circumferences may correspond to
the same object. This constraint guarantees that the same
object is not counted more than once given that two circumferences refer to the same object if their centers are at
a distance less than a threshold.
The number of circular objects in the cluster will correspond
to the number of valid recognized circumferences.
C. Ellipse Adjustment
The circumferences adjustment method is not suitable for
clusters that include elongated or elliptical objects. Thus, we
propose the use of ellipses to detect objects with circular or
elongated shapes in a cluster, as well as new constraints for
determining the valid objects. The ellipse that corresponds to
the adjacent concave points being analyzed is obtained by performing a least squares adjustment of the arc formed by the n

(9)

where N is an n × n matrix of ones.
Because the least squares adjustment minimizes the sum of
the squares of the remainders, the coefficients are determined by
the derivative of S with respect to each parameter and by setting
the result equal to zero. For the matrix, the parameters vector is A
∂S
= 2X t XA + 2F t X = 0.
∂A
After the ellipse has been fitted and the parameters of (7)
are obtained, we must determine the canonical ellipse equation, a1 x2 + c1 y 2 + d1 x + e1 y + f1 = 0, and straightforward
calculations permit us to compute the minor axis α1 , the major
axis α2 , and the center (x0 , y0 ) of ellipse using the equations
 
 
 f1 
 f1 
d1
e1
α1 =  , α2 =  , x0 = −
, y0 = −
a1
c1
2a1
2c1
where
a1 = a(cos Φ)2 − bcos Φsin Φ + c (sin Φ)2
c1 = a(sin Φ)2 + bcos Φsin Φ + c (cos Φ)2
d1 = dcos Φ − esin Φ, e1 = dsin Φ + ecos Φ


b
(d1 )2
(e1 )2
1
f1 = 1 +
+
, Φ = arctan
.
4a1
4c1
2
c−a
The validity of the ellipse is demonstrated because this ellipse
has been adjusted relative to the concave points. The criteria
include the relationship between the areas of the tight-fitting
object and the ellipse detected, as well as the percentage of object
occlusion. The following criteria are checked when analyzing
a cluster S and the ellipse E found for an arc between two
adjacent concave points i and i + 1.

GONZÁLEZ-HIDALGO et al.: RED BLOOD CELL CLUSTER SEPARATION FROM DIGITAL IMAGES FOR USE IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE

Fig. 9.

1519

Area relationship: (a) Good adjustment. (b) Bad adjustment.
Fig. 11. Adding concave points to the adjustment: (a) Bad adjustment for one
pair. (b) A new pair is added, and a valid ellipse is found.

TABLE I
PARAMETER VALUES

Fig. 10. Rejecting ellipses: (a) Interior ellipse. (b) Several ellipses related to
the same object.

(D i )
1) area
area(E i ) > τe1 , where Di = S ∩ Ei and τe1 is a threshold
that controls the relationship between the areas of the
tight-fitting object and the detected ellipse. This criterion
guarantees that most of the interior area of the detected
ellipse is within the occlusion, thereby eliminating ellipses
present in the exterior zone (see Fig. 9).
area(E i ) > τ , where S is the cluster of all the el2) area
e2
Ek
(S E k )
lipses that differ from i, i.e., SE k = {∪nk=1 Ek |k = i},
where n is equal to the number of ellipses detected and
τe2 is a threshold that controls the percentage of occlusion
of objects. This criterion guarantees the exclusion of ellipses inside the cluster and it ensures that only one ellipse
is selected from several that are found for the same object
(see Fig. 10).
If the arc between the pairs of concave adjacent points i and
i + 1 does not provide sufficient information to adjust the ellipses or if the adjustment is incorrect (i.e., it does not meet
the criteria described above), another arc is added that is circumscribed by the pairs of concave adjacent points j and j + 1,
where j = i, j = i + 1, and j + 1 = i. This information is used
to perform another adjustment and for subsequent validation of
the new ellipse (see Fig. 11).
The elliptical coefficient (ESF) proposed in a previous study
[4] can be used to determine the quantity of each type of object
(elongated and normal) in the cluster. The ESF is a measure
that expresses the elongation of an object. The ESF considers
the relationship between the major and minor abscissae of the
object to determine the elongation. Thus, if ESF = 1.0, the object is circular. In the experiments, objects where ESF ≤ 0.6
are considered to be elliptic or elongated deformed, and objects
where ESF > 0.6 are considered circular or discoidal normal
(the characteristic circular shape of erythrocytes).

k

sT

τc 1

τc 2

τc 3

τe 1

τe 2

ESF

17

0.14

64.00

120.00

60.00

0.90

0.15

0.60

The symbols used in this table are defined as follows: k , quantity of points considered
when obtaining the k-curvature; sT , threshold for filtering the new signal obtained
when applying the proposed k-curvature method; τ c 1 , τ c 2 , thresholds used to control
the radius of the valid circumferences; τ c 3 , threshold used to control the distance
between two circumference centers; τ e 1 , threshold used to control the relationship
between the areas of the tight-fitting object and the detected ellipse; τ e 2 , threshold
used to control the percentage of occlusion of the object; ESF, value used to consider
an object as circular or elongated.

D. Analysis of the Parameters
The proposed method requires that the values of some parameters are determined. The thresholds for τc1 , τc2 , τc3 (parameters for circumference adjustment), τe1 , τe2 (parameters
for ellipses adjustment), and ESF (elliptical coefficient) were
determined experimentally. The determination of the value for
the pair (k, sT ) is described below. Table I shows the values
fixed for these parameters. The values for τc1 , τc2 , and τc3 are
measures in points (pixels), k is a measure in contour points,
sT in radians, and τe1 , τe2 , and ESF are dimensionless quantities. The experimental determination of these values used 20
of the 66 real images available (see Section III-A for a detailed
description of the database we used). These 20 images were
selected randomly and they were not used in the subsequent
experiments to validate the proposed methods, as described in
Sections III-B and IV.
The goal was to select the value of (k, sT ) to obtain the best
results in terms of the recognition of concave points in this type
of image. Because k and sT are correlated these values were
studied in the 20 images, where we selected the pairs for which
the correct number of concave points were obtained. For the
real images shown in Fig. 12(a), Fig. 12(b) shows the number of concave points obtained for each pair (k, sT ), where
0 < k < lengthcontour /2 and 0 < sT < π. Each color represents the number of concave points obtained. Fig. 12(c) shows
all the combinations of k and sT in black, which allowed us to
obtain the correct amount of points of interest in all the images
used. We selected the lowest values for k and sT (k = 17 and
sT = 0.14) to detect the most concave points in the remaining
images processed.

1520

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 13. Examples of artificial images: Two- and three-object clusters with
circular and elongated objects.

Fig. 12. Determination of the parameters values for the points of interest
detected. (a) Example showing the overlapping of two and three cells used
in the determinations. (b) The number of points of interest obtained for each
pair (k, sT ), where 0 < k < lengthc o nto u r /2 and 0 < sT < π. Each color
represents the number of points of interest obtained. (c) Black denotes the
intersections of all the combinations of k and sT , which allowed us to obtain the
correct amount of points of interest for all the images used for the determination.

Fig. 14. Examples of real images: Two- and three-cell clusters (circular and
elongated).

III. EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT
The proposed methods were validated based on five experiments using artificial, synthetic, and real images.
The methods proposed in [20], [22], and [28] were implemented, as well as the proposed method, which were applied to
the same images database to facilitate the statistical validation
of the performance of all of the methods.
A. Images
We used three types of images to validate our method: artificial images generated automatically by a computer code; real
images obtained from ten patients with uncritical sickle cell disease; and synthetic images generated from the contours of real
isolated cells.
1) Artificial Images: We randomly generated two- and threeobject clusters where the circumferences and ellipses followed
a uniform distribution for these parameters: minimum and maximum axes of the ellipses, distance between the center and the
objects, and the orientation angle. Fig. 13 shows some examples
of artificial images with two- and three-object clusters.
To validate the circular adjustment method, we randomly
generated 4000 artificial images: 2000 clusters of two circular
objects (4000 objects) and 2000 clusters of three circular objects (6000 objects), i.e., a total of 10 000 processed objects. In
addition, in order to validate the ellipse adjustment method, we
randomly generated 4000 artificial images of two-object clusters and 4000 artificial images of three-object clusters. Among
the two-object clusters, 1975 were circular objects and 2025

were elongated objects. Among the three-object clusters, 2991
were circular objects and 3009 elliptical objects.
2) Real Images: Specialists in hematology from the “Dr.
Juan Bruno Zayas” General Hospital in Santiago de Cuba prepared real images from peripheral blood smear samples. They
provided us with smear images of 45 peripheral blood samples
of ten patients with uncritical sickle cell disease. They obtained
66 images (500 × 375 pixels, 480 dpi) using a Leica microscope
(100×) and a Kodak EasyShare V803 camera (Kodak Retinar
Aspheric All Glass Lens de 36–108 mm AF 3× optical). We
used 30% of the images for parameter estimation and the remainder for experimentation. The specialists also provided us
with the clusters and the cell classification ground truth, which
are available at http://erythrocytesidb.uib.es/. Fig. 14 shows the
two- and three-cell clusters in the real images (circular and elongated) and the contours obtained using the level set segmentation
method with an automatic segmentation.
To validate the circular adjustment method, we used 41 clusters of circular cells in the images (30 clusters with two cells
and 11 with three cells), where 93 objects in total were used
in the process. To validate the ellipse adjustment method, we
used 34 cluster of two cells and 12 clusters of three cells. There
were 97 normal cells and seven elongated cells among a total of
104 cells.
3) Synthetic Images: Only seven elongated cells were
present in the two- and three-cell clusters analyzed in the real
images; thus, we generated synthetic images from the contours
of real isolated cells (normal and elongated). We generated

GONZÁLEZ-HIDALGO et al.: RED BLOOD CELL CLUSTER SEPARATION FROM DIGITAL IMAGES FOR USE IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE

1521

TABLE II
THREE-OBJECT CLUSTER DETECTION USING OUR METHOD AND THE
METHODS OF [20] AND [28]

Total
Detected
Efficiency (%)

[20]

[28]

Our method

6000
4278
71.30

6000
5350
89.17

6000
6000
100.00

Fig. 15. Example of synthetic images: (a) Original isolated cells. (b) Synthetic
two-cell cluster.

200 two-cell clusters and 200 three-cell clusters (616 were normal cells and 384 were elongated cells). Fig. 15 shows an example of the synthetic clusters obtained from the contours of real
objects.
B. Experiments
To validate the proposed method, we performed five experiments with artificial, synthetic, and real images.
1) Experiment 1: We computed the efficiency of circular
adjustment using the concave point detection method proposed in this study, as well as those in [20] and [28]. The
objective was to compare the three methods using twoand three- object clusters of artificial images to demonstrate the superior performance of our method for concave
point detection.
2) Experiment 2: We computed the efficiency of our ellipse
adjustment method using two- and three-object clusters in
artificial images. The objective was to test the validity of
our methods with circular and elongated objects.
3) Experiment 3: We compared the efficiency of our ellipse
adjustment method with [20], [22] using two- and threecircular cell clusters in real images. The goal of the experiment was to demonstrate that [22] and our method,
both of them using ellipse adjustment, were also superior
over two- and three-circular cell clusters than the specific
method [20].
4) Experiment 4: We compared the efficiency of our ellipse
adjustment method with [22] using two- and three-object
clusters in real images (circular and elongated).
5) Experiment 5: The objective was to statistically validate
the efficiency of the discrimination between circular and
elongated cells using two- and three-object clusters in
synthetic images to analyze the results of the clinical
diagnosis.
The results obtained from these experiments are described in
detail in the next section.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experiment 1
All methods obtained 100% efficiency using the artificial
images with two-object clusters. Table II shows the efficiency
levels using artificial images with three-object clusters.
Using the method of Song and Wang [20], some points
were not detected correctly because they computed the concave
points based on the distances to the skeleton. The efficiency was

Fig. 16. Examples of object detection. Object detected with a black contour
and its center in yellow. (a) Incorrect circular adjustment due to the incorrect
detection of a concave point [20]. (b) Incorrect circular adjustment because A
and B are false positives [28]. (c) Our method: correct detection.

71.30%, and Fig. 16(a) shows that the circular adjustment was
incorrect in one case due to the incorrect detection of a concave
point.
Using the method of Agam and Dinstein [28], the concave
point detection method generated false positives that resulted
in invalid circumference adjustments (the constraints rejected
some false positives). The efficiency was 89.16% and Fig. 16(b)
shows that the incorrect circular adjustments due to A and B are
false positives.
Our method obtained the best circular adjustment performance using artificial images due to the concave point detection
method. The efficiency was 100%. Compared with the previous
two methods that analyzed all possible pairs of adjacent points
of interest and discarded each pair of points accepted as a valid
division line (the analysis was repeated using only the remaining
points), our method did not discard previously analyzed concave
points, thus it did not eliminate possible valid cases.
Fig. 17 shows an example of the points of interest computed based on the k-curvature using [28] and our method.
Fig. 17(a) shows the detected points of interest for circular
cells and Fig. 17(c) for the elongated cells using the method
of [28]. The results show that an excessive number of points
were detected because the method analyzes the changes in curvature in only one axis, thereby resulting in false local maxima
in the k-curvature. Fig. 17(b) and (d) shows the points of interest
detected, which were all correct, using the k-curvature method
proposed in the present study.
The proposed algorithm for detecting concave points is efficient and it can discard most of the detected points that correspond to a local minimum. Some of these points can remain and
they are not concave points of interest that generate ellipses or
circumferences, but these points will be rejected by the criteria
used to validate these ellipses and circumferences.

1522

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

TABLE IV
RESULTS OBTAINED USING ARTIFICIAL IMAGES TO VALIDATE THE ELLIPSE
ADJUSTMENT METHOD FOR THREE-OBJECT CLUSTERS

Circular
Elongated

Objects

Detected

Efficiency (%)

2991
3009

2908
2883
Total

97.23
95.81
96.52

Fig. 18. Circular and elongated two- and three-object clusters with undetected
objects. (a) and (b) Undetected objects due to the nondetection of a point of
interest. (c) Undetected object due to very high overlapping. (d) Two undetected
objects due to the nondetection of the intersection point A.

Fig. 17. (a) and (c) Examples of concave point detection using the k-curvature
method proposed in [28]: incorrect detection due to false local maxima in the
k-curvature. (b) and (d) Examples of concave point detection using the
k-curvature method proposed in the present study.
TABLE III
RESULTS OBTAINED USING ARTIFICIAL IMAGES TO VALIDATE THE ELLIPSE
ADJUSTMENT METHOD FOR TWO-OBJECT CLUSTERS

Circular
Elongated

Objects

Detected

Efficiency (%)

1975
2025

1949
1942
Total

98.68
95.90
97.28

TABLE V
OBJECT DETECTION IN TWO-CIRCULAR CELL CLUSTERS USING THE METHODS
PROPOSED IN [20] AND [22], AND THE PRESENT STUDY

Number of circular objects
Detected
Efficiency (%)

[20]

[22]

Our method

60
55
91.67

60
60
100.00

60
60
100.00

gated objects. Fig. 18 shows examples of two- and three-object
clusters with undetected objects. Fig. 18(a) and (b) shows undetected objects due to the nondetection of a point of interest.
Fig. 18(c) shows an undetected object due to be very high overlapping. Fig. 18(d) shows two undetected objects due to the
nondetection of the intersection point (A).

B. Experiment 2
Tables III and IV show the results of the detection of the circular and elongated objects using artificial images of two- and
three-objects clusters with our proposed method. The cluster
generation process occasionally obscured the detection of intersection points because the positions of the objects sometimes
overlapped greatly. Therefore, some objects were impossible to
detect. In this experiment, the detection of two-object clusters
was 98.68% efficient for circular objects and 95.90% efficient
for elongated objects. For three-object clusters, the detection
efficiency was 97.22% for circular objects and 95.81% for elon-

C. Experiment 3
Tables V and VI show the results obtained after applying the
methods proposed in [20] and [22] and the present study to real
images of two- and three-circular cell clusters.
The contours obtained contained some noise, even after filtering, which caused the detection of more concave points.
For the algorithm proposed in the previous study [20], these
additional points were detrimental because they generated more
line divisions and the points could not be used for other
lines. Furthermore, the invalid lines could be considered valid,

GONZÁLEZ-HIDALGO et al.: RED BLOOD CELL CLUSTER SEPARATION FROM DIGITAL IMAGES FOR USE IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE

TABLE VI
OBJECT DETECTION IN THREE-CIRCULAR CELL CLUSTERS USING THE
METHODS PROPOSED IN [20] AND[22] AND THE PRESENT STUDY

Number of circular objects
Detected
Efficiency (%)

[20]

[22]

Our method

33
19
57.58

33
30
90.90

33
33
100.00

TABLE VII
ELLIPSE ADJUSTMENT EFFICIENCY OBTAINED USING THE METHOD OF [22]
AND OUR PROPOSED METHOD

Circular
Elongated

Total

[22]

%

Our method

%

97
7

81
5

83.51
71.45

96
7

98.97
100.00

particularly with noisy contours. The efficiency obtained using
the method of [20] was 91.67% for two-cell clusters and 57.58%
for three-cell clusters.
When ellipse fitting methods were used, the ellipses generated
were always classified as circular. For the algorithm proposed
in [22], although ellipse fitting was employed, the method was
based on line segmentation. Better results were obtained than
the previous method, where all cases with two overlapped cells
were detected, whereas the efficiency was only 90.90% in the
cases with three cells because this method also assumed the
separation of cells by considering lines and ellipse fitting was
applied using the points obtained in the previous process, thus
the efficiency was decreased due to the positions of the cells in
some overlapping cases.
Using our proposed algorithm, more ellipses were generated
for the concave points but the proposed constraints successfully discarded all the points that did not represent real cells.
Furthermore, the efficiency was 100.00% for both the two- and
three-cell clusters because the noise of the contour did not affect
the correct detection of ellipses.
D. Experiment 4
Table VII shows the results obtained after applying the methods proposed in [22] and our method using two- and three-cell
clusters obtained from real images (circular and elongated).
The method proposed in [22] obtained an efficiency of
83.50% for normal cells and 71.42% for sickle cells because
it was based on line segmentation and it was not appropriate
for very elongated objects, or overlapping objects in some case.
Using our proposed method, the efficiency of detecting normal
cells was 98.97%. Due to a low-staining zone existing at the
border, one normal cell was not detected and was not considered valid. All of the elongated cells were detected. No normal
cells were detected as sickle or elongated, and vice versa.
E. Experiment 5
In total, four circular cells were not detected, thus the detection efficiency was 99.35%. Among the elongated cells, 21 were

1523

TABLE VIII
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR THE DETECTION OF SYNTHETIC GENERATED CELL
CLUSTERS WITH REAL CONTOURS

Normal
Elongated

NCE

ECE

TPR

P

TNR

612
4

0
359

1.00
0.99

0.99
1.00

0.99
1.00

Results and classifications of the objects detected in synthetic images, analyzed using three standard statistical parameters: NCE: normal cells estimated. ECE: elongated cells estimated TPR: true positive rate, for the normal cell class TPR =
NCE/(NCE + E C E ) and the elongated cell class TPR = ECE/(NCE + ECE).
P : precision for the normal cell class P = NCE/Total(NCE) and the elongated cell
class P = ECE/Total(ECE), where Total is the sum of the referred column. TNR
for the normal cell class TNR = ECE/(NCE + ECE) and the elongated cell class
TNR = NCE/(NCE + ECE). Note that the TNR value for the elongated cell class
was equal to the TPR for the normal cell class and vice versa because there were only
two classes.

not detected; thus, the detection efficiency was 94.53%. The initially undetected normal and elongated cells were attributable to
the following reasons: the position of the objects prevented the
detection of concave points, or the cells overlapped significantly
and they were not recognized.
To satisfy the aims of clinical diagnostic support, we were
only interested in detected objects, because we could not diagnose undetected objects. Table VIII shows the results and
classifications of the objects detected in synthetic images. The
algorithm calculated the normal cells estimated (NCE) and elongated cells estimated (ECE). The results were analyzed using
three standard statistical parameters based on comparisons with
the manual separation results: true positive rate or sensitivity
(TPR), precision (P), and true negative rate or specificity (TNR)
(see [29] for further details).
In this experiment, the specificity of normal cells increased
to 0.99. Only four elongated cells were classified as normal.
In these cases, although the cells were detected, the problems
detecting nonconcave points caused the misclassification. In addition, the level of overlap did not allow making an adequate
adjustment so the analyzed cells could be classified as elongated. None of the normal cells were classified as elongated.
The sensitivity value for the normal cell class was 1 and that
for the elongated cell class was of 0.99. Thus, the feasibility of
applying this method to practical cases can be assumed and the
results can be considered valid.
The experiments were performed using two- and three-cell
clusters obtained from real images of peripheral blood smears,
but the method could be extended to the processing of complete
images. The segmentation algorithm is equally efficient in these
cases and the method can identify all contours of interest. Fig. 19
shows some examples of the application of the proposed method
to clusters with more cells, and Fig. 20 shows the results obtained
after applying the method to an image of sickle cell disease,
which was classified by a specialist. In both figures, the blue
ellipses indicate cells classified as elongated and the red ellipses
indicate cells classified as normal.
To analyze these results, the significance of the classification
errors obtained using the proposed method must be considered.
For example, classifying a normal cell as elongated increases

1524

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 19. Examples of the application of the proposed method to clusters of
more than three cells. Blue ellipses indicate cells classified as elongated and red
ellipses indicate cells classified as normal.

Fig. 20. Image of sickle cell disease. (a) Ground truth, which was classified
previously by a specialist (E = elongated, C = circular). (b) Object detection
using our method: circular = red contour, elongated = blue contour.

the actual number of elongated cells. Thus, the specialist may
assume that the patients condition has worsened and they will
suggest a treatment, which generally has no secondary effects
because the procedure consists basically in moisturizing treatments. In addition, classifying an elongated cell as normal may
underestimate a patient’s real condition and prevent necessary
treatments, thereby making the situation worse.
For a critical patient, the cell deformation classifications obtained using these methods do not significantly affect the diagnosis because these patients always have many deformed cells
and they require periodic treatments, which may include antideforming agents. Therefore, it is desirable to avoid false positives
for normal cells and to maintain a high sensitivity to elongated
cells. The obtained results through the experiments showed that
our method achieved these requirements and it was superior
to the referenced methods. For this reason, our method can be
used as criterium to count normal and elongated cells in a blood
sample.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a method for determining the number of normal and elongated cells inside a cell group. The method
is completely automatic and it uses ellipse adjustment to detect
cells in an efficient manner. It also incorporates a new technique
for the efficient detection of concave or convex points of interest in a contour. To reduce the execution time, the images are
not preprocessed. The results obtained are excellent using our
method because it is capable of determining valid ellipses using
the proposed criteria and the point-of-interest detection method

is efficient. To compare the performance with previously proposed methods, experiments were performed using circumference adjustments that considered the new constraints and the
new method for point-of-interest detection. The experiments
were performed using three types of images: images generated
using a computer program, synthetic images generated from real
data, and real images. For circular objects or normal cells, the efficiency was 100% for computer generated images, whereas the
methods of [20] and [28] obtained efficiency levels of 71.30%
and 89.16%, respectively. The experiments using real images
with two-object and three-object circular clusters showed that
our method achieved an efficiency of 100% in both cases, and
it was superior to the previous methods of [20] and [22]. Moreover, the experiments using ellipse adjustments of real images of
circular and elongated objects obtained efficiency levels greater
than 98% for the classifications of all the objects or cells (circular or normal, elliptical or elongated), which were also greater
than those obtained using the method of [22]. In the case of synthetic images, we obtained an efficiency of 99.35% for circular
objects and 94.53% for elongated objects, where the precision
exceeded 0.99. Thus, the proposed method is efficient and it can
be applied to differential red blood cell counting in peripheral
blood smear sample images from sickle cell disease subjects to
provide a criterion for determining the number of normal and deformed cells. This criterion can be used by the specialist to assess
the actual clinical condition of the patient, but only to support
the diagnosis. A patient diagnosis cannot be made based solely
on this method, which should always consider complementary
analyses. The peripheral blood smear sample images of sickle
cell disease used in this study are available as supplementary
material from http://erythrocytesidb.uib.es/.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. K. F. Garcı́a, from the
Clinical Laboratory of the General Hospital “Dr. J. B. Zayas”
for her contribution to this study in terms of sample preparation
and the classification of cells. They would also like to thank the
Mathematics and Computer Science Department at the University of the Balearic Islands for its support.
REFERENCES
[1] J. W. Bacus, “Quantitative red cell morphology,” Monogr. Clin. Cytol.,
vol. 9, pp. 1–27, 1984.
[2] K. Horiuchi, J. Ohata, Y. Hirano, and T. Asakura, “Morphologic studies
of sickle erythrocytes by image analysis,” J. Lab. Clin. Med., vol. 115,
no. 5, pp. 613–620, 1990.
[3] L. L. Wheeless, R. D. Robinson, O. P. Lapets, C. Cox, A. Rubio,
M. Weintraub, and L. J. Benjamin, “Classification of red blood cells as
normal, sickle, or other abnormal, using a single image analysis feature,”
Cytometry, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 159–166, 1994.
[4] T. Asakura, T. Hirota, A. T. Nelson, M. P. Reilly, and K. Ohene-Frempong,
“Percentage of reversibly and irreversibly sickled cells are altered by the
method of blood drawing and storage conditions,” Blood Cells, Mol., Dis.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 297–306, 1996.
[5] M.-T. Le, T. Bretschneider, C. Kuss, and P. Preiser, “A novel semiautomatic image processing approach to determine plasmodium falciparum parasitemia in giemsa-stained thin blood smears,” BMC Cell Biol.,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2008.
[6] V. V. Makkapati and R. M. Rao, “Segmentation of malaria parasites in
peripheral blood smear images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech,
Signal Process., 2009, pp. 1361–1364.

GONZÁLEZ-HIDALGO et al.: RED BLOOD CELL CLUSTER SEPARATION FROM DIGITAL IMAGES FOR USE IN SICKLE CELL DISEASE

[7] D. M. U. Sabino, L. da Fontoura Costa, E. Gil Rizzatti, and M. Antonio
Zago, “A texture approach to leukocyte recognition,” Real-Time Imag.,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 205–216, 2004.
[8] S. Eom, S. Kim, V. Shin, and B. Ahn, “Leukocyte segmentation in blood
smear images using region-based active contours,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
Adv. Concepts Intell. Vis. Syst., 2006, pp. 867–876.
[9] N. Ritter and J. Cooper, “Segmentation and border identification of cells
in images of peripheral blood smear slides,” in Proc. 13th Australasian
Conf. Comput. Sci., 2007, pp. 161–169.
[10] C. Yao, J. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Blood cell identification and segmentation by means of statistical models,” in Proc. 7th WSEAS Int. Conf. Signal
Process., Comput. Geom. Artif. Vis., 2007, pp. 177–181.
[11] D. Frejlichowski, “Pre-processing, extraction and recognition of binary
erythrocyte shapes for computer-assisted diagnosis based on MGG images,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Graph.: Part I, 2010, pp. 368–375.
[12] M. Habibzadeh, A. Krzyzak, and T. Fevens, “Application of pattern recognition techniques for the analysis of thin blood smear images,” J. Med.
Informat. Technol., vol. 18, pp. 29–40, 2011.
[13] X. Qi, F. Xing, D. J. Foran, and L. Yang, “GPU enabled parallel touching
cell segmentation using mean shift based seed detection and repulsive
level set,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assisted
Intervention, pp. 30–40, 2010.
[14] X. Qi, F. Xing, D. J. Foran, and L. Yang, “Robust segmentation of
overlapping cells in histopathology specimens using parallel seed detection and repulsive level set,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 3,
pp. 754–765, Mar. 2012.
[15] N.-T. Nguyen, A.-D. Duong, and H.-Q. Vu, “Cell splitting with high degree
of overlapping in peripheral blood smear,” Int. J. Comput. Theory Eng.,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 473–478, 2011.
[16] J. Huang, “An improved algorithm of overlapping cell division,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Comput. Integr. Syst., 2010, pp. 687–691.
[17] J. M. Sharif, M. F. Miswan, N. A. Ngadi, M. S. H. Salam, and M. Mahadi
bin Abdul Jamil, “Red blood cell segmentation using masking and watershed algorithm: A preliminary study,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed.
Eng., 2012, pp. 258–262.
[18] G. Dı́az, F. A. González, and E. Romero, “A semi-automatic method
for quantification and classification of erythrocytes infected with malaria
parasites in microscopic images,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 42, no. 2,
pp. 296–307, 2009.

1525

[19] H. Berge, D. Taylor, S. Krishnan, and T. S. Douglas, “Improved red blood
cell counting in thin blood smears,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed.
Imag.: From Nano to Macro, 2011, pp. 204–207.
[20] H. Song and W. Wang, “A new separation algorithm for overlapping blood
cells using shape analysis,” Int. J. Pattern Recog. Artif. Intell., vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 847–864, 2009.
[21] R. C. Gonzalez, R. E. Woods, and S. L. Eddins, Digital Image Processing
Using MATLAB, vol. 2. Knoxville, TN, USA: Gatesmark Publishing,
2009,
[22] S. Kothari, Q. Chaudry, and M. D. Wang, “Automated cell counting and
cluster segmentation using concavity detection and ellipse fitting techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag.: From Nano to Macro,
2009, pp. 795–798.
[23] X. Bai, C. Sun, and F. Zhou, “Splitting touching cells based on concave
points and ellipse fitting,” Pattern Recog., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 2434–2446,
2009.
[24] C. Zhang, C. Sun, T. D. Pham, P. Vallotton, and M. Fenech, “Detection
of nuclear buds based on ellipse fitting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Digit. Image
Comput.: Techn. Appl., 2010, pp. 178–183.
[25] Z. Ma, J. Tavares, R. Jorge, and T. Mascarenhas. (2010). A review of algorithms for medical image segmentation and their applications to the female
pelvic cavity. Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng.. [Online]. 13(2),
pp. 235–246. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10255840903131878
[26] S. Osher and J. A. Sethian, “Fronts propagating with curvature-dependent
speed: algorithms based on Hamilton–Jacobi formulations,” J. Comput.
Phys., vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 12–49, 1988.
[27] J. A. Sethian, Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods: Evolving
Interfaces in Computational Geometry, Fluid Mechanics, Computer Vision, and Materials Science, vol. 3. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1999.
[28] G. Agam and I. Dinstein, “Geometric separation of partially overlapping nonrigid objects applied to automatic chromosome classification,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1212–1222,
Nov. 1997.
[29] D. G. Altman, Practical Statistics for Medical Research, vol. 12. London,
U.K.: Chapman & Hall, 1991.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

