124

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Improving Brain Injury Cognitive Rehabilitation
by Personalized Telerehabilitation Services:
Guttmann Neuropersonal Trainer
Javier Solana, César Cáceres, Member, IEEE, Alberto Garcı́a-Molina, Eloy Opisso, Teresa Roig, José M. Tormos,
and Enrique J. Gómez, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Cognitive rehabilitation aims to remediate or alleviate the cognitive deficits appearing after an episode of acquired
brain injury (ABI). The purpose of this work is to describe the telerehabilitation platform called Guttmann Neuropersonal Trainer
(GNPT) which provides new strategies for cognitive rehabilitation, improving efficiency and access to treatments, and to increase
knowledge generation from the process. A cognitive rehabilitation
process has been modeled to design and develop the system, which
allows neuropsychologists to configure and schedule rehabilitation
sessions, consisting of set of personalized computerized cognitive
exercises grounded on neuroscience and plasticity principles. It
provides remote continuous monitoring of patient’s performance,
by an asynchronous communication strategy. An automatic knowledge extraction method has been used to implement a decision support system, improving treatment customization. GNPT has been
implemented in 27 rehabilitation centers and in 83 patients’ homes,
facilitating the access to the treatment. In total, 1660 patients
have been treated. Usability and cost analysis methodologies have
been applied to measure the efficiency in real clinical environments. The usability evaluation reveals a system usability score
higher than 70 for all target users. The cost efficiency study results
show a relation of 1–20 compared to face-to-face rehabilitation.
GNPT enables brain-damaged patients to continue and further extend rehabilitation beyond the hospital, improving the efficiency of
the rehabilitation process. It allows customized therapeutic plans,
providing information to further development of clinical practice
guidelines.
Index Terms—Cognitive science, rehabilitation, telemedicine.

I. INTRODUCTION
CQUIRED BRAIN injury (ABI) is defined as brain damage that suddenly and unexpectedly appears in people’s
life, being the main cause of disability in developed countries
[1]. The World Health Organization (WHO) [2] predicts that
by the year 2020 traumatic brain injury (TBI) and stroke, the
two main causes of ABI, will be within the top five etiologies
considering not only the economic cost, but also costs related
to disability-adjusted life year, that can be thought of as the
number of years of normal life lost by the disability.

A

Manuscript received April 14, 2014; revised July 9, 2014; accepted August 27,
2014. Date of publication September 4, 2014; date of current version December
30, 2014.
J. Solana, C. Cáceres, and E. J. Gómez are with the Bioengineering and
Telemedicine Center of Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid 28040,
Spain (e-mail: jsolana@gbt.tfo.upm.es; ccaceres@gbt.tfo.upm.es; egomez@
gbt.tfo.upm.es).
A. Garcı́a-Molina, E. Opisso, T. Roig, and J. M. Tormos are with the Instituto
Universitario de Neurorrehabilitación Guttmann-UAB, Badalona 08916, Spain
(e-mail: agarciam@guttmann.com; eopisso@guttmann.com; torig@guttmann.
com; jmtormos@guttmann.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2354537

Cerebrovascular disease is the second leading cause of death
and the eighth cause of severe disability in the elderly. Annually,
15 million people worldwide suffer a stroke. Statistical data
show that after a stroke, one-third of patients die during the
first month, and 40% of people who recover from the acute
phase exhibit a high degree of impairment that decreases their
independence and quality of life. Only one-third of patients
recover their basic functions and can resume a normal life [3].
The WHO estimated that in 2005, the number of people suffering
a disability as a consequence of a stroke accounted for 30.7
million people [1].
On the other hand, according to the WHO, TBI will exceed
many diseases as the major cause of disability by the year 2020.
Worldwide, an estimated 10 million people are affected by TBI
every year [4]. Its incidence over industrialized countries is in
a range of 200–300 per 100 000 habitants, with an average age
range between 16 and 35 and mostly male [5]. Although the
incidence of TBI is lower compared to dementia, the associated
cost is even higher, due to the early age of the affected people [6].
Furthermore, both stroke and TBI increase the risk to develop
dementia earlier in the future [7].
According to the Brain Injury Association of America, consequences of an ABI vary between cases and can cause motor,
cognitive and behavioral deficits to the patients, disrupting their
daily life activities at personal, social and professional levels.
Cognitive deficits are of particular concern regarding further
independence, because they make even harder to cope with
physical disability. The most important cognitive deficits after
suffering an ABI are those related to attention, decrease of memory and learning capacity, worsening of scheduling and solving
problems capability, reduction of abstract thinking capabilities,
communication problems, and limitations on self-consciousness
about their own condition. As a consequence, these cognitive
impairments hamper the path to functional independence and a
productive lifestyle [1].
New techniques of early intervention and the development of
intensive ABI care have noticeably improved the survival rate.
However, despite these advances, brain injuries still have no surgical or pharmacological treatment to reestablish lost functions
[8]. Cognitive rehabilitation is defined as a process whereby
people with brain injury work together with health service professionals and others to remediate or alleviate cognitive deficits
arising from a neurological insult [9]. This is achieved by taking advantage of the plastic nature of the nervous system [10],
where the brain can reconfigure its connections, both creating

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SOLANA et al.: IMPROVING BRAIN INJURY COGNITIVE REHABILITATION BY PERSONALIZED TELEREHABILITATION SERVICES

new ones, or modifying the previously existing. Plasticity is an
intrinsic property, being always present, but it can lead to either
adaptive or maladaptive changes [11].
Neurorehabilitation aims to optimize the plastic nature by inducing a reorganization of the neural network, based on specific
experiences. However, the probability of new maladaptive patterns is much higher than in normal conditions, where changes
take advantage of phylogenetical evolution. Personalized interventions from individual impairment profile will be necessary
to optimize the remaining resources by potentiating adaptive
responses and inhibiting maladaptive changes.
In addition, it is well described in basic neuroscience whether
neurobiological correlates of right responses are different than
the neural network activated during wrong responses, having
a differential impact on the establishment of plastic changes.
This makes necessary to continuously monitor the responses,
because exposure to stimuli would not be enough to induce
adaptive changes, and a specific number of right responses
seems to become critical in order to consolidate induced
responses [12].
Despite the existence of empiric and experimental knowledge about the benefits of cognitive training in neuropsychological rehabilitation [13], extending it to most potential users
fails because of important limitations. First, the traditional onsite intervention model requires a neuropsychologist supervising the procedure, to administer exercises and cues, based on
patient performance. The cost of this process limits the intensity and length of the treatments, compromising sustainability,
accessibility, and scalability. Besides, the patient is forced to
move to the clinical center, making the duration of the treatment
conditional to the patient’s availability. Second, clinical practice guidelines to allow a rational extension of these services
are missing, and successful experiences find difficulties to disseminate results around professionals, generating the “lack of
evidence” phenomenon.
In the last years, some applications and software programs
have been developed to train or stimulate cognitive functions of
different neuropsychological disorders, such as ABI, Alzheimer,
psychiatric disorders, attention deficit or hyperactivity disorder.
Some of the most relevant software solutions are BrainTrain,
Feskits, Vienna Test System + Cogniplus/RehaCom, FastForWord or Cogmed. However, almost all of them are conceived
as stand-alone applications oriented to train cognitive functions
in single individuals, not allowing personalization and monitoring of the process, as well as data management for evidence
generation and service innovation [14]. Due to the heterogeneity of lesions and deficits, individualization of therapeutic plans
becomes necessary, as well as their storage for further consideration in efficacy studies. In addition, performance monitoring
of every cognitive exercise becomes essential to appropriately
design well-controlled efficacy studies.
Besides, while there is wide documentation of efficacy of
computerized cognitive training in dementia, there is no evidence in the literature of an evaluation carried out in large
populations of ABI patients, trying to demonstrate the usability and effectiveness of this new kind of clinical rehabilitation
programs.

125

Telemedicine allows improving the quality of clinical services, providing better access to them and helping to break
geographical barriers [15]. Moreover, one of the main advantages of telemedicine is the possibility to extend the therapeutic processes beyond the hospital (e.g., patient’s home). As a
consequence, a reduction of unnecessary costs and a better
costs/benefits ratio are achieved, making possible a more efficient use of the available resources [16], [17].
A number of reported experiences have been trying to demonstrate the use of telemedicine as a better way to perform the
neurorehabilitation, making possible for therapists to schedule
rehabilitation sessions that patients can then asynchronously execute at home, on a supervised and more efficient way [18], [19].
Furthermore, findings are comparable or better than those from
reviews of more traditional, paper-and-pencil cognitive training
approaches, suggesting that computerized training is an effective alternative [20].
This paper presents a telerehabilitation platform, called
Guttmann Neuropersonal Trainer (GNPT), which has been integrated in clinical routine over the last three years in several rehabilitation centers. It addresses the rehabilitation of patients with
cognitive impairments, using advanced technologies and knowledge, grounded on cognitive neuroscience, plasticity, and neuropsychology (traditional rehabilitation experience and strategies). It allows the provision of individualized and personalized
treatments, improving the traditional on-site rehabilitation processes. Besides, as one of the most differential distinctiveness,
it incorporates a decision support system that systematizes the
classification of each patient’s individual characteristics, it identifies the comparable cases, and it provides to the therapist the
most successful experiences stored in the system for his or her
consideration. This procedure empowers the therapist to design
the personalized plans based on the highest degree of evidence
available at any moment.
Summarizing, GNPT is conceived as a large-scale and holistic solution, enabling to complete and extend the traditional
rehabilitation process beyond the rehabilitation centers toward
day centers or patients’ homes. The final aim of this study is
to identify the instrumental and methodological limitations of
the traditional face-to-face rehabilitation, and to develop a platform to manage, register, and monitor treatments, increasing the
efficiency of the process.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Rehabilitation Process
A model of the rehabilitation process has been developed to
define the requirements and functionalities of the final system.
The design process of the GNPT system is supported by a usercentered and model-based design methodology. For this purpose
UML has been used, describing the system’s behavior through
use cases and sequence diagrams.
The rehabilitation process defined in GNPT starts by assigning a patient to a therapist responsible for the treatment. The
therapist has then to perform the initial neuropsychological assessment, consisting of a set of validated tests used to evaluate

126

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

cognitive functions (attention, memory or executive functions)
prior to the treatment.
Each test’s item has been semantically translated onto the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
(ICF) [21], as a common taxonomy to describe patients’ cognitive and functional impairment. This process will help to escalate the use of the system, because it permits to introduce
new evaluation tools and compare results in a common taxonomy framework. The results of these tests will be stored in the
system as the PRE neuropsychological assessment. Then, the
cognitive profile is calculated using these PRE results, after a
normalization process that takes into account the patient’s age
and study level, following the ICF standard. This patient’s profile gives the therapists relevant information to support their
treatment decision.
Usually, cognitive rehabilitation treatments consist of 3–5 sessions per week, with a total of 60 sessions. The therapist defines
these rehabilitation sessions by assigning a set of computerized
tasks to a certain day, configuring the input parameters of each
task in order to personalize treatments (e.g., number of images,
presentation speed, or latency time). Once a rehabilitation session is defined, the patient executes the assigned tasks, sending
the results back to the server, so therapists can asynchronously
see the performance. These results help therapists to select the
difficulty level for the next sessions, adjusting treatments to
patient’s evolution.
The system defines three different ranges of performance
according to each task’s execution score.
1) Therapeutic range, when the score is between 65% and
85% of correct answers. The patient executes the task with
an appropriate difficulty configuration in order to get the
best treatment effectiveness.
2) Infra-therapeutic, when the score is below 65%. The difficulty level of the task is too high for the patient’s capacity
and could also lead to frustration.
3) Supra-therapeutic, when the score is above 85%. The difficulty level is too low for the patient’s capacity and the
neurological activation is not being high enough. Could
also lead to boredom.
These ranges are used by the system to improve the effectiveness of the rehabilitation, by automatically relaunching a task
when the score of the patient on that task is out of the therapeutic
range, readjusting the difficulty level. The objective is to have
the patient most of the time executing tasks in therapeutic range,
trying to avoid the too easy (supra) or too difficult (infra) ranges
during the treatment.
After a patient completes the treatment, the therapist performs
the final neuropsychological assessment (POST), which is compared to the PRE one in order to determine the improvement of
the patient’s cognitive capacities.
B. User Requirements Analysis
For the elicitation and definition of user requirements, a detailed process was followed, using requirements structured questionnaires and both face-to-face and online interviews and meetings, with the neuropsychologists from the Institut Guttmann.

TABLE I
COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS AND SUBFUNCTIONS CLASSIFICATION
Category

ABI

Cognitive function

Cognitive subfunction

Attention

Sustained
Selective
Divided

Memory

Verbal
Visual
Working

Executive functions

Scheduling
Inhibition
Flexibility
Sequencing
Categorization

In order to achieve a more efficient rehabilitation, the following
requirements have been identified.
1) Therapists need to decrease their devoted time to manage
treatments, using an asynchronous connection model.
2) More personalized and more intensive treatments are
needed, in order to provide more efficient cares.
3) To obtain an objective evaluation, a remote continuous
monitoring of patient’s performance is needed, always
based on clinical criteria.
4) Real-time results processing and intelligent data management are desirable in order to offer more suitable therapeutic options depending on the patient’s characteristics
and progress.
5) The system must allow the establishment of clinical guidelines based on the knowledge extracted from data collected by computer systems.
C. Rehabilitation Computerized Tasks
The rehabilitation content used in GNPT consists of a set of
computerized cognitive exercises covering different cognitive
functions and subfunctions (see Table I) [22]. Every task has
been specifically designed by neuropsychologists of the Institut Guttmann based on cognitive paradigms to address specific
cognitive subfunction, in order to obtain a better personalization of the treatment according to the patient’s specific needs.
In total, GNPT has 95 different tasks designed for rehabilitating
ABI patients.
To make possible that patients with different degrees of impairment maintain a certain critical level of right responses,
every rehabilitation task has a set of parameters (e.g., number of
images, presentation speed, or latency time), which can be used
to configure different difficulty levels. Therefore, therapists can
adjust the difficulty level to the specific needs of each patient.
Neuropsychologists have also defined how the execution result
is calculated, based on several performance parameters (correct
and wrong answers, omissions, execution time, etc.) depending
on each task. Thus, when a patient performs a task, a score
between 0 and 100 is always calculated and stored related to
that execution.
Universal accessible interfaces are a key factor in every
telemedicine platform, even more when the target users are

SOLANA et al.: IMPROVING BRAIN INJURY COGNITIVE REHABILITATION BY PERSONALIZED TELEREHABILITATION SERVICES

127

inclusion criteria for ABI patients was to be older than 17. Regarding the distribution of the cohort, 602 are men (67.96%) and
285 women (32.23%), and considering the etiology, 612 (69%)
patients suffered ABI from a TBI, 152 (12.13%) from stroke,
and 123 (13.87%) from other causes.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 1. (a) Working memory task example. (b) Sustained attention task
example.

patients who have suffered an ABI with problems in their cognitive capacities [23]. In general, a simple and consistent design
is desired to make the patient feel familiar with the environment.
Thus, every rehabilitation task has a common interface design,
which aims to achieve the maximum usability, based on the
common cognitive deficits of brain-damaged patients, related
to perception, attention or the semantic memory system. For
enhancing usability, patterns of consistency and coherence have
been applied in order to maintain uniformity in screen design
regarding backgrounds and layout of the different elements and
accessibility usability guidelines have been used [24]. Likewise,
the same colors prevail in the common elements of the different
tasks for an easier and more intuitive identification. Besides,
using simple interaction methods, such as mouse clicks on big
buttons, facilitates the possibility of using the same interface for
touch screen devices.
Two examples of rehabilitation tasks are shown in Fig. 1. In
order to show examples of how each task has been specifically
design to treat a cognitive function, the task shown in Fig. 1(a)
consists of presenting a sequence of visual stimuli (pictures)
and, after a latency time, the patient has to click the elements in
the same order that they appeared before. The main cognitive
function treated here is working memory, specifically the difficulty that a patient has to remember objects seen previously.
On the other hand, Fig. 1(b) represents the bingo task, where
the patient has to find the target number, shown at the top of
the screen, among all the numbers of the card. This task tries
to rehabilitate sustained attention, specifically the difficulty that
a patient has to maintain the attention on a specific task over a
long period of time.
D. Exploratory Study
A preliminary study has been carried out to analyze the clinical outcomes of the process. The GNPT system is running at the
Institut Guttmann Hospital in clinical routine, so specific ethical approval is not required to carry out this study. Nevertheless,
clinical data usage is aligned with the Declaration of Helsinki,
and every treated patient had previously agreed to allow for
the use of anonymized data derived from their treatment, for
research purposes.
In total, 887 patients have been included in the study, all
of them having a complete PRE and POST neuropsychological assessment. From these 887 patients, 663 of them have
received treatment at the Institute Guttmann, 141 in other clinical centers, and 83 have completed their treatment at home. The

A. Telerehabilitation Platform Architecture
The GNPT system is based on a telemedicine architecture
that has been defined to support this kind of telerehabilitation
services [25], grouping related functionalities into modules. Security aspects come transversally, and have to be taken into
account across every module to keep information and all connections safe to ensure patient confidentiality. The security module is responsible of controlling every access, including those
related to the patients’ electronic health record (EHR).
A model-view-controller (MVC) pattern has been followed,
so the view and the logic to access and process data are separated.
The main modules defined in the architecture are described as
follows:
1) Communication: the main element of this module is a
customized and very usable videoconference, which allows therapists to do teleappointments with their assigned
patients, helping to avoid isolation when following treatment at home. One of the main challenges addressed in
this work has been the implementation of a web-based
videoconference application, so the users do not need any
local software installed in their computers. For this module OpenMeetings has been used, which implements the
real-time multimedia protocol, using a red5 server for the
audio and video streaming. Additionally, a virtual community has been integrated into the platform, where patients
and therapists find a place to interact, sharing experiences
and concerns related to the disease. Besides, this module
implements an alert service, helping users to remember
what tasks they must accomplish.
2) Operational information management: this module
groups functionalities related to the generation and edition of information that depends on the patient’s EHR. A
reporting module can also be used by therapists and supervisors to visualize graphs and detailed statistics on the
use of the system comparing different parameters, such
as information regarding completion of sessions, time expended executing tasks, set of tasks used for a specific
patient, or activity done by other therapists and centers.
JQuery libraries have been used for its implementation.
3) Monitoring: in order to comply with the Data Protection
Law, every action carried out is stored in both the database
and a log file, so the administrator can track every action
related to any user and its data. Apart from this, the system
offers a module to monitor the execution of the tasks, so
the therapist can then reproduce a task as it was performed
by the patient. This allows the therapist to see exactly what
a patient did in the monitored task, which is very useful
because sometimes it is not enough to merely see the
numeric results.

128

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

4) Data Analysis and Knowledge Discover0079: the main
objective of this module is to extract the maximum knowledge from the information stored in the system. To achieve
this, a tool for knowledge management was designed, and
it is applied to each data collected, being able to filter, analyze, and extract the necessary knowledge to help the neuropsychologists in their decision making. This module, by
analyzing a set of data defined together with the clinicians,
is able to assign a patient to a cognitive profile [26], which
groups patients with similar characteristics using clustering techniques. Using this input, a decision support system
called intelligent therapy assistant (ITA) has been also designed and implemented, which automatically configures
and schedules personalized rehabilitation plans. The ITA
selects the most suitable tasks for each cognitive profile,
by taking into account all the performance results obtained
by similar patients in the past. Besides, it automatically
configures the difficulty level considering both the initial
neuropsychological assessment and the patient’s progress
during the treatment, increasing personalization. For this
module, statistics and data mining techniques have been
used. All data mining and clustering algorithms have been
programmed using the Weka tool (University of Waikato,
New Zealand).
B. User Interface
Regarding the web application for therapies and content management, one of the main efforts has been the design of the
user interface, following the user-centered design model, whose
principles are based on classic ergonomics and the accessibility
guides. During this designing phase, an iterative mock-up has
been used to show the experts not only how GNPT would look
like, but also the different functionalities they would find and
how they would perform every action. The user interface is personalized depending on the user’s role. It is also multilanguage,
and comes in Catalan, Spanish, and English, but it could be
easily adapted to other languages. In Fig. 2, an example of the
interface used by therapists to configure, schedule, and visualize
the previous results is shown.
C. Interoperability
Given that any hospital in which GNPT is used may have its
own health information system, a procedure to integrate it with
the GNPT database has also been designed, so therapists do not
need to enter the same patient’s information twice. GNPT has
been integrated with other rehabilitation platforms too, making
possible to share users, clinical data and results in a transparent way for users. For this purpose, a solution implementing
the open source MirthConnect health care integration engine
has been used. By supporting numerous standards and protocols (like HL7 or TCP/LLP, HTTP, JDBC, and File/FTP/SFTP),
Mirth Connect allows for the filtering, transformation, and routing of messages between disparate systems to allow them to
share data.
Since GNPT has been defined to be used not only in the
Institut Guttmann, a procedure to ensure data protection has

Fig. 2. Left hand column: rehabilitation session configuration. Right hand
column: previous sessions’ monitoring window.

been implemented. This is achieved by storing the user’s private
data in a separate database, so it can be externally managed by
each center that uses the system.
D. Implementation Technologies
The GNPT platform consists of two main components: 1) a
web application for managing treatments, where the therapists
configure and schedule rehabilitation sessions consisting in sets
of personalized computerized tasks; and 2) the client application
that patients use to execute the scheduled rehabilitation tasks and
send the results to the server.
The local application for patients does not have to be preinstalled in the patient’s PC, but rather it is automatically downloaded the first time he or she access the web application. This is
achieved thanks to Java Web Start, using Java Network Launching Protocol, which allows users to download and run Java applications from the web, providing an easy, one-click activation
of applications. Besides, it guarantees that users are always running the latest version of the software, eliminating complicated
installation or upgrade procedures.
The web application requires Java (jdk 1.6, jre 6.x) and runs
over Apache Tomcat 6.X, as it is based on Servlet/JSP and Java
2 Platform (J2EE, Enterprise Edition). The database used is
MySQL Server 5.X and MySQL Java Connector 5.X (JDBC).
However, thanks to the MVC, the platform could be easily
adapted to other database models.
E. Rehabilitation Sessions and Clinical Outcomes
Regarding the total number of patients treated, and their rehabilitation sessions and executed tasks, the GNPT system has
already collected data from 40 237 scheduled sessions with a
total of 260 308 executed tasks. In terms of compliance, 901

SOLANA et al.: IMPROVING BRAIN INJURY COGNITIVE REHABILITATION BY PERSONALIZED TELEREHABILITATION SERVICES

rehabilitation sessions have been not completed by patients,
meaning a drop-out ratio of 2.24%.
Related to clinical outcomes, the improvement of the cognitive capacities after completing treatment has been measured,
comparing the results of the PRE neuropsychological assessment to the POST intervention assessment, as described before
in the rehabilitation process section. This first explorative study
has yielded a 67.53% of patients who improved their cognitive
capacities after completing treatment. An improvement of the
patient’s cognitive capacities is considered when he or she improves, at least, on one of the three main cognitive capacities,
and does not get worse in any of the others.
IV. EVALUATION
GNPT was originally implemented at Institut Guttmann, expanding its use to other 26 cognitive rehabilitation centers, and
83 patient’s homes. After three years of use, the efficiency of
GNPT system has been evaluated, in order to analyze how the
system reduces treatment’s costs. Furthermore, a usability evaluation study has been carried out.
A. Usability Evaluation
Usability evaluation has been performed in order to determine
the ease of use and learnability of GNPT. System usability scale
(SUS) [27] has been used, studying separately three different
groups of users: 10 therapists, 25 patients, and 13 administrators. SUS is one of the most accepted questionnaires to assess
usability in computer systems and it has become a popular questionnaire for end-of-test subjective assessments of usability, as
it has been shown to discriminate well between systems that
have poor usability and those that are considered usable. SUS
has ten items, so it is easy for users to answer the questionnaire.
These ten items were translated to Spanish, and respondents
were asked to record their immediate response to each item,
rather than having time to think about them. SUS yields a single number representing a composite measure of the overall
usability of the system being studied.
Considering this usability evaluation, for therapists the SUS
average score was 80.83; for patients 70.00; and for administrative role, the score was 75.58.
B. Efficiency Study
An efficiency study has been done to see how GNPT helps
to reduce the costs associated with the rehabilitation treatment.
The provision of the rehabilitation service using GNPT has been
compared to the traditional face-to-face one.
The intensive cognitive rehabilitation treatment proposed in
GNPT consists of a total of 60 sessions (five sessions per
week, during three months). By using the traditional face-toface model, the approximated cost would be US$55 per hour
(according to the Catalan hospital’s network), meaning a total
cost of US$3300. Then, the costs associated with the PRE and
POST neuropsychological assessments have to be added (2 h
plus indirect costs, that is, US$247). So, the complete intensive
face-to-face treatment would cost US$3547 in total.

129

On the other hand, GNPT allows the provision of these 60
rehabilitation sessions, with the same level of personalization,
but expending only 30 min for each 10 sessions. In total, the
therapist will dedicate only 3 h to manage the treatment of each
patient. So, the efficient ratio in terms of personnel costs is 1–20,
that is, US$177 versus US$3547.
V. DISCUSSION
The platform has been initially implemented and tested in 27
cognitive rehabilitation centers, including the Institut Guttmann,
and afterward in 83 patients’ homes.
The system is conceived as a tool to enhance cognitive rehabilitation, strengthening the relationship between neuropsychologists and patients, and offering treatment personalization,
results’ monitoring, and computerized rehabilitation tasks’ performance. The system allows therapists to efficiently manage
rehabilitation treatments, configuring and scheduling computerized tasks and evaluating the patients’ performance results
and their evolution. The efficiency studio shows a ratio of 1–20,
meaning a considerable reduction of the costs associated with
the treatments, in terms of both money and dedicated time by
therapists. Furthermore, the modularity and flexibility of the
telemedicine system architecture have enabled us to easily extend the rehabilitation process to other pathologies rather than
ABI, such as dementia, neurodevelopmental disorders in childhood, or schizophrenia.
GNPT allows personalization and individualization of therapies, one of the main advantages compared to the traditional
therapy and also to other stand-alone application solutions. In
order to enhance this feature, a data analysis module has been
implemented, helping neuropsychologists in decision-making
processes. Moreover, this knowledge is being used to learn about
the neurorehabilitation processes and to improve the designed
rehabilitation tasks, as well as for modifying those that appear
not to be appropriate for certain kind of patients, depending on
the assigned cognitive profile and the previous results of similar
patients, increasing personalization.
Considering the usability evaluation, the SUS score obtained
from the questionnaires reveals that users perceive the system to
be efficient and more satisfying to use, as well as easy to learn.
As the typical minimum reliability goal for questionnaires used
in research and evaluation is 70 [27], we can consider the system
presented here as a usable system.
The neuropsychologists particularly highlight the design of
the user interface that allows, for example, the possibility to
visualize the results of previous rehabilitation sessions while
they are configuring and scheduling new ones. This helps them
to efficiently adapt treatments to the patient’s evolution. On the
other hand, the set of rehabilitation tasks used in GNPT allows
to apply rehabilitation procedures devoted to rehabilitation of
all the defined cognitive functions and subfunctions, allowing
the therapists to individualize treatments to the specific patient’s
needs.
Evidence may be found in the literature supporting neuropsychological rehabilitation and cognitive training [28], [29]. However, despite the existence of studies trying to demonstrate the

130

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

effectiveness of the process, the results are still limited and inconclusive. The main reasons are the clinical variability of the
patients, the heterogeneous nature of the procedures, and the
lack of objective information related to the different kind of
treatments and how patients completed the rehabilitation tasks.
The extensive use of GNPT will continue in the future to be
focused on extracting all the hidden knowledge from this stored
information, so each executed rehabilitation task will be considered as a new therapeutic hypothesis. These new knowledge will
help therapists: 1) to know if a patient is able to finish a certain
task; 2) to see if a positive result improves the cognitive function; and 3) to see if this improvement helps the patient in his or
her daily life. Thus, the final goal will be to get evidence about
the proposed treatment effectiveness, apart from establishing
clinical practice guidelines in cognitive rehabilitation.
In order to study the efficacy of the treatment, it is still necessary to carry out a detailed clinical analysis of the data, to determine all the factors related to the improvement of the patient’s
cognitive capacities. The development of the GNPT aimed to
increase the efficiency without reducing effectiveness of the rehabilitation procedure, and to monitor a list of variables that
theoretically have an influence on the evolution of the process,
making possible to include them in future researches. On the
other hand, there is still no evidence demonstrating that an improvement in cognitive functions turns into an improvement in
activities of the daily living (ADL). In this regard, we plan to
introduce ADL questionnaires to assess how the improvement
of cognitive functions benefits patient’s quality of life.
VI. CONCLUSION
GNPT telerehabilitation service enables brain-damaged patients to continue and further extend cognitive rehabilitation
beyond the specialized neurorehabilitation hospital, improving the efficiency of the rehabilitation process and reducing
treatment costs. In addition, it allows customized therapeutic
plans based on cumulative evidence about clinical outcome, providing information to further development of clinical practice
guidelines.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the University of Rovira
i Virgili for its collaboration during development of the PREVIRNEC platform. They also thank their colleagues from the Institut Guttmann, especially to R. Sánchez, M. Morell, A. Garcı́a,
R. López, C. Gómez, V. Muriel, and C.Aparicio, and the rest of
the team of the Bioengineering and Telemedicine Group, especially P. Chausa, R. Caballero, J. M. Martı́nez, and R. Pérez. This
research has also been carried out thanks to the ICA Company,
and the other members of the consortium of the Neurolearning,
NeuroContent, and Cognitio projects.
REFERENCES
[1] Brain Injury Association of America (Mar. 2014) [Online]. Available:
http://www.biausa.org/
[2] World Health Organization (Mar. 2014). Burden Disease Statistics
[Online]. Available: http://www.who.org/

[3] L.C. Álvaro, P. López-Arbeloa, and R. Cozar, “Hospitalizations for acute
cerebrovascular accidents and transient ischemic attacks in Spain: Temporal stability and spatial heterogeneity, 1998–2003,” Rev. Calid Asist.,
vol. 24, pp. 16–23, 2009.
[4] A. Hyder, C. Wunderlich, P. Puvanachandra, G. Gururaj, O. Kobusingye,
“The impact of traumatic brain injuries: A global perspective,” Neurorehabil. J., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 341–353, 2007.
[5] F. Tagliaferri, C. Compagnone, M. Korsic, F. Servadei, J. Kraus, “A systematic review of brain injury epidemiology in Europe,” Acta Neurchir.,
vol. 148, no. 3, pp. 255–268, 2006.
[6] C. J. Murray et al., “Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 291
diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2010,” Lancet J., vol. 380,
pp. 2197–223, 2012.
[7] D. Smith, V. Johnson, and W. Stewart, “Chronic neuropathologies of single
and repetitive TBI: Substrates or dementia?” Nature Rev. Neurol., vol. 9,
pp. 211–221, 2013.
[8] G. Winocur and I. H. Robertson, Cognitive Rehabilitation: Evidence and
Application, D. T. Stuss, Eds., 2nd ed., Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 2008.
[9] B. A. Wilson, “La réadaptioncognitivechez les cérébro-lésés,” Neuropsychologi e clinique et neurologi e du comportement, 2nd ed., Les Presses
de I’Universitie de Montreal (Montreal), pp. 637–652, 1996.
[10] C. Freitas, J. Perez, M. Knobel, J.M. Tormos, L. Oberman, M. Eldaief,
S. Bashir, M. Vernet, C. Peña-Gómez, A Pascual-Leone, “Changes in
cortical plasticity across the lifespan,” Front. Aging Neurosci., vol. 3, pp.
1–8, 2011.
[11] A. Pascual-Leone, A. Amedi, F. Fregni, and L. B. Merabet, “The plastic
human brain cortex,” Annu. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 28, pp. 377–401, 2005.
[12] M. H. Histed, A. Pasupathy, and E. K. Miller, “Learning substrates in
the primate prefrontal cortex and striatum: Sustained activity related to
successful actions,” Neuron, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 244–253, 2009.
[13] K. D. Cicerone, C. Dahlberg, K. Kalmar, D. M. Langenbahn, J. F. Malec,
T. F. Bergquist, T. Felicetti, J. T. Giacino, J. Harley, D. E. Harrington, J.
Herzog, S. Kneipp, L. Laatsch, P. A. Morse, “Evidence-based cognitive
rehabilitation: Recommendations for clinical practice,” Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil., vol. 81, no. 12, pp. 1596–615, 2000.
[14] C. Peretz, A. D. Korczyn, E. Shatil, V. Aharonson, S. Birnboim,
N. Giladi, “Computer-based, personalized cognitive training versus
classical computer games: A randomized double-blind prospective
trial of cognitive stimulation,” Neuroepidemiology, vol. 36, no. 2,
pp. 91–99, 2011.
[15] C. Caceres, E. J. Gomez, F. Garcia, J. M. Gatell, and F. del Pozo, “An
integral care telemedicine system for HIV/AIDS patients,” Int. J. Med.
Informat., vol. 75, no. 9, pp. 638–42, 2006.
[16] C. E. Lathan, A. Kinsella, M. J. Rosen, J. Winters, and C. Trepagnier,
“Aspects of human factors engineering in home telemedicine and telerehabilitation systems,” Telemed. J., vol. 5, pp. 169–75, 1999.
[17] S. E. Palsbo and D. Bauer, “Telerehabilitation: Managed care’s new opportunity,” Managed Care Quart., vol. 8, pp. 56–64, 2000.
[18] C. Caltagirone and G. D. Zannino, “Telecommunications technology in
cognitive rehabilitation,” Funct. Neurol., vol. 23, pp. 195–199, 2008.
[19] M. Zampolini, E. Todeschini, M. Bernabeu Guitart, H. Hermens, S. Ilsbroukx, V. Macellari, R. Magni, M. Rogante, S. Scattareggia Marchese,
M. Vollenbroek, C. Giacomozzi, “Tele-rehabilitation: Present and future,”
Ann. Ist. Super. Sanità, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 125–134, 2008.
[20] A. M. Kueider, J. M. Parisi, A. L. Gross, and G. W. Rebok, “Computerized
cognitive training with older adults: A systematic review,” PLoS One,
vol. 7, no. 7, p. e40588, 2012.
[21] A. Cieza, T. Brockow, T. Ewert, E. Amman, B. Kolerits, S. Chaterji,
T. Berdihan Üstün, G. Stucki, “Linking health-status measurements to
the international classification of functioning, disability and health,” J.
Rehabil. Med., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 205–210, 2002.
[22] R. Caballero, J.M. Martı́nez, A. Garcı́a, S. Ferrer, J. Solana, R. Sánchez,
E. Fernández, R. Pérez, A. Gómez, C. Anglès, C. Cáceres, M. Ferré,
T. Roig, P. Garcı́a, J. M. Tormos, E. J. Gómez, “2D-tasks for cognitive
rehabilitation,” in Proc. 5th Eur. Conf. Int. Fed. Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 37,
2012, pp. 838–841.
[23] A. J. Rotondi, J. Sinkule, G. Haas, M. Spring, C. Litschge, C. Newhill,
R. Ganguli, C. Anderson, “Designing websites for persons with cognitive
deficits: Design and usability of a psychoeducational intervention for persons with severe mental illness,” Psychol. Serv., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 202–224,
2007.
[24] J. Small, P. Schallau, K. Brown, R. Appleyard, “Web accessibility for
people with cognitive disabilities,” in Proc. Extended Abstracts Human
Factors Comp. Syst., 2005, pp. 1793–1796.

SOLANA et al.: IMPROVING BRAIN INJURY COGNITIVE REHABILITATION BY PERSONALIZED TELEREHABILITATION SERVICES

[25] J. Solana, C. Cáceres, E. J. Gómez, S. Ferrer, M. Ferré, P. Garcı́a,
A. Garcı́a-Molina, A. Garcı́a-Rudolph, T. Roig, J. M. Tormos, “PREVIRNEC: A new platform for cognitive tele-rehabilitation,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Adv. Cognitive Technol. Appl., 2011, pp. 59–72.
[26] J. Solana, A. Garcı́a-Molina, A. Garcı́a-Rudolph, C. Cáceres, P. Chausa,
T. Roig, J. M. Tormos, E. J. Gómez, “Clustering techniques for patients
suffering acquired brain injury in neuro personal trainer,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Recent Adv. Neurorehabil., 2013, pp. 143-145.
[27] J. R. Lewis and J. Sauro, “The factor structure of the system usability
scale,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Human Centered Des., vol. 5619, 2009,
pp. 94–103.
[28] N. Carney, R. M. Chesnut, H. Maynard, N. C. Mann, P. Patterson, and
M. Helfand, “Effect of cognitive rehabilitation on outcomes for persons
with traumatic brain injury: A systematic review” J. Head Trauma Rehabil., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 277–307, 1999.
[29] K. D. Cicerone, D. M. Langenbahn, C. Braden, J. F. Malec, K. Kalmar, M.
Fraas, T. Felicetti, L. Laatsch, J. P. Harley, T. Bergquist, J. Azulay, J. Cantor, T. Ashman, “Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: Updated review
of the literature from 2003 through 2008,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol.
92, no. 4, pp. 519–530, 2011.

Javier Solana received the degree in telecommunication engineering in 2008, and the M.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, in 2009.
His research experience has been focused in the
cognitive telerehabilitation field, working in all the
projects, together with Institut Guttmann, related to
the GNPT platform. He has a wide experience in interoperability, data mining techniques and knowledge
extraction, and monitoring technologies for user interaction.

César Cáceres (M’06) received the degree in
telecommunication engineering in 1999, the M.D.
degree in biomedical engineering in 2007, and the
Ph.D. degree in telecommunication engineering in
2007.
His research experience has been focused in web
technologies applied to chronic diseases management, specifically to HIV/AIDS and neurorehabilitation. Since 2003, he has been with the Computer
Science Department, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos,
Spain. He has published 16 articles, 7 books chapters, and 60 national and international conferences.

Alberto Garcı́a-Molina received the M.D. degree in
psychology, the Master’s degree in neuropsychology,
and Ph.D. degree in neuroscience from the Universitat Autònoma, Barcelona, Spain.
Since 2003, he has been a Neuropsychologist
for Neuro-Psychosocial Rehabilitation Unit at the
Guttmann Institute, Barcelona. His main area of expertise is the study of higher cognitive functions; he
has clinical experience of more than eight years in the
treatment of these effects, and more than 20 articles
published in specialized magazines. He has participated in national and international research projects.

131

Eloy Opisso received the Ph.D. degree from the Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain.
His PhD thesis was based on the neuromodulation of
the neurogenic bladder.
He is a Biomedical Engineer. Since 2003, he
has been involved in several national and European projects in Neurorehabilitation, Telerehabilitation and BCIs. He is currently a Professor at the
Official Master of Neurorehabilitation and the Official Master of Cognitive Stimulation and Neurophysochological Rehabilitation of Institut GuttmannUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona. He has authored and coauthored more than
10 papers in peer-reviewed specialized journals in the last six years.

Teresa Roig received the Ph.D. degree in psychology
and M.D. degree in neuropsychology.
She is a Clinical Psychology Specialist, and is the
Head of the Neuro-Psycho-Social Rehabilitation Department of Institut Guttmann, Barcelona, Spain. She
has coordinated and participated in several national
and international projects. Her areas of expertise are
the assessment and diagnosis in brain damage, the
neuropsychological rehabilitation and the telerehabilitation.

José M. Tormos received the Ph.D. degree in
medicine and surgery from the University of
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
He is an associated member of the Laboratory for
Non Invasive Brain Stimulation of Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. He is the Research Coordinator of the Guttmann Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
His areas of expertise include noninvasive brain stimulation, neurorehabilitation, and brain plasticity. He
has coordinated and participated in several national
and international projects in the field of neurorehabilitation and telerehabilitation, both cognitive and physical.

Enrique J. Gómez (S’83–M’85–SM’06) received
the degree and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication engineering in 1985 and 1987 respectively, both
from the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain.
He is a Full Professor of biomedical engineering at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM),
Madrid, Spain, the Head of Phot. Tech. Bioengineering Department, and the Director of MSc on Biomedical Engineering of UPM. His research interests are in
the areas of telemedicine for chronic disease management, active and healthy ageing, and rehabilitation of
patients with cognitive deficits. He has published 410 publications on scientific
journal papers and conference proceedings in related fields and directed 52 national and international research projects.
Mr. Gómez is the Secretary General of Spanish Society for Biomedical Engineering and the former treasurer and council member of EAMBES society.

