IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

443

A Dynamic Mechanical Analysis Technique
for Porous Media
Adam J. Pattison∗ , Matthew McGarry, John B. Weaver, and Keith D. Paulsen

Abstract—Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) is a common
way to measure the mechanical properties of materials as functions of frequency. Traditionally, a viscoelastic mechanical model is
applied and current DMA techniques fit an analytical approximation to measured dynamic motion data by neglecting inertial forces
and adding empirical correction factors to account for transverse
boundary displacements. Here, a finite-element (FE) approach to
processing DMA data was developed to estimate poroelastic material properties. Frequency-dependent inertial forces, which are
significant in soft media and often neglected in DMA, were included
in the FE model. The technique applies a constitutive relation to
the DMA measurements and exploits a nonlinear inversion to estimate the material properties in the model that best fit the model
response to the DMA data. A viscoelastic version of this approach
was developed to validate the approach by comparing complex
modulus estimates to the direct DMA results. Both analytical and
FE poroelastic models were also developed to explore their behavior in the DMA testing environment. All of the models were
applied to tofu as a representative soft poroelastic material that is
a common phantom in elastography imaging studies. Five samples
of three different stiffnesses were tested from 1–14 Hz with rough
platens placed on the top and bottom surfaces of the material specimen under test to restrict transverse displacements and promote
fluid–solid interaction. The viscoelastic models were identical in the
static case, and nearly the same at frequency with inertial forces
accounting for some of the discrepancy. The poroelastic analytical
method was not sufficient when the relevant physical boundary
constraints were applied, whereas the poroelastic FE approach
produced high quality estimates of shear modulus and hydraulic
conductivity. These results illustrated appropriate shear modulus
contrast between tofu samples and yielded a consistent contrast in
hydraulic conductivity as well.
Index Terms—Dynamic mechanical analysis, finite-element (FE)
method, poroelasticity, soft tissue.

I. INTRODUCTION
YNAMIC mechanical analysis (DMA) is a powerful technique that characterizes materials, primarily polymers, as
a function of time, temperature, or frequency. A sample of material is placed in one of a series of clamps (e.g., three-point bending, compression, shear) and a periodic stress is applied, eliciting
a periodic strain response. Mechanical energy loss in materials

D

Manuscript received November 21, 2013; accepted September 6, 2014. Date
of publication September 15, 2014; date of current version January 16, 2015.
This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health
(R01EB018230). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. J. Pattison is with the Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH 03755 USA (e-mail: adam.j.pattison.th@dartmouth.edu).
M. McGarry is with the Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH 03755 USA (e-mail: matthew.d.mcgarry@dartmouth.edu).
J. B. Weaver and K. D. Paulsen are with the Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755 USA, and also with the
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756 USA (e-mail:
john.b.weaver@hitchcock.org; keith.d.paulsen@dartmouth.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2357771

with nonnegligible damping results in a strain response, which
is out of phase with the applied stress. The amplitude and phase
lag of the strain response is sufficient to calculate complex moduli, such as bulk, elastic, or shear, and damping properties of
materials. The stress wave can also be applied over a range of
frequencies or temperatures, even in a single experiment, to alter
the mechanical response of the material of interest.
While DMA is important for characterizing material properties, it is commonly limited to viscoelastic material assumptions,
where the physical interactions are represented by a network of
springs and dashpots [1], although a number of different viscoelastic models exist (e.g., Maxwell, Kelvin–Voigt). These assumptions are sufficient for many materials, including polymers,
but they do not account for mechanical behaviors associated
with hyperelasticity, poroelasticity, or anisotropy. In the latter materials, viscoelastic assumptions create model-DMA-data
mismatch, which can cause significant differences, for example,
in stiffness estimates of porous media between the DMA-based
viscoelastic material model and a magnetic resonance poroelastography estimate [2].
Biological tissues like brain parenchyma are mechanically
complex, in part because they are composed of solid and fluid
phases, where the latter can account for up to 75% of the volume
[3]. Studies have demonstrated that brain tissue responds most
like a poroelastic material when probed [4]; yet, viscoelasticity
is still more common in brain modeling [5]–[7]. The poroelastic
theory, developed initially by Biot for soil consolidation [8],
assumes materials like brain to be biphasic, where a porous
elastic matrix is penetrated by a viscous fluid. Here, the physical
mechanisms of mechanical energy loss result from interactions
between the solid and liquid phases when a force is applied.
Poroelastic models have been widely applied in the quasistatic
case, where a slow increase in applied pressure develops fluid
flow through the elastic matrix obeying the principles of Darcy’s
Law [9]–[11]. Cheng et al. [12] developed the dynamic equivalent and modeled the transient response under specific conditions. Studies have applied dynamic poroelastic models in the
assessment of seismic waves and soil settlement [13]–[15]. For
biological applications, poroelasticity has been used to study
the deformation effects on articular cartilage [16], [17] and bone
[18]. In many of these cases, an analytic evaluation was considered to simplify the algorithms involved [12], [19], [20], but
the solutions were constrained to one dimension. Studies typically investigate the deformation effects of the porous material,
where property parameters are assigned values based on results
reported in the literature or from empirical tests [21]. Errors in
the property assumptions can cause large changes in the deformation estimate, so accurate material property representation is
important. Also, if measured correctly, these properties would

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

provide more information on the material and its response to
applied stress.
Ex vivo studies of the biological tissue like brain could
help differentiate normal and diseased states. Tumors, hydrocephalus, and Alzheimer’s disease are all known to change the
mechanical characteristics of the brain tissue [3], [22], [23],
and a poroelastic model would represent both solid matrix and
fluid related changes due to disease. Similarly, understanding
the porous properties of the brain could create a more accurate
model for estimating tissue displacement during surgery [24],
[25]. Food science is another application, where studying the
consistency of the matrix and fluid properties of consumables
like tofu would be advantageous for quality control [26]. Finally,
frequency-dependent poroelastic properties of soils estimated
using this technique could assist in modeling the propagation of
seismic waves during an earthquake [13].
Here, a 3-D finite-element (FE) inversion approach was applied to estimate the frequency-dependent poroelastic material
properties of porous media using a DMA platform (DMA Q800,
TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA). Analytical solutions
were derived to test the limits of viscoelastic (visco-analytic)
and poroelastic (poro-analytic) models in 1-D. A viscoelastic
FE (visco-FE) method was also considered to compare the accuracy of a numerical approach relative to the analytical estimates.
Sensitivity analyses were performed with different poroelastic
boundary conditions (BCs) to determine the feasibility of estimating poroelastic material properties accurately. Using the
DMA-acquired displacement and force data, the poroelastic FE
(poro-FE) scheme generated high quality estimates of shear
modulus and hydraulic conductivity of porous samples of tofu
of different compositions over frequency.
II. METHODS
A. Governing Equations
1) Viscoelasticity: Deformation of an isotropic, viscoelastic
medium is described by the partial differential equation [27],
[28]
∂
∂
μ∇2 u + (λ + μ)∇∇ · u + η ∇2 u + (ξ + η) (∇∇ · u)
∂t
∂t
∂2
u+F
(1)
∂2 t
where μ is the shear modulus, λ is the first Lamé’s constant, u
is the 3-D displacement vector, ξ is the viscosity of the compressional wave, η is the shear viscosity, and ρ is the material
density. For time harmonic motions, u(x, t)=u(x)eiw t (where
ω is the actuation frequency), the equation simplifies to
··· = ρ

μ∗ ∇2 u + (λ∗ + μ∗ )∇∇ · u = −ρω 2 u + F

(2)

where Lamé’s constants become complex valued, μ∗ = μ +
iωη and λ∗ = λ + iωξ and the overbar (–) represents the
complex-valued amplitude of the variable. At the frequencies
used in this paper, the attenuation of the compressional wave
can be neglected by setting ξ = 0.
2) Poroelasticity: The governing equations to model timeharmonic poroelastic deformation are based on the work on

quasistatic deformation by Biot [8]. Dynamic poroelasticity
equations were later developed by Cheng et al. [12]. More recent papers present analytical variations explored by Schanz
et al. [20] and a 3-D FE equivalent outlined by Perrı́ñez et al.
[29] in which the generalized Cheng equations were simplified
through assumptions of isotropic behavior, a fully saturated material, and incompressible constituents. The resulting coupled
set of equations include a stress equation similar to (2) with
an additional fluid interaction term and corresponding pressure
equation
μp ∇2 u + (λp + μp )∇∇ · u − (1 − β)∇P
· · · = −ω 2 (ρ − βρf )u + F

(3a)

β∇ P + (1 − β)ρf ω ∇ · u = 0

(3b)

ωφ2 ρf κ
iφ2 + ωκ(ρa + φρf )

(4)

2

2

and
β=

where μp and λp represent the poroelastic shear modulus and
first Lamé’s constant, P is the fluid pressure and β includes
a compilation of the poroelastic material properties, including
hydraulic conductivity κ (the ease with which fluid penetrates
the pores), porosity φ (volume fraction of pore space), fluid
density ρf , and apparent mass density, ρa . For more detailed
descriptions of dynamic poroelasticity and these parameters,
see Cheng et al. [12] and Perrı́ñez et al. [29].
B. Visco-Analytic Solution
The DMA technique for the Q800 applies a user-specified
periodic displacement or force amplitude to the material, and
measures the amplitude and phase lag of the other (induced) parameter. The material properties are typically estimated through
an analytical approximation based on the sample geometry and
the actuation parameters [30]. Specifically, for parallel plate
compression, the relation is given as
FL
(5)
Ax
where E is the complex elastic modulus, F is the force, L
is the sample thickness, A is the sample cross-sectional area,
and x is the displacement. An empirical correction factor C,
is incorporated based on sample geometry and the material’s
Poisson’s ratio. The correction factor is used because transverse
displacements are assumed to be small in the model equation,
but are not necessarily negligible in practice.
E=C ·

C. Poro-Analytic Solution
An analytic solution has been reported in poroelasticity [20],
[31], but is limited to a 1-D column with certain BC constraints.
Poroelastic analytical solutions in higher dimensions have been
described [32], but their forms are lengthy and implementation
is cumbersome. Here, a 1-D analytic solution was created and
applied to 1) explore the feasibility of using a 1-D approach to
estimate poroelastic properties using DMA data and 2) verify
the poro-FE method. While previous work applied a stress BC

PATTISON et al.: DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE FOR POROUS MEDIA

445

on the top surface of the column, to represent the DMA appropriately, the corresponding equations need to be developed with a
displacement BC applied on the top surface. With q representing
fluid flow calculated from Darcy’s Law and following similar
analysis from Schanz et al. [20] and Perrı́ñez et al. [31], (3)
can be reduced to a 1-D ordinary differential equation with four
known BCs (Uz (z = 0) = 0, Uz (z = L) = −Uo , Pz (z = L) = 0,
qz (z = 0) = 0), which leads to closed-form solutions for displacement (U ) and pressure (P ) expressed as a function of depth
z, along a column with length L given as
(eλ3 z − e−λ3 z )
Uz (z) = −U0 λ L
(e 3 − e−λ3 L )

(6a)

Fig. 1. Example of a tofu sample placed between the two DMA platens
(left) with a depicted sinusoidal force (top left) applied to the top surface.
Corresponding BCs are listed (right) for the three faces of interest (1 = top;
2 = cylindrical sides; 3 = bottom).

Pz (z) =
− U0

(ES λ23 + ω 2 (ρ − βρf ))(eλ3 z + e−λ3 z − eλ3 L − e−λ3 L )
(eλ3 L − e−λ3 L )
(6b)

where λ3 is a complex root of the eigenvalue problem expressed
as

−ES β(βρ − 2βρf + ρf )ω
(7)
λ3 =
ES β
and ES is written as
ES =

2μp (1 − ν)
.
(1 − 2ν)

(8)

The force on the top face Fp oro was computed by summing the
elastic matrix forces Fσ and fluid pressures FP , expressed as
Fp oro = Fσ + FP .

(9)

Zero pressure BCs are applied to the top surface and the elastic
force is given by Fσ = AES dU
dz (z = L), where A is the area of
the top face, resulting in an analytic expression for Fp oro
Fp oro = AES

dU
(z = L).
dz

(10)

topface

The amplitude and phase of the strain response are measured
by the DMA; therefore, two unique parameters can be estimated
in the FE model. The visco-analytic and visco-FE techniques
estimate a complex-valued shear modulus, whereas a real shear
modulus and hydraulic conductivity were found in the poroFE method. Shear modulus is the common property determined
through DMA techniques but κ has been shown to have a significant effect on the dynamic response of the porous media and
is a critical factor as well [2].
In this approach, each iteration finds an update to the material
properties that reduces the squared difference expressed in (11).
A series of steepest gradient descent and Gauss–Newton steps
achieved the best match between F c and F m .
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment 1: Comparison of Visco-Analytic
and Visco-FE Methods

D. Nonlinear Inversion
In-house 3-D viscoelastic (visco-FE) and poroelastic (poroFE) FE solvers were developed using linear tetrahedral FEs
implemented in Fortran and solved on the Discovery Cluster
available on the Dartmouth College campus. Material properties
for each model were estimated from the DMA-acquired data
through iterative minimization of the objective function
Φ(θ) = |F c (θ) − F m |2

from the elastic matrix for poro-FE can be computed in the same
way; however, the additional stress from the fluid pressure must
also be included

−P dA.
(12)
Fﬂuid =

The visco-analytic solution in (5) produces a complex modulus based on the force–displacement interaction of the material
sample at frequency. To validate the visco-FE method, the estimated complex moduli should be close to their analytic values.
A sample was examined over a frequency range (further explanation in Experiment 3 and the two results were compared.

(11)

where Fc is the force amplitude on the top face computed by
the FE code with the current estimate of the material property
values θ, and Fm is the force amplitude measured by the DMA.
Equation (11) requires the force on the top surface to be
computed from the FE models for comparison with the DMA
force measurement, which is the amplitude of the oscillating
vertical force on the top face as indicated in Fig. 1. For viscoFE, the appropriate force is computed by summing the terms
on the right-hand side of the FE matrix-vector system for all
elements, which have a face on the top surface [33]. The force

B. Experiment 2: Comparison of Poro-Analytic
and Poro-FE Methods
The poro-analytic solution given in (10) would provide a
simple way to estimate the shear modulus of a porous material sample, but the 1-D problem assumptions could prove
to be inappropriate in the DMA testing environment. Force
estimates were calculated from (10) over a frequency range
of 10−3 − 102 Hz and compared with the forces estimated by
the poro-FE solution with 1) the 1-D BCs used to derive (6) and
2) the BC constraints shown in Fig. 1 that emulate the DMA

446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Illustration of the change in error between the visco-analytic and viscoFE results when the inertial terms (ρω 2 ) are removed from the visco-FE model.
The results show an average decrease in relative error of 38.5%.
Fig. 2. Storage modulus (μ r ) and loss modulus (μ i ) estimates obtained from
the visco-analytic (DMA) algorithm compared to the visco-FE method over a
frequency range of 1–14 Hz.

testing environment more closely. A cylindrical FE mesh was
created to represent a standard DMA sample size (d = 25 mm,
h = 10 mm).
C. Experiment 3: Dynamic Testing of Porous Materials
Tofu is considered to be a poroelastic material and was used
for this experiment [9], [11], [29]. Silken (Mori-nu) tofu is
available in three different consistencies, denoted “soft,” “firm,”
and “extra firm,” and these products were used to demonstrate
the validity of the poro-DMA technique. Five samples were
extracted from the larger tofu block and cut into small cylinders that were 28.5 mm in diameter and 7.5–10 mm in thickness. Displacement BCs on the top surface were selected to
limit the strain to about 1%, resulting in displacements between
75–100 μm depending on the sample thickness. A 0.1-N preload
was applied to keep the platens attached to the tofu surface
throughout the duration of the DMA data acquisition. To emulate the BCs in Fig. 1 as closely as possible, a rough surface
was applied to the top and bottom platens on the DMA sample holder to eliminate transverse slippage, which counteracts
the fluid–solid interactions, and therefore, the poroelastic effects within the sample [34]. The samples were tested over a
frequency range of 1–14 Hz, and the resultant normal force on
the top platen was acquired. The Poisson’s ratio was assumed
to be 0.45.
IV. RESULTS
A. Experiment 1: Comparison of Visco-Analytic
and Visco-FE Methods
Excellent agreement was found between the dynamic shear
modulus estimates from the visco-analytic (the traditional DMA
approach) and visco-FE methods (see Fig. 2). Relative errors in
the storage modulus were 1.12% on average with a maximum
error of 2.59% at 14 Hz. The smallest differences occurred at
the lower frequencies.
The increasing error observed with frequency prompted an
investigation to see if the frequency-dependent inertial forces
(ρω 2 , which are neglected in the visco-analytic model) were a
contributing factor. These forces were removed from the visco-

Fig. 4. Force estimation as a function of frequency (top) for the analytic
solution, the poro-FE method with 1-D BCs, and the poro-FE method with BCs
representing the physical DMA conditions. Relative error (bottom) between the
analytic solution and the poro-FE method with 1-D BCs and physical BCs.
The FE mesh resembled the geometry of a typical sample found in DMA
experiments.

FE model and the storage modulus results were recalculated
for multiple tofu samples. The difference between the viscoanalytic and visco-FE results decreased with removal of inertial
terms in all cases. Fig. 3 illustrates an example, where the average relative difference between the two models was decreased
from 1.17 to 0.72%. The remaining difference is attributed to
FE discretization error, which decreases with mesh refinement.
The mesh size used in the experiments was chosen to produce
acceptable discretization error with reasonable processing time.
B. Experiment 2: Comparison of Poro-Analytic
and Poro-FE Methods
The poro-analytic and poro-FE methods produced very similar force estimates in the 1-D case up to 100 Hz, indicating that
the poro-FE force calculation is correct. When the physical BCs
(that allow lateral distension of the sample) were applied to the
poro-FE method, the difference in the two solutions was substantial, as shown in Fig. 4. In the frequency range of interest,
60% error in the estimated force was found at 1 Hz with nearly
90% error occurring at 10 Hz. These results suggest that a 1-D

PATTISON et al.: DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE FOR POROUS MEDIA

Fig. 5. Viscoelastic parameter estimates obtained from the DMA data of shear
storage modulus (top) and loss modulus (bottom) for five “extra firm,” “firm,”
and “soft” tofu samples measured from 1–14 Hz.

TABLE I
RESULTS FOR THE VISCO-FE AND PORO-FE METHODS AT 14 HZ

Visco-FE
μ r (kPa)
DR
Poro-FE
μ p (kPa)
κ (x 10 −6

m3s
kg

)

Soft

Firm

Extra Firm

3.88 ± 0.636
0.100 ± 0.124

11.8 ± 1.56
0.112 ± 0.126

21.1 ± 3.49
0.120 ± 0.152

2.96 ± 0.402
2.97 ± 0.617

8.10 ± 1.16
0.229 ± 0.0686

14.7 ± 2.42
0.0909 ± 0.0269

The columns represent the three tofu types, denoted “soft,” “firm,” and “extra
firm.” μ r corresponds to the real component of the complex shear modulus,
μ
DR is the damping ratio (given as 12 μ ri ), μ p is the poroelastic shear modulus,
and κ is hydraulic conductivity.

analytic solution (i.e., confined compression) is not sufficient
for mechanical analysis of poroelastic materials even at very
low frequencies.
C. Experiment 3: Dynamic Testing of Porous Materials
For the tofu samples, the visco-FE results in Fig. 5 demonstrate the expected contrast in storage modulus for the three
compositions (soft, firm, extra firm). The loss modulus properties have similar contrast with the stiffer materials having larger
imaginary shear modulus values. Damping ratios (DR = 12 μμri )
were found to be similar between the three types of tofu and had
values ranging from 0.10 to 0.12. Values at 14 Hz are listed in
Table I.
The poro-FE method was applied to the same data, and the
results appear in Fig. 6. Shear modulus values illustrate contrast
with the extra firm tofu being stiffest (14.7 kPa at 14 Hz), firm
tofu being significantly softer (8.10 kPa at 14 Hz) and soft tofu
being the least stiff (2.96 kPa at 14 Hz). These values represent
similar contrast between tofu types as the visco-FE results, but

447

Fig. 6. Poroelastic parameter estimates obtained from the DMA data of shear
modulus (top) and hydraulic conductivity (bottom) for five “extra firm,” “firm,”
and “soft,” tofu samples measured from 1–14 Hz.

are found to be much softer in absolute terms by comparison.
Furthermore, the κ values exhibit the opposite contrast. κ is
largest (fluid flows freely) in the soft tofu, whereas it is smallest
(fluid flow is difficult) in the extra firm tofu. The κ contrast
between the three types of tofu was consistent over the frequency
range and the shear modulus and κ values were repeatable across
samples of the same tofu composition. The values at 14 Hz are
listed in Table I.
V. DISCUSSION
Dynamic tests on the three grades of tofu stiffness were
performed using dynamic mechanical analysis. The visco-FE
method applied to DMA data on material samples agreed very
closely with the traditional visco-analytic approach, which verified that an FE model would produce accurate material property
estimates. The visco-FE results in Fig. 2 demonstrate that the
mechanical property estimates are accurate and suggest that
similar FE techniques could be applied to other material models
to measure specimen properties accurately. For the quasistatic
response (0 Hz, not shown), the storage and loss modulus results
were identical (here, the frequency was set as 10−5 Hz) to the
analytic model shown in (5). As the frequency was increased
from 1 to 14 Hz, the material property estimates in Fig. 2 remain very similar. The relative error between the visco-analytic
and visco-FE methods increased nominally as the frequency
increased (1.12–2.59%).
The increasing error with frequency between the two methods is partially due to FE discretization error. However, the
visco-analytic approach does not consider inertial forces (ρω 2 ),
whereas the visco-FE method incorporates these effects. Also,
these forces are larger at higher frequency and are proportionally
large, especially in soft materials. Fig. 3 illustrates a decrease in
the error between the two models, once the inertial forces were

448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

removed in the visco-FE method, revealing that these forces are
important in dynamic testing. Thus, the FE models presented
here may better characterize the true response of a material under dynamic loading than the current standard DMA approach
that discards the inertial effect.
The dynamic test results are revealing. The visco-FE data (in
Fig. 5) show that the tofu samples yield an expected contrast
between the three stiffness grades. The DR of the different tofu
types, however, do not exhibit much contrast (all values fell
between DR = 0.10 and DR = 0.12). The poro-FE results (in
Fig. 6) demonstrate similar trends to the visco-FE findings. The
shear modulus values present the correct trends and the contrast
ratios between the three types of tofu are similar to the viscoelastic case. An increase in shear modulus from 1 to 14 Hz is
observed, which is also similar to the viscoelastic theory, where
material stiffness increases with the frequency. However, the
increase may be a result of limitations of the poroelastic model,
which does not directly include any viscous damping effects
associated with the solid matrix or other frequency-dependent
variables like the effective porosity. As shown in Table I, the
poroelastic shear modulus values are much lower than their viscoelastic counterparts because of the addition of the fluid pressure in the governing poroelastic equations. The lower shear
modulus values also agree with reports by Perrı́ñez et al. [2],
where poroelastic magnetic resonance elastography estimates
were lower than the DMA-acquired storage modulus.
More interesting, however, are the κ results because these data
represent the first time that κ has been measured over a range
of frequencies. The trend is opposite from the shear modulus: κ
is higher for the soft tofu, and lower for the firm and extra firm
compositions. High κ values indicate that fluid can move more
easily through the porous matrix relative to materials with lower
values. κ increases (the fluid moves more easily) with higher
frequency, as well, and the values reported here fall within the
range of those found in the literature for tissues and other porous
media [25], [35]–[37].
Comparison can be drawn between the damping characteristics of the two models because κ represents the damping characteristics in a poroelastic material similarly to the energy loss
found in the viscoelastic equivalent. Lower values of κ signify
more difficult fluid transport, whereas higher values represent
easy fluid flow. At the upper and lower limits of κ, damping loss
is near zero, with the maximum damping properties occurring
at some intermediate value dependent on the pore structure and
stiffness of the material. In both models, an extra firm tofu is
found to exhibit the most highly damped environment (highest
DR, lowest κ).
Several drawbacks are associated with the technique presented here. An obvious disadvantage is the small frequency
range over which mechanical properties can be estimated. Values were only recovered from 1 to14 Hz because of DMA limitations like machine resonance when testing very soft materials.
As frequency increased above 14 Hz, the DMA sample-holder
platen would detach from the sample and yield unusable data.
One option to extend the frequency range is to employ time–
temperature superposition, which relates changes in temperature
with frequency to generate high frequency estimates from low

temperature and low frequency data [38]. Other options would
include linear extrapolation of the curve to higher frequencies
or fitting a log curve to the data. A power-law fit is a popular
alternative [39], [40], but is commonly related to viscoelasticity,
and may not be appropriate for a poroelastic material.
Another shortcoming with the poro-FE technique is the assumption of Poisson’s ratio. The visco-analytic solution also
requires a Poisson’s ratio assumption for compression tests;
hence, accurate comparisons can be made. Here, Poisson’s ratios of the tofu and brain are not well known, leading to an added
source of uncertainty in the final estimates of shear modulus.
Introducing a shear clamp or attempting to estimate a Poisson’s
ratio would reduce this source of variation. Acquiring more independent force measurements for each material and frequency
would enable accurate estimation of additional material properties by amending (11) to include multiple force measurements.
The visco-FE method presented here demonstrates that viscoelastic parameters can be estimated accurately from data
recorded with a DMA and they match the visco-analytic results
very closely. Also, the FE model accounts for inertial forces inherent in viscoelastic materials, possibly providing better property estimates for soft materials at frequency. While viscoelastic
estimates are sufficient in many applications, model-data mismatch can be lowered through a poroelastic FE method when
considering fluid-saturated materials like tofu (or, more importantly, brain tissue). The poroelastic properties of shear modulus
and κ reported here demonstrate consistency and contrast with
respect to the three different grades of tofu that were evaluated.

VI. CONCLUSION
The ability to estimate both solid- and fluid-related material
properties may produce greater understanding of disease processes. For instance, malignant tissue properties vary based on
tumor location, disease type, and stage. In benign cysts, the stiffness of the abnormality may be the defining difference relative
to the surrounding normal tissue. In other cases, a tortuous vasculature may have more edema and fluid flow; thus, the defining
characteristic could be κ. Knowledge of the material structure
would help with quality control in food science, where accuracy of the food stiffness and the ease of fluid flow through the
solid matrix would create more consistent products [9], [41].
Higher order characterization of poroelastic mechanical properties through stiffness and hydraulic conductivity in materials like
the brain tissue is of great interest and could increase the understanding of complex pathological processes such as Alzheimer’s
disease [23] and hydrocephalus [3].

REFERENCES
[1] K. P. Menard, Dynamic Mechanical Analysis: A Practical Introduction.
Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1999.
[2] P. R. Perriñez, A. J. Pattison, F. E. Kennedy, J. B. Weaver, and K. D.
Paulsen, “Contrast detection in fluid-saturated media with magnetic resonance poroelastography,” J. Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 3518–3526,
2010.
[3] R. D. Penn and A. Linninger, “The physics of hydrocephalus,” Pediatric
Neurosurg., vol. 45, pp. 161–174, Jan. 2009.

PATTISON et al.: DYNAMIC MECHANICAL ANALYSIS TECHNIQUE FOR POROUS MEDIA

[4] G. Franceschini, D. Bigoni, P. Regitnig, and G. A. Holzapfel, “Brain tissue
deforms similarly to filled elastomers and follows consolidation theory,”
J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 54, pp. 2592–2620, Dec. 2006.
[5] S. A. Kruse, G. H. Rose, K. J. Glaser, A. Manduca, J. P. Felmlee, C. R.
Jack, and R. L. Ehman, “Magnetic resonance elastography of the brain,”
NeuroImage, vol. 39, pp. 231–237, 2008.
[6] M. Hrapko, J. A. W. Van Dommelen, G. W. M. Peters, and J. S. H. M.
Wismans, “Characterisation of the mechanical behaviour of brain tissue
in compression and shear,” Biorheol., vol. 45, pp. 663–676, 2008.
[7] A. F. Christ, K. Franze, H. Gautier, P. Moshayedi, J. Fawcett, R. J. M.
Franklin, R. T. Karadottir, and J. Guck, “Mechanical difference between
white and gray matter in the rat cerebellum measured by scanning force
microscopy,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, no. 15, pp. 2986–92, Nov. 2010.
[8] M. A. Biot, “General theory of three-dimensional consolidation,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 155–164, 1941.
[9] G. P. Berry, J. C. Bamber, N. R. Miller, P. E. Barbone, N. L. Bush, and
C. G. Armstrong, “Towards an acoustic model-based poroelastic imaging
method: II. experimental investigation,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 32,
no. 12, pp. 1869–85, Dec. 2006.
[10] E. E. Konofagou, T. Harrigan, J. Ophir, and T. A. Krouskop, “Poroelastography: Imaging the poroelasic properties of tissues,” Ultrasound Med.
Biol., vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 1387–1397, 2001.
[11] R. Righetti, M. Righetti, J. Ophir, and T. A. Krouskop, “The feasibility of
estimating and imaging the mechanical behavior of poroelastic materials
using axial strain elastography,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 3241–3259,
Jun. 2007.
[12] A. H.-D. Cheng, T. Badmus, and D. E. Beskos, “Integral equation for
dynamic poroelasticity in frequency domain with BEM solution,” J. Eng.
Mech., vol. 117, no. 5, pp. 1136–1157, 1991.
[13] P. Dineva, M. Datcheva, G. Manolis, and T. Schanz, “Seismic wave propagation in laterally inhomogeneous poroelastic media via BIEM,” Int. J.
Numerical Analytical Methods Geomech., vol. 36, pp. 111–127, 2012.
[14] J. Dvorkin and A. Nur, “Dynamic poroelasticity: A unified model with the
squirt and the Biot mechanisms,” Geophysics, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 524–533,
Apr. 1993.
[15] R. Burridge and C. A. Vargas, “The fundamental solution in dynamic
poroelasticity,” Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc., vol. 58, pp. 61–90, 1979.
[16] V. Mow, S. C. Kuei, W. M. Lai, and C. G. Armstrong, “Biphasic creep
and stress relaxation of articular cartilage in compression: Theory and
experiments,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 73–84, Feb. 1980.
[17] H. T. Nia, L. Han, Y. Li, C. Ortiz, and A. Grodzinsky, “Poroelasticity
of cartilage at the nanoscale,” Biophys. J., vol. l, no. 9, pp. 2304–13,
Nov. 2011.
[18] S. C. Cowin, “Bone poroelasticity.” J. Biomech., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 217–38,
Mar. 1999.
[19] M. Schanz and A. H.-D. Cheng, “Transient wave propagation in a
one-dimensional poroelastic column,” Acta Mechanica, vol. 145, no. 1,
pp. 1–18, Mar. 2000.
[20] M. Schanz and S. Diebels, “A comparative study of Biot’s theory and
the linear theory of porous media for wave propagation problems,” Acta
Mechanica, vol. 161, pp. 213–235, 2003.
[21] O. Ivanchenko, N. Sindhwani, and A. A. Linninger, “Experimental techniques for studying poroelasticity in brain phantom gels under high flow
microinfusion,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 132, no. 5, p. 051008, May 2010.
[22] H. Yu, J. K. Mouw, and V. M. Weaver, “Forcing form and function:
Biomechanical regulation of tumor evolution,” Trends Cell Biol., vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 47–56, Sep. 2010.
[23] R. Paparcone, S. Keten, and M. J. Buehler, “Atomistic simulation of
nanomechanical properties of Alzheimer’s Abeta(1-40) amyloid fibrils
under compressive and tensile loading,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, no. 6,
pp. 1196–201, Apr. 2010.
[24] K. D. Paulsen, M. I. Miga, F. E. Kennedy, P. J. Hoopes, A. Hartov, and
D. W. Roberts, “A computational model for tracking subsurface tissue
deformation during stereotactic neurosurgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 213–25, Feb. 1999.

449

[25] M. I. Miga, K. D. Paulsen, P. J. Hoopes, F. E. Kennedy, A. Hartov, and D.
W. Roberts, “In vivo modeling of interstitial pressure in the brain under
surgical load using finite elements,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 122, no. 4,
pp. 354–63, Aug. 2000.
[26] R. P. Carpenter, D. H. Lyon, and T. A. Hasdell, Guidelines Sensory Analysis in Food Product Development and Quality Control., 2nd ed. Gaithersburg, MD, USA: Aspen, 2000.
[27] R. Sinkus, M. Tanter, S. Catheline, J. Lorenzen, C. Kuhl, E. Sondermann,
and M. Fink, “Imaging anisotropic and viscous properties of breast tissue
by magnetic resonance-elastography,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 53,
pp. 372–387, Feb. 2005.
[28] L. Landau and E. Lifschitz, Theory of Elasticity. New York, NY, USA:
Pergamon, 1986.
[29] P. R. Perriñez, F. E. Kennedy, E. E. W. Van Houten, J. B. Weaver, and
K. D. Paulsen, “Magnetic resonance poroelastography: An algorithm for
estimating the mechanical properties of fluid-saturated soft tissues,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 746–755, Mar. 2010.
[30] DMA Modulus Equations, T. Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA, 2010,
pp. 1–9.
[31] P. R. Perriñez, S. P. Marra, F. E. Kennedy, and K. D. Paulsen, “3D Finite
Element Solution to the Dynamic Poroelasticity Problem for Use in MR
Elastography,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 6511, pp. 65 111B-1–65 111B-11, Mar.
2007.
[32] P. Li and D. Lu, “An analytical solution of two-dimensional flow and
deformation coupling due to a point source within a finite poroelastic
media,” J. Appl. Mech., vol. 78, no. 6, p. 061020, 2011.
[33] O. C. Zienkiewicz and R. L. Taylor, The Finite Element Method, Solid
Mechanics, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2000.
[34] K. Miller, “Modelling soft tissue using biphashic theory—A word of
caution,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, no. 3,
pp. 261–263, 1998.
[35] P. J. Basser, “Interstitial pressure, volume, and flow during infusion into
brain tissue,” Microvascular Res., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 143–65, Sep. 1992.
[36] T. Nagashima, T. Shirakuni, and S. I. Rapoport, “A two-dimensional, finite
element analysis of vasogenic brain edema,” Neurol. Med. Chir., vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 1–9, Jan. 1990.
[37] S. Kalyanasundaram, V. D. Calhoun, and K. W. Leong, “A finite element model for predicting the distribution of drugs delivered intracranially
to the brain,” Amer. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., vol. 273,
pp. R1810–R1821, 1997.
[38] G. W. M. Peters, J. H. Meulman, and A. A. H. J. Sauren, “The applicability of the time/temperature superposition principle to brain tissue,”
Biorheology, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 127–138, 1997.
[39] J. Guo, O. Posnansky, S. Hirsch, M. Scheel, M. Taupitz, J. Braun, and
I. Sack, “Fractal network dimension and viscoelastic powerlaw behavior:
II. An experimental study of structure-mimicking phantoms by magnetic
resonance elastography.” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 4041–53,
Jun. 2012.
[40] E. H. Clayton, J. R. Garbow, and P. V. Bayly, “Frequency-dependent viscoelastic parameters of mouse brain tissue estimated by MR elastography.”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 2391–2406, Mar. 2011.
[41] Y. Cheng, N. Shimizu, and T. Kimura, “The viscoelastic properties of
soybean curd (tofu) as affected by soymilk concentration and type of
coagulant,” Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 385–390,
Apr. 2005.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

