IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

399

A Cardiovascular Occlusion Method Based
on the Use of a Smart Hydrogel
Nathan Jackson∗ , Member, IEEE, Peter Verbrugghe, Dieter Cuypers, Kenneth Adesanya, Leeya Engel, Piotr Glazer,
Peter Dubruel, Yosi Shacham-Diamand, Eduardo Mendes, Paul Herijgers, and Frank Stam

Abstract—Smart hydrogels for biomedical applications are
highly researched materials. However, integrating them into a device for implantation is difficult. This paper investigates an integrated delivery device designed to deliver an electro-responsive
hydrogel to a target location inside a blood vessel with the purpose of creating an occlusion. The paper describes the synthesis
and characterization of a Pluronic/methacrylic acid sodium salt
electro-responsive hydrogel. Application of an electrical bias decelerates the expansion of the hydrogel. An integrated delivery system
was manufactured to deliver the hydrogel to the target location in
the body. Ex vivo and in vivo experiments in the carotid artery of
sheep were used to validate the concept. The hydrogel was able to
completely occlude the blood vessel reducing the blood flow from
245 to 0 ml/min after implantation. Ex vivo experiments showed
that the hydrogel was able to withstand physiological blood pressures of > 270 mm·Hg without dislodgement. The results showed
that the electro-responsive hydrogel used in this paper can be used
to create a long-term occlusion in a blood vessel without any apparent side effects. The delivery system developed is a promising
device for the delivery of electro-responsive hydrogels.
Index Terms—Blood vessel, cardiovascular, delivery device, electroactivation, hydrogel, occlusion.

I. INTRODUCTION
URING the last two decades, there have been significant advances in the development of smart hydrogels
for biomedical applications [1]–[3]. Hydrogels are ideal for
biomedical applications due to their ability to swell/deswell several thousand times their original volume. Smart hydrogels have

D

Manuscript received June 6, 2014; revised August 15, 2014; accepted August
22, 2014. Date of publication September 4, 2014; date of current version January
16, 2015. This work was supported by the European Union Seventh Framework
Program FP7/2007–2013 under Grant 258909. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ N. Jackson is with the Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork,
Cork, Ireland (e-mail: Nathan.jackson@tyndall.ie).
P. Verbrugghe and P. Herijgers are with the Clinical Cardiac Surgery at KU
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium (e-mail: peter.verbrugghe@med.kuleuven.be;
Paul.herijgers@uz.kuleuven.ac.be).
D. Cuypers is with the Centre for Microsystems Technology, IMEC and Ghent
University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium (e-mail: dieter.cuypers@elis.ugent.be).
K. Adesanya and P. Dubruel are with the Chemistry Department at Ghent
University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium (e-mail: kehinde.adesanya@ugent.be; peter.
dubruel@ugent.be).
L. Engel and Y. Shacham-Diamand are with the Materials and Science and
Nano-technology Department at Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel
(e-mail: leeya7@gmail.com; yosish@eng.tau.ac.il).
P. Glazer and E. Mendes are with the Chemical Engineering Department
at Delft University, Delft 2628, The Netherlands (e-mail: P.Glazer@tudelft.nl;
E.Mendes@tudelft.nl).
F. Stam is with the Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland (e-mail: frank.stam@tyndall.ie).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2353933

the capability of changing their dimensions due to an external
stimulus, which can include thermal, magnetic, light, electrical,
or pH [4], [5]. However, with the exception of electrical stimulus, these methods are less suitable for implantable biomedical
applications as they are difficult to integrate into a medical
device. Although there have been significant advances in the
development of smart hydrogels, integrating them onto an implantable system has been limited [6].
The most common biomedical applications for smart hydrogels are artificial muscles [7] or drug delivery [8], where an applied stimulus causes the hydrogel to expand or deswell which
releases a specified volume of drug. Another application which
is currently being investigated uses the hydrogels ability to expand significantly in order to create an occlusion in a blood
vessel [9]. Smart hydrogels have previously been used as valves
in fluidic devices [10]. Previously, nonstimuli responsive hydrogels have been used to embolize blood vessels in aneurysms. In
these cases, the hydrogel can be coated on a coil [11] or they
can be injected at the site of the aneurysm [12].
There are several medical procedures which require the occlusion of blood vessels including a blood vessel wall bleed,
vascular embolization, aneurysms, and prevention of blood from
reaching a particular location, such as in cancer therapy [13],
[14]. Currently, the treatment for these conditions includes invasive surgical repair or cauterizing the blood vessel [15].
Due to their swelling capacity in aqueous solutions, hydrogels
are ideal for creating occlusions in blood vessels because they
can be introduced to the vascular system in a compact state and
expand significantly in blood. However, once the hydrogel is in
contact with the blood, it begins to swell immediately, making
delivery of the hydrogel to the target location in a timely manner critical. Surgical procedures which involve implantation of
a hydrogel can vary in time duration depending on the target
location. In the case where an implantation takes several minutes, a typical hydrogel could expand and occlude an unwanted
blood vessel which has potential to cause fatal side effects. An
increased delivery time could be required due to tortuosity or
stenosis in the blood vessel. Alternatively, a smart hydrogel can
be used to reduce the risk of unsuccessful delivery of the hydrogel by decelerating expansion through an applied stimulus.
The stimulus investigated in this paper includes an electrical
bias that can be applied to the hydrogel while it is being delivered. Electrical stimuli have previously been shown to actuate
electro-responsive hydrogels (ERH) for applications including artificial muscles [16]. ERH applications typically include
bending of the material in salt solutions. The ERH bends
while between two sheet electrodes of opposite potential [17].

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 1. Schematic of the application and integrated delivery device with IDT
electrodes to prevent swelling of the hydrogel. (a) Application involving bleeding of a blood vessel. (b) Delivery of electro-responsive hydrogel where the
electrical bias prevents swelling. (c) Remove electrical bias and release device
at the target location allowing hydrogel to passively swell. (d) Zoomed in image
of the electrode configuration with unswollen ERH in the center.

Recently it has been shown that an interdigitated (IDT) electrode
array can be used to create a uniform cylindrical deswelling [9].
Therefore, the possibility of slowing down the expansion of a
cylindrical ERH during implantation is feasible. This paper investigates the use of an ERH to create an occlusion in a blood
vessel. However, there are several key challenges which will also
need to be addressed including 1) the ERH ability to expand and
adhere to the blood vessel surface creating an occlusion under
normal physiological blood pressures and 2) the development
of a delivery device that can be used for short or long duration
implants.
This paper aims to develop a system to deliver a smart hydrogel to the target location with a minimally invasive procedure
in order to occlude a blood vessel. This requires integration of
various components including: a specifically modified Pluronics ERH, a flexible IDT electrode device to apply the electrical
bias, and a manufactured delivery device to deliver the ERH
through the blood vessels. Fig. 1 shows the application concept
that is investigated within this paper. The schematic shows a
blood vessel bleed for visual purposes as the concept could be
applied to numerous occlusion applications.
This paper deals with design and manufacturing of a delivery
device with integrated flexible IDT electrodes that is capable
of successfully delivering an ERH to a target location in vivo.
A proof of concept of the application is demonstrated through
in vitro electrical and mechanical characterization of the ERH,
followed by a study on the capability of the ERH to occlude a
carotid artery in both ex vivo and in vivo using the integrated delivery device. The development of an integrated delivery device
and its operation is described below.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Synthesis of Electro-Responsive Hydrogels
The ERH used in this study is a Pluronic/methacrylic acid
sodium salt hydrogel (PLMANa). Pluronic F127, an ABA

block copolymer, was chosen as a base material because of its
known biocompatibility. The ERH was prepared by crosslinking methacrylate endcapped Pluronic F127 (PF127-BMA) with
the sodium salt of methacrylic acid, as described previously
[18]. Briefly, 1.5 g of PF127-BMA (PL), 2.4 g of hydrolyzed
methacrylic acid sodium salt (MANa), and 4.6 g of deionized
water (DI) (with resistivity of 18 MΩ · cm) were mixed together.
A 1 M ammonium persulfate (Sigma Aldrich A3678) solution
(0.75 ml) was added as the initiator, and a 1 M tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) (Sigma Aldrich T9281) solution (0.75 ml) as the accelerator. The solution was slowly mixed,
covered with a blanket of N2 gas to avoid oxygen trapping, and
then transferred to a mold and refrigerated for 1 h before being transferred to a water bath at 37°C for 3 h. The molds
consisted of various sized silicone tubes in order to create a
cylindrical shape.
After polymerization was completed, the samples were removed from the molds and purified in Krebs solution for three
days to remove any residual material. After purification, the
samples were air dried to deswell the hydrogels to the appropriate dimensions. The dried hydrogel samples were then used for
in vitro characterization or they were integrated on the delivery
device for ex vivo and in vivo implantation trials.
B. Swelling Characterization
The rate of swelling and the maximum swelling of the hydrogels are critical for this application. To characterize the ERH,
dried hydrogels samples with a diameter of 2.5 mm and lengths
of 4 mm were prepared. Samples (n = 3) were placed into two
different solutions to determine the swelling rate in different
ionic concentrated solutions. The samples were submersed in
Krebs solution (a blood mimicking solution), and blood plasma
for 24 h. The swelling rate is expected to be similar in blood
plasma and Krebs because they both have similar ionic concentrations and previous results have shown that the electroactuation of ERH is similar for both solutions [18]. Swelling was
determined by weighing the dried samples (Wd ) and the swollen
samples (Ws ) using the following formula:
S=

Ws − W d
∗ 100%.
Wd

(1)

C. Electroactuation of Hydrogels
Electro-responsivity of the PLMANa material using sheet
electrodes for bending tests was previously published [19].
However, to produce radial deswelling, which is required for
this application, a 3-D macro-scale IDT electrode device was
developed. The 3-D IDT electrode was used to validate the concept that an electrical bias can decelerate expansion while the
hydrogel is being delivered in the body. The IDT electrode configuration creates a uniform electric field, allowing the hydrogel
to expand/deswell radially. The IDT electrode device was previously validated [9]. The device consists of 500-μm diameter Pt
electrodes that are equally spaced every 45°. The electrodes alternate between cathode and anode, and the hydrogel is situated
in the center.

JACKSON et al.: CARDIOVASCULAR OCCLUSION METHOD BASED ON THE USE OF A SMART HYDROGEL

401

Fig. 2. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for the microelectrodes. Top
to bottom: glass carrier with first polyimide layer—TiW/Au metallization—
additional TiW metallization for the electrodes—Pt metallization for the
electrodes—second polyimide layer—opening of electrode and bondpad
areas—release from carrier. (b) Picture of flexible microfabricated IDT
electrodes.

In order to validate the concept in an in vitro experiment,
the hydrogels were purified in DI water following synthesis, in
order to reduce the number of ions in the ERH. After purification, the samples were air-dried until deswelling had ceased.
Two sets of hydrogels (n = 3) were used in the experiment,
1) controlled (nonelectro biased) and 2) electro-biased sample.
The dried hydrogels had a diameter of 3 mm, due to the size of
the macroscale electrodes. After the samples were dried, they
were placed in the IDT electrode device in a Krebs solution
environment. The electrically biased samples were biased using previously reported parameters [20], which consisted of a
pulsed dc (monophasic) waveform with 5 Vpp , 50% duty cycle
at 1 kHz. The hydrogels were removed from the experimental setup and weighed periodically throughout the experiment.
Swelling was determined based on (1).
D. Fabrication of Flexible Microelectrodes
Flexible microelectrodes were required in order to integrate
the IDT electrode design into a delivery device. The microelectrodes were fabricated on a glass substrate for mechanical
support as shown in Fig 2(a). Polyimide precursor (PI-2611, HD
Microsystems) was spin-coated and then imidized in a nitrogen
oven at 350°C resulting in a uniform 5-μm-thick polyimide
layer [21], [22]. Polyimide was chosen as the flexible substrate
because of its biocompatibility and favorable processing properties and low water adsorption [23], [24]. Following imidization,
the surface of the film was microroughened to increase adhesion
to the subsequently deposited metal layer. A metallization stack
consisting of 50-nm TiW adhesion layer and a 200-nm gold
layer was sputter deposited. Using standard photo-lithography
and wet etching techniques, this metal stack was then patterned
to form the IDT electrode configuration, the bond pads and the
interconnection. On top of this, a 100-nm TiW metal layer was
deposited. The TiW layer was added as a barrier layer to protect
the Au from dissolution at higher voltages (>1 V) in ionic concentrated solution. A 30-nm Pt layer was then deposited using
electron beam evaporation and patterned using a lift-off technique. The Pt was used as the electrode material due to its chemical stability under an electrical bias in a salt solution [25]. A
second polyimide layer (5 μm thick) was applied and imidized,
and acted as an insulation layer between the electrodes. Reactive ion etching was used to etch through the polyimide layer,

Fig. 3. Schematics and images of the ERH delivery device. (a) Schematic
of the handle for the delivery device which contains a pusher and rotator, an
electrical connection for the electrodes, a saline/dye supply port and balloon
inflation port. (b) Schematic of the distal end of the delivery device containing
the dry hydrogel, flexible IDT electrodes, holding bar, and pusher. (c) Photo of
the manufactured delivery device handle with electrical connection. (d) Photo
of hydrogel on the delivery device before it is loaded and the inflated balloon.
(e) Micrograph of the IDT electrode and hydrogel as it is being pushed out of
the sheath. Scale bar is 2 mm.

in order to open up the electrodes, bond pads and to define the
shape of the flexible microelectrode device. The devices were
mechanically removed from the glass substrate.
Pure Pt electrodes would be the ideal material for the electrodes. However, for reasons such as cost, manufacturability,
and connectivity, a Pt only metallization is not feasible. Therefore, Au was chosen as the core metal, with a thin Pt coating
on top. Gold can be easily dissolved under an electrical bias in
a chloride-rich electrolyte, so an additional protection layer of
TiW was deposited.
The flexible IDT electrode device was fabricated so that it
could be attached to the inner wall of a catheter. The IDT design
consists of six electrodes that are 800 μm wide with 400-μm
pitch and 15 mm in length as shown in Fig. 2(b).
E. Delivery Device
The delivery device is a critical component to the system, as
the ERH requires an integrated tool for transporting the material to the target location and applying an electrical bias to the
material during transportation. The delivery device also must
contain a method of holding the ERH during delivery, pushing
the ERH out of the catheter, and a method for releasing it after
it is swollen.
The basic concept of the device is to contain a holder, which
can hold the dried hydrogel prior to expansion, a catheter to
protect the hydrogel during delivery, a flexible IDT electrodes
inside the catheter, a mechanical pusher to extend the hydrogel
out of the catheter, a conical balloon at the proximal end of
the ERH to temporarily block the blood flow, and a method to
release the holder. Fig. 3 shows the schematic design and the
manufactured device (Aran Research and Development, Israel).
The delivery device consists of a 9 FR sheath that is preinserted into the target location and a 7 FR catheter containing the
holder, the IDT flexible electrodes, and the ERH. The holder is

402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

a stainless steel wire of 0.9 mm which partially penetrates the
ERH. The ERH can be molded to contain a 0.9-mm hole in the
middle. A through-hole guide wire was not used because a hole
extending through the entire length of the ERH would prevent a
full occlusion by allowing residual blood flow through the ERH.
Fig. 3(d) shows the dried hydrogel mounted on the holder. The
flexible IDT electrodes were bonded to the inside of the catheter
using UV curable biocompatible nonconducting epoxy (Loctite
3341). The IDT electrodes are connected to electrical wires that
extend back to the handle where they can be connected to a
signal generator as shown in Fig. 3(c). Fig. 3(e) shows a micrograph of the tip of the catheter with ERH and IDT electrodes.
The balloon can be used to prevent blood flow when the flow
is going in the direction of the insertion. This helps prevent the
risk of the hydrogel being released prematurely from the holder.
However, in cases where the blood flow is against the insertion,
such a balloon is not necessary. The handle contains ports for
the catheter, sheath and balloon; it also contains a mechanical
pusher that extends the ERH from the catheter and into the environment. Fig. 3(d) shows the extended ERH before it is loaded
into the catheter and Fig. 3(e) shows the tip of the hydrogel as
it is pushed out of the catheter.
The operational procedure for the delivery of the hydrogel
begins with inserting the sheath to the desired location. Next,
the dried hydrogel is mounted on the holder and retracted into
the catheter which is then inserted into the device through the
handle. The electrical bias can then be applied via a signal
generator if the procedure is likely to take several minutes. The
electrical bias is required to prevent swelling, because the ERH
starts to swell when it comes into contact with fluid, and if the
ERH swells while inside the catheter the pusher will not be
able to deploy the ERH out of the catheter without the risk of
damaging the ERH. Once the tip of the catheter is at the target
location, the hydrogel is extended out of the catheter, the balloon
is inflated, the electrical bias is switched OFF, and expansion
is started. The holder remains in place until the ERH expands
to the blood vessel wall, which can be assessed by using a
light push/pull movement. Then the holder is retracted into the
catheter and the delivery device is removed, leaving behind the
hydrogel to occlude the blood vessel. The occlusion of the blood
vessel can also be monitored via angiography or fluoroscopy.
F. Ex Vivo Concept Testing
Prior to in vivo testing, the authors performed ex vivo occlusion experiments to determine if the ERH could create an
occlusion in an extracted carotid artery. The carotid artery of a
sheep was mounted in a custom built circulatory system with
Krebs solution being pumped through it. The carotid artery was
placed in a tissue bath with Krebs solution to minimize the
effect of altering the mechanical elasticity due to air. The circulatory system allowed the researchers to increase the pressure
and monitor the maximum pressure needed to move the ERH
after it was swollen.
Dried ERH of 3.9-mm diameter (n = 3) was used in this
experiment due to the size of the arteries. The hydrogels were
held in place with a catheter until they were fully swollen. Then,

Fig. 4. Average swelling results versus time PLMANa in Krebs solution and
blood plasma. Error bars represent the standard deviation, and the line is a fitted
model.

the catheter was removed. Pressure in the circulatory system
was increased until movement of the ERH was visually seen.
This experiment was used to validate the capability of the ERH
to occlude the blood vessel, and to show that the ERH could
withstand physiological blood pressures. If the ERH could not
withstand blood pressure, the hydrogel would become dislodged
and could create an emboli.
G. In Vivo Testing
In vivo testing of the occlusion capabilities of the ERH was
performed in an adult sheep. The hydrogel samples were sterilized using ethylene oxide. All procedures were carried out with
the approval of the ethical committee for animal experiments at
KU Leuven, Belgium. The sheep (n = 4) were sedated with an
intramuscular injection of ketamine (15 mg/kg). Anesthesia was
induced with isoflurane 5% (Isoba, Scherin-Plough, Brussels),
and the animal was intubated with an oral-gastric tube. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane (2–4%). Arterial lines were
inserted in the ears, while heart rate, blood pressure, CO2 and
blood O2 were monitored. The hydrogel was implanted in the
right carotid artery and pressure measurements were monitored
distal and proximal to the hydrogel to validate occlusion using
an intraarterial catheter. A Doppler flow device was used to measure the blood flow. The surgical procedure took approximately
3 h from initial incision to skin closure.
Once the hydrogel had expanded to the blood vessel wall,
the delivery device was removed. Angiography was used (every
ten minutes) following the procedure to visually validate the
occlusion of the blood vessel. The sheep were monitored for
side effects and sacrificed after four weeks in order to retrieve
the ERH to investigate any signs of deterioration.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Characterization of Electro-Responsive Hydrogel
The PLMANa hydrogel swelling rates in Krebs solution and
blood plasma are shown in Fig. 4. The results show that the
average swelling rate was similar for both solutions, which is
expected since Krebs solution has a similar ionic concentration

JACKSON et al.: CARDIOVASCULAR OCCLUSION METHOD BASED ON THE USE OF A SMART HYDROGEL

403

Fig. 6. Images of the hydrogel swelling in an ex vivo carotid artery. (a) 12-min
post implant. (b) 30-h post implant. (c) Imaging showing bulging properties of
the hydrogel. Arrows show location of the hydrogel and balloon of delivery
device (big arrow).

Fig. 5. Average swelling results versus time for electrically biased samples
compared to nonbiased (control) samples, the line is a fitted model, and error
bars represent the standard deviation.

as blood plasma. The hydrogel samples had a swelling rate of
258% and 279% within 30 min for Krebs and blood plasma,
respectively. After 24 h, the samples in Krebs solution swelled
1540% on an average compared to 1450% for blood plasma.
The maximum swelling results show no significant difference
between the two set of samples p > 0.1. The results confirm that
Krebs solution can be used as an alternative to blood plasma for
in vitro testing, and that the PLMANa hydrogels swell significantly in physiological fluid. The swelling rate in whole blood
is expected to be slightly slower due to the presence of proteins
and other molecules. Free swelling hydrogels swell in all dimensions. However, in a blood vessel the hydrogel will begin to
swell radially until it contacts the vessel wall and then it will begin to expand lengthwise until it reaches equilibrium. A higher
final swelling value is desired as it allows the hydrogel to be
smaller during insertion, but it would have the disadvantage of
having reduced mechanical properties.
The results for the in vitro electro-actuation experiment using the macroscale IDT electrodes, were used to validate the
deceleration of the hydrogel’s swelling due to an electrical bias
is shown in Fig. 5. The results show that the electrically biased
hydrogels did not expand as quickly as the nonbiased hydrogels.
A t-test showed that there was a significant difference between
the two samples p < 0.01. Swelling of a polyelectrolyte hydrogel is governed by the osmotic pressure of the counter ions. The
added salt ions from Krebs or blood plasma decelerate the process compared to pure water. Swelling stops when the chemical
potential of ions inside the ERH and bulk solution are equal.
The electrical bias causes the hydrogel to swell even slower,
interfering with the diffusion of the ions until equilibrium is
reached. Both sets of samples expand which was expected as
the hydrogel still absorbs the fluid from the Krebs solution. The
results also show that the difference in the expansion increases
with time. The expansion rate of the ERH decreases as the hydrogels expand. This is related to the depth of the electric field.
The dried samples were 3 mm in diameter whereas the IDT electrodes have a configuration diameter of approximately 6 mm.
The depth of the electric-field from the IDT in this case was
previously shown to be shallow [9]. As the hydrogel expands, it

becomes closer to the electrodes, thus increasing the impact of
the applied electrical bias. Based on these results an ideal IDT
electrode would expand/shrink with the hydrogel; however, this
is difficult to achieve. The ERH in this paper has a relatively
slow swelling/deswelling rate. However, this can be increased
by increasing the hydrogels conductivity [26].
Previous results demonstrated that an electrical bias does not
significantly affect the swelling equilibrium level, as the ERH
swells normally, once the biased is removed [9]. The overall
results from the in vitro electro-actuation experiment validate
the concept that an IDT electrode configuration can slow down
expansion of the hydrogel. Therefore, an IDT electrode configuration integrated into a delivery system could be used for
operations that require longer insertion times. Another electrode
configuration option includes using a peripheral electrode with
a center core electrode (guide wire). However, the disadvantage
to using a center core electrode is that a hole needs to be created
in the hydrogel which prolongs the swelling rate to cause a full
occlusion.
The flexible IDT electrodes were validated for single use only,
because the TiW layer developed microcracks when bent, which
lead to the dissolution of the Au layer during an applied electrical
bias due to its exposure to chloride ions in Krebs solution. There
are methods to resolve this issue in the future, for instance: 1)
an all Pt IDT electrode or 2) to electroplate a thick Pt layer after
the flexible material has been bent. As mentioned in Section II,
the first option is expensive and difficult to fabricate since thick
Pt is difficult to pattern. The latter option would protect the gold
layer from dissolution by coating it with a crack-free Pt layer.
B. Ex Vivo Results
The image in Fig. 6 shows swelling of the ERH at various time
intervals. The results show that the ERH was able to occlude
the ex vivo carotid artery of a sheep. In addition, a bulge in
the artery is visually noticeable. The bulge helps to prevent the
hydrogel from dislodging. Once the hydrogel swelling force
cannot overcome the elastic properties of the blood vessel the
hydrogel starts to expand laterally instead of radially, which can
be seen from the expansion in length from Fig. 6(a) to (b), so
damage of the blood vessel through bulging was not an issue.
Table I shows the results from the ex vivo test for the three
hydrogel samples. The carotid artery had an initial diameter of
7.1 ± 0.5 mm. The fully swollen hydrogels had a diameter of
7.6 ± 0.3, which shows that there was an average bulge increase

404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF SWOLLEN HYDROGELS IN Ex Vivo CAROTID ARTERIES

Gel 1
Gel 2
Gel 3

Diameter of
Carotid
Artery
(mm)

Length of
Hydrogel
fully
Swollen (mm)

Diameter of
Hydrogel
fully
Swollen (mm)

Volume
Expansion
(%)

Maximum
Pressure
(mm·Hg)

7.35
7.45
6.47

20.5
22.8
29.3

7.94
7.64
7.25

1003
978
906

220
240
> 270

Fig. 7. Angiography of occluded carotid artery 1 h after delivery of hydrogel,
the black arrow shows location of the hydrogel.
TABLE II
In Vivo RESULTS
Sheep

the ERH implants were explanted to investigate the integrity of
the implants and vessels. Fig. 8 shows the explanted hydrogel.
Visually, the ERH was intact and showed no signs of deterioration or cracking. The ERH did not adhere to the wall of
the carotid artery. The swollen ERH had a diameter of 7.4 ±
1.1 mm and they had an initial diameter of 3 mm. The ERH also
swelled lengthwise once the hydrogel was in contact with the
vessel wall.

IV. CONCLUSION

Flow Before Implant
(ml/min)

Flow After Implant
(ml/min)

Angiography

235
250
250
243

0
0
0
0

Occluded
Occluded
Occluded
Occluded

1
2
3
4

Fig. 8. Explanted carotid artery with occluded hydrogel. Black arrows show
the location of the hydrogel. The thick black arrow shows a thrombus at the
proximal site.

of approximately 0.5 mm. This amount of bulge is not significant to cause long-term permanent damage to the blood vessel.
The overall volume expansion of the hydrogel was 962 ± 50%.
The average maximum pressure that the ERH was able to withstand before being dislodged was 243 ± 25 mm·Hg, which is
higher than normal physiological blood pressure. However, the
maximum pressure that the ERH could withstand is believed
to be highly dependent on the length of the fully swollen hydrogel. Therefore, a longer material should be more difficult to
dislodge. This is to be expected as the force required to dislodge
the material is related to both the friction and the contact force
which is dependent on the contact length.
C. In Vivo Results
Results from the in vivo testing of the occluded carotid artery
of sheep are shown in Fig. 7 and Table II. All four ERH successfully occluded the carotid artery as shown in the angiography
in Fig. 7. The average flow in the carotid artery before implantation of the hydrogel was 245 ± 7 ml/min, while after
implantation the flow was 0 ml/min in all four sheep. The flow
rate remained 0 ml/min throughout the duration of the experiment. There was a slight pressure drop over the hydrogel due to
collateral flow.
The animals did not show any visual side effects in behavior due to the occlusion of the carotid artery, and no changes
were seen on the CT scans. After the sheep were sacrificed,

This paper demonstrates the successful synthesis of an ERH
and its ability to occlude a carotid artery both ex vivo and in
vivo. The in vitro mechanical and electrical characterization of
the ERH validates the concept of using an electrical bias to decelerate the expansion of the material. Removal of the electrical
bias allowed the ERH to passively swell, which provided precise
control over the timing of the ERH swelling. Ex vivo results of
the carotid arteries showed that the ERH could withstand physiological blood pressures of >270 mm · Hg while maintaining
an occlusion. In vivo experiments validated that the ERH could
be delivered to the carotid artery and it created an occlusion,
which prevented blood flow.
The delivery device that was developed allows for a minimal
invasive implantation of an ERH to a blood vessel to create
an occlusion. The delivery device had an integrated electrical
connection that could be powered using a signal generator connected to the IDT electrode. The electrical bias applied to the
ERH could be used to decelerate the expansion of the ERH in
long duration surgical procedures.
Future study in this area will include optimization of the ERH
material to increase the expansion rate and optimization of the
electrode configuration and electrical bias parameters. In addition, a complete biocompatibility experiment of the hydrogels
and their interaction with the physiological environment will be
conducted, along with long-term studies to determine the ERH
stability.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Heart-e-Gel Project Officer and reviewers H. Rajbenbach, C. Merveille, and M. Vamvakaki for their guidance. They would also like to thank Aran
Research Ltd. for manufacturing the delivery device, and the
other Heart-E-Gel consortium partners for their contributions.

JACKSON et al.: CARDIOVASCULAR OCCLUSION METHOD BASED ON THE USE OF A SMART HYDROGEL

REFERENCES
[1] J. Burdick and G. Prestwich, “Hyaluronic acid hydrogels for biomedical applications,” Adv. Mater., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. H41–H56,
2011.
[2] A. Guiseppi-Elie, “Electroconductive hydrogels: Synthesis, characterization and biomedical applications,” Biomaterials, vol. 31, pp. 2701–2716,
2010.
[3] A. Hoffman, “Hydrogels for biomedical applications,” Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 3–12, 2002.
[4] C. Alarcon, S. Pennadam, and C. Alexander, “Stimuli responsive polymers
for biomedical applications,” Chemical Soc. Rev., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 276–
285, 2004.
[5] H. Meng and J. Hu, “A brief review of stimulus-active polymers responsive
to thermal, light, magnetic, electric, and water/solvent stimuli,” J. Intell.
Mater. Syst. Struct., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 859–885, 2010.
[6] H. Schwerdt, R. Bristol, and J. Chae, “Miniaturized passive hydrogel check
valve for hydrocephalus treatment,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61,
no. 3, pp. 814–820, Mar. 2014.
[7] M. Bassil, J. Davenas, and M. El Tahchi, “Electrochemical properties and
actuation mechanisms of polyacrylamide hydrogel for artificial muscle
application,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 134, no. 2, pp. 496–501,
2008.
[8] S. Murdan, “Electro-responsive drug delivery from hydrogels,” J. Controlled Release, vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2003.
[9] N. Jackson, N. Cordero, and F. Stam, “3-D interdigitated electrodes for
uniform stimulation of electro-responsive hydrogels for biomedical applications,” J. Polymer Sci. Part B: Polymer Phys., vol. 51, pp. 1523–1529,
2013.
[10] D. Eddington and D. Beebe, “Flow control with hydrogels,” Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 199–210, 2004.
[11] D. Kallmes and N. Fujiwara, “New expandable hydrogel-platinum coil
hybrid device for aneurysm embolization,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 23,
no. 9, pp. 1580–1588, 2002.
[12] H. Bearat, M. Preul, and B. Vernon, “Cytotoxicity, in vitro models and
preliminary in vivo study of dual physical and chemical gels for endovascular embolization of cerebral aneurysms,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A,
vol. 101, no. 9, pp. 2515–2525, 2013.
[13] P. Carmeliet and R. Jain, “Angiogenesis in cancer and other diseases,”
Nature, vol. 407, pp. 249–257, 2000.
[14] P. White, S. Lewis, H. Nahser et al., “HydroCoil endovascular aneurysm
occlusion and packing study,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 29, pp. 217–223,
2008.
[15] D. Palanker, A. Vankov, Y. Freyvert, and P. Huie, “Pulsed electrical stimulation for control of vasculature: Temporary vasoconstriction and permanent thrombosis,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 29, pp. 100–107, 2008.
[16] E. Moschou, M. Madou, L. Bachas et al., “Voltage-switchable artificial
muscles actuating at near neutral pH,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 115,
no. 1, pp. 379–383, 2006.
[17] P. Glazer, M. van Erp, A. Embrechts et al., “Role of pH gradients in the
actuation of electro-responsive polyelectrolyte gels,” Soft Matter, vol. 8,
no. 16, pp. 4421–4426, 2012.
[18] P. Glazer, P. Verbrugghe, K. Adesanya et al., “Electro-actuation of biocompatible pluronic/methacrylic acid hydrogel in blood plasma and in
blood mimicking buffers,” RSC Adv., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1890–1894,
2013.
[19] L. Engel, O. Berkh, K. Adesanya et al., “Electromechanical response
and the role of applied current,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 191,
pp. 640–658, 2014.
[20] N. Jackson and F. Stam, “Optimization of electrode activation parameters
for electro-responsive hydrogels for biomedical applications,” submitted
for publication, J. Appl. Polymer Sci..
[21] N. Jackson and J. Muthuswamy, “Flexible chip-scale package and interconnect for implantable MEMS movable microelectrodes for the
brain,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 396–404,
2009.
[22] T. Stieglitz, M. Schuettler, and J. Meyer, “Micromachined polyimidebased devices for flexible neural interfaces,” Biomed. Microdevices,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 283–294, 2000.
[23] A. Mercanzini, P. Colin, J. Bensadoun et al., “In vivo electrical impedance spectroscopy of tissue reaction to microelectrode arrays,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1909–1918,
Jul. 2009.
[24] T. Stieglitz, “Development of a micromachined epiretinal vision prosthesis,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1–11, 2009.

405

[25] N. Lago, K. Yoshida, K. Koch et al., “Assessment of biocompatibility of
chronically implanted polyimide and platinum intrafascicular electrodes,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 281–290, Feb. 2007.
[26] N. Jackson, A. Sheehan, M. Hasan et al., “Electro-mechanical properties of carbon nanotube infused polyacrylamide hydrogel,” submitted for
publication, Adv. Polymer Technol..

Nathan Jackson (M’08) received the B.S.E. degree
(summa cum laude) in bioengineering in 2003, the
M.S. degree in bioengineering in 2008, and the Ph.D.
degree in bioengineering in 2009, all from Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
He is currently a Senior Researcher in the Microsystems Centre, Tyndall National Institute, Cork,
Ireland. His research interests include BioMEMS,
thin film piezoelectric materials, microfabrication,
and neural interface devices.
Dr. Jackson is a Member of IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society.

Peter Verbrugghe received the Master’s degree in
medicine from KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in
2007, and the Master’s degree in health care and
hospital management in 2013. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical sciences,
emerging concepts in cardiovascular medicine at KU
Leuven.
He is currently a Member of the Experimental
Cardiac Surgery Group.

Dieter Cuypers received the M.S. degree in electromechanical engineering in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree
in electronic engineering in 2005 from Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
He is currently a Senior Engineer in the Centre for
Microsystems Technology, IMEC, Zwijnaarde, Belgium. His research interests include liquid crystals,
thin film technology, and flexible electronics.

Kenneth Adesanya received the Bachelor’s degree in
biochemistry from King’s College London, London,
U.K., the M.S. degree in biochemical and process engineering from University College London, London,
and the Ph.D. degree in biomaterials from the King’s
College London.
He carried on with his polymer chemistry research
study by taking a postdoctoral position at the Polymer
Chemistry and Biomaterials Group at the University
of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.

406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Leeya Engel received the B.Sc. degree in physics
from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
Israel, in 2008. She is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in materials engineering and nanotechnology at Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Her research interests include electroactive polymers and their integration into micro/nano scale sensors and actuators, and bioengineering.

Eduardo Mendes received the M.Sc. degree in quantum optics. He received the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, after
which he joined the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique at École Supérieure de Physique et de
Chimie Industrielles de la Ville de Paris.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the
Department of Chemical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, where
he works on functional soft matter, with a focus on
hydrogels.

Piotr Glazer received the M.Sc. degree (summa cum
laude) in 2008 from the Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland, and the Ph.D. degree in 2013
from the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher in the
Department of Chemical Engineering, Delft University of Technology. His research interests include soft
matter, BioMEMS, and microfabrication.

Paul Herijgers received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees
from KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in 1991 and
1998, respectively. He received the board certification in surgery in 1998 with specific competence in
cardiac surgery in 1999.
He was appointed Associate Professor in surgery
in 1999 and Professor in 2005.
He is currently the Head of the Department of
Anatomy and a Full Staff Member of the Cardiac
Surgery Department, KU Leuven.

Peter Dubruel received the Ph.D. degree in chemistry from Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, in
2003.
He is currently a Professor at Ghent University,
and in charge of the Polymer Chemistry and Biomaterials Group. In 2005, he was awarded the Alexander
von Humboldt Fellowship.

Yosi Shacham-Diamand received the B.Sc., M.Sc.,
and D.Sc. degrees in 1977, 1979, and 1983, respectively, from the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
He is a Full Professor at the Department of Solid
Mechanics, Materials, and Systems, School of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. His main research interests include the field of
microtechnologies and silicon devices.

Frank Stam received the B.Sc. and M.Eng.Sc. degrees in mechanical engineering from the University
of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands, in 1989.
He was a Project Engineer with Digital Equipment
Corporation, Galway, Ireland, from 1989 until 1992,
before he joined the Tyndall National Institute, Cork,
Ireland. He was the Coordinator of the EU Heart-eGel Project.
His research interests include mechanical characterization of materials, joints and interfaces, and
system integration and packaging of biomedical
implants.

