382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Automatic Segmentation of Trophectoderm
in Microscopic Images of Human Blastocysts
Amarjot Singh, Student Member, IEEE, Jason Au, Parvaneh Saeedi∗ , Member, IEEE, and Jon Havelock

Abstract—Accurate assessment of embryos viability is an extremely important task in the optimization of in vitro fertilization treatment outcome. One of the common ways of assessing the
quality of a human embryo is grading it on its fifth day of development based on morphological quality of its three main components
(Trophectoderm, Inner Cell Mass, and the level of expansion or
the thickness of its Zona Pellucida). In this study, we propose a
fully automatic method for segmentation and measurement of TE
region of blastocysts (day-5 human embryos). Here, we eliminate
the inhomogeneities of the blastocysts surface using the Retinex
theory and further apply a level-set algorithm to segment the TE
regions. We have tested our method on a dataset of 85 images and
have been able to achieve a segmentation accuracy of 84.6% for
grade A, 89.0% for grade B, and 91.7% for grade C embryos.
Index Terms—Blastocyst analysis, embryo quality assessment,
in vitro fertilization (IVF) procedure, level set, Retinex.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE process of in vitro fertilization (IVF) has evolved considerably since the first successful treatment three decades
ago. However, the efficiency remains somewhat questionable,
with most patients requiring more than one treatment cycle to
succeed. This is partly related to the high variability in developmental competence of the embryos produced during an IVF
cycle and difficulties in determining which of the generated embryos has the highest potential leading to live birth. For this
reason, IVF clinics across the world often transfer more than
one embryo per cycle to increase the odds that a viable embryo
will be transferred. While this approach has helped to maintain the current IVF’s pregnancy rates, it has also led to large
numbers of multiple pregnancies (MP). The potentially negative
consequences of MPs include preeclampsia, maternal haemorrhage, operative delivery, uterine rupture, and preterm labor [1].
MPs can easily be prevented by transferring fewer embryos to
the patient’s uterus, if the quality of embryos can be determined

T

Manuscript received April 26, 2014; revised August 25, 2014; accepted
September 4, 2014. Date of publication September 8, 2014; date of current
version December 18, 2014. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. Singh is with the Laboratory for Robotic Vision, School of Engineering
Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada (e-mail:
asa168@sfu.ca).
J. Au is with the Pacific Center of Reproduction Medicine, Burnaby, BC V5G
4X7, Canada (e-mail: JAu@pacificfertility.ca).
∗ P. Saeedi is with the Laboratory for Robotic Vision, School of Engineering
Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada (e-mail:
psaeedi@sfu.ca).
J. Havelock is with the Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility Special
Interest Group, Canadian Fertility Andrology Society, Montreal, QC H8Y 1Y4,
Canada (e-mail: JHavelock@pacificfertility.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2356415

precisely and therefore transferring only the embryo with the
highest implantation potential.
Researchers are continuously making efforts toward developing techniques and measures that enhance the chance of
selecting more viable embryos. These efforts have led to the
development of grading systems that are used to bench mark
embryos into different categories according to their potentials
in leading to live birth. A morphological grading system crafted
by Gardner and Schoolcraft [2] is widely adopted by IVF clinics for selecting the embryo with highest quality based on three
morphological measures [3]. Despite the availability of such
scoring metric, it is very difficult to choose one embryo over
its sibling embryos without knowing the relative contribution
of each parameter. Experiments by Ahlström et al. [4] proved
the superiority of Trophectoderm (TE) over the other measures,
which can be further used to select the embryo(s) with highest
implantation potential from a group of embryos. The study also
proved an essential need for a strong TE layer for successful
hatching of an implanted embryo. Hence, it is extremely important and necessary to analyze the TE’s quality to assess the
quality of an embryo at the blastocyst stage.
In the past, medical professionals have manually analyzed
human embryos and further guessed the probability of live birth
associated with such embryos. Bendus et al. [5] proved that the
involvement of human embryologists may lead to significant
difference between the scores allocated to a set of embryos by
different embryologists. It is impossible to avoid such difference
in these scores resulting in a direct impact on the likelihood of
IVF success. This difference can potentially be avoided by taking aid from automatic methods that are capable of computing
more robust scores.
A number of attempts have been made in the past to analyze human embryos using semiautomatic techniques. Hnida
et al. [6] presented a semiautomatic software to analyze human
embryo’s morphology. FertiMorph, a semiautomatic system by
IHMedical A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark, was proposed for analyzing the blastocyst size in a sequence of embryo images.
Giusti et al. [7] presented an approach for segmentation of day2 embryos with an energy value linked to each stage. They used
a variational level-set algorithm proposed by Li et al. [8] to
segment the TE’s inner boundaries.
Although many semiautomatic methods have been developed
in the past, full automaton has yet not been achieved due to the
complex nature of patterns and shape of different components of
an embryo at different stages. In addition, a significant error can
occur in automatic identification due to the image quality and debris in the neighborhood of an embryo’s growing environment.
In this paper, we propose a robust and automatic segmentation

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SINGH et al.: AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF TROPHECTODERM IN MICROSCOPIC IMAGES OF HUMAN BLASTOCYSTS

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1.

Human embryo on day 5 (blastocyst stage) of its creation.

method for TE region that performs accurately even if there are
other embryos or debris in the vicinity of the embryo of interest
and seen in the background. Our algorithm does not require any
manual preprocessing for removing such cells or particles and
can still deliver good results. We utilize the Retinex algorithm
[9] to deemphasize cells in the cavity area and further apply a
level-set algorithm [10] to segment TE regions in the blastocyst
image. The superiority of our algorithm over previous work is
demonstrated using blastocyst images of all TE grades.
The paper is divided into the following sections. Section II
describes the blastocyst grading system. The previous work in
computer-based embryo image processing and analysis is also
presented in that section. Section III explains details of the
proposed segmentation algorithm. Section IV overviews our
image acquisition device and its settings as used for capturing
our dataset images. Section V describes the ground truth (GT)
establishment. Section VI details related parameters and the
experimental results on our database of Hoffman Modulation
Contrast (HMC) embryo images. It also provides performancerelated details. Finally, Section VII summarizes the conclusions
and future challenges.
II. BLASTOCYST GRADING
Before providing more details of the proposed method, it is
essential to develop an understanding of blastocyst components
and grading. Each blastocyst consists of cavity that is filled with
fluid enveloped by single layer of cells known as TE. In addition
to TE, the cavity contains a set of cells known as the inner cell
mass (ICM) that is responsible for the formation of definitive
structures of the fetus. Each embryo has a glycoprotein membrane surrounding the cells inside of the embryo named Zona
Pellucida (ZP). The ZP membrane helps maintain the proximity
of the blastomeres before compaction which occurs after day
3 of development. The image of a human blastocyst with its
different components is displayed in Fig. 1. Gardner’s grading
system [11] ranks blastocysts from 1 to 6 for development, A
or B or C for ICM’s quality, and A or B or C for TE’s quality.
Since the objective of the proposed work in this paper is only to
segment TE region, we only describe the TE quality measures.
TE quality of A represents many cells in a unified tightly packed
layer, B denotes few cells in a loose-fitted epithelium, and C

383

Sample images of three grades of TE (A to C).

characterizes a collection of few large cells. Fig. 2 depicts three
images of a blastocyst with different TE grades.
Currently, the decision on which embryo to transfer is made
on the basis of morphological assessments of embryos conducted by embryologists and endocrinologists in the IVF laboratories [11]–[13]. There are a number of morphological features
that have shown some association with embryo viability, but it
is not always clear how these features should be weighted relative to one another. Moreover, the available grading systems
mostly rely on the visual information that are observed by embryologists and therefore are subjective and highly dependent
on the level of expertise and experience of the observers (and
to some extent intraobserver) [5]. Automated image analysis
could add objectivity to the processes of embryo assessment
and selection and consequently lead to better identification of
viable embryos.
A. Previous Work in Computer-Based Embryo Analysis
Much of the clinical research in IVF is focused on analyzing
different aspects of an embryo while under development and
ultimately grading it according to its morphology, size, and
shape at different stages of growth, fragmentation, development
rate, etc. Most aspects of such analysis, however, are performed
manually. While there are some user interface and software tools
that could assist researchers to perform region and boundary
identification as well as computing various measures, there are
very few machine-vision-based systems that could perform any
of the above tasks automatically.
A number of previous works (although not that many) have
been presented for identification and grading of different components of human embryos in HMC microscope images. Pedersen
et al. [14] used level sets by Zhao et al. [15] to model embryos’
boundaries. Karlsson et al. [16] described an automatic areabased segmentation system for identification of the inner and
outer circumferences of ZPs with 88% success rate using 48
samples. Morales et al. [17] presented a system using Canny
edge detection [18] and active contours to highlight ZP contours. Wong et al. [19] presented an automatic tracking method
based on particle filter to track the cleavage of embryos. A few
researchers have tried to model blastomeres using 3-D modeling. Pedersen et al. [14] proposed a 3-D modeling system for
blastomeres through Z-stack images using a multiphase variational level set with manually extracted contours. Giusti et al.
[7] proposed a system for analyzing blastomeres (cells in day
1 to day 3 of the embryo’s development) using 3-D volumes of
microscopic HMC embryo images. They first transfer each image to an acyclic graph associated with a predefined energy. By

384

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Proposed system’s flowchart.

searching the path of lowest energy, the 3-D contour generator
curve was found. Thus, the segmentation was achieved. Filho
et al. [20] presented a semiautomatic blastocyst grading system.
They utilized training sets to establish fundamental characteristics of class centeroids, and then, they classified each region
according to its distance from classes’ centers using support
vector machines (SVM). The feature vectors that represented
each embryo were composed of a set of moments calculated
based on the embryo image histogram. They identified the outer
and inner boundaries of TE regions and computed the fractal
dimension correlating with the number of TE cells.
As presented in the above reviews, only few prior works have
been established for automatic analysis of embryo images, and
therefore, the potential for making contribution in this area is
significant. In this paper, we propose a novel that automatically identifies TE regions. We extend on the preliminary work
reported by Filho et al. [20] through presenting a full feature
extraction procedure. We present the preclinical results of our
approach and suggest some potential avenues of future work. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first report for automatic
detection of TE regions.
The main contribution of this work is in introducing a fully
automatic segmentation algorithm for identification of TE regions in HMC images of day-5 human embryos (blastocysts).
The proposed algorithm can work in the presence of artifact and
requires no manual intervention.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
The segmentation algorithm proposed in this study is comprised of three main components. The first component is the
Retinex algorithm that is used to remove debris in the cavity
area of the embryo. The second component of the algorithm is
the level-set algorithm used to segment the TE regions. The third
and final step of the algorithm is a postprocessing procedure that
is aimed for final cleaning and segmentation. Fig. 3 displays the
block diagram of the proposed method. Details of each section
are described next.
A. Retinex Theory
The 2-D projection of a 3-D spherical embryo, the transparency of the embryos’s shell, and the focus/fixation of the
imaging device could create visual artifacts that appear as shad-

ows and ghost like cells on the cavity regions of blastocyst images. The image data in the cavity region include low-frequency
components with small slopes that are similar to those of nonuniform illumination. In order to remove these low-frequency components, we make use of the Retinex algorithm [21]. This
algorithm exploits the property of human visual system to
achieve color constancy by reducing the impact of the illumination component on the reflectance component of an image.
Retinex is also utilized for digital image enhancement and lightness/color rendition [22].
According to this theory, the observed color/intensity of an
object depends on the light reflection property of the object and
not the absolute value of the intensity of the light source. Therefore, by computing the ratio of light and shade in an image, one
may correct the grayscale values of the image in shaded areas.
The Retinex algorithm has been modified and presented in many
different ways for various applications with different efficiencies
[23]–[25]. The first group of Retinex algorithms were of random
walk type [21]. They compute the relative relationship between
light and shade by walking along all 1-D paths in the entire image and computing reflection values (at each pixel) that depend
on the average value of the light to shadow ratio of all pixels in
a global scale. The second group of the Retinex algorithm [23],
[25] use Homomorphic filtering [26]. They utilize the fact that
illumination in an image is expected to be spatially smooth while
the sharp details are associated with the reflectance. The third
group of the Retinex algorithm is based on an iterative spatial
comparison of the image pixels to gradually adjust the maximum
brightness [27], [28]. The fourth group of Retinex algorithms
focuses on improving the efficiency of the algorithm [9], [29].
Through different assumptions, these methods make the Retinex
algorithm a candidate for Poisson formulation. For this, often
the image Laplacian and a thresholding method are utilized to
highlight or extract image discontinuities.
In this study, we have adopted the Retinex algorithm proposed
by Morel et al. [9]. On an image, paths are defined by a set of
pixels starting from a pixel x and ending at a random stopping
pixel y [21]. At image boundaries, these random paths approximate Brownian paths. Isotropic Brownian paths are functions
of radial distance from a pixel coordinate and hold similar values in all directions subject to the same parameter settings and
similar gradient slopes in the image plane.
We further adopt the formulation of discrete random walks
over an image grid from [30]. This formulation considers a collection of N walks or paths 1, . . . , k, . . . N , starting at xt and
ending at an arbitrary pixel y. nk denotes the number of pixels
of the path k, and xi and xi+1 (i = {1, ..., nk −1 }) represent two
consecutive points in the path k. All these paths for the collection of N walks that are formulated on an image I of M × N
pixels are defined on the discrete rectangular grid R, with xt as
the starting pixel and y as ending pixel. The Neumann boundary
condition [31] is forced by converting the image into a symmetric and periodic image of size 2M × 2N by first mirroring the
image across its right and then bottom sides. Morel et al. [9]
consider a target pixel y is met when the random walk from xt
and x̂t both stop at y. Here, x̂t is conjugate to xt in the image
plane which is both symmetric and periodic. The random walk

SINGH et al.: AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF TROPHECTODERM IN MICROSCOPIC IMAGES OF HUMAN BLASTOCYSTS

385

is expected to stop in finite-bounded time n(y). The symmetric
random walk is hence defined as

xt , if t<=n(y)
y
(1)
xt =
y,
otherwise.
The relative lightness of a random walk starting at x and
stopping at y is defined as


n (y ) 

I(xyt )
L(x; y) = E
δ log
(2)
I(xyt+1 )
t=1
where E is the expectation or the average over all the paths in
the image plane. For a fixed contrast threshold t, δ is defined by

s, |s| ≥ t
δ(s) =
(3)
0, |s| < t.
Equation (3) represents that if the log difference of pixel
values between adjacent pixels is less than a predefined threshold
(t), one may perceive no change in the lightness of those pixels.
In case of Retinex algorithm, the definition of lightness holds
for a standard random walk. The relative lightness L(x, y) in
a chromatic channel is the unique solution to the Poission’s
equation with the Neumann boundary condition given by

if x = y, xR
−Δx L(x, y) = F (x),
(4)
∂L
if x = ∂R
∂ n = 0,
where Δx is defined as the Laplacian operator with respect to x
and F (x) is defined as




I(x)
I(x)
F (x) = v
+v
I(x−0 )
I(x+0 )




I(x)
I(x)
+v
+v
(5)
I(x0− )
I(x0+ )
and
v(x) = δ(log(x)).

(6)

The above equation is identical to Poisson’s equation as formulated by Perez et al. [31]. Here, the main objective is to
remove the gradient of lightness on the left side for first condition of (4), which is less than a specified threshold t. In order to
evaluate the derivative of L(i, j), it is essential for us to solve
the function F (i, j) using the discrete Laplace operator on the
image plane defined as
Δv(i, j) = v(i + 1, j) + v(i − 1, j) + v(i, j + 1)
+ v(i, j − 1) − 4v(i, j)

(7)

where (i, j) represent the coordinates of a pixel point in the image domain R. The small gradients of the image are eliminated
using (3).
The lightness value in the frequency domain can be obtained
more efficiently by solving the Poisson equation in the Fourier
space using the discrete Fourier transform:
F̂ (k, l)
,
− L̂(k, l) = 
l
4 − 2cos 2πNk − 2cos 2π
N

for(k, l) = (0, 0).
(8)

Fig. 4. (a) Input blastocyst image. (b) Blastocyst image after the application
of Retinex.

The lightness values are then converted back to the discrete
image domain R using inverse discrete Fourier transform. The
lightness value for each point on the grid is normalized to a band
of [0, 255].
As mentioned earlier, the main purpose of the Retinex algorithm in our system is to smooth the cavity region in blastocyst
images. The main characteristic of the cavity is that it includes
more low-frequency components comparing to the TE or ICM
regions. Such preprocessing leads to a better performance of
the level-set algorithm in identification of TE inner boundaries.
Fig. 4 shows a typical blastocyst image before (a) and after (b)
the application of Retinex algorithm.
B. Level-Set-Based Segmentation
The level-set algorithm is a numerical method that is widely
used for identification and tracking of boundaries and shapes.
In particular, level set is very good for following changes in
shapes and topologies. For the purpose of blastocyst analysis,
the level set by Li et al. [8] has been previously used by [32] in
a semiautomatic manner. In this study, we aimed to utilize the
level-set algorithm to automatically identify TE regions as the
outer and inner boundaries of TE regions seem to look distinctive. However, what we noticed was that despite the fact that
the cavity region includes low frequencies and damped edges,
the level-set algorithm still has difficulties in stopping at the
right boundaries and often leaks into the cavity region. For this
reason, we utilized the Retinex algorithm to further smooth the
cavity region, as a preprocessing step, before the application of
the level-set algorithm for the TE region. As it is not possible to
completely smooth out the cavity region, a more sophisticated
level set capable of segmenting in the presence of some inhomogeneities in the form of cells is necessary. Therefore, we use
a new level set proposed by Li et al. [10], capable of segmenting
in the presence of intense inhomogeneities.
In order to cope with intensity inhomogeneities in an image, Li et al. [10] formulated a method based on a model that
considers the composition of an image as
I = BJ + n

(9)

where J is the original or true image, B is the biased field which
represents the intensity inhomogeneity, and n is additive noise
(zero mean Gaussian). I is an image function in image domain
(Ω) defined over all real values (R). Bias field B can be easily
predicted by a neighborhood constant of each point in the image

386

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

(a) Input blastocyst image. (b) Output of the level-set algorithm.

due to its slowly varying property. The true image J takes N
distinct values from c1 . . . cn in the disjoint region Ω1 . . . Ωn ,
respectively. Based on the assumptions stated above, our objective is to minimize the energy in a variational framework by
N
finding the optimum regions {Ω̂}N
i=1 , the constants {ĉ}i=1 , and
the estimation of bias field B̂. Hence, the image segmentation
and the bias field estimation are found simultaneously through
energy minimization. More details of the level-set algorithm are
presented in the Appendix of this paper.
Fig. 5 represents the output of the level-set algorithm in cyan
overimposed on the smoothed version of the input image.
C. Postprocessing of Level-Set Output
In this section, we perform a postprocessing step to clean
up and better represent the output of the level-set algorithm.
This is a necessary step as the output of the level-set algorithm
correspond to TE regions and other regions including ICM,
floating cells outside the blastocysts, and some debris. Our main
goal here is to precisely identify and modify those segments that
correspond to the TE regions while removing those segments
that correspond to others.
Here, we start with the Canny edge detector [18] that is applied on the output of the level-set algorithm. Naturally, the
edge detection here will identify the boundaries of the segments
identified by the level set. The resultant binary output contains
a set of edges that correspond to TE segment boundaries and
those of other regions. These edges may contain discontinuities
that sometimes originate from TE regions with lower qualities,
natural discontinuities that may exist at the outer boundaries of
the TE region, and perhaps the noncustomized parameter setting
of the Canny edge detector. It should be noted that for all the
processed images that are presented in this study, only one set of
parameters is utilized for the Canny operator. These parameters
include a lower threshold of 0.12 and a higher threshold of 0.3
that are found empirically.
Next, the discontinuities within or in-between the TE segments are padded using a morphological dilation operation that
expands the TE segments by a structuring element of disk shape
with a radius 3 pixels. The discontinuities within a TE segments
(holes) and in-between the majority of TE segments are filled
out after the dilation operation. However, this process is unable
to fill those discontinuities in-between TE segments at larger
proximity. Usually for TEs with lower qualities, it is observed
that the number of disconnected TE segments is larger. In order
to identify those segments that truly correspond to the TE re-

gion, we first find the center of gravity of the blastocyst mass.
Here, we take advantage of the spherical shape and the circular 2-D footprint of an embryo which indicate that the exterior
points of the TE (which are also located on the inner ZP) have
similar distances from the centroid of the embryo. We find the
center of gravity for all the segments found by the level-set algorithm. This center might be a bit off from the real centroid of the
embryo especially in images with debris and parts from other
cells. We then radiate 72 beams with a separation of 5◦ from the
center of the mass toward outside. These beams intersect with
the boundaries of the TE regions as they move outward. Indeed,
the first and last intersections of the beams with the level-set
segments are recorded. We expect the second intersection of
the beams to be right on the inner boundary of the ZP (also on
outer boundary of the TE region) and, therefore, should have
smooth variation comparing to the neighboring intersections.
We use this property and identify those points where the intersection deviates more than ±5 pixels from the median of the
neighboring second intersections. The retained segments most
likely correspond to the TE segments due to their equidistant
property from the center of the mass. In addition, this process
removes the segments that correspond to the debris, inside or
outside the cavity region. However, this process fails to remove
those segments corresponding to the ICM region in cases where
the ICM is connected to the TE’s interior boundary.
For those beams that intersect with the ICM, the distance of
the first intersection from the center of the mass is much shorter
than those cases when the beam’s first intersection occurs at the
interior boundary of the TE region. In order to identify those
intersections with the ICM, we use a K-means clustering approach to cluster the beams into two groups according to the
distance of their first intersection with the radiated beams. Between the two found clusters, the one with the smaller centroid
(shorter distance from the center of the mass) most likely corresponds to the intersection of the beams with regions in which
the ICM is connected to the TE region. All those intersections
are replaced with the centroid location of the other cluster. Then,
the level set is locally applied to each replaced point to allow
the adjustment according to the local properties. A maximum
one standard deviation from the centroid is allowed in this final
adjustment.
At this point, TE segments are identified by all those regions
in between the first and the second intersections with the beams.
A simple erosion of 1 pixel is applied to remove the exterior
pixels that were added during the earlier dilation operation.
Fig. 6 displays a visual representation of the postprocessing
procedure.

IV. IMAGE ACQUISITION
The blastocyst images used in the experimentation have been
acquired using an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope with a
Nomarski (DIC) optics. The software used for capturing our images is the Research Instrument (RI) Cronus 3. The microscope
includes a built-in magnification changer of 1×/1.6×; however,
all the images are captured at 1.6× and a lens objective of 20×.

SINGH et al.: AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF TROPHECTODERM IN MICROSCOPIC IMAGES OF HUMAN BLASTOCYSTS

387

Fig. 6. (a) Canny edge detector applied on the output of level set. (b) Canny edges are dilated. (c) Beams are radiated from the center of the mass. (d) First and the
last intersections of the segments with the beams are recorded. (e) Segments corresponding to the intersecting points are retained. (f) TE segments are converted to
the polar coordinate system (CS). (g) Regions with high variation are identified and removed using K-means clustering. (h) Removed intersections are substituted
with the cluster mean and are adjusted locally using the level-set algorithm. (i) Segments are converted back into the Cartesian CS and overlaid on the input image.

V. GROUND TRUTH
In order to compute the accuracy of the proposed algorithm, We have used a dataset of 85 HMC human blastocyst
images. These embryos were graded, and their different components were manually extracted by expert embryologists: Carole
Lawrence and Jason Au, both from the Pacific Center for Reproductive Medicine. We utilize the results of the manual identification as our ground truth (GT) or gold standard and compare
the output of our algorithm with that.

VI. PARAMETERS, EXPERIMENTATION, AND RESULTS
The proposed method is tested using 85 HMC human embryo
images containing embryos of grades A, B, and C. These images
each include one complete blastocyst with some debris or other
cells in the background. Some of these images may include partial views of neighboring embryos in them. We assume that the
region associated with the embryo of interest is larger than any
other part in the image. A single set of parameters is used for all
images. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations, comparisons

with other methods, as well as performance aspects in terms of
implementation and portability are presented next.
A. System Parameter Settings
Like any complex system, the proposed system has a few
parameters that are set according to the characteristics of the
input imagery. In this section, we explain the rational behind
the values chosen for such parameters as we think this might
help to port our system for input images from different sources.
In order to customize the system for other kind of input images
(captured by different groups and laboratories and perhaps with
other HMC microscopes or at different settings), some of these
parameters must be adjusted. We consider these parameters to
be the most important ones in the success of our algorithm for
other images.
1) Retinex: As explained earlier, the Retinex algorithm is
utilized to remove small gradients inside and outside the blastocyst region, as shown in Fig. 4. In the Retinex algorithm,
the level of smoothness of the output image depends on the
value of threshold t in (3). Clearly, this threshold must be set

388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I
EMPIRICALLY ESTIMATED THRESHOLD t
TE Grade
A
B
C
Average

Fig. 7. Different threshold values for Retinex algorithm: (a) Original image,
(b) t = 10, (c) t = 20, (d) t = 40.

Fig. 8. Histogram of the manually found best threshold t for the Retinex
algorithm.

according to the application and types and settings of input images. Fig. 7 shows a blastocyst image after application of the
Retinex algorithm at three different t settings.
To find a proper value for t that somehow fits all of our input
images empirically, the Retinex algorithm was applied to 15
embryo images of different grades. We must note that these 15
images are not part of our 85 test images. In each case, the
value of the threshold was adjusted manually, so that the best
output in terms of maximum smoothing of the cavity region was
achieved. The distribution of these threshold values is shown
in Fig. 8.
The threshold values, for all cases of different grades, as
shown in Table I, were averaged. The average value was then
used as the parameter t whenever the Retinex algorithm was
called throughout all of our experiments.
2) Level Set: In the succeeding step, the level-set algorithm
is applied to the output of Retinex algorithm. The parameter N
in the level-set algorithm is set to 2 as we utilize the level set as
a two-phase case. Parameter σ is set to 4, μ to 1.0, while t to

Mean Threshold t
24.3
26.7
24.4
25.1

0.1. A mask size of 17 × 17 pixels in accordance to the value of
σ is utilized. All these values are set according to the suggestion
by Li et al. [10]. The value of v is set to 0.001 × 2552 since our
data range is [0, 255].
3) Postprocessing: The parameters of Canny edge detector
in the postprocessing section include lower and upper thresholds
that are set to 0.12 and 0.3, respectively. These two values are
found empirically. A morphological dilation with a structuring
element of disk shape (radius of 3 pixels) is then applied to the
output of the Canny edge detector.
As explained in Section III-C, we have used a star shape radiating beam set to choose proper segments associated with the
TE region. We have used a separation of 5◦ for those beams.
A smaller value of such separation would allow catching those
tiny segments that may exist in the TE region. We have not noticed significant differences in the quality of the detected TE by
reducing this parameter. However, we noticed that our running
time could increase slightly. Increasing this parameter, however,
might cause missing few segments that ultimately might affect
the accuracy slightly. We have also allowed a 5-pixel deviation
in the exterior boundaries of neighboring TE segments. This
value is set according to the resolution of our HMC images as
well as usual offsets that may exist between the real center of a
blastocyst and the center of gravity of the blastocyst mass which
is used in the beam radiation process.
B. Performance
The proposed system is implemented in MTLAB 7 and tested
on a PC (CPU Intel Core2 Quad 2.26 GHz with 2-GB RAM).
The input images are 720 × 479 pixels. The entire extraction
process takes an average of 34 s to complete.
C. Qualitative Evaluation
Table II represents typical results for several HMC human
embryo images with the extracted TE boundaries overlaid on
the input images. To demonstrate the performance of the system
clearly and with no bias, we have categorized the visual data
by their grade and according to the quality of the output generated by our system. In this table, the first column represents
TEs’ actual grades, which were determined by our expert embryologists. The second column, Quality, represents the quality
of the results and in each case we show the best, the average,
and the worst results. We think that such information may provide some perspective for the readers of this paper. The third
column, Proposed method, shows the visual presentation of the
output regions generated by our algorithm. The boundaries of the

SINGH et al.: AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF TROPHECTODERM IN MICROSCOPIC IMAGES OF HUMAN BLASTOCYSTS

TABLE II
OUTPUT OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM ALONG WITH THE GT AND DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO FOR SAMPLE IMAGES

389

390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE IV
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS FOR BLASTOCYST IMAGES

TE
Grade
A
B
C
All

Mean
Shape
Accuracy [%]

Mean
Correctness [%]

Mean
Completeness [%]

Mean
Overall
Quality [%]

84.6
88.9
91.7
87.8

79.8
85.5
84.6
83.3

74.2
82.3
78.4
78.7

67.6
76.8
72.3
72.7

Fig. 9. TE region masks (a) marked by the expert and (b) identified by the
proposed algorithm automatically.

TABLE III
SHAPE ACCURACY OF TE REGIONS FOR 85 TEST IMAGES
Grade

No. of
images tested

Mean Shape
Accuracy [%]

Min/Max Shape
Accuracy [%]

A
B
C
Total

32
41
12
85

84.6
89.0
91.7
87.8

27.4/100
43.4/100
74.6/100
27.4/100

detected TE regions are shown with red lines. The fourth column, Ground Truth, demonstrates the GT, which are manually
marked with green lines by our experts. The fifth column, Difference, depicts the difference between the output of our algorithm
and the GT. Finally, the sixth column, Accuracy, lists the computed shape accuracy in each case in percentage.

normalization between the previous two
TP
(11)
TP + FP
TP
(12)
Completeness =
TP + FN
TP
(13)
Overall Quality =
TP + FP + FN
where, TP represents true positives (correctly extracted TE pixels), FP false positives (incorrectly extracted TE pixels), and
FN false negatives (missed TE pixels). Optimal values for the
four metrics are 1, and the overall quality cannot be higher than
either correctness or completeness.
Table IV represents the mean value of the above measures for
our dataset of 85 images.
In Fig. 10, the results of the shape accuracy measure are
plotted against the thickness of the ZP in pixels. The thickness
of the ZP was manually measured in pixels, and it is the average
width between the inner and outer ZP boundaries. We wanted to
see if the algorithm has any bias toward the level of expansion.
From these results, we could not see any bias. However, we still
thought that it might be informative to show these results as they
highlight the distribution of our image dataset.
Fig. 10 depicts the shape accuracy results against the level of
expansion or ZPs grade (which increases as the ZP width decreases.) To make the graph more informative, we have included
the histogram of the number of images for each ZP grade (2 to
4). We wanted to see if the algorithm has any bias toward the
Correctness =

D. Quantitative Evaluation
After the segmentation of TE regions, we compute the accuracy of the segmentation by comparing our results with the
GT. We have generated GT masks for all the embryo images
based on the manual segmentation done by our expert embryologists. Fig. 9 shows a sample case, where the GT mask (a) and
the TE region found by our algorithm (b) are displayed next to
each other.
To evaluate the proposed method quantitatively, we have used
the McKeowns shape accuracy factor [34] using the following
equation:
TEs = 1 −

Fig. 10. Shape accuracy for all the tested data against the level of expansion
of the embryos or ZP thickness.

|AGT − ATE |
.
AGT

(10)

Here, the area of TE region in the ground truth (AGT ) is compared against the area of the automatically detected TE region
by our proposed algorithm (ATE ). The shape accuracy in % for
each grade is shown in Table III.
As errors of pixel labeling are not taken into account in
the shape accuracy, additional metrics are required to obtain
a complete assessment. Therefore, three metrics of correctness,
completeness, and overall quality are computed. Correctness
measures the degree to which detected TE pixels are indeed
TE pixels, whereas completeness measures the degree to which
true TE pixels are detected by the system. Overall quality is

SINGH et al.: AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF TROPHECTODERM IN MICROSCOPIC IMAGES OF HUMAN BLASTOCYSTS

level of expansion. From these results, we could not conclude
any bias toward any specific ZP grade by our algorithm.
In [32], Filho et al. proposed a semiautomatic system for
classification of TE grades in day-5 human blastocysts. In their
work, authors identify the TE’s inner boundaries using Li et al.
[8] variational level set. The initialization of the level set was
performed manually. They estimated the TE region as the area
confined by the ZP’s inner and TE’s inner boundaries. Once
the TE region was extracted, fractal dimension of the signal
was calculated and used to approximate the regularity of the TE
thickness. The fractal dimension was utilized as a feature by
an SVM algorithm to classify (or grade) the TE. They report a
classification accuracy of 0.53 and 0.92 for TE grades of b and
c, respectively.
The main focus of the proposed work by Filho [32] is
the classification of grades, for which the area of the TE
region is segmented semiautomatically. Since the classification accuracy depends on the fractal dimension of the TE region, it is vital to estimate the TE area as accurate as possible. However, an automated algorithm for accurate identification of TE region plays a crucial role in the complete
analysis of embryos during the growth period, and it provides more details about the growth dynamics and, therefore, eliminates interpolation of the knowledge from discrete
observations.
The method proposed in this paper is capable of segmenting
the TE automatically in the presence of inhomogeneities in
the cavity region and debris in the neighborhood. To our best
knowledge, this is the first time that a fully automated method
for segmentation of the TE in human’s blastocyst is reported.
We believe that our algorithm can be used in systems such as the
one proposed by Filho to automate and remove the requirement
for human intervention as much as possible. Removal of the
debris through the Retinex algorithm [9] plays a critical role and
facilitates extraction of the true boundaries using an advanced
level set [10].

VII. CONCLUSION
In this study, we presented a novel algorithm for identification
of Trophectoderm regions of human embryos on their fifth day
of creation. We utilized the Retinex algorithm to enhance the
quality of our input images by deemphasizing blastocyst cavity
regions and those areas outside the embryo. We then used the
level-set algorithm that did not require manual initialization
and automatically converges to the TE boundaries. The proposed system can effectively and automatically segment TE
regions in blastocyst images of grades A, B, and C. We require only one condition in which the size of the embryo
of interest must be larger than the remaining embryos in
the image. As demonstrated, the proposed algorithm can detect TE regions with an average shape accuracy of 87.8%.
To our best knowledge, the presented results here are the
best reported results for the segmentation of Trophectoderm
regions.

391

APPENDIX
NITTY-GRITTY DETAILS OF THE LEVEL-SET ALGORITHM
In order to compute the local intensity property, a circular
neighborhood, defined by Oy  {x : |x − y| ≤ ρ} with a radius
ρ centered at each point y ∈ Ω, is considered. By assuming
that the bias field is changing slowly, the value of B(x) for a
point x in the circular neighborhood of Oy is considered near
to B(y) or
for x ∈ Oy

B(x) = B(y),

(14)

with the assumption that the intensities of B(x)J(x) in each
region Oy ∩ Ωi are close to constant B(y)ci
B(x)J(x) = B(y)ci ,

for x ∈ Oy ∩ Ωi

(15)

we have
I(x) = B(y)ci + n(x),

for x ∈ Oy ∩ Ωi .

(16)

Hence, the intensity in the set
= {I(x) : x ∈ (Oy ∩ Ωi )})
forms a cluster with a centroid of mi = B(y)ci , which is believed to be a sample picked out of a Gaussian distribution
with a mean value of mi . Image segmentation and bias field
estimation are computed using the above formulated local intensity clustering property. The neighborhood intensities of Oy
can be classified into N clusters with centers of mi = B(y)ci
for i = {1 . . . N } using the clustering properties derived above.
This is achieved via an iterative K-means algorithm that minimizes the clustering criteria in a continuous form [33]. Clustering criteria for classifying the intensities in Oy for a window
function K are defined as
N 

εy =
K(y − x)|I(x) − B(y)ci |2 dx
(17)
(Iyi

i=1

where

Oy

⎧


2
⎪
⎨ 1 exp −|u| ,
a
2σ 2
K(u) =
⎪
⎩
0,

for |u| < ρ

(18)

otherwise.

The convolution window K(y − x) is constructed as a w × w
mask, with w > 4 ∗ σ + 1, defined as the Gaussian kernel in
(18). The radius ρ for the neighborhood Oy should be chosen carefully depending on the intensity inhomogeneities. For
more localized intensity inhomogeneity, smaller ρ and σ should
be used. The classification of local intensities depends on the
minimization of the clustering criterion function εy . The classification is precise, if the value of εy is as small as possible. We
optimize εy over the entire domain Ω such that εy is minimum
for all ys in Ω. This can be realized by minimizing the integral
of εy for all ys in image domain Ω

ε=
 εy dy
(19)
or
ε=


N 

i=1

Oy



K(y − x)|I(x) − B(y)ci |2 dx dy.

(20)

392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

By minimizing the energy with respect to regions Ω1 . . . Ωn ,
constants c1 . . . cn , and bias field B, segmentation can be
achieved. To minimize the energy, the energy term is formulated in terms of the level-set function φ, constant vector
c = {c1 . . . cn }, and bias field B as
ε(φ, c, B) =

 
N

ei (x)Mi (φ(x))dx

(21)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge with gratitude the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) for support through the NSERC Engage Grant
Program.
REFERENCES

i=1

where ei is defined as

ei (x) = K(y − x)|I(x) − B(y)ci |2 dy.

(22)

The variational level-set formulation uses the energy ε as a
data term as defined by
T (φ, c, B) = ε(φ, c, B) + vL(φ) + μR(φ)

(23)

where the energy term L(φ) is defined as

L(φ) = |∇H(φ)|dx.

(24)

H is a heavy-side function, and the energy term R(φ) is

Rp (φ) = p|∇φ|dx.

(25)

We minimize the energy T (φ, c, B) with respect to each of its
variables (φ, c, and B) in each iteration.
1) Energy Minimization With Respect to φ: The energy is
minimized with respect to φ by keeping c and B constant. After
minimization the final gradient flow, ∂T /∂φ is expressed as


∇(φ)
∂T
= −δ(φ)(e1 − e2 ) + vδ(φ)div
∂φ
|∇(φ)|
+μdiv (dp (|∇(φ)|∇(φ)))

(26)

where  is the gradient operator, div is the divergence operator,
and dp is defined as
dp (s) =


p
.
s

(27)

2) Energy Minimization With Respect to c: For constant
φ and B, the most favorable c vector, ĉ = {ĉ1 , . . . , ĉN }, minimizing the energy, is

(B ∗ K)Iui dy
ĉ = 
,
i = 1, B, N.
(28)
((B 2 ∗ K))ui dy
3) Energy Minimization With Respect to B: For fixed φ
and c, the formulation is
(IJ (1) ) ∗ K
.
(29)
J (2) ∗ K

(2)
In the above equation, J (1) = N
=
i=1 ci ui and J
N
2
c
u
.
In
the
case
of
N
>
2
or
multiphase
level-set
fori
i=1 i
mulation, one may use more than two level-set functions to
formulate the energy function. In this application, however, we
utilized a value of 2 for N as our clustering algorithm will cluster
the image into two regions (TE and non-TE).
B̂ =

[1] J. G. Bromer and E. Seli, “Assessment of embryo viability in assisted
reproductive technologies: Shortcomings of current approaches and the
emerging role of metabolomics,” Curr. Opin. Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 20,
pp. 234–241, 2008.
[2] D. K. Gardner and W. B. Schoolcraft, “In-vitro culture of human blastocyst, R Jansen, D Mortimer (Eds.),” Towards Reproductive Certainty: Infertility Genetics Beyond, Parthenon Press, Carnforth. pp. 378–388, 1999.
[3] P. Crosignani, “Multiple gestation pregnancy,” Towards Reproductive Certainty, Infertility Genetics Beyond, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 1856–1864, 2000.
[4] A. Ahlström, C. Westin, E. Reismer, M. Wikland, and T. Hardarson,
“Trophectoderm morphology: An important parameter for predicting live
birth after single blastocyst tran,” Human Reproduction, vol. 26, no. 12,
pp. 3289–3296, 2011.
[5] A. E. B. Bendus, J. F. Mayer, S. K. Shipley, and W. H. Catherino, “Interobserver and intraobserver variation in day 3 embryo grading,” Fertility
Sterility, vol. 86, no. 6, pp. 1608–1615, 2006.
[6] C. Hnida, E. Engenheiro, and S. Ziebe, “Computer-controlled, multilevel,
morphometric analysis of blastomere size as biomarker of fragmentation
and multinuclearity in human embryos,” Human Reproduction, vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 288–293, 2004.
[7] A. Giusti, G. Corani, L. Gambardella, C. Magli, and L. Gianaroli, “Blastomere segmentation and 3D morphology measurements of early embryos
from Hoffman modulation contrast image stacks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Biomed. Imag., From Nano Macro, 2010, pp. 1261–1264.
[8] C. Li, C. Xu, C. Gui, and M. D. Fox, “Level set evolution without reinitialization: A new variational formulation,” in Proc. IEEE Comput.
Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis Pattern Recog., 2005, vol. 1, pp. 430–436.
[9] J.-M. Morel, A. B. Petro, and C. Sbert, “A PDE formalization of retinex
theory,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2825–2837,
Nov. 2010.
[10] C. Li, R. Huang, Z. Ding, J. Gatenby, N. Metaxas, and J. Gore, “A
level set method for image segmentation in the presence of intensity
inhomogeneities with application to MRI,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 2007–2016, Jul. 2011.
[11] D. K. Gardner, E. Surrey, D. Minjarez, A. Leitz, J. Stevens, and
W. B. Schoolcraft, “Single blastocyst transfer: A prospective randomized
trial,” Fertility Sterility, vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 551–555, 2004.
[12] J. Cohen, R. F. Simons, R. G. Edwards, C. B. Fehilly, and S. B. Fishel,
“Pregnancies following the frozen storage of expanding human blastocysts,” J. In Vitro Fertilization Embryo Transfer, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 59–64,
1985.
[13] A. Dokras, I. Sargent, and D. Barlow, “Human blastocyst grading: An
indicator of developmental potential?” Human Reproduction, vol. 8,
no. 12, pp. 2119–2127, 1993.
[14] U. D. Pedersen, O. F. Olsen, and N. H. Olsen, “A multiphase variational
level set approach for modelling human embryos,” in Proc. 2nd IEEE
Workshop Variational Geometric Level Set Methods Comput. Vis., 2003,
pp. 25–32.
[15] H. K. Zhao, T. Chan, B. Merriman, and S. Osher, “A variational level
set approach to multiphase motion,” J. Comput. Phys., vol. 127, no. 1,
pp. 179–195, 1996.
[16] A. Karlsson, N. C. Overgaard, and A. Heyden, “A two-step area based
method for automatic tight segmentation of zona pellucida in HMC images
of human embryos,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Scale Space PDE Methods
Comput. Vis., 2005, pp. 503–514.
[17] D. Morales, E. Bengoetxea, and P. Larraaga, “Automatic segmentation of zona pellucida in human embryo images applying an active
contour model,” in Proc. Med. Image Understanding Anal., 2008,
pp. 209–213.
[18] J. Canny, “A computational approach to edge detection,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. PAMI-8, no. 6, pp. 679–698, Nov. 1986.
[19] C. Wong, K. Loewke, N. Bossert, B. Behr, C. De Jonge, T. Baer, and
R. Reijo Pera, “Non-invasive imaging of human embryos before embryonic genome activation predicts development to the blastocyst stage,” in
Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 28, no. 10, 2010, pp. 1115–21.

SINGH et al.: AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF TROPHECTODERM IN MICROSCOPIC IMAGES OF HUMAN BLASTOCYSTS

393

[20] E. Santos Filho, J. A. Noble, and D. Wells, “Toward a method for automatic
grading of microscope human embryo images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Biomed. Imag., From Nano Macro, 2010, pp. 1289–1292.
[21] E. H. Land and J. J. McCann, “Lightness and retinex theory,” J. Opt. Soc.
Am., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 1971.
[22] V. Agarwal, B. Abidi, A. Koschan, and M. Abidi, “An overview of color
constancy algorithms,” J. Pattern Recog. Res., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 42–54,
2006.
[23] E. Provenzi, L. de Carli, A. Rizzi, and D. Marini, “Mathematical definition
and analysis of the Retinex algorithm,” vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2613–2621,
2005.
[24] L. Lei, Y. Zhou, and J. Li, “An investigation of Retinex algorithms for
image enhancement,” J. Electron. (China), vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 696–700,
2007.
[25] D. H. Brainard and B. A. Wandell, “Analysis of the Retinex theory of
color vision,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 1651–1661, 1986.
[26] T. G. Stockham, “Image processing in the context of a visual model,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 828–842, Jul. 1972.
[27] J. Frankle, and J. McCann, “Method and apparatus for lightness imaging,”
U.S. Patent 4 384 336, May 17, 1983.
[28] B. Funt, F. Ciurea, and J. Mccann, “Retinex in Matlab,” J. Electron. Imag.,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 48–57, Jan. 2004.
[29] B. K. Horn, “Determining Lightness from an image,” Comput. Graph.
Image Process., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 277–299, 1974.
[30] G. R. Grimmett and D. R. Stirzaker, Probability and Random Processes:
Problems and Solutions (ser. Oxford science publications). New York,
NY, USA: Clarendon, 1992.
[31] P. Prez, M. Gangnet, and A. Blake, “Poisson image editing,” ACM Trans.
Graph., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 313–318, 2003.
[32] E. Santos Filho, J. A. Noble, M. Poli, T. Griffiths, G. Emerson,
and D. Wells, “A method for semi-automatic grading of human blastocyst microscope images,” Human Reproduction, vol. 127, no. 9,
pp. 2641–2648, 2012.
[33] S. Theodoridis and K. Koutroumbas, Pattern Recognition, 3rd ed. Orlando,
FL, USA: Academic, 2006.
[34] D. McKeown, T. Bulwinkle, S. Cochran, W. Harvey, C. McGlone, and
J. Shufelt, “Performance evaluation for automatic feature extraction,” Int.
Archives Photogrammetry Remote Sens., vol. 33 , pp. 379–394, 2000.

Jason Au graduated from the University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, with a double
major in biochemistry and chemistry and received
the Master’s degree in clinical embryology from the
University of Leeds, Leeds, U.K.
He has been working as an Embryologist at the
Pacific Centre for Reproductive Medicine over the
past six years and is proficient in all facets of andrology and embryology. He has extensive theoretical
knowledge in reproductive science and strong technical skills in the laboratory. His research interests
include clinical research in the field of in vitro fertilization.

Amarjot Singh (S’08) received the Bachelor of Technology degree from the National Institute of Technology, India. He is working toward the Graduate degree
in the School of Engineering Science, Simon Fraser
University (SFU), Burnaby, BC, Canada.
Before joining SFU, he was a Research Engineer
at the National University of Singapore, Singapore.
He has worked for multiple organizations in the past
including INRIA, Sophia Antipolis, France, and the
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. His research interests include image segmentation, motion tracking,
and computational photography.

Jon Havelock received the B.Sc. and M.D. degrees
from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB,
Canada. .
He completed his residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada, then a three-year fellowship in reproductive endocrinology and infertility at UT Southwestern
Medical Center in Dallas, TX, USA. He is certified
in obstetrics and gynecology by the Royal College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology. His focus
is on in vitro fertilization and tubal reconstructive surgery.

Parvaneh Saeedi (M’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran, and the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer
engineering from the University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 1998 and 2004, respectively.
From 2004 to 2006, she was a Research Associate
with MacDonald Detwiller and Associates Ltd. In
2007, she joined the School of Engineering Science
at Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada,
where she is currently an Associate Professor. Her research interests include
pattern recognition, machine vision, image understanding, and artificial intelligence.

