1672

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Analysis of the EMG Signal During Cyclic
Movements Using Multicomponent
AM–FM Decomposition
Giorgio Biagetti, Member, IEEE, Paolo Crippa, Member, IEEE, Alessandro Curzi, Simone Orcioni, Member, IEEE,
and Claudio Turchetti, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Sport, fitness, as well as rehabilitation activities, often
require the accomplishment of repetitive movements. The correctness of the exercises is often related to the capability of maintaining the required cadence and muscular force. Failure to maintain
the required force, also known as muscle fatigue, is accompanied
by a shift in the spectral content of the surface electromyography (EMG) signal toward lower frequencies. This paper presents
a novel approach for simultaneously obtaining exercise repetition
frequency and evaluating muscular fatigue, as functions of time, by
only using the EMG signal. The mean frequency of the amplitude
spectrum (MFA) of the EMG signal, considered as a function of
time, is directly related to the dynamics of the movement performed
and to the fatigue of the involved muscles. If the movement is cyclic,
MFA will display the same pattern and its average will tend to decrease. These two effects have been simultaneously modeled by a
two-component AM–FM model based on the Hilbert transform.
The method was tested on signals recorded using a wireless system applied to healthy subjects performing dumbbell biceps curls,
dumbbell lateral rises, and bodyweight squats. Experimental results show the excellent performance of the proposed technique.
Index Terms—AM-FM, cadence estimation, cyclic movements,
Hilbert transform, muscle fatigue, surface EMG.

I. INTRODUCTION
ANY recreational, sportive, training, or even rehabilitation activities require the execution of repetitive movements. Examples include walking, running, cycling, exercising
on strength training machines, or lifting freeweights, which are
all accomplished by repetitively contracting skeletal muscles. In
order to quantify performance, maximize efficiency, and even
prevent injuries, it is important to control the forces generated
by muscles during their dynamic contractions.
However, direct recording of forces produced by muscles
during many physical activities is currently unpractical, often
requiring use of special force or torque sensors, which can be
bulky, expensive, and not user friendly. The analysis of surface
electromyography (EMG) signals offers an alternative, albeit
indirect, method of quantifying [1] and classifying [2] the muscular activity.

M

Manuscript received March 5, 2014; revised August 1, 2014; accepted August 29, 2014. Date of publication September 8, 2014; date of current version
September 1, 2015.
The authors are with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università Politecnica delle Marche, I-60131 Ancona, Italy (e-mail: g.biagetti@
univpm.it; p.crippa@univpm.it; a.curzi@univpm.it; s.orcioni@univpm.it;
c.turchetti@univpm.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2356340

From another point of view, localized muscle fatigue is
a complex process that is due to various physiological (and
psychological) phenomena [3]. As a muscle becomes more fatigued, movement coordination deteriorates, work efficiency decreases, and the muscle itself could strain. Therefore, assessing
muscle fatigue is also very important in order to prevent possible
injuries and to maximize workout efficiency.
In this paper, we thus propose an EMG signal analysis algorithm that is able to simultaneously extract features that can
be related to the “effort” (cadence) and to the resulting muscle fatigue. The aim is to provide a simple, easy-to-understand,
and near real-time “summary” of the exercise that is being performed, so that the exercising subject can immediately use this
information to direct and try to maximize the effectiveness of
their routine.
There is evidence [4]–[6] that spectral parameters derived
from the EMG signal, such as mean frequency or median
frequency, can be used to evaluate muscular fatigue. In fact,
during a sustained isometric contraction, there is an increase in
the amplitude of the low-frequency band and a relative decrease
in the higher frequencies, which is called EMG spectrum
compression [7].
However, for dynamic or cyclic movements, or for contraction levels higher than 50% of maximum voluntary contraction,
the EMG is inherently a nonstationary signal, reducing the physical meaning of the overall spectrum and requiring the use of
more sophisticated time–frequency analysis techniques, since
amplitude and frequency change over time. To deal with this
time variability, many signal processing methods suitable for
application in EMG-based muscle fatigue evaluation have been
proposed [8]–[10]. Also, natively nonstationary signal analysis
techniques, such as wavelet transform, have been proposed to
analyze the EMG signal during dynamic contractions by estimating the time-dependent spectral moments [11]–[15].
Moreover, a different time–frequency analysis technique,
known as the empirical mode decomposition (EMD), was proposed in [16]. It is based on the iterative extraction of intrinsic
modes (starting from the highest frequency component of the
signal) and followed by the application of the Hilbert transform
to compute a spectrum from them. The EMD, which has been
recently revisited in [17], has been applied to many different
application fields, such as seismology, oceanography, and the
processing of biological data, and one application to the EMG
signal can be found in [18].
Other recent works [19]–[22] have proposed different
methodologies that use the EMG signal for evaluating fatigue

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BIAGETTI et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE EMG SIGNAL DURING CYCLIC MOVEMENTS USING MULTICOMPONENT AM–FM DECOMPOSITION

in cyclic movements, where sinusoidal AM–FM models could
also be useful.
Sinusoidal AM–FM models are representations of signals
that can be considered as resulting from simultaneous amplitude modulation and frequency modulation, where the carriers,
amplitude envelopes, and instantaneous frequencies (IFs) need
to be estimated. These representations can be classified as monocomponent or multicomponent.
Monocomponent representations are well established and
several demodulation techniques exist, as those based on the
Teager-Kaiser operator [23], [24] and the Hilbert transform [25].
These approaches use ad hoc filters in order to regularize the
estimated envelope and IF of the signal.
Multicomponent AM–FM representations, widely used in audio and speech processing, are better suited to model nonlinear
and nonstationary signals [26]–[28]. A recent development of
one of these techniques can be found in [29], where the parameters of the sinusoidal components are estimated by means of
likelihood maximization over the windowed signal.
The mean frequency of the amplitude spectrum (MFA) of
the EMG signal, considered as a function of time, is directly
related to the dynamics of the movement performed and to the
fatigue of the involved muscles. If the movement is cyclic, MFA
will display the same cyclic pattern, but its average will tend
to decrease as the muscle becomes fatigued due to the reduced
conduction velocity of muscle fibers that cause a shift of the
spectrum toward lower frequencies. These two effects can be
simultaneously modeled by a multicomponent (two-component)
AM–FM model.
In this paper, we applied to the MFA of the EMG signal a
technique based on the Hilbert transform and inspired by the
work proposed by Feldman in [30] for analyzing mechanical
vibrations. In this technique, called Hilbert vibration decomposition, the nonstationary frequency of the largest component is
estimated as an average function of the IF of the composition,
and the corresponding envelope is estimated according to the
synchronous demodulation.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the
mathematical formulation of the used multicomponent AM–FM
model and the proposed technique for extracting both muscular
fatigue and exercise cadence from the EMG signal. Section III
describes the EMG data and their preprocessing. Section IV reports the experimental results and comments on the performance
of the technique. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. MULTICOMPONENT AM–FM MODEL
The basic form for a multicomponent AM–FM model of a
generic real signal x(t) is


 t
N

ai (t) cos ϕi +
ωi (τ ) dτ
(1)
x(t) =
i=1

0

where N is the number of components and for i = 1, . . . , N ,
ai (t) is their (instantaneous) amplitude, ωi (t) is their (instantaneous) frequency, and ϕi is their initial phase. Of course, for any
given signal x(t), the representation (1) is not unique. The aim
of AM–FM modeling is, thus, usually to find a representation

1673

that has useful properties for the problem at hand. This is often
stated by simply requiring that ai (t) and ωi (t) be regular and
slowly time-varying signals.
In the following, we will briefly outline an algorithm, adapted
from the one first described in [30], that is able to extract one
component at a time from the original signal, each having the
desired smoothness properties, under the constraint that different components have different amplitudes. To this end, a few
definitions must first be given.
A. Instantaneous Amplitude and Frequency
Let z(t) be an analytic complex signal, given by
z(t) = x(t) + j H[x(t)]

(2)

where H[·] denotes the Hilbert transform. The previous equation
can also be written as
z(t) = a(t) ej ϕ(t)

(3)

with
a(t) = |z(t)| ,

ϕ(t) = Im(log(z)) .

(4)

We can directly define a(t) as the signal instantaneous amplitude (IA), and ω(t) = dϕ(t)
dt as its instantaneous frequency (IF),
that can be computed as


1 dz(t)
ω(t) = Im
(5)
z(t) dt
so that
z(t) = a(t) ej (ϕ(0)+

t
0

ω (τ ) dτ )

(6)

or, equivalently



 t
x(t) = a(t) cos ϕ(0) +
ω(τ ) dτ .

(7)

0

An example may help to visualize the situation and give some
insight on the workings of the algorithm that will be described
next. First, by comparing (6) and (7), it is easy to see that the
complex signal corresponding to a fixed-amplitude and fixedfrequency sinusoid is just a point that moves in a circle of
radius a around the origin of the complex plane, making ω/2π
revolutions per second. Let us then consider a simple synthetic
signal xB (t) composed of just two components, x1 (t) and x2 (t),
defined as
xB (t) = x1 (t) + x2 (t)

(8)

x1 (t) = a1 (t) cos(ω1 t)
a1 (t) = 1 + 0.2 sin(ωA1 t)

(9)
2

x2 (t) = a2 (t) cos(ω2O t + ω2Δ t /2T )
a2 (t) = 0.1 + 0.05 cos(ωA2 t)

(10)

so that x1 (t) is a simple AM signal, while x2 (t) is both amplitude and frequency modulated, with ω2 (t) = ω2O + ω2Δ t/T
increasing linearly with time.
A portion of this signal is shown in Fig. 1. For simplicity in
stating results, in this figure and throughout the paper, we will

1674

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 1. Portion of the signal used for the example given in (8), with f1 = 5 Hz,
fA 1 = 1 Hz, f2 O = 40 Hz, f2 Δ = 25 Hz, fA 2 = 10 Hz, and T = 10 s.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the process used to identify the largest component.
“H” is the Hilbert transformer that produces the complex analytic signal, “LPF”
are linear low-pass filters with zero group delay implemented with non-causal
time-varying FIR filters as described in the text.

Fig. 2. Portion of the analytic signal resulting from the example given in (8),
parametric curve showing zi (t) = xi (t) + H[xi (t)] for 8.8 s < t < 9.2 s.

make use of either the symbol ω or f to denote IFs with the
understanding that it’s always ω = 2π f . Fig. 2 shows a parametric curve of the corresponding complex analytic signal. As
can be seen, the larger signal z1 (t) (in dashed line) determines
the overall evolution of the trajectory around the origin (in the
considered time span, a1 (t) is just almost linearly increasing).
The smaller component, z2 (t), cannot cause the trajectory to
circle the origin, it can only add a small “wander” around the
trajectory imposed by z1 (t). This is the key idea underpinning
the decomposition algorithm. Since the number of revolutions
around the origin cannot be influenced by smaller components,
the average IF of the complex signal will only be determined by
the largest of its components (see [31] for a mathematical proof
of this for a two-component case).
B. Multicomponent Decomposition
Once the frequency of the largest component is identified,
it can be extracted by any of several means, e.g., by coherent
demodulation in our case, and then removed from the signal. If
we suppose that all the components have similar bandwidths,
perfect separation is possible provided that the bandwidth of the
low-pass filter used in the coherent demodulator is smaller than

half the distance between the carrier frequency of the desired
component and that of its nearest neighbor. The procedure can,
then, be iterated at will to extract progressively smaller components provided that they have sufficiently differing amplitudes
(a sufficient condition is that every given component is larger
than the sum of all the smaller components).
A sketch of the algorithm for extracting the largest component is depicted in Fig. 3. It would have been a straightforward
coherent demodulator but for the phase filtering stage. This step
is indeed quite tricky, as the iterative sifting allows for no synchronization errors. Traditional filters cannot, thus, be used to
filter the phase signal, as they introduce unacceptable errors and
delays. These problems can largely be avoided if the filter is
used to process the frequency signal, after differentiation, as
shown in the bottom part of the figure, because the frequency
we are interested in is almost stationary and, thus, much more
amenable to noncausal filtering. But, then, the initial phase lost
to differentiation must be restored and integration errors compensated for. The algorithm is, thus, composed of the following
steps:
1) Given a signal x(t), compute its analytic counterpart z(t)
as in (2).
2) Compute the IF ω(t) of the overall signal according to
(5).
3) Estimate the average IF ω(t).
Since the IF can vary with time, the estimation is done by
low-pass filtering the signal ω(t) but the bandwidth and
the performance of the filter employed must accurately
be chosen according to the desired smoothness of the
extracted components. This usually requires a very narrow
filter, which introduces large delays to the signal. In a
batch analysis scenario, as the one we consider, this is not
important as the delay can easily be compensated, or a
noncausal zero-group-delay filter used, but this must be
taken into consideration if a real-time implementation is
eventually tried.

BIAGETTI et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE EMG SIGNAL DURING CYCLIC MOVEMENTS USING MULTICOMPONENT AM–FM DECOMPOSITION

1675

Mathematically, filtering the IF means computing its convolution with the impulse response hF (t) of a suitable
low-pass filter that we will assume has zero group delay
ω(t) = ω(t)  hF (t)

(11)

where the operator  here means a “mirrored” convolution, a particular type of convolution that extends the
signal to be filtered by mirroring it along the time axis at
the beginning and end of the interval, so that there is no
missing data near the boundaries and large transients at
signal start and end can be avoided. As mentioned before,
this works best for almost stationary signals but has the
drawback that the filter itself is no longer time invariant
(which is not a particular concern for the problem at hand,
while it is much more important for us to be able to use
very narrow and, hence, very long filters without losing
large intervals during transients).
4) Compute a first estimate of the phase of the identified
component, ϕ(t), as
 t
ϕ(t) =
ω(τ ) dτ.
(12)
0

Since ω(t) will be used for coherent demodulation and the
result subtracted from the original signal, it is of uttermost
importance that synchronization between the local phase,
obtained by integrating the filtered IF, and the original
signal phase, is kept (a coherent demodulator will tolerate
phase discrepancies but the subtractor employed to remove the extracted component will not). If the signals are
relatively noise-free and computations are done with high
resolution, keeping the demodulator synchronized may
not be an issue, only the initial phase needs to be detected.
But for real-world signals, it is much more robust to add
a phase-lock-loop to assure continued synchronization, as
the numerical evaluation of (12) will inevitably introduce
errors in the long term. This will be done in the following
step.
5) Adjust initial phase and keep synchronization. This can be
done in a single step by checking the instantaneous phase
difference between ϕ(t) and the original signal
δ(t) = ϕ(t) − ϕ(t)

(13)

and by low-pass filtering this phase error as
δ(t) = δ(t)  hF (t)

(14)

so that it can be used to correct the initial frequency and
phase estimates. The corrected phase will, thus, become
ϕ̂(t) = ϕ(t) + δ(t)

(15)

so that the corresponding frequency results
dδ(t)
.
dt
It is worth noticing that the correction is such that
 t
ϕ̂(t) =
ω̂(τ ) dτ + δ(0)
ω̂(t) = ω(t) +

0

(16)

Fig. 4. Amplitude of the components extracted from the example signal given
in (8) with the proposed algorithm.

being, from (12)
 t
ω(τ ) dτ + (δ(t) − δ(0)) + δ(0) = ϕ(t) + δ(t)
0

(18)
and ϕ̂(t) can be regarded as a filtered and time-aligned
version of ϕ(t). In fact, δ(t)  ϕ(t)  hF (t) − ϕ(t) being
ϕ(t)  hF (t)  ϕ(t) because a signal does not change
much if passed twice under the same low-pass filter, so
that ϕ̂(t)  ϕ(t)  hF (t).
Unfortunately, computing (13) is not as trivial as it may
look because ϕ(t) is computed as Im(log(z)), and the
complex logarithm is a multiple-valued function. A suitable phase unwrapping algorithm is needed to restore continuity of ϕ(t) before filtering
6) Perform coherent demodulation. Now that we have the
IF and aligned phase, we can compute the IA by coherent demodulation. Let c(t) be the demodulated complex
signal
c(t) = z(t) e−j ϕ̂(t)

that still contains all of the lower amplitude components.
We can extract the demodulated component by low-pass
filtering
c(t) = c(t)  hA (t)

(20)

â(t) = |c(t)|

(21)

and letting

be the demodulated amplitude. hA (t) is again the impulse
response of a suitable zero-group-delay low-pass filter (it
will usually be different from the one used to filter the IF).
7) Compute the selected component as
x̂(t) = â(t) cos(ϕ̂(t)) .

(22)

The parameters of the extracted component are thus â(t)
and ϕ̂(t) or ω̂(t).
8) Subtract the selected component from the original signal
e(t) = x(t) − x̂(t)

(17)

(19)

(23)

and repeat the process using e(t) as the new x(t) as many
times as desired.

1676

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. Frequency of the components extracted from the example signal given
in (8) with the proposed algorithm.

To complete the example given at the beginning, in Figs. 4
and 5, it is possible to see the estimated IAs (â1 (t) and â2 (t))
and IFs (fˆ1 (t) = ω̂1 (t)/2π and fˆ2 (t) = ω̂2 (t)/2π) of the extracted components. The filters employed had 2 Hz and 20 Hz
cutoff frequencies for hF and hA , respectively. Almost perfect
separation of the two components was obtained.

Fig. 6. Windowed EMG signal recorded from a biceps muscle during an
exercise with a 3 kg dumbbell, and corresponding sliding mean frequency.

III. DATA ANALYSIS
Given an EMG signal s(t), the first step to be performed is to
remove possible acquisition artifacts and to locate the regions
of interest. To this end, the signal s(t) is first high-pass filtered
with a second-order Butterworth filter (hL ) with an fL = 10 Hz
cutoff frequency to remove dc offset and baseline wander due
to cable movement. Then, a simple activity detection is performed. As it will be clearer next, there is absolutely no need of
employing an accurate endpoint detector, since the presence of a
few false positives or negatives at this stage will only have negligible consequences on the final results. So, a two-thresholds
(hysteretic) comparator acting on the signal RMS, averaged over
127.5 ms windows (255 samples at the sample rate employed)
was used to identify rest and activity periods, with thresholds
that had been set to 40 μV and 20 μV, after evaluation of the
background noise of the acquisition unit. The signal was zeroed
during rest periods to avoid contamination of the MFA estimate
due to dominating higher frequency electrical noise when no
muscle activity is present. The signal after preprocessing is thus
y(t) = (s(t) ∗ hL (t)) w(t)

(24)

where w(t) ∈ {0, 1} is the comparator output.
Then, we need to compute the MFA trajectory from y(t).
There are several ways in which this can be accomplished, e.g.,
by wavelet decomposition, time-frequency distributions, shorttime Fourier transform (STFT), etc. Among these, we found the
best results with the STFT, implemented by performing a sliding
fast Fourier transform with segments containing 2.048 s worth
of signal (i.e., not counting samples where w(t) = 0) windowed
with a raised cosine (that essentially halves the effective length
of the window giving improved time resolution). Let Y (t, ω) be
the result. The ability of the STFT to use relatively large analysis
windows is beneficial to our approach as it intrinsically smooths
the time dependence of Y (t, ω) and attenuates the effects of

localized artifacts. The MFA is, then, computed as
 fH
ω |Y (t, ω)| dω
1 0
x(t) =
 fH
2π
|Y (t, ω)| dω

(25)

0

where fH = 500 Hz is the cutoff frequency of the electromyograph used to record the signals. Please note that, contrary to
many other authors, we prefer to weigh the frequency with the
signal amplitude, and not power, as in our experiments this led to
significantly better results. Unfortunately, this also makes direct
comparisons of extracted frequencies to those of other published
works harder, as the scales are not immediately comparable.
The signal x(t), an example of which can be seen in Fig. 6
together with its corresponding EMG signal and activity detection windows, contains lots of information about the movement
being performed and the muscle fatigue status. If the movement
is cyclic, so will x(t) be, but the average frequency will tend
to decrease as the muscle becomes fatigued due to the reduced
conduction velocity of muscle fibers that cause a shift of the
spectrum towards lower frequencies. These two effects can be
simultaneously modeled by a two-component AM–FM model,
obtained using the algorithm described in Section II-B on the
MFA computed in (25).
The first component sought will, thus, be the slowly timevarying average frequency decreasing trend due to fatigue. Since
x(t) never crosses the origin, the global trend is clearly the
largest amplitude component, associated to an almost vanishing
IF. It is, thus, expected that the trend of x(t) is captured by the
amplitude of the first component â1 (t) alone, with ω̂1 (t)  0.
After having subtracted this trend, the resulting signal will oscillate around the origin due to MFA variations during the different
phases of the cyclic movement. These variations are expected

BIAGETTI et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE EMG SIGNAL DURING CYCLIC MOVEMENTS USING MULTICOMPONENT AM–FM DECOMPOSITION

1677

(BC)] lie around 20 reps/min ( 0.3 Hz), we selected the cutoff
frequencies for both hF and hA at 30 mHz, a decade below
the frequency we need to reject. Please be aware that cutoff
frequencies cannot be set too low as doing so would hinder the
possibility of tracking pace changes. The proposed value seems
to be a reasonable compromise between good rejection of the
cyclic component and tracking of the possibly time-varying
pace.
From the above discussion, it should be possible to derive
that two important characterizing properties of the performance
achieved during an exercise, fatigue, and cadence can be easily
associated to the extracted â1 (t) and ω̂2 (t) signals, which, thus,
provide a compact, visual, and immediately understandable representation of the exercise performed.
In terms of processing times, deriving these results only took
about 1.6 s for the STFT and just 35 ms for the AM–FM decomposition, for a recording of 43.4 s, on a common PC equipped
with an Intel Core2 Q9550 processor at 2.8 GHz running code
under GNU Octave.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Methodology

Fig. 7. Amplitudes and frequencies of the first two components extracted
from the signal x(t) reported in Fig. 6. As a reference, the inverse of the interval
between consecutive contractions (manually annotated) is also reported with
dots alongside the curve fˆ2 (t).

to be captured by the second component extracted from x(t).
The amplitude of the second component â2 (t) will represent the
amplitude of these frequency variations (i.e., difference between
“peak” and “mean” MFA during one cycle of the movement),
while ω̂2 (t) will represent the frequency of these variations, i.e.,
the muscle contraction rate (e.g., the cadence at which the exercise was performed), which can be related to the effort put in
performing the exercise. This can clearly be seen in Fig. 7. â1 (t)
very closely follows the decreasing trend of x(t), and similarly,
fˆ2 (t) follows the pace at which the exercise was performed. To
prove this, dots have been placed at a frequency corresponding
to the inverse of the interval between two consecutive contractions, manually annotated from the original EMG signal. fˆ2 (t)
just smooths out these points, which are indeed quite noisy due
to intrinsic difficulties in accurately annotating the position of
every contraction using nothing but the EMG signal alone, and
to the inherent variation in the execution of the exercise.
The filters used for this decomposition task only need to
be able to separate this slow fatigue-induced trend from the
cyclic component due to the repetition rate of the exercise,
and so, their precise cutoff frequency is not very critical. Since
typical execution speeds for this kind of exercise [biceps curls

Five healthy subjects, aged from 32 to 48 years, volunteered
to perform the experiments.
They were all informed about the aims and procedure of the
experiment and signed a written consent form to participate in
it.
They were asked to choose three dumbbell weights from the
set 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg, and 7 kg, according to their level of fitness,
and perform BC, at an approximately constant pace of about
20 reps/min (0.33 Hz), for 1 min. Exercises were performed
starting with the lighter dumbbell and progressing in increasing
weight order, allowing the subjects 10 min to rest before moving
to the next weight.
To further validate the algorithm under different conditions
and ensure its applicability to different muscle groups, subject
3 also performed some additional exercises: 1) a longer BC
exercise at a variable cadence to help to better highlight the
capabilities of the proposed algorithm of tracking time-varying
features; 2) dumbbell lateral rises (DLR); 3) and bodyweight
(BW) squats.
For the variable-cadence BC exercise, the subject was asked
to start at the “standard” pace with a 3 kg dumbbell, then to
double the pace after 15 s, slow down after a dozen curls, and
then speed up again after about 45 s from the start and try to
keep up until exhaustion.
For the DLR, the exercise was also performed with a 3 kg
dumbbell until exhaustion, but on another day, so that fatigue
from the previous exercises did not influence the measure.
Finally, the BW squat exercise was performed at an approximately constant pace of about 15 reps/min (0.25 Hz), for about
2 min.
The EMG signal was recorded using a wireless electromiograph system. Electrode location and orientation on the muscle has been established following the SENIAM [32] recommendations, though since our method is mainly aimed towards

1678

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS OF THE FATIGUE TEST FOR ALL THE SUBJECTS:
ESTIMATED RATE OF MFA VARIATION [ %/min ]

Subject

Fig. 8. Photograph of the recording setup with the wireless electromyograph
attached to the biceps.

subject 1
subject 2
subject 3
subject 4
subject 5

Weight
2 kg

3 kg

5 kg

7 kg

−7.9
−0.6
−1.2

−4.2
−9.8
−7.5
−7.4
−12.0

−12.4
−30.3
−19.1
−16.8
−14.3

−23.7
−34.3

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS OF THE FATIGUE TEST FOR ALL THE SUBJECTS:
ESTIMATED MEAN CADENCE [reps/min ]

Subject

subject 1
subject 2
subject 3
subject 4
subject 5

Weight
2 kg

3 kg

5 kg

7 kg

17.7
23.5
20.9

20.5
21.7
20.1
23.4
22.4

21.4
18.6
18.3
24.5
24.9

20.4
22.6

A picture of the setup for the BC exercise, with self-adhesive
electrodes connected to the biceps brachii muscle, is shown
in Fig. 8, along with the sensing unit (including the sensor
proper, battery, and electrode attachments) which weighs just
23 g. It has a bandwidth extending from 5 Hz to 500 Hz, a
resolution of 5 μV, and a sampling rate of 2 kHz. For the other
two exercise types, the signal was recorded from the deltoideus
medius muscle for the DLR and from the rectus femoris muscle
for the BW squats.
B. Result Summary and Discussion

Fig. 9. Amplitudes of the first component extracted from signals recorded
during exercises with different weights from two different subjects. The decreasing trend shows the reduction in MFA due to fatigue. The average cadence
(mean value of fˆ2 (t)) is also reported.

fitness and recreational users, it is not reasonable to expect them
to strictly follow skin preparation procedures nor to be able
to place the electrodes with extreme accuracy. We, thus, used
larger electrodes (24 mm diameter), which are less sensitive to
positioning errors, increased the center spacing to about 4 cm,
and applied them directly on washed skin. The algorithm we
propose is supposed to be very immune to noise and, to a certain degree, artifacts present in the signal, so it should be able to
cope with signals recorded under less-than-optimal conditions.

All of the recorded EMG signals were analyzed using the proposed algorithm. An excerpt of the obtained results is shown in
Fig. 9, which reports the fatigue plot for two subjects that chose
different sets of weights. The decrease of MFA with fatigue and
the different effects of the various loads, can clearly be seen. To
avoid clutter in the figures, only the mean cadence was reported.
A summary of all the results relative to the constant-pace BC
exercises is also reported in Tables I and II, which show the
estimated relative average rate of MFA variation (computed by
linear regression on â1 (t), i.e., we pose â1 (t) ≈ α + β t and report the value of β/α) and estimated mean cadence, respectively.
Furthermore, Fig. 10 shows the results for the variable-pace exercise.
To further validate the applicability of the algorithm, the estimated instantaneous cadence was subject to deeper investigation. Indeed, the algorithm extracts components according
to their relative amplitudes, and is based on the assumption
that the second largest component contains information about
the cadence. Sometimes, due to noise in the signal, abnormal
execution of the exercise, or other phenomena, it can be that

BIAGETTI et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE EMG SIGNAL DURING CYCLIC MOVEMENTS USING MULTICOMPONENT AM–FM DECOMPOSITION

1679

TABLE III
ERROR IN THE ESTIMATED INSTANTANEOUS CADENCE [MISSED/INSERTED REPS]
Subject

subject 1
subject 2
subject 3
subject 4
subject 5

Fig. 10. Amplitudes of the first two components extracted form a variablepace exercise (top), together with estimated instantaneous cadence (middle),
and difference between the integral of the instantaneous cadence and the accumulated number of repetitions (bottom).

the second largest component is affected by errors and is not
directly related to the instantaneous cadence, i.e., z(t) might
circle the origin not because the subject completed a repetition
but because of other sources of error (by the way, it is worth
noticing that the first component cannot be mistaken for something else because, by definition, x(t) does not cross the zero,
so even in the eventuality that something happens to the second
component, it cannot affect fatigue estimation at all). In such
cases, the estimated instantaneous cadence will be in error but
since the signals are then smoothed out by quite narrow filters,
if these events are rare this has little consequences on the mean
cadence estimation.

constant pace

variable pace

2 kg

3 kg

5 kg

7 kg

0/0
0/0
0/0

0/0
0/0
0/0
0/0
0/0

2/0
0/0
1/0
0/1
0/2

1/1
0/0

3 kg

2/0

Fig. 11. Amplitudes and frequencies extracted from signals recorded during
DLR and BW squat exercises.

The frequency of occurrence of these potential problems was
investigated by comparing the integral of the estimated cadence
(that should sum up to the number or recorded repetitions) and
the actual number of recorded repetitions, manually verified on
the signal. This difference, for the variable-speed exercise, can
be seen always in Fig. 10: between 20 s and 40 s, a couple of
contractions were missed causing a slight underestimation of
the instantaneous cadence. The results of the comparison for
the whole set are shown in Table III, where it can be seen that
only 10 repetitions were missed and/or inserted, over a total
of 349 repetitions, giving an overall accuracy better than 97.1%.
Moreover, most of the recordings with light weights are

1680

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

completely correct, only at higher loads does the problem manifest with a certain frequency, probably because of the higher
difficulty in correctly and regularly performing the exercise near
subject’s own strength limit.
As a last test of the suitability of the algorithm for correctly processing signals recorded under different conditions,
two other exercise types have been analysed. Fig. 11 shows the
result for a 3 kg DLR exercise and a BW squat exercise. In the
first case, which was executed until exhaustion, the ensuing of
muscle fatigue is strongly apparent in the decrease of the MFA
(signals â1 (t)). For squats, this is less apparent as they involve
stronger muscles not so easily fatigable with just body weight.
In both cases, estimated cadence (signals fˆ2 (t)) matches results
coming from manual inspection of the data.

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an efficient technique for simultaneously
evaluating repetition frequency and muscular fatigue during the accomplishment of cyclic movements was presented.
This methodology uses only the EMG signal acquired by a
lightweight wireless electromyograph applied close to the involved muscles. The MFA of the EMG signal considered as
a function of time is directly related to the dynamics of the
movement and to the fatigue of the muscles. These two effects have been simultaneously modeled by a two-component
AM–FM model based on the Hilbert transform. Experimental
results based on data extracted from dumbbell BC, DLR, and
BW squats showed the excellent performance of the proposed
technique in monitoring muscular activities.

[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

REFERENCES
[1] C. De Luca, “Physiology and mathematics of myoelectric signals,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-26, no. 6, pp. 313–325,
Jun. 1979.
[2] G. Ouyang, X. Zhu, Z. Ju, and H. Liu, “Dynamical characteristics of
surface EMG signals of hand grasps via recurrence plot,” IEEE J. Biomed.
Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 257–265, Jan. 2014.
[3] N. Dimitrova and G. Dimitrov, “Interpretation of EMG changes with
fatigue: Facts, pitfalls, and fallacies,” J. Electromyography Kinesiol.,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 13–36, 2003.
[4] R. Merletti, M. Knaflitz, and C. J. De Luca, “Myoelectric manifestations
of fatigue in voluntary and electrically elicited contractions,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 1810–1820, 1990.
[5] R. Merletti and L. R. L. Conte, “Surface EMG signal processing during isometric contractions,” J. Electromyography Kinesiol., vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 241–250, 1997.
[6] J. Potvin and L. Bent, “A validation of techniques using surface EMG signals from dynamic contractions to quantify muscle fatigue during repetitive tasks,” J. Electromyography Kinesiol., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 131–139,
1997.
[7] T. Sakurai, M. Toda, S. Sakurazawa, J. Akita, K. Kondo, and Y. Nakamura,
“Detection of muscle fatigue by the surface electromyogram and its
application,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf. Comput. Inform. Sci., 2010,
pp. 43–47.
[8] M. Cifrek, V. Medved, S. Tonković, and S. Ostojić, “Surface EMG based
muscle fatigue evaluation in biomechanics,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 327–340, 2009.
[9] F. Bai, T. Lubecki, C.-M. Chew, and C.-L. Teo, “Novel time-frequency
approach for muscle fatigue detection based on sEMG,” in Proc. IEEE
Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf., 2012, pp. 364–367.
[10] F. Bai and C.-M. Chew, “Muscle force estimation with surface EMG
during dynamic muscle contractions: A wavelet and ANN based

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

approach,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 4589–4592.
C. Ranniger and D. Akin, “EMG mean power frequency determination
using wavelet analysis,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 1997, vol. 4, pp. 1589–1592.
S. Karlsson, J. Yu, and M. Akay, “Enhancement of spectral analysis of
myoelectric signals during static contractions using wavelet methods,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 670–684, Jun. 1999.
S. Karlsson, J. Yu, and M. Akay, “Time-frequency analysis of myoelectric
signals during dynamic contractions: A comparative study,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 228–238, Feb. 2000.
M. Cifrek, S. Tonković, and V. Medved, “Measurement and analysis of
surface myoelectric signals during fatigued cyclic dynamic contractions,”
Measurement, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 85–92, 2000.
R. Chowdhury, M. Reaz, and M. Islam, “Wavelet transform to recognize
muscle fatigue,” in Proc. 3rd Asian Himalayas Int. Conf. Internet, 2012,
pp. 1–5.
N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng, N.-C.
Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition
and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series
analysis,” in Proc. Roy. Soc. London—A, Mar. 1998, vol. 454, no. 1971,
pp. 903–995.
X. Hu, S.-L. L. Peng, and W.-L. L. Hwang, “EMD revisited: A new
understanding of the envelope and resolving the mode-mixing problem in
AM-FM signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1075–
1086, Mar. 2012.
H. Xie and Z. Wang, “Mean frequency derived via Hilbert-Huang transform with application to fatigue EMG signal analysis,” Comput. Methods
Prog. Biomed., vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 114–120, 2006.
M. Knaflitz and P. Bonato, “Time-frequency methods applied to muscle
fatigue assessment during dynamic contractions,” J. Electromyography
Kinesiol., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 337–350, 1999.
P. Bonato, S. Roy, M. Knaflitz, and C. De Luca, “Time-frequency parameters of the surface myoelectric signal for assessing muscle fatigue during
cyclic dynamic contractions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 7,
pp. 745–753, Jul. 2001.
V. Agostini and M. Knaflitz, “An algorithm for the estimation of the
signal-to-noise ratio in surface myoelectric signals generated during cyclic
movements,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 219–225, Jan.
2012.
Y. Hotta and K. Ito, “Detection of EMG-based muscle fatigue during cyclic dynamic contraction using a monopolar configuration,”
in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 2140–2143.
P. Maragos, J. Kaiser, and T. Quatieri, “On amplitude and frequency
demodulation using energy operators,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1532–1550, Apr. 1993.
A. Bovik, P. Maragos, and T. Quatieri, “AM-FM energy detection and
separation in noise using multiband energy operators,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3245–3265, Dec. 1993.
S. L. Hahn, Hilbert Transforms in Signal Processing. Boston, MA, USA:
Artech House, 1996.
Y. Bar-Ness, F. Cassara, H. Schachter, and R. DiFazio, “Cross-coupled
phase-locked loop with closed loop amplitude control,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 195–199, Feb. 1984.
B. Santhanam and P. Maragos, “Multicomponent AM-FM demodulation via periodicity-based algebraic separation and energy-based demodulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 473–490, Mar.
2000.
F. Gianfelici, G. Biagetti, P. Crippa, and C. Turchetti, “Multicomponent AM-FM representations: An asymptotically exact approach,” IEEE
Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 823–837, Mar.
2007.
S. Gazor and R. R. Far, “Adaptive maximum windowed likelihood multicomponent AM-FM signal decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech,
Lang. Process., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 479–491, Mar. 2006.
M. Feldman, “Time-varying vibration decomposition and analysis based
on the Hilbert transform,” J. Sound Vib., vol. 295, no. 3–5, pp. 518–530,
2006.
M. Feldman, “Analytical basics of the EMD: Two harmonics decomposition,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 2059–2071,
2009.
H. J. Hermens, and B. Freriks, “European recommendations for surface
electromyography [CDROM],” Roessingh Res. Develop., Enschede, the
Netherlands, 1999.

BIAGETTI et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE EMG SIGNAL DURING CYCLIC MOVEMENTS USING MULTICOMPONENT AM–FM DECOMPOSITION

1681

Giorgio Biagetti (S’03–M’05) received the Laurea (summa cum laude) and Ph.D. degrees in
electronics engineering from Università Politecnica
delle Marche, Ancona, Italy, in 2000 and 2004,
respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor teaching
digital electronics. His research interests include circuit and embedded systems design and simulation
and wireless systems and networks.

Simone Orcioni (S’89–M’04) received the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering from the Università
Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy.
Since 2000, he has been a Assistant Professor
teaching courses in analogue and digital electronics,
and publishing a text book. His research interests
include statistical device modeling and simulation,
nonlinear system, and analogue circuit and system
level design.

Paolo Crippa (M’02) received the Laurea degree
(summa cum laude) from the Università degli Studi
di Ancona, Ancona, Italy and the Ph.D. degree from
the Polytechnic of Bari, Bari, Italy, in 1994 and 1999,
respectively, both in electronics engineering.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy.
His research interests include statistical integrated
circuit design and device modeling, mixed-signal circuits, neural networks, signal processing, and speech
recognition.

Claudio Turchetti (M’86) received the Electronics
Engineering degree from the University of Ancona,
Ancona, Italy, in 1979, which he then joined in 1980.
He has been the Director of the Department of
Electronics, Artificial Intelligence and Telecommunications and is currently a Full Professor of Micronano Electronics and Design of Embedded Systems.

Alessandro Curzi received the Ph.D. degree in electronics and computer science from the Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy, in 2009.
In 2010, he joined the Department of Information Engineering as a Research Assistant. His current
research interests include system identification, computational intelligence, and natural language understanding.

