426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Magnetic Sensor for Configurable Measurement
of Tension or Elasticity With Validation
in Animal Soft Tissues
Kalpesh Singal, Rajesh Rajamani∗ , Mahdi Ahmadi, A. Serdar Sezen, and Joan E. Bechtold

Abstract—This paper presents a novel Hall-effect-based magnetic sensor for handheld measurement of either elasticity or
tension in soft tissues. A theoretical model is developed for the
mechanical interaction of the sensor with the tissue, and conditions are established under which the separate effects of tension or
elasticity can be measured. A model of the magnetic field within the
sensor is developed and a technique to estimate the sensor response
in the presence of multiple magnets is established. This paper then
provides analytical sensor responses and compares them with experimental results obtained on synthetic materials. It is found that
the sensor can measure tension values upto 100 N with a resolution
of 10 N in handheld operation and elasticity of upto 0.87 MPa with
a resolution of 0.02 MPa. Significant experimental characterization
and statistical analysis of sensor repeatability is performed. The viability of this sensor to make tension and elasticity measurements
with biological tissues is then demonstrated using turkey tendons
and fresh swine tissues.
Index Terms—In vivo tissue tension, magnetic tissue property
sensor, tissue elasticity sensor, tissue tension sensor.

I. INTRODUCTION
N orthopedic surgeries such as total knee arthroplasty (TKA)
[1]–[4], hip replacement surgeries [5], anterior cruciate ligament repair [6], and shoulder stabilization [7], [8], the surgeon
must not only handle and manipulate the bone but also the surrounding soft tissue, including muscle, fascia, tendon, ligament,
and capsule. The balancing of tension in soft tissues during various orthopedic procedures is key to proper soft tissue healing,
restoration of overall limb function in the patient, and a long-

I

Manuscript received April 30, 2014; accepted August 30, 2014. Date of
publication September 11, 2014; date of current version January 16, 2015. This
work was supported in part by a grant from the Institute for Engineering in
Medicine, University of Minnesota, and by Grant CMMI-0856387 from the
National Science Foundation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
K. Singal is with the GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY 12309
USA (e-mail: ksingal@me.umn.edu).
∗ R. Rajamani is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: rajamani@
me.umn.edu).
M. Ahmadi is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail:
ahma0147@umn.edu).
A. S. Sezen is with the Department of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, MN 56301 USA (e-mail:
ssezen@stcloudstate.edu).
J. E. Bechtold is with the Excelen Center for Bone and Joint Research,
Minneapolis, MN 55415 USA (e-mail: bechtold@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2357345

lasting implant [1], [2], [5]. This paper develops a sensor for the
handheld measurement of tension in soft tissues.
One example of an orthopedic surgery where measurement of
tension in soft tissues would be useful is knee arthroplasty. Knee
arthroplasty was among the top five most common procedures
performed for patients aged between 65 and 84 years [9]. The
number of TKA performed in U.S. per year is expected to rise
from 402 000 in 2003 to 3.48 million by 2030 [10]. During the
TKA surgery, the surgeon not only manipulates the bones, but
also has to balance the tension in the surrounding ligaments.
This soft tissue balancing still largely depends on the surgeon’s
subjective “feel” during surgery [1]–[4]. A recent metaanalysis
estimated the rate of misalignment in the conventional TKA
patients to be over 30% [11].
The buckle transducer proposed by Salmons [12] in 1969 is
one of the widely used transducers in research for tissue tension measurement. The measurement process involves drawing
a loop of ligament through a rectangular frame and securing it in
place using a rectangular crossbar [13]. The transducer works by
measuring the deflection in the frame due to three-point bending
caused by its interaction with the ligament. However, the need
to install the sensor on the ligament precludes its use in actual
surgical applications. The liquid metal strain gauge (LMSG)
[14], [15] is a mercury (or mixture of indium and gallium [16])
filled compliant capillary tube incorporated into an electrical
wire. The electrical resistance of this tube changes as a function
of the applied strain, which is used to indirectly calculate the
tension. The gauge is attached to the ligament by either using
contact cement or by suturing the lead wires of the gauge to
ligament itself [17]. In addition to involving significant amount
of tissue handling and the need to attach the LSMG to the ligament itself, LSMGs are sensitive to temperature and present
a risk of release of toxic substances [16], [17]. Several other
devices have been proposed that employ Hall-effect transducers
[18], implantable force transducers [19], or optic fibers [20] to
measure strain or force in the ligament. However, all of the existing transducers for in situ measurement of soft tissue tension
require significant dissection and handling of the tissue, making
them infeasible for use during actual surgeries.
Krystal et al. [21] presented a method for measuring tension
in small ligaments based on measuring tension in an axially
loaded string by deflecting it laterally and measuring the load
and deformation. The sensor employed a linearly variable differential transformer to measure deformations and a load cell to
measure force. The proposed device was tested by Kristal et al.
[21] and Weaver et al. [22] on small wrist ligaments. The sensor

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SINGAL et al.: MAGNETIC SENSOR FOR CONFIGURABLE MEASUREMENT OF TENSION OR ELASTICITY WITH VALIDATION

required an inertial reference, making it unsuitable as a handheld
device; moreover, it involves estimating the free length of the
ligament [17], which would require an extra measurement not
usually available. Unlike previous results, this paper develops a
handheld sensor that can measure tension without any inertial
reference and does not require knowledge of the length of the
ligament.
Besides tissue tension, another tissue characteristic that is
important in many biomedical applications is tissue stiffness.
For instance, it can be used for reliable diagnosis by palpation
of the patient’s tissue [23], for diagnosing breast cancers [24], to
provide a tactile perception during minimally invasive surgery
to distinguish between healthy and diseased tissues [25], or for
teleoperation [26].
An approach that is frequently used for measuring the elasticity of a target material is to obtain the force displacement
response of the material under investigation [26]–[30]. Bonomo
et al. [26] demonstrated a sensor consisting of a piezoelectric
actuator and sensor element. The actuator was used to provide
a sinusoidal force, while the sensor measured the displacement
of the tissue. Vannah et al. [28] used an air-driven indenter
to measure tissue stiffness. Multiple authors [29], [30] used a
piezoelectric cantilever to measure elastic and shear modulus of
soft materials. However, all of these sensors generally require
an actuating mechanism to apply a controlled deformation or
force on the target material.
An alternate formulation using a purely passive sensing element has also been proposed [31]–[34]. These sensors employed
measurement to sense the ratio of displacements of two sensing
diaphragms made from either silicon nitride [31], PDMS [32],
PU rubber [33], or polyimide [34]. These sensors sense relative
displacements of two sensing diaphragms of different stiffness
and correlate the stiffness of the target material to the ratio of
force exerted on the two sensing membranes. The relationship
between stiffness of the target material and the ratio of forces
exerted on the two sensing membranes suggests that the ratio
of the stiffness of chosen membranes would have a significant
effect on the measurement range and resolution of the sensor.
However, since in the previously developed sensors [31]–[34]
the membrane stiffness depended upon the choice of material
of the sensors, the relationship was not experimentally verified
by varying the sensor parameters.
The authors previously presented a sensor to measure tension
in inelastic strings [35]. The previous paper did not take into
account the effect of elasticity of the strings, and furthermore,
did not provide any validation with biological data. This paper presents a new tissue model that incorporates the effects of
both the tension in soft tissues as well as their elasticity on the
response of sensors based on measurement of relative displacements of two or more sensing diaphragms. A set of conditions
are then established under which the sensor responses as given
by this theoretical model are identical to the ones proposed in
the literature for the two cases. Finally, this paper presents experimental results, with both synthetic and biological materials,
to verify that the sensor can measure either tension or elasticity
with suitable reconfiguration.

427

Fig. 1. Homogenous elastic material under tension (a) with no force applied
(b) with a point load applied.

Fig. 2.

Model of the homogeneous model under a single transverse force.

II. THEORETICAL SENSOR-TISSUE MODEL
A homogeneous elastic material, taut under tension T , is
shown in Fig. 1(a). When a transverse point force F is applied
to the material, the material will deform as shown in Fig. 1(b).
The total deformation in the material can be modeled as a
combination of the lateral buckling of the material under longitudinal tension and the local deformation caused in the material
due to its elasticity in the transverse direction. The displacement due to the buckling of the material under tension can be
described by modeling the material as an inelastic string under
tension, while the effect of local deformation can be modeled
using a spring of stiffness kt . Since the total deformation is the
sum of both these lateral deformations, the homogeneous elastic material can be modeled as a linear combination of these
two elements, as shown in Fig. 2. The linear combination assumption allows solution of the equations to obtain an algorithm for real-time estimation of either tissue tension or tissue
elasticity. This algorithm would still provide an approximate
solution if the combination of the two influences were in fact
nonlinear.
Fig. 3 shows a schematic of the sensor, similar to one described in [35], before and after being pushed against the material. Here, ks and kc represent the spring constants of the side
spring and center spring, respectively, in the sensor.
The displacement of three points on the inelastic string under
the action of three-point loads [36] is given by (1), where A is
defined by (2), as shown bottom of the next page.
U = A(l, x2 , T )F

(1)

where, l, x2 , d, and T are the length of string, position of contact of center sensing element, lateral distance between contact
points, and tension in the string, respectively. F and U are vectors representing the transverse forces on the springs and the
corresponding displacements at the three points.

428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

⎡ ⎤
z
Z = ⎣z⎦.
z

(8)

A relationship between F and Z, given by (9), can be established by substituting (1), (3), and (5) into (7).
(A + Kt−1 + Ks−1 )F = Z.

Fig. 3. Schematic of the multiprobe magnetic sensor before and after being
pushed against the material.

Assuming that the local deformations at three points are independent of each other, the compression (ΔV ), of the equivalent
tissue spring of stiffness kt at each of the locations is given by
(3), where Kt is defined in (4)
ΔV = Kt−1 F
⎡
kt 0
⎢
Kt = ⎢
⎣ 0 kt
0

0

0

⎥
0⎥
⎦.

(3)
=
(4)

kt

−1
ΔY = Ksensor
F
⎡
⎤
ks 0 0
⎢
⎥
⎥
Ksensor = ⎢
⎣ 0 kc 0 ⎦ .
0
0 ks

(5)

(6)

kc
ks

	

ks + kt
kc + kt

	

⎛

⎞
2T


⎝
2T +

kc kt
k c +k t

 ⎠.
d

(10)

If the compressions in the springs are used instead of the
experienced forces, (10) reduces to (11), where ΔYi is the compression in the ith sensing element. The advantage of using
(11) instead of (10) is that the ratio expressed by the following
equation is always upper bounded by unity irrespective of the
choice of sensor springs.
⎞
⎛

	
ks + kt ⎝
2T
ΔY2
 ⎠.

=
R=
kc kt
(ΔY1 + ΔY3 )/2
kc + kt
d
2T +
k c +k t

Referring to Fig. 3(b), under a normal contact assumption
(equal displacements of the base of the three bumps), the compressions in the springs of the sensor (ΔY ), the compressions
in equivalent tissue springs (ΔV ) and the displacement of the
inelastic string (U ) follows a relationship given by (7), where Z
is the displacement of the base of three bump assemblies and for
normal contact with equal displacements of the base z is given
by (8).
U + ΔV + ΔY = Z

F2
(F1 + F3 )/2


Also, the compressions (ΔY ), in the three springs of the
sensor are given by (5), where Ksensor is given by (6).

⎡

Equation (9) can be solved to obtain the force vector F , and
then, the displacements of the three pistons can be obtained
from the forces. However, it turns out that the expressions of the
individual forces obtained from solving (9) are highly nonlinear
and involve parameters like length of the string, position of
contact, and displacement of the base of the sensor, which are
all unknown. Hence, even if the forces in F are measured, the
tension in the string cannot be computed easily.
A ratio of linear combinations of the force values from (9) can
be constructed that is independent of the parameters described
previously. It is found that the variable R given by (10), where
Fi is the force experienced by the ith sensing element in the
sensor, is dependent only on the tension (T ) in the string and
the tissue stiffness (kt ).
R=

⎤

(9)

(7)

(l − (x2 − d))(x2 − d)
⎢
l
1 ⎢ (l − x2 )(x2 − d)
A(l, x2 , T ) = ⎢
T ⎢
l
⎣
(l − (x2 + d))(x2 − d)
l

(11)
This ratio consists of a product of two terms; the first term
corresponds to the effect of the tissue elasticity, while the second
term corresponds to effect of tissue tension. The sensor can be
reconfigured to measure each term individually with a minimal
influence of the other term.
If the spring constants of the sensor are chosen such that,
ks = kc  kt , i.e., the side and the center spring constants are
equal and the tissue material is much stiffer than the springs of
the sensor, then the ratio described in the (11) reduces to (12),
and the readout of the sensor then is an estimate of the tension in
(l − x2 )(x2 − d)
l
(l − x2 )x2
l
(l − (x2 + d))x2
l

⎤
(l − (x2 + d))(x2 − d)
⎥
l
⎥
(l − (x2 + d))x2
⎥.
⎥
l
⎦
(l − (x2 + d))(x2 + d)
l

(2)

SINGAL et al.: MAGNETIC SENSOR FOR CONFIGURABLE MEASUREMENT OF TENSION OR ELASTICITY WITH VALIDATION

Fig. 4.

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

Schematic of Sensor.

Magnetic dipole pointing in y-direction place at origin.

assembly comprises of a circular stainless steel shaft of 3-mm
diameter, a neodymium magnet, and a spring of spring constant
1.96 N/mm. On the lower side, the spring is supported on a thin
plastic laminate, which is placed between the circuit board and
the springs. The laminate is placed to avoid any electrical shorts
that might occur due to the spring coming into contact with the
traces on the printed circuit board (PCB). A PCB consisting of
five AS5510 magnetic encoders, one under each slot and two for
cancelling the magnetic coupling terms is placed in the bottom
housing and is aligned to the slots with the help of guide pins.

Photograph of the sensor.

the string. This is the same result that was presented in previous
publications [35], [37].
R=

429

2T
.
2T + kc d

(12)

On the other hand, if the tension in the string is large as
compared to the product of the distance (d) and the equivalent
spring constant (kc kt /(kc + kt )), then the second term of the
product in (11) will tend toward unity and the ratio can be
reduced to (13). The sensor can then be used to estimate the
stiffness of the tissue materials.

	
ks + kt
R=
.
(13)
kc + kt
Since ks and kc are known, kt can be computed from the
measurement of R. Note that the tissue elasticity calculated by
this technique assumes a linear force–displacement curve for
the tissue.
III. SENSOR DESIGN
The sensor presented in [35] was improved and fitted with
linear bearings to eliminate friction. Fig. 4 shows the schematic
of the improved sensor. A photograph of the sensor with a handle
for handheld applications is shown in Fig. 5.
The sensor assembly comprises of a housing, which is printed
using a transparent polyjet resin. For ease of assembly, the housing is split into two halves: top and bottom, which can be joined
together using a nut and bolt on either sides. There are three
cylindrical slots in the housing. Each of the three slots are fitted
with a linear bearing (SLMU3 from Misumi, Inc.) that allows
the pistons of the bump assembly to move freely in the axial direction, while constraining their motion in the radial direction.
The center to center distance of these slots is 10 mm. The bump

IV. ADDRESSING CROSS-COUPLING IN MAGNETIC FIELDS
A detailed derivation of the magnetic field due to each magnet
is presented in [38] and is not derived here due to lack of space.
Fig. 6 shows a magnetic dipole m pointing in y-direction
placed at the origin. Each magnet in the sensor can be modeled
by such a dipole. Since the Hall-effect sensors utilized in this
sensor are unidirectional, due to the relative orientation of the
permanent magnets and the Hall-effect sensor they are limited
to measuring magnetic field components in y-direction only.
The magnetic effect (Bij ) of the ith magnet on jth chip for axial
(x = 0) and off-axial (x = 0) cases are given by (14a) or (14b),
respectively, where m is the dipole moment of the dipole.
Bij = m̂BA (y)

(14a)

Bij = m̂BO (y, x)

(14b)

2
y3

(14c)

where
BA (y) =



1
y2
−1
(14d)
BO (y) =
3 2
x + y2
(x2 + y 2 )3/2
μ0 m
.
(14e)
m̂ =
4π
A typical sensor configuration is shown in Fig. 7, where Mi
represents the three magnets and Ci represents the three Halleffect sensor chips; using superposition principle the readouts
(Ri ) of the three sensors under each magnet are given by (15),
where m̂1 , m̂2 , and m̂3 , as defined by (14e), are constants
representing the magnetic strengths of the three magnets.
R1 = m̂1 BA (y1 ) + m̂2 BO (y2 , d) + m̂3 BO (y3 , 2d)
(15a)

430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 9.

Fig. 7.

Modified circuit board to incorporate two additional magnets.

Sample sensor configuration.

Fig. 10. Corrected reading of center chip when side magnets are displaced
(X) Chip 1 (black) Chip 3 (gray) (Y) Chip 2 before correction (Z) Chip 2 after
correction.

Fig. 8. Readout of three chips when only one magnet is displaced. Note that
cross-coupling magnitude is approximately 5% for a neighboring magnet and
less than 1% for a far magnet.

R2 = m̂1 BO (y1 , d) + m̂2 BA (y2 ) + m̂3 BO (y3 , d) (15b)
R3 = m̂1 BO (y1 , 2d) + m̂2 BO (y2 , d) + m̂3 BA (y3 ).
(15c)
The sensor has three magnets in close proximity. While it is
desired that the movement of each magnet should only influence its own corresponding measurement chip, following two
problems are encountered.
1) The movement of the center magnet causes small changes
in the readings of the left and center chips.
2) The movement of the left and right magnet causes small
changes in the readings of the center chip.
This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 8. This figure consists of nine subfigures arranged in a 3 × 3 grid. Each column
represents effect of one particular magnet on all three chips,
while each row represents the effect of different magnets on
one particular chip. For instance Row 1 and Col 1 shows the
readout of chip 1 when magnet 1 is displaced, while Row 3
and Col 2, represents the readout of chip 3 when magnet 2 is
displaced.
As can be seen from any of the columns, not only does the
chip corresponding to its moving magnet exhibit a change, but
so do the neighboring chips.
For the distance between the two extreme slots equal to current design distance ( =20 mm), it was experimentally found
that the cross coupling between the left (or right) magnet and the
right (or left) chip is negligible, i.e., subfigures Row 1 Col 3 and

Row 3 Col 1 do not exhibit any change. Further, the direction
of change depends on the relative polarity of the chip and the
magnet.
A. Compensation of the Side Magnet Movements
on Center Chip
The reading of center chip 2 (R2 ) is given by (15b) and it
includes the influence of the movement of all the three magnets.
The influences of the left and right magnets on this chip are
measured individually by adding two additional chips (4 and 5)
as shown in Fig. 9. Chips 4 and 5 are not located in a straight line
with chips 1, 2, and 3 so as to reduce the sensor width. These
chips were located so that the distance (d) between chip 1 (or
3) and chip 2 is same as that between chip 1 (or 3) and chip 4
(or 5); however, the distance between chip 2 and chip 4 (or 5) is
maximized to ensure that the effects of magnet 2 (located above
chip 2) on these additional chips are negligible.
Since by design, the additional chip 4 (5) is only affected by
the magnet above chip 1 (3), the readouts of these two additional
chips (R4 and R5 ) are given by the following equations:
R4 = m̂1 BO (y1 , d)

(16a)

R5 = m̂3 BO (y3 , d).

(16b)

An estimate, expressed by (17), then provides the effect of
magnet 2 on chip 2 without any coupling terms.
R2 − R4 − R5 = m̂2 BA (y2 ).

(17)

Fig. 10 provides an experimental verification of this methodology. When either of the side pistons is displaced, the reading
of the center chip change, but there is no appreciable change in
the readout of center after correction.

SINGAL et al.: MAGNETIC SENSOR FOR CONFIGURABLE MEASUREMENT OF TENSION OR ELASTICITY WITH VALIDATION

431

TABLE I
PARAMETER VALUES USED FOR SIMULATION FOR DIFFERENT TENSIONS
Parameter
l
x2
d
ks , kc
m̂
y0
ET

Fig. 11. Average reading of side chips when magnet 2 is displaced (X) Chip
2 (Y) Chip 1 (black) Chip 3 (gray) (Z) Average reading of side chips.

B. Compensation of the Center Magnet Movement
on Side Chips

Value

Length of string
Position of center sensor from end of string
Pitch of Hall effect sensors
Spring constants of the spring in the sensor
Strength of permanent magnets
Initial distance between magnets and chips
Gain for tension change

76.2 mm ( = 3 in)
38.1 mm ( =1.5 in )
10 mm
1.96 N/mm
40 000 counts/mm3
6.3 mm
6 N/mm

The quantities given by (17) and (20) can be used as the
numerator and denominator to estimate the ratio, given by (11),
without any magnetic coupling terms.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Tension Measurement

The movement of the center magnet influences the two side
chips equally, as these two chips are equidistant from the center.
Further, only the sum of the left and right magnet movements
needs to be measured and used in the computation of R, and not
the individual movements themselves. By orienting the left and
right magnets in opposite polarity, the influence of the center
magnet motion on the sum of the left and right magnetic fields
is eliminated.
Equations (15a) and (15c) provide an expression for the reading of chip 1 and chip 3, respectively.
If sensors 1 and 2 are configured to read the proximity to south
pole as positive and the magnet above them are positioned so
that the south pole of these magnets face these sensors, while
the sensor 3 is configured to read the north pole as positive and
magnet above it is positioned so that its north pole faces this
sensor, then (15a) and (15c) can be modified and rewritten as
R1 = m̂1 BA (y1 ) + m̂2 BO (y2 , d) − m̂2 BO (y3 , 2d) (18a)
R3 = −m̂1 BO (y1 , 2d) − m̂2 BO (y2 , d) + m̂3 BA (y3 ).
(18b)
The sum of these magnetic fields is given as follows:
R1 + R3 = m̂1 BA (y1 ) + m̂2 BO (y2 , d) − m̂2 BO (y3 , 2d)
− m̂1 BO (y1 , 2d) − m̂2 BO (y2 , d) + m̂3 BA (y3 ).
(19)
It has been shown in Fig. 8 that there is negligible coupling between the extreme magnets; hence, the terms involving
BO (yi , 2d) can be assumed as zero and (19) will be reduced to
(20), which does not involve any coupling terms.
R1 + R3 = m̂1 BA (y1 ) + m̂3 BA (y3 ).

Description

(20)

Fig. 11 shows the readings of the different chips when the
center piston is displaced, as can be seen that along with chip 2,
the reading of chip 1 and chip 3 also change; however, due to
the opposite signs of the two changes, the change in average of
the two is negligible as compared to the individual changes.

A simulation study was conducted in MATLAB to analyze
the effect of using the change in magnetic field data obtained
directly from the chip instead of converting to displacement
data.
At the start of the simulation, the sensor was assumed to be in
contact with the string with no force being exerted on the string.
During the simulation, the sensor was then moved forward in
increments of 0.1 mm and the expected values of the forces
exerted on the three bumps were calculated using (9) with Kt−1
set to zero. These forces were then converted to the equivalent
compressions in the three springs using (5). These compression
values were then converted into expected change in magnetic
field as obtained from the Hall-effect sensors using (15) and (16).
The sensor’s forward movement was continued till the average
of readings from side sensors exceeded 150 counts (∼7.5 mT).
The model used for simulation was further improved to take
into account the increase in tension due to transverse force
applied by the sensor. The change in tension (ΔT ) in the string
was modeled using (21), where ET is a gain dependent on the
material properties of the string and u(x2 ) is the displacement
of the string at the point of contact of the middle bump of the
sensor, as given by (1). This updated estimate of tension was
used when calculating the expected values of the forces.
ΔT = ET u(x2 ).

(21)

The values of the various parameters used for this simulation
are given in Table I. These values were the design values except
for the strength of permanent magnets that was estimated by
fitting a model to the experimentally obtained calibration data
and ET that was based on empirical observations while doing
experiments.
Fig. 12 shows the expected values of displacement and change
in magnetic field of side sensors versus that of the center ones
obtained for a tension value of 40 N.
An ordinary least-square line, given by (22), was then fit
using average of side readings as the x values and the center
reading as y values. Such an exercise was conducted using both
the expected compression values as the readings and also using

432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE II
PARAMETER VALUES USED FOR SIMULATION FOR DIFFERENT STIFFNESS
Parameter
ks
kc
m̂
y0

Description

Value

Spring constants of the soft spring in the sensor
Spring constants of the hard spring in the sensor
Strength of permanent magnets
Initial distance between magnets and chips

0.84 N/mm
1.96 N/mm
40 000 counts/mm3
6.3 mm

Fig. 12. Simulated displacement and magnetic field data for tension of 40 N.
(a) Displacements of the bumps. (b) Change in magnetic field for the bumps.

Fig. 14. Simulated comparison of sensor response to stiffness when using
magnetic field data.

Fig. 13. Simulated comparison of sensor response to tension when using
magnetic field data.

change in magnetic field. It should be noted that the change in
magnetic field is not a linear function of displacement of base of
the sensor; however, for small displacement, the function can be
assumed to be linear. The obtained value of the slope (β1 ) was
used as the response of the sensor in lieu of the ratio described
by (12).
y = β0 + β1 x.

(22)

Fig. 13 shows the response of the sensor (ratio R) obtained for
different tension values using either displacements or magnetic
fields. The modified sensor response obtained using magnetic
field change in place of displacements results in a sensor response, which is also a monotonically increasing function of
tension, and hence, can be used as an estimate of tension. Since
the modified sensor response is based on the individual magnetic
field readings, it does not contain any cross-coupling effects between magnets.
B. Stiffness Measurement
A similar exercise was conducted for stiffness measurement
by setting different values of Kt in (9) with A set as zero. The
values of the various parameters used for this simulation are
given in Table II. These values were the design values except
for the strength of permanent magnets, which was estimated by
fitting a model to the experimentally obtained calibration data.
Fig. 14 shows the response of the sensor obtained for different
stiffness values when both compression values and magnetic
field are used to calculate the slope (β1 ) expressed by (22). The

Fig. 15.

Magnetic sensor mounted on a translation stage.

modified sensor response obtained using the change in magnetic
field in place of displacements results in a sensor response,
which is a monotonically increasing function of stiffness, and
hence, can be used as an estimate of stiffness.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS—TENSION MEASUREMENT
An in vitro experimental setup was first designed to apply
known tensions to a nylon lace of width 1 cm.
Fig. 15 shows the photograph of the setup, which was used
to test the sensor for known tension values. The setup consists
of a force gauge of 200-N range (HP-200 from Handpi TM)
mounted on a vertical test stand. The nylon lace was tied to one
end of the setup and was routed through a pulley on the other
side to the force gauge. The height of the test stand was adjusted
to change the tension in the lace. The string was routed through
an attachment plate to control the free length of the string against
which the sensor was pushed. The attachment plate shown in
this figure constraints the free length of the string to 3 in ( =
76.2 mm).

SINGAL et al.: MAGNETIC SENSOR FOR CONFIGURABLE MEASUREMENT OF TENSION OR ELASTICITY WITH VALIDATION

Fig. 16.

Mean response of sensor for controlled orientation.

433

Fig. 17.

Comparison of sensor response for handheld and on-stage testing.

Fig. 18.

Mean response of sensor for handheld tests.

A. On-Stage Testing With Fixed Orientation
For the initial set of testing, the sensor was mounted on a
x − y translation stage as shown in Fig. 15. The translation
stage was used to ensure that the orientation of the sensor with
respect to the lace remains constant. It was ensured that a normal contact occurs between the sensor and the string by visually
adjusting the angle of the attachment plate and sensor. Furthermore, the sensor was positioned so that the center piston comes
into contact with the free length of the string at approximately
its midpoint.
The sensor was tested at various tension values varying between 20 and 80 N in increments of 10 N. The standard deviation
of the errors based on 30 tests per tension, where each test comprises of one push of the sensor against the string, was found
to be 0.0018. Fig. 16 shows the mean value of the sensor response along with an error bar corresponding to the expanded
uncertainty with a coverage factor corresponding to 95% level
of confidence as defined by National Institute of Standards and
Technology [39]. The coverage factor is a multiplier used to
convert standard uncertainty (an equivalent of a single standard
deviation) to expanded uncertainty. The expanded uncertainty
(Uc ) is a value such that it can be confidently believed that the
measured value Y lies between y ± Uc , where y is the measurement result. With the desired level of confidence as 95%,
the sensor was found to have a resolution better than 10 N, i.e.,
there was no overlap between the error bars shown in Fig. 16.
B. Handheld Testing
Without any control of orientation, the sensor was tested at
various tension values varying between 20 and 100 N in increments of 10 N. A total of 30 tests were conducted, where each
test comprises of one push of the sensor against the string.
The mean of the handheld tests along with the mean of the
onstage tests are shown in Fig. 17. The responses were found
to be in agreement with each other, thus making the sensor a
viable tool for handheld tension measurement.
The overall standard deviation of these errors was found to
be 0.0066, which is approximately 3.6 times that found for controlled orientation. Fig. 18 shows the mean value of the sensor
response along with an error bar corresponding to the expanded

uncertainty with a coverage factor of 1.96 (corresponding to
95% level of confidence).
In order to achieve a 10-N resolution throughout the range, the
expanded uncertainty [39] for 95% level of confidence should
be less than the difference between the mean readouts of each
pair of consecutive groups. The minimum difference between
consecutive mean values occurs between 90 and 100 N and is
equal to 0.0163. An expanded uncertainty of less than 0.0163
at 95% level of confidence corresponds to a required standard
deviation of less than 0.0042.
For independent observations of a random variable X, the
relationship between the standard deviation of X (σX ) and the
standard deviation of the sampling distribution of the mean of
n independent observations X̄ (σX̄ ) is given by (23). Thus, one
method of obtaining the desired resolution could be to take an
average of n handheld readings such that the standard deviation
of the mean of those readings is less than the required threshold.
σX
σX̄ = √ .
n

(23)

For the observed data, it was found that the expected standard deviation of the mean of three observations would be
0.0038, which is less than the standard deviation required for a
10-N resolution. The standard deviation for a mean of any three
consecutive tests for the observed data was found to be 0.0043,
which leads to a 10-N resolution for tension values up to 90 N.

434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 21.
Fig. 19.

Sensor response versus applied tension for turkey tendon.

Cast turkey foot for testing.

Fig. 20. Experimental setup with turkey ligament (a) Experimental setup with
turkey tendon, (b) Zoomed in sensor.

C. Testing With Biological Tissue
The performance of the sensor was evaluated on tendons
acquired from turkey euthanatized for causes unrelated to this
study. The specimen was wrapped in saline soaked gauge and
was stored frozen (at −20 °C) until dissection prior to testing.
Fig. 19 shows the tendon/bone preparation for testing. The claw
of the turkey along with some residual bone was cast using a
casting resin.
The prepared sample was mounted on an optical table as
shown in Fig. 20(a). The cast bone was clamped down on the
table, while the free end of the tendon was held in a serrated
grip attached to a force gauge. The force gauge was mounted
on a test stand whose height could be adjusted to adjust tension
in the tendon. The sensor was mounted on a translation stage,
which was fixed on the optical table such the orientation of the
sensor with respect to the tendon was approximately normal, as
shown in Fig. 20(b).
Fig. 21 shows the mean sensor response for the ten tests at
each tension values for both set of tests. A good agreement was
observed between the two set of experiments.
D. Sensitivity Analysis of the Sensor
A theoretical and experimental sensitivity analysis was performed to evaluate the effects of length of the string and position
of contact of the sensor along the string on the sensor response.

For the purpose of theoretical sensitivity analysis, a simulated
sensor response was obtained using a process similar to the one
used in Section V-A.
1) Length of String: The simulated response of the sensor for
three different free lengths of the string is shown in Fig. 22(a).
While estimating the simulated response, it was assumed that
the middle bump of the sensor makes contact at the midpoint of
the string.
An experiment was conducted to verify the simulation. The
mean of ten tests conducted at different tensions are shown in
Fig. 22(b).
In both simulated and experimental cases, the sensor response
show monotonic increase with an increase in length. Furthermore the two cases demonstrate a good agreement. Thus, for
effective use of the sensor, either the value of KT should be
small, i.e., the change in tension due to the transverse force applied by the tension is small, or an estimate of the value of KT
should be available. It is acknowledged that this could potentially limit the sensor’s applications when the value of KT is
unknown.
2) Location of Contact: The effect of the position of contact
of the sensor along the string on the sensor response was analyzed by simulating the sensor response at five positions along
the length of the string spanning a length equal to 20% of the
string length. Fig. 22(c) shows the simulate response for string
of length 3 in.
An experiment was conducted to verify the simulation. The
mean of ten tests conducted at different tensions for five different
contact locations are shown in Fig. 22(d). Both experimental and
theoretical response show a slight effect of position, however, it
is less pronounced as compared to the length.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS—STIFFNESS MEASUREMENT
A. Experimental Results With Rubber Samples
Springs of different stiffness were procured from Lee Springs,
Inc. The sensor was configured with three distinct side and center
spring combinations, listed in Table III, to evaluate their relative
performance and also to validate the theoretical formulation.
The theoretical response of the three configurations listed in
Table III is shown in Fig. 23.

SINGAL et al.: MAGNETIC SENSOR FOR CONFIGURABLE MEASUREMENT OF TENSION OR ELASTICITY WITH VALIDATION

435

Fig. 22. Characterization of tension sensor for different lengths and position of contact. (a) Length (simulated). (b) Length (experimental). (c) Position (simulated).
(d) Position (experimental).

TABLE III
SPRING CONSTANTS OF SIDE AND CENTER SPRINGS FOR DIFFERENT
SENSOR CONFIGURATIONS
Config. #

k s (N/mm)

k c (N/mm)

r = k c /k s

0.28
0.84
0.28

0.84
1.96
1.96

3.00
2.33
7.00

1
2
3

Fig. 23.

Fig. 24.

Photograph of experimental setup.

Fig. 25.

Experimental response of the sensor.

Theoretical responses of the three configuration.

TABLE IV
YOUNG’S MODULI OF THE SORBOTHANE RUBBER SPECIMENS
Shore Scale
30OO
30 A
40 A
50 A
70 A
80 A

Young’s Modulus (MPa)
0.14
0.87
1.54
2.18
5.48
8.68

The sensor was tested by pushing it against sorbothane rubber
specimens of hardness varying from Shore 30OO to Shore 80
A. The Young’s moduli of the target rubber specimens used
are listed in Table IV [33]. The target specimens have Young’s
modulus ranging from 0.14 to 8.68 MPa.
During experimentation, the sensor was mounted on a translation stage to prevent oblique contact. The rubber samples were
mounted on an aluminum back plate fixed in front of the sensor
using a double-sided tape, this can be considered as an equiva-

lent of infinite tension as the aluminum plate would not allow
any macro deformation, hence U , defined by (7), would be zero.
The translation stage was then moved forward till the average
of forces experienced by the side bumps exceeded 1 N. Fig. 24
shows a photograph of the experimental setup. Each rubber
specimen was tested five times with each sensor configuration
to evaluate the repeatability of the reading.
The sensor responses for the three configurations (listed in
Table III) for rubbers listed in Table IV are shown in Fig. 25
with the solid line representing the mean of the five responses
and the error bars representing the range of response.
The resolution of the sensor varies with the value of the target
material’s Young’s modulus. However, the sensor response was
found to be repeatable with the standard deviations for the three
sensor configurations over repeated tests being 0.0032, 0.0054,
and 0.0035, respectively. For a level of confidence of 95%,
the expanded uncertainty (Uc ) [39] for any particular range
of Young’s modulus can be calculated and is defined by the
following equation:
Uc = 2 × 1.96 × σ ×

ΔE
ΔR

(24)

436

Fig. 26.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Various swine tissues used for testing.

Fig. 27. Experimental sensor elasticity measurement response for different
fresh swine tissues.

where ΔE and ΔR are the changes in Young’s modulus and
mean sensor response in the range of interest, respectively.
Using (24), for rubber of Young’s modulus between 0.14 and
0.87 MPa, the measurement uncertainties of the three sensor
configurations are 0.03, 0.04, and 0.02 MPa, respectively, while
between 0.87 and 1.54 MPa, the measurement uncertainties of
the three sensor configurations are 0.14, 0.14, and 0.07 MPa,
respectively.
B. Experimental Results With Biological Tissues
The compatibility of the sensor for measurement on biological tissues was evaluated by pushing the sensor against different
tissues procured from a freshly euthanized swine for an unrelated study. Fig. 26 shows the photograph of the various tissues
that were used for the test.
The tissues were placed in a plastic tray with flat rigid bottom
and the modified sensor was pushed against it. As some of the
tissues were very soft, the sensor configuration 1, as listed in
Table III, was used. The rigid base prevents any macro deformation, hence U , defined by (7), was zero. Fig. 27 shows the
response of the sensor for different tissues. The height of the
error bar represents the spread in the readings obtained in five
individual tests. It is known from the literature that fat tissue
is less stiff than muscle tissue, which is less stiff than kidney
tissue, which is less stiff than esophagus. Thus, the trends measured by the sensor developed in this paper match the expected
trends.
VIII. DISCUSSIONS
This paper presented a novel reconfigurable sensor for measurement of elasticity and tension in soft tissues. A theoretical

model for the interaction of this sensor with the tissue was developed. The model assumed that the total deformation in a taut
soft tissue under tension can be represented as a linear combination of indentation and of string motion. Conditions under
which separate effects of tension or elasticity can be measured
by the sensor were then established.
Characterization of the magnetic sensor was performed to
evaluate the performance of the sensor both with controlled
orientations and with handheld operation. The viability of the
sensor to measure tension in biological tissues was also demonstrated using tendons extracted from a turkey leg. It was demonstrated that the developed sensor can successfully measure
tension values up to 100 N in both synthetic short strings and
soft tissues. Evaluation of the repeatability of the sensor and
corresponding statistical analysis of experimental data to characterize repeatability were also performed.
The resolution of the sensor for elasticity measurement was
found to be 0.02 MPa in the range 0.14 and 0.87 MPa. The viability of this sensor to measure stiffness in biological tissues was
also demonstrated using different swine tissues. The elasticity
obtained from the technique developed in this paper is approximate and based on a linear force-deformation assumption.
The limitations of the sensor are its use of a model based
on a linear combination of indentation and string motion. This
assumption seems to yield good results for the measurement of
tension in taut tissues. Turkey tendons were tested under a range
of tension values expected in real-world in vivo conditions. The
sensor was able to measure tension with good accuracy and
repeatability. Thus, the practical value of the developed device
as a viable tension sensor has been established. However, the
validity of the model for combined deformations due to both
elasticity and string motion has not been verified.
Potential future work could involve verifying the theoretical
model in the presence of both elasticity and tension in the soft
tissue and developing techniques to obtain estimates of both
elasticity and tension simultaneously.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Matsueda, T. R. Gengerke, M. Murphy, W. D. Lew, and R. B. Gustilo,
“Soft tissue release in total knee arthroplasty: Cadaver study using knees
without deformities,” Clin. Orthop., vol. 366, pp. 264–273, 1999.
[2] D. D. D’Lima, S. Patil, N. Steklov, and C. W. Colwell Jr, “Dynamic intraoperative ligament balancing for total knee arthroplasty,” Clin. Orthop.,
vol. 463, p. 208–212, 2007.
[3] D. D. D’Lima, S. Patil, N. Steklov, and C. W. Colwell, “The 2011 ABJS
Nicolas Andry Award:‘Lab’-in-a-Knee: In vivo knee forces, kinematics,
and contact analysis,” Clin. Orthop. Related Res., vol. 469, pp. 2953–2970,
2011.
[4] D. H. Lee, J. H. Park, D. I. Song, D. Padhy, W. K. Jeong, and
S. B. Han, “Accuracy of soft tissue balancing in TKA: comparison between
navigation-assisted gap balancing and conventional measured resection,”
Knee Surg., Sports Traumatol., Arthroscopy, vol. 18, pp. 381–387, 2010.
[5] D. Longjohn and L. D. Dorr, “Soft tissue balance of the hip,” J. Arthroplasty, vol. 13, pp. 97–100, 1998.
[6] M. Arnold, N. Verdonschot, and A. van Kampen, “ACL graft can replicate the normal ligament’s tension curve,” Knee Surg., Sports Traumatol.,
Arthroscopy, vol. 13, pp. 625–631, Nov. 2005.
[7] K. Hayes, M. Callanan, J. Walton, A. Paxinos, and G. A. Murrell, “Shoulder instability: Management and rehabilitation,” J. Orthop. Sports Phys.
Therapy, vol. 32, pp. 497–509, Oct. 2002.
[8] A. K. Franta, T. R. Lenters, D. Mounce, B. Neradilek, and F. A. Matsen
III, “The complex characteristics of 282 unsatisfactory shoulder arthroplasties,” J. Shoulder Elbow Surg., vol. 16, pp. 555–562, 2007.

SINGAL et al.: MAGNETIC SENSOR FOR CONFIGURABLE MEASUREMENT OF TENSION OR ELASTICITY WITH VALIDATION

[9] A. Pfuntner, L. M. Wier, and C. Stocks. (2013). Most frequent procedures performed in U.S. hospitals, 2011. Statistical brief #165. Agency
for Health Care Policy and Research, Rockville, MD, USA. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK174682/
[10] K. Steven, O. Kevin, L. Edmund, M. Fionna, and H. Michael, “Projections
of primary and revision hip and knee arthroplasty in the United States from
2005 to 2030,” J. Bone Joint Surg., Amer., vol. 89, pp. 780–785, 2007.
[11] J. B. Mason, T. K. Fehring, R. Estok, D. Banel, and K. Fahrbach, “Metaanalysis of alignment outcomes in computer-assisted total knee arthroplasty surgery,” J. Arthroplasty, vol. 22, pp. 1097–1106, 2007.
[12] S. Salmons, “The 8th international conference on medical and biological
engineering–meeting report,” Bio. Med. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 467–474, 1969.
[13] D. Barry and A. Ahmed, “Design and performance of a modified buckle
transducer for the measurement of ligament tension,” J. Biomech. Eng.,
vol. 108, pp. 149–152, 1986.
[14] T. D. Brown, L. Sigal, G. O. Njus, N. M. Njus, R. J. Singerman, and
R. A. Brand, “Dynamic performance characteristics of the liquid metal
strain gage,” J. Biomech., vol. 19, pp. 165–173, 1986.
[15] D. Glos, D. Butler, E. Grood, and M. Levy, “In vitro evaluation of an
implantable force transducer (IFT) in a patellar tendon model,” J. Biomech.
Eng., vol. 115, pp. 335–343, 1993.
[16] B. Ravary, P. Pourcelot, C. Bortolussi, S. Konieczka, and N. CrevierDenoix, “Strain and force transducers used in human and veterinary
tendon and ligament biomechanical studies,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 19,
pp. 433–447, 2004.
[17] M. Chimba, K. Phyllis, and T. Allan, “A technique for the measurement of
tension in small ligaments,” in Musculoskeletal Models and Techniques,
C. T. Leondes, Ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2000.
[18] B. Fleming, B. Beynnon, H. Tohyama, R. Johnson, C. Nichols, P. Renström, and M. Pope, “Determination of a zero strain reference for the
anteromedial band of the anterior cruciate ligament,” J. Orthop. Res., vol.
12, pp. 789–795, 1994.
[19] D. Glos, J. Holden, D. Butler, and E. Grood, “Pressure versus deflected
beam force measurement in the human patellar tendon,” Trans. 36th Orthop. Res. Soc., vol. 15, p. 490, 1990.
[20] A. Erdemir, S. J. Piazza, and N. A. Sharkey, “Influence of loading rate and
cable migration on fiberoptic measurement of tendon force,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 35, pp. 857–862, 2002.
[21] P. Kristal, A. Tencer, T. Trumble, E. North, and D. Parvin, “A method for
measuring tension in small ligaments: An application to the ligaments of
the wrist carpus,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 115, pp. 218–224, 1993.
[22] L. Weaver, A. F. Tencer, and T. E. Trumble, “Tensions in the palmar
ligaments of the wrist. I. The normal wrist,” J. Hand Surg., vol. 19,
pp. 464–474, 1994.
[23] R. Aoyagi and T. Yoshida, “Frequency equations of an ultrasonic vibrator
for the elastic sensor using a contact impedance method,” Jpn J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 43, pp. 3204–3209, 2004.
[24] J. Dargahi, S. Najarian, V. Mirjalili, and B. Liu, “Modelling and testing of
a sensor capable of determining the stiffness of biological tissues,” Electr.
Comp. Eng., Can. J., vol. 32, pp. 45–51, 2007.

437

[25] G. Tholey, J. P. Desai, and A. E. Castellanos, “Force feedback plays a
significant role in minimally invasive surgery: Results and analysis,” Ann.
Surg., vol. 241, pp. 102–109, 2005.
[26] C. Bonomo, P. Brunetto, L. Fortuna, P. Giannone, S. Graziani, and
S. Strazzeri, “A tactile sensor for biomedical applications based on
IPMCs,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 1486–1493, Aug. 2008.
[27] T. Lyyra, I. Kiviranta, U. Väätäinen, H. J. Helminen, and J. S. Jurvelin,
“In vivo characterization of indentation stiffness of articular cartilage in
the normal human knee,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res., vol. 48, pp. 482–487,
1999.
[28] W. M. Vannah, D. M. Drvaric, J. A. Hastings and J. A. Stand III, “A
method of residual limb stiffness distribution measurement,” J. Rehabil.
Res. Develop., vol. 36, pp. 1–7, 1999.
[29] A. Markidou, W. Y. Shih, and W. Shih, “Soft-materials elastic and shear
moduli measurement using piezoelectric cantilevers,” Rev. Sci. Instrum.,
vol. 76, p. 064302, Jun. 2005.
[30] S. T. Szewczyk, W. Y. Shih, and W. Shih, “Palpation like soft-material
elastic modulus measurement using piezoelectric cantilevers,” Rev. Sci.
Instrum., vol. 77, p. 044302, Apr. 2006.
[31] P. Peng, A. Sezen, R. Rajamani, and A. Erdman, “Novel MEMS stiffness
sensor for force and elasticity measurements,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys.,
vol. 158, pp. 10–17, 2010.
[32] P. Peng, R. Rajamani, and A. G. Erdman, “Flexible tactile sensor for
tissue elasticity measurements,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 18,
pp. 1226–1233, 2009.
[33] P. Peng and R. Rajamani, “Handheld microtactile sensor for elasticity
measurement,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 1935–1942, Sep. 2011.
[34] J. Engel, J. Chen, Z. Fan, and C. Liu, “Polymer micromachined multimodal
tactile sensors,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 117, pp. 50–61, 2005.
[35] K. Singal and R. Rajamani, “Handheld magnetic sensor for measurement
of tension,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 100, pp. 154105-1–154105-5, Apr. 9
2012.
[36] I. Stakgold, Boundary Value Problems of Mathematical Physics. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., 2000.
[37] K. Singal, P. Peng, R. Rajamani, and J. Bechtold, “Measurement of tension
in a string using an array of capacitive force sensors,” IEEE Sensors J.,
vol. 13, pp. 792–800, 2013.
[38] K. Singal, “Novel Handheld Sensors for in-Vivo Soft Tissue Tension
Measurement during Orthopedic Surgery,” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities, MN, USA, 2014.
[39] NIST Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty—Uncertainity of
Meaurement Results. (2000, Oct.). [Online]. Available: http://physics.
nist.gov/cuu/Uncertainty/index.html

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

