IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

407

On the Optimal Measurement Configuration
for Magnetic Nanoparticles-Enhanced Breast
Cancer Microwave Imaging
Ovidio Mario Bucci∗ , Fellow, IEEE, Lorenzo Crocco, Senior Member, IEEE, and Rosa Scapaticci, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Magnetic nanoparticles-enhanced microwave imaging has been recently proposed as an effective and reliable means
to detect breast cancer. Thanks to the nonmagnetic nature of human tissues, the imaging problem corresponds to the retrieval of
a weak magnetic anomaly hosted into an unknown nonmagnetic
scenario. Hence, properly targeted magnetic nanoparticles in principle allow to avoid false positives and reduce occurrence of false
negatives. In this paper, we outline some guidelines for the design
of the imaging device based on an optimized measurement configuration. In particular, we determine the nonredundant number of
probes and their collocation needed to ensure a reliable solution of
the underlying inverse scattering problem. The analysis exploits the
spectral properties of the relevant mathematical operators and it is
corroborated by reporting numerical results exploiting the phantoms’ repository from the University of Wisconsin. It is shown that
magnetic nanoparticles-enhanced microwave imaging can reliably
detect cancer lesions even using low-complexity arrangements, designed according to the devised guidelines.
Index Terms—Breast cancer imaging, contrast-agent, magnetic
nanoparticles (MNP), microwave imaging (MWI).

I. INTRODUCTION
N the last years, the use of microwaves to detect and image breast cancer has been an active and popular topic of
research [1]. In particular, several studies in the open literature have demonstrated, also by means of clinical trials, that
microwave imaging (MWI) can be a potential tool for breast
cancer diagnosis [2], [3]. However, the technique has not been
adopted yet in the hospital practice [4]. One of the causes of this
situation, possibly the main one, is the remarkable reduction of
the electric contrast that occurs when the tumor is embedded
in fibroglandular breast tissue [5]. Such a circumstance significantly limits the effectiveness (and the usefulness) of the
diagnostic technique, since tumors developed in fibroglandular
tissue are the most widespread ones.

I

Manuscript received November 5, 2013; revised September 1, 2014; accepted
September 2, 2014. Date of publication September 8, 2014; date of current
version January 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Italian Ministry
of Research, under the Medical Research in Italy Action. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
*O. M. Bucci is with the UNINA-DIETI, Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples
80125, Italy, and is also with the CNR-IREA, Naples 80124, Italy (e-mail:
bucci@unina.it).
L. Crocco and R. Scapaticci are with the CNR-IREA, National Research
Council of Italy—Institute for Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment,
80124 Napoli, Italy (e-mail: crocco.l; scapaticci.r@irea.cnr.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2355411

To overcome this difficulty, researchers’ attention has been
recently addressed toward the development of new strategies,
capable of removing this limitation while preserving the advantages of MWI-based diagnostics (i.e., its harmless nature and
relatively low cost). In this respect, the adoption of contrast
agents appears as a promising opportunity [6]–[11].
Magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) possibly represent the most
convenient choice for contrast-enhanced MWI [9]. First of all,
they are already allowed for clinical use in magnetic resonance
imaging [12]. Second, they can be properly functionalized to
selectively target cancerous cells [13], [14]. Third, due to the
nonmagnetic nature of human body, they can create a localized
(and specific) variation of the magnetic permeability, which can
be unambiguously associated to the presence of a tumor. Based
on these considerations, MNP-enhanced MWI has been recently
proposed [9] as a new and reliable technique, being in principle
able to avoid occurrence of false positives and remarkably reduce that of false negatives. Such a capability has been assessed
through a numerical analysis [15], whereas feasibility studies
[16] have shown that MNP-enhanced MWI requires devices
with a dynamic range comparable to that of standard MWI [17].
These results motivate the ongoing research activities aimed
at the experimental and preclinical assessment of the technique.
To this end, two topics have to be addressed. The first one is
determining the actual concentration of MNP that can be targeted to cancerous cells, by means of in vitro and in vivo studies.
The second one is understanding the design constraints for an
optimal imaging device, capable of gathering all the relevant
information in a nonredundant way. In this paper, we focus our
attention on the second topic, by addressing the question of
determining the optimal number and positioning of the probes
required by a device for MNP-enhanced MWI.
It is worth to recall that the design of an optimal device for
MWI is in general a difficult task, due to the properties of the
underlying mathematical operator [18], which relates the data
to unknown contrast in a nonlinear way. In this respect, two
remarkable simplifications hold true in MNP-enhanced MWI:
1) The magnetic contrast corresponding to the deliverable
amount of MNP is in any case low, so that the scattering
phenomenon can be accurately modeled by a linear operator [9]. Accordingly, one can take advantage of tools
available to analyze this class of “simpler” operators, such
as the singular value decomposition (SVD) [19].
2) Within the dynamic range of interest, the properties of
such an operator are only loosely affected by the morphological and constitutive parameters of the breast [15].

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

408

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Considered scenario and the measurement configuration.

Accordingly, no patient specific information is required
to carry out the design, whose results have then a general
applicability.
It must be stressed that, reducing the system complexity, while
being an important goal per se, has a particular relevance for
MNP-enhanced MWI, where the data are acquired through a
two-stage differential measurement process [9], [16]. In fact, the
acquisition has to be performed quickly enough to avoid variations of the electric scenario between the two stages. Since the
main physiological process that can be “sensed” at microwaves
is the chest movement due to breathing [20], the requirement to
fulfill is that the patient can hold her breath during the whole
measure. This entails that the acquisition has to be fast enough
to make this possible, and this is obviously a challenging goal
when the number of probes is larger and larger. In this respect,
the fact that MNP-enhanced MWI is based on monochromatic
data is a further simplification.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the statement
of the problem is given. In Section III, we address the problem of
properly measuring the fields arising in MNP-enhanced MWI.
In Section IV, we optimize the measurement configuration by
showing how a suitable arrangement of the antennas can allow a
further reduction of the system’s complexity, while in Section V
we assess this result through some numerical examples. Concluding remarks and an outline of future work follow.
II. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM
Let us consider the measurement scenario depicted in Fig. 1.
The system is immersed in a coupling medium, with permittivity
εm and conductivity σm and the breast is probed by means of Np
antennas, working in both transmitting and receiving modes, at
fixed frequency f . For simplicity, let us assume that the probes
are z-directed electric dipoles.1 For each pair of transmitter–
receiver’s positions (rT , rR ), the measurement provides the ratio between the received and excitation signals, namely, the
value of the scattering function, S, at (rT , rR ).
The antennas are located on a measurement surface D, which
is assumed to be a truncated cylinder with circular cross section.
Note that there is no loss of generality in such a choice. In fact,
1 Note that we are assuming that the measured quantities are scalar, the generalization to the case of polarimetric measurements being straightforward.

while in the following we consider this specific configuration,
the adopted methodology can be replicated for any other surface.
The measurement procedure of MNP-enhanced MWI consists of two stages, which differ for the intensity of an externally
applied polarizing magnetic field (PMF) [9], [16]. Obviously,
such a PMF does not interact with the breast tissues, and its
role is to “drive” the MNP-induced magnetic contrast. In particular, by properly setting the PMF intensity variation [16], it
is possible to turn ON and OFF the magnetic response of the
MNP (and so the induced magnetic contrast), without affecting
the electric response of the surrounding scenario. Hence, the
differential scattering function ΔS(rT , rR ), given by the difference between the scattering functions measured during the
two stages, is directly related to the variation of the magnetic
susceptibility, say Δχ, induced by the variable PMF intensity.
Owing to the low amount of MNP that can be actually targeted in the tumor, the magnetic perturbation is always weak.2
Accordingly, the relationship between Δχ and ΔS(rT , rR ) can
be reliably modeled by means of a linear operator [9], [16]. In
particular, by neglecting some unessential factors, such a relationship reads [15]

h(r, rR ) · h(r, rT )Δχ(r)dr = SΔχ (1)
ΔS(rT , rR ) =
Ω

wherein rR , rT ∈ D, Ω is the domain and h is the magnetic
field at the location r ∈ Ω (i.e., inside the breast) due to a unitary
source located in rR or rT and S denotes the scattering operator,
i.e., the operator from L2 (Ω) to L2 (D) × L2 (D) mapping Δχ
into ΔS. As usual, L2 denotes the Hilbert space of the square
integrable functions.
Of course, any actual scattering measurement provides just
a finite dimensional-sampled version of ΔS (i.e., the so-called
scattering matrix). Hence, denoting with Sd the discretized scattering operator corresponding to the adopted measurement configuration, our imaging problem consists of recovering Δχ from
the measured values of Sd Δχ. Because of reciprocity, the scattering matrix corresponding to Np probes is symmetric, with
Nm =

Np (Np + 1)
2

(2)

independent elements. Hence, the rank of Sd is Nm , which
quantifies the amount of available information.
Now, due to the fact that Sd is of finite rank, all Δχ lying
in its null space are “invisible” (i.e., they give raise to a null
scattering matrix). Therefore, in absence of some a priori information on Δχ, we can only determine its orthogonal projection
onto the “visible,” finite dimensional space, i.e., the orthogonal
complement of the null space of Sd . The projection is given by
Sd+ Sd Δχ, Sd+ being the pseudo inverse of Sd [19].
The crucial point is that, since Ω and D are bounded and the
kernel of S is (at least) square integrable, S is a compact operator, which implies that its inverse is not continuous. This leads to
the classical conundrum of all ill-posed inverse problems. If we
increase the number of probes (hence the measures) to enlarge
2 On

the order of 0.01.

BUCCI et al.: ON THE OPTIMAL MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATION FOR MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLES-ENHANCED BREAST CANCER

the visible space, with the aim of achieving a more faithful image, the norm of Sd+ increases without bounds, thus making the
imaging problem more and more ill conditioned.3 This implies
that, in presence of the unavoidable measurement errors, the
pseudo inversion of the measured data becomes more and more
unreliable, unless some kind of regularization is adopted [19].
But regularizing the inversion procedure always amounts to filtering in some way the measured data, thus throwing away part
of the information contained in these data. In turn, this reduces
the effective dimension of the visible space, i.e., the amount of
recoverable information.
Taking into account the above considerations, we can state
the goal of our optimized design:
For a given measurement precision (dictated by the measurement dynamic range and the signal to noise ratio), determine
the measurement configuration (namely, the number of probes
and their location on D), which ensures the best compromise
between the amount of recoverable information and the required
number of probes, while allowing the achievement of a reliable
image.
III. ENSURING A NEGLIGIBLE DISCRETIZATION ERROR
As a preliminary step toward the design of an optimal device,
let us face the problem of determining a measurement domain
discretization such that, within a given accuracy, the scattering
function ΔS can be recovered from its discretized version, thus
ensuring that no relevant information is lost in the discretization
process.
To this end, let us observe that, for any fixed rT , the differential scattering function ΔS can be seen as the field radiated by the induced differential magnetic contrast source
Jm (r , rT ) = Δχ(r )h(r , rT ). Hence, if the discretization does
not affect the measurement of the field, the same will happen
for the scattering function.
Accordingly, let us introduce the radiation operator
A : Jm ∈ L2 (Ω) → ΔS(rT ) ∈ L2 (D)

(3)

which, for a given rT , maps the induced magnetic current into
the corresponding “slice” of the differential scattering function,
as

h(r, rR ) · Jm (r, rT )dr = AJm . (4)
ΔS(rT , rR ) =
Ω

Note that in (3) rT is fixed and L2 denotes the Hilbert space
of the square integrable vector functions.
Let Ad be the corresponding discretized operator, which is
related to the adopted measurement configuration. Again, the
operator A is compact, and the knowledge of the samples of the
field radiated by Jm allows to determine its projection onto
the visible space of Ad , as well as the corresponding slice
of the scattering function, say ΔSd . We have

 
Jm .
(5)
ΔSd = A A+
d Ad
3 Remember the condition number is equal to S S + ,  denoting the
d
d
L 2 operator norm.

409

Fig. 2. Approximated breast model. Comparison between the exact shape of
phantom ID : 0706P A2 and a semiellipsoidal-approximated breast.

Accordingly, the normalized discretization error on ΔS is



 A − A A+
Jm 
ΔS − ΔSd 
d Ad
=
(6)
AJm 
AJm 
and, by the definition of the L2 operator norm, we get the
discretization error on A





A − A A+
Jm 
 A − A A+
d Ad
d Ad 
≤
= A . (7)
AJm 
A
The operators in (6) and (7) depend on the electric and geometric properties of the breast, so that our analysis should,
in principle, consider all possible scenarios. However, as it has
been stressed in Section I, the numerical study reported in [15]
has shown that the properties of the scattering operator are
loosely affected by the morphological and constitutive properties of the breast. Accordingly, we can safely carry out our
design strategy by making reference to a simplified reference
scenario.
In particular, we have assumed that the region Ω is a semiellipsoid filled with the background medium (see Fig. 2). The
dimensions of the semiellipsoidal region Ω (ax = ay = 7.5 cm,
az = 14 cm) have been chosen according to the size of phantom
ID : 0706P A2 of the University of Wisconsin (UW) repository
[21]. The operator A has been numerically evaluated using the
method of moments, discretizing Ω into cubic voxels of side
λ/5. The measurement domain D is a cylindrical surface of radius 16 cm, 7 cm high, positioned between −3.5 and 3.5 cm.
A lossless coupling medium (εm = 25) has been considered,
since the results achieved in absence of losses provide an upper
bound for case of lossy media. It is worth noting that similar
values of permittivity are shown by actual medium, such as water/oil emulsions [22] or polyethylene glycol monophenyl ether
and distilled water solutions [23].
Taking into account the symmetry of the considered scenario,
we can separately analyze the effect of the discretization along
the φ and the z-direction, respectively. In particular, we have
first analyzed the case in which the measures are taken on a
circumference at z = 0, with a variable number of sampling
points, evenly spaced in angle. Then, we have considered a
vertical rectilinear domain with a variable number of evenly

410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE I
DISCRETIZATION ERROR A OF THE RADIATING OPERATOR FOR DIFFERENT
MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATIONS [DB]
φ direction
samples
75
50
32

A
−135
−86
−17

z-direction
samples
15
9
8

A
−135
−101
−85

spaced measurement points on it. The corresponding values of
A are reported in Table I. These errors have been evaluated
by considering as reference, i.e., as the continuous operator,
that corresponding to an intersample distance of λ/6 both in φ
and z-directions. As can be seen, 50 samples along φ and eight
along the z-direction are sufficient to represent the differential
scattered field, with an error as low as −85 dB, which is much
lower than that reasonably achievable in actual measurements.
Accordingly, this configuration will be adopted as a benchmark
for the following analysis.
Note explicitly that sample spacing in φ is about 2/3λ
(∼ 2 cm), while along z it equals λ/3. These differences with
respect to the “common” λ/2 spacing are in agreement with
the sampling theory of the radiated fields [24]. In particular,
the increase of required samples along z is related to the small
extension (in terms of wavelengths) of the observation domain
in that direction.
IV. OPTIMIZING THE MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATION
The analysis reported in the previous section shows that locating 50 antennas on each of eight measurement circles, allows
to accurately measure the differential field arising in an MNPenhanced MWI experiment and so we can state that this configuration approximates very well a continuous measurement
process.
However, such an arrangement, not only involves a number
of probes (Np = 400) and corresponding measurements (Nm =
80200) hardly feasible in practice, but the information it gathers
is also likely to be strongly redundant. First of all, as already
stressed, the error level chosen for the definition of the reference
benchmark, is unrealistically low. Second, the error we make in
representing a slice of S (i.e., A), is an upper bound for the
error in representing the whole S, because the different slices
could be linearly dependent (within the given precision), thus
decreasing the effective dimension of S.
Accordingly, to determine an optimal (or at least, a suboptimal) configuration, we must directly analyze the influence of
the discretization on the scattering operator S. To this end,
let {sn , σn , χn } denote the SVD of Sd , wherein for each
n = 1, ..., Nm
Sd χn = σn sn , Sd∗ sn = σn χn
where ∗ denotes the operator’s adjoint.

(8)

Fig. 3. Singular values spectra computed for a different sampling along the
z-direction, 50 evenly spaced probes in φ are located on each circle. The black
line represents the benchmark spectrum.

As is well known
Sd =

Nm

n =1

σn sn χn , ·	D ,

Sd+

Nm

1
=
χn sn , ·	D
σ
n =1 n

(9)

wherein χn and sn provide orthonormal bases for the visible
space and the rank of Sd , respectively. Note explicitly that for
Nm → ∞, not only Sd → S, but also the SVD of Sd tends to
that of S [25].
It must be also recalled that the condition number, say CN, of
Sd is σN m . More generally, σN is the condition number of the
operator obtained truncating the expansion (9) to N terms. This
fact provides the simplest and most widespread way of regularizing the inversion problem: just truncate the SVD expansion
of Sd to an index matching the maximum acceptable condition
number.
First, we have compared the singular values spectrum of the
“benchmark” configuration (400 antennas evenly distributed on
eight circumferences), representing the SVD of S up to −80dB
(at least), with that obtained for two different discretizations
along z:
(1) a five rings configuration (with 50 evenly spaced in angle
antennas on each circle);
(2) a three rings configuration (with 50 evenly spaced in
angle antennas on each circle).
The results for this comparison, reported in Fig. 3, show
that, even considering a looser sampling along the z-direction,
it is possible to obtain a good approximation of the singular
spectrum of S. It is worth to note that the curves in Fig. 3 do not
exactly overlap because the measurement circles considered in
the different arrangements actually cover different portions of
the actual surface D.
We have then considered the effect of reducing the number of
samples along φ. In particular, for both the five and three rings
configuration presented above, we have observed the effect of
considering 32, 16, and 8 antennas, evenly spaced in angle,
on each circle. Moreover, since in a configuration with fewer

BUCCI et al.: ON THE OPTIMAL MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATION FOR MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLES-ENHANCED BREAST CANCER

Fig. 4.

411

Different three circles measurement configurations. (a) 16 × 3 colinear probes. (b) 8 × 3 colinear probes. (c) 8 × 3 staggered probes.

TABLE II
DISCRETIZATION ERROR S OF THE SCATTERING OPERATOR S FOR DIFFERENT
MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATIONS [DB]

TABLE III
CN VALUES FOR THE DIFFERENT MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATIONS [DB]
probes per circ

probes per circ
32
16
16 stagg
8
8 stagg

5 meas circ

3 meas circ

−122
−34
−42
−8
−10

−23
−12
−14
−5
−10

antennas an effect of the positioning is expected, we have also
assessed this point. In particular, the 8 and 16 antennas cases,
we have considered both a colinear configuration, in which the
antennas are located at the same angular positions across the
circles, and a staggered configuration, in which the angular positions of probes on different measurement circles are staggered,
in order to increase the diversity among measurements. For the
three rings case, the different arrangements are shown in Fig. 4.
To provide a quantitative appreciation of the approximation
error, we introduce the discretization error defined as in (7), but
for the scattering operator


S − S Sd+ Sd 
.
(10)
S =
S
Table II reports the S values for all the considered cases. First
of all, let us notice that the 32 × 5 configuration corresponds to
an extremely low discretization error, much lower than that of
the radiation operator for the corresponding discretization, thus
confirming the expected reduction of the rank of Sd with respect to that of Ad . When the number of probes is reduced,
the approximation error increases. However, we can notice that
a measurement configuration consisting of 80 probes (16 × 5
staggered probes, about a quarter of the benchmark) allows to
represent the scattering operator quite accurately, since the corresponding error is lower than −40 dB. Accordingly, the 32 × 5
and 32 × 3 will not be considered anymore in the following.
Moreover, it is worth noting that, as expected, the influence
of the probes’ position increases as the number of probes decreases. For instance, in the 8 × 3 case, staggering the probes
allows a reduction of the approximation error of about 35%.
Notably, the same accuracy is obtained using three or five rings.
However, the impact of the system configuration on the discretization error, i.e., the error we make in representing S with

16
16 stagg
8
8 stagg

5 meas circ

3 meas circ

218
179
92
59

116
74
36
21

Sd , is just one face of the problem. As it has been already
stressed, achieving a low representation error can be useless.
As a matter of fact, due to the ill conditioning of the imaging
problem, one could be not able to exploit the measured data,
because of the measurement errors.
The condition numbers of the discretized operators corresponding to the considered configurations, are reported in Table III. As it can be seen, for most of the configurations, the
value of CN is too high. As a matter of fact, our feasibility study
[16] has shown that the level of the differential scattered field is
at least 70 dB below the level of overall field scattered by the
breast (which is the one actually sensed by the probes in each
stage of the measurement process). Accordingly, achieving error levels (on ΔS) lower than −20 dB can be quite difficult, if
not impossible.
This implies that, except for the case of 8 × 3 staggered
probes, the inversion must be performed truncating the pseudo
inverse representation of Sd in (9) to an index N such that
σN /σ1  −20 dB.
The singular value spectra of the discretized scattering operators corresponding to the considered configurations (restricted
to the dynamic range of interest) are reported in Fig. 5.
From these spectra, we can immediately determine the
amount of retrievable information, i.e., the dimension N20dB
of the visible space corresponding to a −20-dB precision, for
each measurement configuration. These values, together with
the corresponding ratio (Nm − N20dB )/Nm , which quantifies
the amount of information loss, are summarized in Table IV.
As expected, the staggered configuration is always preferable.
In particular in the 8 × 3 case all the available information can
be practically exploited, while the other configurations involve
an information loss in the order of 50% or larger, even if the
amount of retrievable information is obviously larger.
However, this does not result in a significant reduction of
the discretization error, as shown in Table V. Hence, we can

412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 5. Singular values spectra computed for different measurement configurations. The black line represents the benchmark spectrum. (a) Comparison between
the spectra obtained using 16 probes evenly spaced in angle on each ring, for both the case of three and five rings. The solid lines correspond to a colinear
positioning in φ, the dashed and dotted ones are related to staggered arrangements. (b) Like (a), but using eight probes evenly spaced in angle on each ring.

TABLE IV
RETRIEVABLE INFORMATION FOR DIFFERENT MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATIONS
Np

N20d B

(N m − N 2 0 d B )/N m

454
508
504
534
201
390
212
289

0.86
0.84
0.57
0.55
0.76
0.53
0.29
0.04

16×5
16×5 stagg
16×3
16×3 stagg
8×5
8×5 stagg
8×3
8×3 stagg

Fig. 6. Transversal slices of the reference permittivity profiles. (a) Heterogeneously dense breast. (b) Scattered fibroglandular breast.
TABLE V
DISCRETIZATION ERROR OF THE SCATTERING OPERATOR S TRUNCATED AT
−20 dB FOR DIFFERENT MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATIONS [DB]
probes per circ
16
16 stagg
8
8 stagg

5 meas circ

3 meas circ

−9
−10
−5
−10

−9
−10
−5
−10

image, if, as it can be foreseen, the reconstruction error is
distributed over the entire image, i.e., it is clutter-like.
This ansatz is supported by the numerical examples reported
in the following section, confirming that a 8 × 3 staggered measurement configuration is an optimal one.
V. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES

conclude that, for the considered measurement precision, a configuration of three rings with eight staggered probes on each
ring can be considered as optimal, thus providing a feasible and
effective solution for the design of a device for MNP-enhanced
MWI. The corresponding discretization error (– 10 dB) is significantly larger than the measurement one (−20 dB). However,
this does not necessarily imply a poor imaging capability for
two main reasons:
1) S is an upper bound for the discretization error, so that the
one corresponding to the actual Δχ could be significantly
lower.
2) The contrasts of our interest are localized. Hence, the
presence of a relatively large reconstruction error in the
L2 norm does not necessarily impair the quality of the

In this section, we validate the previous conclusions on the
optimal measurement configuration, in terms of imaging results. To this end, we considered two breast phantoms, taken
from the UW repository [21]. The two phantoms belong to different classes of breasts. The first (ID: 070604P A2) is heterogeneous fibroglandular, the second scattered fibroglandular (ID:
012204). In the first phantom, we have simulated the presence
of a tumor as a spherical inclusion of radius 0.5 cm, located at
(0 cm, 0 cm, 1.2 cm) [see Fig. 6(a)]. In the second example, we
have inserted a tumor of 0.5 cm in size located at (0 cm,−1 cm,
0 cm) [see Fig. 6(b)]. The working frequency is again 2 GHz
and a value of |Δχμ | = 0.0094 has been assumed, which corresponds to a MNP concentration of about 12 mg/cm3 [16]. With
reference to the analysis carried out in previous sections, three
different measurement configurations have been considered: the

BUCCI et al.: ON THE OPTIMAL MEASUREMENT CONFIGURATION FOR MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLES-ENHANCED BREAST CANCER

413

Fig. 7. MNP enhanced MWI reconstructions with different measurement configurations. (a) 24 (8 × 3) staggered probes. (b) 24 (8 × 3) colinear probes. (c) 48
(16 × 3) colinear probes. (d), (e), and (f) as aforementioned but for the scattered fibroglandular breast.

“optimal” 8 × 3 staggered configuration, and the 8 × 3 and
16 × 3 colinear ones.
Data have been simulated by means of a MoM-based forward solver, assuming an additive gaussian noise with SNR
= 70 dB with respect to the total field. Note that, as the
differential signal is 70 dB below the measured one, such
an SNR value corresponds to a noise level comparable with
the useful data [16]. Coherently with the analysis in Section IV and the numerical assessment in [15], the inversion
is performed by assuming a semiellipsoidal-shaped homogeneous body filled with the background medium as reference
scenario.
Fig. 7 shows the reconstructions achieved by means of a truncated SVD-based inversion in the three measurement configurations. According to the consideration made above, the singular
values spectrum has been truncated at −20 dB. The results, and
in particular, the comparison between Fig. 7(a), (d) and Fig. 7(b),
(e), clearly confirm the advantage of probes staggering, while the
comparison between Fig. 7(a), (d) and Fig. 7(c), (f) demonstrates
the effectiveness of the envisaged configuration, showing that no
significant improvement is obtained by doubling the number of
antennas.

VI. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
MNP-enhanced MWI is a recently proposed and promising
technique to pursue microwave diagnostics of breast cancer. In
this paper, we have addressed the problem of the optimum design of a measurement device devoted to the implementation
of this technique. More precisely, we have addressed the problem of determining the suitable number of measuring probes
and their positioning. In particular, the analysis has shown that
reliable imaging results can be achieved with quite simple setups, as indeed foreseen by analyzing via SVD the properties
of the relevant operators and then demonstrated through some
numerical examples exploiting anthropomorphic phantoms.
Notably, the required number of probes is comparable, or
even lower, with respect to a system already exploited in clinical
practice for standard MWI of breast cancer [26], whose dynamic
range and acquisition times ensures us that the patient can indeed
hold her breath during the measurement interval, so to allow
accurate differential measurements. In this respect, an argument
which is worth of further investigation in the future is that the
differential scattering matrix can be acquired one row at the
time, so that it is not actually necessary to scan all multistatic
pairs at the same time. Would this be possible, the patient could

414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

even breath between each on-off acquisition, thus reducing her
discomfort.
The results reported in the paper, together with the ongoing
studies concerned with MNP targeting, provide the backbone for
our study in progress, which aims at providing an experimental
proof-of-concept of the idea underlying this novel method.
As a final comment, it is worth saying that, while in this
study we have considered a measurement domain compliant to
a cylindrical surface with circular cross section, the methodology is general and can be straightforwardly applied to any other
array configuration. Actually, the study has a validity which goes
beyond the framework in which it has been presented, since the
adopted approach and tools are applicable to any inverse problem which can be modeled through a linear integral equation
having the same structure as (1). This could be possibly exploited to address the much broader problem of the design of an
optimal system for standard MWI.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Fear, S. Hagness, P. Meaney, M. Okoniewski, and M. Stuchly, “Enhancing breast tumor detection with near-field imaging,” IEEE Microw.
Mag., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 48–56, Mar. 2002.
[2] T. Grzegorczyk, P. M. Meaney, P. Kaufman, R. di Florio Alexander, and
K. D. Paulsen, “Fast 3-D tomographic microwave imaging for breast
cancer detection,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 1584–1592,
Aug. 2012.
[3] J. Bourqui, J. M. Sill, and E. C. Fear, “A prototype system for measuring
microwave frequency reflections from the breast,” Int. J. Biomed. Imag.,
vol. 12p, 2012, Art. ID 851234.
[4] N. Nikolova, “Microwave imaging for breast cancer,” IEEE Microw. Mag.,
vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 78–94, Dec. 2011.
[5] M. Lazebnik, D. Popovic, L. McCartney, C. Watkins, M. J. Lindstrom,
J. Harter, S. Sewall, T. Ogilvie, A. Magliocco, T. M. Breslin, W. Temple,
D. Mew, J. H. Booske, M. Okoniewski, and S. C. Hagness, “A large-scale
study of the ultra wideband microwave dielectric properties of normal,
benign and malignant breast tissue obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 52, no. 20, pp. 6093–6115, 2007.
[6] J. Shea, P. Kosmas, B. V. Veen, and S. Hagness, “Contrast enhanced
microwave imaging of breast tumors: A computational study using 3D
realistic numerical phantoms,” Inverse Problems, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1–22,
2010.
[7] A. Mashal, B. Sitharaman, X. Li, P. Avti, A. Sahakian, J. Booske, and
S. Hagness, “Toward carbon-nanotube-based theranostic agents for microwave detection and treatment of breast cancer: Enhanced dielectric and
heating response of tissues-mimicking materials,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1831–1834, Aug. 2010.
[8] Y. Chen, I. J. Craddock, and P. Kosmas, “Feasibility study of lesion classification via contrast-agent-aided UWB breast imaging,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1003–1007, May 2010.
[9] G. Bellizzi, O. Bucci, and I. Catapano, “Microwave cancer imaging exploiting magnetic nanoparticles as contrast agent,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2528–2536, Sep. 2011.
[10] M. Klemm, J. Leendertz, D. Gibbins, I. J. Craddock, A. Preece, and
R. Benjamin, “Towards contrast enhanced breast imaging using ultrawideband microwave radar system,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless Symp.,
2010, pp. 516–519.

[11] Y. Chen, P. Kosmas, and S. Martel, “A feasibility study for microwave
breast cancer detection using contrast-agent-loaded bacterial microbots,”
Int. J. Antennas Propag., vol. 2013, 11p, 2013, Art. ID 309703.
[12] H. Na, I. Song, and T. Hyeon, “Inorganic nanoparticles for MRI contrast
agents,” Adv. Mater., vol. 21, no. 21, pp. 2133–2148, 2009.
[13] C. Leuschner, C. Kumar, W. Hansel, W. Soboyejo, J. Zhou, and
J. Hormes, “LHRH-conjugated magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for detection of breast cancer metastases,” Breast Cancer Res. Treatment, vol. 99,
pp. 163–176, 2006.
[14] J. Park, G. von Maltzahn, L. Zhang, A. Derfus, D. Simberg, T. J. Harris,
E. Ruoslahti, S. Bhatia, and M. Sailor, “Systematic surface engineering
of magnetic nanoworms for in vivo tumor targeting,” Small, vol. 5, no. 6,
pp. 694–700, 2009.
[15] R. Scapaticci, G. Bellizzi, I. Catapano, L. Crocco, and O. Bucci,
“An effective procedure for MNP-enhanced breast cancer microwave
imaging,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1071–1079,
Apr. 2014.
[16] O. M. Bucci, G. Bellizzi, I. Catapano, L. Crocco, and R. Scapaticci, “MNPenhanced microwave breast cancer imaging: Measurement constraints and
achievable performances,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 11,
pp. 1630–1633, Dec. 2012.
[17] V. Zhurbenko, “Challenges in the design of microwave imaging systems
for breast cancer detection,” Advances Electr. Comput. Eng., vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 91–96, 2011.
[18] O. M. Bucci and T. Isernia, “Electromagnetic inverse scattering: Retrievable information and measurement strategies,” Radio Sci., vol. 32,
pp. 2123–2138, 1997.
[19] M. Bertero and P. Boccacci, Introduction to Inverse Problems in Imaging.
Bristol, U.K.: CRC Press, 1998.
[20] O. Aardal, Y. Paichard, S. Brovoll, T. Berger, T. Lande, and S.-E. Hamran,
“Physical working principles of medical radar,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1142–1149, Apr. 2013.
[21] E. Zastrow, S. Davis, M. Lazebnik, F. Kelcz, B. V. Veem, and S. Hagness,
“Database of 3D grid-based numerical breast phantom for use in computational electromagnetics simulations,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2792–2800, Dec. 2008.
[22] M. Haynes, J. Stang, and M. Moghaddam, “Microwave breast imaging system prototype with integrated numerical characterization,” Int. J. Biomed.
Imag., vol. 2012, 18p, 2012, Art. ID 706365.
[23] S. Romeo, L. D. Donato, O. Bucci, I. Catapano, L. Crocco, M. Scarfı̀,
and R. Massa, “Dielectric characterization study of liquid-based materials
for mimicking breast tissues,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 53, no. 6,
pp. 1276–1280, 2011.
[24] O. M. Bucci, C. Gennarelli, and C. Savarese, “Representation of electromagnetic fields over arbitrary surfaces by a finite and nonredundant
number of samples,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 351–359, Mar. 1998.
[25] I. Gohberg and M. Krein, “Introduction to the theory of linear non self
adjoint operators,” AMS, Transl. Math. Monographs,, vol. 18, 1969.
[26] T. Henriksson, M. Klemm, D. Gibbins, J. Leendertz, T. Horseman,
A. Preece, R. Benjamin, and I. Craddock, “Clinical trials of a multistatic UWB radar for breast imaging,” in Proc. Antennas Propag. Conf.,
2011, pp. 1–4.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

