IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

1483

Morphological Analysis of the Left Ventricular
Endocardial Surface Using a Bag-of-Features
Descriptor
Anirban Mukhopadhyay, Zhen Qian, Suchendra M. Bhandarkar, Tianming Liu, Szilard Voros, and Sarah Rinehart

Abstract—The limitations of conventional imaging techniques
have hitherto precluded a thorough and formal investigation of
the complex morphology of the left ventricular (LV) endocardial
surface and its relation to the severity of coronary artery disease
(CAD). However, recent developments in high-resolution multirowdetector computed tomography (MDCT) scanner technology have
enabled the imaging of the complex LV endocardial surface morphology in a single heartbeat. Analysis of high-resolution computed
tomography images from a 320-MDCT scanner allows for the noninvasive study of the relationship between the percent diameter
stenosis (DS) values of the major coronary arteries and localization of the cardiac segments affected by coronary arterial stenosis.
In this paper, a novel approach for the analysis of the nonrigid LV
endocardial surface from MDCT images, using a combination of
rigid body transformation-invariant shape descriptors and a more
generalized isometry-invariant Bag-of-Features descriptor, is proposed and implemented. The proposed approach is shown to be
successful in identifying, localizing, and quantifying the incidence
and extent of CAD and, thus, is seen to have a potentially significant clinical impact. Specifically, the association between the
incidence and extent of CAD, determined via the percent DS measurements of the major coronary arteries, and the alterations in
the endocardial surface morphology is formally quantified. The
results of the proposed approach on 16 normal datasets and 16 abnormal datasets exhibiting CAD with varying levels of severity are
presented. A multivariable regression test is employed to test the
effectiveness of the proposed morphological analysis approach. Experiments performed on a strictly leave-one-out basis are shown to
exhibit a distinct and interesting pattern in terms of the correlation
coefficient values within the cardiac segments, where the incidence
of coronary arterial stenosis is localized.
Index Terms—Bag-of-features (BoF), cardiovascular, computed
tomography (CT), nonrigid shape analysis, shape index, ventricular endocardial surface.

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE coronary artery disease (CAD) is a leading cause
of morbidity and mortality worldwide [1], techniques that
increase the effectiveness and/or lower the costs of diagnostic or
prognostic procedures associated with CAD are expected to have
a significant clinical impact. CAD is caused by atherosclerosis

S

Manuscript received April 22, 2014; revised July 5, 2014; accepted September
4, 2014. Date of publication September 12, 2014; date of current version July
23, 2015.
A. Mukhopadhyay, S. M. Bhandarkar, and T. Liu are with the Department of
Computer Science, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602–7404 USA
(e-mail: anirban.akash@gmail.com; suchi@cs.uga.edu; tliu@cs.uga.edu).
Z. Qian, S. Voros, and S. Rinehart are with the Fuqua Heart Center, Piedmont
Heart Institute, Atlanta, GA 30309 USA (e-mail: zhen.qian@piedmont.org;
szilard.voros@piedmont.org; sarah.rinehart@piedmont.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2357472

or accumulation of lipoprotein plaque in the coronary arteries
that supply blood to the myocardium or cardiac muscle tissue.
Atherosclerotic plaques lead to the progressive narrowing or
stenosis of the coronary arteries, resulting in reduced blood flow
and, consequently, reduced oxygen supply to the myocardium,
a condition termed as myocardial ischemia. If untreated, myocardial ischemia may lead to irreversible necrosis of the myocardium wherein the healthy myocardium is increasingly replaced by a scar tissue, thus compromising the cardiac function
and resulting in congestive cardiac failure. Some plaques that
are deemed vulnerable may suddenly rupture resulting in coronary artery occlusion and cardiac arrest, potentially leading to
sudden death.
X-ray coronary angiography (XRA) is an invasive technique
that is a clinically accepted standard for assessment of vascular morphology and the extent of vessel stenosis due to
artherosclerotic plaque deposition. Cardiovascular functional
assessment is conventionally performed via a stress-induced
perfusion test that uses magnetic resonance or radionuclide
myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI). However, a comprehensive assessment of CAD necessitates a study of both vascular
morphology and cardiovascular function. Since vascular morphology and cardiovascular function are imaged using separate
modalities, the time and cost associated with a comprehensive
assessment of CAD and the potential health risk to the patient associated with higher radiation doses are all significantly
increased.
Computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) is a
noninvasive imaging technique that allows for robust quantification of vascular morphology and has the potential for characterizing the atherosclerotic plaque composition [2]. When performed using a 320-Multirow-Detector Computed Tomography
(MDCT) scanner, a CTCA scan can be performed within a single
heartbeat, yielding images with an isotropic spatial resolution
of 0.5 mm in a volumetric fashion. The resulting images, in
addition to providing vascular morphology information, are capable of providing significant details about the left ventricular
(LV) endocardial surface structure. The CTCA images, backed
by anatomical studies, have revealed that, instead of a simple
and smooth surface, the LV endocardial surface is composed
of a complex structure of trabeculae carneae which are small
muscular columns that arise naturally from the inner surface of
the ventricles (see Fig. 1). Also revealed in the CTCA images
are the papillary muscles which are attached via fine chordae
tendinae to the cusps of the atrioventricular (i.e., the mitral)
valves (see Fig. 1).

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1484

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 1. Left ventricular trabeculae carneae (indicated by the red arrow) and
papillary muscles (indicated by the yellow arrow) can be clearly seen in the
raw CTCA images (a) acquired using a 320-MDCT scanner and (b) in the
reconstructed triangular mesh.

The subendocardial layer of the myocardium is the first and
the most susceptible cardiac region in the development of CAD
on account of its inherently higher oxygen consumption requirement and the restricted collateral blood flow resulting in reduced
oxygen delivery during the progression of CAD. Consequently,
alterations in the LV trabeculation structure have been clinically
observed to closely associate with some cardiovascular diseases,
such as myocardial noncompaction disease [3] and hypertrophy
[1]. The presence of intermediate to severe CAD in patients is
often clinically suggestive of varying degrees of myocardial ischemia in the corresponding regions of the myocardium. Since
the affected ischemic myocardium loses contractibility and has
a tendency to get stiffer and be pushed outward by the high
LV blood pressure, these myocardial changes are reflected in
the LV endocardial surface morphology, in which the structure
of the trabeculae carneae and the papillary muscles on the LV
endocardial surface are clinically observed to be substantially
altered [4].
The clinically hypothesized association between the observed
changes in the LV endocardial surface morphology and the incidence and severity of CAD constitutes the central thesis of
this paper. However, due to the limitations in the spatial resolution of conventional in vivo imaging techniques, very few
research studies have been undertaken to formally investigate
the LV trabeculation structure at a detailed level and quantify
the relationships between structural changes in LV trabeculation,
changes in cardiovascular function, and clinically observed cardiovascular pathologies. This paper aims to formally establish
the clinically observed relationship between the incidence and
severity of CAD, as quantified by the extent and location(s) of
coronary arterial stenoses, and the structural alterations in the
LV endocardial surface as observed in high-resolution MDCT
images. The LV endocardial surface structure, specifically the
structure of the LV endocardial trabeculae carneae and papillary
muscles, is formally characterized using 3-D morphological features obtained via 3-D shape analysis algorithms. To the best
of our knowledge, this research is among the first to formally
characterize the LV endocardial surface structure using CTCA
image data and quantify the clinically observed association between the alterations in the LV endocardial surface structure and
the extent and location(s) of coronary arterial stenoses.

If formal analysis of the LV endocardial surface structure
can be shown to provide significant insights into vascular morphology, cardiovascular function, and the progression of CAD,
then it has the potential to add significant diagnostic value to
the results of MPI, CTCA, and XRA and improve the effective
management of CAD. It could also potentially reduce the need
for invasive and/or stress-based testing procedures that are expensive, time consuming, and pose a greater health risk to the
patient, thus making CTCA imaging, using MDCT scanners, a
potential one-stop-shop technique for assessment of both vascular morphology and cardiovascular function. In the long term, a
formal investigation, quantification, and verification of the clinically observed association between the LV endocardial surface
morphology, cardiovascular function, and vascular morphology
would enable comprehensive assessment and understanding of
the physiological mechanisms underlying the development and
progression of CAD.
II. RELATED WORK
Our preliminary work [4] demonstrated the potential diagnostic value of characterization of the LV endocardial surface structure in assessing the incidence of CAD. Our preliminary work,
though encouraging, did exhibit shortcomings that stemmed
primarily from the selection of the two shape descriptors used
to characterize the LV endocardial surface. Since these shape
descriptors were based on the implicit assumption of rigidity
of the LV endocardial surface as observed in the MDCT images, they were seen to have significant limitations in terms
of their classification accuracy [4]. Although the MDCT image
data were collected at a relatively steady phase of 75% in the
R–R cardiac cycle, the continuous LV motion and the human
error involved in the data collection tested severely the limits of the rigidity assumption. It was clear that a more robust
shape descriptor was needed to characterize the LV endocardial
surface, i.e., one that is invariant to isometric global shape deformation [5], [6]. Although isometry-invariant shape descriptors
have been the topic of recent research in computer vision [6],
[7] and computer graphics [8], [9], their use in the characterization of the LV endocardial surface has not been explored in the
research literature. In this paper, we show that the incorporation
of isometry-invariant features in the LV endocardial surface descriptor enables more accurate and robust characterization of
the underlying LV endocardial surface.
Deriving a feature-based representation of the image contents generally entails two stages of processing: feature detection and feature description [9]. The goal of feature detection is to localize relatively stable points or regions within an
image that possess significant information and can be repeatedly and reliably detected in transformed versions of the image.
Feature detection approaches in cardiovascular imaging can be
broadly categorized based on the intrinsic nature of the features,
i.e., point-based or region-based, and their scale of abstraction. Point-based feature detection techniques represent the cardiac surface using point clouds [10] and characterize the points
using features such as the scale-invariant feature transform
(SIFT) [11], whereas region-based feature detection techniques

MUKHOPADHYAY et al.: MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE LV ENDOCARDIAL SURFACE USING A BAG-OF-FEATURE DESCRIPTOR

1485

Fig. 2. Illustration of the sequence of steps in the morphological analysis of the LV endocardial surface: (a) accurate mesh segmentation followed by (b)
generation of a 17-segment LV surface model with demarcation of coronary arterial territories (red: LAD, green: LCX, blue: RCA), (c) feature vector generation
and (d) and (e) final generation of the BoF histogram via vector quantization (k-means clustering).

typically rely on segmentation of the cardiac images using shape
priors [12], [13]. The high-dimensional shape prior is projected
into a low-dimensional subspace using dimensionality reduction
techniques to constrain the shape variation. The detected features are tracked in a cardiac image sequence using a Kalman filter [12] or particle filter [13], whereas the shape prior is adapted
using a learning algorithm such as AdaBoost [13]. Other regionbased feature detection techniques for cardiac images include
model-based deformable templates [14], Markov random fields
[15], optical flow techniques [16], and combinations of the above
[17].
The goal of feature description is to arrive at a representation of the local image information in the neighborhood of
the detected feature. In order to achieve a parsimonious representation, a feature vocabulary consisting of visual words is
constructed by performing vector quantization in the feature
descriptor space using a clustering technique such as the kmeans clustering algorithm. The individual feature descriptors
are then replaced by indices in the vocabulary of visual words.
The overall shape is described by a frequency histogram of the
visual words in the vocabulary, termed as a Bag-of-Features
(BoF). The BoF representation has been used in object-based
search in image and video collections [18], [19], shape matching [9], shape comparison [20], and image classification [21]
where two shapes or images are compared using their respective BoF representations, thus reducing the shape similarity or
image classification problem to one of frequency histogram
comparison.
We propose a novel BoF-based shape analysis approach designed specifically for cardiac image analysis, and for medical

image analysis in general. The proposed BoF representation
encapsulates the local and global geometry, local surface orientation, and global contextual information resulting in a robust
feature vector for morphological analysis of the LV endocardial
surface. The proposed approach is shown to result in successful localization of instances of coronary arterial stenoses which
serves to quantify the clinically observed relationship between
the incidence, severity, and localization of CAD and morphological alterations in the LV endocardial surface. While featurebased approaches have been successful in characterization of
rigid 3-D shapes, very few are capable of dealing with nonrigid 3-D shape deformations [22]. This paper presents one of
the first works to use a BoF-based shape analysis approach for
comparison of nonrigid deformable 3-D shapes in the context
of cardiovascular imaging in particular, and medical imaging
in general. The sequence of steps in the proposed approach is
depicted in Fig. 2.
III. CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE PAPER
The paper makes two principal contributions:
(1) The BoF framework for nonrigid shape analysis is
adapted for the purpose of cardiac shape analysis. It is
also important to note that the proposed approach is sufficiently general to be applicable to other problems in
medical imaging that deal with 3-D shape analysis.
(2) The paper proposes a geometric and machine-learningbased approach to study the complex clinical relationship
between localized changes in the LV endocardial surface
morphology and the incidence and extent of stenosis in

1486

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

specific coronary arteries. This paper represents an important initial step toward comprehensive assessment and
understanding of the physiological mechanisms underlying the development and progression of CAD.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
IV, the proposed LV surface segmentation and LV shape analysis
procedures are detailed; in Section V, the experimental results
are presented; and finally, in Section VII, this paper is concluded
with a brief discussion of the proposed approach and an outline
of directions for future work.
IV. MDCT IMAGE SEGMENTATION AND LV SHAPE ANALYSIS
A. LV Endocardial Surface Segmentation and Meshing
The trabeculae carneae along the LV endocardial surface can
be broadly classified into three different morphological types:
1) those that lie along the entire length of the LV wall forming
prominent ridges; 2) those that are fixed at their extremities
but free in the middle; and 3) those that connect the roots of
the papillary muscles to the ventricular wall. These different
trabeculae morphologies contribute to the complexity of the LV
endocardial surface topology [23].
A 3-D level set approach is employed to segment the LV
endocardial surface while adapting to the topological changes
caused by the complex trabeculation structure [24]. A median
filter-based denoising procedure is employed on the 3-D MDCT
data prior to segmentation in order to suppress noise while
retaining the edges in the MDCT images. A level set-based
segmentation procedure without reinitialization, as proposed by
Li et al. [24], is applied to the median-filtered 3-D image dataset
followed by the Marching Cubes procedure [25] to generate the
surface meshes. The surface meshes are subsequently denoised
via a mean face normal filtering procedure [26] to obtain the
smooth shape of the LV myocardial surface.
B. Data Preparation
The standardized myocardial segmentation model proposed
by the American Heart Association (AHA) is adopted to enable accurate segmentation, understanding, and localization of
the cardiac anatomy and pathology [23]. The AHA-approved
17-segment cardiac model [27] is adapted to divide the left
ventricle into 17 segments for more accurately localized shape
analysis (see Fig. 3). The long axis of the left ventricle is first
computed to divide the LV endocardial surface into four main
segments along the longitudinal orientation termed as the apex,
apical, mid-cavity, and basal. Further division of the LV endocardial surface along the short axis view is tackled by exploiting knowledge of the cardiac anatomy. Three landmark points
are considered across the septum to perform the division process. This results in the division of the apical segment into four
segments and the mid-cavity and basal segments each into six
segments, whereas the apex segment remains undivided. At the
end of the segmentation process, the LV endocardial surface is
divided into 17 segments in conformity to the AHA model as
shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. Bull’s eye view of the 17-segment AHA model. Each LV segment is
color coded to denote the territory of the major coronary artery it falls under,
i.e., LAD: red; RCA: blue; and LCX: green.

The ground truth data for experimental validation are obtained
via XRA performed on the cardiac patients and CTCA on the
normal subjects. XRA is an invasive imaging modality that is
distinct from noninvasive CTCA. XRA is considered the clinical
standard for the diagnosis of coronary artery stenosis. Both XRA
and CTCA provide the percent diameter stenosis (%DS) data
for each major coronary artery.
C. LV Endocardial Surface Descriptors Based on the
Rigidity Assumption
In our preliminary work [4], we considered two primary shape
descriptors to characterize the LV endocardial surface morphology, i.e., the D2 shape descriptor, a global shape descriptor
proposed by Osada et al. [28], and the shape index, a local
shape descriptor first introduced by Koenderink [29] and subsequently modified by Zaharia and Preteux [30]. Both descriptors
make an implicit assumption of rigidity of the endocardial surface and are invariant to scale and 3-D rigid body transformation
(i.e., rotation and translation) in Euclidean space.
The D2 shape descriptor is a global shape signature of a 3-D
object and is represented by a probability distribution function
obtained via sampling of a prespecified local shape function
which measures a basic geometric property of the underlying
3-D shape. In the case of the D2 shape descriptor, the shape
function is the distance between two randomly sampled vertices
on the mesh-based representation of the 3-D LV surface. The
D2 shape descriptor has been shown to serve as an effective
object signature for 3-D shape-based retrieval from a 3-D object
database [28].
The shape index, in contrast, describes the local shape of the
3-D surface mesh based on the values of the principal surface
curvatures computed within a local neighborhood of a given
3-D surface point. The shape index Ip of a surface point p is a
function of the two principal surface curvatures κ1 (p) and κ2 (p)
associated with point p and is defined as follows:


κ1 (p) + κ2 (p)
1
1
Ip = − arctan
(1)
2 π
κ1 (p) − κ2 (p)

MUKHOPADHYAY et al.: MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE LV ENDOCARDIAL SURFACE USING A BAG-OF-FEATURE DESCRIPTOR

where κ1 (p) > κ2 (p).
The value of the shape index lies within the interval [0, 1]
and enables surface-based representation of basic elementary
shapes such as convex, concave, rut, ridge, and saddle [30].
The shape index is particularly effective in describing the local
extrinsic geometry of the surface. Our preliminary work showed
the shape index to be more effective than the D2 shape descriptor
for classification of the sample LV endocardial surface data into
normal and diseased classes [4].
D. LV Endocardial Surface Descriptors Based
on Nonrigid Deformation
In a BoF-based shape representation approach, the feature
detectors and feature descriptors are typically designed to be
invariant under various surface transformations including bending, shearing, and changes in pose, viewpoint, and connectivity.
In our case, the LV endocardial surface deformation can be constrained to lie within a prespecified range since all the CTCA
images are acquired at a relatively steady phase (75%) within the
R–R cardiac cycle. The steady phase assumption allows the LV
surface deformation to be approximated by an isometric deformation. Consequently, the LV endocardial surface descriptors
need to be robust enough to capture the important characteristics
of the underlying shape while exhibiting invariance to isometric deformation. Since the LV endocardial surface is typically
less rich in terms of features than common images, the task of
detecting a large number of stable, repeatable, and isometric
deformation-invariant feature points is significantly harder.
1) Feature Detection: Although the feature detection step
is not mandatory, it can improve computational efficiency in
practice. In our case, the feature detection strategy comprises of
dense random sampling where 500 randomly sampled surface
points are generated from each of the 17 LV endocardial surface
segments. The sampling is ensured to be as dense as possible so
that the entire spectrum of interesting points on the LV endocardial surface is considered for further analysis. If computational
power is not a constraint, the feature selection step can be ignored, and all the points on the surface can be considered for
the subsequent feature description step.
2) Feature Description: The feature descriptors are designed to ensure that both the local and global geometric properties of the surface are represented in sufficient detail. Inspired
by the work of Toldo et al. [20], five surface descriptors are designed to represent each sampled surface point. The first three
descriptors represent the local geometry of the surface around
a specific point, the fourth descriptor is a contextual descriptor which encapsulates the global properties of a specific point
with respect to other points on the surface, and the fifth descriptor is based on the Wave Kernel Signature (WKS) [31]. The
descriptors are detailed below:
a) Shape index (Ip ): The shape index Ip of a surface point
p is computed using (1) as previously described. The shape
index is particularly important for its ability to quantitatively
characterize the local shape of a surface.
b) Curvedness (Cp ): The normalized curvedness descriptor [29] encapsulates the degree of local surface curvature and

1487

also the rate of change of local surface curvature; a value close
to 1 implies a very gentle change, whereas a value close to 0 implies a very sharp change. The curvedness Cp at a surface point
p is defined as a function of the two principal surface curvatures
κ1 (p) and κ2 (p) associated with surface point p as follows:

(κ1 (p))2 + (κ2 (p))2
(2)
Cp =
2
where κ1 (p) > κ2 (p). Like the shape index Ip , the value of
curvedness Cp is also invariant to scale and 3-D rigid-body
transformation in the Euclidean space.
c) Normal Orientation (θp ): It has been clinically observed that the incidence of myocardial infarction and myocardial ischemia can cause changes in the 3-D orientation of the
LV trabeculation structure due to the build up of scar tissue.
Consequently, the local 3-D orientation of the LV endocardial
surface is incorporated within the feature vector. The normal
orientation θp at surface point p is defined as the angle between
the unit normal vector at surface point p and the XZ plane.
d) Geodesic Contextual Descriptor (GCDpf 1 ): The GCD
provides a means for describing the overall shape and measuring shape similarity based on point correspondences. Contextual
information is used to describe a specific surface point p with respect to the 3-D shape as a whole. The GCD for a surface point p
encapsulates the distribution of relative positions of other points
on the same surface with respect to p, thus summarizing global
shape in an informative and isometric deformation-invariant
manner.
Since BoF-based methods typically employ a frequency distribution histogram, there is inherent loss of contextual information that is critical for disambiguation. Since it is difficult to incorporate contextual information within a frequency distribution
histogram, it needs to be incorporated within the feature vector.
The GCD, denoted by GCDfp 1 , is an isometric deformationinvariant contextual descriptor that encapsulates the relative position of a surface point p in relation to the other points on the
surface segment. It is characterized by a f1 -bin histogram generated by computing the normalized geodesic distance between
the surface point p and other sampled points on the surface segment. The value of GCDfp 1 is invariant to scale, 3-D rigid body
transformation, and isometric deformation.
e) WKS-Based Descriptor (W KSpf 2 ): The WKS-based
geometric feature descriptor characterizes each point on the object surface while taking into account its relation to the entire
shape [31], [32]. Since the WKS is derived from the Laplace–
Beltrami operator, it is inherently invariant under isometric deformation. Additionally, the WKS exhibits a bandpass characteristic which reduces the influence of low frequencies and allows
for better separation of frequency bands across the descriptor
dimensions [31], [32]. Since the WKS is a multiscale signature,
we consider the WKS at f2 different values of scale for each
point. The WKS-based descriptor at point p is formally denoted
as WKSfp 2 .
The feature detection and feature description procedures described above result in an N -tuple feature vector for each surface point p denoted by Fp = (Ip , Cp , θp , GCDfp 1 , WKSfp 2 ), as
depicted in Fig. 2, where N = f1 + f2 + 3.

1488

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 4. Concept visualization for the BoF histogram generation procedure.
The frequency distribution histogram of the sampled visual words is illustrated
for a sample LV endocardial surface.

3) Construction of Visual Vocabularies: The feature vectors
Fp at each surface point are clustered in order to obtain the visual
words and the feature vector space further quantized to obtain a
compact representation for the vocabulary of visual words, in a
manner similar to the Shape Google approach [9]. A vocabulary
of visual words is defined as a set of representative vectors in
the descriptor/feature space, obtained by means of unsupervised
learning, i.e., vector quantization via k-means clustering in our
case. More formally, a vocabulary of visual words is defined as a
collection V = {v1 , . . . , vk }, where vi is the centroid of the ith
cluster and the clusters represent the visual words. We employ an
adaptive k-means clustering algorithm for generating the final
histogram. Fig. 4 depicts the frequency distribution histogram of
the sampled visual words for a sample LV endocardial surface.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
The proposed methods for segmentation, meshing, and endocardial surface shape description were tested on 32 MDCT
datasets consisting of 16 datasets from cardiac patients and
16 datasets from normal subjects. This was a retrospective review study based on data from the archives of the Piedmont
Heart Institute and approved by the Institutional Review Board
of Piedmont Healthcare. The incidence of single- or multivessel
obstructive CAD was found in the three major coronary arteries,
i.e., the left anterior descending artery (LAD), left circumflex
artery (LCX), and right coronary artery (RCA) using XRA, and
further confirmed by MPI and fractional flow reserve (FFR) tests
performed on the cardiac patients. In the case of normal subjects, the extent and locations of coronary arterial stenoses were
ascertained using CTCA. A detailed description of the ground
truth data generated for all 32 subjects is shown in Table I. The
individual territories for each of the three major coronary arteries are depicted in Fig. 3 in conformity to the AHA convention.
The cardiac patients and normal subjects were subject to a
contrast-enhanced CTCA scan on a 320-MDCT scanner using
a standard protocol with electrocardiogram (ECG) gating. The
resulting images were reconstructed at a relatively steady state

of 75% in the R–R cardiac cycle to ensure minimal ventricular
motion. Although the above protocol is designed to ensure that
the endocardial surfaces are reconstructed at a relatively fixed
cardiac dilation stage and that the subsequent shape analysis is
minimally affected by cardiac motion, it still results in the presence of motion artifacts in the acquired images due to various
factors such as the high velocity of the ventricular motion and
irregular ECG. However, the assumption of isometric deformation enables us to better account for these motion artifacts. The
segmentation technique described in Section IV-A was used to
generate topologically correct and geometrically accurate data
for subsequent analysis.
The experimental results are detailed for three different scenarios. In the first scenario, the problem is modeled as one
of global classification wherein the shape index (Ip ) histogram,
the rigid-body shape descriptor (Ip , Cp , θp ) histogram, the combined rigid-body and isometric deformation-invariant shape descriptor (Ip , Cp , θp , GCDfp 1 , WKSfp 2 ) histogram, and the BoF
histogram are each used to classify the entire LV endocardial
surface into one of two classes, i.e., normal and diseased. In
the second scenario, the BoF-based approach is used to model
the problem as one of localized classification where each LV
segment is labeled as normal or diseased based on the extent
of DS in the major coronary arteries supplying blood to the
LV segment under consideration. The LV segment is considered
normal if the percent DS (%DS) value of the corresponding
major coronary artery is <70% and diseased if it is ≥70%. In
the third scenario, the BoF-based approach is used to model
the problem as one of multivariable regression where the exact
%DS values of each of the major coronary arteries are treated as
the labels based on which the correlation coefficients for each
of the LV segments are computed.
B. Segmentation Results
The results of the LV endocardial surface segmentation have
already been proven to be reasonably accurate in our preliminary study [4]. The spatial distribution of the trabeculation was
observed by clinicians to vary with the location within the left
ventricle, thus providing the rationale for using the standard
17-segment AHA model to perform localized shape analysis.
Furthermore, the proposed segmentation approach has already
shown a visually observable distinction in trabeculation between
normal and diseased hearts, yielding a classification accuracy
greater than 80% with simple rigid-body surface descriptors and
a nearest-neighbor classifier [4]. Our previous work has demonstrated the accuracy of the proposed segmentation method as
well as its applicability for subsequent quantitative shape analysis [4]. In this particular experiment, we varied the size of
median filter kernel and considered three different sizes, i.e.,
5 × 5, 7 × 7, and 9 × 9 to determine the effect of the median
filter size on the final surface mesh.
In order to optimize the filter kernel and validate the segmentation method, an in vitro experiment was conducted to study the
correlation between the segmentation accuracy and the image
noise level. An excised porcine heart was put in a plastic container and immersed in the CT contrast solution. The air in the

MUKHOPADHYAY et al.: MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE LV ENDOCARDIAL SURFACE USING A BAG-OF-FEATURE DESCRIPTOR

1489

TABLE I
GROUND TRUTH DATA GENERATED FOR ALL THE 32 SUBJECTS
Case

Disease

LAD

LCX

RCA

01–16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Normal
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased
Diseased

Mid: 60% D1: 50% D2 prox: 80% D2 dis: 99%
Mid: 30–40%
Mid: 70%
Mid: 95%
Prox: 40%
Mid: 70%
Normal
Normal
90%
60–70%
80%
Normal
90%
70%
95%
20%

Normal
40% towards the origin of the PDA
Prox: 40–50%
Prox: 80% Ostium: 90%
Prox: 75%
Normal
Prox: 90%
80%
30%
40–50%
Normal
Normal
90%
50–60%
Normal
80%

Prox 70–75%
Prox: 40% Mid: 60–70%
Mid: 30–40%
Prox: 20%
Prox: 30% Dis: 40% PDA: 20–30%
Normal
Borderline
Normal
Normal
80%
Normal
90–95%
40%
40%
Normal
40–50%

LAD: Left anterior descending artery, LCX: Left circumflex artery, RCA: Right coronary artery. The columns corresponding to LAD, LCX, and RCA denote the
locations and extent of stenoses in the corresponding coronary arteries; Prox: proximal, Mid: mid portion, Dis: distal, Dx: diagonal branches, PDA: Posterior descending
coronary artery, Ostium: Origin of the coronary artery just above the aortic valve, Normal: unconstricted coronary artery.

ventricle was carefully squeezed out and completely removed.
The porcine heart was scanned with different levels of tube current to emulate the different radiation exposure conditions that
result in CT images of varying quality.
The detailed CT imaging parameters include: volumetric acquisition; tube voltage: 120 kVp; tube current: 50–550 mA; and
reconstruction slice thickness: 0.5 mm. The CT images were
acquired with 550-mA tube current, which is the highest possible tube current setting available on the CT scanner, and used
as the ground truth. Compared to the human chest in clinical
studies, the very small volume of the excised porcine heart and
the highest possible tube current setting ensured adequate image
quality for the purpose of ground truth validation.
The in vitro images of the porcine heart acquired for varying
tube current values in the range 50–400 mA were used for
validation of the segmentation procedure, since the image noise
levels were observed to be in a range similar to that of clinical
in vivo CT images. Quantitative evaluation of the segmentation
procedure was performed by tuning the median filter kernel size
for the CT images of the porcine heart. For each tube current
setting, median filtering was performed for three different kernel
sizes, i.e., 5 × 5, 7 × 7, and 9 × 9. The volume overlap (i.e., the
Jaccard index) VO between the segmented volume SV and the
volume generated by the ground truth segmentation SG was
computed as
VO =

(SV ∩ SG )
.
(SV ∪ SG )

(3)

The average VO results over all tube current setting values
for varying values of the median filter kernel size are reported
in Table II. Based on the results in Table II, for all subsequent
experiments, the median filter kernel size was fixed at 7 × 7
since it was observed to provide a good balance between the
smoothness and preservation of geometric details of the LV
endocardial surface.

TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF THE SEGMENTATION FRAMEWORK: AVERAGE
VOLUME OVERLAP OF THE SEGMENTED REGION WITH RESPECT TO THE
GROUND TRUTH FOR DIFFERENT SIZES OF THE MEDIAN FILTER KERNEL
Median Filter Kernel Size
Average Volume Overlap

5 ×5
0.796

7 ×7
0.925

9 ×9
0.831

TABLE III
PARAMETER TUNING FOR MAXIMIZING THE MCA OVER ALL THE 17
SEGMENTS ACROSS 32 SUBJECTS
GCD (f 1 )
10
10
10
10
20
20
20
20

WKS (f 2 )

k

MCA

10
10
20
20
10
10
20
20

10
20
10
20
10
20
10
20

0.51
0.57
0.51
0.49
0.49
0.53
0.48
0.54

C. Parameter Estimation
The main three parameters that need to be chosen for our
method are f1 (number of bins in the GCD histogram), f2
(number of discrete scales of the WKS-based descriptor), and
k (number of clusters in the k-means clustering algorithm). We
computed the mean classification accuracy (MCA) over all the
17 LV segments across all 32 subjects using a simple nearestneighbor classifier for different combinations of values for the
parameters f1 , f2 , and k and reported the results in Table III. The
MCA denotes the fraction of LV segments across all 32 subjects
that are correctly classified as normal or diseased. Since the
combination of parameter values f1 = 10, f2 = 10, and k = 20
was observed to yield the best classification accuracy, we used
this set of parameter values for all the experiments reported in

1490

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

TABLE IV
CONFUSION MATRIX TO ILLUSTRATE THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF THE
Ip -BASED HISTOGRAM

Actual Diseased
Actual Normal

Classified Diseased

Classified Normal

13
3

3
13

TABLE VII
CONFUSION MATRIX TO ILLUSTRATE THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF THE
BOF HISTOGRAM

Actual Diseased
Actual Normal

Classified Diseased

Classified Normal

14
1

2
15

TABLE V
CONFUSION MATRIX TO ILLUSTRATE THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF THE
(Ip , C p , θp )-BASED HISTOGRAM

Actual Diseased
Actual Normal

Classified Diseased

Classified Normal

13
3

3
13

TABLE VI
CONFUSION MATRIX TO ILLUSTRATE THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF THE
(Ip , C p , θp , GCD1p 0 , WKS1p 0 )-BASED HISTOGRAM

Actual Diseased
Actual Normal

Classified Diseased

Classified Normal

14
3

2
13

the remainder of the paper. Thus, the N -tuple feature vector
described earlier is essentially a 23-tuple feature vector in all of
our experiments.

Fig. 5. Illustration of a sample BoF frequency histogram which demonstrates
its discriminative power. The normal subjects (blue) exhibit a frequency histogram pattern that is very distinct from that of the diseased subjects (green).
A particular region of the BoF frequency histogram is shown here to depict
the difference between diseased subjects and normal subjects in this particular
region. This, in turn, is reflected in the higher classification accuracy for the
BoF histogram.

D. Global Classification Results
An artificial neural network (ANN), employing a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) architecture with a single hidden layer and a
learning rate of 0.3, was used for the purpose of global classification in a manner similar to that described in [2]. The MLP-ANN
was chosen on account of its ability to handle nonlinearity in
the input data. The ANN-based classification procedure was
carried out within a strictly leave-one-out setting. The shape
index, curvedness, normal orientation (Ip , Cp , θp )-based histogram was observed not to result in any improvement in classification over the shape index Ip -based histogram (see Table IV
and Table V).
10
In the case of the (Ip , Cp , θp , GCD10
p , WKSp )-based histogram, 27 out of 32 samples were classified correctly resulting
in an overall accuracy of 84.37%. Table VI shows the confusion matrix for the diagnosis accuracy. The false alarm rate was
observed to be 18.75%, whereas the miss rate was observed
to be 12.5%. Thus, the incorporation of the ten-bin Geodesic
Context Descriptor GCD10
p and ten-scale Wave Kernel Signature WKS10
in
the
feature
vector was observed to improve the
p
overall classification accuracy on account of its invariance to
isometric deformation.
To demonstrate the superiority of the BoF-based description,
the binary classification experiment described above was repeated for the BoF frequency histogram. In this experiment, 29
out of 32 samples were classified correctly resulting in an over-

all accuracy of 90.62%. Table VII shows the confusion matrix
for the diagnosis accuracy. The false alarm rate was observed
to be 6.25%, whereas the miss rate was observed to be 12.5%.
The cases that were always misclassified in Table IV–Table VII
were observed to exhibit less endocardial trabeculation structure
which translated to less reliable endocardial surface morphology
information that could be used for the purpose of classification.
E. Localized Classification Results
A series of experiments was performed to demonstrate the
effectiveness and limitations of the nonrigid shape descrip10
tor Fp = (Ip , Cp , θp , GCD10
p , WKSp ). In this series of experiments, a coronary artery was considered as diseased or stenotic
if the extent of stenosis was 70% or greater. The LV myocardial segments were labeled as diseased if they belonged to the
stenotic artery’s territory in conformity to the AHA convention.
The available %DS data were used for determining whether
a coronary artery is normal or diseased. The 20-bin BoF frequency histograms (see Section V-C) resulting from the vector
quantization procedure (see Section IV-D), for a particular LV
segment from all the LV datasets across the 32 subjects, were
used as the inputs to the MLP ANN with same configuration parameters as the one described in Section V-D. Fig. 5 illustrates
the discriminative power of the BoF frequency histograms in
being able to distinguish between normal and diseased subjects.

MUKHOPADHYAY et al.: MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE LV ENDOCARDIAL SURFACE USING A BAG-OF-FEATURE DESCRIPTOR

TABLE VIII
MCA, PCC, AND COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION R 2 FOR MULTIVARIABLE
REGRESSION ON A PER AHA-DEFINED LV SEGMENT BASIS
Coronary Artery

Segment No.

MCA

PCC

R2

LAD

1
2
7
8
13
14
17

0.41
0.38
0.51
0.65
0.74
0.68
0.53

0.32
0.27
0.76
0.55
0.62
0.64
0.42

0.1
0.07
0.57
0.3
0.38
0.4
0.17

RCA

3
4
9
10
15

0.49
0.35
0.69
0.68
0.72

0.29
0.25
0.61
0.63
0.72

0.08
0.06
0.37
0.39
0.51

LCX

5
6
11
12
16

0.27
0.33
0.77
0.75
0.71

0.31
0.29
0.74
0.77
0.59

0.09
0.08
0.54
0.59
0.35

of the LV endocardial surface. Furthermore, another probable
reason for the lower classification rate in the basal area is that the
apical and mid-cavity segments exhibit greater endocardial trabeculation structure than the basal segments, which translates to
more reliable endocardial surface morphology information that
can be used for the purpose of classification in the case of the
apical and mid-cavity segments.
F. Nonrigid Shape Descriptor-Based Localized Multivariable
Regression Results
In this experiment, the classification problem of Section V-E
was recast as a multivariable linear regression problem wherein
the exact %DS data were considered as the ground truth. The
regression procedure was carried out within a strictly leaveone-out setting. Multivariable linear regression attempts to fit a
linear model to multiple independent (or explanatory) variables
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn to obtain an estimate for a single dependent (or
response) variable y shown as follows:
y = β0 + β1 x1 + β2 x2 + · · · + βn xn + 

Fig. 6. Illustration of the classification accuracy for detection of coronary
arterial stenosis based on the change of surface morphology in the 17 LV
segments in the AHA model. Higher gray values denotes higher classification
accuracy and vice versa. The numerical label for each LV segment is color
coded to denote the territory of the major coronary artery it falls under: LAD:
red; RCA: blue; and LCX: green.

The output of the MLP ANN is the classification of a particular
LV segment as normal or diseased.
The success rate for detection of stenosis for a specific coronary artery is tabulated in Table VIII and also depicted in
Fig. 6. The classification results depict a clinically observed relationship between the coronary arterial stenosis and the affected
segment in the 17-segment AHA model. The lower classification accuracy in the basal area (segments 1–6) can be explained
by the clinical observation that several instances of coronary
arterial stenoses encountered in this study are located in the mid
to distal portion of the coronary arteries that only affect the midcavity (segments 7–12) and apical (segments 13–16) portions

1491

(4)

where the βi ’s are the model coefficients and  is the fitting
error. In our case, the dependent variable y denotes the exact
%DS value and the independent variables xi , i = 1, . . . , n = 20,
denote the components of the 20-tuple BoF histogram feature
vector generated via the vector quantization procedure described
in Section IV-D.
During the training process, the exact %DS data for a major
coronary artery (LAD, LCX, and RCA) and the 20-tuple BoF
histogram feature vectors corresponding to the AHA-defined LV
segments that comprise the territory of that coronary artery are
fed as inputs to the multivariable linear regression procedure.
The multivariable linear regression procedure determines the
model coefficients, i.e., βi ’s, that minimize the mean squared
2
error given by m1 Σm
k =1 m , where m is the number of exact %DS
value points associated with the major coronary artery [see (4)].
During the testing procedure, the estimated %DS value, yest ,
for the major coronary is computed using the 20-tuple BoF
histogram feature vector (x1 , x2 , . . . , x20 ) and the coefficients
(β0 , β1 , . . . , β20 ) as follows:
yest = β0 + β1 x1 + β2 x2 + · · · + βn xn .

(5)

The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (PCC) and the coefficient of determination (R2 ) between the estimated outcome
yest of (5) and the exact %DS data y (i.e., the ground truth) are
computed.
The values of the PCC and R2 for changes in the LV morphology (as characterized by the 20-tuple BoF histogram feature vectors) with respect to the %DS values in a localized
LV segment are tabulated in Table Table VIII and depicted
in Fig.7. The regression results are seen to depict an intriguing and clinically observed relationship between the extent of
coronary arterial stenosis and the affected LV segment in the
17-segment AHA model. The lower PCC and R2 values in the
basal area (segments 1–6) compared to those in the mid-cavity
(segments 7–12) and apical portions (segments 13–16) of the

1492

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

TABLE IX
MCA, PCC, AND COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION R 2 FOR MULTIVARIABLE
REGRESSION WHEN CONSIDERED ON THE BASIS OF EACH CORONARY
ARTERIAL TERRITORY

Fig. 7. Illustration of the correlation coefficient for detection of coronary
arterial stenosis based on the change in surface morphology in the 17 LV
segments in the AHA model. For each coronary arterial territory, a separate
color is used to denote the correlation coefficient value, e.g., LAD: red; RCA:
blue; and LCX: green. The numerical label for each LV segment is color coded
to denote the territory of the major coronary artery it falls under: LAD: yellow;
RCA: magenta; and LCX: black.

LV endocardial surface could be explained in a manner similar
to that described in Section V-E.
G. Results of Coronary Arterial Territory-Wise Classification
and Multivariable Regression Using the Nonrigid Shape
Descriptor
The relatively low values of the classification accuracy and
correlation coefficients resulting from the proposed BoF-based
approach might stem from the use of the LV territories defined on the basis of the current AHA convention which may
not accurately reflect the true anatomy in individual patient
cases. Consequently, we repeated the experiments described in
Sections V-E and V-F, where instead of focusing on the individual AHA-defined segments that comprise the LV territory
of each major coronary artery, we considered the entire LV
territory of each major coronary artery in our analysis. Thus,
instead of the 17-segment AHA LV model, we considered a
three-supersegment LV model where the supersegments comprise the territories of the major coronary arteries LAD, LCX,
and RCA. The supersegments are obtained via aggregation of
the corresponding segments of the 17-segment AHA LV model.
The procedures for feature detection, feature selection, classification, and regression are exactly the same, except that the shape
being considered is not that of one specific segment within the
17-segment AHA LV model but the aggregate shape of all segments comprising the territory of a specific coronary artery, i.e.,
LAD, LCX, or RCA. Since the size of the coronary arterial territory is significantly larger than that of a typical AHA-defined
segment, the number of randomly sampled points per coronary arterial territory is 2000 instead of 500 per AHA-defined
segment, thereby ensuring comparable sampling density (i.e.,
points per unit surface area) in both scenarios. The results in
Table IX show significantly higher values for the classification

Coronary Artery

MCA

PCC

R2

LAD
RCA
LCX

0.88
0.92
0.91

0.85
0.89
0.90

0.72
0.79
0.81

accuracy and regression correlation coefficient when considered on the basis of each coronary arterial territory compared
to the results in Table VIII which are on a per AHA-defined LV
segment basis. These results suggest that although the standard
AHA model-based segmentation may not be very reliable across
all the patients, the overall aggregation of the AHA segments
into coronary arterial territories is more reliable.
VI. LIMITATIONS OF THE PROPOSED APPROACH
Currently, there are some limitations of the BoF technique
described in the paper. First, although coronary arterial stenoses
lead to myocardial ischemic events, there is an underlying gradual and complex process that precedes the clinical manifestation
of myocardial infarction. This results in the clinical observation
of different types of myocardial regions: stunned, hibernating,
normal, and remote. The proposed BoF technique is currently
unable to identify or distinguish between these specific types
of myocardial regions. Second, the use of LV territories defined
on the basis of the current AHA convention may not accurately
reflect the true cardiac anatomy in individual patient cases. This
could be the cause underlying the low classification accuracy in
the localized classification results (see Section V-E). This suggests that the current AHA model may need to be adapted to
the cardiac anatomy in individual patient cases. Third, due to
the limited number of patients, it was not possible to generate
a separate validation dataset. Instead, all the experiments were
performed using a strictly leave-one-out cross validation procedure. Finally, a further thorough study of other confounding
variables such as body mass index, age, gender, ethnicity, previous medical history, presence of diabetes, hypertension, and
myocardial infarction, etc. would be necessary for this work to
be generalizable in a real-world clinical setting.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper is one of the earliest works that studies the relationship between coronary artery stenosis and the morphological
alterations in the LV endocardial surface using high-resolution
MDCT data and demonstrates its potential predictive value for
the diagnosis of the incidence and severity of CAD. In spite
of the limitations mentioned previously, our investigation sheds
new light on the localization of LV regions that are the most affected by coronary arterial stenosis, a phenomenon which is yet
to be fully explained. The association between the morphological features of the LV endocardial surface and cardiovascular
function will be explored in our future work. In particular, we

MUKHOPADHYAY et al.: MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE LV ENDOCARDIAL SURFACE USING A BAG-OF-FEATURE DESCRIPTOR

aim to investigate the correlation between the LV endocardial
surface morphology and the results of MPI and FFR tests in
addition to the coronary arterial stenosis results obtained via
XRA.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Goo, P. Joshi, G. Sand, D. Gerneke, A. Taberner, Q. Dollie, I. LeGrice,
and D. Loiselle, “Trabeculae carneae as models of the ventricular walls:
Implications for the delivery of oxygen,” J. Gen. Physiol., vol. 134, no. 4,
pp. 339–350, Oct. 2009.
[2] A. Mukhopadhyay, Z. Qian, S. M. Bhandarkar, T. Liu, S. Rienhart, and
S. Voros, “Morphological analysis of the left ventricular endocardial surface and its clinical implications,” presented at the Med. Image Comput.
Comput.-Assisted Intervention, Nice, France, Oct. 2012.
[3] Y. Agmon, H. M. Connoll, L. J. Olson, B. K. Khandheria, and J. B.
Seward, “Noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium,” J. Amer. Soc.
Echocardiography, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 859–863, Oct. 1999.
[4] A. Mukhopadhyay, Z. Qian, S. M. Bhandarkar, T. Liu, and S. Voros,
“Shape analysis of the left ventricular endocardial surface and its application in detecting coronary artery disease,” presented at the Int. Conf.
Funct. Imag. Model. Heart, New York, NY, USA, 2011.
[5] F. Memoli and G. Sapiro, “A theoretical and computational framework
for isometry invariant recognition of point cloud data,” Found. Comput.
Math., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 313–347, 2005.
[6] J. Sun, M. Ovsjanikov, and L. J. Guibas, “A concise and provably informative multi-scale signature based on heat diffusion,” in Proc. Symp. Geom.
Process., 2009, pp. 1383–1392.
[7] M. Ovsjanikov, Q. Mrigot, F. Mmoli, and L. J. Guibas, “One point isometric matching with the heat kernel,” in Proc. Eurograph. Symp. Geom.
Process., 2010, pp. 1555–1564.
[8] N. J. Mitra, L. J. Guibas, and M. Pauly, “Partial and approximate symmetry
detection for 3D geometry,” in Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH, 2006, pp. 560–
568.
[9] M. Ovsjanikov, A. M. Bronstein, M. M. Bronstein, and L. J. Guibas,
“Shape Google: A computer vision approach to invariant shape retrieval,”
in Proc. NORDIA Workshop, 2009, pp. 320–327.
[10] K. Wilson, G. Guiraudon, D. Jones, and T. M. Peters, “4D shape registration for dynamic electrophysiological cardiac mapping,” in Proc. Med.
Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2006, pp. 520–527.
[11] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant key points,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, 2004.
[12] D. Comaniciu, X.-S. Zhou, and S. Krishnan, “Robust real-time myocardial
border tracking for echocardiography: An information fusion approach,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 849–860, Jul. 2004.
[13] Z. Qian, D. Metaxas, and L. Axel, “Boosting and nonparametric based
tracking of tagged MRI cardiac boundaries,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput.
Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2006, pp. 636–644.
[14] V. Chalana, D. T. Linker, D. R. Haynor, and Y. Kim, “A multiple active contour model for cardiac boundary detection on echocardiographic
sequences,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 290–298, Jun.
1996.
[15] M. Mignotte, J. Meunier, and J. C. Tardif, “Endocardial boundary estimation and tracking in echocardiographic images using deformable templates
and Markov random fields,” Pattern Anal. Appl., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 256–271,
Nov. 2001.

1493

[16] G. E. Mailloux, F. Langlois, P. Y. Simard, and M. Bertrand, “Restoration
of the velocity field of the heart from two-dimensional echocardiograms,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 143–153, Jun. 1989.
[17] K. Althoff, G. Hamarneh, and T. Gustavsson, “Tracking contrast in
echocardiography by a combined snake and optical flow technique,”
in Proc. IEEE Comput. Cardiol., Cambridge, MA, USA, Sep. 2000,
vol. 3653, pp. 29–32.
[18] J. Sivic and A. Zisserman, “Video Google: A text retrieval approach to
object matching,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2003, pp. 1–8.
[19] J. Sivic and A. Zisserman, “Video Google: Efficient visual search of
videos,” in Toward Category-Level Object Recognition,” vol. 4170, J.
Ponce, M. Hebert, C. Schmid, and A. Zisserman, Eds. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2006, pp. 127–144.
[20] R. Toldo, U. Castelllani, and A. Fusiello, “The bag of words approach
for retrieval and categorization of 3D objects,” Visual Comput., vol. 26,
no. 10, pp. 1257–1268, Oct. 2010.
[21] J. C. Caicedo, A. Cruz, and F. A. Gonzalez, “Histopathology image classification using bag of features and kernel functions,” in Proc. Artif. Intell.
Med., 2009, pp. 126–135.
[22] N. J. Mitra, L. J. Guibas, J. Giesen, and M. Pauly, “Probabilistic fingerprints for shapes,” in Proc. Symp. Geom. Process., Vienna, Austria, 2005,
pp. 121–130.
[23] Medtronic Inc. The Visible Heart (2008). [Online]. Available:
http://www.visibleheart.com/index.shtml
[24] C. Li, C. Xu, C. Gui, and M. D. Fox, “Level set evolution without reinitialization: A new variational formulation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2005, vol. 1, pp. 430–436.
[25] W. E. Lorensen and H. E. Cline, “Marching cubes: A high resolution
3D surface construction algorithm,” Comput. Graph., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 163–169, 1987.
[26] Y. Zhang and A. B. Hamza, “Vertex-based diffusion for 3-D mesh denoising,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1036–1045, Apr.
2007.
[27] M. D. Cerqueira, N. J. Weissman, V. Dilsizian, A. K. Jacobs, S. Kaul,
W. K. Laskey, D. J. Pennell, J. A. Rumberger, T. Ryan, and M. S. Verani, “Standardized myocardial segmentation and nomenclature for tomographic imaging of the heart,” Circulation, vol. 105, pp. 539–542, 2002.
[28] A. R. Osada, T. Funkhouser, B. Chazelle, and D. Dobkin, “Shape distributions,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 807–832, Oct. 2002.
[29] J. Koenderink, Solid Shape. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1990.
[30] T. Zaharia and F. Preteux, “3D Shape-based retrieval within the MPEG-7
framework,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 4304, pp. 133–145, 2001.
[31] M. Aubry, S. Ulrich, and C. Daniel, “The wave kernel signature: A quantum mechanical approach to shape analysis,” in Proc. Comput. Vis. Workshops, 2011, pp. 1626–1633.
[32] R. Litman and A. M. Bronstein, “Learning spectral descriptors for deformable shape correspondence,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 171–180, Jan. 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

