IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

489

A Novel Robotic Platform for Laser-Assisted
Transurethral Surgery of the Prostate
S. Russo∗ , Student Member, IEEE, P. Dario, Fellow, IEEE, and A. Menciassi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the most common pathology afflicting ageing men. The gold standard for the surgical treatment of BPH is transurethral resection of the prostate.
The laser-assisted transurethral surgical treatment of BPH is recently emerging as a valid clinical alternative. Despite this, there are
still some issues that hinder the outcome of laser surgery, e.g., distal dexterity is strongly reduced by the current endoscopic instrumentation and contact between laser and prostatic tissue cannot
be monitored and optimized. This paper presents a novel robotic
platform for laser-assisted transurethral surgery of BPH. The system, designed to be compatible with the traditional endoscopic instrumentation, is composed of a catheter-like robot provided with
a fiber optic-based sensing system and a cable-driven actuation
mechanism. The sensing system allows contact monitoring between
the laser and the hypertrophic tissue. The actuation mechanism allows steering of the laser fiber inside the prostatic urethra of the
patient, when contact must be reached. The design of the proposed
robotic platform along with its preliminary testing and evaluation
is presented in this paper. The actuation mechanism is tested in
in vitro experiments to prove laser steering performances according to the clinical requirements. The sensing system is calibrated
in experiments aimed to evaluate the capability of discriminating
the contact forces, between the laser tip and the prostatic tissue,
from the pulling forces exerted on the cables, during laser steering.
These results have been validated demonstrating the robot’s capability of detecting sub-Newton contact forces even in combination
with actuation.
Index Terms—Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), Bragg
gratings, laser-assisted surgery, steerable surgical tool, surgical
robotics.

I. INTRODUCTION
OBOTIC technology has gained a wide acceptance in the
field of urology in the last decades [1], since the first
robotic platform was proposed for prostate resection [2]. In
2011, the 83% of prostatectomy operations in USA were performed with the da Vinci Surgical System, Intuitive Surgical,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA. Nevertheless, prostatectomy performed
with the da Vinci Surgical System in 2012 were 15% below
2011 (http://www.intuitivesurgical.com/), but this could depend

R

Manuscript received April 16, 2014; revised July 4, 2014 and August 9, 2014;
accepted September 9, 2014. Date of publication September 17, 2014; date of
current version January 16, 2014. This work was supported by the MILoRDS
Project (Minimally Invasive Laser Robotic assisted Diagnosis and Surgery)
funded by Tuscany Region, POR CReO Fesr 2007-2013. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ S. Russo is with the The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna,
56025 Pontedera, Italy (e-mail: s.russo@sssup.it).
P. Dario and A. Menciassi are with The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, 56025 Pontedera, Italy (e-mail: p.dario@sssup.it; a.menciassi@
sssup.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2358711

on improved prevention and change in treatment recommendations for the low-risk prostate cancer away from the definitive
treatment.
In addition, many research robotic platforms have been studied and developed in the last years for urologic applications. A
robotic system for transurethral inspection of bladder urothelium and tumor resection is presented in [3]. An active remote
steering mechanism for bladder cancer detection and postoperative surveillance is proposed in [4]. The Hansen Medical Inc.
robotic platform was adapted and tested for visual inspection of
the interior of the urethra and kidneys in [5]. The feasibility and
safety of an MR imaging-controlled transurethral ultrasound
therapy robotic system for prostate cancer is evaluated in [6].
Robotic systems for precise needle insertion in the prostate under continuous magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) guidance
are discussed in [7] and [8]. Hashimoto et al. in [9] proposed a
manipulator for transurethral resection of the prostate, provided
with a prostate displacement mechanism and a continuous perfusion resection system. Pantuck et al. presented in [10] a tool to
improve the efficacy and safety during transurethral endoscopic
surgery. A robotic system to perform transurethral ultrasound
scanning, surgical motion planning, execution, and virtual evaluation of transurethral laser resection is introduced in [11].
Recently, the application of lasers in urology has undergone
significant advances [12]. In particular, laser-assisted procedures
are emerging as a valid clinical alternative to transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) for the treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH). Despite this, there are still some issues that
hamper the widespread of this technology, e.g., distal dexterity
is highly reduced and contact between laser and prostatic tissue cannot be controlled. These limitations may influence the
outcome of surgery since, with some laser types, the prostatic
tissue can be ablated only when in direct contact with the laser
[13], [14]. Refinements to existing technology could increase
the role of lasers in BPH surgical treatment; in particular, a significant advance could be introduced by the merging of robotics
with minimally invasive laser techniques. Among the robotic
platforms described previously, laser technology is integrated
only in [3] and [11], respectively, for bladder and prostate tumors. No robotic platforms exist for laser-assisted BPH surgery
combining distal dexterity and direct contact monitoring at the
surgical tool.
In this paper, the design of the ASTRO (actuated and sensorised tool for laser-assisted surgery of the prostate), a novel
robotic platform for transurethral laser surgery of BPH, is presented along with its preliminary evaluation. This system combines at the same time contact monitoring at the surgical site
and distal dexterity, while maintaining a small distal overall

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 1. Overview of the laser-assisted transurethral surgical procedure of BPH.
The resectoscope is inserted through the urethra to access the prostate. The
surgeon can move the resectoscope by translating and rotating it along/about its
longitudinal axis.

encumbrance. The ASTRO is designed to be compatible with
current commercial endoscopic instrumentation, thus avoiding
the necessity for dedicated or customized instruments.
II. CLINICAL MOTIVATIONS
BPH is a nonmalignant enlargement of the prostate that may
compress or cause an occlusion of the urethra: It is the most
common pathology afflicting ageing men and constitutes a major
factor impacting male health [15]. BPH can lead to symptoms
that affect quality of life and sleeping patterns, such as urgency
to urinate, frequent urination, weak stream, straining, and/or the
sensation of incomplete bladder emptying. In the most severe
stage of BPH, the inability to completely empty the bladder may
progress to complete urinary blockage, which can in turn lead
to kidney damage [16].
The gold standard for the surgical treatment of BPH is TURP.
TURP is performed through the resectoscope, an endoscopic
straight instrument that is composed of three elements: a working element provided with an operative channel for the surgical
tool insertion, optics for visualization of the surgical site and a
sheath with irrigating fluid valves. In TURP, a wire-loop electrode for cutting and coagulating is inserted by the surgeon
through the operative channel. The procedure requires general
or spinal anesthesia. This operation has disadvantages such as
blood loss requiring transfusion, incontinence, impotence, long
postoperative catheterization time, etc. [16].
In recent years, other surgical techniques have been proposed
in order to find a valid alternative to TURP (in 2005, only 39%
of BPH surgeries were TURP according to [17]), providing
the same clinical outcome while reducing the intra and postoperative complications. In particular, laser-assisted procedures
allow reducing intraoperative blood loss as well as postoperative bleeding, catheterization time, invasiveness of the surgical
procedure, duration of hospital stay, and recovery time [18].
The laser-assisted treatment of BPH is performed
transurethrally via the resectoscope similarly as TURP, as
shown in Fig. 1. In the last decades, various lasers have
been introduced for the treatment of BPH [14], [19] including neodymium:yttrium–aluminum–garnet (Nd:YAG), potassium titanyl phosphate:yttrium–aluminum–garnet (KTP:YAG),
diode laser, holmium:yttrium–aluminum–garnet (Ho:YAG), and

thulium:yttrium–aluminum–garnet (Tm:YAG). Depending on
laser wavelength, laser interaction with tissue can be different: laser radiation can be absorbed by water or hemoglobin in
prostate tissue. The Nd:YAG laser produces energy at a wavelength of 1060 nm and it has an optical penetration depth (OPD)
in prostatic tissue of 3 mm. The Nd:YAG laser radiation is
transmitted in noncontact mode because the laser radiation is
absorbed by the hemoglobin in the tissue. The KTP:YAG laser
has a wavelength of 532 nm and an OPD in prostatic tissue of
0.8 mm. KTP:YAG laser energy is selectively absorbed within
the tissue by hemoglobin (similarly as Nd:YAG laser), therefore, it does not require contact with target tissue. Diode lasers
for the prostate treatment are available at various wavelengths
940, 980, or 1470 nm that are all absorbed by both water and
hemoglobin. A diode laser can be pulsed or continuous and
have different OPDs. The Ho:YAG laser is a pulsed laser with a
wavelength of 2120 nm, the OPD in prostatic tissue is 0.4 mm.
The laser energy of the Ho:YAG laser is highly absorbed by water (resulting in rapid dispersion of heat) and requires a contact
with the target tissue; if used in noncontact mode, the efficiency
of tissue vaporization is reduced. The Tm:YAG laser operates
continuously at a wavelength of 2000 nm. Similarly to Ho:YAG,
the Tm:YAG offers complete absorption of laser energy in water
and it requires contact with target tissue. The OPD in prostatic
tissue is 0.25 mm.
Different laser surgical techniques for the prostate treatment
have been studied [14], [18], [19] based on the different wavelength dependent laser–prostatic tissue interactions: coagulation and vaporization. Vaporization is used in different ways
to achieve different treatments that range from complete tissue vaporization to incision, resection, or enucleation. Visual
laser ablation of the prostate (VLAP) and interstitial laser coagulation (ILC) are based on the principle of laser coagulation.
During VLAP, Nd:YAG laser energy is delivered to the prostate
gland with a side-firing, noncontact, free-beam laser. The ILC
is performed with diode or Nd:YAG laser. The optical fiber is
inserted directly into the prostate gland, and the laser energy is
emitted into the tissue. The VLAP and ILC have mostly been
abandoned because of long postoperative catheterization, unpredictable outcomes, and high reoperation rates [14]. In laser
vaporization, laser energy is delivered with a contact or noncontact laser fiber causing the tissue to vaporize (at around 100 °C).
Photoselective vaporization of the prostate (PVP) is mainly performed with KTP:YAG. With the recent commercial availability
of higher power, 80-W KTP lasers, such as the “GreenLight”
laser, higher tissue vaporization rates can be achieved. KTP
laser vaporization has a relatively short learning curve and can
be performed safely but no tissue for histological evaluation is
obtained. Furthermore, KTP:YAG laser fiber are single use (and
cost about 1000 Euro per patient) while Holmium laser fibers
can be resterilized (cost per patients are about 20 Euro) [18].
Holmium laser ablation of the prostate (HoLAP) is based on
the principle of vaporization. HoLAP procedures were initially
performed using 60-W systems and side-firing laser fibers. It
was considered to be a time-consuming procedure and limited
to use in smaller prostates but, with the recent introduction of
higher power Ho:YAG lasers (100–120 W), HoLAP is being

RUSSO et al.: NOVEL ROBOTIC PLATFORM FOR LASER-ASSISTED TRANSURETHRAL SURGERY OF THE PROSTATE

reexplored for small and medium-sized prostates because procedure times is reduced. HoLRP is based on the principle of
laser vaporization. The energy is delivered to the prostate in
contact mode through an end or side-firing fiber. This procedure
does not completely vaporize the tissue, therefore, some tissue
specimen for histological examination can be obtained (differently from HoLAP and PVP). The prostate is resected into chips
small enough to be retrieved from the bladder through a standard resectoscope. Larger prostates take more time to resect,
making them less suitable for this method. The Holmium laser
enucleation of the prostate principle of operation is similar to
HoLRP, in that it is based on the principle of tissue vaporization
with a contact laser fiber. This procedure is mainly executed
with end fire fibers. Here, the entire lobes are enucleated intact
from the prostatic capsule, pushed up into the bladder, mechanically morcellated into smaller pieces, and then, flushed out of
the urinary system. This technique is faster than HoLRP and
can be used on larger prostate glands. The Tm:YAG laser is
currently been studied for ablation, resection and enucleation
of the prostate almost identically to Ho:YAG. Rapid absorption
in water, short penetration depth and incisional and haemostatic
properties are similar to those of the Ho:YAG, but the cutting is
smoother owing to the continuous mode.
Laser-assisted BPH procedures are performed through the
resectoscope (see Fig. 1) that is a telescopic straight and rigid
instrument allowing only translation and rotation along/about its
longitudinal axis. For this reason, dexterity and force feedback
at the tip of the surgical tool are strongly reduced. Furthermore,
in cases of a larger prostate, there can be some difficulties in
manipulating the resectoscope [13]. These issues may affect the
outcome of surgery in the procedures (related to Ho:YAG and
Tm:YAG laser) that require direct contact between the laser and
prostatic tissue. In particular, the closer the contact, the better
is the distribution of laser energy; consequently, energy loss by
water absorption is minimized, tissue ablation is more homogeneous avoiding formation of craters (that can entrap tissue
fragments, debris, and perfusion liquid that partially absorb and
scatter the incident light, thus, hindering laser effect [20]).
Laser-assisted surgical procedures can be efficient and cost
effective for the BPH treatment with better long-term surgical outcomes compared with the conventional TURP or open
prostatectomy. However, a steep operative learning curve caused
by the previously discussed issues may be an obstacle to the
widespread use of these techniques. Moreover, surgical outcomes are currently variable and dependent on the experience
and technical ability of the urologic surgeon [13]. The limitations of the current laser instrumentation play a critical role
in the ability of surgeons to deliver consistent care. Advancement in the instrumentation with the aim of providing dexterity
and force feedback at the tip of the surgical tool can potentially improve the laser-assisted BPH treatment, and final patient
outcomes.
We decided to focus our clinical target on the Ho:YAG laser
(that is currently widely applied in BPH procedures). In particular, the surgical procedure we focused on is HoLRP that is
a well established procedure, guarantees to collect tissue specimen, and does not strictly require the use of a morcellator;

491

Fig. 2. Laser tip steering: definition of requirements for the actuation unit:
(a) overview of the laser procedure for BPH; (b) close view of the laser in the
prostatic urethra.

therefore, the ASTRO system needs to be compatible only with
the resectoscope instrumentation.
III. DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF THE ASTRO PLATFORM
The design and fabrication of the ASTRO robotic platform for
transurethral laser-assisted surgery of BPH is described in the
present Section. The proposed system is composed of a catheterlike robot, integrated in a commercial resectoscope operative
channel, provided with a cable-driven actuation mechanism and
an optical fiber-based sensing unit. The design requirements
of the robotic platform along with design details and system
components are discussed in the following.
A. Design Requirements
During the design phase of the ASTRO system, clinical and
technical specifications have been analyzed.
The system must be inserted into the operative channel
of a commercial resectoscope working element, which typically has a maximum diameter of 2.5 mm. The resectoscope
working element used for this study is the Karl Storz 27042
LV (https://www.karlstorz.com), with an operative channel of
2.5 mm. Furthermore, ASTRO needs to integrate a commercial
laser fiber for prostatic tissue ablation; typical diameter of the
laser fiber is 0.8–1 mm. The laser fiber used in this study is
provided by El.En. SpA (http://www.elengroup.com): it has a
diameter of 1 mm and it is a lateral emission fiber, thus it emits
the laser light beam at 90° to the fiber direction.
ASTRO has to integrate both an actuation mechanism for
enhancing distal dexterity and steering the laser fiber, and a
contact sensing system for contact monitoring between laser
and tissue.
The actuation mechanism of the ASTRO system has to guarantee a sufficient steering of the laser fiber in order to establish
contact between the surgical tool and the prostatic tissue during the treatment. Nevertheless, the steering of the laser fiber
has to be restrained in order to avoid risks such as perforations
[18]. The diameter of a healthy prostatic urethra is around 6 mm
and its length is around 30 mm (shown as d and l in Fig. 2).
In BPH, the prostate is enlarged and the prostatic urethra is
occluded. Considering these anatomical dimensions, a laser tip

492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Schematic overview of the ASTRO system design. In the inset, section
of the multilumen catheter integrating the laser fiber, the FBG sensors (in pink)
and actuation cables (in green) is shown.

displacement of ± 3 mm (shown as d/2 in Fig. 2) is estimated
to be appropriate to establish contact and safe to avoid risks of
perforations for the specific application (HoLRP is mainly suitable for small prostates, therefore a larger steering range may
increase the risk of perforation of the prostate capsule).
In laser-assisted BPH surgery, contact monitoring is of outmost importance for the effectiveness of the procedure (see
Section II). The ASTRO sensing system needs to achieve a
sub-Newton sensitivity and a scanning frequency greater than
100 Hz, in order to provide a quick and precise contact monitoring. The sensing unit location should be inside the prostate,
close to the distal end of the surgical tool, in order to directly
measure the contact forces between the laser tip and tissue, without artifacts. The sensors must be easy to install, biocompatible,
sterilizable, and safe for the patient; in addition, it is preferable that the sensors have no cabling, thus avoiding risks due to
electrical powering at the sensor. Finally, the sensing unit must
not interfere with the overall size of the surgical instrument,
therefore, the sensors should be small in size.
In the laser surgical treatment of BPH, tissue is removed locally by heating at around 100 °C [19]. In order to guarantee
the overall safety of the system, ASTRO components need to
be compatible with this ablation temperature. Anyway, the temperature drops dramatically as soon as we move away from
the ablation site, because of saline solution’s continuous flow
through the resectoscope sheath (see Fig. 3).
According to the aforementioned specifications, a flexible
catheter-like robot has been selected and designed. A schematic
overview of the ASTRO system design is shown in Fig. 3.
The system is composed of a multilumen catheter that integrates the laser fiber, an actuation mechanism, and a contact
sensing system. The multilumen catheter design is discussed in
Section III-B. The ASTRO system is provided with a cabledriven actuation unit. Three cables are distributed at 120° intervals in the section of the catheter, in order to steer the laser in all
directions. Details regarding actuation unit design are reported
in Section III-C. Fiber Bragg grating (FBG) sensors have been
selected for the contact sensing system. FBG are fiber optic
sensors whose principle of operation is to monitor the shift in
wavelength of the returned “Bragg” signal with the changes in
the measurand (i.e., strain and temperature) [21]. In this study,
FBG sensors serve to monitor the strain, therefore, they must be

Fig. 4. Multilumen catheter: (a) tip of the ASTRO system, with the multilumen
catheter inserted in the resectoscope, (b) picture of the multilumen section at
the optical microscope, (c) metal plate to fix the cables on a 5 cent euro coin.

glued inside the multilumen catheter, and so the laser fiber. In
recent research studies, FBG sensors have been applied in ophthalmology [22], [23], urology [24], colonoscopy [25], needle
biopsy [26], and cardiac surgery [27], [28]. FBG sensors hold
a great potential for biomedical applications [29] due to their
interesting properties such as small size, biocompatibility, sterilizability, chemical inertness, electromagnetically inert nature,
high sensitivity, and low cost. In particular, FBG sensors have
been employed as contact force sensors for vitreoretinal microsurgery in [22] and [23], prostate needle insertion [24], and
cardiac ablation in [27] and [28]. An extensive review of existing
approaches on fiber optic contact force sensors for catheterization procedures can be found in [30], and a review on FBG-based
contact force sensors for minimally invasive surgical procedures
is presented in [31]. The contact sensing unit design of the ASTRO system is discussed in Section III-D. The ASTRO system
overview is detailed in Section III-E.
B. Multilumen
The multilumen catheter [shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b)] is designed with an outer diameter of 2.1 mm, in order to be inserted
into the operative channel of the Karl Storz 27042 LV resectoscope working element (2.5-mm diameter), and a central lumen
of 1.3 mm, so as to integrate the laser fiber (1-mm diameter).
The multilumen is also provided with six small lumens (arranged around the periphery forming the vertices of a hexagon)
with a diameter of 0.22 mm to integrate cables for actuation
(0.17-mm diameter) and FBG sensors (0.18-mm diameter). Cables are fixed at the tip of the multilumen catheter thanks to a
metal plate, shown in Fig. 4(c), fabricated by the Kern HSPC
2522 CNC micromilling machine. The metal plate, bonded to
the catheter surface, provides with a stiffer interface where to
connect the cables, thus avoiding high stress concentration on
the multilumen catheter during steering. In this way, the multilumen catheter is more protected from possible damages.
The multilumen can be sterilized by ethylene oxide (EtO)
and beta and gamma rays. The material used for the multilumen catheter is Polyamide 12 (PA12). The Young’s modulus of
PA12 is 1.1 GPa, thus allowing the multilumen to serve both as a

RUSSO et al.: NOVEL ROBOTIC PLATFORM FOR LASER-ASSISTED TRANSURETHRAL SURGERY OF THE PROSTATE

493

Fig. 5. Finite-element results: computation of total deformation in millimeter
of the system when a 12-N pulling force on the cable is applied.

Fig. 7. Schematic representation of the ASTRO sensing system design: FBG
positioning within the ASTRO system (FBG sensors are integrated inside the
multilumen catheter and two of them are visualized in the picture for clarity).

Fig. 6. Actuation unit of the ASTRO system: (a) components of the actuation
mechanism, (b) closeup view of multilumen support and redirection system of
the cables, (c) assembled actuation system, (d) closeup view of the pulleys.

mechanical continuum for strain transmission between laser and
sensors (that have a coating of polyimide with a Young’s modulus of 2.5 GPa), but also to be flexible to be bent by actuation
cables. The melting point of PA12 (178 °C) is compatible with
the laser ablation. The material lubricity (coefficient of friction
of 0.28) makes it possible to insert actuation cables and fibers
into the lumens, but also to firmly glue the FBG sensors and the
laser fiber to the multilumen body.
C. Actuation Mechanism
The necessary pulling force to be applied on a cable in order
to reach the required laser displacement (see Section III-A) is
estimated with finite-element analysis (FEA), as shown in Fig. 5.
The model is implemented in Ansys with the static structural
analysis. The model considers the mechanical parameters of
the system components: operative channel of the resectoscope
working element (stainless steel), multilumen catheter (PA12),
cables (HDPE), FBG sensors (core in silica glass and recoating
in polyimide), laser fiber (silica glass), etc. The total length of
the ASTRO tip is 30 mm (dimensioned considering the length
of a healthy prostatic urethra, see Section III-A): the multilumen
protrudes out the resectoscope working element 20 mm and the
laser protrudes out the multilumen 10 mm. The required pulling
force resulted in 12 N.
According to the previously described specifications, three
actuation units are integrated in the ASTRO system, as shown
in Fig. 6. A double-bending DOF cable mechanism is chosen
instead of a single bending plus manual twisting so as to avoid
rolling the whole system around its z-axis of ±180° from the
outside of the patient, to reach all points to be treated within the
prostate. In addition, this rolling procedure would produce difficulty in transmitting the rotational motion to the laser tip (due

to friction with the tissues) and would cause stretching of surrounding tissue. In particular, three brushless dc motors (EC-45
Flat-339281, Maxon Motor, Switzerland) with gear head of 19:1
reduction ratio (GP-42C-203117, Maxon Motor, Switzerland)
have been selected [see Fig. 6(a)]. Motor control is performed
using commercial drivers (EPOS2 24/2 390003 position controllers, Maxon Motor, Switzerland), shown in Fig. 6(c). The
three motors are, respectively, connected to three pulleys with a
diameter of 3 cm. The actuation units are designed to be fixed
on a base plate provided with a dedicated support for the resectoscope and for the multilumen [see Fig. 6(b) and (d)]. The
multilumen support is a mechanical stop that allows fixing the
multilumen at 20 mm out of the resectoscope distally. Cables are
wound on the pulleys, conducted into the multilumen catheter
with a redirection system and fixed at the tip of the multilumen
catheter at 120° intervals thanks to the metal plate. Nonabrasive
Dyneema cables have been chosen with a diameter of 0.17 mm
(and a rated load of 215 N), thus allowing insertion and sliding
inside the dedicated lumens of the multilumen catheter. The total pulling force of the designed actuation system is 44 N. The
actuation unit is designed with a safety factor of 3.6 with respect
to the FEA results. The cables are designed with a safety factor
of 4.8 with respect to the total pulling force of the designed
actuation system.
D. Sensing System
1) Design and Integration: FBG sensors are used for the
ASTRO contact monitoring system. These sensors are sensitive
to both temperature and strain; the shift in Bragg wavelength
Δλ is expressed as
Δλ = kε ε + kT ΔT

(1)

where kε is the strain sensitivity, ε is the strain, kT is the temperature sensitivity, and ΔT is the variation of temperature. In
order to compensate for temperature effects and measure only
the strain, redundant FBG sensors can be used, as for electrical
strain gauges. Three FBG sensors are integrated with 120° intervals into the multilumen catheter (refer to Fig. 3). The sensing
element (i.e., the Bragg grating) is positioned at about 25-mm
distance from the ablation site, i.e., the laser tip, as shown in
Fig. 7). The laser tip protrudes out the multilumen 10 mm.
Due to this arrangement, sensors experience the same ΔT, but

494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

and the principle of superposition, the local strain at the FBG
sensors embedded in the ASTRO system, is linearly dependent
on the bending moment Mc caused by the contact force on the
prostatic tissue Fc , and the bending moment Mp caused by the
pulling force exerted on the cables Fp (see Fig. 8). The local
strain can then be expressed as
Mc + Mp
r
r = (Fc L + Fp d)
(2)
EI
EI
where εFBG is the local strain at the FBG sensor, M is the
bending moment, r is the radial distance between the bending
neutral axis and the FBG sensor, E is the Young’s modulus, I is
the moment of inertia, Fc is the contact force, L is the moment
arm of the force Fc , Fp is the pulling force, and d is the moment
arm of the force Fp (see Fig. 8). Combining (1) and (2) we can
write
r
Δλtot = kε (Fc L + Fp d)
+ kT ΔT.
(3)
EI
The parameters L, d, r, E, and I are only related to the design
of the system, and therefore, are constant. The wavelength shift
of the three sensors is, therefore, related to three contributions
(contact, pulling, and temperature) and can be expressed as
εFBG =

Fig. 8. Schematic representation of the system showing the contact force and
pulling force contribution to the local strain at the FBG sensors embedded in
the ASTRO system: (a) bending moment M c caused by the contact force on
the prostatic tissue Fc and the bending moment M p caused by the pulling force
exerted on the cables Fp ; (b) cross-sectional view showing the contact force
Fc and its moment arm L, and the pulling force Fp and its moment arm d.
The decoupling of the components is a convention, consequence of the chosen
coordinate system (principal axes of the system).

different strain in terms of compression and tension, and therefore, temperature compensation can be performed. As stated in
Section III-A, the ablation temperature drops dramatically as
soon as we move away from the ablation site, therefore, the
laser will not affect the FBG sensors operation.
SmartFBG (Smart Fibres Ltd., U.K.) are integrated in the
ASTRO platform. The selected sensors are polyimide fiber with
polyimide recoat, which is the recommended combination for
strain sensing (http://www.smartfibres.com/); they have a strain
sensitivity of 1.2 pm/με and a strain range of ± 9000 με. Diameter of the fiber is 0.18 mm, grating length is 5 mm, and distance
from the grating to the tip of the fiber is 15 mm (see Fig. 7).
The centre Bragg wavelength is 1550 nm for all three sensors,
thus avoiding possible optical interferences with typical wavelengths of laser fibers for prostate treatment (see Section II).
The SmartScan interrogator (Smart Fibres Ltd., U.K.) is used to
sample the FBG sensors at a 2.5-kHz refresh rate (resolution of
0.39 pm).
The Epo-Tek 301 optical adhesive is used to glue the FBG
sensors and the laser fiber in the multilumen catheter. Since the
volume in which to pour the glue is very low, a low-viscosity
glue is used to facilitate the casting of the glue. The selected
glue has a 100–200 cPs viscosity (at 23 °C, at 100 r/min).
Furthermore, the Epo-Tek 301 is nontoxic, it resists to the most
common sterilization methods, it has a fast curing time and it
has an operating temperature range of up to 300 °C, which is
compatible with the laser application. The assembly procedure
description is the following: first the optical fibers are inserted
in the lumens of the multilumen catheter, then the multilumen
is kept in a vertical position in order to facilitate the flow down
of the glue, and at this point, the glue is inserted inside the
lumens by using a microneedle (0.16-mm diameter) mounted
on a syringe. The glue curing time is 24 h at room temperature.
2) Calibration: The aim of the calibration is to correlate the
contact force Fc (shown in Fig. 8) applied at the ASTRO tip with
the response of the sensors. The components of the force to be
monitored are Fcx along the x-axis and Fcy along the y-axis. The
force component along the z-axis Fcz is not of interest since the
laser fiber is a lateral emission fiber (see Section III-A).
Assuming we can apply the constitutive equations of the beam
theory (Navier’s equation for stress distribution) to the system

Δλtot = Δλc + Δλp + ΔλT

(4)

where Δλtot is the total wavelength shift, Δλc is the wavelength
shift caused by Fc , Δλp is the wavelength shift caused by Fp ,
and ΔλT is the wavelength shift caused by temperature change.
We can assume that there is negligible temperature gradient in
the small volume in which the sensors are integrated, so the
three FBG sensors experience the same ΔT. As demonstrated
in [22], by subtracting the mean of the Bragg wavelength shifts
of all three FBG sensors, the common mode such as noise, axial
strain, and temperature change can be removed. We can then
derive the sensor differential signal:
1
kεi εi
3 i=1
3

ΔRi = Δλi − Δλm ean = kεi εi −

(5)

and (4) can be rewritten as
ΔRtot = ΔRc + ΔRp

(6)

where ΔRtot is the total differential signal and ΔRc and ΔRp
are, respectively, the differential signals caused by Fc and Fp .
At this point, the temperature contribution is compensated, but
we still need to discriminate the pulling from the contact. In
order to discriminate between the signal caused by the contact
forces (ΔRc ) and the signal caused by the pulling forces (ΔRp )
that produce the steering of the laser, thus deriving only the
contact forces between the laser fiber and the prostate tissue,
calibration experiments are carried out. Since the contributions
are coupled, we need to do two separate calibration processes
(one applying only contact forces, one applying only pulling
forces) to discriminate the components. For the first calibration,
known contact transverse forces are applied to the ASTRO tip,
without applying tension on the cables (no-steering condition),
and wavelength shifts are recorded. Thanks to this calibration,
we can relate the contact force with the sensors differential

RUSSO et al.: NOVEL ROBOTIC PLATFORM FOR LASER-ASSISTED TRANSURETHRAL SURGERY OF THE PROSTATE

Fig. 9.

495

ASTRO system overview.

signal and obtain:
Fc = KΔRc

(7)

where Fc is a 2 × 1 vector of the components of the contact force
(Fcx and Fcy ) measured by the FBG sensors at the ASTRO tip,
K is a 2 × 3 wavelength-to-force conversion matrix obtained
thanks to this calibration step and ΔRc is a 3 × 1 vector of the
differential signal caused by Fc . As a second step, a calibration
phase is carried out in which known laser steering is performed
(no-contact-force condition) and wavelength shifts are recorded.
Thanks to this calibration, we can derive a coefficient matrix C
that relates the sensors differential signal and the laser steering
as follows:
ΔRp = Cd

(8)

where ΔRp is a 3 × 1 vector of the differential signal caused
by the laser steering, C is a 3 × 3 coefficient matrix obtained by
this calibration step, and d is a 3 × 1 vector of the corresponding laser steering values for the three actuation units. At this
moment, since the direct kinematics of the system is known (the
control of the ASTRO system is based on the standard constant
curvature kinematic modeling [32], the derivation of the kinematic model is not reported in this paper), the vector d (position
of the end effector) is known. Therefore, using (8), the differential signal ΔRp can be derived exploiting the matrix C. At
this point, we can subtract the contribution ΔRp of the pulling
forces Fp from the total differential signal ΔRtot in (6). Finally,
only the contribution ΔRc of the contact forces Fc is present and
contact forces can be derived with (7) using the wavelength-toforce conversion matrix. The calibration phases of the ASTRO
system sensing unit are discussed in Section IV-B.
E. Overview of the ASTRO Platform
The overall ASTRO platform is shown in Fig. 9. The platform is composed of a PC running a LabVIEW graphical user
interface (GUI) to acquire the signals from the FBG sensors and
control actuation motors, the FBG interrogator, and the driving
motor platform. The system is currently conceived to provide

Fig. 10. Actuation assessment. The direction of steering, for each test, is
schematically shown in the left part, respectively, in (a), (b), and (c). The laser
tip steering, recorded through the resectoscope optics, is shown in the right part
of the figures. A close view of the laser tip steering is shown in the bottom of
each figure.

contact force feedback (via visual and/or auditory signals) to
the surgeon by means of the GUI. The ASTRO platform overall
dimensions [see Fig. 6(c)] are: 600 mm in length, 300 mm in
width, and 100 mm in height. The overall weight is 4 Kg.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Actuation Assessment
In order to assess the overall ASTRO actuation mechanism
performance, the following two tests are carried out.
The ASTRO platform is first positioned so as to point the laser
fiber toward a panel of graph paper (see Fig. 10), which serves as
a geometric reference during the steering of the laser. Tests are
recorded through the optics of the resectoscope. The steering of
the laser fiber is successfully performed in all three directions
as shown on the left side, respectively, in Fig. 10(a), (b), and
(c). The required laser tip displacement of 3 mm, discussed in
Section III-A, is achieved in all cases.
A second experimental setup shown in Fig. 11(a) consists of
the ASTRO platform inserted in an anthropomorphic phantom
that reproduces urethra, prostatic urethra, prostate, and bladder. The anthropomorphic phantom has been developed by the
EndoCAS Centre for Computer Assisted Surgery, Cisanello
Hospital, Pisa, Italy (http://www.endocas.org/), starting from
the study of the physical properties of the tissues involved in the
surgical scenario, and from anatomical models derived by 3-D
radiological images, in order to mimic tissues mechanical properties and anatomy. Two different laser steering experiments are
carried out inside the prostatic urethra phantom: approaching
and slicing a tissue. The approaching test, shown in Fig. 11(b)
and (c), consists of steering the laser from a central position
of the laser fiber inside the urethra to the wall of the prostatic
urethra. The slicing test, shown in Fig. 11(d) and (e), consists

496

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 12. Calibration setup: (a) picture of the calibration setup showing the
ASTRO system mounted on the robot, the FBG interrogator, the computer
and calibration weights, (b) schematic representation of the system orientation
during calibration (40° rolling angles). Calibration chamber is not shown in the
picture.
Fig. 11. Actuation assessment test with the anthropomorphic phantom:
(a) experimental setup, (b) and (c) approaching phases of the laser tip to the
tissue phantom, (d) and (e) slicing phases of the laser tip on the tissue phantom.
During experiments, optics is inserted in the phantom so as to point towards the
front of the ASTRO system.

of steering the laser mimicking the ablation of a portion of the
prostatic urethra.
During the actuation assessment tests, the ASTRO platform
is controlled by a LabVIEW GUI. The control of the system is
based on standard constant curvature kinematic modeling [32],
the derivation of the kinematic model is not reported in the
paper. These tests show that the laser steering can be performed
successfully with the ASTRO actuation mechanism, according
to the clinical requirements.
B. Calibration
In order to measure the contact forces exerted at the tip of
the ASTRO system (see Section III-D2), two calibration experiments are carried out. The wavelength-to-force conversion
matrix K is computed with the first calibration experiment, carried out under no-steering condition. The coefficient matrix C
is computed with the second calibration experiment, carried out
under no-contact-force condition. The two calibration experiments are described in the following.
1) Calibration Applying Known Contact Forces (No-Steering
Condition): In this test, the calibration of the ASTRO platform is carried out applying only known forces on the tip. The
calibration setup, shown in Fig. 12, consists of the ASTRO system (with embedded FBG sensors, cables and laser fiber), an
industrial 6 degrees-of-freedom (DOF) robot with an angular
resolution of 0.05° (RV-3SJB, Mitsubishi Co, Japan), calibration weights, the FBG interrogator, a computer, and a calibration
chamber (in order to avoid environmental disturbances, such as
temperature variation and air currents). The calibration weights

have been weighted before the tests, with an electrically shielded
analytical balance, RADWAG Wagi Elektroniczne, which has a
readability of 0.1 mg. The ASTRO platform is mounted on the
robot, and during calibration, the system orientation is changed
by rolling it around the z-axis in a range from 0° to 360° and
with step of 40°. In this way, the components of the force, generated by the applied calibration weights, change with respect
to the system and the FBG sensors experience different strain
(in terms of tension or compression). For each orientation, a
load/unload cycle is performed by applying loads: calibration
weights are applied at the tip of the system by using a thin
wire, with a calibration range from 0 to 2 mN and a calibration
step of 0.2 mN. At each step, the corresponding wavelength of
the three sensors is recorded. For each orientation, load/unload
cycles are repeated ten times. The interrogator is used to sample the three FBG sensors at a 2.5-kHz refresh rate and each
acquisition lasts one second. The final log data are 5940 samples (corresponding to the acquisition from the 3 sensors at 9
different orientations, 11 different weights per load/unload cycle, for 10 repetitions) and each sample is the mean value of
2500 (1-s acquisition). Data acquisition and postprocessing are
performed, respectively, using the interrogator software SmartSoft (Smart Fibres Ltd., U.K.) and MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc.,
Natick, MA, USA). The following wavelength-to-force conversion matrix is then obtained by solving (7) using the Moore–
Penrose pseudoinverse (least-square solution):


−37.4756 −11.6845
0.8172
K=
.
(9)
4.0836
−40.8700 −18.0800
The force components Fcx and Fcy , estimated with the
wavelength-to-force conversion matrix, versus the actual value
of the force using linear fitting and the corresponding residual
errors are shown in Fig. 13. The slope of the linear fitting is,

RUSSO et al.: NOVEL ROBOTIC PLATFORM FOR LASER-ASSISTED TRANSURETHRAL SURGERY OF THE PROSTATE

Fig. 13. Calibration results. On the top of the figure, force components Fc x
and Fc y , estimated with the wavelength-to-force conversion matrix, versus the
actual value of the force using linear fitting are reported. On the bottom of the
figure, corresponding residual errors are shown.

respectively, 1.084 for Fcx and 1.052 for Fcy . The root mean
square error (RMSE) is 0.2083 mN for Fcx and 0.1597 mN for
Fcy .
2) Calibration Performing a Known Steering of the Laser
Fiber (No-Contact-Force Condition): In this test, the calibration of the ASTRO platform is carried out applying only tension
into cables, thus performing a known steering of the laser fiber.
The calibration setup consists of the ASTRO system (with embedded FBG sensors, cables, and laser fiber), the FBG interrogator, a computer, and a calibration chamber. Steering of the laser
fiber is performed in all three directions from 0 to 3 mm with
a step of 0.5 mm. The system is able to move in intermediate
configurations, but during calibration, it is important to test each
steering direction separately in order to derive the components
of the coefficient matrix C (see Section III-D2). At each step,
the corresponding wavelength of the three sensors is recorded.
For each direction, load/unload cycles are repeated ten times.
The interrogator is used to sample the three FBG sensors at a
2.5-kHz refresh rate and each acquisition lasts one second. The
final log data are 1260 samples (corresponding to the acquisition from the three sensors at three different steering directions,
seven different steps per load/unload cycle, for ten repetitions)
and each sample is the mean value of 2500 (1-s acquisition). The
results of this experiment are shown in Fig. 14. The following
coefficient matrix composed of the angular coefficient of the
curves is obtained:
⎛
⎞
−0.1519 0.3404 −0.1781
⎜
⎟
C = ⎝ 0.3251 −0.1608 −0.1783 ⎠ .
(10)
−0.1561

−0.1695

0.3644

Results reported in Fig. 14 show a linear relationship between the steering of the laser fiber and the wavelength shifts
of the three FBG sensors, furthermore, a good symmetry is
shown. The system hysteresis is computed as the area under the
curves for load/unload cycle of pulling forces Fp applied at the
ASTRO system versus steering of the laser fiber tip. The pulling
force Fp that causes laser steering is computed from the wavelength shifts obtained in this test ΔRp , with the wavelength-toforce conversion matrix (9). The mean value of the hysteresis is

497

Fig. 14. Calibration results of the ASTRO system under steering (no-contactforce condition). The three sensors differential signals, for the three steering
directions are shown. For each graph (a), (b), and (c), the three components of
the vector ΔR p are shown as scalars. The steering directions are shown in the
scheme on the left: cables are in green, FBG sensors are in pink.

Fig. 15. Validation experiment results. On the top of the figure, force components Fc x and Fc y , estimated with the wavelength-to-force conversion matrix,
versus the actual value of the force using linear fitting are reported. On the
bottom of the figure, corresponding residual errors are shown.

0.066 × 10−3 J and 0.073 × 10−3 J, respectively, for the component along the x-axis Fpx and the component along the y-axis
Fpy ; therefore, it can be considered negligible.
C. Validation
Validation of the ASTRO system sensing unit is described in
the following. First, validation is performed testing if the force
calculation with the wavelength-to-force conversion matrix (9)
can provide reliable force estimation. Second, system validation is carried out, testing if the force calculation can still be
performed during laser steering, using the algorithm described
in Section III-D2.
1) Validation of the Wavelength-to-Force Conversion Matrix
(No-Steering Condition): The purpose of this experiment is to
validate at first if the contact force can be estimated correctly
without the laser steering. The test is performed applying known
forces to the ASTRO tip and no tension on the cables. The
experimental setup used is the same as the one discussed in
Section IV-B1. The applied forces are in the range from 0 to
2 mN with a step of 0.2 mN and the orientation of the force

498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 16. Validation experiment results: (a) linear fitting of the estimated contact force along the x-axis (Fc x ) with pulling compensation versus the actual value,
(b) its residual errors, (c) estimated contact force along the x-axis (Fc x ) with and without pulling compensation versus the actual value, (d) linear fitting of the
estimated contact force along the y-axis (Fc y ) with pulling compensation versus the actual value, (e) its residual errors, (f) estimated contact force along the y-axis
(Fc y ) with and without pulling compensation versus the actual value.

changes in a range from 0° to 360° and a step of 45°. The
force components Fcx and Fcy , estimated with the wavelengthto-force conversion matrix, versus the actual value of the force
using linear fitting and the corresponding residual errors are
shown in Fig. 15. The slope of the linear fitting is, respectively,
1 for Fcx and 1.002 for Fcy . The RMSE is 0.2063 mN for Fcx and
0.1701 mN for Fcy . The estimation of the force components is
consistent with the actual values and with the calibration results.
2) Validation With Steering and Measurement of Contact
Forces: The purpose of this experiment is to validate if the contact force can still be estimated correctly during laser steering,
using the algorithm described in Section III-D2. The experimental setup used is the same as the one discussed in Section IV-B1.
The test is performed applying known forces to the ASTRO tip
and performing laser steering. The applied forces range from 0 to
2 mN, with a step of 0.5 mN. The orientation of the force covers
the full circle with steps of 45° and 120° (for symmetry). Laser
steering is performed in all three directions with a range from 0
to 3 mm and a step of 1.5 mm. The linear fitting of the estimated
force component along the x-axis Fcx versus the actual value
of the force, calculated with pulling compensation is shown in
Fig. 16(a) and its residual errors are shown in Fig. 16(b). The
estimated force component along the x-axis Fcx versus the actual value of the force without pulling compensation are shown
in Fig. 16(c), overlapped to the pulling compensated ones. The
linear fitting of the estimated force component along the y-axis
Fcy versus the actual value of the force, calculated with pulling
compensation is shown in Fig. 16(d) and its residual errors are
shown in Fig. 16(e). The estimated force component along the
y-axis Fcy versus the actual value of the force without pulling
compensation are shown in Fig. 16(f), overlapped to the pulling

compensated ones. The slope of the linear fitting is, respectively,
1.017 for Fcx and 0.9906 for Fcy . The RMSE is 0.348 mN
for Fcx and 0.3389 mN for Fcy . This test shows that the estimation of the force during laser steering, with the pulling compensation algorithm, is still consistent with the actual values and
with the validation results for the estimation of the force under
no-steering condition (see Section IV-C1).
V. CONCLUSION
The laser-assisted transurethral treatment of BPH is an emerging surgical procedure. Nevertheless, it has still some limitations, e.g., reduced distal dexterity and lacking of force feedback at the surgical tool that influence the outcome of surgery.
Automation of the existing technology, with the introduction of
robotic tools, could improve the surgical procedure.
In this study, a novel robotic platform for transurethral laserassisted surgery of BPH is developed. The system combines at
the same time distal dexterity and contact monitoring at the surgical site, while maintaining a small distal overall encumbrance
and compatibility with current commercial instrumentation (resectoscopes and laser fibers). The ASTRO platform overall dimensions [see Fig. 6(c)] are: 600 mm in length, 300 mm in
width, and 100 mm in height. The overall weight is 4 Kg. The
platform can possibly be supported by an arm during the surgical
procedure so as to compensate for the weight, such as a robotic
arm (see Fig. 12) or a Martin’s Arm. The surgeon can move
the ASTRO system from outside of the patient in an easier way
and translate it forward and backwards with respect to its z-axis.
Designing a smaller actuation stage is part of our future work.
The actuation mechanism of the ASTRO platform is tested in

RUSSO et al.: NOVEL ROBOTIC PLATFORM FOR LASER-ASSISTED TRANSURETHRAL SURGERY OF THE PROSTATE

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE CALIBRATION AND VALIDATION RESULTS
RMSE

Calibration
Validation (only Fc applied)
Validation (Fc and Fp applied)

Fc x

Fc y

0.2083
0.2063
0.348

0.1597
0.1701
0.3389

in vitro experiments and proved to be capable of performing
laser steering according to the clinical requirements. The sensing system for performing contact monitoring between the laser
fiber and the hypertrophic prostatic tissue is characterized with
calibration and validation experiments. A contact force calculation method, with the aim of discriminating the contact forces
from the pulling forces exerted on the cables, is proposed and
validated. The sensing system proved to be capable of monitoring contact, with a sub-Newton sensitivity, in both no laser
steering and laser steering condition. If we compare RMSE resulted from calibration and validation tests with only contact
force Fc applied (see Table I), we see that the results are consistent: Error affects the second figure. The validation results for
the test with both contact force Fc and pulling force Fp applied
is still consistent with the calibration results and with validation
tests with only contact force Fc applied (see Table I): error affects the first figure, still sub-Newton sensitivity is reached. The
dynamic response of the sensing system will be investigated in
future experiments.
Ex vivo and in vivo tests with clinicians will be performed in
future experiments. The authors envisage that these tests will
pave the way to study the necessary contact forces during laserassisted transurethral surgery of the prostate and the necessary
dexterity of the laser fiber. This activity will allow to understand
which are the best combinations of dexterity and contact forces
to be applied in order to improve the ablation procedure. This
data, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, are not yet known
in the literature.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. M. Pracchia for the support during the fabrication and assembly of the ASTRO platform and the EndoCAS Centre for Computer Assisted Surgery,
Cisanello Hospital, Pisa, Italy (http://www.endocas.org/) for
making the anthropomorphic phantom available for the tests.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Murphy, B. Challacombe, M. S. Khan, and P. Dasgupta, “Robotic
technology in urology,” Postgraduate Med. J., vol. 82, no. 973, pp. 743–
747, 2006.
[2] S. J. Harris, F. Arambula-Cosio, Q. Mei, R. D. Hibberd, B. L. Davies,
J. E. A. Wickham, and B. Kundu, “The probot—An active robot for
prostate resection,” in Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., H, J. Eng. Med., vol. 211,
no. 4, pp. 317–325, 1997.
[3] R. Goldman, A. Bajo, L. Maclachlan, R. Pickens, S. Herrell, and
N. Simaan, “Design and performance evaluation of a minimally invasive telerobotic platform for transurethral surveillance and intervention,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 918–925, Apr. 2013.

499

[4] W. J. Yoon, S. Park, P. G. Reinhall, and E. J. Seibel, “Development of
an automated steering mechanism for bladder urothelium surveillance,”
J. Med. Devices, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 0110041–0110049, 2009.
[5] M. Aron and M. M. Desai, “Flexible Robotics,” Urol. Clin. North Amer.,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 157–162, 2009.
[6] R. Chopra, A. Colquhoun, M. Burtnyk, W.A. N’djin, I. Kobelevskiy,
A. Boyes, K. Siddiqui, H. Foster, L. Sugar, M. A. Haider, M. Bronskill,
and L. Klotz, “MR imaging-controlled transurethral ultrasound therapy
for conformal treatment of prostate tissue: Initial feasibility in humans,”
Radiology, vol. 265, no. 1, pp. 303–13, 2012.
[7] R. Seifabadi, E. E. Gomez, F. Aalamifar, G. Fichtinger, and I. Iordachita,
“Real time tracking of a bevel tip needle with varying insertion depth
toward teleoperated MRI guided needle steering,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2013, pp. 469–479.
[8] W. Shang, H. Su, G. Li, and G. S. Fischer, “Teleoperation system with
hybrid pneumatic-piezoelectric actuation for MRI-guided needle insertion
with haptic feedback,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
2013, pp. 4092–4098.
[9] R. Hashimoto, D. Kim, N. Hata, and T. Dohi, “A tubular organ resection
manipulator for transurethral resection of the prostate,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2004, vol. 4, pp. 3954–3959.
[10] A. J. Pantuck, J. Baniel, Z. Kirkali, T. Klatte, N. Zomorodian,
O. Yossepowitch, and A. S. Belldegrun, “A novel resectoscope for
transurethral resection of bladder tumors and the prostate,” J. Urol.,
vol. 178, no. 6, pp. 2331–2336, 2007.
[11] G. Ho, W. S. Ng, M. Y. Teo, C. K. Kwoh, and W. S. Cheng, “Computerassisted transurethral laser resection of the prostate (CALRP): Theoretical and experimental motion plan,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48,
no. 10, pp. 1125–1133, Oct. 2001.
[12] S. A. Pierre and D. M. Albala, “The future of lasers in urology,” World J.
Urol., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 275–283, 2007.
[13] M. Kim, H. E. Lee, and S. J. Oh, “Technical aspects of holmium laser
enucleation of the prostate for benign prostatic hyperplasia,” Korean J.
Urol., vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 570–579, 2013.
[14] S. Gravas, A. Bachmann, O. Reich, C. G. Roehrborn, P. J. Gilling, and
D. L. J. Rosette, “Critical review of lasers in benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH),” BJU Int., vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1030–1043, 2011.
[15] K. T. McVary, “Clinical evaluation of benign prostatic hyperplasia,” Rev.
Urol., vol. 5, pp. S3–S11, 2003.
[16] A. Thorpe and D. Neal, “Benign prostatic hyperplasia. Lancet, vol. 361,
no. 9366, pp. 1359–1367, 2003.
[17] B. Rocco, G. Albo, R. C. Ferreira, M. Spinelli, G. Cozzi, P. Dell’Orto, and
F. Rocco, “Recent advances in the surgical treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia,” Therapeutic Adv. Urol., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 263–272, 2011.
[18] R. M. Kuntz, “Laser treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia,” World J.
Urol., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 241–247, 2007.
[19] N. M. Fried, “New laser treatment approaches for benign prostatic hyperplasia,” Current Urol. Rep., vol. 8, pp. 47–52, 2007.
[20] H. W. Kang, J. Kim, and Y. S. Peng, “In Vitro investigation of wavelengthdependent tissue ablation: Laser prostatectomy between 532 nm and
2.01 μm,” Lasers Surg. Med., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 237–244, 2010.
[21] A. D. Kersey, M. A. Davis, H. J. Patrick, M. LeBlanc, K. P. Koo, C. G.
Askins, and E. J. Friebele, “Fiber Grating Sensors,” J. Lightw. Technol,
vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 1442–1463, Aug. 1997.
[22] X. He, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. Taylor, and I. Iordachita, “A submillimetric 3-DOF force sensing instrument with integrated fiber Bragg
grating for retinal microsurgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61,
no. 2, pp. 522–534, Feb. 2014.
[23] B. Gonenc, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, and I. Iordachita, “Design
of 3-DOF Force Sensing Micro-Forceps for Robot Assisted Vitreoretinal
Surgery,” in 35th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Jul. 2013,
pp. 5686–5689.
[24] R. Monfaredi, R. Seifabadi, G. Fichtinger, and I. Iordachita, “Design
of a decoupled MRI-compatible force sensor using fiber Bragg grating
sensors for robot-assisted prostate interventions,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8671,
pp. 867118–867118, Mar. 2013.
[25] X. Yi, J. Qian, L. Shen, Y. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “An Innovative 3D
colonoscope shape sensing sensor based on FBG sensor array,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Inform. Acquisition, Jul. 2007, pp. 227–232.
[26] Y. L. Park, S. Elayaperumal, B. Daniel, S. C. Ryu, M. Shin, J. Savall, and
M. R. Cutkosky, “Real-time estimation of 3-D needle shape and deflection
for MRI-guided interventions,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics., vol. 15,
no. 6, pp. 906–915, Dec. 2010.
[27] K. Yokoyama, H. Nakagawa, D. C. Shah, H. Lambert, G. Leo, N. Aeby,
and W. M. Jackman, “Novel contact force sensor incorporated in irrigated

500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

radiofrequency ablation catheter predicts lesion size and incidence
of steam pop and thrombus,” Circulation, Arrhythmia Electrophysiol.,
vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 354–362, 2008.
[28] S. C. M. Ho, M. Razavi, A. Nazeri, and G. Song, “FBG sensor for contact level monitoring and prediction of perforation in cardiac ablation,”
Sensors, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1002–1013, 2012.
[29] V. Mishra, N. Singh, U. Tiwari, and P. Kapur, “Fiber grating sensors in
medicine: Current and emerging applications,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys.,
vol. 167, no. 2, pp. 279–290, 2011.
[30] P. Polygerinos, D. Zbyszewski, T. Schaeffter, R. Razavi, L. D. Seneviratne,
and K. Althoefer, “MRI-compatible fiber-optic force sensors for catheterization procedures,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 1598–1608,
Oct. 2010.

[31] A. A. Abushagur, N. Arsad, M. I. Reaz, and A. Bakar, “Advances in biotactile sensors for minimally invasive surgery using the fibre Bragg grating
force sensor technique: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 6633–6665,
2014.
[32] R. J. Webster and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling of constant
curvature continuum robots: A review,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 13,
pp. 1661–1683, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

