IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1707

Experimental Evaluation of an Invasive Medical
Instrument Based on a Displacement
Measurement System
Dimitris A. Fotiadis, Member, IEEE, Alexandros Astaras, Member, IEEE, Panagiotis D. Bamidis, Member, IEEE,
Kostas Papathanasiou, and Anestis Kalfas

Abstract—This paper presents a novel method for tracking the
position of a medical instrument’s tip. The system is based on phase
locking a high frequency signal transmitted from the medical instrument’s tip to a reference signal. Displacement measurement is
established having the loop open, in order to get a low frequency
voltage representing the medical instrument’s movement; therefore, positioning is established by means of conventional measuring techniques. The voltage-controlled oscillator stage of the phaselocked loop (PLL), combined to an appropriate antenna, comprises
the associated transmitter located inside the medical instrument
tip. All the other low frequency PLL components, low noise amplifier and mixer, are located outside the human body, forming the
receiver part of the system. The operating details of the proposed
system were coded in Verilog-AMS. Simulation results indicate robust medical instrument tracking in 1-D. Experimental evaluation
of the proposed position tracking system is also presented. The
experiments described in this paper are based on a transmitter
moving opposite a stationary receiver performing either constant
velocity or uniformly accelerated movement, and also together with
two stationary receivers performing constant velocity movement
again. This latter setup is implemented in order to demonstrate
the prototype’s accuracy for planar (2-D) motion measurements.
Error analysis and time-domain analysis are presented for system
performance characterization. Furthermore, preliminary experimental assessment using a saline solution container to more closely
approximate the human body as a radio frequency wave transmission medium has proved the system’s capability of operating
underneath the skin.
Index Terms—Displacement measurement, medical instrument,
phase shift, position tracking, radio frequency (RF).

Manuscript received June 26, 2014; revised August 25, 2014; accepted
September 15, 2014. Date of publication September 24, 2014; date of current
version September 1, 2015.
D. A. Fotiadis is with the School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece, and also with the Department of Informatics
Engineering, Technological Education Institution of Western Macedonia, Kastoria 52100, Greece (e-mail: dfotiadis@med.auth.gr).
A. Astaras is with the Dept. of Computer Science, American College of
Thessaloniki, Pylea 55535, as well as with the School of Medicine, Laboratory
of Medical Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124,
Greece (e-mail: astaras@act.edu).
P. D. Bamidis is with the School of Medicine, Laboratory of Medical
Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece (email: bamidis@med.auth.gr).
K. Papathanasiou is with the Department of Physics, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece (e-mail: kostasp@physics.auth.gr).
A. Kalfas is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece (e-mail: akalfas@auth.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2359580

I. INTRODUCTION
OSITION tracking is a technology with a considerable
historical record and a number of currently associated researchers in science and engineering. Some of the application
fields that commonly employ and benefit from position tracking are biomedical engineering [1], military applications [2],
robotics [3], the steel industry [4]–[6], weather forecasting [7],
automotive industry [8], animation industry and virtual reality
[9]. Among these, there are biomedical engineering applications
related to medical surgery, such as cardiovascular, orthopedic
and neurosurgical catheterization or the precise detection of tumors and biopsy needle insertion. In all aforementioned applications, knowing the precise position of a medical instrument’s
tip is often a requirement.
Each aforementioned application field imposes particular requirements and design specifications on position tracking systems, thereby rendering implementations to vary significantly
across them. The overall size of the system, its precision, operational range, cost, or even public health impact are among
the competitive advantages which promote one technology over
another. Biomedical engineering applications impose stringent
technological limitations to all aforementioned system aspects.
For example, system response times should be such that realtime position tracking representations can be provided and,
therefore, system sampling rates should have reasonable values.
Additional critical parameters in real-time invasive medical instrument position tracking scenarios are the absence of direct
line-of-sight (LOS) between the instrument and the external
tracking system, as well as, limited space for wiring due to the
small cross-sectional area (typically ࣘ 1 mm).
Position tracking techniques based on electromagnetic (EM)
radio frequency (RF) methods have been invented, implemented, and improved for several decades now. Some of these
methods can be adapted for compatible operation in parallel
with other medical imaging technologies (intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) scanning, magnetic resonance scanning, etc.).
Several others would be suboptimal or entirely inadequate technological choices. These methods will be succinctly reviewed
in the following section.
In this paper, we present the experimental development of an
RF position tracking system capable of being integrated within
the tip of a medical instrument, but also allowing for the latter
to be tracked inside the human body using exact 3-D Cartesian
coordinates (see Fig. 1). The aim of this paper is threefold: first,

P

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1708

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

accuracy. Such systems are not affected by the absence of direct
LOS between the tracking system and the medical instrument
tip, but do suffer from interference produced by the presence of
metal objects [10]. EM tracking is one of the most established
technologies used in position tracking, but has only recently
been adopted for use in computer-assisted surgery [11].
Trackers for EM systems include small sensor coils that
are attached to or are embedded into the instrument. Several technology generations of trackers are available commercially. These range from first-generation ac EM technology [12],
later enhanced by other medical devices [13]–[17] and secondgeneration trackers which introduced third-generation dc magnetic technology [18].
B. Inertial Sensor-Based Systems

Fig. 1. Three-dimensional position tracking system implementation, integrated into a catheter, with out-of-body located receivers.

to describe the system and its precision and accuracy characteristics for both 1-D and 2-D medical tip displacements and
experiments with constant velocity or linearly accelerated displacements; second, to provide error analysis results; and finally,
to investigate the system’s capability to operate under the skin
by using a human body phantom.
This paper is structured as follows. In the next section, various position tracking technologies employed in biomedical engineering are revisited. Section III presents the proposed implementation at simulation, hardware and system levels. The
experimental results from various implemented setups together
with the system characterization are described in Section IV.
A discussion on experimental results and a proposed future
roadmap are laid out in Section V, while overall conclusions are
provided in Section VI.
II. POSITION DETERMINATION AND TRACKING TECHNOLOGIES
IN BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
A. Low Frequency EM Wave-Based Systems
EM tracking systems are based on the use of a transmitter,
located on the moving object being tracked, and a number of
receivers located a short distance away (generally closer than
2 m). The transmitted signal frequency is low, in the order of
a few kilohertz. EM systems generate a series of EM pulses
from the field generator or “transmitter.” The signals from the
transmitter induce a voltage in the sensors that are attached to
the medical instruments.
The transmitting and receiving antennae are a set of three coils
perpendicular to each other, able to transmit and receive in three
dimensions (X, Y, and Z). Using triangulation, the exact spatial
position of a catheter’s tip can be defined with subcentimeter

Inertial navigation systems have existed for a couple of
decades, following the introduction of microelectronic mechanical systems (MEMS) in 1965 [19] and the fabrication of the
first MEMS accelerometer in 1979 [20]. Inertial trackers use
accelerometers to estimate an object’s position and gyroscopes
in order to provide information regarding its inclination and
orientation. They are commonly deployed in orthogonal triplets
(for 3-D position in X, Y, and Z and 3-D orientation in roll,
pitch, and yaw) in order to provide an estimated 6-D set of data.
A computation device on the receiver’s end provides the exact
position and orientation of an object, without the need for an
external reference system, following initial and periodic system
calibration.
They have been adopted for use in several application fields;
however, position tracking of medical instruments inside the human body requires packaging miniaturization and extreme precision, making such adaptations a tough technological challenge.
The accuracy provided by inertial sensors is not sufficient for accurate measurements of the relatively small displacements made
during surgery conditions. Significant breakthroughs in this
field would be required in order to overcome these limitations
and provide adequate tracking accuracy for computer-aided
surgery [21].
C. RF-Based Systems
RF or wireless technology has long been used in order to track
objects. Lately, RFID, WLAN, Bluetooth and ultrawideband
(UWB) technologies are being used in order to provide location
information inside a room and even in wider spaces.
The use of a moving RFID tag together with multiple
transceivers can provide position information of acceptable
accuracy for several applications. The received radio signal
strength is commonly used for the measurement or definition of
the exact object position. Radio transmitter and receiver parameters, RF transmission safety, and possible performance degradation due to interference and signal attenuation remain to be
addressed. The most common operating frequency for such systems is in the order of several hundreds megahertz [22]–[24],
with no widely adopted standards.
WLAN technology can also be used, covering wider areas, but the position tracking accuracy is limited [25]. WLAN

FOTIADIS et al.: EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF AN INVASIVE MEDICAL INSTRUMENT BASED ON A DISPLACEMENT MEASUREMENT

position tracking systems usually measure signal strength in order to define the exact position of a human or object. Range estimation of the positioning system is based on an approximation
of the relation between the radio signal strength indicator (RSSI)
and the associated distance between a transmitter and a receiver.
The actual location estimation is carried out by using triangulation methods. The accuracy of WLAN-based position tracking technology systems is as high as other options [26], making this technology inadequate for biomedical position tracking
applications.
Bluetooth protocol RF transmissions have also been used
for position tracking [27], thereby providing small area coverage and accuracy in the order of several centimeters. This
level of precision is inadequate for intrabody medical instrument tracking. Undesirable effects such as reflections and wall
damping alter the propagation equation characteristics, thereby
leading to the need for special propagation models, complex signal strength estimation algorithms, Kalmann filtering and other
methods of compensating for lost accuracy. RSSI indication
does not vary linearly with the signal strength, which is another
contributing factor toward inadequate accuracy of Bluetoothbased position tracking for medical applications [28].
There are three main hurdles associated with UWB technology which need to be overcome in order for it to be commonly
utilized in biomedical engineering applications. The first one has
to do with the fact that there exist almost no practical knowhow
on building UWB systems for position tracking. The second
hurdle to overcome is associated with the UWB antenna size.
Finally, the fact that the accuracy provided for the position tracking of the catheter tip is at centimeter level is a disadvantage,
since the accuracy demand for such a tracking system is at least
an order higher. However, miniaturized transmitter frequencies
are increasing every year, so soon enough the accuracy of UWB
systems is expected to improve to levels adequate for medical
instrument position tracking.
III. PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION
A. Physical Implementation Description
The proposed herein method is based on phase-shift measurements, a well-known distance measurement methodology. It is
based on the fact that when a sinusoidal wave transmitter is increasing or decreasing its distance from a receiver, even though
the received signal has the same initial frequency, its phase
compared with a reference phase changes. Each wavelength of
transmitter displacement in reference to a fixed located receiver
corresponds to a phase change of 2π radians. The total phase
change or phase shift in the transmitter–receiver path is directly
associated with the transmitter displacement; thus, exact transmitter position can be calculated by measuring the transmitter–
receiver phase change. The system’s theoretical background has
been presented into [29].
As far as the system’s physical implementation concerns, we
propose that the transmitter voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO)
be integrated inside the medical instrument’s tip, while a miniaturized antenna is integrated inside the instrument body itself, as
is shown in Fig. 2. The VCO control voltage is provided through

1709

Fig. 2.
ment.

Basic system architecture for tracking the position of a medical instru-

Fig. 3.

System schematic design for 1-D distance measurement.

a single wire running the length of the medical instrument,
while two additional wires provide supply current and reference
ground. The hardware parts inside the medical instrument are
limited and this is a major advantage for this implementation.
As the error voltage is derived at the output of the loop filter—a
low-pass filter—it provides a very low frequency signal to the
VCO and thereby minimizing any effects depending on the parasitic wire inductances or capacitances, rendering the medical
instrument cable a length irrelevant of design parameter.
The switch component can be manually set ON or OFF triggered by the pressure applied by the physician on the medical instrument, each time that an instrument movement occurs.
Alternatively, an electromechanical device could automate this
process outside the patient’s body. If a movement of the medical
instrument occurs, the PLL operates with open loop, meaning
that the switch is OFF, whereas when the instrument is stable
the switch can be closed and the PLL locks again to provide a
reference point for future movement tracking.
Using the aforementioned hardware setup allows the measurement of medical instrument displacement relative to the
receiver in 1-D. If multiple receivers are used, it is possible to
determine 2-D and 3-D trajectories. Using trilateration, the exact
medical instrument coordinates can be calculated and measured.
Fig. 3 shows a system-level simulation of aforementioned
technique. The system was coded in Verilog-AMS an Analog
Hardware Description Language, which can be substituted by
real circuit blocks once their transistor level design is finalized.

1710

Fig. 4.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5.

MDU 1100T schematic diagram.

Fig. 6.

Experimental system architecture.

360° phase shift occurring in a 100 μs time period.

The transition delay module is described as a voltage source
and is used for simulation purposes only, in order to imitate
the medical instrument’s movement and consequent VCO signal phase shift in an analog design environment. Fig. 4 shows a
graph of data from an example scenario involving a 360° phase
shift lasting 100 μs between two 10 GHz sinusoidal signals. The
sinusoidal form of the error voltage demonstrates functionality
of the proposed system, as discussed earlier in the paper and
calculated using expression (4). The low power spectral density levels of the proposed system’s transmissions minimize the
possibility of potentially exceeding regulated RF signal levels
absorbed by the human body [30], while the provided accuracy
is by far superior to all other wireless position tracking methods
considered in this study. Circuit design is of low complexity,
while required test and quality measuring devices are readily
available for the proposed prototype since all signals measured
are of low frequency properties. All components (transceivers,
antennas, etc.) can also be built by off-the-shelf discrete components. This fact could significantly lower the total cost of such
an implementation during early prototyping stages as well as
address system problems in early production stages.
The material of the transmitter antenna should ideally be
noncorrosive and biocompatible with good electrical characteristics, which makes platinum or gold likely candidates. However, the use of the aforementioned materials rather than copper
would lead to poorer performance, a detail that should be carefully taken into account vis-a-vis system link budget parameters
[31]. On the other hand, the antenna could be entirely encased
inside the medical instrument body. This would allow for it to
be made out of copper. Ideally, it should be printed on the inside of the casing on an insulated medium similar to modern IC
system-on-a-chip packaging plastic enclosures.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Material and Setup
In this paper, two commercially available X-Band Doppler
motion detection units [32]–[35] were deployed for the exper-

imental system implementation. The MDU 1100T unit’s basic
principle of operation consists of detecting frequency or phase
shift between a transmitted and a received signal, the latter have
been reflected back from a moving object within the unit’s field
of view. Instead of using the two MDU 1100T units as Doppler
radar transceivers, two evaluation modules were modified so that
one was used as transmitter and another as receiver. Both units
had an operating frequency of 10.587 GHz. The MDU1100T
schematic diagram can be seen in Fig. 5.
A subset of the theoretical setup shown in Fig. 2 was implemented as it is shown in Fig. 6. The MDU1100T units were
preferred for our evaluation prototype board because they were
readily available operating in high frequencies, and offered a
good documentation of the module, while offering numerous
points for the user to probe the operation of the module.
In the mentioned board, the transmitter contains an integrated
dielectric resonator stabilized oscillator (DRO) in comparison to
a preferred VCO. Since we obtain location information by opening the switch of Fig. 2, a limited controllability and therefore
the lack of a VCO circuit can be tolerated in our evaluation prototype. On the receiver side, a DRO is employed also, allowing
for a good control of the reference frequency, which provides
a stable reference signal at approximately the same operating
frequency as the transmitter DRO. As a multiplier, we used the
MDU1100T receiver’s single balanced mixer consisting of two
Schottky diodes in an antiparallel configuration.
As depicted in Fig. 7, the transmitter is moved away from
the receiver, using a platform on wheels construction. A foil
sheet is prohibiting receiver antenna to transmit and transmitter
antenna to receive, in order not to have undesirable signal mixing, into each unit’s mixing stage or interference in general. A
measurement of the intermediate frequency (IF) output of the
receiver unit is consequently performed, moving the transmitter while maintaining the receiver unit in place. Because both

FOTIADIS et al.: EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF AN INVASIVE MEDICAL INSTRUMENT BASED ON A DISPLACEMENT MEASUREMENT

Fig. 7.
setup.

1711

MDU 1100T X-Band Doppler motion detection unit experimental
Fig. 9. Experimental setup providing uniform transmitter acceleration along
a linear trajectory.

technique is nearly insensitive to outliers. The smoothing factor
used is 15%, which means that the smoothing window used
has a total width of 15% of the horizontal axis variable. In the
waveform shown in Fig. 8, the horizontal axis variable is time.
The standard deviation (σ) for ten repetitions is 0.653 mm and
the standard error 0.206 mm. Based on the empirical 68–95–
99.7% confidence intervals rule for sample data with a Gaussianshaped distribution, as it is the case in our experiments, we can
conclude that 99.7% of our transmitter displacement measurement values will lie within three standard deviations (3σ) from
the mean value. This corresponds to a precision of 3 × 0.653 mm
= ±1.959 mm.
Fig. 8. Typical ZIF output waveform for transmitter displacement of 8 cm
into 2 s time period.

DROs are operating at about the same frequency, the IF signal
is in essence centered at dc; therefore, it is a zero intermediate
frequency (ZIF) and a common place oscilloscope may be used
to monitor it.
B. Constant Velocity Transmitter Displacement
The first experimental setup measured the transmitter’s displacement in respect to the fixed receiver covering a distance of
8 cm, while the movement is concluded in a 2 s time interval.
The transmitter velocity is constant and controlled with the use
of a microcontroller controlled step motor. This setup is shown
in Fig. 7.
Ten measurements were obtained using a digital oscilloscope
to capture the IF output in order to extract statistical results and
estimate system precision. A typical captured IF waveform is
shown in Fig. 8.
It is clear that the resultant IF signal is of sinusoidal nature,
which is in agreement with theoretical predictions. The phaseshift method analysis of Section III was therefore deemed valid.
All waveforms were curve fitted in order to accommodate
subsequent noise or interference filtering. The time-domain regression analysis method which was selected is based on locally
weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS) [36].
As a result, the zero crossing of the best fit smoothed curve is
observed. Unlike the standard least squared error method, this

C. Uniformly Accelerated Transmitter Displacement
Since a medical instrument’s displacement is not always performed with constant velocity as evaluated previously, additional setups with different experimental conditions were implemented, in order to evaluate the system’s characteristics in
more detail.
In this experiment, a setup was formed around a platform
on wheels, capable of moving the transmitter along a linear
trajectory toward or away from a stationary receiver. This setup
was similar to the one shown in Fig. 7 and is designated in Fig. 9.
The setup described in the previous subsection measured the
system’s transmitter displacement with constant velocity away
from the stationary receiver. In order to prove the capability
of the system to operate with nonconstant velocities, as the
case of an IVUS catheter movement, we did perform an experiment where the transmitter was displaced from the stationary receiver with uniform acceleration. Thus, the setup aims to
evaluate the system characteristics in order to verify its capabilities on measuring the exact position of any medical instrument moving inside a human body with whatever speed, either
constant or variable. The uniformly accelerated transmitter displacement was chosen in order to characterize the system in
easily controllable conditions, since the transmitter movement
associated with a mass acceleration due to earth’s gravity field
as shown in Fig. 9 is a well defined, with accurate specifications,
experimental setup.
The combined mass of the wheeled platform and transmitter
is m2 . The platform is connected with mass m1 using a light,
inextensible cord. The cord passes around a stationary pulley

1712

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

attached to the edge of a table. The receiver is located in a fixed
position at a distance of approximately 20 cm apart from the
transmitter. Mass m2 is initially held still manually by the experimenter and eventually released and allowed to move freely.
Since m1 is greater than m2 , m1 starts accelerating downward,
dragging along m2 by means of the inextensible cord; thus, m2
is displaced with the same acceleration as m1 . The radius of
the pulley r is 0.026 m, while mass m3 was measured to be
0.0017 Kgr. Masses m1 and m2 were measured to be 0.24 and
0.170 Kgr, respectively.
The total external torque about the pulley axle is

τext = m1 · g · r.
(1)
The total angular momentum can thus be calculated
L = m1 · u · r + m2 · u · r + m3 · u · r
(m1 + m2 + m3 ) · u · r.

(2)

A system is defined as nonisolated when there is no net torque
on it. The total angular momentum of a system can vary with
time only if a net external torque is acting on the system; thus, the
mathematical representation of the angular momentum version
of the nonisolated system model is
→
 tot
dL
τ ext =
.
(3)
dt
If a system is nonisolated in the sense that there is a net
torque on it, the torque equals to the time rate of change of
angular momentum. Our system is subject to an external torque
due to the gravitational force on m1 so it is characterized clearly
as a nonisolated system. Combining equations (1)–(3) gives


dL
dt
d
[(m1 + m2 + m3 ) · u · r]
m1 · g · r =
dt
m1 · g · r = (m1 + m2 + m3 ) · r · du
dt .
τext =

Since du/dt = a, where α is the acceleration, we have
m1 · g
a=
.
m1 + m 2 + m 3

Fig. 10. ZIF voltage signal received from the linearly, uniformly accelerated
transmitter.

The first negative semiperiod of the ZIF signal was excluded
from measurements and subsequent statistical analysis. This is
due to the fact that tremors from the manual release of the
wheeled platform influence the transmitter’s movement and
adversely affect measurement accuracy. All ten measurements
were time shifted in order to obtain a common normalization
point. Each zero crossing point was detected and used to calculate an average across ten measurements. In [29], we presented
our methodology according to which we measured that the time
period between two successive zero crossings of the ZIF signal
correspond to 17 mm displacement. It is also known that the
displacement of an accelerated mass is given by
1
· a · t2
(5)
2
where Δx is the displacement, α is acceleration, and t is the time
that took the mass to be displaced by Δx. Given that the time
difference between zero crossings—as measured on the oscilloscope voltage curve—represents a displacement Δx = 17 mm,
the acceleration was calculated for eight zero crossings. The
estimated transmitter acceleration arithmetic mean value is
5.75 m/s2 . The acceleration measurement for eight zero crossings is shown in Fig. 11.
In each zero crossing, an averaging of all ten measurements
has been performed, in order to use the mean value of all measurements at the zero crossings.
The measured and calculated values differ slightly by approximately 0.35%. This can be explained by the fact that in
the theoretical acceleration calculation both the pulley and platform wheels were assumed to be frictionless, which is clearly
not the case. Nevertheless, it is clear that transmitter acceleration is almost constant as expected, thereby providing the system
proof-of-concept validation.
Masses m1 and m2 were measured with a kitchen scale machine, having a weighting tolerance which has an uncertainty
δm1 = δm2 = 0.012 Kgr, while the mass suspended from the
pulley was measured with a digital weight scale for jewels
Δx =

(4)

The forces that the cord exerts on masses m1 and m2 are
known; they are internal to the system which was analyzed as a
whole entity. The only torques that contribute to the change in
the system’s angular momentum are the external ones.
From (4), assuming a value for the gravity acceleration constant g = 9.81 m/s2 , the calculated transmitter acceleration
value is 5.73 m/s2 .
Ten consecutive measurements were obtained using an oscilloscope, in order to capture the ZIF voltage value as described
previously. The wheeled platform carrying the transmitter is
initially held immobile by the experimenter’s hand. It is subsequently released and allowed to move freely, due to the descending mass m1 . Movement is linear and uniformly accelerated as
analyzed earlier on, resulting in the transmitter also accelerating
in the same fashion. A plot representing 0.25 s of transmitter
displacement is shown in Fig. 10. It can be clearly observed that
the ZIF signal, representing transmitter displacement, has an
increasing frequency. This frequency represents the increasing
speed of the transmitter with respect to the stationary receiver.

FOTIADIS et al.: EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF AN INVASIVE MEDICAL INSTRUMENT BASED ON A DISPLACEMENT MEASUREMENT

1713

of measurement uncertainty, as obtained by the aforementioned
error analysis.
D. Two-Dimensional Transmitter Displacement Measurement

Fig. 11. Graph showing the acceleration variation in time. The consistency of
acceleration values (σ< 0.05 m/s2 ) is within 0.35%.

featuring an uncertainty δm3 equal to 0.05 Kgr. Since uncertainties δm1 , δm2 , and δm3 are independent random variables,
measurement uncertainty δα for acceleration α is given [37] by

2 
2 
2
∂a
∂a
∂a
δa =
· δm1 +
· δm2 +
· δm3 .
∂m1
∂m2
∂m3
(6)
A basic derivative identity that is used in order to solve (6) is


f (x)
f  (x) · g(x) − f (x)g  (x)
=
.
(7)
g(x)
(g(x))2
In order to calculate all parts of (6) and using (7), we have
∂a
m2 + m 3
=
∂m1
(m1 + m2 + m3 )2

(8)

∂a
m1
= −
∂m2
(m1 + m2 + m3 )2

(9)

∂a
m1
= −
.
∂m3
(m1 + m2 + m3 )2

(10)

Since we assumed that the g constant does not impose any
uncertainty in our calculations, it does not contribute to the
total acceleration uncertainty. From (6), (8), (9), and (10), we
obtain (11).
Since all factors of (11) as shown bottom of the page are
known, the acceleration measurement uncertainty or the acceleration margin of error equals to 0.03 m/s2 . This proves that
our measurement of acceleration is within the predicted limits

δa =

In order to define transmitter displacement in two dimensions, at least two receivers are required. Three different setups
were implemented in order to investigate whether interference
between the two receivers would deteriorate the system’s accuracy and precision or not, and determine its impact. In these
setups the transmitter is being displaced at different angles with
respect to Receiver 1 and Receiver 2. These are shown in Figs.
12–14.
Each experiment was performed with the use of the setup described in Section IV-A, the only difference being that in this set
of experiments a second receiver was used. The oscilloscope’s
second channel was used in order to capture the Receiver 2 ZIF
voltage signal. The transmitter displacement in reference to Receiver 1 is always 8 cm, while its displacement in reference to
Receiver 2 is calculated subtracting transmitter’s initial position
from its final one.
All distances between transmitter and Receiver 2 shown in
Fig. 12–14 were calculated using the Pythagorean theorem for
orthogonal triangles.
In all three sets of results, the LOWESS curve-fitting method
[36] was applied in order to be able to manipulate the waveforms
and acquire accurate measurement results. Ten measurements
were performed for each of the three sets of experimental data
and the results for each one of those are shown in Table I.
As elaborated in [29], it is once again assumed that a ZIF signal semiperiod (time between two consecutive zero crossings)
correspond to 17 mm of transmitter displacement.
In all experiments, the transmitter was displaced in reference
to Receiver 1 by a distance of 8 cm over a 2 s time period.
The transmitter displacement was achieved with the use of the
microcontroller operated step motor as described previously.
It is clear that, using trilateration and an initial reference point,
the final transmitter position can be defined in a Cartesian coordinate system. The transmitter displacement in reference with
each receiver denotes a new position located at the periphery
of a circle. The two circles defined, each for every receiver,
are intersecting each other. The intersection point’s coordinates
define the new transmitter position in 2-D.
As shown in Table I, the estimated mean displacement error is in the order of 0.2 cm. Since the transmitter position
after its displacement was measured with conventional methods
and not a reference distance measurement system (such as an
optical one), the aforementioned mean displacement error is satisfying our expectations for millimeter accuracy displacement
measurements. Also, the experimental evaluation of our system
measuring 2-D transmitter displacement verifies that there is
no interference significant enough to deteriorate the system’s

(m2 + m3 )2 · δm21
m21 · δm22
m21 · δm23
+
+
.
(m1 + m2 + m3 )4
(m1 + m2 + m3 )4
(m1 + m2 + m3 )4

(11)

1714

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 14. Transmitter displaces with 45° angle in respect with Receiver 1 and
Receiver 2 axis.
TABLE I
TWO-DIMENSIONAL TRANSMITTER DISPLACEMENT MEASUREMENT

Fig. 12. Transmitter displaces with 90° angle in respect with Receiver 1 and
Receiver 2 axis.

Fig. 13. Transmitter displaces with 60° angle in respect with Receiver 1 and
Receiver 2 axis.

performance and that a 3-D displacement measurement would
be a straightforward evolution for our system.
E. Underwater Transmitter Displacement
Up to now, the system’s capability of operation in a nonanechoic environment, with the presence of various interference
sources and absolutely realistic conditions, has been presented.

Receiver 1 90° setup
Receiver 2 90° setup
Receiver 1 60° setup
Receiver 2 60° setup
Receiver 1 45° setup
Receiver 2 45° setup

Calculated value (cm)

Measured mean value (cm)

Error (cm)

8.0
5.3
8.0
5.0
8.0
2.2

7.8
5.6
7.8
4.9
8.2
2.4

0.2
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.2

Its capability of measuring transmitter displacement in 1-D and
2-D allows the claim that the system is a 3-D position tracking
system, with millimeter precision capability. In order to prove
the system’s capability to operate in vivo, experiments that more
closely resemble the human body environment were performed.
In order to have an initial idea of the way, the system may
behave under in vivo conditions, an experiment using a phantom
was designed. The phantom was actually a plexiglass container
filled with an aqueous saline solution, simulating the human
body which is mainly composed of water. Looking at the composition in the human body, it can be found that a concentration
of approximately 7 g of NaCl per liter of water provides an
acceptable modeling of the human tissues [38], [39]. This is the
reason for which the liquid used was a saline solution. The container was filled with normal saline, which imitates the human
body’s dielectric properties [40].
The container with the transmitter attached on it was once
again fixed onto the experimental wheeled platform in order to
be able to move with respect to the receiver. The transmitter was
located behind the front side of the container, directly facing
the receiver as shown in Fig. 15. What was actually simulated
was the operation of the system with the transmitter antenna located near the surface of a rectangular box of human body tissue
moving away from the system’s receiver. The receiver was located at an initial distance of 20 cm from the transmitter antenna
at room temperature (as opposed to human body temperature).
This setup is far from ideal, since the transmitter should be moving inside the lossy medium, but in any case, the setup used is
a preliminary one aiming to provide a first idea on the way the
system would behave under in vivo conditions. More realistic

FOTIADIS et al.: EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF AN INVASIVE MEDICAL INSTRUMENT BASED ON A DISPLACEMENT MEASUREMENT

1715

V. DISCUSSION

Fig. 15. Setup with the moving transmitter located inside a container filled
with saline water.

Fig. 16.

Underwater transmitter displacement of 8 cm in 2 s time period.

experiments have been planned based on these preliminary results. Fig. 16 depicts the plot from the saline-blocked transmitter
displacement for a distance of 8 cm over approximately 2 s. It
is clear that the received signal level is weaker compared to the
one obtained from the nonblocked transmission experimental
setup presented in Section IV, and this is something that was expected due to the attenuation that normal saline introduces using
the operating frequency of 10.587 GHz. Even for measurements
with a human body phantom like the one at Fig. 15, the influence of the surrounding environment is hard to be controlled.
The operating frequency of 10.587 GHz is optimal for a millimeter position tracking resolution, but the dielectric properties
of body tissues—specifically permittivity and conductivity—
are strongly correlated with tissue water content, especially at
microwave frequencies. If we consider that a frequency in the
order of 10.587 GHz has a penetration depth in blood in the
order of approximately 3 mm [41], then the system’s operation
is as expected. The use of additional amplification blocks would
increase signal amplitude, while appropriate low-pass filtering
could potentially remove amplified noise.

In this piece of work, a novel position tracking system based
on the phase-shift measurement and phase-lock methodology
was proposed, simulated, constructed, and experimentally tested
and characterized in terms of accuracy and precision. To the
best of the authors knowledge, this is the first time that such
a system is employed into biomedical engineering applications
successfully, thereby providing millimeter level precision and
accuracy results.
Up to now, the operation of our displacement measurement
system has been demonstrated using scenarios such as uniform
rectilinear transmitter movement, uniformly accelerated movement and 2-D displacement measurement. Using more receivers
as initially shown in Fig. 1, an omnidirectional transmitter antenna and trilateration would allow us to obtain 3-D displacement measurements. The problem with 3-D measurements is
that the antennas used in the MTU1100 modules [32] are directional and a setup with 3-D displacement characteristics requires a transmitter with an omnidirectional antenna attached
to it. These measurements can be easily performed in real time,
since the data processing complexity for the measured voltage
signal is minor. The high precision of the system in free space
allows us to be optimistic as far as the use of the system for
invasive applications is concerned.
In order to have a first idea of the way that the system would
perform inside the human body, we designed and performed an
experiment with the system’s transmitter attached into a normal saline filled plexiglass container. It is a highly simplified
simulation model for the human body, due to the simplicity of
the medium’s dielectric characteristics. It is the most simple
and common method used in human body phantom simulation concerning EM wave transmission [40]. It is widely known
that human tissues are both lossy and dispersive and this fact
does not only affect the electrical characteristics of the transmitter antenna, but also results in transmission loss and RF wave
absorption.
Since the human body consists primarily of water [42], an
initial experiment was performed, with the use of normal saline
as the transmission medium in order to build a homogeneous
experimental phantom. The fact that the transmitter was not
possible to move inside the normal saline filled container lead
us to modify the initial test setup specification and displace
both transmitter and the liquid filled container in tandem. It
is a scenario that would provide us with interesting conclusions on whether the system could operate inside human and
an estimate of its accuracy under such conditions. The fact
that our received signal was near noise floor proved that frequencies around 10 GHz can be used in cases that the system
operates just beneath the skin. Skin has a high water content,
and therefore, the measurement setup is considered to be appropriate for this case. Skin thickness for adult males and females is 0.03–1.4 mm and 0.86–3 mm, respectively [43]. A frequency of 10.587 GHz has a penetration depth of about 3.5 mm
in dry skin [41]; thus, our system seems to be a good solution for medical instrument position measurement under the
skin.

1716

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

A setup in which the transmitter will be moving inside a
medium that simulates the human body is the next experiment
planned in the future. This setup is expected to provide information on whether the system can operate in vivo and the
precision and accuracy specifications that it has. Also this latter
experiment will reveal whether the operating frequency used is
appropriate or a lower frequency is necessary. 2.36–2.4 GHz
medical BAN band operation has already been validated for
numerous implant transmission applications [44], [45]; thus, it
would be a valid candidate frequency for our position tracking
system as well.
Finally, the improvement of the data processing methods is
going to be further explored, in order to compare it with other
possible solutions and obtain optimal position tracking resolution results.
VI. CONCLUSION
A novel position tracking system for use in biomedical engineering applications was theoretically and experimentally described and characterized. The proof-of-concept validation results presented herein were obtained using simulations, as well
as, experimental setups in which a single transmitter was initially
displaced with constant velocity and then uniformly accelerated
along a linear trajectory, with respect to a single receiver (1-D
measurements). Subsequently, two receivers were employed together with a single moving transmitter with constant velocity in
order to perform 2-D accuracy measurements. All three aforementioned setups provide us the proof-of-concept validation
and system characterization data for functionality, precision,
and accuracy.
As expected, experiments while transmitting through a lossy
medium (saline solution) denoted that system performance substantially degrades under such conditions, due to the high operating frequency. Further experimentation will follow in order to
more accurately characterize the system’s operation with transmission taking place through increasingly realistic lossy media
such as muscle (lean meat) together with fat layers at lower
operating frequencies. Waveforms from displacement measurements will further be processed with alternative methods other
than the curve-fitting method employed to date, in order to maximize accuracy and precision.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Mr. D. A. Fotiadis, currently a Lecturer at the Department
of Informatics Engineering, T.E.I. of Western Macedonia (TEI
WM), Greece, is particularly appreciative of his institution’s
support.
REFERENCES
[1] T. M. Peters and K. R. Cleary, Image-Guided Interventions: Technology
and Applications. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008.
[2] J. R. Lowell, “Military applications of localization, tracking, and targeting,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 60–65, Apr. 2011.
[3] P. Lamon, 3D-Position Tracking and Control for All-Terrain Robots,
2008th ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008.
[4] D. L. Maskell, G. S. Woods, and J.-M. Murray, “A microprocessor controlled microwave ranging system for high accuracy industrial applications,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Anniversary Adv. Technol. Instrum. Meas.
Technol. Conf., vol. 3, 1994, pp. 1269–1272.

[5] Y. Kawata, T. Kusaka, C. Manabe, A. Kobayashi, and H. Imada, “A
precision microwave range finder and its application to level measurement in the steel industry,” Ind. Metrol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 19–32,
Mar. 1990.
[6] A. Stelzer, C. G. Diskus, K. Lubke, and H. W. Thim, “A microwave position sensor with submillimeter accuracy,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 2621–2624, Dec. 1999.
[7] M. I. Skolnik, Radar Handbook. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill,
2008.
[8] M. Schneider, “Automotive radar—Status and trends,” in Proc. German
Microw. Conf., Duisburg-Essen, 2005, pp. 144–147.
[9] J. P. Rolland, Y. Baillot, and A. A. Goon, “A survey of tracking technology
for virtual environments,” in Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and
Augmented Reality. Mahwah NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2001.
[10] J. Hummel, M. Figl, C. Kollmann, H. Bergmann, and W. Birkfellner,
“Evaluation of a miniature electromagnetic position tracker,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 2205–2212, Oct. 2002.
[11] T. R. Willoughby, P. A. Kupelian, J. Pouliot, K. Shinohara, M. Aubin,
M. Roach 3rd, L. L. Skrumeda, J. M. Balter, D. W. Litzenberg, S. W.
Hadley, J. T. Wei, and H. M. Sandler, “Target localization and real-time
tracking using the Calypso 4D localization system in patients with localized prostate cancer,” Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., vol. 65, no. 2, pp.
528–534, Jun. 2006.
[12] Polhemus Electromagnetics. (2014, Apr. 12) [Online]. Available: http://
polhemus.com/applications/electromagnetics/
R
[13] Preface
Braided Guiding Sheaths. (2014, Apr. 12) [Online]. Available:
http://www.biosensewebster.com/preface.php
[14] Medtronic Core Technologies. (2014, Apr. 12) [Online]. Available: http://
www.medtronic.com/core-technologies/?loc = mdt_home_pg_patients_
spot1_CTA1_CoreTech_Innovation_ReadMore_030314
[15] MediGuide Technology. (2014, Apr. 12) [Online]. Available: http://
professional-intl.sjm.com/products/ep/navigation/mediguide-technology
[16] Medical Aurora. (2014, Apr. 12) [Online]. Available: http://www.
ndigital.com/medical/products/aurora/
[17] superDimension—The World Leader in the Diagnosis and Treatment
of Distal Lung Disease and Makers of the inReach System. (2014,
Apr. 12) [Online]. Available: http://superdimension.com/index.cfm/go/Products.iLogic
[18] Ascension Technology Corporation. (2014, Apr. 12) [Online]. Available:
http://www.ascension-tech.com/
[19] H. C. Nathanson and R. A. Wickstrom, “A resonant-gate silicon surface
transistor with high-Q band-pass properties,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 84–86, 1965.
[20] I. Lee, G. H. Yoon, J. Park, S. Seok, K. Chun, and K.-I. Lee, “Development
and analysis of the vertical capacitive accelerometer,” Sens. Actuators
Phys., vol. 119, no. 1, pp. 8–18, Mar. 2005.
[21] M. Bandala and M. Joyce, “Wireless inertial sensor for tumour motion
tracking,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser., vol. 76, pp. 12–36, Jul. 2007.
[22] Information Technology—Real Time Locating Systems (RTLS)—Part 2:
433 MHz Air Interface Protocol, American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), New York, NY, USA, 2003.
[23] Information Technology–Real Time Locating Systems (RTLS)—Part 3: Application Programming Interface, American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), New York, NY, USA, 2003.
[24] ISO/IEC 18000-7, International Organization for Standardization. (2014,
Apr. 12) [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:isoiec:18000:-7:ed-3:v1:en
[25] P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan, “RADAR: An in-building RF-based
user location and tracking system,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Joint Conf. IEEE
Comput. Commun. Soc., vol. 2, 2000, pp. 775–784.
[26] F. Evennou and F. Marx, “Improving positioning capabilities for indoor
environments with WiFi,” presented at the 13th European Signal Processing Conference, Antalya, Turkey, 2005.
[27] S. Feldmann, K. Kyamakya, A. Zapater, and Z. Lue, “An indoor bluetoothbased positioning system: Concept, implementation and experimental
evaluation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., 2003, pp. 109–113.
[28] U. Bandara, M. Hasegawa, M. Inoue, H. Morikawa, and T. Aoyama,
“Design and implementation of a bluetooth signal strength based location
sensing system,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless Conf., 2004, pp. 319–322.
[29] D. A. Fotiadis, A. Astaras, A. Kalfas, K. Papathanasiou, and P. Bamidis,
“Displacement measurement of a medical instrument inside the human
body,” in Proc. 13th Mediterranean Conf. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput, Sevilla,
Spain, 2013.
[30] P. Vecchia, R. Matthes, G. Ziegelberger, J. Lin, R. Saunders, and A.
Swerdlow, “Exposure to high frequency electromagnetic fields, biological
effects and health consequences (100 kHz-300 GHz),” Int. Commission
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, 2009.

FOTIADIS et al.: EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF AN INVASIVE MEDICAL INSTRUMENT BASED ON A DISPLACEMENT MEASUREMENT

[31] M. Chen, S. Gonzalez, A. Vasilakos, H. Cao, and V. C. Leung, “Body
area networks: A survey,” Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 171–193,
Apr. 2011.
[32] Microwave solutions—MDU1100T. (2014, Apr. 13) [Online]. Available:
http://www.microwave-solutions.com/shop/modules/mdu1100t.html
[33] J. G. Hallatt and I. R. Aldred, “Oscillator circuit,” U.S. Patent 6 064 276,
May 16, 2000.
[34] A. G. Philpott, I. R. Aldred, R. T. J. Dodd, and R. F. Humphryes, “Motion
detector unit,” U.S. Patent 5 262 783, Nov. 16, 1993.
[35] R. A. Bell, A. M. Bullen, and I. R. Aldred, “Temperature compensated
dielectric resonant oscillator,” U.S. Patent 5 208 567, Apr. 5, 1993.
[36] W. S. Cleveland, “Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 74, no. 368, pp. 829–836, 1979.
[37] J. R. Taylor, An Introduction to Error Analysis: The Study of Uncertainties
in Physical Measurements, 2nd ed. Sausalito, CA, USA: Univ. Sci. Books,
1996.
[38] S. Heymsfield, Human Body Composition. Champaign, IL, USA: Human
Kinetics, 2005.
[39] H. A. Harper, V. W. Rodwell, and P. A. Mayes, Review of Physiological
Chemistry. Los Altos, CA, USA: Lange Medical Publications, 1977.
[40] J. Bohnert, Effects of Time-Varying Magnetic Fields in the Frequency
Range 1 kHz to 100 kHz Upon the Human Body: Numerical Studies and
Stimulation Experiment. Karlsruhe, Germany: KIT Sci. Publishing, 2012.
[41] C. Gabriel, Compilation of the Dielectric Properties of Body Tissues at RF
and Microwave Frequencies. London, U.K.: Dept. Phys., King’s College,
1996.
[42] A. C. Guyton and J. E. Hall, Textbook of Medical Physiology. Philadelphia,
PA, USA: W.B. Saunders, 1996.
[43] D. K. Ghodgaonkar, “Measurement of complex permittivities of biological
materials and human skin in vivo in the frequency band,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. The Univ. of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA,
1987.
[44] E. Y. Chow, A. L. Chlebowski, and P. P. Irazoqui, “A miniatureimplantable RF-wireless active glaucoma intraocular pressure monitor,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 340–349, Dec. 2010.
[45] H. Chen, M. Liu, W. Hao, Y. Chen, C. Jia, C. Zhang, and Z. Wang,
“Low-power circuits for the bidirectional wireless monitoring system of
the orthopedic implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no.
6, pp. 437–443, Dec. 2009.

Dimitris A. Fotiadis (M’14) received the B.Sc. degree in electronics engineering from the Technological Educational Institute of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, in 1996, and the M.Sc. degree in electronics (digital systems) from the University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, U.K., in 1997.
He is currently a Lecturer in the Department of
Informatics Engineering, Kastoria Branch, Technological Educational Institute of Western Macedonia,
Thessaloniki, and is also working toward the Ph.D.
degree in the Medical Informatics Lab, School of
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki. His research interests are mainly concentrated on RF positioning and usage into biomedical
field and implantable RF systems, biomedical systems instrumentation, microcontrollers/microprocessors biomedical robotics design and implementation.

Alexandros Astaras received the B.A. degree in
physics from Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH, USA,
in 1995, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., in 2004.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in Computer
Science at the American College of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki and a Research Associate in Biomedical Engineering in the Medical Physics Lab, School
of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki.
His research interests include biomedical diagnostics,
medical instrumentation, and mixed signal systemon-chip very large scale integration design.

1717

Panagiotis D. Bamidis (M’09) received the Diploma
degree in physics from the Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki (AUTH), Thessaloniki, Greece, in 1990,
the M.Sc. (with distinction) degree in medical physics
from the University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K.,
in 1992, and the Ph.D. degree in bioelectromagnetism and functional brain analysis and imaging
from the Open University, Milton Keynes, U.K., in
1996.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in medical education informatics within the Laboratory of
Medical Physics, Medical School, AUTH. He has been the Coordinator of
large European projects (www.meducator.net; www.longlastingmemories.eu,
www.epblnet.eu, www.childrenhealth.eu) as well as the Principal Investigator
for a number of national and international funded projects (more than 30 in
total). His research interests are within assistive technologies (silverscience,
silvergaming, mobile health, decision support, avatars), technology enhanced
learning in Medical Education (web2.0, semantic web, serious games, virtual
patients, PBL, learning analytics) and affective and physiological computing
and HCI, (bio)medical informatics with emphasis on neurophysiological sensing and health information management (open health big data), and affective
neuroscience.
Dr. Bamidis received the Prize of the AUTH Research Committee for the Best
Track Record in funded research projects among AUTH young academic staff
in 2009. He has been the Chairman/Organiser of six international conferences
(iSHIMR2001, iSHIMR2005, MEDICON2010, GASMA2010, SAN2011, and
MEI2012) and the Conference Producer of the Medical Education Informatics
Conference and Spring School Series. He is a member of the Advisory Board
for the Open Knowledge Foundation (OKFN), a founding member of OKFN
Greek chapter, and a Treasurer for the Greek Biomedical Technology Society.

Kostas Papathanasiou received the degree in electrical engineering in 1992, the M.Sc. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from the University
of Patras, Patras, Greece, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
U.K., in 1998.
He is currently a Lecturer in the Electronics and
Computers Lab, Physics Department, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. His
research interests include analog and RF integrated
systems, implantable low-power devices, biomedical
signal monitoring, analog uses of floating gates, CAD techniques for parasitic extraction, analog design automation and porting, device modeling and
mismatch.

Anestis Kalfas received the Ph.D. degree in turbomachinery aerodynamics from Cranfield University,
Bedfordshire, U.K., in 1994, and the Dipl.-Ing. degree in mechanical engineering from Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
He is an Assistant Professor of turbomachinery.
He belongs to the teaching staff of the Laboratory of
Fluid Mechanics and Turbomachinery of the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. He was a Research Associate in
the Whittle Laboratory, University of Cambridge and
as an Aircraft Engineer at the Hellenic Air Force. He has been a Senior Scientist
in the Turbomachinery Laboratory of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
in Zurich, Switzerland, since July 2000, where he lectured in turbomachinery
design. He is active in the areas of axial steam and gas-turbine aerodynamics,
gas-turbine performance and power plant optimization, boundary layer transition and turbulence and novel aerodynamic probe technology.

