1428

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Automatic Annotation of Seismocardiogram
With High-Frequency Precordial Accelerations
Farzad Khosrow-khavar, Member, IEEE, Kouhyar Tavakolian, Member, IEEE, Andrew P. Blaber, John M. Zanetti,
Reza Fazel-Rezai, Senior Member, IEEE, and Carlo Menon, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Seismocardiogram (SCG) is the low-frequency vibrations signal recorded from the chest using accelerometers. Peaks
on dorsoventral and sternal SCG correspond to specific cardiac
events. Prior research work has shown the potential of extracting
such peaks for various types of monitoring and diagnosis applications. However, annotation of these peaks is not a trivial task and
complicated in some subjects. In this paper, an automated method
is proposed to annotate these peaks. The high-frequency accelerations obtained from the same accelerometer, used to record SCG
with, were used to facilitate the annotation of the SCG. Algorithms
were developed for detection of isovolumic moment (IM) and aortic
valve closure (AC) points of SCG. Four different envelope calculation methods were used: cardiac sound characteristic waveform
(CSCW), Shannon, absolute, and Hilbert. The algorithms were
evaluated based on a dataset including 18 subjects undergoing
lower body negative pressure and were further tested with another dataset, which included 67 subjects. These datasets had been
previously manually annotated. The algorithm based on CSCW
envelope calculation produced the highest detection accuracy for
both IM and AC. The overall CSCW algorithm detection accuracy
for the test dataset was 98.7% and 99.1% for the IM and AC points,
respectively.
Index Terms—High-frequency accelerometer (HFACC), phonocardiogram (PCG), seismocardiogram (SCG).

I. INTRODUCTION
EISMOCARDIOGRAM (SCG) is noninvasively recorded
by placing an accelerometer on the chest [1]. The lower
frequency portion of the recorded acceleration signal has been
called SCG, while the higher frequency acceleration (HFACC),
component of the same signal recorded from the chest, has
a close morphological similarity to phonocardiogram (PCG).
Specific peaks of the SCG signal, recorded from the sternum,
in dorsoventral direction, have been assigned to different events
of the cardiac cycle (see Fig. 1) [2].

S

Manuscript received May 15, 2014; revised August 25, 2014; accepted
September 15, 2014. Date of publication September 23, 2014; date of current version July 23, 2015. This work was supported in part by Heart Force
Medical Inc. The work of F. Kohsrow-khavar was supported in part by MITACS
Accelerate scholarship. (Corresponding author: Kouhyar Tavakolian)
F. Khosrow-khavar and C. Menon are with the MENRVA Research Group,
School of Engineering Science at Simon Fraser University 8888 University
Drive, Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6, Canada.
K. Tavakolian and R. Fazel-Rezai are with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of North Dakota, Room 160N, Upson II, 243 Centennial
Drive, ND 58202 USA (e-mail: kouhyar@und.edu).
A. P. Blaber is with the Department of Biomedical Physiology and Kinesiology at Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
J. M Zanetti is with the Acceleron Med Systems, WI, USA.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2360156

Fig. 1. Simultaneously recorded ECG and SCG are on top. High-pass filtering
of the acceleration recorded from the sternum derives HFACC. The envelope of
HFACC is calculated using four different methods (CSCW, Shannon, ABS, and
Hilbert), as in the last four traces.

The SCG peak labeled MC (mitral-valve closure) and AO
(aortic-valve opening) correspond to the start and the end of
the isovolumic contraction period, respectively. The isovolumic
moment (IM) peak occurs in this region that includes a rapid
change in the pressure of the ventricle, which starts with closure
of mitral valve (initiation of S1 sound), and eventually, leads to
the opening of the aortic valve. On the other hand, AC (aorticvalve closure) is the start of diastole when the pressure inside the
ventricle has dropped causing the aortic valve to close abruptly
(S2 sound).
Research has shown the potential of utilizing the timing information (i.e., MC, AO, and AC) for measurement of systolic time
intervals [3] and various cardiovascular biomedical engineering applications such as: diastolic timed vibration [4], cardiac

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KHOSROW-KHAVAR et al.: AUTOMATIC ANNOTATION OF SEISMOCARDIOGRAM WITH HIGH-FREQUENCY PRECORDIAL ACCELERATIONS

1429

computed tomographic gating [5], optimization of cardiac
resynchronization therapy [6], earlier detection of hemorrhage
[7], and ischemia detection [8], [9]. Therefore, an automatic
segmentation of the SCG signal is of critical importance. In this
paper, we proposed an algorithm for the automated detection of
these SCG points for off-line and near-real-time modes.
The difference between annotation of electrocardiogram
(ECG) and SCG is the intersubject variability of SCG morphologies compared to ECG. For example, the classical dorsoventral
sternal SCG, first introduced in 1990 [10], includes an AO that
is the highest peak after the R-wave of ECG. In many normal
subjects, similar to SCG shown in Fig. 1, the MC peak is actually higher than AO. Thus, a simple peak finder algorithm would
fail and incorrectly identify MC for AO. Since AC and IM are
the most consistent points on the SCG, the major focus of this
research has been on their detection. If these two points could
be consistently annotated, then the remaining points could also
be annotated with respect to them.
The novelty of the proposed method was the use of the
high-frequency acceleration signal, recorded with the same accelerometer, to annotate the SCG. In this study, we assessed
four different envelope calculation algorithms, inspired from
PCG analysis.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Acquisition
The SCG signals were measured with a high sensitivity accelerometer (Brüel & Kjær model 4381, Nærum, Denmark).
The participants were in the supine position and the SCG signals were recorded in back-to-front direction, perpendicular to
the body surface. The ECG signal was also acquired and used
to segment the cardiac cycles. All signals were recorded using
an NI 9205 analog input module (National Instruments, Austin,
TX, USA). Two separate studies were conducted: SFU_GYM
and lower body negative pressure (LBNP).
The SFU_GYM study contained a total of 67 volunteers
recruited at the Simon Fraser University Gymnasium (age:
27.1 ± 9.7 years, weight: 67.4 ± 10 kg, and height: 171.9
± 8.2 cm, 32 female). None had any documented cardiac abnormality. The LBNP dataset contained 18 participants (age:
27.6 ± 3.3 years, weight: 71.2 ± 11.8 kg, and height: 174.3 ±
7.1 cm, 3 female) where the heart rate was gradually increased
by the application of graded LBNP. In this procedure, the lower
half of the body was placed in a sealed chamber in which the
pressure was gradually decreased to −50 mmHg [7]. With this
method, the heart rate was increased up to 120 beats/ min. For
this study, signals were recorded at the Aerospace Physiology
Laboratory (Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada).
For both studies, the data were recorded with an ethics approval from office of research ethics at Simon Fraser University.
The participants signed and followed the informed consent procedure and were compensated by a fee for their time.
The recorded ECG and SCG signals were manually annotated
cycle by cycle. The duration of the LBNP study for each subject
was 1 h and more than 17000 cardiac cycles were manually
annotated for all the LBNP subjects. The recording duration for

Fig. 2. Top: Block diagram of the segmentation algorithm. ACC is the unfiltered acceleration signal recorded from the sternum in dosrsoventral direction.
ACC is high pass filtered to derive HFACC and low-pass filtered to derive SCG.
Bottom: Schematic diagram of ECG, SCG, and the envelope of HFACC. The
peaks of the envelopes are the starting points from which the SCG points of IM
and AC are derived from.

the SFU_GYM database was 1 min per each subject and total
of 4480 cycles were annotated over all subjects.

B. Summary of Segmentation Algorithm
The overall strategy of the SCG detection algorithm was to
find a relationship between the peak of the envelope of the
HFACC and the desired SCG extrema points (i.e., IM and AC).
Different subunits of the algorithm are shown in Fig. 2 (top).
As mentioned previously, both HFACC and SCG are derived
from the same accelerometer signal. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
SCG signal is obtained from the low-pass component (<30 Hz)
and the HFACC is obtained from the high-pass component
(>20 Hz) of the ACC signal. A fifth-order Butterworth filter was
designed for low-pass and high-pass filtering. Once the HFACC
signal was extracted, its envelope was derived (see Figs. 1
and 2). This envelope includes two profiles. The first one (with
respect to ECG R-wave) is the systolic profile (corresponding
to IM), while the second is the diastolic profile (corresponding
to AC).

1430

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

In parallel, the well-known Hamilton–Tompkins algorithm
was applied to the simultaneously recorded ECG signal to detect R-wave [11]. The locations of the peaks of the envelope
of the systolic and diastolic profiles were then referred to as
ENV_PEAK_1 and ENV_PEAK_2. Since ENV_PEAK_1 was
close to the ECG-R wave, a fixed window of 200 ms with respect to R-wave was selected for its detection. This window was
referred to as ENV_WIN_1 (see Fig. 2).
The same fixed window allocation with respect to ECG-R
wave was not suitable for the detection of ENV_PEAK_2 since
its location changed with respect to heart rate. As a result,
the “ENV Peak Detection” subunit of Fig. 2 was used to estimate a window, which included ENV_PEAK_2 (ENV_WIN_2
in Fig. 2).
After ENV_PEAK_1 and ENV_PEAK_2 were found, the
same corresponding locations on the SCG signal were selected
(dotted lines of 2 and 5 in Fig. 2) for the systolic and diastolic
profile, respectively. By finding a percentage of the peak, an
associated location of the SCG was shifted to the left (dotted
line 1 for the systolic profile and 3 and 4 for the diastolic profile,
see Fig. 2). This percentage of the peak was named α. It should
be noted that separate α values were used for the systolic and
diastolic profile.
It was the aim of the annotation algorithm to find an optimum
α such that for the systolic profile, IM would always be the
first encountered minimum and for the diastolic profile the AC
would always be the first encountered maximum. If such an “α”
existed for all cases, the correct detection goal of the annotation
algorithm had been accomplished.
The “SCG Window Selection” and “SCG First Extrema Detection” blocks were used for detection of the corresponding
extrema based on α value (see Fig. 2).
As an example for the systolic profile, the dotted line 1 did not
achieve this goal since it was past the IM point. For the diastolic
profile, the dotted line 4 corresponded with the appropriate α
since the AC was the first maximum before it. The dotted line
3 also did not achieve the desired goal since AC was not on the
left side of this line.

C. HFACC Envelope Derivation
The HFACC component of the accelerometer has a similar
morphology and timing characteristics with phonocardiogram
signal [4]. There have been various algorithms proposed for
envelope calculation of the phonocardiogram. Four of these algorithms were selected for this research: cardiac sound characteristic waveform (CSCW) [12], absolute (ABS), Shannon, and
Hilbert envelope [13]. It was the aim of this research to find the
best envelope calculation method in order to achieve the highest
overall detection rate for IM and AC detection.
The rationale behind the CSCW envelope calculation revolves around the fact that the human ear hears the duration
of the envelope of the SCG signal. Consequently, a single degree of freedom vibration model that captures the low-frequency
component of the phonocardiogram is representative of the
eardrum [4].

The ABS method uses a simple method of finding the average
of the absolute value of the signal of duration of 20 ms. The
Shannon envelope method uses the same method as the ABS
method with the only difference that it finds the average of
the multiplication of the square of signal and the square of the
logarithm of the signal [12].
The Hilbert method uses the average of 20 ms of the magnitude of the Hilbert transform. The output of the Hilbert transform
generates a signal with slower temporal variation where averaging will generate a smooth envelope [12]. An example of all
the aforementioned envelope calculation methods is in Fig. 1.

D. Envelope Window Selection
As previously discussed, the annotation algorithm selects the
peak of the HFACC envelope, and then, finds the percentage of
this peak in order to find the targeted SCG locations. As a result,
the start and the end of the window where the peaks of ENV
resides (ENV_WIN_1 and WIN-2) are of interest.
Previous research has shown an inverse relationship between
systolic time intervals and the heart rate [14]. Total electromechanical systole (also known as QS2), corresponds to the interval
of the ECG-Q wave to the S2 sound of PCG or the AC peak of
SCG. Therefore, we expect that with increasing heart rate, the
interval of the ECG_Q to ENV_PEAK_2 will decrease [14].

E. Segmentation Algorithm With and Without a Fixed α
Once the peaks of the envelope of HFACC were detected,
their associated points on the SCG were selected. By using a
percentage of the HFACC peak, the associated point was moved
closer toward the desired peak on the SCG signal (IM or AC).
This occurred because the peak of the HFACC always came
after the desired points on the SCG. The challenge, however, is
to select the optimum value for this percentage of the HFACC
peak, called α from here on.
In the α selection, we first found a fixed α value such that
the IM and AC were the first encountered minima. Since there
can be interindividual differences in SCG morphology, after
we assessed fixed values for α, an alternate method, i.e., a variable α for different individual was tested.
ECG_Q to IM and ECG_Q to AC periods do not significantly
change from one cycle to the next. It has also been shown that
if the locations of IM and AC are known in advance, through
averaging 10–15 heartbeats, it is possible to predict the same
periods in the future cycles with an acceptable error margin [4].
Therefore, a cost function was defined based on the cycle-tocycle differences (CCDs) of IM and AC points.
Based on this fact, a modified algorithm is proposed, which
consists of two parts. The first part iterates through different
values of α in order to find its optimum value. In the second
part, once an optimum value is selected, annotations with higher
than certain CCD is replaced. This is done by defining a window
based on the median of the Q_IM ± 15 ms and finding the
minimum within this window for annotation of IM. Similar
methodology is applied for AC as well.

KHOSROW-KHAVAR et al.: AUTOMATIC ANNOTATION OF SEISMOCARDIOGRAM WITH HIGH-FREQUENCY PRECORDIAL ACCELERATIONS

1431

The following pseudocode explains the algorithm for the IM
point. Similar algorithm can be applied for the AC point but
with a different value selected for α.
————————————————————————
A) Selection of optimum α:
1. Set α = 1.
2. Apply the annotation algorithm with fixed value of α.
As a result of the automatic segmentation, the location of
IM, ECG_Q, and ECG_R is saved for later use.
3. For the current α and the current heart beat n calculate the
cycle-to-cycle differences (CCD). The interval of ECG_Q
to IM is referred as Q_IM.
Let:
n ≥ 2 → CCD [n, α] = (Q IM)[n, α]−(Q IM)[n − 1, α].
4. Calculate the overall cost of α over all the cardiac cycles
N:
CostIM (α) =

N


abs(CCD[n, α]).

n =2

5. Reduce α by 0.1 (10%). If α ࣙ Limit, go to step 2, otherwise
go to step 4. The limit for IM detection is 0.5.
6. For each profile, select the optimum alpha with the
associated lowest cost. This is referred to as αopt .
B) Replacement of cycles with high CCD:
1. Go through all the annotated αopt cardiac cycles and find
the median of total intervals of Q_IM. The median (called
“med” in the equations) is used in order to prevent the
outliners.
Let:
(Q IM)(m ed) [αopt ] = {med(Q IM)[n, αopt ])|n = 1 : N }}.
2. Go through all the annotated αopt cardiac cycle and refine
the search area for those cardiac cycles that their CCV is
higher than that threshold. In the following equations, F1
and F2 are set to 15 and limit to 30 ms.
if CCD [n, αopt ] > Limit
→ Replace IM with the Minimum in the

Interval (Q − IM)(m ed) [αopt ] − F1 ,

(Q − IM)(m ed) [αopt ] + F2 .
————————————————————————–
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For the purpose of evaluation of the algorithm, the dataset
was divided into two categories: training and test dataset. The
LBNP dataset was chosen for the training purposes. As it was
mentioned previously, the heart rate was increased in the pressure chamber up to 120 beats per minute. Therefore, the dependence of parameters of interval (ECG_Q, ENV_PEAK_1),
interval (ECG-Q, ENV_PEAK_2), and α with respect to heart
rate is examined. The parameters from the training set were used
to evaluate the detection accuracy of the algorithm on the test
dataset SFU_GYM.

Fig. 3. Top: Relationship between the interval of ECG_Q wave to
ENV_PEAK_2 and heart rate. Bottom: Density of the residual of interval of
ECG_Q and ENV_PEAK_2 for the CSCW envelope calculation method. The
width of the residual, 130 ms from −60 to 70, is used for the ENV_WIN_2,
which is the window that the ENV_PEAK_2 most likely resides.

A. Estimation of Parameters From the Training Dataset
1) Interval (ECG_Q, ENV_PEAK_2): As described previously, we know that the systolic time intervals reduce by increasing heart rate thus, it is expected that the interval (ECG_Q
to ENV_PEAK_2) will also reduce by increasing heart rate.
In order to find this relationship, a linear regression equation
was used to find the approximate location of the desired interval as a function of heart rate and the residual value (2 standard deviation of the error of the regression equation) is used
for the ENV_WIN_2. The relationship between the Interval
(ECG_Q, EV-PEAK-2) and the heart rate is examined on the
LBNP dataset. Fig. 3 (top) shows this relationship for the CSCW
envelope calculation.
As expected the interval (ECG_Q, ENV_PEAK_2) decreased
as the heart rate increased. It should be noted that the purpose of
the regression equation was to find a window (ENV_WIN_2),
where the peak resides and not the exact location of the peak.
Thus, the goodness of fit value was acceptable for our purpose.
In order to find the width of the EVN_WIN_2, the histogram
of the residual (interval (ECG-Q, ENV_PEAK_2)—regression
equation of Fig. 4) was calculated. This is shown in Fig. 4
(middle) for the CSCW envelope detection algorithm. Almost
identical results were achieved for the other envelope detection
algorithms. The width of the residual histogram was 130 ms
(from start = −60 to end = 70). As a result, the start and end
of the ENV_WIN_2 for the CSCW could be estimated by the
following regression equations:
ENV WIN 2−START = Interval − 60 = 477 − 2∗ HR
(1)
∗

ENV WIN 2−END = Interval + 70 = 607 − 2 HR. (2)

1432

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

TABLE I
DETECTION ACCURACY FOR THE MODIFIED ALGORITHM WHEN ONLY
SELECTION OF OPTIMUM α IS APPLIED ON THE SFU_GYM DATASET
Detection Accuracy of Algorithm with Selection of Optimum α
Percentage of Cases that Achieve Detection
Accuracy of 100%-50%
Envelope
Calculation
CSCW
SHANNON
ABS
HILBERT
CSCW
SHANNON
ABS
HILBERT

Fig. 4. Top: Number of minimum between IM and α. If there is only one
minimum, then that is the indication that IM is correctly detected. The “F” case
stands for the failure and it occurs when α is passed IM, and hence, there is
no way to correctly annotate IM. Bottom: Number of minimum between AC
and α.

2) Interval
(ECG_Q,
ENV_PEAK_1): Since
the
ENV_PEAK_1 profile is close to the ECG_R wave, we
expected less dependence on the heart rate. Similar methodology was applied and indeed no relationship between interval
(ECG_Q, ENV_PEAK_1) and heart rate (ENV_PEAK_1 =
99 + 0.057 ∗ HR) was found. Therefore, a fixed window of
200 ms was selected for ENV_WIN_1.
3) Selection of Optimum α: Once the ENV_PEAK_1 and
ENV_PEAK_2 are selected, it is desired to find the percentage
α of each peak such that the IM and AC will be the first maxima.
As it was mentioned previously, two α selection methods were
proposed. In this section, we want to examine if the fixed value
for α achieves the desired goal of detecting the IM and AC.
Consequently, fixed value α selection was applied to LBNP
dataset and the value of α was changed from 100% to 50% of
the peak of the envelope.
Fig. 4 shows the number of minimums between IM and the
corresponding α point (minimum order). It was desired to find a
case where IM was always the first minimum. No fixed threshold could achieve prediction accuracy of higher than 86% for
AC and 45% for IM (see Fig. 4). This is due to the fact that
morphology and the width of the HFACC was different for each
individual and as a result the associated envelope also differed
accordingly.
In Fig. 4, the cases “F” refer to failure and occurred when α
location on the SCG falls before the IM point, which was not
desirable. For values of α lower than 90%, the number of failure steadily increased. All other envelope detection algorithms
achieved the same results. The same procedure was applied for
detection of AC. In contrast to IM detection, each envelope detection algorithm behaved differently for AC in terms of correct
detection.
It can be concluded that a fixed-value of α cannot be used
for the purpose of the detection of IM and AC. This is due

Over All
100%
95%
Cardiac Cycles
IM Detection Accuracy
12.3
30.7
83.2
0.0
12.1
78.7
6.1
21.2
82.1
9.1
24.2
83.6
AC Detection Accuracy
33.3
69.2
91.8
21.2
46.7
86.8
28.8
51.5
84.5
21.2
40.9
74.6

90%

80%

50%

49.2
39.4
40.1
48.5

70.7
63.7
69.7
71.2

93.8
92.4
92.4
95.5

78.5
65.15
61.0
59.1

87.7
82.0
75.8
65.2

97.0
95.5
89.3
77.3

The first column is the detection accuracy over all the cardiac cycles. Columns
labels ranging from 100% to 50% indicate the percentage of the overall cases in the
test dataset (67 individual cases), where the algorithm achieves the label detection
accuracy. For instance, for the IM, 12.3% of 67 individuals (8 out of 67 cases) have
the correction accuracy of 100% or all the cycles within the cases were correctly
detected.

to the fact that the morphology of the systolic and diastolic
profile varies from one individual to another one. We should
expect that the variable α selection method is more appropriate
since it finds different values of α for different individuals with
different morphology. The detection accuracy is examined on
the test dataset.
B. Evaluation of the Algorithm on the Test Dataset
In order to find the detection accuracy, the algorithm was
applied to the SFU_GYM test dataset. The differences between
manual and automatic annotations were used for finding the
detection accuracy. If the detected peak was within the 5 ms
of the manual annotated peak, it was assumed to be a correct
detection and otherwise a misdetection. The regression equation
from the training set was used to find the window where the
ENV_PEAK_2 might reside (ENV_WIN_2). The highest peak
within this window was selected as the ENV_PEAK_2. A fixed
window of 200 ms was used for the ENV_WIN_1. A variable
α-selection algorithm was used for detection of IM and AC with
respect to the peak of the envelope.
Table I illustrates the results for all different envelope calculation methods for both IM and AC when variable α selection
method is applied without replacing the cycles with high CCD
of Q_IM. In other words, only part A of the algorithm (as in the
box on top of page 4) for detection of optimum value of α was
used.
The first column, labeled as “overall cycles,” finds the detection accuracy over all the cardiac cycles of all different individuals. The rest of the columns, range from 100% to 50%, show
the percentage of individual cases that achieve the labeled detection accuracy. For instance, for the CCSW algorithm, 12.3%
of the individual cases (8 out of 67 individuals), have accuracy
of 100% for IM. In other words, all the cycles of those eight
individual cases were correctly detected.

KHOSROW-KHAVAR et al.: AUTOMATIC ANNOTATION OF SEISMOCARDIOGRAM WITH HIGH-FREQUENCY PRECORDIAL ACCELERATIONS

TABLE II
DETECTION ACCURACY FOR THE MODIFIED ALGORITHM WHEN BOTH
SELECTION OF OPTIMUM α AND REPLACEMENT OF CYCLES WITH HIGH CCD
IS APPLIED ON THE SFU_GYM DATASET
Detection Accuracy of Algorithm with Selection of Optimum α and
Removal of Cycles with High CCD Values
Percentage of Cases that Achieve Detection
Accuracy of 100%-50%
Envelope
Calculation
CSCW
SHANNON
ABS
HILBERT
CSCW
SHANNON
ABS
HILBERT

Over All
100%
95%
Cardiac Cycles
IM Detection Accuracy
81.8
93.9
98.7
71.2
89.4
98.1
68.2
87.9
97.7
74.2
89.4
97.0
AC Detection Accuracy
75.8
92.4
99.1
68.2
90.9
97.9
74.2
92.2
97.8
69.7
93.9
98.9

90%

80%

50%

93.9
90.1
92.4
93.9

98.4
96.7
95.4
93.9

100
98.5
98.5
96.7

97.0
90.9
97.0
95.5

100
95.5
97.0
98.5

100
98.5
96.9
98.5

The first column is the detection accuracy over all the cardiac cycles. Columns labels
ranging from 100% to 50% indicate the percentage of the overall cases in the test dataset (67
individual cases) where the algorithm achieves the label detection accuracy. For instance,
for the IM, 81.8% of 67 individuals (55 out of 67 cases) have the correction accuracy of
100% or all the cycles within the cases were correctly detected.

According to Table I, the CSCW envelope calculation accomplished the highest detection accuracy over all the cycles for both
IM and AC. Furthermore, the CSCW envelope method also accomplishes the highest detection accuracy, when the worst percentage of individuals are considered. For instance, 93.8% of
individuals (63 out of 67 individual cases) had detection accuracy of more than 50% for the CSCW, which is higher than all
other methods. Clearly, CSCW achieved the highest detection
accuracy rate, and hence, was the best method. However, it also
had the highest computational complexity compared to the other
envelope calculation methods.
It is clear that for most individual cases, the variable α selection achieves higher than 50% detection accuracy. As a result, if
the outliers are corrected, the detection accuracy will increase.
By replacing cycles that contained high CCD of Q_IM and
Q_AC, the detection accuracy improved, which is illustrated in
Table II.
Only 58 IM’s and 40 AC’s out of 4480 cardiac cycles were
not correctly detected for the CSCW envelope calculation. In
the cases of misdetection, the adjacent peaks before and after
IM were selected in all cases. On average, 53 and 37 ms were
the average misdetection error for IM and AC, respectively.
Almost all the envelope calculation methods performed the
same in terms of detection accuracy. This indicates that by replacing the high variable cycles, the shortcomings of inferior
envelope calculations were overcome. Despite this, CSCW still
achieved the highest detection accuracy in comparison to other
envelope calculation methods.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced an accurate and highly robust algorithm for automatic SCG annotation. The introduced method
uses the high-frequency component of the accelerometer in

1433

order to find a window for detection of IM and AC of the lowfrequency component of the accelerometer, i.e., the SCG signal.
The core of the algorithm uses the fact that CCD of isovolumic
moment and aortic valve closure with respect to electrocardiogram Q-wave is limited to 30 ms (99% confidence interval).
The algorithm works on the basis that SCG peaks are very
close to the peak of the envelope of the high-frequency component of the accelerometer. Thus, by adjusting the window
between the Q-wave of ECG and the peaks on HFACC, it is
possible to find the desired annotations on SCG (i.e., IM and
AC). This was accomplished using an iterative window adjustment. The optimum solution is the one that minimizes the overall
cycle-to-cycle variability.
The best practical way to implement this algorithm is to use
a training stage in order to have accurate estimation of IM and
AC. This could be applied for a period of 1 min prior to using
the automatic detection algorithm. Afterwards, the algorithm
replaces the annotations that have a high cycle to cycle difference
with the one estimated during the training stage. This stage can
be implemented in near real-time fashion. For most of the current
application of seismocardiography, this solution is suitable.
This paper investigated the detection accuracy for a healthy
dataset with no prior heart conditions. Since no prior research
has been conducted in the automatic annotation of SCG, this is
a good step forward but further investigation is required to find
the accuracy of the algorithm for patients with different heart
conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would also like to thank G. A Dumont and
B. Kaminska for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Zanetti and K. Tavakolian, “Seismocardiography: Past, present and
future,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2013, pp. 7004–7007.
[2] R. Crow, P. Hannan, D. Jacobs, L. Hedquist, and D. Salerno, “Relationship
between seismocardiogram and echocardiogram for events in the cardiac
cycle,” Amer. J. Noninvasive Cardiol., vol. 8, no. 39, pp. 39–46, 1994.
[3] K. Tavakolian, A. P. Blaber, B. Ngai, B. Kaminska, E. Science,
B. Columbia, and B. Physiology, “Estimation of hemodynamic parameters from seismocardiogram,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2010, pp. 1055–
1058.
[4] K. Tavakolian, F. Khosrow-Khavar, B. Kajbafzadeh, M. Marzencki,
A. P. Blaber, B. Kaminska, and C. Menon, “Precordial acceleration signals
improve the performance of diastolic timed vibrations,” Med. Eng. Phys.,
vol. 35, pp. 1133–1140, Jan. 2013.
[5] C. a Wick, J.-J. Su, J. H. McClellan, O. Brand, P. T. Bhatti, A. L. Buice,
A. E. Stillman, X. Tang, and S. Tridandapani, “A system for
seismocardiography-based identification of quiescent heart phases: Implications for cardiac imaging,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 869–77, Sep. 2012.
[6] L. Giorgis, A. I. Hernandez, A. Amblard, L. Senhadji, S. Cazeau,
G. Jauvert, E. Donal, S. Group, E. L. A. Medical, L. Plessis-robinson, and
D. Rennes, “Analysis of cardiac micro-acceleration signals for the estimation of systolic and diastolic time intervals in cardiac resynchronization
therapy,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2008, pp. 393–396.
[7] K. Tavakolian, G. a Dumont, G. Houlton, and A. P. Blaber, “Precordial vibrations provide noninvasive detection of early-stage hemorrhage,” Shock,
vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 91–96, Feb. 2014.
[8] M. Becker, a. B. Roehl, U. Siekmann, a Koch, M. de la Fuente, R. Roissant,
K. Radermacher, N. Marx, and M. Hein, “Simplified detection of myocardial ischemia by seismocardiography: Differentiation between causes of
altered myocardial function,” Herz, vol. 39, pp. 586–592, Aug. 2014.

1434

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

[9] D. M. Salerno and J. M. Zanetti, “Seismocardiography for monitoring
changes in left ventricular function during ischemia,” CHEST J., vol. 100,
no. 4, pp. 991–993, Oct. 1991.
[10] J. M. Zanetti and D. Salerno, “Seismocardiography: A new technique for
recording cardiac vibrations. concept, method, and initial observations,”
J. Cardiovasc. Technol., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 111–118, 1990.
[11] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[12] Z. Jiang and S. Choi, “A cardiac sound characteristic waveform method
for in-home heart disorder monitoring with electric stethoscope,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 286–298, Aug. 2006.
[13] S. Choi and Z. Jiang, “Comparison of envelope extraction algorithms for
cardiac sound signal segmentation,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 34, no. 2,
pp. 1056–1069, Feb. 2008.
[14] A. M. Weissler, W. S. Harris, and C. D. Schoenfeld, “Systolic time intervals
in heart failure in man,” Circulation, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 149–159, Feb. 1968.

Farzad Khosrow-khavar (M’13) received the
B.Eng. degree in electrical engineering and the M.Sc.
degree in computer engineering from the University
of Victoria, Victoria, Canada. Since 2010, he has been
working toward the Ph.D. degree in the MENRVA
lab, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada.
He works in the area of biomedical signal processing and machine learning focusing on cardiovascular
engineering applications. He also works in the area
of system modeling and algorithm development for
medical devices.

Kouhyar Tavakolian (M’00) received the B.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering from Tehran Polytechnic, Tehran, Iran, in 2000, the M.Sc. degree in
computer science from the University of Northern
British Columbia, Prince George, Canada, in 2005,
an another M.Sc. degree in bioelectrical engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, in 2003,
and the Ph.D. degree from Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, Canada, in 2010.
He has been an Assistant Professor at the University of North Dakota (UND), Grand Forks, ND, USA,
since 2014, where he is also the Codirector at Biomedical Engineering Research
Center. Prior to joining UND, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. His research interests include biomedical signal processing with a special focus on cardiac vibration signals such as
ballistocardiogram and seismocardiogram.

Andrew P. Blaber received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degree from the University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada,
in 1984 and 1986 respectively, the B.Ed. degree from
the University of Western Ontario, London, Canada,
in 1988, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department
of Kinesiology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
Canada, in 1994.
He is an expert in human cardiovascular and respiratory physiology and has published several highly
referenced articles on noninvasive analysis of baroreflex function and cerebral autoregulation. In the past
several years, he has contributed to the further development of seismo- and
ballisto-cardiography for clinical use. He has also a strong interest in space
physiology and is currently directing groundbreaking research into the interaction between the cardiovascular and postural control systems that may provide
new insights into postural hypotension and postspaceflight orthostatic intolerance. Since 1997, he has been a faculty member at Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, Canada, where he founded the Aerospace Physiology Laboratory and
is currently an Associate Professor and continues to teach and do research in
the Department of Biomedical Physiology and Kinesiology.

John M. Zanetti is one of the pioneers of seismocardiography and a Seismologist by training. He started
Seismed Medical Inc., Minneapolis, USA, in 1987,
and for the first time, used the technology for detection of coronary artery disease. He has published
multiple papers in this field and is currently collaborating with the biomedical engineering research center, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND,
USA.

Reza Fazel-Rezai (SM’05) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran the M.Sc. degree
in biomedical engineering from Tehran Polytechnic,
Tehran, Iran, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and
computer engineering from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada, in 1990, 1993, and 1999,
respectively.
He was a Senior Research Scientist and Research
Team Manager at Edge Networks Corp., Winnipeg,
Canada and YottaYotta Inc., Edmonton, Canada from
1999 to 2002. He was an Assistant Professor first at the Sharif University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran, and later, at the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada, in 2002 and 2004, respectively. In 2008, he joined the Department of
Electrical Engineering, University of North Dakota (UND), Grand Forks, ND,
USA, where he is currently an Associate Professor and the Graduate Program
Director. He has published more than 150 scientific papers and edited six books
in the field of biomedical engineering. His research interests include signal and
image processing, brain–computer interface, seizure detection and prediction,
neurofeedback, and human performance evaluation based on physiological signals. He is the Codirector at Biomedical Engineering Research Center, UND.

Carlo Menon (M’01) received the Laurea degree
in mechanical engineering from the University of
Padua, Padova, Italy, in 2001 and the Ph.D. degree
from the same university in 2005.
He was a Research Fellow at the European Space
Agency, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, in 2005 and
2006. In 2007, he joined the School of Engineering
Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada,
as an Assistant Professor and founded the Menrva Research Group. Since 2012, he has been an Associate
Professor within the same School. He has published
about 200 articles including both journal and conference papers.
Dr. Menon received the International IAF Luigi G. Napolitano Award, Spain,
in 2006, and the International BIONIS Award on Biomimetics, U.K., in 2007. In
2012, he received both the Career Investigator Award from the Michael Smith
Foundation for Health Research and the New Investigator Award from the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research. He is a member of the editorial board
of the Journal of Bionic Engineering and Associate Editor of Bionics and
Biomimetic, Frontiers. He is a member of the American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

