102

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Signal Quality Measures on Pulse Oximetry
and Blood Pressure Signals Acquired from
Self-Measurement in a Home Environment
Jumadi Abd Sukor, Mas S. Mohktar, Member, IEEE, Stephen J. Redmond, Member, IEEE,
and Nigel H. Lovell, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Recently, decision support system (DSSs) have become more widely accepted as a support tool for use with telehealth systems, helping clinicians to summarize and digest what
would otherwise be an unmanageable volume of data. One of the
pillars of a home telehealth system is the performance of unsupervised physiological self-measurement by patients in their own
homes. Such measurements are prone to error and noise artifact,
often due to poor measurement technique and ignorance of the
measurement and transduction principles at work. These errors
can degrade the quality of the recorded signals and ultimately degrade the performance of the DSS system, which is aiding the clinician in their management of the patient. Developed algorithms for
automated quality assessment for pulse oximetry and blood pressure (BP) signals were tested retrospectively with data acquired
from a trial that recorded signals in a home environment. The
trial involved four aged subjects who performed pulse oximetry
and BP measurements by themselves at their home for ten days,
three times per day. This trial was set up to mimic the unsupervised physiological self-measurement as in a telehealth system. A
manually annotated “gold standard” (GS) was used as the reference against which the developed algorithms were evaluated after
analyzing the recordings. The assessment of pulse oximetry signals
shows 95% of good sections and 67% of noisy sections were correctly detected by the developed algorithm, and a Cohen’s Kappa
coefficient (κ) of 0.58 was obtained in 120 pooled signals. The BP
measurement evaluation demonstrates that 75% of the actual noisy
sections were correctly classified in 120 pooled signals, with 97%
and 91% of the signals correctly identified as worthy of attempting
systolic and/or diastolic pressure estimation, respectively, with a
mean error and standard deviation of 2.53 ± 4.20 mmHg and
1.46 ± 5.29 mmHg when compared to a manually annotated GS.
These results demonstrate the feasibility, and highlight the potential benefit, of incorporating automated signal quality assessment
Manuscript received April 15, 2014; revised August 8, 2014; accepted
September 29, 2014. Date of publication October 7, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014. This work was supported by the University of
Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia; the University of Malaya, Malaysia under University of Malaya Research Grant: RP009C-13AET; and the Graduate School of
Biomedical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia.
J. A. Sukor is with the Faculty of Engineering Technology, Department of
Electrical Engineering Technology, University of Tun Hussein Onn, Batu Pahat 86400, Malaysia and also with the Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia (e-mail:
jumadi@uthm.edu.my).
M. S. Mohktar is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center
for Innovation in Medical Engineering, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur
50603, Malaysia and also with the Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia (e-mail:
mas_dayana@um.edu.my).
S. J. Redmond and N. H. Lovell are with the Graduate School of Biomedical
Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia (e-mail:
s.redmond@unsw.edu.au; n.lovell@unsw.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2361654

algorithms for pulse oximetry and BP recording within a DSS for
telehealth patient management.
Index Terms—Blood pressure (BP), pulse oximetry, signal
quality.

I. INTRODUCTION
USEFUL telehealth medical records are dependent to the
quality of data in the databases [1]. There are two main criteria of data quality; the precision (accuracy) and the completeness. Accuracy is the belief that data are correct, and completeness is the impression that data are recorded in the database [2].
A study by Aronsky et al. has used routinely recorded computerized patient records in a decision support system (DSS) to
assess the risk of mortality in patients with community-acquired
pneumonia. The data quality issue affected 27.9% of the DSS
output, with the system underestimating the patient’s risk of
mortality [3]. The study above indicated that a DSS using poor
data quality may generate and send false recommendations to
clinical users. Consequently, the quality of data area becomes a
significant and fundamental issue in the design of a DSS [1]–[5].
Three studies have examined the impact of data quality on
DSS performance. However, two of the studies analyzed medical
data recorded in supervised clinical environments and the third
study used simulated data [1]–[3]. It can easily be argued that
home telehealth data quality is going to affect the performance
of a DSS, as the measurement is performed in an unsupervised
environment [6].
Thus, to ensure the guidance provided by the DSS is reliable,
the quality of the data used in the system should be assessed
prior to utilization. The data collected by the home telehealth
system should be free from erroneous values [2], [3].
Measured home telehealth vital sign data, such as peripheral
blood oxygen saturation (SpO2 ), heart rate (HR), and systolic
and diastolic blood pressures are derived automatically from
acquired signals. Currently, to our knowledge, there are no standard approaches in handling contaminated raw signals in such
unsupervised telehealth recordings. Therefore, if an extracted
measurement parameter is of concern because it is excessively
high or low, it is difficult to determine the credibility of the
given parameter [7]. Pulse oximetry is a noninvasive method for
monitoring a patient’s oxygen (O2 ) saturation. Heart rate can
also be derived from the signal. SpO2 represents the estimates
of the oxygen saturation (SaO2 ) value; that is the ratio of oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO2 ) to the combined amount of HbO2
and deoxygenated hemoglobin (Hb) present in arterial blood.

A

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ABD SUKOR et al.: SIGNAL QUALITY MEASURES ON PULSE OXIMETRY AND BLOOD PRESSURE SIGNALS ACQUIRED

The way of measuring SpO2 using pulse oximetry is based on
the principle of photoplethysmography (PPG). A typical PPG
probe uses two wavelengths (red and infrared) and each wavelength is preferentially absorbed by HbO2 or Hb in the blood.
This enables the derivation of SpO2 estimate using a general
empirical linear approximation [8].
Despite the considerable advantages obtained by employing
pulse oximetry for SpO2 estimation, there are some factors that
may degrade the accuracy of the estimation. The introduction
of ambient light at the photodetector, wearing nail polish, poor
blood perfusion of the peripheral tissues, motion artifact (including the relative movement between the fingertip and the
oximetry probe), are all well-known sources of error [9].
The measurement of blood pressure (BP) through noninvasive blood pressure monitors (NIBPMs) is highly vulnerable
to artifact such as patient movement; external vibration and
coughing that subsequently leads to degradation in the accuracy
of the measurement. When the measurement is contaminated
with motion artifact, the air flow in the deflating cuff is typically
interrupted, causing corruption of the small pressure oscillations
from each heartbeat, which constitutes the oscillometric waveform [10], as well as introducing acoustic artifact that will be
picked up by the microphone used to detect the Korotkoff sounds
[11], [12]. As well as pulse oximetry measurement, the motion
artifact is likely to occur in an unsupervised home environment.
Pulse oximetry and BP signal quality algorithms have been
developed by our research group to detect and eliminate artifact
in noise contaminated pulse oximetry signals and to assess the
quality of an NIBPM measurement, respectively [13], [14].
The main objective of this paper is to assess the performance
of the developed algorithms as in [13] and [14] when measuring the quality of the respective signals acquired from selfmeasurement performs by the subjects in their homes, which
involved the presence of a trainer nearby but not actually intervening during the subject’s signal acquisition process. This is
a preliminary study before the developed algorithms are tested
with the actual data recorded in a telehealth system. The methodology for assessing the performance of the algorithms is by
comparing the output from each algorithm against a manually
annotated gold standard (GS).
II. METHODS
A. Subjects
In general, the preferred subjects for this study were aged
people (since home telehealth systems are commonly used with
older people) who were able to perform the physiological measurement protocols. Therefore, the general criteria for inclusion were: over 50 years old, able to operate a mouse using
the hand contralateral to the hand being measured, willing to
use a computer, independently living and ambulant. The specific exclusion criterion was peripheral vascular disease, since
it may cause physiological artifacts (this was determined from
information in a pretest questionnaire that was completed by
subjects beforehand). The study required subjects to perform
self-administered measurements of pulse oximetry and BP in
their own homes.

103

Fig. 1. System used to acquire simultaneous ECG, BP and pulse oximetry
signals.

There were four qualified subjects, two males (65 and 67 years
old) and two females (59 and 62 years old), who participated in
the study.
B. Data Acquisition
In this study, simultaneous electrocardiography (ECG) and
pulse oximetry, and simultaneous ECG and BP signals were
recorded using a data acquisition system, which was set up as
shown in Fig. 1. Note that the ECG was simultaneously recorded
in order to be used as a reference signal for pulse oximetry and
BP signals as described in detail in [13] and [14].
Signals were acquired from each subject for over ten days,
with the subject performing pulse oximetry and BP measurements in a closed room at their homes three times per day:
before 9 A.M., between 1 P.M. and 2 P.M. and after 5 P.M. This
condition was purposely set up to mimic the unsupervised telehealth environment.
Before the study took place, subjects had a brief training
session on the study background and the measurement protocols and devices. This session was conducted by a trainer at
the subjects’ homes. During the session, the trainer first briefly
explained the background of the study then verbally and practically explained each protocol that was to be performed to
measure pulse oximetry and BP, demonstrated in their home as
they would use it. Finally, in order for the subjects to familiarize
themselves with, and correctly perform the measurement protocols, the trainer supervised while they practiced until they were
able to complete them unassisted.
On every occasion before the subject performed the pulse
oximetry and BP measurement during the study, the trainer
placed ECG leads on the subject, to ensure that a good quality
ECG as a reference signal would be acquired, and then, left the
subject’s house so that the subject could perform the measurements unsupervised.

104

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

C. Measurement Protocol
The pulse oximetry recording was executed first, followed by
BP. The subject placed the BP cuff on an arm and clipped the
pulse oximeter on the middle finger, of the hand ipsilateral to
the BP cuff. On the provided computer screen, a measurement
graphical user interface (MGUI) was presented to the subject.
The subject started the pulse oximetry measurement by clicking the “Pulse Oximetry” icon using the hand contralateral to
the measured hand, causing a new window to appear on the
laptop screen, indicating that the measurement was being performed. After 1 min, the window automatically closed and the
MGUI reappeared on the screen, indicating that 1 min of pulse
oximetry had been completed.
When measuring BP, the subject clicked on the “BP” icon
and a new pop-up window was displayed. After clicking the
“Start” icon electronically controlled mechanical pump automatically started inflating the cuff. During this measurement,
cuff pressure, Korotkoff sounds, and the ECG signal were simultaneously recorded by the data acquisition system. When
this automated BP measurement was complete, the displayed
window automatically closed.

D. GS Development
The GS development was based on the same methods applied
in [13] and [14], for pulse oximetry and BP, respectively. In
the development processes, two human experts (known as Rater
1 and Rater 2) for each signal first manually annotated the
recorded signal to classify any noise section in the signals. Then,
as a group of two (for each signal), any discrepancy in the
marking was reconciled.

E. Algorithm
1) Pulse Oximetry: The pulse oximetry noise detection algorithm (NDA) is based on waveform morphology analysis of
the PPG to automatically identify noise artifact in contaminated
pulse oximetry waveforms. The output of the algorithm comprises sections of clean pulses free of various forms of artifact.
In a simulated environment, the performance of the algorithm
is compared to a manually annotated GS. The results show that
the algorithm can increase the accuracy of SpO2 estimation as
well as HR derivation.
The pulse oximetry NDA has been designed to automatically
classify bad, poor, and good pulses in an artifact contaminated
pulse oximetry PPG signal. Three stages are involved in the classification process; 1) the pre-processing; 2) the removal of bad
pulses known as Morphological analysis I, and 3) the removal
of poor pulses Morphological analysis II [13].
2) BP: The BP signal quality algorithm automatically assessed the quality of a BP measurement by determining the
feasibility of accurately estimating the diastolic and systolic
pressures from various levels of artifact contaminated BP signals. A manually annotated reference scoring is developed and
compared to the performance of the algorithm. The results from
the laboratory testing demonstrate the robust performance of the

TABLE I
INTERSCORER AGREEMENT ON 120 POOLED PPG SIGNALS—NOISE DETECTION
Measure
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity
Cohen’s Kappa

Rater 1 v. Rater 2

Rater 2 v. Rater 1

Rater 1 v. GS

Rater 2 v. GS

94.86%
94.84%
95.25%
0.66

94.86%
99.70%
53.00%
0.66

95.26%
99.85%
55.00%
0.68

99.52%
99.66%
98.30%
0.97

algorithm, which indicates the readiness of the algorithm when
implemented into existing NIBPM devices.
The function of the signal quality algorithm is first to detect
noise sections (if any) from the raw signals. Then, the algorithm
determines if it is possible to estimate the systolic and diastolic
values from the waveform. The algorithm can be elaborated in
three stages: preprocessing, noise classification, and feasibility
of systolic and diastolic values estimation. A detailed description on the development of the BP signal quality and the BP
NDAs can be found in [14].
F. Algorithm Performance
A comparison was undertaken between the performances of
the developed algorithms [13], [14] with the relevant GS. When
evaluating the performance of the developed algorithms in classifying noise sections in the pulse oximetry signals, Cohen’s
Kappa coefficient, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity were
calculated. When measuring the performance of the developed
algorithm for the BP signal quality estimation, the following
metrics were employed: the accuracy in determining if an estimate of systolic or diastolic BP should be attempted; the error
in those estimated systolic and diastolic pressures (for signals
where attempting such an estimate was deemed appropriate) ;
and capability of classifying noise sections, as indicated by the
derived accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. Moreover, the results from the developed algorithms and the GS were compared
by using Bland–Altman analyses [15].
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A total of 120 measurements for each signal (pulse oximetry
and BP) were recorded throughout the study.
A. Interscorer Agreement
1) Pulse Oximetry: Table I details the interscorer agreement
between the two experts when annotating the noise artifact in
the 120 PPG signals. All signals are pooled to calculate the total
agreement between experts (Rater 1 and Rater 2) when identifying noise artifacts. Cohen’s Kappa coefficient, as shown in
Table I, shows low specificity of “Rater 2 v. Rater 1” and “Rater
1 v. GS” (53% and 55%, respectively) and the high specificity
of “Rater 2 v. GS” imply that the judgment in classifying noise
in the PPG signal during the reconciliation process was dominantly influenced by Rater 2. The major contribution to these
results is simply caused by the discrepancy in classifying the
first and last pulses in each recorded signal. The discrepancy
from both experts occurred when the first and/or the last trough

ABD SUKOR et al.: SIGNAL QUALITY MEASURES ON PULSE OXIMETRY AND BLOOD PRESSURE SIGNALS ACQUIRED

105

TABLE IV
ALGORITHM PERFORMANCE RESULTS—DEVELOPED ALGORITHM PPG [13]
VERSUS GS FOR VARIOUS SIGNAL CONDITIONS
Signal condition

n

κ

Accuracy (%) Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%)

Totally clean signal 18
undefined 93.80 ± 6.06 93.78 ± 0.06
undefined
Partly noisy signal 101 0.60 ± 0.25 91.73 ± 9.46 94.52 + 0.08 75.23 ± 0.26
Totally noisy signal 1
undefined
51.68
undefined
52.00
Pooled signals
120
0.58
91.84
94.71
66.71
The classification of signal condition (except the pooled signals) is based on the manually
annotated GS.

B. Classification Performance

Fig. 2. Example of initial pulses in the filtered version of the PPG when
(a) first trough further from x-axis and (b) first trough closer to x-axis. The
initial pulse in (b) becomes a poor pulse, although it might be a good pulse in
the unfiltered version of PPG.

TABLE II
INTERSCORER AGREEMENT RESULTS—POSSIBLE
SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC DIFFERENCE
Approach

Mean ± standard deviation (mmHg)

n

1.85 ± 3.57
3.00 ± 3.40

119
109

Possible systolic difference
Possible diastolic difference

TABLE III
INTERSCORER AGREEMENT ON 120 POOLED BP SIGNALS—NOISE
CLASSIFICATION DETECTION
Measure
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

Rater 1 v. Rater 2

Rater 2 v. Rater 1

Rater 1 v. GS

Rater 2 v. GS

97.73%
92.39%
97.90%

97.73%
80.72%
99.81%

97.07%
93.24%
98.16%

97.28%
90.13%
97.35%

of the initial and the last pulses were closer to the x-axis. Fig. 2
(a) and (b) illustrates an example of two initial pulses with the
first trough further from and closer to the x-axis, respectively. It
should be noted that the scoring on pulse oximetry is based on
pulse-by-pulse assessment.
2) BP: Tables II and III show the interscorer agreement results between the two human scorers in identifying possible
systolic and diastolic events and classifying noise sections in
120 pooled signals, respectively.
For systolic and diastolic event, not all the systolic and/or
diastolic events were detectable by the experts in each signal,
due to the presence of noise that altered the visual and audio
characteristics of the signal. Consequently, from 120 signals,
only 119 signals were analyzed for systolic estimation, and 109
signals for diastolic estimation.

1) Pulse Oximetry: Table IV and Fig. 3 show the results of the
noise classification when comparing the output of the developed
algorithm with the GS. Note that in Table IV, “pooled signals”
(in signal condition column) refers to a single long record that
comprises the entire 120 signals.
In Table IV using the GS, from 120 pulse oximetry signals, 18 signals are totally clean, while only one consisted
entirely of noise. The remaining 101 signals contain at least
some noise. This demonstrates that approximately 85% (101 +
1) of the study data were contaminated with noise to some extent. However, the Cohen’s Kappa value of 0.58 (for all signals
pooled together) when detecting this noise, implies that the NDA
has successfully identified many of these noise sections in the
signals.
2) BP: Fig. 4 shows the results of the classification performance of the BP NDA when compared with the GS for the 61
noise-contaminated signals. Figs. 5 and 6 show Bland–Altman
plots of possible systolic and diastolic pressures, respectively,
with the NDA compared with the GS. Figs. 7 and 8 show Bland–
Altman plots of possible systolic and diastolic pressures, respectively, without the NDA compared with the GS. In the cases in
which the NDA and the GS could not determine the systolic
and diastolic pressures, these signals were excluded from the
calculation and the scatter plot.
In general, the noise classification from the experts (i.e., the
GS) shows that artifacts that could corrupt the signals do occur
when measuring pulse oximetry and BP in unsupervised home
environments. Moreover, only 15% of the recorded pulse oximetry (see Table IV) and less than half of the recorded BP signals
were free from noise artifacts. When observing the number of
noise-contaminated signals and the summarized duration of the
noise in these contaminated signals (as illustrated in Fig. 4),
it can be concluded that noise artifacts have a high tendency
(61.67% in this study) to occur during self-measurement of BP
in the home environment; but artifacts are likely to be of short
duration (less than 3 s in this study). Nevertheless, these artifacts could cause the measurement of BP to fail; in this study,
for example, four of the signals may have failed to give accurate systolic pressure estimation and eight for diastolic pressure
estimation.
The Bland–Altman plots comparing systolic pressures (see
Fig. 5) estimated by the GS with those estimated by the developed algorithm, demonstrate that approximately 95% of the

106

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Number of signals in ten interval ranges of Cohen’s Kappa coefficient (κ) based on the algorithm performance for 101 partly noise-contaminated PPG
signals, when compared with the GS.

Fig. 4. Mean sensitivity in 11 interval ranges of noise duration, detailing the classification performance of the BP NDA when compared with the GS for the 61
noise contaminated.

Fig. 5. Bland–Altman plot of possible systolic pressures showing the GS
compared with the NDA. Approximately 94% of the data fall between –5.70
and 10.76 mmHg [mean ± 1.96 standard deviation (SD)].

Fig. 6. Bland–Altman plot of possible diastolic pressures showing the GS
compared with the NDA. Approximately 95% of the data fall between –8.90
and 11.83 mmHg [mean ± 1.96 standard deviation (SD)].

data fall between −5.70 and 10.76 mmHg, while for diastolic
pressure (see Fig. 6) approximately 95% of data fall between
−8.90 and 11.83 mmHg, showing fewer small discrepancies
between BP estimation by the algorithm and the GS foremost
of the study data.
When the algorithm estimated the BP, even without noise detection, the mean and standard deviation of systolic and diastolic
estimation still revealed a close agreement between the GS and
algorithmically determined values. This performance might be a

result of implementation of reliable Korotkoff pulse verification
based on oscillometric and possible systolic- and diastolic-point
predetermination processes.
It should be noted that comparison of the possible BPs derived from the algorithm, with and without the noise detection
function, with the possible BP estimation from the GS was
performable only if determination of systolic or diastolic pressure values were feasible from both the estimate and the GS,
respectively.

ABD SUKOR et al.: SIGNAL QUALITY MEASURES ON PULSE OXIMETRY AND BLOOD PRESSURE SIGNALS ACQUIRED

Fig. 7. Bland–Altman plot of possible systolic pressure showing the GS compared to estimations performed without the NDA. Approximately 95% of the
data fall between –5.70 and 11.20 mmHg [mean ± 1.96 standard deviation (SD)].

107

values from respective signals are usually stored (as in [20], [28],
and [29]); this also includes monitoring systems that perform
only pulse oximetry [30]–[33] or BP [34], [35] measurements.
Captured biosignal data (i.e., pulse oximetry and BP signals)
are rarely transmitted, since the devices used for the measurements themselves are also equipped to derive the SpO2 and BP
estimates directly from the measured pulse oximetry and BP
signals at the point of recording. Moreover, this also minimizes
the database memory usage of the system.
Thus, monitoring SpO2 and BP without storing the raw signals may have thus far caused the study of biosignal quality
measures for pulse oximetry and BP signals in telehealth monitoring systems to be overlooked.
In this study, the developed algorithms [13], [14] were tested
offline. Implementing the algorithms in real time will enable
the patient to immediately repeat the measurement if it was corrupted. Real-time implementation may also help the patient to
learn how to improve their measurement technique by providing
immediate feedback and education.
IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 8. Bland–Altman plot of possible diastolic pressure showing the GS
compared to estimations performed without the NDA. Approximately 91% of
the data fall between –14.06 and 22.90 mmHg [mean ± 1.96 standard deviation
(SD)].

The developed algorithm correctly determined whether the
recorded signals were worthy of deriving systolic pressure measurement episodes for approximately 97% of all cases, and approximately 91% of diastolic pressures measurement episodes.
In a vital sign monitoring system that involves unsupervised
biosignal recordings, such as those used by a telehealth system, it is crucial that recorded waveforms are of high quality so
that accurate and reliable features can be extracted from them
[16]. However, surprisingly little published literature has considered biosignal quality measures in any telehealth monitoring
system [17].
The study of biosignal quality measures in telehealth monitoring systems could be conducted if the system has the facility
to store raw biosignal waveforms in a database for analysis.
However, the literature demonstrates that only certain types of
biosignal waveforms (such as ECG [18]–[23], electroencephalogram [24], [25], heart sounds [26], and respiratory sounds [27])
are commonly captured and transmitted to a database in telehealth monitoring systems.
For pulse oximetry and BP signal recordings captured by
telehealth monitoring systems, only the derived SpO2 and BP

The results show that the developed algorithms have performed well at noise classification for the recorded pulse oximetry and BP signals, and effectively identified which BP signals
might provide accurate systolic and diastolic pressure measurements. This robust performance indicates that the developed
algorithms could be readily implemented in a DSS in which
biosignal recordings are performed in actual unsupervised home
environments. Therefore, in the future, this study will be extended to analyze the effect of home telehealth data quality on
DSS accuracy in the free living situation.
REFERENCES
[1] E. S. Berner, R. K. Kasiraman, F. Yu, M. N. Ray, and T. K. Houston,
“Data quality in the outpatient setting: Impact on clinical decision support
systems,” in Proc. AMIA Annu. Symp., 2005, pp. 41–45.
[2] S. Hasan and R. Padman, “Analyzing the effect of data quality on the
accuracy of clinical decision support systems: A computer simulation
approach,” in Proc. AMIA Annu. Symp., 2006, pp. 324–328.
[3] D. Aronsky and P. J. Haug, “Assessing the quality of clinical data in a
computer-based record for calculating the pneumonia severity index,” J.
Amer. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 7, pp. 55–65, 2000.
[4] W. R. Hogan and M. M. Wagner, “Accuracy of data in computer-based
patient records,” J. Amer. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 4, pp. 342–355, 1997.
[5] M. M. Wagner and W. R. Hogan, “The accuracy of medication data in
an outpatient electronic medical record,” J. Amer. Med. Inform. Assoc.,
vol. 3, pp. 234–244, 1996.
[6] S. Redmond, Y. Xie, D. Chang, J. Basilakis, and N. Lovell, “Electrocardiogram signal quality measures for unsupervised telehealth environments,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 33, p. 1517, 2012.
[7] G. D. Clifford, W. J. Long, G. B. Moody, and P. Szolovits, “Robust
parameter extraction for decision support using multimodal intensive care
data,” Philosophical Trans. Roy. Soc. A, Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 367,
pp. 411–429, 2009.
[8] T. L. Rusch and R. Sankar, “Blood chemistry measurement,” in The Measurement, Instrumentation, and Sensors Handbook, J. G. Webster, Ed.
Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1999.
[9] T. Rusch, R. Sankar, and J. Scharf, “Signal processing methods for pulse
oximetry∗ 1,” Comp. Biol. Med., vol. 26, pp. 143–159, 1996.
[10] S. Charbonnier, J. P. Siche, and R. Vancura, “On line detection of movement artifacts to improve ambulatory blood pressure monitoring,” in Proc.
IEEE 17th Instrum. Meas. Technol. Conf., 2000, pp. 693–697.

108

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[11] C. T. Chittenden and C. S. Weaver, “Blood pressure measurement artifact
rejection in noisy environments,” presented at the IEEE 10th Annu. Int.
Conf. of Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, New Orleans, LA,
USA, 1988.
[12] S. P. Glasser and M. R. Ramsey, “An automated system for blood pressure
determination during exercise,” Circulation, vol. 63, pp. 348–353, 1981.
[13] J. Abdul Sukor, S. J. Redmond, and N. H. Lovell, “Signal quality measures for pulse oximetry through waveform morphology analysis,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, pp. 1–16, 2011.
[14] J. Abdul Sukor, S. J. Redmond, G. S. H. Chan, and N. H. Lovell, “Signal
quality measures for unsupervised blood pressure measurement,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 33, pp. 465–486, 2012.
[15] O. Gödje, K. Höke, A. E. Goetz, T. W. Felbinger, D. A. Reuter, B. Reichart,
R. Friedl, A. Hannekum, and U. J. Pfeiffer, “Reliability of a new algorithm
for continuous cardiac output determination by pulse-contour analysis
during hemodynamic instability,” Critical Care Med., vol. 30, pp. 52–58,
2002.
[16] N. H. Lovell, S. J. Redmond, J. Basilakis, and B. G. Celler, “Biosignal
quality detection: An essential feature for unsupervised telehealth applications,” Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. e-Health Netw. Appl. Services, 2010,
pp. 81–85.
[17] N. H. Lovell and S. J. Redmond, “Biosignal processing to meet the emerging needs of telehealth monitoring environments,” in Advances in Biomedical Sensing, Measurements, Instrumentation and Systems, Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010.
[18] D. Franchi, A. Belardinelli, G. Palagi, A. Ripoli, and R. Bedini, “New
telemedicine approach to the dynamic ECG and other biological signals
ambulatory monitoring,” Comp. Cardiol., vol. 25, pp. 213–216, 1998.
[19] V. Kumar, C. Saxena, and V. K. Giri, “Direct data compression of ECG
signal for telemedicine,” Int. J. Syst. Sci., vol. 37, pp. 45–63, 2006.
[20] D. K. Jung, K. N. Kim, G. R. Kim, D. H. Shim, M. H. Kim, B. C. Choi,
and D. J. Suh, “Biosignal monitoring system for mobile telemedicine,” in
Proc. 7th Int. Workshop Enterprise Netw. Comp. Healthcare Ind., 2005,
pp. 31–36.
[21] M. Ogawa, T. Tamura, M. Yoda, and T. Togawa, “Fully automated biosignal acquisition system for home health monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE 19th
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. , 1997, vol. 6, pp. 2403–2405.
[22] S. Khoor, K. Nieberl, K. Fugedi, and E. Kail, “Telemedicine ECGtelemetry with Bluetooth technology,” Comp. Cardiol., vol. 28, pp. 585–
588, 2001.
[23] D. Lucani, G. Cataldo, J. Cruz, G. Villegas, and S. Wong, “A portable ECG
monitoring device with Bluetooth and Holter capabilities for telemedicine
applications,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2006, pp. 5244–5247.

[24] X. Kong and R. Feng, “Watermarking medical signals for telemedicine,”
IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 5, pp. 195–201, 2001.
[25] F. Vaz, O. Pacheco, and A. M. Silva, “A telemedicine application for EEG
signal transmission,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
1991, vol. 13, pp. 466–467.
[26] H. Qu, J. Cheng, Q. Cheng, and L. Y. Wang, “Wife-based telemedicine
system: signal accuracy and security,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comp. Sci. Eng.,
2009, pp. 1081–1085.
[27] S. H. Salleh, I. Kamarulafizam, A. I. Chowdhury, and M. Z. Zamri, “Signal
processing application for telemedicine,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Intell.
Inform. Hiding Multimedia Signal Process., 2007, pp. 197–200.
[28] S. H. Toh, K. H. Do, W. Y. Chung, and S. C. Lee, “Health decision support
for biomedical signals monitoring system over a WSN,” in Proc. 2nd Int.
Symp. Electron. Commerce Security, 2009, pp. 605–608.
[29] M. F. A. Abdul and B. Woodward, “Bluetooth telemedicine processor
for multichannel biomedical signal transmission via mobile cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 35–43,
Mar. 2005.
[30] N. Nassi, R. Piumelli, and E. Lombardi, “Comparison between pulse
oximetry and transthoracic impedance alarm traces during home monitoring,” Archives Disease Chilhood, vol. 93, pp. 126–132, 2008.
[31] S. J. Jung, Y. D. Lee, Y. S. Seo, and W. Y. Chung, “Design of a
low-power consumption wearable reflectance pulse oximetry for ubiquitous healthcare system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Control, Autom. Syst., 2008,
pp. 526–529.
[32] C. Casanova, C. Henandez, A. Sanchez, I. G. Talavera, J. P. Torres,
J. Abreu, J. M. Valencia, A. A. Jaime, and B. R. Celli, “Twenty-fourhour oximetry monitoring in COPD patients with moderate xypoxemia,”
Respiratory Care, vol. 51, pp. 1416–1423, 2006.
[33] V. G. Kirk, S. G. Bohn, W. W. Flemons, and J. E. Remmers, “Comparison of home oximetry monitoring with laboratory polysomnography in
children,” Amer. College Chest Phys., vol. 124, pp. 1702–1708, 2003.
[34] D. S. Moller, A. Dideriksen, S. Sorensen, L. D. Madsen, and E. B. Pedersen, “Accuracy of telmedical home blood pressure measurement in the
diagnosis of hypertension,” J. Human Hypertension, vol. 17, pp. 549–554,
2003.
[35] A. Nordmann, B. Frach, T. Walker, B. Martina, and E. Battegay, “Reliability of patients measuring blood pressure at home: Prospective observational study,” Brit. Med. J, vol. 319, p. 1172, 1999.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

