92

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Embedded DSP-Based Telehealth Radar System
for Remote In-Door Fall Detection
Carmine Garripoli, Marco Mercuri, Student Member, IEEE, Peter Karsmakers, Ping Jack
Soh, Student Member, IEEE, Giovanni Crupi, Senior Member, IEEE, Guy A. E. Vandenbosch, Fellow, IEEE,
Calogero Pace, Member, IEEE, Paul Leroux, Senior Member, IEEE, and Dominique Schreurs, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Telehealth systems and applications are extensively
investigated nowadays to enhance the quality-of-care and, in
particular, to detect emergency situations and to monitor the wellbeing of elderly people, allowing them to stay at home independently as long as possible. In this paper, an embedded telehealth
system for continuous, automatic, and remote monitoring of realtime fall emergencies is presented and discussed. The system, consisting of a radar sensor and base station, represents a cost-effective
and efficient healthcare solution. The implementation of the fall detection data processing technique, based on the least-square support vector machines, through a digital signal processor and the
management of the communication between radar sensor and base
station are detailed. Experimental tests, for a total of 65 mimicked
fall incidents, recorded with 16 human subjects (14 men and two
women) that have been monitored for 320 min, have been used to
validate the proposed system under real circumstances. The subjects’ weight is between 55 and 90 kg with heights between 1.65
and 1.82 m, while their age is between 25 and 39 years. The experimental results have shown a sensitivity to detect the fall events in
real time of 100% without reporting false positives. The tests have
been performed in an area where the radar’s operation was not
limited by practical situations, namely, signal power, coverage of
the antennas, and presence of obstacles between the subject and
the antennas.
Index Terms—Contactless, DSP platform, fall detection, health
monitoring, least-square support vector machines (LS-SVM),
movement classification, radar remote sensing, telehealth systems,
Zigbee communication.

Manuscript received March 31, 2014; revised August 9, 2014; accepted
September 24, 2014. Date of publication October 1, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014. This work was supported by FWO-Flanders, KU
Leuven GOA Project, and the Hercules Foundation.
C. Garripoli is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven,
3001 Leuven, Belgium, and also with the Dipartimento di Informatica, Modellistica, Elettronica e Sistemistica, Università della Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy
(e-mail: garripoli.carmine@gmail.com).
M. Mercuri, P. Karsmakers, G. A. E. Vandenbosch, P. Leroux, and D. Schreurs
are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, 3001 Leuven,
Belgium (e-mail: Marco.Mercuri@esat.kuleuven.be; Peter.karsmakers@esat.
kuleuven.be;
Guy.Vandenbosch@esat.kuleuven.be;
Paul.Leroux@esat.
kuleuven.be; Dominique.Schreurs@esat.kuleuven.be).
P. J. Soh is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven,
3001 Leuven, Belgium, and also with the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Universiti Malaysia Perlis, 02600 Arau, Malaysia (e-mail:
pingjack.soh@esat.kuleuven.be).
G. Crupi is with the Dipartimento di Ingneria Civile, Informatica, Edile,
Ambientale e Matematica Applicata, University of Messina, 98166 Messina,
Italy (e-mail: crupig@unime.it).
C. Pace is with the Dipartimento di Informatica, Modellistica, Elettronica e Sistemistica, Università della Calabria, 87036 Rende, Italy (e-mail:
calogero.pace@unical.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2361252

I. INTRODUCTION
HE elderly population has been steadily increasing worldwide [1]. This situation, together with the shortage of nursing homes and the natural desire to stay at home, has resulted in
a growing need for healthcare solutions to improve the quality
of life for senior citizens and to increase the efficiency of systems for health and social care. Elderly people who live alone
are usually exposed to health risks which in some cases may
cause fatality. Moreover, in addition to chronic health problems,
fall incidents are considered one of the major problems among
the elderly worldwide. They often result in serious physical and
psychological consequences [2]. The rapid detection of a fall
event can reduce the mortality risk and increase the chance to
survive the incident and return to independent living [3], [4].
For that reason, it is imperative to detect falls as soon as they
occur such that immediate assistance may be provided.
Current fall detection systems are based on a necklace or
wristwatch with a button that is activated by the patient in case
of an accident. Other devices involve accelerometers and gyroscopes attached to the body [5], [6]. However, in emergency
situations, this imposes an important risk factor. In fact, the
person may forget to wear the device, or likely may no longer
be able to press the button. Moreover, these devices produce
discomfort and false alarms. An academic investigation of an
accelerometer-based fall detector system using a biocompatible
and impermeable skin patch has been reported in [7]. It can be
carried by the user with the added value that the subject does
not have to remember to wear it. The ideal solution is therefore
a contactless approach that avoids the need for actions by the elderly person. Systems under investigation in the latter category
are based on video cameras [8]–[11], floor vibration [12], and
acoustic sensors [13]. In the case of the video camera method,
researchers are currently trying to address challenges related to
low light, field of view, and image processing, but privacy is
also a concern [8]–[11]. Floor vibration and acoustic sensors
have limited success due to the environmental interference and
background noise [12], [13].
A novel and complementary investigation was presented by
the authors in [14]–[16]. The resulted system, combining radar,
wireless communication, and data-processing techniques, was
demonstrated in an in-door environment to detect fall emergencies and to localize persons without the need of radio-frequency
identification tags attached to the person [16]. The system consists of a radar sensor that detects the monitoring signals of a
person and transmits this information to a base station for remote
data processing. The described base station consists of a Zigbee

T

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GARRIPOLI et al.: EMBEDDED DSP-BASED TELEHEALTH RADAR SYSTEM FOR REMOTE IN-DOOR FALL DETECTION

Fig. 1.

93

Block diagram of the fall detection telehealth system.

module, a microcontroller, and laptop, resulting in a noncompact
and energy-inefficient solution. Moreover, the system was not
able to work in real time. In fact, the speed signals, consisting
of one single activity (i.e., falling, walking) with known starting and end time points, were collected, stored, and processed
offline later.
In comparison to the previous study [16], a cost-effective and
energy-efficient base station based on a DSP-embedded platform has been developed to detect fall emergencies in real time.
The implementation of the data processing technique to operate
in real time, the management of the communication between
radar sensor and base station, together with design challenges,
practical limitations, and their solutions, are presented and
discussed.
Other interesting studies on contactless fall detection using
radar techniques were also reported in [17]–[19]. In these studies, a sequence of feature vectors, as a result of the short time
Fourier transformer (STFT), is transformed to a single feature
vector of fixed length per segment. Hence, each activity can
be represented by a single feature vector which can be the basis
for standard machine learning methods such as least squares
support vector machines (LS-SVM). However, in this proposed
study, an activity is represented by a sequence of vectors (with
possibly different lengths). Within the LS-SVM framework, it
is feasible to work on such data by choosing a specific kernel function that is suited to process varying-length sequences
of vectors. For this purpose, the global alignment (GA) kernel
[20] was used in this study. More specifically, the sequences of
vectors are computed using the STFT. Therefore, each vector
containing the spectral information of a single time window,
considers a radar signal segment with a movement activity at
some position (beginning, middle, end). The use of the GA kernel allows to correctly compare two segments with the, to be
detected, movement positioned differently. This is done without relying on some energy selection criterion that selects small
parts of the segment to construct a fixed length vector but by

comparing the frequency signatures. The details of our classification strategy are described in [15]. Moreover, in [17]–[19], the
radar data were collected and processed offline, and nothing was
mentioned about full radar-based telehealth system, where the
monitoring signals are transmitted wirelessly to a base station
unit to process them in real time.
The telehealth monitoring system is introduced in Section II.
The implementation of the data processing technique by means
of a DSP platform is detailed in Section III, while the experimental results are described in Section IV.

II. FALL DETECTION TELEHEALTH SYSTEM
In this section, the telehealth system described in [16], is
briefly introduced to better understand the novelty of this study
which will be detailed in the next section. However, as opposed
to [16], where the base station consists of a Zigbee module,
a microcontroller, and a laptop, a DSP-based base station has
been developed and used in this study.
The telehealth system consists of a sensor, combining radar,
computational, and wireless communication capabilities, and a
base station for data processing (see Fig. 1). A continuous wave
waveform at 5.8 GHz is generated and transmitted toward a human target to detect its speed produced during daily activities,
such as falling, walking, random movements. In fact, by the
Doppler effect, a radio wave reflected by a moving target undergoes a frequency shift proportional to its velocity. The reflected
echo, containing the person’s speed information, is collected by
the receiver. The resulting baseband signals are digitized and
transmitted to the base station to distinguish fall events from
normal movements.
The sensor architecture and the DSP-based base station are
described in Sections II-A and II-B, respectively. Moreover, the
technique to distinguish fall events from normal movements is
described in Section II-C.

94

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.

Developed radar sensor.

DSP-based base station.

and is performed in between sampling instants. This guarantees
both that the sampling rate is always constant and that the person
is continuously monitored.

A. Sensor Architecture

B. DSP-Based Base Station Architecture

The radar sensor is composed of a radar module, a microcontroller, and a Zigbee module (see Fig. 2). It also mounts a
two-element bow-tie antenna to support both the wireless communication between the sensor and the base station and the radar
working frequency. The antenna was optimized to reduce the
backscattering and crosstalk effects, presenting a semispherical
radiation pattern to cover a whole room [21].
The radar module integrates a fractional-N phase-locked loop
(PLL), a power divider, a radio frequency (RF) switch, a low
noise amplifier (LNA), a gain block, an in-phase and quadrature
(IQ) mixer, baseband filters, and amplifiers.
The 5.8-GHz single tone is generated by the PLL that is
configured by the microcontroller. This signal is sent to the
power divider that splits it in two branches. The first output
is connected to the RF switch. The latter is controlled by the
microcontroller to alternatively connect the radar transmitter
and the Zigbee module to the transmitter antenna. The signal
reflected from the target is received, amplified, and then mixed
with a copy of the transmitting signal. On the receiving path,
the signal is amplified by the LNA and the gain block, for a total
gain of 30 dB. The output of the gain stage is connected to the
RF input of the mixer. The local oscillator input of the mixer
is connected to the second output of the power divider. The IQ
baseband signals produced by the mixer are amplified, filtered,
and adapted to the ADC’s dynamic range. The 10-bit ADC is
integrated into the microcontroller and works with a sampling
frequency of 250 Hz, such that every 4 ms an IQ sample pair is
acquired and digitized. Since the Zigbee module transmits only
frames organized in bytes, each IQ sample pair is mapped in 3
bytes. These samples are packed in a frame of 75 bytes and then
transmitted wirelessly to the base station through the Zigbee
module every 100 ms. This transmission requires about 3 ms

The developed base station consists of a Zigbee module and
the TMS320C6678 DSP platform (see Fig. 3). This processor
implements a single instruction, multiple data approach in floating point instructions in single (32 bits) and double (64 bits)
precision, allowing to maintain the same data format of Matlab
scripts. It integrates eight DSP cores that run at 1 GHz each, and
it has shared integrated static random access memory (SRAM)
of 4 MB. It also has a high speed external memory controller,
which supports DDR3 up to 1600 MT/s, together with a data
bus width of 64 bits that is capable of 12.8 GB/s. For this particular DSP, mathematic and signal processing hand assembly
optimized libraries are also available, to speed up the process of
optimizing signal processing algorithms.
The DSP is connected through a serial peripheral interface
(SPI) to the Zigbee IC. The latter acts as a slave in the SPI
interface while the DSP is the master. There are also three control
lines, namely, RST (active low reset), SLP (sleep), and IRQ
(interrupt request). The latter is the interrupt pin that is set every
time a complete frame is received. This pin in connected to a
DSP general-purpose input/output port that triggers the routine
for receiving the transmitted frame from the Zigbee module.
C. Data Processing Technique
In this Section, the technique to distinguish fall events from
normal movements, which was already explained in [16], is
briefly introduced for completeness to understand how the system has been extended to work in real time. In [16], in fact, the
speed signals, consisting of one single activity with known starting and end time points, were collected, stored, and processed
offline later. Moreover, in [16], the validation was performed
considering only falling and walking movements.

GARRIPOLI et al.: EMBEDDED DSP-BASED TELEHEALTH RADAR SYSTEM FOR REMOTE IN-DOOR FALL DETECTION

The digitized speed baseband signals are processed offline in
Matlab. A movement classification based on an LS-SVM approach combined with a GA kernel [15] is applied to analyze
the digitized baseband speed signals in order to distinguish fall
events from the other activities. The fall detector aims at assessing the changes in speed experienced during a fall or a normal
movement. The developed algorithm consists of two stages of
data analysis, namely, the training phase and the testing phase.
The training phase consists of event detection and segmentation, preprocessing, and model estimation. For each collected
signal, consisting of one single activity, the energy’s peak is first
detected and then the signal is cut around it to create a segment
of 2 s, considered sufficient to cover the details of the activities
and mainly of a fall event. Those segments are used to build
a dataset. After that, the data is preprocessed (or standardized)
such that each dimension has zero mean and unit standard deviation. Next, it is transformed using the STFT from which only
the magnitude spectrum is retained. The resulting data are standardized again and the learning process is started. The model is
then created and stored in a memory to be used in the testing
stage. In the model, the activities are divided in two groups,
namely, fall events and normal movements.
In order to validate it, an independent test set, with data not
used in the training phase, is needed. It is built, acquiring test
signals, consisting of one activity, that has undergone the same
operations of event detection, segmentation, and preprocessing
described for the training phase. The resulting test set is then
compared to the model.
III. FALL DETECTOR
In this Section, the implementation of the data processing
technique to operate in real time is detailed. In particular, the
synchronization and the communication between radar sensor
and base station are explained in Section III-A. The training
phase and the testing phase are described in Sections III-B and
III-C, respectively. The classification implementation is detailed
in Section III-D.
A. Sensor-Base Station Communication
In order to synchronize the system, the Zigbee modules of
the sensor node and of the base station are set at power-on as
receiver and transmitter, respectively. The sensor node will stay
in this modality until it receives a frame of two fixed bytes
(coins) from the base station, meaning that it is ready to process
the monitoring signals. The base station sends the coins to the
sensor. The latter checks whether the received bytes are equal
to a copy of the coins saved in its memory. If that condition
is verified, the sensor is changed immediately to transmission
mode and it sends back the received coins to the base station
that in the meanwhile has set itself as receiver. Once they have
been received, the base station checks whether the received
coins are equal to the initial token sent at the beginning of the
synchronization process. In the case this procedure is correct, a
message, meaning that the synchronization has been achieved,
is printed out to the debug monitor. On the other hand, if this
procedure is not correct or the coins are not received within 1 s,

Fig. 4.

95

Block diagram of the implemented LS-SVM with GA kernel technique.

an error message is printed out and the system must be rebooted
to restart the synchronization process.
The Zigbee module in the base station receives the speed
frames every 100 ms. Every time a new frame is received, the
IRQ pin of the Zigbee module is set. This triggers an interrupt
to the DSP, such that the data can be read.
B. Training Phase
The simplified block diagram of the training phase is shown
in Fig. 4. In order to create the model, a routine has been implemented to acquire the signal activities. In particular, it allows
acquiring signals of 8 s. During this time, a subject should
perform only one activity (i.e., falling, walking, random movement). Moreover, in between successive acquisitions, there is a
time slot of 30 s such that the person can prepare himself/herself
to mimic another activity.
After the acquisition, the activity energy’s peak of each signal
is extracted such that the signal is cut around this peak to produce
a segment of 2 s. All these segments are arranged in a matrix
and the preprocessing is performed, where the STFT is involved,
such that the segments are first cut into 50% overlapping frames
that are multiplied with a Hamming window, and then the fast
Fourier transform (FFT) is computed on each of these frames.
The result of the preprocessing is sent to a laptop for the model
estimation, where an off-the-shelf algorithm implemented in a
Matlab script was involved. The generated model is saved as a
three-dimensional (3-D) matrix in a C header file and is then
stored in the internal SRAM of the DSP.
The operations of event detection, segmentation, and preprocessing could be directly run in Matlab. However, in order to
perform the FFT, the DSP uses assembly optimized libraries that
produce results slightly different from Matlab. The differences
would have resulted in classification errors during the testing
phase that is performed by the DSP.
C. Testing Phase
The testing phase consists of signal concatenation, preprocessing, and classification (see Fig. 4). In order to process a

96

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 6. Classification pseudocode. N tra in represents the number of matrices
in the training structure. The vector α and the constant b are variables estimated
in the training phase.

Fig. 5.

Fall detection testing phase flow chart.

continuous stream of radar signals consisting of multiple activities invoked at unknown instants, a signal concatenation technique has been investigated in the testing phase. More precisely,
every time a new frame is available (i.e., 100 ms of new speed
signals), the relative I/Q samples are concatenated with the last
1.9 s of the previous signals to create a segment of 2 s, that
is preprocessed and classified. The system also manages the
power-on situation. In fact, when it is powered on, it accumulates 2 s of signals (i.e., 20 frames of 25 I/Q sample pairs). After
this first segment is processed, every new frame will be concatenated to the previous 19. This procedure involves an overlap of
95% among segments. This large overlap is used to improve
the performance of the system. In fact, a larger overlap involves
a higher number of classifications such that a fall event will
be considered over multiple segments. This makes the system
more immune to the noise that could generate a false positive
in a single segment classification. An alarm is activated if a fall
event has been detected. The flow chart of the testing phase is
shown in Fig. 5.
D. Parallelization Classification Technique
A custom parallelization technique involving the eight cores
of the TMDS320C6678 DSP has been implemented to perform
real-time classification. The strict requirement is that a segment

classification must be performed before a new Zigbee communication occurs, that means in a time shorter than 100 ms. In this
study, a fall event is detected when three consecutive segments
have been classified as a fall. This involves that the maximum
time to detect a fall should be shorter than 400 ms.
The pseudocode of the classification is shown in Fig. 6.
The core of the algorithm is to determine the kernel array
K, whose elements are calculated by the function computeGAK(Test, Training), that is an off-the-shelf C code that computes the GA Kernel for the LS-SVM algorithm [15], [20]. The
K array is generated starting from the Training matrix and the
Test matrix, which are multidimensional arrays, resulting from
the model estimation and the preprocessing in the testing phase,
respectively. The Training matrix, consisting of Ntrain elements,
contains the result of the preprocessing performed in the training
phase. In particular, each activity is segmented into sequences
of 2 s (i.e., 500 samples), on which the STFT is applied. Since
the latter involves 32-sample windowing with 50% overlap, 30
sequences of 32 samples are generated. The meaningful information for the classification resides in the first eight samples
of the STFT, meaning that, for each activity, 30 nonredundant
sequences of eight samples are produced. These sequences are
then organized into a two-dimensional (2-D) array of dimension
30 × 8. This means that the Training matrix consists of Ntrain
elements, where each element is a 30 × 8 matrix. This makes
the Training matrix a 3-D array of dimension Ntrain × 30 × 8.
Similar considerations are valid for the Test matrix. Since in the
real–time implementation, only a single 2-s segment of signal

GARRIPOLI et al.: EMBEDDED DSP-BASED TELEHEALTH RADAR SYSTEM FOR REMOTE IN-DOOR FALL DETECTION

Fig. 7.

97

FSM of the slave cores.

is classified each time, the resulting Test matrix is a 2-D array
of dimension 30 × 8.
For each iteration of the loop (see Fig. 6), eight elements of
the kernel array K are computed at the same time by the eight
cores of the DSP. Each core invokes the function computeGAK()
independently. Finally, the function f(K) returns a number that,
compared to a threshold, determines whether the segment contains a fall or normal movement data.
In order to generate the K array, a fork/join method, based
on an inter processor communication (IPC) technique, has been
designed. It exploits the internal shared memory of an architecture to synchronize and exchange data among processing units.
In doing this operation, a master/slave approach has been chosen, where core0 is the master core that manages the fork/join
processes and also computes kernel elements. In particular, during the fork process, the arguments for the function computeGAK(Test, Training) are passed to the eight cores, while in the
join process, the results of each core are collected. More precisely, during the fork phase, the master core core0 passes to
each slave core both the address of one element of the Training
matrix and the address of the Test matrix. Each core therefore
compares each time the jth 30 × 8 element of the Training matrix with the 30 × 8 Test matrix. The result of the comparison is
a double precision float that is saved, during the join phase, into
the kernel array K at the jth position. This operation is possible
because the elements of the Training matrix are independent
from each other.
A finite state machine (FSM) has been designed to control
the seven slave cores (see Fig. 7). It consists of two states,
namely, STATE0 and STATE1, and two flags, Status and Idle.
Initially, all the slave cores are in STATE0, meaning that they
are in idle mode, with Idle flag set to 1. They remain in this
state until the master sets the Status flag after having passed
them the computeGAK() arguments. When this happens, the
slave cores clear their Idle flags and go to STATE1. In this state,
the slave cores call the function computeGAK(). When all the
cores have cleared the Idle flag, the master core can also call the
computeGAK() function. After the results are computed, each
slave core sets the Idle flag and waits for Status flag to be cleared
by the master core, meaning it has received the results. When
this happens, the slave cores return to STATE0, waiting for new
data to be processed.
In order to exchange arguments and to control the FSM properly, eight shared memory messages have been designed for the

Fig. 8.

Example of message used in the shared memory IPC technique.

eight cores. Each message has the format of a C structure as
shown in Fig. 8 where
1) status is the control flag that is used to trigger the start of
the slave core operation;
2) idle is the flag that indicates whether a slave core is processing data or is waiting to receive new data (i.e., idle
state);
3) ∗ seq1 is the pointer to the jth 30 × 8 element of the Training matrix that needs to be processed;
4) ∗ seq2 is the pointer to the 30 × 8 Test matrix that needs to
be processed;
5) nX is the first dimension of each element of the Training
matrix (i.e., 30 in this study);
6) nY is the first dimension of each element of the Test matrix
(i.e., 30 in this study);
7) dimvect is the second dimension of each element both of
the Test matrix and of the Training matrix (i.e., 8 in this
study);
8) sigma and triangular are two parameters generated in the
training phase of the classification. The values of these
parameters are evaluated in order to minimize the cost
function of the LS SVM formulation [15], [20];
9) return_value is the result of the comparison between one
element of the Test matrix and one element of the Training
matrix.
When all the elements of the kernel matrix K are calculated, the master core calculates the values f(K) and establishes
whether the event is a fall or a normal movement.
The implemented parallelization technique together with the
signal reception, managed by interrupts, represents a flexible
solution even if multiple sensors are used. In fact, the DSP
is able to receive frames from the Zigbee module even if the
classification is running, meaning that a sensor can transmit data
at any time, without requiring a complex synchronization of the
whole network. In fact, the interrupt service routine is served
only by the master core, that reads and stores the new data in
a buffer, while the slave cores can continue to perform their

98

Fig. 9.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Real room environment.

operation without interruption. This means that the maximum
number of sensors that can be managed by the base station
is limited only by the number of classifications that can be
performed within 100 ms.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Experimental tests have been performed with human volunteers in a room of 5 × 5 m2 (see Fig. 9). Furniture, a metal shelf,
tables, a sofa, PCs, and chairs were positioned to mimic a real
room setting. The sensor was fixed to the wall at a height of
1.25 m while the base station was positioned on a desk about
4 m away the sensor.
The classification model has been created on signals acquired
on three volunteers in different positions in the room who did not
participate in the testing phase. It includes 40 random walking
activities, 30 activities of sitting down and standing up, 40 fall
activities, considering both hard falls, where the person falls
directly to the ground, and soft falls, by which the person tries
to avoid the incident by grabbing objects. In addition, 20 random
movements, such as opening the window, moving a chair, have
been also considered.
In order to validate the real-time fall detector, 64 tests, for
a total of 65 simulated fall events, have been performed on 16
volunteers (14 men and two women) that have been continuously monitored for 5 min each. This means that this validation
considered 320 min of measurements. Therefore, considering
that a segment of signal is processed every 100 ms and also the
power-on condition (namely, the system should first accumulate
2 s of signals), this validation has been performed over 190 784
testing segments of radar signal. The subjects were allowed
to move without restrictions within the antenna’s beamwidth,
meaning that they could mimic all the typical movements that
are normally achieved in a domestic environment (i.e., walking, talking at the cellular while walking in the room, dropping
object or even a chair, walking with a cane and with a walker,
sweeping, working at the PC, watching films, resting on the
sofa, eating, open windows, drinking water, etc.). One single
volunteer was present in the room at a time and performed only
one fall during the monitored period. Only in one test, the volunteer was invited to mimic two consecutive falls where the

subject experiences a first fall, then tries to gets up, and then
falls again. The mimicked fall incidents included both hard falls
and soft falls. Other simulations consider situations where the
person falls from a chair, loses the equilibrium while walking
with a cane or with a walker, sits and misses the chair, loses
the equilibrium and falls on a chair, is bent over and tries to get
up. To this end, videos recorded in nursery homes with real fall
incidents have been watched in order to mimic real life situations. The subjects’ weight is between 55 and 90 kg with heights
between 1.65 and 1.82 m, while their age is between 25 and 39.
The experimental results have shown a sensitivity in detecting
the mimicked fall events in real time of 100%. Moreover, no
false positives have been reported.
It should be noted that this validation considers only falls
where the volunteers are located at angles between 0° and about
45° from the line of sight of the antenna, otherwise the related
radial speeds would produce lower Doppler frequencies such
that fall incidents will be classified as normal movements. Other
possible limitations of the radar system are when the person is in
a position outside of the antenna beamwidth and when his/her
reflection is obstructed by furniture. Also, the target absolute
distance could represent a limitation. In fact, the longer the
distance is, the weaker is the target’s reflection, such that it may
no longer lie within the radar dynamic range and then it will
be buried in the noise. This problem can be mitigated both by
increasing the output power and by increasing the receiver’s
gain. However, the maximum transmitted power is limited by
the spectral masks of the standards (i.e., maximum allowable
power in in-door environments), while the receiver’s gain is
limited by the unwanted reflections generated by the radar itself
(i.e., crosstalk, backscattering, isolation between transmitter and
receiver). However, the radar dynamic range does not represent
a serious problem in a typical room of 5 × 5 m2 . Obviously,
these limitations could be avoided by using multiple sensors.
Fig. 10 shows the classification results on a small portion of
a signal containing multiple random activities and a fall event
invoked at about 58 s. Each dot represents the class where a
segment of 2 s of signal has been assigned. The event was
classified as fall for seven consecutive segments.
The measured time to process a segment of 2 s of signal
is about 16 ms. This means that, considering Zigbee transmissions every 100 ms, with the developed approach, it is possible
to process signals coming from six sensors without loss of information. Since an alarm is activated when three consecutive
segments are classified as a fall, the maximum time to detect the
incident is about 316 ms.
Fig. 11(a) and (b) represents the resulting speed signals of
a walking movement and of a fall event, respectively. The frequency of the signals is proportional to the radial velocity of
the person during the movement. Fig. 11(c) and (d) shows the
two spectrograms corresponding to the movement activities of
Fig. 11(a) and (b), respectively. The horizontal axis represents
time, the vertical axis frequency, a third dimension indicating
the amplitude of a particular frequency at a particular time is
represented by different shades of gray. In this example, a sliding window size of 64 samples with 50% overlap is adopted. In
case of a fall, an increase in dominant frequency over time is

GARRIPOLI et al.: EMBEDDED DSP-BASED TELEHEALTH RADAR SYSTEM FOR REMOTE IN-DOOR FALL DETECTION

99

Fig. 10. Classification results (a) of a signal containing multiple activities and (b) zoom of the related fall event. In this example, the results of the classification
are sent to Matlab for plotting.

Fig. 11.

Speed signal during (a) walking movement and during (b) fall event. Spectrograms corresponding (c) to the walking movement and (d) fall event.

observed while for the walking activity the dominant frequency
per time window remain within a small specific band.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a telehealth system aiming at remote fall detection in an in-door environment has been presented. It consists of
a microwave radar sensor and a wirelessly connected base station for data processing. The implementation of the fall detection
algorithm by means of a DSP platform has been presented. Experimental results conducted with human subjects under real
circumstances have shown a sensitivity to detect fall events in
real time of 100%, without reporting any false positives, with a
maximum delay of about 316 ms. The tests have been performed
in an area where the radar’s operation was not limited by practical situations, namely, signal power, coverage of the antennas,
and presence of obstacles between the subject and the antennas.
Moreover, the proposed approach would allow to process at the
same time up to six sensors without loss of information. This

system is the result of the convergence of information, wireless technologies, and radar techniques, and is in-line with the
growing need for health technologies and applications to enhance the quality-of-care for elderly people both in home and
clinical environment. Next step is to integrate multiple sensors
in a wireless sensor network to detect fall incidents in all the
directions and to perform in-door positioning by implementing
a trilateration technique.

REFERENCES
[1] Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of
the United Nations Secretariat. (2013). UN world population prospects.
[Online]. Available: http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm
[2] C. J. L. Murray and A. D. Lopez, “Global and regional descriptive epidemiology of disability: Incidence, prevalence, health expectancies and
years lived with disability,” Global Burden Dis., vol. 1, pp. 201–246, 1996.
[3] E. Dejaeger, S. Boonen, J. Coussement, and K. Milisen, “Recurrent falling,
osteoporosis and sarcopenia, three major problems, an integrated approach,” J. Gerontol. Geriatr., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 262–269, Dec. 2009.

100

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[4] S. R. Lord, C. Sherrington, and H. B. Menz, Falls in Older People: Risk
Factors and Strategies for Prevention. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.,
2007.
[5] T. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liu, and J. Hou, “Fall detection by embedding an
accelerometer in cellphone and using KFD algorithm,” Int. J. Comput. Sci.
Netw. Security, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 227–284, Oct. 2006.
[6] A. K. Bourke and G. M. Lyons, “A threshold-based detection algorithm
using a bi-axial gyroscope sensor,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 84–90, Jan. 2006.
[7] D. Naranjo-Hernandez, L. M. Roa, J. Reina-Tosina, and M. A. EstudilloValderrama, “Personalization and adaptation to the medium and context
in a fall detection system,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16,
no. 2, pp. 264–271, Mar. 2012.
[8] T. Lee and A. Mihailidis, “An intelligent emergency response system: Preliminary development and testing of automated fall detection,” J. Telemed.
Telecare, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 194–198, 2005.
[9] F. Wang, M. Skubic, C. Abbott, and J. M. Keller, “Body sway measurement
for fall risk assessment using inexpensive webcams,” in Proc. 32nd Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 252–255.
[10] A. Edgcomb and F. Vahid, “Automated fall detection on privacy-enhanced
video,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 252–255.
[11] E. Auvinet, F. Multon, A. Saint-Arnaud, J. Rousseau, and J. Meunier, “Fall
detection with multiple Cameras: An occlusion-resistant method based
on 3-D silhouette vertical distribution,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 290–300, Mar. 2011.
[12] Y. Zigel, D. Litvak, and I. Gannot, “A method for automatic fall detection
of elderly people using floor vibrations and sound—Proof of concept on
human mimicking doll falls,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 12,
pp. 2858–2867, Dec. 2009.
[13] L. Yun, Z. Zhiling, M. Popescu, and K. C. Ho, “Acoustic fall detection
using a circular microphone array,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 2242–2245.
[14] M. Mercuri, D. Schreurs, and P. Leroux, “SFCW microwave radar for
in-door fall detection,” in Proc. IEEE Topical Conf. Biomed. Wireless
Technol., 2012, pp. 53–56.
[15] P. Karsmakers, T. Croonenborghs, M. Mercuri, D. Schreurs, and
P. Leroux, “Automatic in-door fall detection based on microwave radar
measurements,” in Proc. Eur. Radar Conf., 2012, pp. 202–205.
[16] M. Mercuri, P. J. Soh, G. Pandey, P. Karsmakers, G. A. E. Vandenbosch,
P. Leroux, and D. Schreurs, “Analysis of an indoor biomedical radarbased system for health monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.,
vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2061–2068, May 2013.
[17] L. Liu, M. Poposcu, M. Skubic, M. Rantz, T. Yardibi, and P. Cuddihy,
“Automatic fall detection based on Doppler radar motion signature,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Technol. Healthcare, 2011,
pp. 222–225.
[18] L. Liu, M. Poposcu, M. Rantz, and M. Skubic, “Fall detection using
doppler radar and classifier fusion,” in Proc. IEEE-EMBS Int. Conf.
Biomed. Health Inform., 2012, pp. 180–183.
[19] L. Liu, M. Poposcu, K. C. Ho, M. Skubic, and M. Rantz, “Doppler radar
sensor positioning in a fall detection system,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 256–259.
[20] M. Cuturi, “Fast global alignment kernels,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learning, 2011, pp. 929–936.
[21] P. J. Soh, M. Mercuri, G. A. E. Vandenbosch, and D. Schreurs, “Dual-band
planar bowtie monopole for a fall-detection radar and telemetry system,”
IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 11, pp. 1698–1701, Nov. 2012.

Carmine Garripoli was born in Locri, Italy, in 1989.
He received the Bachelor and Master degrees in electronic engineering from the Università della Calabria,
Arcavacata di Rende, Italy, in 2011 and 2014, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree at the MsM Research Group, Department of
Electrical Engineering, TU Eindhoven, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands.
His research interests include mixed signal integrated circuit for front ends, organic TFT technology,
and electronics on flexible substrate.

Marco Mercuri (S’12) was born in Lamezia Terme,
Italy, in 1985. He received the Bachelor and Master
degrees in electronic engineering from the Università
della Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, Italy, in 2006
and 2009, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the TELEMIC Research
Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
His research interests include biomedical applications of microwave/RF, remote radar sensing,
wireless sensors, and microwave/millimeter-wave
measurements.
Mr. Mercuri was the Recipient of the 2013 IEEE MTT-S Graduate Fellowship Award, and he obtained the second place both to the 2013 IEEE President’s
Change the World Competition and to the 2013 IEEE MTT-S YouTube/YouKu
Video Competition.

Peter Karsmakers was born on April 14, 1979. He
received the M.Sc. degree in electronics-ICT engineering from the Katholieke Hogeschool Kempen,
Geel, Belgium, in 2001. In 2004, he received the Master degree in artificial intelligence from the KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. In May 2010, he received the
Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Applied Sciences,
Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven.
From 2005 to 2010, he was a Research Assistant at the SISTA Research Group, Department of
Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven. He is currently
a Postdoctoral Researcher at the AdvISe Research Group, KU Leuven. His
research interests include machine learning and biomedical signal processing.
From 2001, he has combined his research with teaching in the areas of electronics, signal processing, and machine learning.

Ping Jack Soh (S’09) was born in Sabah, Malaysia.
He received the Bachelor and Master degrees in electrical engineering (telecommunication) from Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in
2002 and 2005, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium, in 2013.
He is currently a Senior Lecturer at the Advanced
Communication Engineering Center of Excellence,
School of Computer and Communication Engineering (SCCE), Universiti Malaysia Perlis (UniMAP),
Perlis, Malaysia. From 2002 to 2004, he was a Test Engineer at Venture Corp.,
working on new products’ test definition for manufacturing purposes, both hardware and software. In 2005, he joined Motorola Solutions Penang as an R &
D Engineer for Electrical Design. There, he worked on the hardware development of two-way radios, focusing on the characterization and testing of new
radios’ antennas and RF front-ends. In 2006, he joined SCCE-UniMAP as a
Lecturer. He went on leave from UniMAP in 2009 to pursue the Ph.D. degree at
the ESAT-TELEMIC Research Division, Department of Electrical Engineering,
KU Leuven. He was first a Research Assistant (2009–2013), and then a Postdoctoral Research Fellow (2013–2014) and is currently an External Research
Affiliate. Within the context of his Ph.D. research, he was also involved in antenna design and characterization for AGFA Healthcare, Mortsel, Belgium. His
research interests include the design, development, and modeling of flexible,
textile, conformal, and planar antennas, on-body communications, metamaterials, and microwave measurements.
Dr. Soh was the Recipient of the CST University Publication Award in 2011
and 2012, the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society Doctoral Research Award
in 2012, and the IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTT-S)
Graduate Fellowship for Medical Applications in 2013. He was also the Second
Place Winner of the IEEE Presidents’ Change the World Competition and IEEE
MTT-S Video Competition, both in 2013.

GARRIPOLI et al.: EMBEDDED DSP-BASED TELEHEALTH RADAR SYSTEM FOR REMOTE IN-DOOR FALL DETECTION

Giovanni Crupi (S’04–M’12–SM’13) was born in
Lamezia Terme, Italy, in 1978. He received the M.Sc.
degree in electronic engineering (with honors) and
the Ph.D. degree from the University of Messina,
Messina, Italy, in 2003 and 2006, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the University of Messina, where he teaches “Microwave
Electronics” and “Bioengineering.” Since 2005, he
has been a Repeat Visiting Scientist at KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium, and the Interuniversity Microelectronics Center, Leuven. His research interests include
small and large signal modeling of advanced microwave devices. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 publications in international journals and
conferences and two book chapters. He has coedited the book entitled Microwave De-Embedding: From Theory to Applications (Oxford, U.K.: Academic, 2013). He serves as an Associate Editor of the International Journal of
Numerical Modeling: Electronic Networks, Devices and Fields.
Dr. Crupi is the Chair of the IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques
Society Fellowship Program. He also served as the Technical Program Chair
for the IEEE International Workshop on Integrated Nonlinear Microwave and
Millimetre-wave Circuits, Leuven, 2014.

Guy A. E. Vandenbosch (F’13) received the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, in
1985 and 1991, respectively.
Since 1993, he has been a Lecturer, and since
2005, a Full Professor at the same university. He
has taught or teaches courses on “Electromagnetic
Waves,” “Antennas,” “Electromagnetic Compatibility,” “Electrical Engineering, Electronics, and Electrical Energy,” and “Digital Steer- and Measuring
Techniques in Physics.” His research interests include
electromagnetic theory, computational electromagnetics, planar antennas and
circuits, nanoelectromagnetics, EM radiation, EMC, and bioelectromagnetics.
From 2001 to 2007, he was the President of SITEL, the Belgian Society of
Engineers in Telecommunication and Electronics. From 2008–2014, he was a
Member of the Board of FITCE Belgium, the Belgian branch of the Federation
of Telecommunications Engineers of the European Union. In the period 1999–
2004, he was the Vice-Chairman, and in the period 2005–2009, Secretary of
the IEEE Benelux Chapter on Antennas and Propagation. He currently holds
the position of the Chairman of this Chapter. In the period 2002–2004, he was
Secretary of the IEEE Benelux Chapter on EMC. He is currently Secretary of
the Belgian National Committee for Radio-Electricity.

Calogero Pace (M’10) was born in Palermo, Italy, in
1965. He received the degree in electronic engineering in 1990 from the University of Palermo, Palermo,
and the Doctoral degree in electronic engineering,
computer science, and telecommunications from the
same university in 1994.
Since 2002, he has been an Associate Professor of
Electronics at the University of Calabria, Arcavacata,
Italy. He has been the Coordinator of two Italy–Israel
international project on the radiation hardness of electronic devices and systems for space applications. He
is an Associate Editor of the International Journal of Engineering and Industries and author of more than 110 scientific studies, 59 of which are published in
refereed journals. His research interests include development of innovative instrumentation and methodologies for the characterization of electronic devices,
reliability issues of high mobility (SiC, GaN) power transistors, and radiation
effects on electronic devices and systems.

101

Paul Leroux (SM’10) was born in Eeklo, Belgium, in
1975. He received the M.Sc. degree and the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from the KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium, in 1999 and 2004, respectively.
From 1999 to 2004, he was a Teaching and Research Assistant at the MICAS Research Group, KU
Leuven Department of Electrical Engineering.
Since 2009, he has been an Associate Professor
at KU Leuven and the Head of the Electrical Engineering Technology Cluster. He is a Member of the
Advance Integrated Sensing lab (AdvISe) and the MICAS Research Group. His current research interests include radiation tolerant
IC design for nuclear fusion and high-energy physics applications, circuits for
optical communication and instrumentation and electronics for ultra-wideband
and microwave sensing systems. He has coauthored more than 80 papers in
international journals or conference proceedings.
Dr. Leroux received the SCK-CEN Professor Roger Van Geen Award from
the FWO and FNRS for his study on IC design for harsh radiation environments.

Dominique Schreurs (F’12) received the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from the
University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Belgium.
As a Postdoctoral Fellow, she was a Visiting Scientist with Agilent Technologies, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, and the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (USA). She is currently
a Full Professor at KU Leuven. Her research interests
include the nonlinear characterization and modeling
of microwave and millimeter wave devices and circuits, as well as circuit and system design for telecommunications and biomedical applications.
She has served on the IEEE MTT-S AdCom since 2009. She has served in
various roles on the IEEE MTT-S AdCom, such as the Chair of the MTT-S
Education Committee (2012–2013). She is also the Past Chair of the MTT-S
Technical Committee on Microwave Measurements (MTT-11). She was an Associate Editor for IEEE MICROWAVE AND WIRELESS COMPONENTS LETTERS
(2011–2013), and is now Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE
THEORY AND TECHNIQUES. She is also the Distinguished Microwave Lecturer
for the term 2012–2014. She also serves on the Executive Committee of the
ARFTG organization, presently as the Technical Chair. She was the General
Chair of the 2007 and 2012 Spring ARFTG Conferences. In 2002, she was one
of the initiators and is still coorganizer of the successful NVNA Users’ Forum.
She was also the Cochair of the European Microwave Conference in 2008 and
initiated the IEEE Women in Microwaves event at the European Microwave
Week. She is also Associate Editor of the International Journal of Microwave
and Wireless Technologies.
She is TPRC Member of IMS and RWW and Reviewer for many MTT-S
cosponsored conferences as well as for other IEEE journals and conferences.
She has regularly been the Session Chair at conferences, and acted as judge
for student competitions. She is coeditor of four books, contributor to seven
books, and coauthor of more than 100 journal papers and 350 contributions at
international conferences.

