132

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Complexity Index From a Personalized Wearable
Monitoring System for Assessing Remission
in Mental Health
Antonio Lanata, Member, IEEE, Gaetano Valenza, Member, IEEE, Mimma Nardelli, Claudio Gentili,
and Enzo Pasquale Scilingo, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This study discusses a personalized wearable monitoring system, which provides information and communication
technologies to patients with mental disorders and physicians managing such diseases. The system, hereinafter called the PSYCHE
system, is mainly comprised of a comfortable t-shirt with embedded
sensors, such as textile electrodes, to monitor electrocardiogramheart rate variability (HRV) series, piezoresistive sensors for respiration activity, and triaxial accelerometers for activity recognition. Moreover, on the patient-side, the PSYCHE system uses a
smartphone-based interactive platform for electronic mood agenda
and clinical scale administration, whereas on the physician-side
provides data visualization and support to clinical decision. The
smartphone collects the physiological and behavioral data and
sends the information out to a centralized server for further processing. In this study, we present experimental results gathered
from ten bipolar patients, wearing the PSYCHE system, with severe symptoms who exhibited mood states among depression (DP),
hypomania(HM), mixed state (MX), and euthymia (EU), i.e., the
good affective balance. In analyzing more than 400 h of cardiovascular dynamics, we found that patients experiencing mood transitions from a pathological mood state (HM, DP, or MX—where
depressive and hypomanic symptoms are simultaneously present)
to EU can be characterized through a commonly used measure of
entropy. In particular, the SampEn estimated on long-term HRV
series increases according to the patients’ clinical improvement.
These results are in agreement with the current literature reporting on the complexity dynamics of physiological systems and provides a promising and viable support to clinical decision in order to
improve the diagnosis and management of psychiatric disorders.
Index Terms—Bipolar patients, complexity, heart rate variability (HRV), mental disorders, nonlinear analysis, sample entropy
(SampEn), wearable monitoring system.

I. INTRODUCTION
IPOLAR disorder (BD) is a chronic psychiatric condition
[1] recognized to be one of the most common and dangerous disorders of affectivity (diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (DSM-IV-TR) [2]).

B

Manuscript received March 31, 2014; revised June 30, 2014; accepted
September 24, 2014. Date of publication September 29, 2014; date of current
version December 30, 2014.
A. Lanata, G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, and E. P. Scilingo are with the Research
Center ”E. Piaggio,” School of Engineering, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa,
Italy (e-mail: a.lanata@centropiaggio.unipi.it; gaetano.valenza@iet.unipi.it;
nardemi@gmail.com; e.scilingo@ing.unipi.it).
C. Gentili is with the Department of Surgical, Medical, Molecular and Critical
Area Pathology, Clinical Psychology Chair, University of Pisa, 56126 Pisa,
Italy (e-mail: claudio.gentili@med.unipi.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2360711

People affected by BD manifest drastically altered mood regulation, experiencing unbalanced mood shifts among depression, mania or hypomania, and mixed states (where both symptoms of depression and hypomania are present at the same time),
thus having a significant impact on the patients’ social, occupational, and general functioning and wellbeing. As stated peviously, BD strongly affects the patients’ quality of life (QoL),
even during time periods free of clinical relevant symptomatology [3], [4]. Such a reduced QoL can also be related to a
significant loss of cognitive performance [5]. In addition, BD
patients often experience anxiety, which is associated with suicide attempts, lifetime alcohol abuse, and psychosis [6].
Depression is characterized by sadness and hopelessness (including suicidal ideation), whereas mania leads to euphoria or
irritability, excessive energy, hyperactivity, hypertrophic selfesteem, and a reduction of the need of sleep. The moderate
form of mania is called hypomania. Periods in which patients
do not show enough pathological signs to be considered in one
of the aforementioned clinical states are called euthymic states.
Despite the high managing costs and severity of the disease [7]–
[10], in current clinical practice, BD diagnosis relies only on
interviews and scores from psychological questionnaires, the
physician’s own expertise, as well as, the patient’s subjective
description of the symptoms. Moreover, BD is always characterized by comorbidity, i.e., the simultaneous presence of symptoms, which are shared with other psychiatric disorders. All the
mentioned issues associated to BD can likely lead to subjective
interpretations, inconsistencies, and misdiagnoses [11].
Disease management and treatment are often associated with
pharmaceutical and psychosocial interventions. In many cases,
hospitalization is also required in the presence of severe manic
or depressive episodes. Nevertheless, in current clinical practice, neither biological/physiological nor other objective markers are used to support such a diagnosis and treatment. Of note,
the treatment response is still one of the major problems in
psychiatric management, especially in psychopharmachological interventions. Clinicians, in fact, are often obliged to a “trial
and error” approach, which consists of the prescription of a
treatment without being sure of its effectiveness [12].
To overcome these limitations, in this study, we propose a
novel personalized system comprised of a wearable monitoring system with embedded sensors and a smartphone to better
manage patients affected by mental disorders such as BD: The
PSYCHE system. It is based on the novel paradigm related to
the possibility of recognizing mood states through information

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LANATA et al.: COMPLEXITY INDEX FROM A PERSONALIZED WEARABLE MONITORING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSING REMISSION

gathered from the autonomic nervous system (ANS) [13]–[17].
The ANS dynamics, in fact, has been already proven to play a
crucial role in discerning pathological mental states associated
to BD [18].
Previous studies on sleep [19], circadian heart rate rhythms
[20], and the hormonal system [21] emphasized that there may
exist physiological changes that are in agreement with the clinical status and may be considered predictors of clinical changes
[22]–[23]. However, none of the previous studies have led to
the development of an effective system to be introduced into
the current clinical practice. This could be due to the heterogeneity of the mood disorders in terms of psychophysiological,
neuroendocrine, and neurobiological correlates with respect to
the simple clinical phenotypes adopted for clinical purposes
[19], [20], [25], [26]. Of note, many efforts have been made
to investigate biomarkers of BD regardless of setting up pervasive, comfortable, and wearable assisting living systems for the
BD management. In previous studies [15]–[17], [27], we provided a preliminary description of the PSYCHE system showing
how a multiparametric data-mining approach can be usefully
employed to discriminate different pathological mood states
associated to BD. In these previous studies, we validated the
PSYCHE concept performing both feasibility studies and preliminary experimental acquisitions of mild bipolar manifestations. In this study, we applied the PSYCHE system to severe
BD manifestations showing that long-term acquisitions along
with high-level signal analysis can provide robust results in
terms of treatment response, revealing when the clinical follow
up is going into remission. Here, after going into detail about
the system and showing how a patient–physician closed loop is
implemented by means of user and professional interfaces, we
will show how the PSYCHE system can be used on hospitalized
patients in order to investigate the response to treatment on BD
patients with severe symptoms. Although patients are in clinical settings, they are asked to wear the PSYCHE system for
monitoring over long period of time. We propose a simplified
approach focusing on only a complexity measure, i.e., sample
entropy, estimated on long-term HRV series. More specifically
in this study, we aim at verifying the hypothesis that a synthetic
and personalized physiological parameter able to characterize
the course of the pathological mental state evolution toward EU
may exist. This challenging goal is achieved by exploiting the
PSYCHE platform, which enables for long-term monitoring of
bipolar patients.
Currently, several sensor-based wearable systems for health
monitoring used for research scope exist [28]–[32] but, at
present, the PSYCHE platform is the only one applied to patients affected by severe manifestations of BD. It is worthwhile
noting that BD requires lifelong management, and individuals
have to remain constantly vigilant for warning signs that might
indicate a relapse. In the standard practice, this latter aspect
is performed by self-tracking, which is difficult to maintain
over an extended period. Even though an increasing number
of studies demonstrated the ability of a wearable system to assist in the self-tracking, this cutting-edge technology is absent
from the mental health treatment [33]. In addition, it is vital
that patients as well as clinicians accept technological supports.

133

Fig. 1. Overview of the PSYCHE architecture involving wearable monitoring
system, mobile application, and feed-back to patient and clinician.

Patient acceptance is paramount because low acceptance can
lead to reduced adherence or nonuse. Acceptance is, therefore,
a critical factor to consider when introducing sensing in the
management of mental illnesses, which can carry significant
stigma. Therefore, the textile-integrated platform together with
the smartphone framework offered by the PSYCHE system led
to a higher level of acceptance with respect to all of the systems
that are comprised of many off-the-shelf sensors [34].
This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the
technological details of the PSYCHE system, particularly emphasizing the patients’ benefits from this assisted living system. Section III reports the signal processing techniques implemented in the embedded electronics of the wearable monitoring
systems as well as in the remote central server, showing how
data are processed for clinical state identification. In Section IV,
an evaluation study performed on a group of ten BD patients,
along with the experimental protocol and the achieved results,
is described. Finally, Section V reports on the conclusion and
discussion of the obtained results.
II. PSYCHE SYSTEM
The main idea behind the PSYCHE system is grounded on a
novel naturalistic approach of BD patient monitoring, aiming at
providing parameters, indices and trends in order to better assess
pathological mood states [14], [15], [17], [33]. The system provides a continuous communication and feedback to the patient
and physician through a closed loop in order to facilitate disease management by fostering an innovative way to collaborate.
Indeed, constant monitoring and feedback (to both patients and
physicians) constitute the new key to manage the illness, to help
patients, to facilitate interaction between patient and physician,
as well as to alert professionals in case of relapse and depressive
or manic episodes. The closed-loop system, shown in Fig. 1, is
implemented on the patient side through a noninvasive wearable
platform to acquire physiological signals from the patient as well
as from a mobile platform (i.e., a smartphone) for multiple uses.
It records the physiological signals, acquires speech during a
dedicated task, allows patients to fill out a mood agenda and
daily self-administered questionnaires, and finally, sends data
to a remote server wherein the processing block is located. On
the professional side, a central remote server is dedicated to analyze the data acquired from the patients and to provide results
to clinicians for future evaluations. The proposed architecture
was developed in the frame of the European project PSYCHE

134

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 2. Prototype of the PSYCHE wearable monitoring system showing a
t-shirt with embedded textile sensors. From [17].

(FP7/ICT, Grant 247777), whose aim were to develop a pervasive and personalized monitoring system for care assessment in
mental health [15]–[17], [27].
Concerning the physiological measures, the PSYCHE system
is able to perform long-term ANS monitoring through a comfortable textile-based platform, produced by Smartex srl (Prato,
Italy). It is comprised of a sensorized t-shirt able to acquire
ECG, heart rate variability (HRV), and respiration activity [34],
along with an embedded electronics able to acquire, preprocess,
store, and send the acquired data. In addition, an internal triaxial
accelerometer is able to monitor movement activity including
its classification (i.e., supine, sitting, sleep posture, etc.), see
Fig. 2. It is worthwhile noting that the wearable system makes
use of dry textile-based electrodes. These electrodes have a special multilayer structure that increases the amount of sweat and
reduces the rate of evaporation reaching electrochemical equilibrium between skin and electrode after 10 s, thus showing a
good signal quality [37]–[39]. As a matter of fact, the signal
quality is prevalently given by stable electrode– skin interface
impedance, which is mainly governed by the air gap between
the interfaces. For this reason, the presence of a soft layer in
this multilayer electrode provides a skin adaptive electrode soft
enough to adapt to the geometry of the biological site, and
thereby, significantly reduce the air gap between skin and electrode. Moreover, a soft electrode maintains contact even during
motion, rubbing, and sliding of the electrode over the skin that
is one of the major sources of the motion artifact [40].
Two different shirt typologies for women and men were designed as well as a specific sensorized bra for women. A wide
range of sizes were available. In particular, the garments were
made of elastic fibers allowing for tight adhesion to the user’s
body, piezoresistive fibers to monitor fabric stretching (and consequently, respiration activity), and metallic fibers knitted to create fabric electrodes to monitor the ECG. These materials are
knitted together and are fully integrated in the garment without
any mechanical and physical discontinuity, creating areas with
different functionalities.
The shirt was designed taking into account the thermal comfort, both in the selection of the yarns and in the stitch structure,
several zones with an open net were inserted, and a polyamide

Fig. 3. Mobile platform digram for physiological signal acquisition from the
wearable platform.

yarn with antibacterial properties and a natural feeling was used
as a basic component. As a matter of fact, garments were made
of commercial yarns, already tested (and certified) for contact
with human skin, and can be easily washed, and in need, disinfected.
The electronic device of the wearable platform sends the collected physiological data to a mobile device (i.e., a smartphone)
through a bluetooth communication channel. The mobile application, which is based on an object-oriented java programming
for the Android 4.01 operating system, stores physiological data
on a 128 GByte Secure Digital (SD) card, and during the inactive period of the PSYCHE system forwards them to the central
server by means of a wi-fi internet TCP/IP protocol. Fig. 3 shows
the block diagram of the app acquisition stage. The developed
app can be used in two modalities , i.e., “Online” and “Offline.”
First of all, the application foresees a bluetooth scanning port
for detecting the wearable device; once the device is detected,
the physiological data streaming starts. The “Offline” mode is
designed for setting up system configuration and checks the
quality of the physiological signs when the system is given to
the patient first. Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of the acquisition, filtering, and visualization of signals. In this modality,
signals can be visualized in real time (see Fig. 4). After that,
the app is ready to be used in ”Online” mode, in which the
systems is automatically managed and the app runs as a background service during this modality the data are stored in the
SD card (see the down side of the Fig. 3). In the centralized
server, the patients’ physiological and behavior data are processed using a personalized model in order to properly correlate
the obtained parameters with the mental status of the patient.
The general model that is adaptable to each patient is based on
a data-mining concept. It includes several algorithms used for
identifying the mood clinical state, including data reduction and
automatic classification of the extracted features. Hereinafter,
it will be identified as the interpretation unit (IU). A simplified
scheme of the IU concept is shown in Fig. 5. Once the features
are extracted, a dimension reduction is performed by means
of both feature reduction (e.g., principal component analysis)
and selection (e.g., statistical significance). Data gathered from
patients during the acquisition phase are stored in a database

LANATA et al.: COMPLEXITY INDEX FROM A PERSONALIZED WEARABLE MONITORING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSING REMISSION

135

Fig. 6. Block diagram of the PSYCHE processing platform, whose details are
reported in [15].

Fig. 4. Example of signals acquired from the wearable system: a) ECG;
b) obtained HRV;.

activity, questionnaires, mood agenda, sleep agenda, medication
intake, and diary [15]–[18], [27].
III. METHODOLOGY OF BIOMEDICAL SIGNAL PROCESSING

Fig. 5. Data-mining concept implemented in the PSYCHE system: after the
feature selection procedure, statistics and pattern recognition algorithms are
applied, running into the centralized server.

called management platform (MP). For each new acquisition,
the IU provides the predicted status as the output of the trained
classifiers [41]. The patient–physician closed-loop system is
comprised of two logical blocks: the Storage Area where raw
signals and other patient’s information are stored, and the DataMining Area that produces predictive results on the patient’s
state based on the analysis of the uploaded data. Patients at
home are connected to the system, which automatically uploads
data. These data are used, together with other data of the same
patient already present in the MP to extract data-mining results
that will be shown to the attending physician, who will use them
to optimize patient’s therapy, thus closing the loop (e.g., sending
a text message “see you tomorrow for a new visit” or whatever
personalized message).
In addition, other signals such as biochemical data obtained
through portable device (e.g., saliva-based lithium detection as
well as stress-related hormones, etc.), voice and electrodermal
response have also been included into the monitoring platform, along with behavioral data such as sleep quality, physical

Signal processing and data-mining techniques are implemented in the embedded electronics of the wearable monitoring
systems as well as in the remote central server, and aim at analyzing the acquired data in order to maximize the information
for the definition of the patient’s clinical state. Of note, only part
of the preprocessing procedures is implemented in the embodied electronic device, while the remaining part is transmitted to
a smartphone, and then, to a central database for further analysis. The current state-of-the-art of biomedical signal processing
as well as multifunctional and multiparametric analysis are applied to all of the acquired physiological data, including results
also from questionnaires, clinical and medical information, and
patient characteristics (age, gender, etc.). A processing unit was
developed following the schema reported in Fig. 6.
Although the PSYCHE system was based on a multiparametric approach, processing the features from HRV, respiration
signal, activity, voice, and questionnaires all together, using both
linear and nonlinear methodologies [42], this study is focused
only on the elaboration of a single signal, i.e., sample entropy
(SampEn), which is estimated on long-term HRV series. SampEn is a measure of complexity of the HRV, and it is defined
as the negative natural logarithm of the conditional probability that two sequences similar for m points remain similar at
the next point [43]. In the literature, it has been already showed
the relationship between complexity measure of the HRV and
the mental health status [44]. In the next section, the mathematical derivation of such an entropy measure is described in
detail.
A. SampEn
In order to perform the SampEn calculation, the phase space
of the HRV series must be estimated. This task can be performed using Taken’s theorem through two parameters: m the

136

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

embedding dimension, and r, the margin of tolerance. The Entropy calculation of short and noisy time-series data was first
studied by Pincus [45] by defining the Approximate Entropy,
which has subsequently been followed by the SampEn [43],
[46]–[48].
Specifically, starting from the vectors X1 , X2 , ..., XN −m +1
in Rm defined by Xi = [u(i), u(i + 1), ..., u(i + m − 1)], the
distance between two vectors Xi and Xj is defined according to
the Taken’s formulation in his studies on the high-dimensional
deterministic system [49], [50]:
d[Xi , Xj ] = maxk =1,2,...,m |u(i + k − 1) − u(j + k − 1)|.
(1)
For each i, with 1 ≤ i ≤ N − m + 1, the variable Cim (r) is
defined as
Cim (r) =

Number of j such that (d[Xi , Xj ] ≤ r)
.
N −m+1

Starting from the following definition
N −m +1
log Cim (r)
m
C (r) = i=1
N −m+1

TABLE I
CLINICAL MOOD STATES OF THE PATIENTS UNDER STUDY
Patient
Pz01
Pz02
Pz03
Pz04
Pz05
Pz06
Pz07
Pz08
Pz09
Pz10

Acq.1

Acq.2

DP
MX
MX
DP
DP
DP
MX
MX
DP
DP

EU
MX
EU
EU
DP
DP
MX
MX
EU
EU

Acq.3

Acq.4

Acq.5

DP

DP

EU

EU
DP
DP
EU

EU
EU

EU stands for euthymia state; DP stands for depression
state; MX stands for mixed state; Pz stands for patient; Acq
stands for acquisition.

(2)

(3)

the SampEn is computed through the expression[41]
C m +1
.
(4)
Cm
In this study, we used standard values for r and m parameters,
which have been suggested in previous studies dealing with RR
interval series [43]: m = 2 and r = 0.20 ∗ std (std = standard
deviation of time series).
SampEn (m,r,N) = − ln

IV. CASE STUDY: PSYCHE SYSTEM FOR PATIENTS WITH
SEVERE BIPOLAR DISORDER
This study aims at validating the PSYCHE system in terms
of supporting the diagnosis and helping in the prognosis of
patients affected by severe bipolar disorders. Specifically, this
study investigates the PSYCHE system ability to detect early
the response to treatment in bipolar patients who also underwent
electroconvulsive therapy.

3148, 010-PSYCHE-001. In this study, we recruited acutely depressed and depressed/hypomanic, hospitalized patients. This
choice was motivated by the following reasons.
1) Hospitalized patients have, in general, full-bloomed
pathological states. Thus, the changes in clinical states
would have been more marked as, presumably, the effect
of these changes on psychophysiological parameters.
2) The PSYCHE system is in itself a naturalistic study that
does not imply the control for medication intake. On the
other hand, hospitalized patients can undergo a change
in medication prescription, and therefore, that can be
followed in terms of clinical and psycho-physiological
changes due to response to treatment.
3) The goal of this study was to assess if there are psychophysiological changes that might predict remission. For
this reason, hospitalized patients are an ideal candidate
to this end. Given the fact that they were under constant
supervision by health care professionals, they could be
evaluated during remission.
The clinical history of the enrolled ten patients during this
study is detailed in Table I.
B. Experimental Results

A. Patient Recruitment and Experimental Protocol
Ten patients were recruited and monitored during an acute
episode and followed until clinical remission.
Patients were recruited at the Pisa University Hospital within
the Second Chair of Psychiatry and the chair of Clinical Psychology. Patients had to express their written informed consent
to participate in the study and fulfill the following inclusion
criteria:
1) age between 18–65 years;
2) clinical diagnosis of bipolar disorder and the presence of
a mood episode;
3) the absence of high risk suicidal behaviors;
4) occurrence of at least a change of treatment (dosage and/or
drugs) within the two weeks earlier than the recruitment
time.
The experimental protocol for the PSYCHE project was approved by the ethical committee of the University of Pisa, study

In this study, HRV was acquired and processed during normal activity in the clinical settings. In a previous study [51], it
has been shown that linear-derived parameters are inadequate to
discern healthy subjects and patients with major depressive disorders as they have a variance as high as to not be able to infer an
appreciable difference between the two groups. On the contrary,
nonlinear measures such as the entropy-based ones allowed for
discriminating of depressive patients from healthy subjects, always showing a significant decrease of the complexity in the
pathological group [52]. Results from the current study show
that the SampEn, evaluated on data coming from the PSYCHE
platform, can be considered as a viable and simple biomarker
of response to treatment in severe bipolar patients.
Figs. 7–11 and Table II show the SampEn trend for each
of the considered BD. It is straightforward to notice that the
SampEn values increase as the mood state goes from mixed state
(the most severe pathological mental status) to euthymic state

LANATA et al.: COMPLEXITY INDEX FROM A PERSONALIZED WEARABLE MONITORING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSING REMISSION

137

TABLE II
SAMPEN VALUES ASSOCIATED TO BP PATIENTS UNDER STUDY
Patient

Fig. 7.

SampEn values computed on HRV series for patients Pz01 and Pz02.

Pz01
Pz02
Pz03
Pz04
Pz05
Pz06
Pz07
Pz08
Pz09
Pz10

Acq.1

Acq.2

1.29
0.93
0.87
1.39
1.30
1.14
0.81
1.34
1.28
1.18

1.49
1.04
1.48
1.50
1.36
1.15
0.88
1.43
1.33
1.54

Acq.3

Acq.4

Acq.5

1.32

1.31

1.34

1.51
1.22
0.99
1.71

1.46
1.27

TABLE III
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON THE INTERSUBJECT ANALYSIS AMONG DIFFERENT
MOOD STATES

95% Confidence interval
(t-Student)

Fig. 8.

Mixed-State

Depression

Euthymia

[0.8663, 1.1911]

[1.1890, 1.3045]

[1.3930, 1.5333]

SampEn values computed on HRV series for patients Pz03 and Pz04.

(the good affective balance) through depression. According to
these considerations, the coherent trends highlighted using the
intrasubject analysis are informative results.
In order to generalize the results, Table III shows a 95%
confidence interval (CI) for each of the considered mood states.
The CI was calculated according to the following formula:
√
(5)
C.I. = x ± t0.05, σ/ n

Fig. 9.

SampEn values computed on HRV series for patients Pz05 and Pz06.

where x and σ are the mean value and standard deviation of
x, respectively, and n is the number of samples of the vector
x. The variable t0.05, stands for the t -Student variable with
statistical significance 0.05 and = n − 1 degrees of freedom.
Of note, the CI among the pathological mental states are
not overlapped, suggesting the promising role of the PSYCHE
system as a decision support system for BD patients having
severe symptoms.
V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 10.

SampEn values computed on HRV series for patients Pz07 and Pz08.

Fig. 11.

SampEn values computed on HRV series for patients Pz09 and Pz10.

We presented a clinical application of the PSYCHE platform,
that is a personalized wearable monitoring system for care in
mental health. The wearable platform was tested during the
course of the PSYCHE project to be able to comfortably acquire
physiological signals from severe BD patients during long-term
acquisitions. Moreover, embedded mobile device was proven
to be a suitable platform to collect and transmit data to the
server for further processing stages. The PSYCHE architecture
has been designed and developed with the aim of collecting a
large amount of data and implementing a data-mining strategy
to identify the current clinical status as well as predict early the
next mood state transition. In this study, we processed only a
single signal acquired with the platform in order to investigate
the response to treatment. As a matter of fact, we demonstrated
that the PSYCHE system can be usefully employed in assessing
the response to treatment in BD patients with severe symptoms.

138

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

The uncertain positive effect of pharmacological treatments, in
fact, is widely accepted to be one of the major clinical problems,
even if appropriate drugs are administered. Clinicians often need
to try and adjust their treatments if they realize that the expected
clinical response is not coming. Through the PSYCHE system and the related long-term recording of ANS signals, it was
possible to extract and analyze simple but effective complex
measures such as the SampEn, which have been demonstrated
to play an important role in several psychiatric as well as cardiovascular disorders [52], [53]. SampEn and other complexity
measurements have been demonstrated to be reduced in cardiovascular disorders as well as in depression and insomnia [52],
[54], [55]. Complexity measurements were also shown to decrease when healthy individuals were subjected to an acute stress
[54]. As it was expected, also in our sample we found that SampEn varies almost linearly when pathological states go toward
euthymia including a clear distinction between psychopathological states with different levels of severity and with different
clinical characteristics (like mixed state and purely depressive
states). Moreover, following the trend of these parameters we
were retrospectively able to state that the patients were going to
remit. Therefore, as compared to the available literature, we are
able to extend the relationship between complexity reduction
and pathological state, already verified in major depression, to
bipolar disorders. We also show a trend that seems to link the
presence of (hypo)maniac states (in mixed states) to a even bigger loss of complexity as compared to depressive states. These
findings might suggest that SampEn can be considered a marker
of clinical severity in bipolar disorders. Indeed other studies
have shown, at a group level, differences between patients and
controls both in acute depressive states or in remitted euthymic
states [57]. However, no study was able to assess this difference
in SampEn at a single subject level, and longitudinally, in the
same patient through different pathological mood states. Finally,
we were able to find a similar pattern of SampEn changes at a single subject level: the achieved results show coherent behavior of
the SampEn in all of the patients. Although these results are very
preliminary since obtained on a reduced, although consistent,
population, they encourage us to hypothesize that this complexity measure can be used as an early and valid indicator of the
treatment response of each patient toward remission. A change
in SampEn measurements might be a preclinical marker of the
treatment response. From a clinical perspective, such early indications would greatly help to improve the treatment and care,
allowing for more rapid changes in ineffective treatments and
faster optimization of effective treatments. This would have a
possible relevant relapse on psychiatric clinical practice since
the uncertain outcome of pharmacological treatments is widely
accepted as one of the major clinical problems, even if appropriate drugs are administered.
Increasing the number of acquisitions from each patient in a
larger group of patients may also allow for simple prediction
approaches based on linear or nonlinear combinations of values
of previous acquisitions. This approach would allow the determination of mood outcome not only retrospectively, as in this
paper, but also as a real forecast having tremendous impact on
clinical course and quality of life of the patients.

To conclude, we showed how the platform was used as viable support to clinical decision. The closed-loop system implemented in the architecture of the PSYCHE system, where
a continuous biofeedback to physicians and patients is carried
out, resulted to be a novel approach in the psychiatric disorder management. Moreover, the continuous interaction between
clinicians and patients improves the quality of life of patients
helping the clinicians in the diagnosis and preventing relapses.
In addition, the proposed system is to be intended as a personalized system, which can be tailored to a single patient’s needs.

REFERENCES
[1] K. R. Merikangas, R. Jin, J.-P. He, R. C. Kessler, S. Lee, N. A. Sampson,
M. C. Viana, L. H. Andrade, C. Hu, E. G. Karam, M. Ladea, M. E.
Medina-Mora, Y. Ono, J. Posada-Villa, R. Sagar, J. E. Wells, and Z.
Zarkov, “Prevalence and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the
world mental health survey initiative,” Archives Gen. Psychiatry, vol. 68,
no. 3, pp. 241–251, 2011.
[2] A. P. Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders:
DSM-IV-TR. Arlington, VA, USA: Amer. Psychiatric Assoc., 2000.
[3] D. A. Revicki, L. S. Matza, E. Flood, and A. Lloyd, “Bipolar disorder
and health-related quality of life,” Pharmacoeconomics, vol. 23, no. 6, pp.
583–594, 2005.
[4] E. E. Michalak, L. N. Yatham, and R. W. Lam, “Quality of life in bipolar
disorder: A review of the literature,” Health Quality Life Outcomes, vol.
3, no. 1, pp. 72–89, 2005.
[5] S. Brissos, V. V. Dias, and F. Kapczinski, “Cognitive performance and
quality of life in bipolar disorder,” Can. J. Psychiatry, vol. 53, no. 8, pp.
517–524, 2008.
[6] M. Kauer-Sant’ A nna, B. N. Frey, A. C. Andreazza, K. M. Cereser, F.
K. Gazalle, J. Tramontina, S. C. da Costa, A. Santin, and F. Kapczinski,
“Anxiety comorbidity and quality of life in bipolar disorder patients,” Can.
J. Psychiatry, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 175–181, 2007.
[7] R. C. Kessler, K. A. McGonagle, S. Zhao, C. B. Nelson, M. Hughes, S.
Eshleman, H.-U. Wittchen, and K. S. Kendler, “Lifetime and 12- month
prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States: Results from the national comorbidity survey,” Archives Gen. Psychiatry,
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 8–9, 1994.
[8] H. Wittchen and F. Jacobi, “Size and burden of mental disorders in
Europe—A critical review and appraisal of 27 studies,” Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 357–376, 2005.
[9] S. Pini, V. de Queiroz, D. Pagnin, L. Pezawas, J. Angst, G. B. Cassano, and
H.-U. Wittchen, “Prevalence and burden of bipolar disorders in European
countries,” Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 425–434,
2005.
[10] Y.-W. Chen and S. C. Dilsaver, “Lifetime rates of suicide attempts among
subjects with bipolar and unipolar disorders relative to subjects with other
axis I disorders,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 896– 899, 1996.
[11] E. Vieta, M. Reinares, and A. Rosa, “Staging bipolar disorder,” NeuroToxicity Res., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 279–285, 2011.
[12] N. Stafford and F. Colom, “Purpose and effectiveness of psycho education in patients with bipolar disorder in a bipolar clinic setting,” Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, vol. 127, no. s442, pp. 11–18, 2013.
[13] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. P. Scilingo, “Oscillations of heart rate and
respiration synchronize during affective visual stimulation,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 683–690, Jul. 2012.
[14] R. A. Calvo and S. D’Mello, “Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review of models, methods, and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Affective
Comput., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18–37, Jan.–Jun. 2010.
[15] G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, A. Lanata, C. Gentili, G. Bertschy, R. Paradiso,
and E. P. Scilingo, “Wearable monitoring for mood recognition in bipolar
disorder based on history-dependent long-term heart rate variability analysis,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inf., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1625–1635, Sep.
2014.
[16] A. Greco, G. Valenza, A. Lanata, G. Rota, and E. P. Scilingo, “Electrodermal activity in bipolar patients during affective elicitation,” IEEE J.
Biomed. Health Inf., 2014, to be published.
[17] G. Valenza, A. Lanatá, and E. P. Scilingo, “Improving emotion recognition
systems by embedding cardiorespiratory coupling,” Physiol. Meas., vol.
34, no. 4, p. 449, 2013.

LANATA et al.: COMPLEXITY INDEX FROM A PERSONALIZED WEARABLE MONITORING SYSTEM FOR ASSESSING REMISSION

[18] G. Valenza, C. Gentili, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Mood recognition
in bipolar patients through the psyche platform: Preliminary evaluations
and perspectives,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 49–58, 2013.
[19] G. L. Iverson, M. B. Gaetz, E. J. Rzempoluck, P. McLean, W. Linden,
and R. Remick, “A new potential marker for abnormal cardiac physiology in depression,” J. Behavioral Med., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 507–511,
2005.
[20] J. Taillard, P. Lemoine, P. Boule, M. Drogue, and J. Mouret, “Sleep and
heart rate circadian rhythm in depression: The necessity to separate,”
Chronobiol. Int., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 63–72, 1993.
[21] J. C. Huffman, C. M. Celano, S. R. Beach, S. R. Motiwala, and J.
L. Januzzi, “Depression and cardiac disease: Epidemiology, mechanisms, and diagnosis,” Cardiovascular Psychiatry Neurology, vol. 2013,
2013.
[22] K. Latalova, J. Prasko, T. Diveky, A. Grambal, D. Kamaradova, H. Ve- lartova, J. Salinger, and J. Opavsky, “Autonomic nervous system in euthymic
patients with bipolar affective disorder,” Neuro Endocrinology Lett., vol.
31, no. 6, pp. 829–836, 2009.
[23] B. Levy, “Autonomic nervous system arousal and cognitive functioning
in bipolar disorder,” Bipolar Disorders, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 70–79, 2013.
[24] L. L. Watkins, J. A. Blumenthal, and R. M. Carney, “Association of anxiety
with reduced baroreflex cardiac control in patients after acute myocardial
infarction,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 143, no. 3, pp. 460–466, 2002.
[25] H. Stampfer, “The relationship between psychiatric illness and the circadian pattern of heart rate,” Australasian Psychiatry, vol. 32, no. 2, pp.
187–198, 1998.
[26] J. Taillard, P. Sanchez, P. Lemoine, and J. Mouret, “Heart rate orcadian
rhythm as a biological marker of desynchronization in major depression:
A methodological and preliminary report,” Chronobiology Int., vol. 7, no.
4, pp. 305–316, 1990.
[27] A. Greco, A. Lanatà, G. Valenza, G. Rota, N. Vanello, and E. Scilingo, “On
the deconvolution analysis of electrodermal activity in bipolar patients,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 6691–6694.
[28] P. Bonato, “Wearable sensors and systems,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 25–36, 2010.<auq>Author: Please provide the month
of publication in Ref. [28].</auq>
[29] G. Valenza, A. Lanatà, M. Ferro, and E. P. Scilingo, “Real-time discrimination of multiple cardiac arrhythmias for wearable systems based on
neural networks,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2008, pp. 1053–1056.
[30] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “Prognosis a wearable health
monitoring system for people at risk: Methodology and modeling,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 613–621, Jan. 2010.
[31] A. Lanatà, G. Valenza, and E. P. Scilingo, “Eye gaze patterns in emotional
pictures,” J. Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 705–
715, 2013.
[32] A. Armato, A. Lanatà, and E. P. Scilingo, “Comparative study on photometric normalization algorithms for an innovative, robust and real-time
eye gaze tracker,” J. Real-Time Image Process., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–33,
2013.
[33] M. Matthews, S. Abdullah, G. Gay, and T. Choudhury, “Tracking mental
well-being: Balancing rich sensing and patient needs,” Computer, vol. 47,
no. 4, pp. 36–43, 2014.
[34] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable sensorbased systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2010.
[35] A. Lanata, E. P. Scilingo, and D. De Rossi, “A multimodal transducer for
cardiopulmonary activity monitoring in emergency,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 817–825, May 2010.
[36] A. Lanatà, E. P. Scilingo, E. Nardini, G. Loriga, R. Paradiso, and D.
De- Rossi, “Comparative evaluation of susceptibility to motion artifact in
different wearable systems for monitoring respiratory rate,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 378–386, Mar. 2010.
[37] E. P. Scilingo, A. Gemignani, R. Paradiso, N. Taccini, B. Ghelar- ducci, and
D. De Rossi, “Performance evaluation of sensing fabrics for monitoring
physiological and biomechanical variables,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 345–352, Sep. 2005.

139

[38] A. Lanatà, G. Valenza, and E. P. Scilingo, “A novel EDA glove based
on textile-integrated electrodes for affective computing,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 1163–1172, 2012.
[39] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, E. P. Scilingo, and D. De Rossi, “Towards a smart
glove: Arousal recognition based on textile electrodermal response,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3598–3601.
[40] A. Gruetzmann, S. Hansen, and J. Müller, “Novel dry electrodes for ECG
monitoring,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, no. 11, p. 1375, 2007.
[41] A. Lanata, A. Greco, G. Valenza, and E. P. Scilingo, “A pattern recognition approach based on electrodermal response for pathological mood
identification in bipolar disorders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics,
Speech Signal Process., 2014, pp. 3601–3605.
[42] G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, G. Bertschy, A. Lanata, and E. Scilingo, “Mood
states modulate complexity in heartbeat dynamics: A multiscale entropy
analysis,” Europhys. Lett., vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2014.
[43] J. Richman and J. Moorman, “Physiological time-series analysis using
approximate entropy and sample entropy,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 278, no. 6, pp. 2039–2049, 2000.
[44] A. C. Yang and S.-J. Tsai, “Is mental illness complex? From behavior
to brain,” Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 45, pp.
253–257, 2013.
[45] S. Pincus, “Approximate entropy (apen) as a complexity measure,” Chaos:
Interdisciplinary J. Nonlinear Sci., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 110–117, 1995.
[46] V. Srinivasan, C. Eswaran, and N. Sriraam, “Approximate entropy-based
epileptic EEG detection using artificial neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 288–295, May 2007.
[47] Y. Fusheng, H. Bo, and T. Qingyu, “Approximate entropy and its application to biosignal analysis,” Nonlinear Biomed. Signal Process.: Dynamic
Anal. Model., vol. 2, pp. 72–91, 2001.
[48] X. Chen, I. Solomon, and K. Chon, “Comparison of the use of approximate
entropy and sample entropy: Applications to neural respiratory signal,” in
Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2004, pp. 4212–4215.
[49] F. Takens, “Detecting strange attractors in turbulence,” in Dynamical Systems and Turbulence. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1981, pp. 366–381.
[50] J. C. Schouten, F. Takens, and C. M. van den Bleek, “Estimation of the
dimension of a noisy attractor,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 1851–1861,
1994.
[51] S. Schulz, M. Koschke, K.-J. Bär, and A. Voss, “The altered complexity
of cardiovascular regulation in depressed patients,” Physiol. Meas., vol.
31, no. 3, pp. 303–321, 2010.
[52] S. J. Leistedt, P. Linkowski, J. Lanquart, J. Mietus, R. B. Davis, A. L.
Goldberger, and M. D. Costa, “Decreased neuroautonomic complexity
in men during an acute major depressive episode: Analysis of heart rate
dynamics,” Translational Psychiatry, vol. 1, no. 7, pp. 1–6, 2011.
[53] A. Armato, E. Nardini, A. Lanata, G. Valenza, C. Mancuso, E. P. Scilingo,
and D. De Rossi, “An FPGA based arrhythmia recognition system for
wearable applications,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Des. Appl.,
2009, pp. 660–664.
[54] J. S. Chang, C. S. Yoo, S. H. Yi, J. Y. Her, H. M. Choi, T. H. Ha, T.
Park, and K. Ha, “An integrative assessment of the psychophysiologic
alterations in young women with recurrent major depressive disorder,”
Psychosomatic Med., vol. 74, no. 5, pp. 495–500, 2012.
[55] U. Rajendra Acharya, K. Paul Joseph, N. Kannathal, C. Lim, and J. Suri,
“Heart rate variability: A review,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 44, no.
12, pp. 1031–1051, 2006.
[56] A. Williamon, L. Aufegger, D. Wasley, D. Looney, and D. P. Mandic,
“Complexity of physiological responses decreases in high-stress musical
performance,” J. Royal Soc. Interface, vol. 10, no. 89, pp. 1–6, 2013.
[57] A. C. Yang, S.-J. Tsai, C.-H. Yang, C.-H. Kuo, T.-J. Chen, and C.-J. Hong,
“Reduced physiologic complexity is associated with poor sleep in patients
with major depression and primary insomnia,” J. Affective Disorders, vol.
131, no. 1, pp. 179–185, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

