1414

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Ballistocardiography and Seismocardiography:
A Review of Recent Advances
Omer T. Inan, Member, IEEE, Pierre-Francois Migeotte, Member, IEEE, Kwang-Suk Park, Senior Member, IEEE,
Mozziyar Etemadi, Student Member, IEEE, Kouhyar Tavakolian, Member, IEEE, Ramon Casanella, Member, IEEE,
John Zanetti, Jens Tank, Irina Funtova, G. Kim Prisk, Senior Member, IEEE, and Marco Di Rienzo, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In the past decade, there has been a resurgence in
the field of unobtrusive cardiomechanical assessment, through
advancing methods for measuring and interpreting ballistocardiogram (BCG) and seismocardiogram (SCG) signals. Novel instrumentation solutions have enabled BCG and SCG measurement
outside of clinical settings, in the home, in the field, and even in
microgravity. Customized signal processing algorithms have led to
reduced measurement noise, clinically relevant feature extraction,
and signal modeling. Finally, human subjects physiology studies
have been conducted using these novel instruments and signal processing tools with promising results. This paper reviews the recent
advances in these areas of modern BCG and SCG research.
Index Terms—Ballistocardiogram (BCG), cardiomechanical
signals, noninvasive physiologic monitoring, seismocardiogram
(SCG), ubiquitous health.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

S detailed in the following sections, the ballistocardiogram (BCG) is a measurement of the recoil forces of the

Manuscript received May 14, 2014; revised August 20, 2014; accepted
September 29, 2014. Date of publication October 7, 2014; date of current version
July 23, 2015. The work of P. F. Migeotte was supported by the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office via the European Space Agency PRODEX program
(ILSRA-2009–0729). The work of G. K. Prisk was supported by the National
Space Biomedical Research Institute through NASA NCC9–58. The work of
J. Tank and I. I. Funtova were supported by the German Space Agency (DLR)
under Grant 50WB1117. The work of M. Di Rienzo was supported in part by
the Italian Space Agency through ASI 2013–061-I.0 and ASI 2013–079-R.0.
O. T. Inan is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30308 USA (e-mail: oeinan@gmail.com).
P.-F. Migeotte is with the Department of Cardiology, Universite Libre de Bruxelles 1050, Brussels, Belgium (e-mail: Pierre-Francois.Migeotte@ulb.ac.be).
K.-S. Park is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National
University, Seoul 110-799, Korea (e-mail: kspark@bmsil.snu.ac.kr).
M. Etemadi is with the Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143
USA (e-mail: mozziyar.etemadi@ucsf.edu).
K. Tavakolian is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202 USA (e-mail: kouhyart@gmail.com).
R. Casanella is with the Instrumentation, Sensors, and Interfaces Group,
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, 08034 Barcelona, Spain (e-mail: ramon.
casanella@upc.edu).
J. Zanetti is with Acceleron Medical Systems, Arkansaw, WI 54721 USA
(e-mail: jmzsenior@gmail.com).
J. Tank is with the Klinsche Pharmakologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 30625 Hannover, Germany (e-mail: Tank.Jens@mh-hannover.de).
I. Funtova is with the Laboratory for Autonomic Regulation of Cardiorespiratory System, Institute of Biomedical Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences,
123007 Moscow, Russian (e-mail: funtova.imbp@mail.ru).
G. K. Prisk is with the Department of Medicine and Radiology, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093 USA (e-mail: kprisk@ucsd.edu).
M. Di Rienzo is with the Department of Biomedical Technology, Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, ONLUS, 20148 Milano, Italy (e-mail: mdirienzo@
dongnocchi.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2361732

body in reaction to cardiac ejection of blood into the vasculature [1], while the seismocardiogram (SCG) represents the local
vibrations of the chest wall in response to the heartbeat [2].
The BCG phenomenon was first observed in 1877 by Gordon,
with the finding that, as a subject would stand on a weighing
scale, the needle would vibrate synchronously to the subject’s
heartbeat [3]. Nearly 60 years later, Starr and colleagues created
an instrument in the form of a table with a mobile top surface
to measure the BCG in a repeatable scientific manner [1]. The
SCG was first observed by Bozhenko in 1961 [2], and was first
applied in clinical studies 30 years later in 1991 by Salerno and
Zanetti [4]. Throughout the 1900s, both BCG and SCG signals
were heavily investigated and several publications appeared in
major scientific and clinical journals (e.g., [4]–[7]). However,
because of the advent of echocardiography and magnetic resonance imaging, and overly-cumbersome hardware, BCG and
SCG were largely abandoned by the medical community [8].
Today, technological advancements largely simplify the measurement and assessment of these signals and open new perspectives in their clinical use. This paper reviews the instrumentation
and signal processing advances which have helped to propel
BCG and SCG into this revival. It also summarizes some of the
key human subjects studies performed recently that support the
use of BCG and SCG in extra-clinical applications.
II. DESCRIPTION OF BCG AND SCG SIGNALS
A. BCG Signal Description
At every heartbeat, the blood travelling along the vascular tree
produces changes in the body center of mass. Body micromovements are then produced by the recoil forces to maintain the
overall momentum. The BCG is the recording of these movements, can be measured as a displacement, velocity, or acceleration signal, and is known to include movements in all three axes.
The longitudinal BCG is a measure of the head-to-foot deflections of the body, while the transverse BCG represents antero–
posterior (or dorso–ventral) vibrations. The original bed- and
table-based BCG systems focused on longitudinal BCG measurements, representing what was supposed to be the largest
projection of the 3-D forces resulting from cardiac ejection
[1]. Table I summarizes modern BCG measurement systems
and their axes of measurement. Note that for some systems,
head-to-foot and dorso–ventral forces are unavoidably, mixed
together in the measurement, and this should be accounted for
when interpreting results. However, in spite of the 3-D nature of
the BCG, for a long period of time only the microdisplacements

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

1415

TABLE I
MODERN BCG SYSTEMS AND THEIR CORRESPONDING MEASUREMENT AXES
Modern BCG System

Axis

Comments / Challenges

Accel. (0g)
Accel. (1g)

All (3-D)
Head-to-foot

Bed

Head-to-foot or
Dorso-ventral

Chair

Head-to-foot or
Dorso-ventral
Head-to-foot

- Needs reduced gravity
- Placement affects signal shape
and amplitude
- Motion artifacts must be
detected and mitigated
- Cross-axis coupling
- Changes in sleep position affect
signal quality / shape
- Posture affects signal quality
and repeatability
- Posture affects signal quality
and repeatability
- Motion artifacts must be
detected and mitigated

Weighing Scale

of the body along the longitudinal axis (head-to-foot) were considered. Currently, BCG is mainly measured using a force plate
or force sensor placed on a weighing scale or under the seat of a
chair, with the subject in a vertical position. Modern approaches
to BCG measurement are discussed below in Section III.
It should be considered, however, that the gravity force and
any contact of the body with external objects, including the
floor and measuring devices, somewhat interferes with, or even
impedes, the body displacement induced by the recoil forces.
As a result, the BCG measurement on earth is always affected
by some distortion. The ideal environment for assessing the
BCG would be in microgravity settings, such as during space
missions. Such experiments have been performed, and the results described below confirm that in microgravity the whole
body recoil forces (BCG) are significant in all three dimensions
[9]–[12]. Modeling studies examining the cardiogenic traction
forces of the aorta have confirmed this finding as well [13].
B. SCG Signal Description
SCG is the measure of the thoracic vibrations produced by the
heart’s contraction and the ejection of blood from the ventricles
into the vascular tree. Today, the SCG can readily be detected
by placing a low-noise accelerometer on the chest. If a tri-axial
accelerometer is used, SCG components are present in all three
axes, each displaying a specific pattern [12], [14]. However, in
the literature, the majority of studies on SCG only focus on the
amplitude of the dorso–ventral component, although it is likely
that additional biological information could be derived also from
the analysis of the longitudinal and lateral SCG components, and
from the analysis of the acceleration vector trajectory during
the heart cycle. Unless the contrary is stated to be consistent
with the prevalent literature only the dorso–ventral acceleration
component of SCG will be considered in the remainder of this
paper.
C. BCG and SCG Waveforms
For each heart contraction, a BCG and SCG waveform is generated. Each waveform is characterized by several peaks and valleys reflecting specific events of the beating heart. Fig. 1 shows a
typical ECG, head-to-foot BCG, tri-axial SCG, impedance cardiogram (ICG), and arterial blood pressure (ABP) measurement

Fig. 1. Simultaneously acquired Lead II electrocardiogram (ECG); three-axis
seismocardiogram (SCG) with z indicating the dorso-ventral axis, x indicating
the right-to-left lateral axis, and y indicating the head-to-foot axis; ballistocardiogram (BCG); impedance cardiogram (ICG); and arterial blood pressure
(ABP) measured at the finger, signals from one subject, illustrating the relative
timing and amplitude features of the signals.

from a healthy subject (data were collected with approval from
the Institutional Review Board, IRB, at the Georgia Institute
of Technology, and with written informed consent obtained). A
high-resolution, miniature accelerometer was used for the SCG
data collection (356A32, PCB Piezotronics, Depew, NY, USA),
and a modified weighing scale was used for the BCG recording
as described previously in [15]. The ECG and ICG waveforms
were measured using the BN-RSPEC and BN-NICO wireless
units (BIOPAC Systems, Inc., Goleta, CA, USA) interfaced to
the MP150WSW data acquisition hardware (BIOPAC Systems,
Inc., Goleta, CA, USA). The ABP was measured from the finger using the A2SYS Nexfin Monitor (Edwards Lifesciences,
Irvine, CA, USA). For this measurement, z corresponded to the
dorso–ventral, y to the head-to-foot, and x to the right-to-left
lateral components of the SCG. The labels of the peaks and valleys of the dorso–ventral components shown in this figure are
according to [16], [17]; for the BCG, the labels are according
to [1]. For the SCG, the labels correspond to the physiological
event they are believed to represent: MC, mitral valve closure;
IVC, isovolumetric contraction; AO, aortic valve opening; RE,
rapid ejection; AC, aortic valve closure; MO, mitral valve opening; and RF, rapid filling. For the BCG, the labels of the waves
are not associated directly with underlying events, but rather
the current understanding is that the waveform represents the
combined mechanical pulse response of the vasculature and
body to cardiac ejection of blood [18]. Note that, when the
BCG is measured by a scale or force plate, the SCG and BCG

1416

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 2. Compilation of modern BCG and SCG acquisition hardware. (a) PVDF sensor installed into the bed for BCG measurements during sleep. (b) Tri-axial
SCG measurement system built into the MagIC-SCG vest for continuous recordings during normal activities of daily living. Modified from [14] with permission.
(c) Wearable 3-D BCG measurement hardware (Pneumocard) being used on board a parabolic flight for microgravity BCG measurements; Photo Credit: ESA.
(d) Weighing scale with built in circuitry for BCG measurement from a standing subject. (e) Flexible hardware for chest-mounted tri-axial SCG measurements.

units are not the same; the SCG records the accelerations of
the chest wall, and is thus presented in units of milli-g (mg);
the BCG represents the displacements of the center of mass
of the subject on the weighing scale, which are then converted
to units of force by the spring constant for the scale platform,
and thus it is presented in units of Newtons. The mass that is
accelerated for the SCG is not the same as the mass accelerated for the BCG; as such, the direct conversion of the BCG to
acceleration units or the SCG to force units has not yet been
elucidated.

D. Importance of Sensor Location, Axis Selection
and Orientation
For both BCG and SCG, the measurement location has a significant bearing on the morphology, amplitude, and clinically
relevant features of the signal. For the SCG, since it is a measure of local vibrations, the precise location of the sensor on
the chest impacts the measured signal [19]–[21]. A widely used
placement has been on the sternum [14], [22], [23]. Pandia et al.
found that the second heart sound was more pronounced when
the SCG was measured on the left side of the chest compared
to the sternum [19]. For BCG signals measured using an accelerometer, the same is true; an accelerometer placed on the
foot will not measure the same BCG signal as one placed on
the head, thus stressing the importance of a clear description of,
and thoughtfulness regarding, the sensor location on the body.
An additional crucial issue is the orientation of the acceleration
axis. BCG or SCG accelerations in the dorso–ventral direction
will not be identical to those in the lateral (right-to-left) or head-

to-foot direction; consequently, depending on the purpose of
the measurement the axis should be chosen accordingly or a
three-axis accelerometer should be used.
In spite of the major role played by the selection of the measurement axes, the axes orientation, and the sensor location,
from the review of the existing literature it appears that information on these aspects is often missing, making difficult the
understanding of the experimental setup and the interpretation
of results. Thus, as detailed in Section VI, a standardization
on these issues is deemed necessary, and in the meantime, it
is advisable that the above pieces of information are clearly
stated in any scientific communication dealing with BCG and
SCG.
III. INSTRUMENTATION: ENABLING UBIQUITOUS MONITORING
Fig. 2 shows a compilation of photos depicting several examples of modern BCG and SCG acquisition hardware, enabling
data acquisition in a variety of settings, including in bed, in
the home, outdoors, and in microgravity. These systems are
discussed below in detail.
A. Wearable BCG or SCG Systems
The primary advantage of wearable BCG or SCG measurement systems is the possibility of obtaining data continuously throughout normal daily living. Additionally, recordings with wearable systems can potentially be acquired in any
environment; thus, providing an opportunity to assess a person’s cardiovascular performance under various environmental
settings or stressors.

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

The sensor type used most often for wearable BCG or SCG
measurements is an accelerometer, typically with three-axis
measurement capability, that is mechanically coupled to the
body with either adhesives, plastic mounting, or textiles. In
2007, Castiglioni et al. tested the SCG assessment by an external three-axis MEMS accelerometer placed on the left clavicle, connected to a smart garment with textile ECG electrodes,
thus obtaining simultaneous tri-axial SCG and single-lead ECG
recordings [24]. The concept was subsequently refined, and in
2010, Di Rienzo et al. proposed an integrated vest equipped with
sensors, the MagIC-SCG device, in which the accelerometer
was inside the system electronics and placed in contact with the
subject’s sternum [14]. Through this system, SCG was recorded
over 24 h in ambulant subjects, while performing a variety of
activities of normal daily living and beat-to-beat estimates of
cardiac time intervals (CTIs) could be estimated [21]. Chuo
et al. developed miniaturized hardware (55 × 15 × 3 mm) on
a flexible substrate with adhesive backing for wireless tri-axial
SCG recording from the sternum (also with a MEMS accelerometer) together with single-lead ECG and coarse single-point skin
temperature via a thermistor [25]. Baevsky et al. developed a
portable system, “Pneumocard,” for the assessment of the cardiac function of cosmonauts on board the International Space
Station [26]. The system comprised a single-axis MEMS accelerometer placed at the apex of the heart for the recording of
the SCG signal. Later, a three-axis MEMS accelerometer was
added to the system for the recording of the BCG signal. The
accelerometer was placed on the back of the subject, either at
the center of mass or between the scapulae and its performance
during the microgravity phases of parabolic flights was tested
by Migeotte et al. [27]–[29].
He et al. placed a tri-axial MEMS accelerometer for BCG
measurement in a plastic mount over the ear, with auxiliary
sensors included for ECG and / or photoplethysmogram (PPG)
measurement, respectively, [30], [31]. Hyun et al. used an electromechanical film (EMFi) patch to measure the vibrations
of the chest wall in the dorso–ventral direction (transverse);
however, it should be noted that the exact position on the
chest for the measurement was not provided, and on the basis of morphology, while the signal was called the BCG, it
was likely rather an SCG [32]. Another notable approach—
that is not exactly a wearable device, but provides some similar
advantages—was demonstrated by Balakrishnan et al. with the
head-to-foot (longitudinal) direction ballistocardiographic displacements of the head being captured and processed from video
recordings [33].

B. Weighing Scale BCG
The first measurement of BCG on an electronic scale was
demonstrated in 1990 by Jim Williams of Linear Technology, as
described in his application note AN-43 [34]. Williams built an
elegant circuit capable of measuring bodyweight with tremendous accuracy—4.5 g resolution up to 136 kg—and found motion artifacts, and the BCG as the largest sources of noise for
his measurements.

1417

The main advantage with weighing-scale-based BCG measurement is that the subject is standing up for the measurement—
ironically, this is also the main disadvantage. While the standing
posture of the subject is ideal for ensuring that the measurement
is purely longitudinal, it also means the measurements are susceptible to motion artifacts and floor vibrations. This also places
a practical limit on the duration of the measurements, as the patient will likely only stand still on the scale for 30–60 s at a time at
most. Another key advantage of these systems is that they leverage the tremendous popularity of weighing scales, with more
than 80% of American households owning a scale, and multiple
companies developing new and improved “smart” scales with
enhanced capabilities. The scale is also used by heart failure patients at home to monitor increasing trends in their bodyweight,
which may be related to increased fluid retention [35], [36].
With these potential advantages in mind, researchers have
rigorously investigated this mode of BCG measurement. Inan
et al. measured the mechanical frequency response of several
commercially available scales at various loads to determine if
the bandwidth was sufficient for BCG recording over a wide
range of bodyweight. For bodyweights up to 160 kg, they found
that the mechanical systems of most commercial scales have
a bandwidth exceeding 15 Hz, which is sufficient for BCG
measurement [15]. Note that for preserving the accuracy of
time interval detection from the BCG, such as the R–J interval
between the ECG and BCG, analog and digital low-pass filtering
operations should not use a cutoff frequency lower than 25 Hz
[37]. BCG measurement on a scale has also been successfully
demonstrated by Gonzalez-Landaeta et al. [38] and Shin et al.
[39], and in all studies the shape and amplitude of the signal is
very similar to the traditional BCG recordings taken by Starr
et al. nearly a century earlier [1].
C. Bed-Based BCG Systems
BCG can be applied in evaluating the sleep stages and sleep
related disorders in more comfortable environment replacing
some functions done by polysomnography (PSG). Since BCGbased technology does not require attaching electrodes on patient body surface, it has advantage over ECG of not disturbing subject’s ordinary sleep behaviors in collecting data. BCG
measurement can be integrated with the subject’s sleeping environment using several types of sensors, the first of which was
a static charge sensitive bed by Alihanka et al. [40], and more
recently the following implementations: Pressure sensor in the
air mattress [41] or in pad [42], film-type force sensors [43] or
load cells in the legs of bed [44], microbend fiber optic BCG
sensor [45]–[47], EMFi sensors [48], piezoelectric film sensors
[49] or polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) sensors [50] in the mattress pad, strain gauges [51], pneumatic [52], and hydraulic [53]
sensors. Some researchers have also proposed the use of sensor
arrays rather than single sensors to improve robustness [54],
[55]. As these sensors can usually provide the additional information on respiration and body movement as well as heart beats,
this information can be incorporated with the BCG to generate
sleep evaluating parameters more accurately, as well as other
applications such as early warning in the general ward, or home

1418

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

monitoring, where rhythm and dynamics can be monitored over
extended periods of time for predictive analytics.
Sleep stages have mainly been classified into two levels slow
wave sleep or non-slow wave sleep (SWS/non-SWS), or three
levels (wake/REM/NREM) based on BCG. The earliest implementation of BCG based sleep staging was by Watanabe and
Watanabe [56]. Two stage classification between SWS and nonSWS was performed based on BCG with movement measured
unobtrusively by a load cell installed bed [44]. Based on calculated heart rate variability (HRV) parameters, they achieved
the mean agreement of 92.5% (kappa index of 0.62). Sleep efficiency was evaluated by detecting nocturnal awakening epochs
in BCG measured using PVDF sensors on bed mattress [57],
based on the principle that awakening during sleep is related
with subtle changes in heart rate; thus, awakening epochs can
be detected based on HRV parameters. They achieved the classification accuracy of 97.4% (kappa index of 0.83) and 96.5%
(kappa index of 0.81) and evaluated the sleep efficiency with
absolute error of 1.08% and 1.44% for normal subjects and
obstructive sleep apnea patients, respectively.
Three stage classification (Wake/REM/NREM) of sleep has
been derived using the analyses of spectral components of the
heartbeats extracted from multichannel BCG based on EMFi
sensors [58]. By applying a hidden Markov model only on BCG,
they achieved a total accuracy of 79% (kappa index of 0.43)
compared to clinical sleep staging from PSG. The performance
was enhanced by combining the time variant-autoregressive
model (TVAM) and wavelet discrete transform (WDT) with the
quadratic (QD) or linear discriminant (LD) analysis [59]. The
QD-TVAM algorithm achieved a total accuracy of 76.8% (kappa
index of 0.55), while LD-WDT achieved a total accuracy of 79%
(kappa index of 0.51). Although there was also a study done
for sleep stage classification into four levels (wake/REM/deep
sleep/light sleep) with ECG [60], four-level sleep stage classification with BCG is not reported yet. With the ECG signal, Tanida et al. classified the sleep stage with HRV analyzed
for each 60-s epoch of ECG and calculated at three frequency
band powers. Their results for minute-by minute agreement rate
ranged from 32% to 72% with an average of 56% for ten healthy
women.
Sleep monitoring based on BCG technology has a potential to
provide both continuous and longitudinal information on a subjects’ sleep quality and may take a role as a predictive screening
method prior to the sleep studies based on PSG. It could also fill
the gap among PSG of whole night examination and portable
ambulatory PSG, which can be applied at home and simplified
with, for example, a wrist worn movement sensor.
D. Chair-Based BCG and SCG systems
Chair-based systems have mainly used EMFi sensors based
on piezoelectric transduction. Koivistoinen et al. attached EMFi
sensors to a chair to measure BCG signals from two seated
subjects, and found the signal shape to be similar to other BCG
measurements from the literature [61]. Walter et al. placed an
EMFi mat in the cushion of the driver’s seat in a car to measure
the BCG for automatically monitoring driver fitness [62]. These

systems provide a means for measuring BCG or SCG signals
from patients who cannot stand still on their own, minimize
motion artifacts, and allow the user to be comfortable during
the measurement. The main disadvantages for chair-based BCG
recording are the reduction of signal amplitude compared to
measurements using table, bed, or weighing scale systems, and
the effects of postural changes on signal quality.
IV. SIGNAL PROCESSING AND MODELING
A. Heartbeat Detection
Since heart rate is regulated by the autonomic nervous system,
the analysis of HRV is currently employed to obtain physiological and clinical information on the level of sympathetic and
parasympathetic drive to the heart. Even though ECG is the
most widely used biological signal to evaluate heart rate dynamics, BCG may also be used. Due to its easier application for
monitoring in contrast to the inconvenience of attaching electrodes to the skin in ECG measurement, BCG may facilitate the
assessment of heart rate dynamics in daily life [63].
Heartbeats may be identified by the J-wave peak in the BCG
signal, i.e., the point of highest amplitude in the BCG waveform.
Heart rate is evaluated by measuring the interval between consecutive J-peaks, the J-J interval. As there are many algorithms
to detect the R-peak in ECG, there are also various methods to
detect the J-peaks or heart beat from BCG. Since BCG can be
measured in different settings with different type of sensors, the
peak-detection algorithm should be selected to optimize the performance considering the characteristics of measured BCG. A
heartbeat detection algorithm which showed high performance
in R-peak detection from ECG can be applied with minor modification for J-peak detection. Generally the peak detection procedure is applied to select the highest value in amplitude as the
J-peak within the sliding window after some preprocessing to
increase signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and to reject artifacts due
to motion or other interferences.
Choi et al. demonstrated increased detection performance
with a dedicated algorithm, which finds local peaks in four divided subintervals within a period and selects the maximum
peak as J-peak from these local peaks with some rejection rules
[44]. Jansen et al. applied a detection method based on a “template matching” rule by evaluating a correlation function in a
local moving window [64], a method which was further refined
and developed by Shin et al. [65]. Although this method requires
template design in its first stage, Shin et al. successfully applied
it to several types of BCG signals acquired from air mattress,
load cells, and EMFi sensors. The results showed 95.2% of sensitivity and 94.8% of specificity in average for five subjects and
three types of BCG signals. Additional methods for heartbeat
detection from BCG signals include those which combine different estimators [46], [66], [67], and methods which use wavelets
to preprocess the signal prior to peak detection [53], [68].
Heart rate was estimated from the spectral domain specially
focusing on third harmonics of BCG signals acquired with fiber
optic sensors [45]. The results showed an error less than 0.34
beat/min in 2-min averaged heart rate. Heartbeat intervals were
calculated with the cepstrum method, by applying FFT for short

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

time windows including pair of consequent heart beats [48].
Relative error of the method was 0.35% for 15 night recordings with six normal subjects after rejecting movement artifacts.
Since the results of heart beat detection are not perfect, generally
visual editing is required to correct the errors in peak detection
for further application like HRV analysis. Multichannel fusion
techniques have also been demonstrated recently for BCG-based
heartbeat detection [48], [69].
Recently, Paalasmaa et al. [70] and Brueser et al. [71] both
verified heartbeat detection algorithms on large datasets containing hundreds of thousands of heartbeats recorded in uncontrolled
environments. Paalasmaa et al. used hierarchical clustering to
first infer a heartbeat shape from the recordings, then beat-tobeat intervals were found by determining positions at which this
template best fit the signal. The mean beat-to-beat interval error
was 13 ms from 46 subjects in the clinic, home, single bed, double bed, and with two sensor types. Brueser et al. demonstrated
robust estimation of heartbeats for 33 subjects of which 25 were
insomniacs, with a mean beat-to-beat interval error of 0.78%.
Their method used three short-time estimators combined using a
Bayesian approach to continuously estimate interbeat intervals.
Automatic template learning approaches were also presented by
Brueser et al. in 2011 with low error [51].
Performance of HRV analysis using BCG measured on
weighing scale-type load cell is evaluated in reference to the
ECG during the resting and under each condition of Valsalva
and postexercise sessions that induce cardiac autonomic rhythm
changes [72]. Time domain, frequency domain, and nonlinear
domain HRV parameters were evaluated on 15 healthy subjects
to assess the cardiac autonomic modulation under each of these
conditions. For all subjects and for all experimental sessions,
HRV parameters calculated from BCG peak intervals are statistically not different from those obtained from the reference
ECG. The results showed high performance with relative errors
of 5.0–6.0% and strong correlation of 0.97–0.98 in average for
these three states compared with the results from ECG peaks.
The errors were relatively high in HRV parameters reflecting the
high-frequency characteristics of heart rates such as HF, LF/HF
in the spectral analysis, pNN50 in time-domain analysis, and
SD1 in nonlinear analysis. This is considered to be caused by
the inaccuracy in detecting peak from the less sharp J-peak of
BCG compared to the R-peak in ECG. HRV estimates with
BCG have also been compared to the PPG, and the correlation
between the two was found to be high [73]. Preliminary work
was recently presented by Brueser et al. for unsupervised HRV
estimation from BCG signals [74].
B. Noise and Interference Reduction
Several sources of noise and interference can potentially corrupt BCG and SCG measurements taken using modern systems.
These include sensor and circuit noise [75], motion artifacts
[15], [21], [76], [77], and floor vibrations (for standing BCG
measurements) [78].
Both BCG and SCG represent low-level signals that contain very low-frequency information—this can lead to problems
with flicker (1/f) noise in the sensor interface circuit corrupt-

1419

ing the measurements. Furthermore, many diseased subjects,
and elderly subjects, have smaller signal amplitudes compared
to the healthy young population [79]. The sensor and circuit
noise were characterized and reduced for weighing-scale-based
BCG systems using an ac-bridge amplifier approach [75]. This
approach led to a SNR improvement of 6 dB.
For ambulatory and standing subjects, motion artifacts present
the greatest potential obstacle to achieving reliable measurements. Unlike bed or chair systems, where the subject stays
generally still for the measurement, postural sway, or ambulation
can create unwanted peaks or distortion in the measured signals.
Motion artifact detection for standing BCG measurements was
accomplished using auxiliary sensors as noise references; then,
gating the BCG signal based on the detection of excessive noise
[76], [80]. In one study, the noise reference was an extra strain
gauge added to the scale to detect postural sway [76]. In another
study, the rms power of the electromyogram signal from the feet,
indicating the presence of increased muscle contractions due to
excessive movement, was used as a noise gate for the BCG [80].
Pandia et al. presented preliminary methods for cancelling motion artifacts in SCG signals from walking subjects, improving
overall heartbeat detection [77]. Di Rienzo et al. used an automatic selection of movement-free data segments from daily
recordings of SCG signals from ambulant subjects, followed by
an ECG triggered ensemble averaging to reduce signal noise
[21]. This enabled, for the first time, the assessment of systolic
time intervals profiles during normal daily living.
BCG measurements taken in a direction orthogonal to
the plane of the floor can potentially be corrupted by floor
vibrations—this can particularly pose a challenge for measurements taken on a vehicle [62] or plane [81]. Walter et al. instrumented the seat of a car with an EMFi mat to measure the BCG,
aiming to use the information to monitor driver fitness [62].
However, with the engine turned on, the BCG was corrupted
by vibration artifacts and rendered unusable. Inan et al. used
an auxiliary sensor for vibration detection and adaptive noise
cancellation to cancel floor vibration artifacts in the BCG measurement [78]. In this study, high-quality BCG measurements
were successfully demonstrated from a subject standing on a
bus with the engine turned on and idling. Additionally, it was
observed that low-noise SCG waveforms could be obtained in a
subject sitting in the metro, while a train was going by, with the
above mentioned ensemble averaging approach [21].
C. Signal Modeling
Modeling of SCG and BCG provides a tool to better understand the genesis of waves in these signals and to simulate
their morphological changes with different myocardial abnormalities. Modeling of BCG goes back to the early years of
ballistocardiographic research [79].
In most BCG recording systems, the recording device is quite
small compared to the human body and the platform on which
it rests. It is also far away from the heart in most cases; thus,
the volume of the heart has been neglected in such models.
The heart has been modeled like a point source providing the
flow to the circulation system model [82]. Such a model is in

1420

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

the left side of the above equation can be neglected. The first is
(ms + mb )ÿ = ms ÿc

Fig. 3. Schematic showing the subject (with mass, m s ) and the BCG recording
system (with mass, m b ) coupled by a spring dashpot system.
TABLE II
DESCRIPTIONS OF VARIABLES FOR SIGNAL MODELING
Variable
Fi n t
β
y
ẏ
ÿ
D
ms
mb

y=

Internal forces
Damping constant
Displacement or (in subscript) indicating
head-to-foot direction
Velocity
Acceleration
Spring constant
Mass of subject
Mass of recording device

accordance with the classical definition of BCG to be resulted
through movement of center of gravity of the body and platform.
On the contrary, in SCG the recording device (i.e., accelerometer) is near the heart and the volume of the heart cannot be
neglected in any model dealing with SCG or any other precordial vibration signal. Thus, except for some preliminary efforts
[83] SCG modeling has not been pursued by many researchers,
probably because of the complications associated with such a
model.
In ballistocardiographic research, one can study the events
within human body that cause its movement in space, regardless of the recording device or to study the properties of instruments recording them and how their record relates to the
movement originating them. Both of these two approaches are
briefly introduced.
1) Modeling the Recording Device: During the early years
of ballistocardiographic research, several different instruments
were used to measure BCGs, from beds hanging from the ceiling
[84] to tables strongly coupled to ground [1]. These instruments
were giving different records from the same normal subjects. So,
efforts were made to model the effect of these instruments on
BCG morphology. Limiting ourselves to the head–foot direction
the equation giving the components along the y-axis (Fig. 3,
variables defined in Table II) reads:
(1)

After sorting and substituting (Fint )y into ms ÿc (where ÿc is
the acceleration of center of mass of body):
(ms + mb )ÿ + β ẏ + Dy = ms ÿc .

which means that the movement of bed and body is proportional
to the movement of the center of gravity. A good approximation
of this special case is when the ballistocardiograph is weakly
coupled to the environment such as ultralow frequency BCG
(ULF-BCG) systems.
The second type is when:
ms
ÿc
(4)
ẏ =
β
which represents Nickersons’s low-frequency (LF) BCG and
the third type is when:

Description

(Fint )y − β ẏ − Dy = (ms + mb )ÿ.

(3)

(2)

From the above equation, three different classic types of
BCGs can be conceived based on the fact that which terms on

ms + mb
ÿc
β

(5)

which refers to the situation when BCG is strongly coupled to
its environment, which were categorized under high-frequency
BCG (HF-BCG). In other words, when the resonance frequency
of the BCG platform is much higher than heart frequency, then
its displacement is proportional to the internal acceleration of
body’s center of gravity.
From this theoretical evaluation, it is clear that very different
results will be obtained when one records any one aspect of
motion such as displacement or acceleration from each of the
three ideal types of ballistocardiographs [82]. However, there is
a fourth category of classical BCGs, which are the direct body
recordings based on AHA consensus paper on BCG terminology [85]. Direct body BCGs were always criticized for their
inconsistencies [82].
2) Modeling the Internal Forces: Starr started on BCG modeling, where arteries were segmented into 3-cm long pieces and
mass of blood in the aortic segment closest to the aortic valve
was multiplied by acceleration, derived from cardiac ejection
curve, to calculate force. This was repeated when the blood
volume shifted to the next segment [82].
A more comprehensive model of human systemic arterial
tree with distributed properties was constructed in early 1960s
by Starr and Noordergraaf [82] and was improved later on by
Westerhof et al. [86]. This model was based on the fact that,
when using ULF systems, in which the body was free to move in
space in the head–foot axis, it was observed that the body moved
first footward and then headward during the cardiac cycle. This
was explained as a movement to counteract the displacement of
the blood mass, that, shortly after the onset of systole, is first
driven headward out of the heart to distend the great vessels,
and later footward, as the pulse wave spreads peripherally and
blood accumulates at a great distance from the heart in the more
peripheral vessels.
The model divided the arterial tree in 115 segments and calculated the position of the body’s center of gravity in the longitudinal direction yc (t), as a function of time, by numerical
integration of the products of the excess masses of each segment
during the interval t, and the distance yi between the centre of
each segment and the reference plane. Noordergraaf’s model
was successful in quantitatively predicting the amplitudes of

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

ULF BCG waves and in giving an explanation for the origin of
the main peaks. The model was verified on the data acquired
from an astronaut in MIR station [87], where by using the longitudinal BCG recorded in space the model could be used to
derive the aortic flow.
V. HUMAN SUBJECTS STUDIES WITH MODERN SYSTEMS
A. Correlation Studies With Healthy Subjects
Originally, BCG and SCG were proposed as diagnostic tools
for the clinic—for example, a patient would lie on a Starr BCG
table, the recording would be printed on a strip chart, and the
physician would read the recording to make a diagnosis regarding the patient’s cardiovascular health [1], [5]. However, the
large intersubject variability in the signals hampered this approach, particularly given the limited tools available at that time
for signal analysis. On the contrary, studies have shown that the
intrasubject variability in the signals over serial measurements
is actually low [15]—except in the presence of changing cardiovascular health. For this reason, in the past decade the BCG and
SCG have been proposed as tools for monitoring changes in the
same patient’s health overtime. Then, the subject is his/her own
control, and intersubject variability is no longer an obstacle.
To uncover the clinical relevance of BCG and SCG signal features, and to pave the way for future studies with clinical populations, several researchers conducted human subjects studies with
a healthy population using modern instrumentation and analysis
tools. These studies were mainly designed with a noninvasive
protocol for altering the hemodynamics and timing intervals of
the heart—such as exercise, Valsalva maneuver, whole-body tilt
testing, or lower body negative pressure (LBNP)—then, comparing the changes in the BCG or SCG waveform to changes in
a reference standard measurement, such as impedance cardiography (ICG) or Doppler ultrasound.
For both BCG and SCG signals the amplitude (or rms power)
components have been shown to modulate with changes in left
ventricular function—in particular, changes in stroke volume
(SV) or cardiac output (CO). Castiglioni et al. measured clavicular SCG signals before and immediately after exercise and
compared the percent changes in the peak-to-peak amplitude of
the SCG to changes in CO as measured by the finometer model
flow method, finding a strong correlation for four data points
taken from four subjects [24]. Inan et al. further demonstrated
that the changes in rms power resulting from exercise, measured during 10 min of recovery time, were strongly correlated
to changes in CO measured by Doppler ultrasound for 275 data
points taken from nine subjects [88]. Tavakolian etal. trained a
neural network to estimate SV from SCG parameters and tested
this classifier on a separate testing dataset, finding an average
correlation coefficient of 0.61, and Bland–Altman agreement
limits (95% confidence) of +7.4mL, −7.6mL for 4900 heartbeats analyzed from eight participants [16]. It is important to
note that these error bands are larger than what would be needed
for absolute volume estimation using the SCG; however, this
may be of interest for future research.
Many researchers have also examined the time intervals both
within the signals themselves, and between BCG / SCG sig-

1421

nal features and other physiological measurements (e.g., ECG
or PPG), to form a relationship between these timing intervals to more well-known parameters [e.g., preejection period
(PEP), pulse transit time (PTT), or left ventricular ejection time
(LVET)]. The time interval between the ECG R-wave peak and
the BCG J-wave peak has been proposed as a surrogate for the
PEP—a measure of the IVC period of the heart and an index of
cardiac contractility [30], [89]. These authors used the Valsalva
maneuver and/or whole body tilt testing to modulate the PEP
by changing the autonomic balance between parasympathetic
and sympathetic drive, and compared the R-J interval to the
PEP measured using ICG. Etemadi et al. demonstrated a strong
correlation (R2 = 0.86) between the R-J interval and the PEP
for 2126 heartbeats across ten subjects performing the Valsalva
maneuver [89]. He et al. showed similar results for one example
subject with both the Valsalva maneuver and whole-body tilt
testing [30]. Tavakolian et al. proposed the interval between the
ECG Q-wave and the SCG AO-point as a surrogate for PEP, and
found strong correlation between this interval and PEP measurement using ICG and Doppler ultrasound in 25 subjects [16].
Researchers have also attempted to extract data from the BCG
relating to blood pressure (BP), leveraging the known relationship between pulse wave velocity estimated using PTT, and
Pinheiro et al. suggested the use of BCG and PPG for PTT estimation [90]. Shin et al. compared the R-J interval of the BCG,
modulated using the Valsalva maneuver, to beat-by-beat systolic BP (SBP) measurements taken using the Finapres system,
finding a strong correlation [39]. Nevertheless, Casanella et al.
found that, in case of hemodynamic changes induced by paced
respiration, this correlation between R-J interval and SBP was
dependent on the subject and was not always observed [91].
Winokur et al. found, for one example subject, that the time
interval between the BCG and the PPG signal, both measured
at the ear, were correlated to PTT, and could thus be used to
estimate BP [31].
Another important interval is the duration of systolic ejection,
the LVET, as it provides an indication of what percentage of the
cardiac cycle is being devoted to ejection compared to filling.
Tavakolian et al. used LBNP to simulate hemorrhage, and found
that LVET measurements taken using SCG were significantly
different at various stages of LBNP, and correlates with the
LBNP levels (R = 0.90) for 32 subjects [92]. Di Rienzo et al.
found that with exercise LVET changes measured using wearable SCG are in line with the changes reported in the literature
and obtained by traditional laboratory techniques [21], [93].
B. Clinical Findings From Patients
With Cardiovascular Disease
Modern ballistocardiography and seismocardiography systems may be capable of monitoring slow, longitudinal changes
in cardiac function associated with a number of cardiovascular diseases. Timely noninvasive detection of subtle changes in
cardiac pathophysiology may one day enable daily drug dosage
adjustments, thus reducing costly and morbid rehospitalizations
[94]. At this moment, the feasibility of this approach is investigated by the ongoing LAPTOP-HF study which, however, uses

1422

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

an implantable right atrial pressure sensor coupled to a mobile
device that allows daily automatic dosage adjustment [95].
Fortunately, the basis for the SCG’s clinical utility was begun
in 1990 with the initial use of high sensitivity, LF accelerometers
to measure precordial vibrations [96]. Significant features of the
SCG waveform were identified and associated with key events
in the cardiac cycle [17]. This allowed the accurate measurement
of these features (e.g., ACs and MOs) using one sensor, greatly
simplifying the calculation of CTIs.
A large body of work exists on the utility and efficacy of
CTIs [97], [98]. This knowledge combined with the ability to
make accurate, repeatable quantitative measurements using the
SCG resulted in the ability to conduct clinically relavent crosssectional studies. Subsequently, clinical studies were undertaken
to determine if the SCG could be used to identify changes in the
SCG waveform resulting from myocardial ischemia [99].
The SCG’s clinical utility in enhancing the diagnostic outcome of a graded exercise stress test was first shown in [100]. A
large multicenter study demonstrated that when the combined
results of the ECG and SCG were used, the predictive accuracy
of detecting physiologically significant coronary artery disease
was increased significantly over the results of the ECG alone [7].
The introduction in the early 1990s of lightweight (<25g)
accelerometers, whose working range extended below 1 Hz,
made possible other clinical settings for the SCG. The SCG
as a magnetic-field-compatible alternative to the electrocardiogram for cardiac stress monitoring [101] was made possible
using a newly introduced light weight piezoelectric accelerometer (336C, PCB Piezotronics, Depew, NY, USA).
The SCG was used to measure CTI’s during atrial, ventricular,
and biventricular pacing, as compared to normals [102]. One of
the studies objectives was to determine the utility of the SCG
in cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT). This study was the
first to use 3 SCG traces for analysis, i.e., one accelerometer
was placed on the xyphoid process, a second over the apex at
the fourth intercostal, and a third on the right carotid pulse.
In 1994, the SCG was used to make accurate longitudinal
measurements in a study of the effects of elgodiphine on cardiac
hemodynamics [103]. In a sports medicine application, exercise
capacity was evaluated using the SCG [104]. A more extensive
review of the SCG is available in [105].
As a note of interest, the combined patient population of
the myocardial ischemia studies [7], [100] is close to 2000
and consists of both healthy and disease subjects. All the raw
data were recorded with the same instrumentation (SCG 2000,
SeisMed Instruments, Minneapolis, MN, USA) associated with
these datasets are complete patient demographics. A project
is underway to make the raw data available on the PhysioNet
website for study by interested researchers [105].
More recent findings with BCG and SCG further support that
the signals have great potential in allowing proactive cardiac
disease management without a costly implantable device. However, despite stated clinical and/or physiologic motivations, the
overwhelming majority of modern BCG/SCG findings continue
to be from healthy subjects [106]–[108]. Notable exceptions include a bed-mounted BCG system for automated detection of
atrial fibrillation [109], the observation of reduced signal ampli-

tude in the setting of premature atrial or ventricular contractions
[15], and the reduction of signal consistency in heart failure
patients concordant with worsening clinical outcome [110].
One particular subset of patients is particularly well suited for
study using cardiomechanical signals, those undergoing CRT.
CRT patients have abnormal cardiac conduction causing in a
significant delay between the pumping action of the various
chambers of the heart. CRT involves precisely adjusting the
timing of a multichamber pacemaker to reduce or remove these
delays. Such timing is difficult to ascertain using available technologies, spawning the field of “CRT optimization.” Researchers
recently demonstrated the benefits of intracardiac acceleration
monitoring in performing CRT optimization [111], a finding
preliminarily corroborated by BCG findings as well [8].
C. 3-D Ballistocardiography and Microgravity Studies
As the sections on instrumentation earlier in this review have
indicated, measurements of BCG (in particular) are constrained
by the coupling of the body to the ground, a direct result of the
influence of gravity. As such, full 3-D recordings of the BCG
are difficult in the terrestrial environment, and much of the focus
has been on accelerations in the coronal plane (the XY plane as
defined in the section on measurement axes).
Given this limitation, it is therefore not surprising that the
idea of measuring the BCG in a subject in free-fall (weightlessness, zero-G, microgravity) was an obvious target of investigation. The first such experiment was performed in the 1960s in
parabolic flight, with the subject strapped into a “tub,” which
was itself instrumented to record the BCG [9]. Despite the limited periods of microgravity available (typically ∼20 s) and the
subject restraints, recordings of good quality were obtained.
Spaceflight represents the other obvious environment in
which the “true” 3-D BCG can be recorded. The earliest recordings were made by the Soviets on Saluyt-6 [10] and consisted of
a series of five recordings were performed in two crew members
of a long duration mission on days 46, 71, 98, 133, and 175.
A piezoelectric sensor, attached close to the center of mass,
recorded ballistic forces in the feet-to-head axis during breath
holding experiments. Individual changes were seen during the
mission with maximum amplitude of the IJ wave occurring on
day 133. Measurements were also made during the Spacelab-1
mission aboard the Space Shuttle in 1983 [112]. These experiments were conducted in two subjects at two occasions during this short duration spaceflight and showed an increase of
the overall systolic accelerations along the longitudinal axis in
microgravity.
Perhaps the best-analyzed dataset of the BCG in spaceflight
came from measurements made during the Spacelab D-2 mission in 1993. During that flight, extra time became available (due
to an extension of the overall mission length), and an experiment
was hastily conceived, approved, implemented, and performed
to measure 3-D BCG in a free-floating subject. Parenthetically,
this may be one of the fastest spaceflight experiments ever developed with the time from concept, to collection of the data
(including approval of an institutional review board) was only
4–5 days, surely some sort of record. The experiment utilized

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

1423

Fig. 4. Subject in D-2 shown wearing the snuggly-fitting suit incorporating a
respiratory inductance plethysmograph and ECG. Photo Credit: NASA.

data from a free-floating subject instrumented with an ECG
and wearing a snuggly fitting suit that measured respiratory
motion using an impedance plethysmograph (see Fig. 4). This
instrumentation was a part of the Anthrorack series of human
studies managed by the European Space Agency. The second
cruicial piece of instrumentation was a set of high-fidelity triaxial accelerometer that were attached to the vehicle and used
for measuring the accelerations imparted by crew activity in
the Spacelab. The sensor package was detached from the vehicle and taped to the lumbar region of the subject, near to
the (presumed) center of mass. Data were then recorded as
the subject remained stationary and free floated in the center
of the Spacelab, providing a continuous recording, free of interruptions of 146 s. In order to synchronize the two separate
data streams, collisions with the Spacelab structure, which disrupted signals in both data streams, were used as posthoc event
source [11].
The data from the D-2 study and some subsequent studies
provided valuable insight into several aspects of the BCG. In
particular there were four major conclusions derived from this
dataset.
1) Lung volume greatly influences the accelerations
recorded, especially in the longitudinal (head-to-foot)
body axis (see Fig. 5), with the implication being that
there is better coupling between the heart and the body in
the longitudinal axis at higher lung volumes [11]. Interestingly, the actual direction of respiratory motion (mid
inspiration versus mid expiration) had only minimal influence of the BCG.
2) Data derived from short periods of microgravity in
parabolic flight are largely equivalent to data obtained
in sustained microgravity [113].
3) The BCG has a plane of symmetry that is primarily sagittal. This suggests that 2-D recordings performed in a
supine subject (i.e., coronal recordings) fail to capture
a significant portion of the effect of the blood ejection on
the body, complicating their interpretation [113].
4) The accelerations that are recording in a 2-D system are
only modestly correlated with the true 3-D accelerations

Fig. 5. The 3-D BCG recorded in spaceflight in a free-floating subject, at the
end of a normal expiration (dashed lines, functional residual capacity, FRC), and
at the end of a normal inspiration (solid lines, FRC + tidal volume). From [11].

that actually occur, again complicating their interpretation
[113].
BCG flight experiments were also an integral part of the
Russian cardiovascular research program for the orbital station MIR. BCG along the head-to-foot direction was measured
in three crew members during the second MIR mission in
1988 and compared to SCG recordings. Significant changes
of the BCG amplitudes (HI, IJ, JK) during the long-term flight
were described together with large inter individual differences.
The first true 3-D-BCG recordings were made during the sixth
MIR mission in 1990 in two crew members on flight days 56
and 110. Three new piezoelectric sensors were used placed
in perpendicular planes in a small cylindrical box with a diameter of 40 mm and a height of 20 mm. The sensitivity of
the sensor was 20 mV/m/s2 . The sensor was placed between
the scapulae using rubber belts and a metallic plate. The special amplifier (BCG-3) was connected to the recording unit
“Gamma-1,” and the data were transmitted telemetrically to
the ground station. In summary, no dramatic changes in the vector sum were detected. Maximum forces ranged from 5.85 to
10.18 N. However, profound individual changes of the shape,
amplitude, and timing of the BCG, especially in the lateral
and dorso–ventral plane have been found. Finally, combined
BCG and SCG measurements have been made every month
in space during the 14 months space flight of Valeri Poljakov,
15th to 17th MIR missions (Russian–Austrian flight experiment
“Pulstrans”) [114].

1424

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

VI. STANDARDS AND OPEN ISSUES
A. Need For a Standardization
From the analysis of the literature, it appears that important methodological aspects concerning BCG and SCG analysis
are still characterized by a certain level of ambiguity. These
include
1) Definitions of BCG and SCG Signals: In the literature, the
definition of BCG and SCG is not univocal and the “BCG” term
is even sometimes used for the SCG signals.
2) Nomenclature: Since BCG and SCG waveforms are
mostly different (although they might have some common features to be investigated) it is reasonable to use a specific nomenclature for defining peaks and valleys of each signal. The prevalent annotation for BCG was proposed by Starr et al. [1], for
SCG by Crow et al. [17]. However, there are some disagreements on these annotations, and in some instances, SCG peaks
are termed with the BCG annotation.
3) Indication of Site of Measurement, Characteristics of sensor, Sensor Axis Orientation: These pieces of information are
crucial for data comparison and interpretation, but unfortunately
are not invariably reported in scientific communications.
A standardization or at least a common position on the above
issues would greatly facilitate the understanding and comparison
of published results, the exchange of data, and the design of new
experimental protocols in this area.

B. Open Issues
A number of open issues remain to be addressed in this field to
improve the understanding and applicability of BCG and SCG
signals. Hereafter, we provide just a short list of these issues.
1) The biological meaning of BCG and SCG deflections not
yet annotated and their clinical relevance.
2) Possible common features of the BCG and SCG signals.
3) Further parameters derivable from the analysis of the BCG
and SCG 3-D vectors.
4) Effects of respiration, posture, right ventricle, and sensor
adherence on the signal waveform/quality.
5) How to facilitate the use of these signals in clinical practice?
6) Reference values for healthy and diseased subjects for
both types of signals, and for a wide range of body
types/sizes, and ages.

VII. CONCLUSION AND AREAS FOR FUTURE INVESTIGATION
The recent advances in the BCG and SCG field indicate the
strong potential of these measurements to address wide variety of clinical needs, in particular monitoring or trending the
cardiomechanical health of patients outside of the clinic. Both
BCG and SCG measurements can be taken using inexpensive
and unobtrusive sensors, making them ideally suited, for example, for home monitoring of chronic diseases. Nevertheless, to
maximize our ability to interpret these signals, the physiological

origins of both signals must be studied further and elucidated.
Furthermore, there is a need to be able to map each measurement modality to another using cardiovascular and mechanical
modeling of the body, such that any BCG or SCG waveform
amplitude, timing, or morphology measured using one modality can be translated quantitatively to another. For example,
if a bed-based recording in the dorso–ventral axis yielded a
peak BCG J-wave amplitude of 2 N, system modeling tools are
needed to compare this to a corresponding J-wave amplitude
measured using a weighing scale. Finally, an extensive, open
database of BCG and SCG signals, processing tools, and even
microprocessor code needs to be made available to massively
expand the capability of researchers around the world to investigate these signals, use them in their own settings, and grow the
field from a niche into an established technique, routinely used
in clinical practice.

REFERENCES
[1] I. Starr, A. J. Rawson, H. A. Schroeder, and N. R. Joseph, “Studies
on the estimation of cardiac output in man, and of abnormalities in
cardiac function, from the heart’s recoil and the blood’s impacts; the
ballistocardiogram,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 127, pp. 1–28, 1939.
[2] B. S. Bozhenko, “Seismocardiography—a new method in the study
of functional conditions of the heart [Article in Russian],” Ter Arkh,
vol. 33, pp. 55–64, 1961.
[3] J. W. Gordon, “Certain molar movements of the human body produced
by the circulation of the blood,” J. Anat. Physiol, vol. 11, pp. 533–536,
1877.
[4] D. M. Salerno and J. Zanetti, “Seismocardiography for monitoring
changes in left ventricular function during ischemia,” Chest J., vol. 100,
pp. 991–993, 1991.
[5] I. Starr and F. C. Wood, “Studies with the ballistocardiograph in acute
cardiac infarction and chronic angina pectoris,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 25,
pp. 81–101, 1943.
[6] H. Mandelbaum and R. A. Mandelbaum, “Studies utilizing the portable
electromagnetic ballistocardiograph: IV. The clinical significance of serial ballistocardiograms following acute myocardial infarction,” Circulation, vol. 7, pp. 910–915, 1953.
[7] R. A. Wilson, V. S. Bamrah, J. Lindsay, M. Schwaiger, and J. Morganroth,
“Diagnostic accuracy of seismocardiography compared with electrocardiography for the anatomic and physiologic diagnosis of coronary artery
disease during exercise testing,” Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 71, pp. 536–545,
1993.
[8] L. Giovangrandi, O. T. Inan, R. M. Wiard, M. Etemadi, and G. T. A.
Kovacs, “Ballistocardiography: A method worth revisiting,” in Proc.
IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 4279–4282.
[9] W. C. Hixson and D. E. Beischer, “Biotelemetry of the triaxial ballistocardiogram and electrocardiogram in a weightless environment,” Naval
School Aviat. Med., Pensacola, FL, USA, U.S. Naval Medical Center,
Pensacola, Monograph 10, Tech. Rep. 1328. N66-16283, 1964.
[10] R. M. Baevsky and I. I. Funtova, “Ballistocardiographic examinations of
the salyut-6 fourth expedition crew members,” Komsich Biologiya Aviak
Medit, vol. 16, pp. 34–37, 1982.
[11] G. K. Prisk, S. Verhaeghe, D. Padeken, H. Hamacher, and M. Paiva,
“Three-dimensional ballistocardiography and respiratory motion in sustained microgravity,” Aviat. Space Environ. Med., vol. 72, pp. 1067–1074,
2001.
[12] P. F. Migeotte, S. De Ridder, J. Tank, N. Pattyn, I. Funtova, R. Baevsky,
X. Neyt, and G. K. Prisk, “Three dimensional ballisto- and seismocardiography: HIJ wave amplitudes are poorly correlated to maximal
systolic force vector,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2012, pp. 5046–5049.
[13] R. M. Wiard, H. J. Kim, C. A. Figueroa, G. T. A. Kovacs, C. A. Taylor,
and L. Giovangrandi, “Estimation of central aortic forces in the ballistocardiogram under rest and exercise conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 2831–2834.

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

[14] M. Di Rienzo, P. Meriggi, F. Rizzo, E. Vaini, A. Faini, G. Merati, G.
Parati, and P. Castiglioni, “A wearable system for the seismocardiogram
assessment in daily life conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med, Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 4263–4266.
[15] O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, R. M. Wiard, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A.
Kovacs, “Robust ballistocardiogram acquisition for home monitoring,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 30, pp. 169–185, 2009.
[16] K. Tavakolian, “Characterization and analysis of seismocardiogram for
estimation of hemodynamic parameters,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Appl.
Sci, School Eng. Sci., Simon Fraser Univ., Burnaby, BC, Canada, 2010.
[17] R. S. Crow, P. Hannan, D. Jacobs, L. Hedquist, D. M. Salerno, “Relationship between seismocardiogram and echocardiogram for the events
in the cardiac cycle,” Amer. J. Noninvasive Cardiol, vol. 8, pp. 39–46,
1994.
[18] O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, R. M. Wiard, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi, “Novel methods for estimating the ballistocardiogram signal
using a simultaneously acquired electrocardiogram,” in Proc. IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 5334–5347.
[19] K. Pandia, O. T. Inan, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi, “Extracting
respiratory information from seismocardiogram signals acquired on the
chest using a miniature accelerometer,” Physiol. Meas, vol. 33, pp. 1643–
1660, 2012.
[20] Y. Chuo and B. Kaminska, “Sensor layer of a multiparameter single-point
integrated system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 229–240, Aug. 2009.
[21] M. Di Rienzo, E. Vaini, P. Castiglioni, G. Merati, P. Meriggi, G. Parati, A.
Faini, and F. Rizzo, “Wearable seismocardiography: Towards a beat-bybeat assessment of cardiac mechanics in ambulant subjects,” Autonomic
Neurosci., vol. 178, pp. 50–59, 2013.
[22] B. Ngai, K. Tavakolian, A. Akhbardeh, A. P. Blaber, B. Kaminska, and A. Noordergraaf, “Comparative analysis of seismocardiogram waves with the ultra-low frequency ballistocardiogram,”
in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009,
pp. 2851–2854.
[23] M. J. T. Paukkunen, M. T. Linnavuo, and R. E. Sepponen, “A portable
measurement system for the superior-inferior axis of the seismocardiogram,” J. Bioeng. Biomed. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 1–4, 2013.
[24] P. Castiglioni, A. Faini, G. Parati, and M. Di Rienzo, “Wearable seismocardiography,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2007, pp. 3954–3957.
[25] Y. Chuo, M. Marzencki, B. Hung, C. Jaggernauth, K. Tavakolian, P. Lin,
and B. Kaminska, “Mechanically flexible wireless multisensor platform
for human physical activity and vitals monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 281–294, Oct. 2010.
[26] R. M. Baevsky, I. I. Funtova, A. Diedrich, A. G. Chernikova, J. Drescher,
V. M. Baranov, and J. Tank, “Autonomic function testing aboard the
ISS using ‘PNEUMOCARD’,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 65, pp. 930–932,
2009.
[27] P. F. Migeotte, Q. Deliere, J. Tank, I. Funtova, R. Baevsky, X. Neyt, and
N. Pattyn, “3D-ballistocardiography in microgravity: Comparison with
ground based recordings,” presented at the IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 7012–7016.
[28] E. Luchitskaya, Q. Deliere, A. Diedrich, N. Pattyn, A. Almorad, L.
Beck, P. Gauger, U. Limper, I. Funtova, R. M. Baevsky, P.-F. Migeotte,
and J. Tank, “Timing and source of the maximum of the transthoracic
impedance cardiogram (dZ/dt) in relation to the H-I-J complex of the
longitudinal ballistocardiogram under gravity and microgravity conditions,” presented at the IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka, Japan, 2013,
pp. 7294–7297.
[29] Q. Deliere, P. F. Migeotte, X. Neyt, I. Funtova, R. M. Baevsky, J. Tank,
and N. Pattyn, “Cardiovascular changes in parabolic flights assessed by
ballistocardiography,” presented at the IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka,
Japan, 2013, pp. 3801–3804.
[30] D. D. He, E. S. Winokur, and C. G. Sodini, “A continuous, wearable, and
wireless heart monitor using head ballistocardiogram (BCG) and head
electrocardiogram (ECG),” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 4729–4732.
[31] E. S. Winokur, D. D. He, and C. G. Sodini, “A wearable vital signs
monitor at the ear for continuous heart rate and pulse transit time measurements,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 2724–2727.
[32] E. Hyun, S. Noh, C. Yoon, and H. C. Kim, “Patch type integrated sensor
system for measuring electrical and mechanical cardiac activities,” presented at the IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS), Queenstown,
New Zealand, 2014.

1425

[33] G. Balakrishnan, F. Durand, and J. Guttag, “Detecting pulse from head
motions in video,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
2013, pp. 3430–3437.
[34] J. Williams. 1990, Bridge Circuits: Marrying Gain and Balance. Linear
Technology Application Note 43.
[35] S. I. Chaudhry, J. A. Mattera, J. P. Curtis, J. A. Spertus, J. Herrin, Z.
Lin, C. O. Phillips, B. V. Hodshon, L. S. Cooper, and H. M. Krumholz,
“Telemonitoring in patients with heart failure,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol.
363, pp. 2301–2309, 2010.
[36] S. I. Chaudhry, Y. Wang, J. Concato, T. M. Gill, and H. M. Krumholz,
“Patterns of weight change preceding hospitalization for heart failure,”
Circulation, vol. 116, pp. 1549–1554, 2007.
[37] J. Gomez-Clapers, A. Serra-Rocamora, R. Casanella, and R. PallasAreny, “Uncertainty factors in time-interval measurements in ballistocardiography,” in Proc. 19th IMEKO TC-4 Symp. 17th IWADC Workshop Adv. Instrum. Sens. Interoperability, Barcelona, Spain, 2013,
pp. 395–399.
[38] R. Gonzalez-Landaeta, O. Casas, and R. Pallas-Areny, “Heart rate
detection from an electronic weighing scale,” Phys. Meas., vol. 29,
pp. 979–988, 2008.
[39] J. H. Shin, K. M. Lee, and K. S. Park, “Non-constrained monitoring
of systolic blood pressure on a weighing scale,” Phys. Meas., vol. 30,
pp. 679–693, 2009.
[40] J. Alihanka, K. Vaahtoranta, and I. Saarikivi, “A new method for longterm monitoring of the ballistocardiogram, heart rate, and respiration,”
Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 240, pp. R384–R392, 1981.
[41] Y. Chee, J. Han, and K. S. Park, “Air mattress sensor system with balancing tube for unconstrained measurement of respiration and heart beat
movements,” Phys. Meas., vol. 26, pp. 413–422, 2005.
[42] D. C. Mack, J. T. Patrie, P. M. Suratt, R. A. Felder, and M. Alwan,
“Development and preliminary validation of heart rate and breathing rate
detection using a passive, ballistocardiography-based sleep monitoring
system,” IEEE Trans Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 111–120,
Jan. 2009.
[43] A. Vehkaoja, S. Rajala, P. Kumpulainen, and J. Lekkala, “Correlation
approach for the detection of the heartbeat intervals using force sensors
placed under the bed posts,” J. Med. Eng. Technol., vol. 37, pp. 327–333,
2013.
[44] B. H. Choi, G. S. Chung, J.-S. Lee, D.-U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Slowwave sleep estimation on a load cell installed bed: A non-constrained
method,” Phys. Meas., vol. 30, pp. 1163–1170, 2009.
[45] Y. Zhu, H. Zhang, M. Jayachandran, A. K. Ng, J. Biswas, and Z. Chen,
“Ballistocardiography with fiber optic sensor in headrest position: A
feasibility study and a new processing algorithm,” in Proc. 35th IEEE
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 5203–5206.
[46] S. Sprager and D. Zazula, “Heartbeat and respiration detection from
optical interferometric signals by using a multimethod approach,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2922–9, Oct. 2012.
[47] L. Dziuda and F. Skibniewski, “Monitoring respiration and cardiac activity using fiber Bragg grating-based sensor,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1934–42, Jul. 2012.
[48] J. M. Kortelainen and J. Virkkala, “FFT averaging of multichannel BCG
signals from bed mattress sensor to improve estimation of heart beat
interval,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2007, pp. 6685–6688.
[49] J. Paalasmaa, M. Waris, H. Toivonen, L. Leppakorpi, and M. Partinen,
“Unobtrusive online monitoring of sleep at home,” in Proc. IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 3784–3788.
[50] F. Wang, M. Tanaka, and S. Chonan, “Development of a PVDF piezopolymer sensor for unconstrained in-sleep cardiorespiratory monitoring,”
J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., vol. 14, pp. 185–190, 2003.
[51] C. Bruser, K. Stadlthanner, S. De Waele, and S. Leonhardt, “Adaptive
beat-to-beat heart rate estimation in ballistocardiograms,” IEEE Trans
Inf. Technol. Biomed, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 778–786, Sep. 2011.
[52] K. Watanabe, T. Watanabe, H. Watanabe, H. Ando, T. Ishikawa, and K.
Kobayashi, “Noninvasive measurement of heartbeat, respiration, snoring
and body movements of a subject in bed via a pneumatic method,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2100–07, Dec. 2005.
[53] X. Zhu, W. Chen, T. Nemoto, Y. Kanemitsu, K. Kitamura, K. Yamakoshi,
and D. Wei, “Real-time monitoring of respiration rhythm and pulse rate
during sleep,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 2553–63,
Dec. 2006.
[54] J. Kortelainen, M. V. Gils, and J. Parkka, “Multichannel bed pressure
sensor for sleep monitoring,” presented at the Comput. Cardiol. Conf.,
Kraków, Poland, 2012.

1426

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

[55] C. Brueser, A. Kerekes, S. Winter, and S. Leonhardt, “Multi-channel
optical sensor-array for measuring ballistocardiograms and respiratory
activity in bed,” presented at the IEEE 34th Ann. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., San Diego, CA, USA, 2012.
[56] T. Watanabe and K. Watanabe, “Noncontact method for sleep stage estimation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1735–1748, Oct.
2004.
[57] D. W. Jung, S. H. Hwang, H. N. Yoon, Y.-J. G. Lee, D.-U. Jeong, and
K. S. Park, “Nocturnal awakening and sleep efficiency estimation using
unobtrusively measured ballistocardiogram,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 131–138, Jan. 2014.
[58] J. M. Kortelainen, M. O. Mendez, A. M. Bianchi, M. Matteucci, and S.
Cerutti, “Sleep staging based on signals acquired through bed sensor,”
IEEE Trans Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 776–785, May 2010.
[59] M. Migliorini, A. M. Bianchi, D. Nistico, J. Kortelainen, E. ArceSantana, S. Cerutti, and M. O. Mendez, “Automatic sleep staging based
on ballistocardiographic signals recorded through bed sensors,” in Proc.
IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010, pp. 3273–3276.
[60] K. Tanida, M. Shibata, and M. M. Heitkemper, “Sleep stage assessment
using power spectral indices of heart rate variability with a simple algorithm: limitations clarified from preliminary study,” Biol.Res. Nursing,
vol. 15, pp. 264–272, 2013.
[61] T. Koivistoinen, S. Junnila, A. Varri, and T. Koobi, “A new method
for measuring the ballistocardiogram using EMFi sensors in a normal
chair,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2004,
pp. 2026–2029.
[62] M. Walter, B. Eilebrecht, T. Wartzek, and S. Leonhardt, “The smart car
seat: Personalized monitoring of vital signs in automotive applications,”
Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 15, pp. 707–715, 2011.
[63] Y. Lim, K. Hong, K. K. Kim, J. H. Shin, S. M. Lee, G. S. Chung, H.
J. Baek, D.-U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Monitoring physiological signals
using nonintrusive sensors installed in daily life equipment,” Biomed.
Eng. Lett., vol. 1, pp. 11–20, 2011.
[64] B. H. Jansen, B. H. Larson, and K. Shankar, “Monitoring of the ballistocardiogram with the static charge sensitive bed,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 748–751, Aug. 1991.
[65] J. H. Shin, B. H. Choi, Y. G. Lim, D. U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Automatic
ballistocardiogram (BCG) beat detection using a template matching approach,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008,
pp. 1144–1146.
[66] D. Friedrich, X. L. Aubert, H. Fuhr, and A. Brauers, “Heart rate estimation on a beat-to-beat basis via ballistocardiography—a hybrid approach,” presented at the IEEE 32nd Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010.
[67] S. Sprager and D. Zazula, “Optimization of heartbeat detection in fiberoptic unobtrusive measurements by using maximum a posteriori probability estimation,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 1161–1168, Jul. 2014.
[68] W. Xu, W. A. Sandham, A. C. Fisher, and M. Conway, “Detection of
the seismocardiogram W complex based on multiscale edges,” presented
at the 18th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE EMBS (EMBC), Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 1996.
[69] C. Bruser, J. M. Kortelainen, S. Winter, M. Tenhunen, J. Parkka, and
S. Leonhardt, “Improvement of force-sensor-based heart rate estimation
using multi-channel data fusion,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
2014, to be published.
[70] J. Paalasmaa, H. Toivonen, and M. Partinen, “Adaptive heartbeat modelling for beat-to-beat heart rate measurement in ballistocardiograms,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., 2014, to be published.
[71] C. Brueser, S. Winter, and S. Leonhardt, “Robust inter-beat interval
estimation in cardiac vibration signals,” Phys. Meas., vol. 34, pp. 123–
138, 2013.
[72] J. H. Shin, S. H. Hwang, M. H. Chang, and K. S. Park, “Heart rate variability analysis using a ballistocardiogram during Valsalva manoeuvre
and post exercise,” Phys. Meas., vol. 32, pp. 1239–1264, 2011.
[73] X. Zhu, W. Chen, K. Kitamura, and T. Nemoto, “Comparison of pulse
rate variability indices estimated from pressure signal and photoplethysmogram,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Health Informat., 2012, pp.
867 –870.
[74] C. Brueser, S. Winter, and S. Leonhardt, “Unsupervised heart rate variability estimation from ballistocardiograms,” presented at the 7th Int.
Workshop Biosignal Interpretation, Como, Italy, 2012.
[75] O. T. Inan and G. T. A. Kovacs, “A low noise ac-bridge amplifier for
ballistocardiogram measurement on an electronic weighing scale,” Phys.
Meas., vol. 31, pp. N51–N59, 2010.

[76] R. Wiard, O. T. Inan, B. Argyres, M. Etemadi, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L.
Giovangrandi, “Automatic detection of motion artifacts in the ballistocardiogram measured on a modified bathroom scale,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 49, pp. 213–220, 2011.
[77] K. Pandia, S. Ravindran, R. Cole, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi,
“Motion artifact cancellation to obtain heart sounds from a single chestworn accelerometer,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech,
Signal Process., Dallas, TX, USA, 2010.
[78] O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, B. Widrow, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “Adaptive
cancellation of floor vibrations in standing ballistocardiogram measurements using a seismic sensor as a noise reference,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 722–727, Mar. 2010.
[79] I. Starr and S. Ogawa, “On the aging of the heart; why is it so much more
conspicuous in the ballistocardiogram than in the pulse?” Amer. J. Med.
Sci., vol. 242, pp. 399–410, 1961.
[80] O. T. Inan, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi, “Evaluating the lowerbody electromyogram signal acquired from the feet as a noise reference
for standing ballistocardiogram measurements,” IEEE Trans Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1188–1196, Sep. 2010.
[81] R. M. Wiard, O. T. Inan, L. Giovangrandi, C. M. Cuttino, and G. T. A.
Kovacs, “Preliminary results from standing ballistocardiography measurements in microgravity,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 7290–7293.
[82] I. Starr and A. Noordergraaf, Ballistocardiography in Cardiovascular
Research: Physical Aspects of the Circulation in Health and Disease.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott, 1967.
[83] V. Gurev, K. Tavakolian, J. Constantino, B. Kaminska, A. P. Blaber, and
N. A. Trayanova, “Mechanisms underlying isovolumic contraction and
ejection peaks in seismocardiogram morphology,” J. Med. Biol. Eng.,
vol. 32, pp. 103–110, 2012.
[84] Y. Henderson, “The mass movements of the circulation as shown by a
recoil curve,” Amer. J. Phys., vol. 14, pp. 287–298, 1905.
[85] W. R. Scarborough, S. A. Talbot, J. R. Braunstein, M. B. Rappaport, W.
Dock, W. R. Scarborough, W. F. Hamilton, J. E. Smith, J. L. Nickerson,
S. A. Talbot, and I. Starr, “Proposals for ballistocardiographic nomenclature and conventions: revised and extended: Report of committee on
ballistocardiographic terminology,” Circulation, vol. 14, pp. 435–450,
1956.
[86] N. Westerhof, F. Bosman, C. J. De Vries, and A. Noordergraaf, “Analog
studies of the human systemic arterial tree,” J. Biomech., vol. 2, pp.
121–134, 1969.
[87] J. Palladino, J. P. Mulier, F. Wu, M. Moser, T. Kenner, R. M. Baevsky,
and A. Noordergraaf, “Assessing in the state of the circulatory system
via parameters versus variables,” Cardiovasc. Diagn. Proc.., vol. 13, pp.
131–139, 1996.
[88] O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, A. Paloma, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A.
Kovacs, “Non-invasive cardiac output trending during exercise recovery
on a bathroom-scale-based ballistocardiograph,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30,
pp. 261–274, 2009.
[89] M. Etemadi, O. T. Inan, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “Rapid
assessment of cardiac contractility on a home bathroom scale,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 864–869, Nov. 2011.
[90] E. Pinheiro, O. Postolache, and P. Girao, “Pulse arrival time and ballistocardiogram application to blood pressure variability estimation,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Med. Meas. Appl., 2009, pp. 132–136.
[91] R. Casanella, J. Gomez-Clapers, and R. Pallas-Areny, “On time interval
measurements using BCG,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 5034–5037.
[92] K. Tavakolian, G. A. Durmont, G. Houlton, and A. P. Blaber, “Precordial
vibrations provide noninvasive detection of early-stage hemorrhage,” J.
Shock, vol. 41, pp. 91–96, 2014.
[93] M. Di Rienzo, E. Vaini, P. Castiglioni, P. Meriggi, and F. Rizzo, “Beatto-beat estimation of LVET and QS2 indices of cardiac mechanics from
wearable seismocardiography in ambulant subjects,” in Proc. IEEE 35th
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 7017–7020.
[94] S. M. Munir, R. C. Boganev, E. Sobash, K. J. Shankar, S. Gondi, I. V.
Stupin, J. Robertson, M. A. Brewer, S. W. Casscells, R. M. Delgado, and
A. Ahmed, “Devices in heart failure: Potential methods for device-based
monitoring of congestive heart failure,” Texas Heart Inst. J., vol. 35, pp.
166–173, 2008.
[95] ClinicalTrials.gov. (2014). [Online]. Available: http://clinicaltrials.
gov/show/NCT01121107
[96] J. Zanetti and D. Salerno, “Seismocardiography: A new technique for
recording cardiac vibrations. concept, method, and initial observations,”
J. Cardiovasc. Technol., vol. 9, pp. 111–120, 1990.

INAN et al.: BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY AND SEISMOCARDIOGRAPHY: A REVIEW OF RECENT ADVANCES

[97] A. M. Weissler, W. S. Harris, and C. D. Schoenfeld, “Systolic time
intervals in heart failure in man,” Circulation, vol. 37, pp. 149–159,
1968.
[98] C. L. Garrard, A. M. Weissler, and H. T. Dodge, “The relationship of
alterations in systolic time intervals to ejection fraction in patients with
cardiac disease,” Circulation, vol. 42, pp. 455–462, 1970.
[99] D. M. Salerno, J. M. Zanetti, L. A. Green, M. R. Mooney, J. D. Madison,
and R. A. Van Tassel, “Seismocardiographic changes associated with
obstruction of coronary blood flow during balloon angioplasty,” Amer. J.
Cardiol., vol. 68, pp. 201–207, 1991.
[100] D. Salerno, J. M. Zanetti, L. Poliac, R. S. Crow, P. J. Hannan, K. Wang,
L. F. Goldenberg, and R. A. Van Tassel, “Exercise seismocardiography
for detection of coronary artery disease,” Amer. J. Noninvasive Cardiol.,
vol. 6, pp. 321–330, 1992.
[101] M. Jerosch-Herold, J. Zanetti, H. Merkle, L. Poliac, H. Huang, A. Mansoor, F. Zhao, and N. Wilke, “The seismocardiogram as magnetic-fieldcompatible alternative to the electrocardiogram for cardiac stress monitoring,” Int. J. Cardiac Imag., vol. 15, pp. 523–531, 1999.
[102] F. I. Marcus, V. Sorrell, J. Zanetti, M. Bosnos, G. Baweja, D. Perlick,
P. Ott, J. Indik, D. S. He, and K. Gear, “Accelerometer-derived time
intervals during various pacing nodes in patients with biventricular pacemakers: Comparison with normals,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol.
30, pp. 1476–1481, 2007.
[103] B. Silke, J. Spiers, N. Herity, and M. Drake, “Seismocardiography during
pharmacodynamic intervention in man,” Automedia, vol. 16, pp. 35–44,
1994.
[104] J. R. Libonati, J. Ciccolo, and J. Glassberg, “The tei index and exercise
capacity,” J. Sports Med., vol. 41, pp. 108–113, 2001.
[105] J. M. Zanetti and K. Tavakolian, “Seismocardiography: Past, present, and
future,” presented at the IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Osaka, Japan,
2013.
[106] E. Pinheiro, O. Postolache, and P. Girao, “Theory and developments in
an unobtrusive cardiovascular system representation: Ballistocardiography,” Open Biomed. Eng. J., vol. 4, pp. 201–216, 2010.

1427

[107] O. Postolache, P. S. Girao, J. Mendes, and G. Postolache, “Unobstrusive
heart rate and respiratory rate monitor embedded on a wheelchair,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Med. Meas. Appl., 2009, pp. 83–88.
[108] A. Akhbardeh, K. Tavakolian, V. Gurev, T. Lee, W. New, B. Kaminska,
and N. Trayanova, “Comparative analysis of three different modalities
for characterization of the seismocardiogram,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 2899–2903.
[109] C. Bruser, J. Diesel, M. D. H. Zink, S. Winter, P. Schauerte, and S.
Leonhardt, “Automatic detection of atrial fibrillation in cardiac vibration
signals,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, pp. 162–171, 2013.
[110] L. Giovangrandi, O. T. Inan, D. Banerjee, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “Preliminary results from BCG and ECG measurements in the heart failure
clinic,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Annu. Int. Conf., 2012, pp.
3780–3783.
[111] A. I. Hernandez, F. Ziglio, A. Amblard, L. Senhadji, and C. Leclercq,
“Analysis of endocardial acceleration during intraoperative optimization
of cardiac resynchronization therapy,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 7000–7003.
[112] A. Scano and M. Strollo, “Ballistocardiographic research in weightlessness,” Earth-Orient Appl. Space Technol., vol. 15, pp. 101–104, 1985.
[113] G. K. Prisk and P. F. Migeotte, “Physiological insights from gravity-free
ballistocardiography,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 7282–7285.
[114] R. M. Baevsky, I. I. Funtova, E. S. Luchitskaya, and J. Tank, “Microgravity: An ideal environment for cardiac force measurements,” Cardiometry
Open Access e-J., vol. 3, pp. 100–117, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

