IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

117

Using off-the-Shelf Medical Devices for Biomedical
Signal Monitoring in a Telemedicine System
for Emergency Medical Services
Sebastian Thelen, Michael Czaplik, Philipp Meisen, Daniel Schilberg, and Sabina Jeschke, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In order to study new methods of telemedicine usage
in the context of emergency medical services, researchers need to
prototype integrated telemedicine systems. To conduct a one-year
trial phase—intended to study a new application of telemedicine in
German emergency medical services—we used off-the-shelf medical devices and software to realize real-time patient monitoring
within an integrated telemedicine system prototype. We demonstrate its feasibility by presenting the integrated real-time patient
monitoring solution, by studying signal delay and transmission
robustness regarding changing communication channel characteristics, and by evaluating issues reported by the physicians during
the trial phase. Where standards like HL7 and the IEEE 11073
family are intended to enable interoperability of product grade
medical devices, we show that research prototypes benefit from
the use of web technologies and simple device interfaces, as they
simplify product development for a manufacturer and ease integration efforts for research teams. Embracing this approach for
the development of new medical devices eases the constraint to use
off-the-shelf products for research trials investigating innovative
use of telemedicine.
Index Terms—Biomedical
services (EMS), telemedicine.

telemetry,

emergency

medical

I. INTRODUCTION
HE continued progress in mobile communication technology development is a driving force behind applications
and research for telemedicine usage in emergency medical services (EMS). Many research projects have reported success in
building telemedicine systems using different technologies to
enable on-scene EMS staff to consult with specialists in a remote location. Some examples are [1]–[4]. In our pilot studies, the successful implementation of telemedicine systems for
EMS, offering synchronous—often referred to as real-time—
telemedical consultation functionality, has been demonstrated
[5], [6].

T

Manuscript received March 27, 2014; revised July 31, 2014; accepted September 29, 2014. Date of publication October 8, 2014; date of current version December 30, 2014. This work was supported in part by EU/NRW Ziel 2-Program
(EFRE) 2007–2013, the RWTH Aachen University, University Hospital Aachen,
Philips HealthCare, 3M, and P3 communications.
S. Thelen, P. Meisen, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke are with the Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering (IMA), RWTH Aachen University, 52068 Aachen, Germany (e-mail: sebastian.thelen@ima-zlw-ifu.rwthaachen.de; philipp.meisen@ima-zlw-ifu.rwth-aachen.de; daniel.schilberg@
ima-zlw-ifu.rwth-aachen.de; sabina.jeschke@ima-zlw-ifu.rwth-aachen.de).
M. Czaplik is with the University Hospital Aachen, 52074 Aachen, Germany,
and also with the P3 telehealthcare GmbH, Am Kraftversorgungsturm 3, 52070
Aachen, Germany and Docs in Clouds GmbH, Melanieweg 30, 52072, Aachen,
Germany (e-mail: mczaplik@ukaachen.de).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2361775

The telemedicine model applied in these two pilot studies
has its origin in the German, physician-based, EMS system:
two paramedics (an ambulance’s crew in most German EMS)
establish, either from a scene or from inside the ambulance,
a telemedicine session with an especially trained EMS physician (hereafter called tele-EMS physician), who is located in a
remote location (hereafter called teleconsultation center). During the telemedicine session, bidirectional real-time voice communication is the main information channel. Additionally, the
tele-EMS physician receives information from a multitude of
sources from the scene of incident and from within the ambulance: amongst others, the biomedical signals acquired by the
patient monitoring device. In the teleconsultation center, two
tele-EMS physicians are on call for involved ambulances; a
tele-EMS physician supervises only a single ambulance team at
once.
To collect evidence on the medical and organizational impact resulting from the use of this telemedicine model, the declared goal of our pilot studies was to conduct them in regular
EMS operations. Consequently, the telemedicine system must
not hinder patient treatment, making usability a major concern;
besides, application of telemedicine must not prolong on-scene
time intervals significantly, which was already analyzed in former studies [7]. In addition to usability, organizational aspects
and statutory regulations of medical devices are of major importance to the technical system realization [8]–[10]. Philips
Healthcare (Boeblingen, Germany) joined the research project
and supported it by providing off-the-shelf medical devices for
patient monitoring (Philips MRx monitoring/defibrillator device) and accompanying software. From a technical perspective,
the challenge to incorporate these devices into an integrated
telemedicine system—together with additional communication
technology and custom software—remained.
We have already reported general results from a one-month
test phase of this integrated telemedicine system in [11], where
we discuss overall requirements and the performance we achieve
with the overall system architecture. Still, we have not yet reported on the solution to the aforementioned integration challenge, which is a major enabler of our study’s trail phase and
as such may provide valuable insight for future telemedicine
projects in EMS.
During our work, we realized that the most challenging system integration aspect is the biomedical real-time signal transmission for continuous patient monitoring and diagnostics. Current literature leaves central questions unanswered regarding
this topic: How can this integration be achieved, what is the

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/

118

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

impact of existing interoperability standards, and what performance regarding usability, robustness, and real-time aspects are
achievable? To address these open issues, this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we summarize related work. In
Section III, we present the requirements that the integrated
biomedical signal monitoring has to fulfill. In Section IV, we
present our system design that integrates the biomedical signal
monitoring. In Section V, we present the performance evaluation. In Section VI, we discuss the results of our performance
evaluation and the impact of relevant interoperability standards.
In Section VII, we draw the conclusion of our work presented
in this paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Research in mobile telemedicine systems has been broadly
surveyed by others; for an overview, we refer to [12] and instead focus on the works most relevant for this paper, i.e., those
that contribute important details to biomedical signal transmission for patient monitoring in EMS telemedicine systems. Lin
[12] offered a broad technology-focused survey of telemedicine
research; he discusses application areas, communication technology, and the kind of data that are transmitted. From the
projects he describes, two are of concrete relevance for our
work: Anogianakis et al. [13] described the early maritime
telemedicine system MERMAID that enables teleconsultation
centers to provide medical assistance for the patient treatment
on board of ships using satellite communication. Kyriacou et al.
[14] reported on a real-time telemedicine system for use in EMS,
the general concept being close to our use of telemedicine; however, the integration of biomedical signal transmission differs.
They access monitoring data directly at the patient monitoring devices using a RS-232 interface and custom transmission
algorithms and viewing applications. Thereby they effectively
implement software that has to be classified as active medical
device, if intended for patient diagnostics [10].
Alesanco and Garcia [15] analyzed the transmission of clinical real-time electrocardiogram (ECG) via 3G mobile networks
using simulations. They configure their proposed transmission
algorithm—real-time/reliable ECG transmission protocol—in
such a way, that it maintains a signal delay below 3–4 s. According to their clinical trials, 4 s is the maximum acceptable
delay. Trigo et al. [16] presented a prototype implementation
of real-time ECG transmission using the IEEE 11073 standards
family, while harmonization for the ECG device specialization
was still ongoing. This prototype is not clinically evaluated, but
demonstrates general feasibility. The IEEE 11073 ECG device
specialization standard was published in 2012 [17].
LifeBot DREAMS is a commercially advertised, mobile EMS
telemedicine system in the US [18], [19]; technical details and
findings for use by other telemedicine studies are not reported.
Similarly, Viewcare is a Danish telemedicine initiative that utilizes telemedicine in ambulance vehicles [20]; detailed information is scarce as well.
III. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
In a multidisciplinary team of emergency physicians—
experienced in telemedicine usage from a former study—,

engineers, and organizational experts, we conducted a thorough
requirements analysis before starting to design the system. To
document the requirements in a structured and comprehensive
way, we used use-case descriptions. An iterative design process ensured that the requirements, user expectations, and system development remained aligned. In [21], we have given a
general overview of the system requirements, but because of
space limitations, we neglected specific details necessary for
the discussion in this paper; the functional requirements that
the biomedical signal monitoring integration has to fulfill are as
follows:
1) minimal need for an additional system interaction onscene, after a teleconsultation has been successfully initiated, e.g., data transmission either happens automatically
or is controlled by the tele-EMS physician, not by the
on-scene paramedics;
2) to protect patient and staff privacy, no data are transmitted
without an active teleconsultation session;
3) to minimize potential for confusion during a teleconsultation session, only data from the active case may be displayed to the tele-EMS physician;
4) the tele-EMS physician must be able to switch the currently active, i.e., displayed, case by selecting the target
ambulance with a single user interface interaction, e.g., a
single button press and potentially a confirmation;
5) continuous transmission of at least two ECG leads and
pulse oximetry (SpO2 ) waveforms as well as numeric
values of heart rate, SpO2 , pulse, and blood pressure with
minimal achievable delay, ideally not above 3 s;
6) transmission of 12-lead ECG recordings;
7) periodic transmission of numeric trend values for heartrate, SpO2 , and pulse with a 1-min interval, in case the
network conditions on-scene are too bad to support requirement 5;
8) all data acquired during a teleconsultation session, such
as the biomedical signals from requirements 5–7, must be
available in the application that the tele-EMS physicians
uses to create the documentation of the teleconsultation
session.
IV. SYSTEM DESIGN OF INTEGRATED BIOMEDICAL
SIGNAL MONITORING
In [11] and [21], we already introduced the general system
architecture, but did not discuss the design of the biomedical
signal transmission for patient monitoring, its real-time performance, nor our findings in regard to its applicability for future
telemedicine projects. The—commonly used—combined patient monitor and defibrillator HeartStart MRx (model M3535A,
Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA) is the device we chose
for integration into the system; the biomedical signals that this
device acquires and that are relevant to our work are listed
in Table I, together with the communication interfaces used
to access them. In addition to the HeartStart MRx, we tested
our integration approach with the multiparameter monitor IntelliVue X2 (Philips Healthcare, Boeblingen, Germany). The
HeartStart MRx can be equipped with different configuration
options that provide different interfaces and communication

THELEN et al.: USING OFF-THE-SHELF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOMEDICAL SIGNAL MONITORING IN A TELEMEDICINE SYSTEM

TABLE I
RELEVANT BIOMEDICAL SIGNAL TRANSMISSION CAPABILITIES OFFERED BY
HEARTSTART MRX
Signal
waveforms: two-lead
ECG, pulse oximetry
(SpO2 )
numeric values:
heart-rate, SpO2 , pulse,
blood-pressure
numeric values:
heart-rate, SpO2 , pulse,
blood-pressure
12-lead ECG (3.3 s
recording)

TRANSMISSION PERIODICITY

Communication Interface

continuous, real-time

Internet Protocol (IP) via
Ethernet

on-change

IP via Ethernet

periodically: once per minute

Bluetooth File Transfer
Profile

on-capturing/on-demand

Bluetooth File Transfer
Profile

capabilities. Relevant for our system integration are the options
IntelliVue Net (continuous real-time waveform transmission in
a local area network (LAN)), 12-LTx Bluetooth (transmission of
12-lead ECG recordings via Bluetooth), and Per Data Tx (periodic transmission of biomedical signal’s numeric values via
Bluetooth).
The IntelliVue Net option, which provides access to a patient’s
biomedical real-time vital signals, usually utilizing a direct LAN
connection to the proprietary, combined software/hardware appliance IntelliVue Information Center (hereafter called IIC;
Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA) for signal transmission [22], whereas the other two options wirelessly push data via
Bluetooth to a connected device. The latter data can be automatically imported into and displayed by the proprietary software
HeartStart Telemedicine System (hereafter called HTS; Philips
Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA); alternatively, the HeartStart
DataSDK (Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA)—a software development kit—may be used to implement import
adapters that enable access to this data from custom applications [23].
Both the IIC and the HTS are certified medicine products and
their intended use covers patient diagnostics [22], [23]. In the
integrated telemedicine system, the use of periodic data transmission is—according to requirement 7—solely considered as
a fallback option. While no single integration option fulfills the
aforementioned requirements, in combination they cover the
requirements 5 to 7: IntelliVue Net option for requirement 5,
12-LTx Bluetooth option for requirement 6, and Per Data-Tx for
requirement 7. Because of their different underlying interface
technologies and differing proprietary display applications, we
had to implement two distinct integration strategies as shown
in Fig. 1. For the continuous real-time waveforms and numeric
values of requirement 5, we used networking technologies, and
for the 12-lead ECG and periodic data transmission of requirement 6 and 7, we used Bluetooth and file transfer services. In
order to fulfill the remaining requirements 1 to 5, we had to integrate both IIC and HTS into the tele-EMS physician’s workplace
and automate the process of switching the currently displayed
monitoring devices as well as the activation and deactivation of
data transmission from the scene. Fig. 2 shows the various components and their connections that implement the integration
strategies. In the remainder of this section, we provide further
detail to the system integration.

119

A. Mobile Communication Unit
The Mobile Communication Unit (B in Fig. 2) securely connects all on-scene devices to the teleconsultation center; it simultaneously uses three dedicated mobile network data connections
(C) to create a single, encrypted Internet protocol (IP) connection to the stationary communication unit (D) via the Internet.
This connection forms a secured virtual private network (VPN),
containing the on-scene and the teleconsultation center IP networks.
The mobile communication unit’s three mobile network
modems support both 2G (GPRS and EDGE) and 3G (UMTS,
HSDPA, and HSUPA) data connections, individually choosing
the fastest network technology that is available [24]. In order
to ensure on-scene usability, the mobile communication unit is
housed inside the patient monitor’s bag, as shown in Fig. 1,
that was modified to compensate for the space required by the
mobile communication unit.
B. Continuous, Near Real-Time Signal Transmission
The transmission of continuous, near real-time waveform signals is realized by connecting the patient monitor (A) via Ethernet to the mobile communication unit. The mobile communication unit connects the patient monitor to the clinical network
of the IIC (F) using an additional VPN from Mobile Communication Unit to Stationary Communication Unit to create an Ethernet bridge on the data-link layer. The data-link layer firewall
(E) generally blocks communication between connected patient
monitors and the IIC. In this default setting, the patient monitor
is unable to establish a connection to the IIC (requirement 2).
To enable the connection and transmission of the biomedical
signals, the tele-EMS physician selectively activates each patient monitor’s connection (requirement 1). This setup prevents
unintended data transmission and resulting privacy concerns,
because the monitoring device would otherwise begin to transmit signals to the IIC as soon as it is turned ON, even without
an active teleconsultation session.
On the tele-EMS physician workplace (K), the data transmitted from the on-scene patient monitor is accessible
through the IIC’s intranet patient viewer web-application. This
web-application’s monitoring widget—displaying a patient’s
biomedical signal waveforms and numeric values—is embedded
into a wrapper web application. The wrapper web application
selects the patient to be viewed when loading the embedded
monitoring widget without additional interaction by the teleEMS physician (requirements 3 and 4). Direct access to the
numerical values and trend data for the waveform signals is
enabled via the IIC’s HL7 unsolicited messages interface that
publishes data in a configurable interval. These data are then forwarded by a custom import adapter into the case documentation
(requirement 8).
C. Periodic Signal Transmission
For transmission of 12-lead ECG recordings and periodic
trend values of a patient’s biomedical signals, the patient monitor (A) connects to the mobile communication unit (B) via
Bluetooth using the Bluetooth File Transfer Profile. For each

120

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 1.

Device and application overview for the integrated biomedical signal monitoring system.

Fig. 2.

Components and communication links in the integrated biomedical signal monitoring system.

data transmission, i.e., a single 12-lead ECG record or a set of
biomedical signal trend values, the patient monitor transmits
three files to the mobile communication unit via this Bluetooth
connection.
The Mobile Communication Unit forwards these received
files using File Transfer Protocol (FTP) to the Stationary Communication Unit (D), which in turn forwards these files again
via FTP to the file router (G). Here, these files are delivered,
again via FTP, to two distinct data directories on the data import
adapter instance (H) that is assigned to the originating ambulance. Both data directories of a data import adapter instance
are watched by a separate data import service. One data import
service is the HTS, which imports all incoming data into its case
database, the other is a custom data import application implemented using the DataSDK, which forwards the data to the
case documentation (requirement 8). The way that the HTS displays transmissions—grouped to cases from all connected patient monitors in a single list—contradicts requirement 3. Our

solution is to use a separate HTS instance for each ambulance in
the system, and thus, one data import adapter (H) per ambulance,
in order to fulfill requirement 3.
On the tele-EMS physician workplace (K), the HeartStart
Telemedicine Viewer (hereafter called HTS Viewer; Philips
Healthcare, Andover, MA, USA)—a proprietary, dedicated application that connects to one HTS at a time and allows remote
access to the HTS with an identical user interface—is connected to the HTS instance associated to the current ambulance.
By utilizing a dedicated HTS instance per ambulance, the list
of transmissions that the HTS viewer presents to the tele-EMS
physician contains only one active case. We were unable to
automate the selection of this active case, thus the tele-EMS
physician must manually select the sole active case, partially
violating requirement 3. In order to display the transmissions
from another ambulance, the HTS viewer must be connected to
the HTS associated with the desired ambulance, a task we were
able to automate using the user interface automation tool AutoIt

THELEN et al.: USING OFF-THE-SHELF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOMEDICAL SIGNAL MONITORING IN A TELEMEDICINE SYSTEM

121

TABLE II
THRESHOLD VALUES OF COMMUNICATION CHANNEL CHARACTERISTICS FOR
STABLE ECG AND SPO2 WAVEFORM TRANSMISSIONS
Channel Parameter
delay
jitter (with 1 s base delay)
data loss
data corruption

Threshold Value
3.15 s
0.5 s
27%
24%

(AutoIt Consulting, GB), fulfilling requirement 4. To our knowledge, there is no programming interface available to control the
HTS Viewer.

Fig. 3. Grouped histogram of ECG and SpO2 signal’s waveform end-to-end
delay between occurrence on the patient monitor display and the graphical user
interface of the teleconsultation center.

V. EVALUATION METHODS AND RESULTS
In this paper, we focus on two major aspects of our evaluation of the presented biomedical signal monitoring system: the
system’s real-time performance in Section V-A and the usability and robustness we achieve with our system integration in
Section V-B. Outside of the scope of this paper is to report more
broadly about the one-year trail phase that we used to evaluate the complete telemedicine system and its organizational and
medical procedures, which ended in July 2013: six ambulance
teams in five different EMS departments were using the system
during their regular EMS operations; two tele-EMS physicians
staffed the teleconsultation center during this time. A one-month
field test before starting the trail phase ensured that the system
technically performed as necessary. The physicians carrying out
the field test evaluation (age 33 to 44, assigned as EMS physician
for 3 to 14 years) rated the system performance as satisfactory,
thus the trial phase could start, as we reported in [11].
A. Continuous, Near Real-Time Signal Monitoring
Responsible for the near real-time biomedical signal monitoring is the IIC and its connection to the patient monitor. To
establish baseline parameters about this connection’s robustness
against failures in the underlying communication channel, i.e.,
delay, jitter, data loss, and data corruption, we connected the
patient monitor via Ethernet to the IIC’s clinical network and
injected a network emulator, [25], into this Ethernet connection.
The three parameters were then individually increased, starting
at zero, with the other parameters held at zero; the threshold
value, above that at least one of the ECG or the SpO2 waveforms started showing the slightest form of interruptions, i.e.,
missing data points, is recorded (see Table II).
The end-to-end, i.e., patient monitor to tele-EMS physician
display, signal delay for transmission of continuous, near realtime ECG and SpO2 waveforms was measured by a test engineer, who directly observed the waveforms displayed on the patient monitor as well as on the tele-EMS physician’s workplace
display; while transmitting regular signals, either from a patientsimulation device (ECG) or a test subject’s finger (SpO2 ), a
clearly perceivable change in the signal was triggered; the time
difference was measured from onset of this change on the patient
monitor’s display to its occurrence on the tele-EMS physician’s

Fig. 4. Histogram of defect issues concerning the biomedical signal monitoring as reported during the one-year trial phase, grouped by issue category.

workplace display. For each signal type (ECG and SpO2 ), the
delay was independently measured ten times when the mobile
communication unit simultaneously used three 3G data connections (signal strengths at 77–87% / 61–74% / 35–45%) and ten
times, when it simultaneously used three 2G data connections
(signal strengths at 93–96% / 70–77% / 58%).
The grouped histogram of all 40 samples is shown in Fig. 3.
The signal in the teleconsultation center is delayed with a median
of 4.9 s (range 3.4–7.1 s); no correlation with the signal type
(ECG and SpO2 ) or the data connection’s technology (2G and
3G) exists. Due to this range of measurements and with an
additional security factor applied, tele-EMS physicians were
instructed to expect a maximum signal delay of 10 s, when
instructing patient treatment.
B. Usability and System Integration
During the one-year trial phase, the tele-EMS physicians and
the technical support team gathered quantitative data regarding technical system performance in a ticket system to track
the occurrence and elimination of technical performance issues. Out of the 377 issues reported as defects, 17 were related to the biomedical signal monitoring. These 17 issues (see
Fig. 4) can be categorized into three groups: general connectivity
(seven issues), continuous waveforms (six issues), and periodic
signals (four issues). The general connectivity issues describe
unacceptable amount or length of dropouts for continuous waveforms and unacceptable delay of transmitted 12-lead ECGs, all

122

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

caused by poor mobile data connectivity from on-scene to the
teleconsultation center.
The continuous waveform issues were largely caused by unexpected behavior of the embedded IIC display component (4
out of 6 issues, i.e., 66.7%), for which no causes could be identified: the color-coded waveforms and numerical values were
suddenly all displayed white, but could still be read (independently reported twice); the component’s display froze and it
became unusable; no waveforms, only the numerical values
were displayed. The remaining issues were caused by errors in
the custom integration software, failing to handle unexpected
situations (two issues).
Most issues (3 out of 4 issues, i.e., 75%) related to the periodic
signals were caused by the custom integration software failing
to control the HTS Viewer on a tele-EMS physician’s workplace
to connect to the correct HTS; the remaining issue was caused
by the HTS Viewer staying in an unusable state for about one
minute when connecting to an HTS with many stored cases.
VI. DISCUSSION
Using off-the-shelf medical devices and software to build
an integrated telemedicine system proved successful. The presented integration approach fulfills the functional requirements
that a multidisciplinary team of experts from within the domain
of telemedicine in EMS specified prior. The completion of a oneyear trial phase in regular EMS, using this system, validates both
the technical system and the requirements upon which it is built.
This trial enabled medical researchers to gather data to assess
the effectiveness of the underlying model for telemedicine and
its organizational impact on EMS. The medical trial evaluation
is not yet finished but initial analysis is promising [6], [11].
Comparing the doubled maximum channel delay tolerated
by the patient monitor to IIC connection (6.3 s) to the maximum round trip time expected in GPRS (mean below 2 s, 95%percentile can increase up to 4 s) and UMTS (mean at about 0.5 s,
95%-percentile at about 1 s) networks [26], you find evidence
that a GPRS network is sufficient for near real-time biomedical
signal transmission by using the presented setup in most circumstances, given an adequate signal strength and link quality.
In the fully integrated telemedicine system, the negative effects
of data loss and data corruption are prevented by the VPN tunnel using a reliable transport protocol; this in turn, adds to the
channel’s delay and causes more jitter. Considering our findings
from [11], some rural areas exist that do not provide sufficient
network connectivity to support adequate real-time monitoring
using this setup and that require the backup mechanism provided
by the HTS integration.
The measured end-to-end delay for near real-time biomedical
signal waveforms exceeded the otherwise suggested maximum
delay of 4 s in 82.5% of the samples, with the median exceeding
this suggested delay by 0.9 s [15]. Regarding the 10 s expected
delay that was used to instruct the tele-EMS physicians for the
trial phase, it is unclear, if a generalized requirement can be
upheld. However, in diverse clinical circumstances a delay of
10 s seems to be rather inacceptable, e.g., when ECG suddenly
presents an asystole that actually occurred already 10 s ago.

Furthermore, communication between the tele-EMS physician
and the paramedics concerning alterations in real-time ECG
curve (e.g., extra systoles) can be hindered.
The technical integration issues reported during the trail phase
fall into two categories: the issues that can be resolved by improving the custom integration software and the issues that result
from insufficient means of integration offered by the proprietary
application. The two integration issues reported for the IIC fall
into the former category and can be eliminated in a future system, the three integration issues reported for the HTS fall into the
latter category. The IIC’s web technology based interface allows
a more stable integration, because of its individually addressable and embeddable user interface components. Contrary, the
attempt to integrate the native, stand-alone HTS viewer application using user interface automation proved to be an unreliable
method.
All reported issues for the patient monitoring but the two IIC
issues with missing color, severely impact the diagnostic capabilities that the telemedicine system offers to the tele-EMS
physician. The issue of HTS staying in an unusable state could
be solved by backing up old cases and removing them from
the main database. Nevertheless, the tele-EMS physician’s most
important source of information is the bidirectional voice communication to the paramedics on-scene, which was reported as
at least adequate even under bad conditions [11]. Hence, a defect in the patient monitoring is not a life threatening situation
for a patient in this telemedicine setting.
VII. CONCLUSION
We described how to use a commercially available off-theshelf monitor/defibrillator (HearStart MRx, Philips Healthcare,
Andover, MA, USA) and related software to create an integrated
telemedicine system prototype, sufficiently fulfilling requirements regarding statutory regulations, usability, and functionality, in order to enable research of telemedicine in regular EMS.
Despite numerous existing medical data and interface standards,
only HL7 messaging was of importance for the integration; otherwise, web and common computer networking technology offered good integration methods. While our work here focuses
on integrating one device, our general approach of integrating
off-the-shelf components instead of building a complete system
from scratch can speed up the creation of prototypes for research
in clinical trials.
Standards such as HL7 and IEEE 11073 promise full interoperability between medical devices and external software
systems; with our work, we have shown that, in order to easily
create an integrated telemedicine system prototype for clinical
research, a full implementation of these standards is not necessary.
Building user interfaces with standard web technologies that
offer individually addressable display components vastly eases
the work of researchers, who aim to evaluate new methods for
utilizing existing technology. On the data interface level, using
common computer standards and application protocols—in our
case Bluetooth File Transfer Profile together with messages
stored in files—offers an integration point for nonreal-time data

THELEN et al.: USING OFF-THE-SHELF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOMEDICAL SIGNAL MONITORING IN A TELEMEDICINE SYSTEM

that is very simple to access. A device manufacturer searching
for a simple device interface, unwilling or unable to use IEEE
11073, should consider Bluetooth File Transfer Profile instead
of using a proprietary protocol implemented on top of other
Bluetooth Profiles.
At this point, very little work has been done to systematically
identify which biomedical signals (and signal qualities) actually
are necessary for specific telemedicine procedures in EMS. The
aspect of signal delay in this regard has been briefly touched
by our work, but clearly, more research directed to this special aspect is necessary. Resulting knowledge would drastically
improve the support a telemedicine system can offer to a teleEMS physician who has to decide for a treatment method that
heavily relies on the availability of biomedical signals within a
certain maximum delay; this very specific maximum delay then
defines real-time for the case at hand, which can automatically
be assessed by the telemedicine system.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Pavlopoulos, E. Kyriacou, A. Berler, S. Dembeyiotis, and D. Koutsouris,
“A novel emergency telemedicine system based on wireless communication technology—AMBULANCE,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 261–267, Dec. 1998.
[2] F. Chiarugi, D. Trypakis, V. Kontogiannis, P. Lees, C. Chronaki, M. Zeaki,
N. Giannakoudakis, D. Vourvahakis, M. Tsiknakis, and S. Orphanoudakis,
“Continuous ECG monitoring in the management of pre-hospital health
emergencies,” in Computers in Cardiology, Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE,
2003, pp. 205–208.
[3] C.-S. Chang, T.-H. Tan, Y.-F. Chen, Y.-F. Huang, M.-H. Lee, J.-C. Hsu,
and H.-C. Chen, “Development of a ubiquitous emergency medical service
system based on zigbee and 3.5g wireless communication technologies,”
in Medical Biometrics (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 6165,
D. Zhang and M. Sonka, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 201–
208.
[4] K. Shimizu, “Telemedicine by mobile communication,” IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Mag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 32–44, Jul./Aug. 1999.
[5] S. Bergrath, D. Rörtgen, R. Rossaint, S. K. Beckers, H. Fischermann,
J. C. Brokmann, M. Czaplik, M. Felzen, M.-T. Schneiders, and
M. Skorning, “Technical and organisational feasibility of a multifunctional
telemedicine system in an emergency medical service—An observational
study,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 371–377, Oct. 2011.
[6] S. Bergrath, M. Czaplik, R. Rossaint, F. Hirsch, S. Beckers, B. Valentin,
D. Wielpütz, M.-T. Schneiders, and J. Brokmann, “Implementation phase
of a multicentre prehospital telemedicine system to support paramedics:
Feasibility and possible limitations,” Scand J. Trauma. Resusc. Emerg.
Med., vol. 21, no. 54, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[7] M. Skorning, S. Bergrath, D. Rörtgen, S. K. Beckers, J. C. Brokmann,
B. Gillmann, J. Herding, M. Protogerakis, C. Mutscher, and R. Rossaint,
“Teleconsultation does not prolong time intervals in a simulated prehospital cardiac emergency scenario,” Circulation, vol. 120, no. S1482, 2009.
[8] M.-T. Schneiders, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, “A joint organizational
and technical development of a telematic rescue assistance system for
German emergency medical services,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. eHealth,
Telemed., Social Med., Gosier, Guadeloupe, France, 2011, pp. 150–155.
[9] F.
Hulstaert,
M.
Neyt,
I.
Vinck,
S.
Stordeur,
M. Huic, S. Sauerland, M. R. Kuijpers, P. Abrishami, H. Vondeling, and H. van Brabandt, “The pre-market clinical evaluation of
innovative high-risk medical devices,” Health Service Research (HSR),
Belgian Health Care Knowledge Centre (KCE), Brussels, Belgium KCE
Report 158C, 2011.

123

[10] E. French-Mowat and J. Burnett, “How are medical devices regulated in
the European Union?” J. Roy. Soc. Med., vol. 105, pp. S22–S28, 2012.
[11] M. Czaplik, S. Bergrath, R. Rossaint, S. Thelen, T. Brodziak,
B. Valentin, F. Hirsch, S. K. Beckers, and J. C. Brokmann, “Employment of telemedicine in emergency medicine,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 53,
no. 2, 2014.
[12] C.-F. Lin, “Mobile telemedicine: A survey study,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36,
no. 2, pp. 511–520, Apr. 2012.
[13] G. Anogianakis, S. Maglavera, A. Pomportsis, S. Bountzioukas, F. Beltrame, and G. Orsi, “Medical emergency aid through telematics: Design,
implementation guidelines and analysis of user requirements for the MERMAID project,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 52, no. 1–3, pp. 93–103, Oct.
1998.
[14] E. Kyriacou, S. Pavlopoulos, A. Berler, M. Neophytou, A. Bourka,
A. Georgoulas, A. Anagnostaki, D. Karayiannis, C. Schizas, C. Pattichis,
A. Andreou, and D. Koutsouris, “Multi-purpose healthcare telemedicine
systems with mobile communication link support,” BioMed. Eng. OnLine,
vol. 2, no. 7, 2003.
[15] A. Alesanco and J. Garcı́a, “Clinical assessment of wireless ECG transmission in real-time cardiac telemonitoring,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1144–1152, Sep. 2010.
[16] J. D. Trigo, F. Chiarugi, A. Alesanco, M. Martı́nez-Espronceda,
C. E. Chronaki, J. Escayola, I. Martı́nez, and J. Garcı́a, “Standardcompliant real-time transmission of ECGs: Harmonization of ISO/IEEE
11073-PHD and SCP-ECG,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 4635–4638.
[17] Health informatics—Personal health device communication—Part 10406:
Device specialization – Basic electrocardiograph (ECG) (1- to 3-lead
ECG), IEEE Standard 11073-10406, 2012.
[18] LifeBot. (2012, Sep. 27). LifeBot DREAMS: The Most Advanced Telemedicine Systems. [Online]. Available: http://www.lifebot.
us.com/dreams/
[19] Resuscitation and life support system, method and apparatus, by R. L.
Heath, Patent US 7 672 720, (2010, Mar. 2).
[20] Viewcare. (2013, Oct. 23). Viewcare Pre-Hospital Telemedicine System.
[Online]. Available: http://viewcare.com/index.php/da/praehospital
[21] S. Thelen, M.-T. Schneiders, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, “A multifunctional telemedicine system for pre-hospital emergency medical services,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. eHealth, Telemed., Social Med., 2013, pp. 53–58.
[22] Philips Healthcare. (2014, Mar. 03). IntelliVue Information Center System Release L.0: Installation and Service Manual. [Online]. Available:
http://incenter.medical.philips.com/doclib/getDoc.aspx?func=ll&objId=
8673388&objAction=Open
[23] Philips Healthcare. (2014, Feb. 28). HeartStart Telemedicine System
User Guide. [Online]. Available: http://incenter.medical.philips.com/
doclib/getDoc.aspx? func=ll&objId=9286003&objAction=Open
[24] T. Brodziak, I. Forkel, P. Irla, P. Kornatowski, and P. Seidenberg.
(2013, Apr. 21). Secure and Reliable Communication for Telemedical Applications in Emergency Medical Services. Presented at
ICT meets Medicine and Health (ICTMH2013) Workshop. [Online]. Available: http://www.comnets.uni-bremen.de/cewit-tzi-workshop2013/PDF/papers/Brodziak.pdf
[25] deba81, mknambiar, and pravinpardeshi. (2011, Mar.). Wide Area
Network Emulator. WANem Virtual Appliance. [Online]. Available:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/wanem/
[26] F. Vacirca, F. Ricciato, and R. Pilz, “Large-scale RTT measurements from
an operational UMTS/GPRS network,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Wireless
Internet, 2005, pp. 190–197.

Author’s photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

