IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

657

Modeling and Validation of Microwave Ablations
With Internal Vaporization
Jason Chiang∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Sohan Birla, Mariajose Bedoya, David Jones, Jeyam Subbiah,
and Christopher L. Brace, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Numerical simulation is increasingly being utilized
for computer-aided design of treatment devices, analysis of ablation growth, and clinical treatment planning. Simulation models
to date have incorporated electromagnetic wave propagation and
heat conduction, but not other relevant physics such as water vaporization and mass transfer. Such physical changes are particularly noteworthy during the intense heat generation associated
with microwave heating. In this paper, a numerical model was
created that integrates microwave heating with water vapor generation and transport by using porous media assumptions in the
tissue domain. The heating physics of the water vapor model was
validated through temperature measurements taken at locations
5, 10, and 20 mm away from the heating zone of the microwave
antenna in homogenized ex vivo bovine liver setup. Cross-sectional
area of water vapor transport was validated through intraprocedural computed tomography (CT) during microwave ablations in
homogenized ex vivo bovine liver. Iso-density contours from CT
images were compared to vapor concentration contours from the
numerical model at intermittent time points using the Jaccard index. In general, there was an improving correlation in ablation size
dimensions as the ablation procedure proceeded, with a Jaccard
index of 0.27, 0.49, 0.61, 0.67, and 0.69 at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 min,
respectively. This study demonstrates the feasibility and validity
of incorporating water vapor concentration into thermal ablation
simulations and validating such models experimentally.
Index Terms—Computational modeling, heat transfer, microwave, thermal ablation.

I. INTRODUCTION
UMOR ablation is an emerging treatment for early-stage
solid tumors that are not amenable to surgical resection
or which have failed chemotherapy or radiotherapy [1], [2].

T

Manuscript received November 20, 2013; revised August 31, 2014; accepted
October 5, 2014. Date of publication October 15, 2014; date of current version
January 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by the National Institutes
of Health Grants R01 CA142737 and F30 CA165548. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. Chiang is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Department
of Radiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53705, USA
(e-mail: cjchiang@wisc.edu).
S. Birla and D. Jones are with the Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA (e-mail:
Sohan.Birla@conagrafoods.com; david.jones @unl.edu).
M. Bedoya is with the Department of Medical Physics and Department
of Radiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53705, USA
(e-mail: mbedoya@wisc.edu).
J. Subbiah is with the Department of Biological Systems Engineering and
Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
Lincoln, NE 68583, USA (e-mail: jeyam.subbiah@unl.edu).
C. L. Brace is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Department of Radiology, Madison, Wisconsin, USA (e-mail: clbrace@wisc.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2363173

Thermal ablation is typically performed using applicators that
have a thin, needle-like profile that can be inserted into the
target zone under imaging guidance. Once positioned, energy
is applied from the distal tip of the applicator to elevate the
temperature of the adjacent tissue to cytotoxic temperatures
(above 50–60 °C) over the course of several minutes.
The most widely utilized ablation modality to date is radiofrequency (RF) ablation, which generates heat using RF electrical
current applied directly to the tumor [2]. However, at cytotoxic
temperatures, the electrical impedance of the tissue quickly rises
due to dehydration and water vaporization, limiting the application of additional RF current. There is now increased interest
in the application of microwave energy, which is not limited by
the presence of charred or desiccated tissue. Microwave systems
are capable of creating larger and more homogenous ablation
zones compared to those made with predicate RF ablation systems, even around heat-siphoning vasculature—leading to more
complete treatment and a potentially decreased risk for tumor
recurrence [3].
Numerical simulation of thermal ablations is an area of active
research, leveraging computer-aided design to optimize ablation
systems and treatment planning. However, numerical techniques
used previously to simulate RF ablations cannot be fully applied
to microwave ablations. Microwave ablation systems are capable of heating tissues to well above 100 °C and maintaining those
temperatures for several minutes, vaporizing tissue water, and
driving vapor away from the antenna. Vapor diffuses through the
tissue and recondenses within peripheral tissue or blood vessels
[4]–[6]. Thus, physically accurate models must account for the
energy required to vaporize water, and the associated heat and
mass transport.
While water vaporization and transport have been incorporated into numerical models of food preparation by using a
porous media approach, those models have not been applied
to an interstitial energy source such as a microwave ablation
antenna, nor have they been used to evaluate heating in other
biological tissues such as the liver, kidney or bone [7]–[10].
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the porous media approach for simulating water vaporization in liver tissue during
microwave ablation, and experimentally validate the simulation
outputs such as tissue temperature and moisture content.
II. METHODS
A. Numerical Technique
Hepatocytes and blood vessels may be regarded as a porous
skeleton, with water being the major constituent bound within

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

The governing equation for water and vapor saturation within
the tissue was given by a conservation of mass relation:
I˙
∂ci
+ ∇ · (−Di ∇ci ) + ui · ∇ci =
∂t
Mw

(3)

where ci (mol/m3 ) was the concentration of species (water or
vapor), Di (m2 /s) was the diffusivity and ui was the convective
(Darcy’s) velocity of fluid. The right-hand side of (3), with units
(mol/m3 · s) represents the reaction term describing water vaporization or condensation, where Mw (18 g/mol) was the water
molecular weight and I˙ (kg/s · m3 ) is the water vaporization rate.
Darcy’s law was used to describe the convective flows of liquid
water and water vapor caused by pressure gradients within the
tissue:
kin,i · kr,i
∇p (m/s)
(4)
ui = −
μi
Fig. 1. (a) Two-dimensional, axially-symmetric geometry of a clinical microwave antenna inserted within ex vivo, homogenized bovine liver tissue. The
dashed centerline denotes the symmetry axis. (b) A cross section of the experimental setup as seen under CT imaging.

it. As liver tissue is being heated from microwave energy, tissue
water undergoes a phase change to gas and can be transported
through the porous matrix. Therefore, a numerical description
of microwave ablation may be developed using established techniques for heat and mass transport in porous media [9].
1) Geometric Model: An axially-symmetric geometric model
was developed for homogenized tissue in a cylindrical glass container (80 mm radius × 90 mm height) and a clinical microwave
ablation antenna inserted into the liver model as shown in Fig. 1.
2) Governing Equations: Heat and water mass transfer during microwave ablation heating were simulated using the finiteelement method (FEM) in commercial software (COMSOL Inc,
Burlington, MA). Electromagnetic field vectors were calculated by solving Maxwell’s equations (not shown for brevity) at
2.45 GHz. Electromagnetic power dissipation density, Q, was
determined through the following equation:
Q=

1
σ|E|2
2

(W/m3 )

(1)

where σ was the electrical conductivity (S/m) and E was the
electric field intensity magnitude (V/m). Energy conservation
included convection, diffusion, conduction, phase change of
water, and microwave heating source, which were described
using the heat transfer equation in porous media:
⎛
⎞
⎛
⎞


∂ ⎝
ρi Cp,i T ⎠ + ∇ ⎝
ρi Cp,i ui T ⎠
∂t i=s,w ,v
i=w ,v
= ∇ (keﬀ · ∇T ) − λI˙ + Q

(2)

where ρi was the density (kg/m3 ), Cp was the specific heat
(kJ/kg · K), T was the temperature (K), λ was the latent heat
of water vaporization (2435 kJ/kg), and keﬀ was the effective
thermal conductivity calculated as a weighted mean of thermal
conductivities of constituent species, solid (s), liquid water (w),
and water vapor (v).

where kin,i (m2 ) is the intrinsic permeability, kr,i is the relative
permeability, μi (Pa · s) is the viscosity, and p (Pa) is the vapor
pressure.
Darcy’s law was combined with the continuity equation to
solve for the pressure and velocity of the water vapor:
∂
(ρØ) + ∇ · (ρui ) = I˙
(5)
∂t
where ϕ was porosity, defined as the fraction of the domain occupied by pores (zero for pure solid regions to unity for domains
of free flow).
3) Evaporation Rate Determination: In tissue, the liquid and
vapor phases of water were assumed to in equilibrium. The
equilibrium vapor pressure (Pv ,eq , P a) at a particular moisture
content and temperature was described by the moisture isotherm
[11],
Pv ,eq
= −0.0267M −1.65 +0.01e1.287M M 1.5 ln[Psat (T )]
Psat (T )
(6)
where Psat (Pa) was the saturated vapor pressure of pure water,
and M was the moisture content on dry basis.
The phase change of water (vaporization) was described using
nonequilibrium evaporation method [12]:
ln

Pv ,eq − Pv
(kg/s · m3 )
I˙ = τ
(7)
RT
where Pv was the vapor density (kg/m3 ), and τ was a parameter
signifying the rate constant of vaporization, which was of the
order of one for hygroscopic material estimated in previous
literature [12].
4) Boundary Conditions: For solving Maxwell’s equations, a
scattering boundary condition was imposed at the outer surface
of the homogenized liver sample. Water vapor in the tissue was
transported by both diffusion and convection. At the tissue–air
boundary
nv ,sur = cv · vn ,v + Dv · ∇cv

(kg · m−2 · s−1 )

(8)

where nv ,sur was the total mass flux through the surface of the
tissue, cv was the vapor concentration on tissue boundaries, vn ,v
was effective vapor velocity on tissue boundaries, and Dv was
vapor diffusivity in air. Along with the mass transport of species,

CHIANG et al.: MODELING AND VALIDATION OF MICROWAVE ABLATIONS WITH INTERNAL VAPORIZATION

659

TABLE I
INPUT PARAMETERS USED IN NUMERICAL MODEL
Parameter
Specific heat
capacity
Thermal
conductivity
Density
Viscosity
Diffusivity
Intrinsic
permeability
Relative
permeability

Unit

Solid liver

Water

Vapor

J/kg · K

1650

4178

1006

W/m · K

0.21

0.57

0.03

kg/m3
Pa · s
m2 /s
m2

1430
——
——
——

998
9.88E-4
1.00E-7
5.00E-14

Ideal gas
1.80E-5
2.60E-6
10.0E-14

⎧

.08
⎨ S w0 −0
.92
⎩0

3

S w > 0.09
S w < 0.09



1 −1 . 1 S w S w <
0

Sw >

1
1.1
1
1.1

the tissue boundaries also lose heat qn because of the vapor loss,
as well as cooling by ambient air
qn = nv ,sur · Cp,v T + h · (Tair − T ) (W · m−2 )

(9)

where Cp,v was the specific heat of water vapor(kJ/kg · K) and
h was the convective heat transfer coefficient of vapor at the
surface (W/m2 · K). The pressure at the domain boundaries was
set to be atmospheric to mimic experimental conditions. These
boundary conditions were set to mimic our experimental setup,
as opposed to a clinical case.
Table I shows the key input variables and their values. Several
of these parameters in the model were adopted from previous
studies focused on microwave heating in porous media [7], [8],
[12]–[18].
5) Model Assumptions: Some simplifying assumptions were
made to facilitate simulation of the microwave ablation process.
1) Initial uniform water content of 80%, which also accounted for residual fat content [19].
2) The liver architecture was set to 80% porous structure, as
estimated from foodstuff literature [20].
3) No consideration of tissue contraction in the heating zone
was given [21].
6) Simulation Strategy and Comparison: The electromagnetic power dissipation rate (1) was solved using time-harmonic
Maxwell’s equations and the remaining heat (2), mass (3), and
continuity (4), (5) transfer equations were solved using a transient solver. The electromagnetic power dissipation was updated
continuously with temperature-dependent relative permittivity
and effective conductivity [22]. Segregated solvers were used for
calculating temperature, water/vapor velocities, and water/vapor
concentrations. For rapid convergence, a boundary layer mesh
was created at the antenna–tissue interface. The antenna input
power of 50 W was applied for 300 s.
The new model was compared to a thermal conduction-only
model, using the same initial electromagnetic model in the microwave ablation as the heat source. Temperature outputs at 5,
10, and 20 mm away from the emission point of the antenna in
both models were compared against each other in 10 s intervals
throughout the ablation period.

Fig. 2. Experimental setup for the homogenized liver model. (a) Fiber-optic
temperature probes were placed 5, 10, and 20 mm away from the microwave
antenna. Ablations were created at 90 W for 5 min. (b) Postablation visualization
of the homogenized liver. The heating zone near the antenna has desiccated and
collapsed upon the microwave antenna and temperature probes.

B. Experimental Setup
Samples of fresh ex vivo bovine liver tissue (n = 5) were
obtained from a local abattoir and brought to room temperature
(20 °C). The samples (n = 5) were homogenized in order to
eliminate the influence of larger hepatic vessels on water vapor transport. A clinical microwave ablation antenna (Neuwave
Medical Inc, Madison, WI) was placed near the center of the
homogenized liver sample at a depth of 6 cm. Ablations were
created using a generator output of 90 W at 2.45 GHz for 300 s,
which corresponded to a power deposition of approximately
50 W in tissue after accounting for cable and generator losses.
Temperatures were measured 5, 10, and 20 mm from the microwave antenna, flush with the plane of maximal heating in
another cohort of samples (n = 5) (seeFig. 2). Mean temperatures at each location were averaged across samples (n = 5)
and used as a comparison against the numerical models.
A microwave antenna was also placed in intact liver samples (n = 5) in an open environment. Temperature probes were
placed 5, 10, and 20 mm away from the antenna and ablations were created with the same parameters used in the homogenized liver sample. Temperature comparisons between the
homogenized liver samples and the intact liver samples were
made against the numerical simulations to evaluate the role of
anatomical liver structures.
During the ablation of the homogenized liver solution, computed tomography (CT) data were acquired over the entire tissue
volume every 15 s (120 kVp, 200 mA, 512 by 512, 1:1 helical
pitch, 0.625 mm slice thickness; Discovery 750 HD, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI). CT volumes were coregistered using
rigid assumptions and the antenna tip as a fiducial marker. CT
data were then averaged over all experimental samples at each
time point to produce a single composite dataset for comparison
to the numerical modeling results.
C. Parametric Study and Model Comparison
A preliminary study was performed to find a simulated vapor concentration that mapped well to experimental attenuation

660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 3. (a) Temperature comparisons between the water vapor model, the thermal-conduction model and the experimental validation at positions 5, 10, and
20 mm away from the microwave antenna. The greatest discrepancy between the thermal-conduction model and vapor model occurred in the 5 mm position, where
temperatures exceeded 100 °C in the thermal-conduction model. The experimental validation demonstrated temperatures peaking at close to 100 °C, showing
good correlation to the water vapor model. (b) Temperature comparisons between the intact ex vivo liver tissue model and the numerical model. The intact
ex vivo liver model maintained the anatomical structure and vasculature that characterizes liver tissue. Microwave ablations created in the intact ex vivo tissue
exhibited temperature much higher than that predicted in the numerical model at all distances. This can be attributed to the fact that the numerical model utilized a
homogenous porous media system and assumed isotropic thermal and electrical properties throughout the tissue. There was also higher variability in the ex vivo
tissue compared to the homogenized liver, limiting its use for validation studies of numerical models.

found in the CT images. The area enclosed within simulated
vapor concentrations of 1%, 5%, 10%, and 50% were compared
against CT images thresholded at −200, −400, −600, and −800
Hounsfield units (HU). Similarity between the simulated and experimental image masks, A and B, respectively, was calculated
using the Jaccard index, J [23]:
J(A, B) =

A∩B
A∪B

(10)

where greater Jaccard indices (from 0 to 1) implied greater
overlap between the simulated and experimental data. The vapor
concentration and CT threshold pair that yielded the greatest
Jaccard index was used to compare simulated and experimental
data in later analyses.
Temperatures and Jaccard index from each sample group in
experimental studies were averaged across samples to obtain
a representative data point. All data presented in graphs are
displayed as the mean with the error bars representing standard
deviation.
III. RESULTS
A. Numerical Simulations and Validation
Simulation of the fully coupled computational model for
47 635 triangular elements required 30 min on a 2.4 GHz Xeon
processor work station with 24 GB RAM.
Qualitatively, the numerical model predicted an elongated
pattern of vapor movement along the shaft of the antenna for
the first 2 min, followed by a movement predominantly outward
from the antenna until the end of the ablation procedure. The
simulated rate of radial and longitudinal ablation zone growth
was greatest at the beginning of the heating cycle, then decreased
over time as noted in previous experimental studies [24]–[26].

The temperature output from the numerical model at discrete
points 5–20 mm away from the microwave antenna and its comparison to the homogenized liver experiment is summarized in
Fig. 3(a). The water vapor model 5 mm away from the microwave antenna exceeded 80 °C within the first 2 min of the
ablation before leveling off at 90–100 °C. This plateau-effect is
consistent with energy being absorbed during the phase transformation from water to vapor [4]. Temperatures simulated at more
peripheral locations exhibited a much slower increase to lower
levels, as expected. The experimental model matched that of
the water vapor model, but demonstrated a plateau at a slightly
higher temperature that was closer to 100 °C. Experimental temperature comparisons at distances of 10 and 20 mm, where the
water remained in liquid form, were measured to be within a
standard deviation of the water vapor model at corresponding
locations.
Temperature elevation in the homogenized liver model did
not match the intact liver as well. After 1 min of heating, the
temperature at the 10 and 20 mm locations was approximately
20 °C higher in the ex vivo intact liver compared to the homogenized liver samples. This difference was also seen in the
5 mm location but was minimized as the temperature peaked
as the temperature approached 100 °C [see Fig. 3(b)]. Standard deviation of the homogenized liver solution ranged from
1.50–7.31 °C while that of the ex vivo liver tissue ranged from
1.63–15.44 °C.
B. CT Imaging Study
CT imaging in homogenized liver showed trends in water vaporization formation similar to simulation results. Water vapor
appeared as a gradient from complete liquid water in normal tissue (0 HU) to pure water vapor (−1000 HU), with some variation

CHIANG et al.: MODELING AND VALIDATION OF MICROWAVE ABLATIONS WITH INTERNAL VAPORIZATION

661

Fig. 4. (a) Computational model of a water vapor map during microwave ablation heating was created and thresholded at 1% vapor to find the outer boundaries
of the ablation zone. (b) CT imaging was used to visualize the boundaries of the water vapor map using the −200 HU threshold. (c) Boundaries of simulated and
experimental vapor maps were compared to each other at multiple time points. (d) A similarity measure using the Jaccard index was calculated across each time
point in order to validate water vapor model.

in the baseline liver tissue. Very little vapor was observed in the
sample periphery, as indicated by the lack of change seen in the
radiodensity for liver tissue (50 HU). Significant water vapor
generated near the antenna reduced attenuation to levels associated with highly aerated tissue (−800 HU). Toward the end of
the heating period, pockets of water vapor were observed migrating to discrete positions away from the ablation zone. These
vapor-filled pockets collapsed after the microwave energy was
turned off, marking an almost immediate phase change from
water vapor to liquid in the absence of a microwave energy input. This rapid phase change is expected due to the continuous
heating rate necessary to overcome the enthalpy of vaporization
of liquid water (40.65 kJ/mol).

C. Parametric Study and Model Comparison
The preliminary study showed the highest Jaccard index value
of 0.613 between the 1% water vapor threshold in simulations
and the −200 HU threshold in the CT images. These values were
used to define the boundaries on simulated and experimental
vapor concentration maps.
Experimental water vapor profiles were somewhat larger than
those of simulations, especially toward the proximal portion of
the heating zone. In contrast, the distal portion of the ablation
zone exhibited excellent correlation to the modeling data. The
1% vapor contour diameter reached 2.40, 3.20, 3.80, 4.20, and
4.60 cm at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 min, respectively [see Fig. 4(a)].
These measurements compared favorably with the corresponding −200 HU threshold diameter: 2.56, 3.41, 4.00, 4.29, and
4.45 cm at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 min, respectively [see Fig. 4(b)].
Similarity between the simulated and experimental vapor maps
was relatively low for early ablation times (Jaccard index:
0.071 ± 0.039 at 15 s) but increased to a good correspondence

at later time points [Jaccard index: 0.73 ± 0.130 at 300 s; see
Fig. 4(c) and (d)].
IV. DISCUSSIONS
This study demonstrated the feasibility of adding water vaporization and transport to the simulation of microwave tissue heating. The water vapor model showed improved agreement against experimental temperature validations over the
thermal-conduction model, particularly in areas of intense heating near the center of the ablation zone. Simulation of temperature changes where vaporization was occurring leveled off
near 100 °C, a phenomenon not previously observed with the
thermal-conduction model. Lastly, the study demonstrated the
utility of CT imaging technique to validate the numerical predictions of water vapor movement in a cross-sectional area with
high spatial and temporal resolution.
Accounting for water vaporization and transport allows for
more flexible tissue property definition in future numerical studies. To date, models that describe physical properties of tissue
have been mostly limited to temperature as an input variable
[21], [22], [27]. The ability to predict when and where water
vaporization occurs would permit the use of tissue models that
decouple temperature and water content dependencies, leading
to more physically accurate simulations. Improved model accuracy could improve the design of ablation devices and energy
delivery techniques. Validating water vaporization and transport
may also facilitate more thorough analysis of heat transfer from
the various thermal ablation modalities.
The CT imaging and analysis technique used to observe vaporization and transport add another tool to characterize thermal
ablations. In previous studies, tissue water content could only
be analyzed from excised samples after an ablation zone was
created. Thus, the water content measurements were limited

662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

to the final ablation zone and the time evolution of dehydration could not be ascertained [19]. While water vapor content
was not explicitly quantified, CT imaging provided a direct and
temporally-sensitive method of validating the model vapor map
boundaries of the ablation zone. This novel technique augments
the previous strategies of temperature measurement and comparison to final ablation zone dimensions.
Ablations in the ex vivo liver model heated tissue at a faster
rate and to higher temperatures compared to the homogenized
liver model. This could be explained by the intact anatomical
structures in the liver, which offered resistance against free water vapor movement. The water vapor remained localized in
the tissue and was able to absorb more energy. The intact liver
anatomy, which included micro- and macro-vasculature and lobular geometry, also disrupted the heat transfer process and led
to greater variability in temperatures between samples. The ex
vivo liver model also heated tissue at a faster rate compared to
that seen in the numerical model. This was an expected result as
the numerical model was based on a homogenous porous media
environment, conditions much closer to that of the homogenized liver model than that in an intact liver model. Thus, the
homogenized liver experimental setup provided more reliable
temperature measurements for the numerical model validation.
Simulated and measured temperatures showed trends consistent with previous work, but with improved consistency in
the homogenized liver solution [22], [27], [28]. In studies that
did not account for water vaporization, simulated temperatures
tended to exceed measured values [27]. Such discrepancies were
more obvious over 100 °C, since the latent heat of vaporization
was not considered. Other paper has also shown that incorporating the effects of water vaporization into temperature-dependent
dielectric models can improve simulation-experiment correlation [22]. With the prediction of water content realized in the
present study, a numerical model of properties based on temperature and water content would likely improve the generality
of simulations. In turn this would increase the applicability of
simulations to a wider range of clinical goals.
Experimental vapor contours were consistently larger than
simulations, which may be due to assumptions made in
constructing the numerical model. Permeability and porosity
assumptions related to the homogenized liver solution were estimated from foodstuff data, as these properties were not readily
available for liver tissue. Assumed values may also have changed
during homogenization. Tissue contraction was not calculated,
which could potentially affect porosity and diffusion constants
associated with water vapor [21]. In addition, the tendency for
low-density water vapor to rise upward toward a lower-pressure
environment was neglected in the numerical model. Additional
refinements to the numerical model inputs may improve correspondence with experimental data.
V. CONCLUSION
This study demonstrated the potential of incorporating water
and water vaporization and transport physics into the simulation
of microwave thermal ablations. CT imaging was used as a realtime tool to monitor water vapor boundaries during experimental

studies, and could therefore be applied to validate the simulation
model. The new model may help to improve the accuracy of
microwave ablation simulations, allow more general analysis
of ablation inputs, and facilitate the analysis of heat and mass
transfer contributing to thermal ablation growth.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Huang, R. Hernandez-Alejandro, K. P. Croome, L. Yan, H. Wu,
Z. Chen, P. Prasoon, and Y. Zeng, “Radiofrequency ablation versus surgical resection for hepatocellular carcinoma in Childs A cirrhotics-a retrospective study of 1,061 cases,” J. Gastrointest. Surg., vol. 15, no. 2,
pp. 311–320, Feb. 2011.
[2] Y. K. Cho, H. Rhim, and S. Noh, “Radiofrequency ablation versus surgical
resection as primary treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma meeting the
Milan criteria: A systematic review,” J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., vol. 26,
no. 9, pp. 1354–1360, Jun. 2011.
[3] A. Andreano, Y. Huang, M. F. Meloni, F. T. Lee, and C. Brace, “Microwaves create larger ablations than radiofrequency when controlled for
power in ex vivo tissue,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 6, p. 2967, 2010.
[4] D. Yang, M. C. Converse, D. M. Mahvi, and J. G. Webster, “Expanding
the bioheat equation to include tissue internal water evaporation during heating,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1382–1388,
Aug. 2007.
[5] W. Schramm, D. Yang, and D. Haemmerich, “Contribution of direct
heating, thermal conduction and perfusion during radiofrequency and
microwave ablation,” in Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006,
vol. 1, pp. 5013–5016.
[6] L. Consiglieri, I. dos Santos, and D. Haemmerich, “Theoretical analysis of the heat convection coefficient in large vessels and the significance for thermal ablative therapies,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 48, no. 24,
pp. 4125–4134, Dec. 2003.
[7] A. K. D. Gülüm Sumnu, “Transport and related properties of breads baked
using various heating modes,” J. Food Eng., vol. 78, no. 4, pp. 1382–1387,
Feb. 2007.
[8] D. D. Dinčov, K. A. Parrott, and K. A. Pericleous, “Heat and mass transfer
in two-phase porous materials under intensive microwave heating,” J. Food
Eng., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 403–412, Dec. 2004.
[9] A. Halder, A. Dhall, and A. K. Datta, “Modeling transport in porous media
with phase change: Applications to food processing,” J. Heat Transfer,
vol. 133, no. 3, p. 031010, 2011.
[10] A. K. Datta, “Porous media approaches to studying simultaneous heat and
mass transfer in food processes. I: Problem formulations,” J. Food Eng.,
vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 80–95, May 2007.
[11] C. Ratti, G. H. Crapiste, and E. Rotstein, “A new water sorption equilibrium expression for solid foods based on thermodynamic considerations,”
J. Food Sci., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 738–742, 1989.
[12] A. Halder, A. Dhall, and A. K. Datta, “An improved, easily implementable,
porous media based model for deep-fat frying: Part I: Model development
and input parameters,” Food Bioprod. Process., vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 209–219,
Sep. 2007.
[13] A. Halder and A. K. Datta, “Surface heat and mass transfer coefficients for
multiphase porous media transport models with rapid evaporation,” Food
Bioprod. Process., vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 475–490, Jul. 2012.
[14] Y. Choi and M. R. Okos, “Thermal properties of liquid foods—Review,
physical and chemical properties of food,” in Physical and Chemical
Properties of Food, St. Joseph, MI, USA: American Society of Agricultural
Engineers, 1986, pp. 35–37.
[15] W. L. McCabe, J. C. Smith, and P. Harriott, Unit Operations of Chemical
Engineering. Boston, MA, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
[16] R. G. M. van der Sman, “Soft condensed matter perspective on moisture
transport in cooking meat,” Amer. Inst. Chem. Eng. J., vol. 53, no. 11,
pp. 2986–2995, 2007.
[17] H. Ni, Multiphase Moisture Transport in Porous Media Under Intensive
Microwave Heating. Ithaca, NY, USA: Cornell University, Jan. 1997.
[18] J. Bear, Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media. Mineola, NY, USA: Courier
Dover Publications, 1988.
[19] W. Zhou, M. Liang, H. Pan, X. Liu, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, L. Ling, Q. Ding,
and S. Wang, “Comparison of ablation zones among different tissues using
2450-MHz cooled-shaft microwave antenna: Results in ex vivo porcine
models,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 8, p. e71873, 2013.

CHIANG et al.: MODELING AND VALIDATION OF MICROWAVE ABLATIONS WITH INTERNAL VAPORIZATION

[20] C. J. Boukouvalas, M. K. Krokida, Z. B. Maroulis, and D. Marinos-Kouris,
“Density and porosity: Literature data compilation for foodstuffs,” Int. J.
Food Properties, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 715–746, 2006.
[21] C. L. Brace, T. A. Diaz, J. L. Hinshaw, and F. T. Lee, “Tissue contraction
caused by radiofrequency and microwave ablation: A laboratory study in
liver and lung,” J. Vasc. Interv. Radiol., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 1280–1286,
Aug. 2010.
[22] Z. Ji and C. L. Brace, “Expanded modeling of temperature-dependent
dielectric properties for microwave thermal ablation,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 56, no. 16, pp. 5249–5264, Aug. 2011.
[23] P. Jaccard, “The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone,” New Phytologist, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 37–50, 1912.
[24] J. Chiang, K. A. Hynes, M. Bedoya, and C. L. Brace, “A dual-slot microwave antenna for more spherical ablation zones: Ex vivo and in vivo
validation,” Radiology, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 382--389, 2013.
[25] Y. Sun, Z. Cheng, L. Dong, G. Zhang, Y. Wang, and P. Liang, “Comparison
of temperature curve and ablation zone between 915- and 2450-MHz
cooled-shaft microwave antenna: Results in ex vivo porcine livers,” Eur.
J. Radiol., vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 553–557, Mar. 2012.

663

[26] A. U. Hines-Peralta, N. Pirani, P. Clegg, N. Cronin, T. P. Ryan, Z. Liu, and
S. N. Goldberg, “Microwave ablation: Results with a 2.45-GHz applicator
in ex vivo bovine and in vivo porcine liver,” Radiology, vol. 239, no. 1,
pp. 94–102, Apr. 2006.
[27] H. Ai, S. Wu, H. Gao, L. Zhao, C. Yang, and Y. Zeng, “Temperature
distribution analysis of tissue water vaporization during microwave ablation: Experiments and simulations,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 28, no. 7,
pp. 674–685, Nov. 2012.
[28] V. Lopresto, R. Pinto, G. A. Lovisolo, and M. Cavagnaro, “Changes in
the dielectric properties of ex vivo bovine liver during microwave thermal
ablation at 2.45 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2309–2327,
Apr. 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

