618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

RFID Technology for Continuous Monitoring
of Physiological Signals in Small Animals
Tobias Volk∗ , Stefan Gorbey∗ , Mayukh Bhattacharyya, Waldemar Gruenwald, Björn Lemmer,
Leonhard M. Reindl, Member, IEEE, Thomas Stieglitz, Senior Member, IEEE, and Dirk Jansen, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Telemetry systems enable researchers to continuously
monitor physiological signals in unrestrained, freely moving small
rodents. Drawbacks of common systems are limited operation time,
the need to house the animals separately, and the necessity of a stable communication link. Furthermore, the costs of the typically
proprietary telemetry systems reduce the acceptance. The aim of
this paper is to introduce a low-cost telemetry system based on
common radio frequency identification technology optimized for
battery-independent operational time, good reusability, and flexibility. The presented implant is equipped with sensors to measure
electrocardiogram, arterial blood pressure, and body temperature.
The biological signals are transmitted as digital data streams. The
device is able of monitoring several freely moving animals housed
in groups with a single reader station. The modular concept of the
system significantly reduces the costs to monitor multiple physiological functions and refining procedures in preclinical research.
Index Terms—Biotelemetry, implant, in-vivo monitoring, radio
frequency identification (RFID), sensor system.

I. INTRODUCTION
RECLINICAL biomedical research has the need for animal models in pharmacological studies to obtain first results on drug efficacy during drug development. In Germany
alone, around 1.5 million rodents are used for medical research
each year [1]. Evaluation of intended and side effects in pharmaceutical studies requires continuous monitoring of physiological signals, but intermittent manual measurements need special
setups [2] and cause inconvenience and stress to the animals,
which changes vital parameters like heart rate and blood pressure, consequently no longer reflect the normal physiological
situation [3].

P

Manuscript received June 11, 2014; revised September 7, 2014; accepted
September 27, 2014. Date of publication October 13, 2014; date of current version January 16, 2015. This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry
for Research and Education (BMBF) within the project “μTrans” (FHprofUnt
program FKZ 17 095X 10, AIF, PT-FH). Asterisks indicate corresponding author.
∗ T. Volk is with the Institute for Applied Research, University of Applied
Sciences Offenburg, 77652 Offenburg, Germany (e-mail: tobias.volk@hsoffenburg.de).
∗ S. Gorbey is with the Kompetenzentrum Radiotelemetrie, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, 68169 Mannheim, Germany (e-mail:
stefan.gorbey@medma.uni-heidelberg.de).
M. Bhattacharyya, W. Gruenwald, and D. Jansen are with the Institute for
Applied Research, University of Applied Sciences Offenburg, 77652 Offenburg, Germany (e-mail: mayukh.bhattacharyya@hs-offenburg.de; waldemar.
greunwald@hs-offenburg.de; d.jansen@fh-offenburg.de).
L. M. Reindl and T. Stieglitz are with the Department of Microsystems
Engineering-IMTEK, University of Freiburg, 79110 Freiburg, Germany (e-mail:
reindl@imtek.uni-freiburg.de; stieglitz@imtek.uni-freiburg.de).
B. Lemmer is with the Kompetenzentrum Radiotelemetrie, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, 68169 Mannheim, Germany (e-mail:
bjoern.lemmer@medma.uni-heidelberg.de).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2361856

Biotelemetry systems represent an alternative to manual handling and measurements [3]–[5]. Even though the animals have
to undergo an implantation procedure, healing takes only several days. During chronic long-term studies, the handling and
total stress of the animals is reduced to a minimum, which will
not only affect the wellbeing of the animals but also statistical
variability. In using telemetric devices, the number of animals
needed could be reduced, which is one of the principles of the
ethical use of animals (3R concept).
However, common biotelemetry systems use either batteries
[6], which limit the operation time, or additional antennas for
inductive power supply [7], [8]. The communication protocols
are often proprietary, and it is therefore not possible to use
off-the-shelf components. Thus, even commercially available
monitoring systems are costly.
In the last decades, radio frequency identification (RFID) has
been introduced in many industrial fields, and low-cost devices
have been developed to monitor consumer goods. Passive RFID
transponders have become more and more relevant in industrial
farming [9] and veterinary science [10], [11], where it is used
to identify animals and is also able to store a small amount of
data. Particularly, it is possible to meet tracking directives in
an automated manner. The technology became widespread and
widely accepted [12].
The aim of our investigations was the development of a lowcost system using RFID technology as an alternative to conventional biotelemetry systems. We developed an implant for
rodents that is able to measure ECG, arterial blood pressure,
and body temperature.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. System Concept
The concept is focused on increasing the efficiency for laboratories with dozens of subjects as well as on cost reduction.
Therefore, each animal is equipped with one telemetrical implant, which is designed for good reusability. Single animals
can be housed in euro standard type III cages with a floor area
of 825 cm2 , but for social animals like rats group-housing of up
to five subjects in type IV cages (1815 cm2 ) is preferable. Each
cage is equipped with one ISO15693 [13] compatible reader
device with its antenna placed below the cage.
The RFID reader inductively powers the implants and provides a digital communication link with a carrier frequency
of 13.56 MHz and a data rate of approximately 26 kbps. It
is bidirectional, block-oriented, secured by checksums, and
able to handle multiple transponders. Using the standard RFID

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

VOLK et al.: RFID TECHNOLOGY FOR CONTINUOUS MONITORING OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS IN SMALL ANIMALS

619

Fig. 1. System overview of a multidevice monitoring system. Up to four animals can be monitored with one RFID reader device. Several RFID reader stations
and video camera(s) are connected to a local workstation (nettop). A client–server topology has been setup, which connects the local workstation to several web
clients as well as to a central data and application server.

specifications, it is possible to use commercial off-the-shelf
components and common interfaces.
These benefits are used to integrate implants into a modern
and easily scalable client–server topology [14]. In the system
depicted in Fig. 1, the reader operates like a gateway and is
connected via universal serial bus (USB) to a local workstation.
Its function is to control the communication of multiple readers
as well as additional USB devices, e.g., a webcam to monitor
the behavior of the animals. In large-scale systems, it is possible
to use more than one station.
Using a local area network, each station communicates with
the central data and application server, which uses a LAMP
(Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP) stack. All results are written via ODBC into a MySQL database (Oracle Corporation,
USA). Commands to control the acquisition process are also
held in this database, and it is possible to access the data without using a second communication protocol. Consequently, the
database provides a bidirectional communication link between
local workstation and server.
A customized software suite, installed on the server, is also
able to access the database. The software interprets and provides
the data in HTML language format, which can be accessed from
most web-enabling devices using a web browser.
B. Implant
The implant to measure ECG, arterial blood pressure, and
body temperature is the only proprietary element in the system.
It communicates like a common RFID transponder, but implements several concepts, which allow autonomous operations and
processing of physiological signals. In order to reduce the costs,
the implant is designed to last for at least five consecutive uses
in different animals. The implant is wirelessly powered to avoid
the operation time limitations caused by power consumption.
Supply interruptions, which happen if the implants leave the
magnetic field or stay in an unfavorable position, are bridged by
using an electricity storage device, which is charged inside the
field, in a so-called semipassive operation mode [15].
To guarantee good reusability, it is possible to separate the
sensors, which are directly attached to the animal’s body and
take physiological signals at the desired areas, from the elec-

tronics for signal processing and communication. Due to the
different requirements, the so-called sensor module is described
separately in Section II-C. The following section focuses on
the reusable part of the implant. It presents the power supply
as well as the necessary steps to process physiological signals
from plug-in sensors for RFID access. Furthermore, the implementation, casting, and electronic design are shown.
1) Electronics: The electronics of the implant are built in a
discrete manner. Only the RFID communication is integrated
in an application-specified integrated circuit (ASIC) [16] using
AMIS 0.35-μm technology (ON Semi 0.35-μm CMOS Co35M
logic and mixed technology). Besides digital logic, the device
includes analog circuits. It contains an envelope detector to demodulate the data signal, which uses an amplitude shift keying,
from the reader. Another circuit generates a clock signal out
of the carrier frequency of the magnetic field. Power transistors protect the circuit against electrical surges and handle load
modulation for implant to reader communication. In addition,
a power rectifier generates the necessary direct current to drive
all other components on the implant.
The ASIC is placed into the implant’s electronics via chipon-board technology or is bonded in a QFN (quad flat no lead)
housing with 32 pins. The antenna geometry is part of the design
of the printed circuit board (PCB) and consists of two wires
around the circuit on each of the four layers of the PCB. In
detail, it is a 29 × 21.5 mm rectangular PCB antenna with
eight turns, which provides an inductance of 4.26 μH. The rest
of the electronic parts are common components. The circuit is
organized as a microcontroller system, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Apart from the RFID front-end and antenna, it consists of the
following:
r a common microcontroller, Atmel ATMEGA165PV,
equipped with analog-to-digital-converter (ADC) inputs,
a serial peripheral interface (SPI), as well as a real-time
clock (RTC) circuit able to drive a tuning fork crystal oscillator;
r a power management system including an electricity storage device lasting several hours to also work outside the
charging field, as well as regulation circuits;
r a storage device, Microchip 25AA1024, to buffer 50 measurements;

620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 2. Design of the hardware architecture of the implant with wireless energy
supply and data transmission via RFID. The implant’s electronics (left block)
can be connected to versatile sensors (right block) to monitor ECG, temperature
(NTC), and blood pressure.

r analog amplifiers optimized for ECG, arterial blood pressure, and temperature sensing.
Further details of the power management system are described in Section II-B2. The design of the analog amplifiers
as well as the function of the remaining circuit is provided in
Section II-B3.
2) Power Concept: Common RFID systems are classified
into active, including a battery, or passive, without a battery
[17], as well as semiactive, where active transponders operate
passively inside the field to spare battery life [18]. The presented
powering concept of powering the device passively inside the
field and buffering energy for times without sufficient field can,
therefore, be described as semipassive.
To implement the concept, the power, which is induced into
the antenna, is transferred into an electricity storage device from
which the implant is powered. A secondary battery, Panasonic
VL1220, is used, but other technologies are suitable as well.
The supply voltage of the electronics and sensors of the implant
is 2.6 V and is generated by a low drop-out regulator using the
voltage of the storage device as input.
To charge the storage device, the characteristics of an LC
circuit are used, which is formed by the implant antenna together
with an additional capacitor to obtain resonance at 13.56 MHz.
Inside the magnetic field the voltage across the antenna rises
until a power transfer is established. The voltage is converted to
a rectified voltage by the internal rectifiers of the RFID frontend, which is directly connected to the storage device. A shunt
regulator circuit stabilizes the voltage on the storage device to a
value of 3.55 V. Therefore, a comparator, MAX9117, switches to
an extra load, approximately 5 mA. An additional current limiter
is not necessary in this design, because under normal conditions
the power source is not able to generate critical current levels.
3) Signal Processing: To use the benefits of a semipassive
power supply and to simplify the integration into the RFID
system, the signal processing is organized as an autonomous
data logger. A so-called profile, with the configuration of the
three implemented sensor channels and measurement schedule,
is programmed into the memory. Without a communication link,
the implant is therefore able to measure signals independently
and keep the results in the integrated storage. A profile provides

the opportunity to scan, for example, the temperature channel
each hour and the ECG each quarter-hour or to set the device to
increase the number of samples at a specific time of interest. For
a nearly continuous measurement, samples can be taken almost
directly after each other. A small operation system running on
the microcontroller executes the profile like a program using a
RTC timer tick.
To set up the profile as well as for data exchange, only RFID
is used. The communication is implemented as with common
RFID transponders. Only a few extra commands to control the
acquisition flow, e.g., “start” or “stop Logging” as well as “initialize,” are additionally added as custom commands according
to the standard. The data are transferred block-orientated using “read” or “write multiple blocks” commands. Controlled by
the microcontroller, the commands directly access the memory,
which is organized by a flexible file system [19], [20]. All data
are kept in files together with additional calibration information
and checksums.
The physical as well as parts of the data link layer of the RFID
communication are implemented using the RFID front-end and
the microcontroller, which are connected via a proprietary bus
system. The RFID front-end modulates and demodulates signals
from the magnetic field. The higher layers of the open systems
interconnection (OSI) model are implemented as a program on
the microcontroller. The concept follows the philosophy: realtime accesses are processed in the digital part of the front-end,
whereas slower protocol parts are implemented in software.
Besides the communication, the microcontroller also controls
the acquisition of the three sensor channels. According to the
profile, the microcontroller powers the analog amplifiers as well
as the sensors and captures the resulting signals using the integrated 10-bit ADC. It implements a single measurement for the
temperature channel as well as 477-Hz synchronous sampling
for the ECG and the pressure channel.
The channels transform signals provided by the sensors from
low amplitude and high impedance to high amplitude and low
impedance. More precise, the signals of the probes, described
in Section II-C, are matched to the input voltage range of the
used ADC, which is 2.6 V. For this purpose, the transponder
carries four operational amplifiers, TI OPA369, as well as two
instrumental amplifiers, TI INA321.
Temperature and pressure are amplified by a fixed value. The
temperature channel is processed single-ended by an operational
amplifier with an amplification factor of four. An instrumental
amplifier processes the pressure signal with an amplification
factor of 110.
The ECG channel is set to be used for rats with heart rates
of approximately 300 beats/min and signals of around 0.5 mV
amplitude using subcutaneous electrodes. The body potential,
i.e., the right leg lead, is set to half of the analog supply voltage
instead of ground. An instrumental amplifier is used as an input
circuit. Using two operational amplifiers, the signal is filtered
for a frequency range from 2 to 150 Hz and amplified by a factor
of 770. The channel allows a resolution of 3.4 μV.
4) Biocompatible Sealing: The implant is designed to operate
several weeks inside the body. Therefore, this paper presents a
cost-efficient device casing, which shows less interference with

VOLK et al.: RFID TECHNOLOGY FOR CONTINUOUS MONITORING OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS IN SMALL ANIMALS

621

TABLE I
SENSOR CONFIGURATIONS
Configuration
A
B
C
D

ECG Cables

ECG Electrodes

Pressure

copper on polyimide (PCB)
copper on polyimide (PCB)
copper on polyimide (PCB)
helical nickel-copper wires

electroplated gold
electroplated gold
steel 1.4435 with hooks
steel 1.4435 with hooks

invasive with A. abdominalis bypass
noninvasive cuff-like attached to A. abdominalis wall
invasive fluid-filled catheter in A. femoralis
invasive fluid-filled catheter in A. femoralis

the magnetic field than metal casing. The circuit board is cast in
epoxide (EPOTEK 301, Epoxy Technology Inc., USA). Only the
outer shape is defined by a mold with a size of 32 × 36 × 5.5 mm,
which is produced with an Objet 3-D printer (Stratasys Ltd.,
USA). The inner space is filled with the casting material. For a
good biocompatibility, the surface is finished by coating it with
an additional epoxide layer as well as long-time-compatible
silicon (MED-6605, NuSil Technology LLC, USA).
Only the connector for the sensor module is kept open. In a
final step, the implant is equipped with a sensor module, which
is plugged into the device and fixed and sealed using room temperature vulcanization silicone (MED-2000, NuSil Technology
LLC, USA), which provides mechanical fixation and isolation.
The whole unit is disinfected using per-acetic acid (Wolfasteril
E400, Kesla Hygiene AG, Germany).
C. Sensors and Electrodes
For better reusability of the device, the ECG electrodes and
sensors to measure arterial blood pressure and body temperature
are separated from the major implant to make them disposable
and significantly reduce the costs. Flexible wires make it possible to place the sensors according to the researchers needs.
A flexible polyimide circuit board [21] combines sensors and
wires and provides an interface to the implant. Calibration and
testing is done separately. The concept allows the use of different
sensor and electrode configurations.
1) Electrics: The electrics consist of the following:
r a resistor with negative temperature coefficient (NTC),
Panasonic ERT-JZEV104H;
r a miniaturized pressure cell, BCM SE101;
r several calibration resistors;
r three ECG electrodes.
Except for the electrodes, the components are mounted on
the circuit board by a reflow solder process. Gold bumps on the
contacts of the pressure cell, in bare die format, make aluminum
pads solderable and allow flip-chip bonding. It is possible to populate, test, as well as to do further production steps in batches.
A separation is only necessary during the final steps of housing.
The NTC resistor is used as a temperature sensor. Together
with a reference resistor, it is configured as a voltage divider,
which is adjusted to a defined temperature of 36 °C. The signal is
the voltage difference between current value and virtual ground.
In the current setup, a range from 27 °C to 42 °C is covered.
The pressure is measured by a miniaturized pressure cell. The
cell includes a resistive Wheatstone bridge and provides an absolute pressure value. An additional calibration resistor sets the
bridge voltage to zero at 875 mmHg. (The unit mmHg is used for

blood pressure in most countries. For transparency, all pressure
values are given in this unit instead of SI standard unit Pascal
[1 mmHg = 1 torr = 1.33 mbar = 133 Pa)]. After amplification and sampling, the sensor covers an absolute pressure range
between 650 and 1100 mmHg with a resolution of 0.4 mmHg.
To obtain the physiological parameter, the signal is corrected
with respect to the ambient pressure, which is measured by an
external device outside the cage.
For ECG, three electrodes are used, two for a bipolar lead with
one reference electrode. The electrodes are metal contacts (see
Table I), which are directly attached to the muscle surface. For
ECG as well as pressure measurement, different configurations
can be used.
2) Configurations: Based on the populated PCB four configurations, A, B, C, and D, with different ECG electrodes and
cables as well as different pressure measurement methods were
tested. The specifications are listed in Table I. The sensor is
always located at the connecting interface.
For the ECG electrodes galvanized gold (configuration A, B;
see Table I) as well as 1.4435 steel (configuration C, D; see
Table I) is used. The steel electrodes are glued on the gold contacts using electrical conductive epoxide (TDS CW2400, ITW
Chemtronics, USA). Additional hooks optimize the fixation to
the surface. The connection between the electrodes and implant
is prepared by the polyimide PCB or in the case of configuration
D by helical nickel–copper wires (Osypka AG, Germany).
The pressure cell is encapsulated using a biocompatible glop
top material (EPOTEK 320, Epoxy Technology Inc., USA). An
additional silicone layer on the sensor membrane (MED-6605,
NuSil Technology LLC, USA) keeps the membrane clear and
provides chemical as well as electrical isolation.
The resulting pressure module is used to implement three different approaches. Configuration B implements a noninvasive
concept using a cuff, which is formed by the isolating silicone
layer. Two other approaches apply invasive methods. In configuration A, the pressure sensor is mounted over a hole in a
heparized polyurethane tube (CBAS-C30, 3F, Solomon Scientific, USA), which serves as a bypass, providing direct contact
between sensor and bloodstream. The configuration C and D
use a paraffin-filled CBAS-C30 tube with a heparin-containing
tip transferring pressure from the open end in the bloodstream
to the sensor [22].
D. In-Vivo Study
Seven chronic experiments were performed with different
configurations of the implant (see Table II) in compliance with
the German Animal Welfare Act approved by the local authority

622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE II
CHRONIC EXPERIMENTS
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

No. of subjects

Sensor configuration (see Table I)

Duration

1
2
2
1
2
2
2

A
A& B
C
C
C
D
D

1d
48 d
28 d
2d
19 d
22 d
67 d

Fig. 4. Sensor part of the implant before separation. Polyimide-based PCB
with connection pad array, interconnect lines, gold pads as ECG electrodes and
contacts for discrete sensor elements (e.g., diodes for measurement of blood
oxygen saturation). A pressure sensor is flip-chip mounted on the substrate
(magnified view, lower right).

Fig. 3. Climate housing container with controlled light regime system
equipped with several RFID readers for individual and group housing and a
local workstation for data handling and storage.

(RP Karlsruhe AZ 35-9185.81/G-26/13). Throughout the experiment, the animals were kept in a climate cabinet under a lightdark cycle of 12:12 h. The container [Fig. 3] was equipped with
a local station, two type III cages, and one type IV cage. Each
type III cage is equipped with a reader with 1 W transmission
power (Feig ID ISC.MR101-USB) together with a 34 × 24 cm
pad antenna. The type IV cage is equipped with a self-made 55
× 35 cm antenna to match the dimension of the type IV cage
as well as a long range reader (Feig ID ISC.LR2500-A), which
is configured to 2 W of power. Data acquisition and implant
control was done via web access over a distance of 200 km
between the animal care facility (Mannheim) and the Institute
for Applied Research (Offenburg). The ECG signals, including
heart rate calculation, arterial blood pressure with systolic and
diastolic values and body temperature were taken every 20 min
throughout the experiment.
In the most experiments, two sibling male rats with an age
of at least eight weeks and a body weight above 200 g were
used. At the beginning the animals were kept separate in type
III cages until operation wounds were healed. After one week,

they were transferred into type IV and housed in groups of two.
Implantation was done under 2–3% isoflurane anesthesia with
pre- and post-analgesia using carprofen. When measuring the
blood pressure in or at the aorta abdominalis an abdominal incision was made and the device was placed and secured inside
the cavity. An alternative, less invasive method was also examined, whereby the device was placed in a skin pocket within the
abdominal region while the pressure catheter was inserted into
the aorta femoralis and advanced into the lower aorta to prevent
vascular stasis and rapid clotting. The ECG electrodes were always subcutaneously attached to muscle tissue in Einthoven II
positioning for all measurements.
The experiments were carried out as long the implants provided usable results. Thereafter, the animals were euthanized
using a high dose of isoflurane and the implants were explanted
and inspected.
III. RESULTS
A. Sensor Modules
A batch of approximately 30 circuit boards, one example
shown in Fig. 4, was successfully populated and partly processed
to sensor modules. Fig. 5 shows an overview of the modules as
listed in Table I. Each sensor module was tested and calibrated
before assembly. The yield was mainly reduced by damaged
bondings during encapsulation.
The function of the electrodes was qualitatively tested using
a continuity tester. The calibration resistor of the temperature
sensor was set in a range between 54 and 57 kΩ. Later it was
set to a fix value of 56 kΩ and calibration parameters were
defined to remove the remaining variance during digital data
processing. At 2.6-V supply voltage, the temperature sensor

VOLK et al.: RFID TECHNOLOGY FOR CONTINUOUS MONITORING OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS IN SMALL ANIMALS

Fig. 5.

623

Sensor configurations according to Table I.
Fig. 7. Magnetic field and harvested power measured inside a type III cage.
The magnetic field is generated by a RFID reader with a transmission power
of 1 W. The antenna with a size of 34 × 24 cm is placed below the cage. The
magnetic field strength is measured according to ISO 10373-7 [23] and is shown
as a solid line (left y-axis). The dashed line marks the harvested energy (right
y-axis). The power consumption of the circuit is shown by the small dotted line.

Fig. 6. Low-cost implant for small animal models based on RFID technology.
Polyimide-based PCB with integrated sensors for blood oxygen saturation,
blood pressure and two ECG electrodes (left side) are connected to the electronic
system for signal amplification and processing, power management and data
transfer via RFID. The electronic circuitry has been encapsulated in epoxy resin
with an additional silicone rubber coating.

reaches a sensitivity at mean of −34 mV per K according to the
calibration measurements.
To calibrate the pressure sensor, a resistor of approximately
85 kΩ was placed between positive output and ground. Therefore, the configurations A, C, and D show similar sensitivities,
which are approximately 53 μV per mmHg. The cuff were only
qualitatively tested using a silicone tube as replacement for the
vessel. In contrast to the described method, the sensor is calibrated to zero at environmental pressure.
B. Implant
1) Manufacturing: The implants, from which one of them
is depicted in Fig. 6, were produced on demand. The circuit
boards were populated using a conventional reflow soldering
process. Casting was done with low temperature 45 °C at the
beginning and higher temperature 70 °C at the end, because
the mold becomes soft at temperatures above 50 °C. Air pock-

ets, which sometimes occurred, were opened and filled during
surface finishing. The final device reaches a weight of approximately seven gram after casting and was tested via the connector
before sensor modules were installed.
2) Power Management: The power supply was measured
open circuit. Therefore, the configuration of the type III cage
or more precisely a reader device with a transmission power of
1 W was used. In the middle of the cage, the magnetic field is in
the range of 0.6 to 2.2 A/m (RMS) at the first 15 cm of distance
[Fig. 7]. Therefore, the implant is able to harvest 4.3 mW at
max. Taking the static power consumption, which is 0.5 mW
inside and 0.1 mW outside the field, into account, it is possible
to charge the battery or to drive the circuit passively up to a
distance of 15 cm.
Due to the implemented acquisition concept, which solely
takes measurement sequences and powers the whole circuit at
a configured time of interest, the exact power consumption depends on the profile. The implant needs approximately 15.7 mJ
to process one sequence of all sensors and is theoretically able
to run outside the field for approximately six days with a fully
charged battery using the standard configuration, i.e., taking one
sample each 20 min.
3) Data Acquisition: One benefit of the modular concept is
that the signal acquisition can be tested before mounting the
sensor module using electrical signals on the sensor interface.
The result of one of these measurements is depicted in Fig. 8. The
graphic shows that the device is able to measure fast variations
of the signal and fulfills the specifications.
After mounting of the sensors, the implants were finally
checked to ensure that all device were fully operational before
implantation. The mounting process did not change the signals
of ECG and the temperature sensor. Only the pressure sensor
shows a small offset drift, due to the contact voltage as well as
the post curing process, because the calibration was close to the
manufacturing. The offset drift was compensated by software,

624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 8. Simulated ECG (lower curve) and pressure signal (upper curve) measured by the reusable part of the implant before mounting the sensor module.

Fig. 9. Real-time blood pressure (upper curve) and ECG (lower curve) signal taken from a male rat. Blood pressure was measured with a fluid-filled
catheter inserted into the Aorta femoralis. ECG was measured in Einthoven II
configuration. The recordings were taken during experiment 7.

so that only calibrated and 100% tested devices were used in the
following in-vivo study.
C. First In-Vivo Measurement
In the facility in Mannheim, the devices were successfully
implanted and first results were taken. An example of an unfiltered real-time readout is shown in Figs. 9 and 10. It shows that
the ECG and the pressure measurement methods used in configurations A, C, and D show a good noise to signal ratio and reliable physiological data. The noninvasive, bloodless aortic cuff
measurement method (configuration B) was saturated after implantation and was not further investigated in the chronic study.
D. Chronic In-Vivo Study
Experiments were performed as long as possible to gain
experience with the system. Some of the implants were used
for a maximum of 67 days with proper power supply and
communication.
The experiments were limited due to mechanical problems
(experiments 2, 3, and 7), but also animals tried to remove their

Fig. 10. Real-time blood pressure (upper curve) and ECG (lower curve) signal
taken from a male rat. Blood pressure was measured by a bypass set on the Aorta
abdominalis. ECG was measured in Einthoven II configuration. The recordings
were taken during experiment 2.

Fig. 11. Heart rate of a male rat over a period of three weeks calculated from
the ECG. The graph shows diurnal variations with a minimum during the day
and a maximum at night. The recordings were taken during experiment 6.

implants (experiments 4, 5, and 6) even after surgical incisions
were healed, which is may be caused by the increase of activity
due to group housing. The implants were, therefore, placed in
the abdominal cavity instead of a skin pocket during the last
experiment.
In addition, the invasive blood pressure measurements methods always resulted in a signal loss due to blood clots. Implanting
the sensor directly into the blood stream (configuration A), we
were able to measure the blood pressure for around half a day.
Using a fluid-filled catheter (configurations C and D) enabled
us to extend the measurement to around three to four days, but
with increasing attenuation of the signal.
The polyimide PCB (configurations A, B, and C), especially
the connector area, was vulnerable to shear and tear stress which
loosens the electrical isolation of the polyimide foil and added
background noise or resulted in a short circuit. Therefore, in the
current design the device only provided an ECG signal up to six
day using the polyimide PCB.
Longer operations were performed using configuration D.
Two sample measurements are depicted in Figs. 11 and 12. The

VOLK et al.: RFID TECHNOLOGY FOR CONTINUOUS MONITORING OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS IN SMALL ANIMALS

625

implant, enables application specific changes and the use of
components already available on the market. This makes the
device a highly competitive product to already available telemetric devices. Especially the use of low-cost disposable sensor
modules and the semipassive power supply reduce the cost of
purchase and refurbishment. The main RFID implant can be
reused several times. A modern, standardized, and cost-efficient
IT infrastructure also allows central data management and access with web-enabled devices. Long-term stability, especially
of the sensor module and blood pressure measurement concept,
is subject of ongoing research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Fig. 12. Body temperature of a male rat measured inside the abdominal cavity
over several weeks. The graph shows diurnal variations with a minimum at day
and a maximum in the night. Two exceptional events within the graph are caused
by technical incidents: a small decrease on August 6th due to a check-up as well
as small interruption on August 19th due to maintenance. The recordings were
taken during experiment 7.

The authors would like to thank their collaborators at the
University of Heidelberg, Kompetenzentrum Radiotelemetrie,
for conducting the experiments and the Osypka AG, Rheinfelden
(Germany) for technical and material support.
REFERENCES

heart rate (see Fig. 11) was calculated from the ECG signal.
The body temperature was measured inside the abdominal cavity. Both measurements show reliable physiological values with
the typical diurnal variation and confirm that the system was
operational over several weeks.
IV. DISCUSSION
The in-vivo study successfully demonstrates that the presented concept of an RFID-based modular implant is an alternative to common designs. Main advantages are the energy
concept and reusability due to the modular design. Both the network as well as the reusable part of the implant could be used
immediately for further analysis and applications.
The sensor module needs to be refined. Especially the mechanical stability of the sensor interconnection has to be increased. In addition, the problem with the preferable noninvasive blood pressure measurement method could be solved by
filtering the offset voltages to prevent saturation and build a cuff
that clings around the aorta. For the presented invasive method
the material, which is in contact with blood, has to be optimized.
Nevertheless, the implant is able to measure ECG, arterial
blood pressure and temperature with sufficient accuracy using
the presented configurations. The signal, depicted in Figs. 9 and
10, show the required resolution as well as a good signal to noise
ratio. The remaining artefacts, a common result of electrode
motion, could be removed by applying high- and low-pass filters.
The device is well suited to measure the moment-to-moment
liability of the blood pressure and the heart function by ECG.
V. CONCLUSION
A concept of a low-cost RFID implant to measure physiological functions in small animals has been proposed, developed,
and characterized by sampling ECG, arterial blood pressure,
and body temperature data. The accuracy is within the requirements of a modern biotelemeteric device and enables research
on freely moving animals, which can be kept in groups. The
modular concept of the device, separating sensors and RFID

[1] I. Aigner, “Tierschutzbericht der bundesregierung 2011 (trans.: Animal
protection report of the Federal Government 2011),” BMELV, Bonn,
Germany Rep. 17/6826, 2011.
[2] P. E. Sharp and M. C. LaRegina, The Laboratory Rat. Boca Raton, FL,
USA: CRC Press, 1998.
[3] A. Grundt, C. Grundt, S. Gorbey, M. Thomas, and B. Lemmer, “Straindependent differences of restraint stress-induced hypertension in WKY
and SHR,” Physiol. Behavior, vol. 97, nos. 3/4, pp. 341–346, 2009.
[4] C. Hiploylee and F. Colbourne, “Intracranial pressure measured in freely
moving rats for days after intracerebral hemorrhage,” Exp. Neurol.,
vol. 255, pp. 49–55, 2014.
[5] B. Dexter, K. Rahmouni, T. Cushman, G. Hermann, C. Ni, P. Nopoulos,
D. Thedens, and R. Roghair, “Neonatal leptin deficiency reduces frontal
cortex volume and programs adult hyperactivity in mice,” Behavioural
Brain Res., vol. 263, pp. 115–121, 2014.
[6] K. Fricke, A. Dounavis, and R. Sobot, “Wireless telemetry system for
implantable cardiac monitoring in small animal subjects using pressurevolume sensors.” presented at the IEEE 11th Int. New Circuits Syst. Conf.,
Paris, France, 2013.
[7] P. Cong, N. Chaimanonart, W. H. Ko, and D. Young, “A wireless and
batteryless 10-bit implantable blood pressure sensing microsystem with
adaptive RF powering for real-time laboratory mice monitoring,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuit, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 3631–3644, Dec. 2009.
[8] E. Kilinc, B. Canovas, F. Maloberti, and C. Dehollain, “Intelligent cage for
remotely powered freely moving animals telemetry systems,” presented
at the IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Seoul, Korea, 2012.
[9] A. Voulodimos, C. Patrikakis, A. Sideridis, V. Ntafis, and E. Xylouri, “A
complete farm management system based on animal identification using
RFID technology,” Comput. Electron. Agriculture, vol. 70, pp. 380–388,
2010.
[10] W. J. Eradus and M. B. Jansen, “Animal identification and monitoring,”
Comput. Electron. Agriculture, vol. 24, pp. 91–98, 1999.
[11] L. Catarinucci, R. Colella, L. Mainetti, L. Patrono, S. Pieretti, I. Sergi,
and L. Tarricone, “Smart RFID antenna system for indoor tracking
and behavior analysis of small animals in colony cages,” IEEE Sens.
J., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1198–1206, Apr. 2014.
[12] R. Murphy, D. Pendell, D. Morris, J. Scanga, K. Belk, and G. Smith,
“Review: Animal identification systems in North America,” Professional
Animal Sci., vol. 24, pp. 277–286, 2008.
[13] Identification Cards—Contactless Integrated Circuit Cards—Vicinity
Cards, ISO 15693, 2010.
[14] T. Volk and D. Jansen, “Implantable RFID sensor platform to monitor
vital functions of small animals controlled by network based software,” in
Proc. 2012 Eur. Conf. Smart Objects, Syst. Technol., 2012, pp. 1–6.
[15] T. Volk and D. Jansen. (2011). “Semi passive sensor implant powered via RFID to monitor vital functions of small animals,” 1st
Int. Workshop Wireless Energy Transport Harvesting, [Online].
Available: http://www.iwweth.org/wp-content/uploads/SEMI-PASSIVESENSOR-IMPLANT-POWERED-VIA-RFID-TO-MONITOR-VITALFUNCTIONS-OF-SMALL-ANIMALS_abstract.pdf

626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

[16] T. Volk, “RFID-Frontend ISO 15693,” MPC Workshopband, Hochschule
Ulm, vol. 39, pp. 29–34, 2008.
[17] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in
Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency Identification and Near-Field
Communication. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2010.
[18] H. K. Heinrich and V. Pillai, “RFID tag having combined battery and
passive power source,” U.S. Patent 2003/0017804 A1, Jan. 23, 2003.
[19] T. VolkD. Jansen, H. Speletz, B. Fleiner, D. Bau, A. Kreker, and A. Riske,
“Active RFID sensor with integrated file system for logistic applications,”
in Proc. RFID Systech 2010 – Eur. Workshop Smart Syst., 2010, pp. 1–7.
[20] D. Jansen, H. Speletz, and T. Volk, “Anordnung zur Organisation
von Daten auf einem RFID- Transponder (eng. title: Configuration to
organize data on a RFID transponder),” German Patent Application
DE102012008147A1, Apr. 24, 2012.
[21] T. Volk and D. Jansen, “Anordnung zur Erfassung von physiologischen
Vitalparametern in Versuchstieren und anderen Lebewesen mit Hilfe der
RFID Übertragungstechnik (engl. title: “Implantable device for detection
of vital parameters in laboratory animals and other living things, has
catheters, which are formed as spiral-shaped extensions in inside of comprehensive antenna),” German Patent Application DE102011119358A1,
Nov. 23, 2011.
[22] B. P. Brockway, P. A. Mills, and T. Miller, “Device for chronic measurement of internal body pressure,” U.S. Patent 4 846 191, Jul. 1989.
[23] Identification Cards—Test Methods—Part 7: Vicinity Cards, ISO 10373-7,
2008.
Tobias Volk was born in 1981. He received the Diploma and Master’s degrees
in electrical engineering from the University of Applied Sciences Offenburg,
Offenburg, Germany.
Since 2006, he has been a Development Engineer for the Institute for Applied
Research, University of Applied Sciences Offenburg. His research interests
include low-power electronics and RFID devices in medical environments.

Stefan Gorbey was born in Stuttgart, Germany, and studied biology at the
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany, before moving to Mannheim,
where he received the Ph.D. degree in human sciences from the Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, in 2001.
His thesis topic examined the circadian regulation of cardiovascular rhythms.
Since then, he has been with the University of Heidelberg, doing research with
a focus on the circadian clock and physiological functions mostly using radio
telemetry. In 2007, he set up a telemetric research center offering telemetric services to other research institutions. The center specializes in providing real-time
data to enable the analysis of behavior and physiological functions in disease
models, drug targeting, and drug validation. He is a Lecturer in pharmacology
at the Faculty of Medicine and is regularly asked to be a guest speaker about his
specialist field in chronobiology and pharmacology. His interest in developing
and improving available telemetric devices has grown over the years since he
has been working closely with telemetric devices.

Mayukh Bhattacharyya was born in 1985. He received the Bachelor’s degree in electrical and electronics engineering from Visvesvaraya Technological
University, Belgaum, India, in 2007 and the Master of Science degree in communication and media engineering from the University of Applied Sciences
Offenburg, Offenburg, Germany, in 2010.
Since 2010, he has been a Research Assistant at the Institute for Applied
Research, University of Applied Sciences Offenburg, Offenburg. His main research interests include ultra-low power systems using RFID technology.

Waldemar Gruenwald received the Diploma degree (FH) in electrical engineering and communication technology from the University of Applied Sciences
Offenburg, Offenburg, Germany, in 2008. Afterward, he joined the Master’s degree program “Electrical Engineering and Information Technology,” which he
finished in November 2009. During this time, he spent six months at the Oregon
State University to work on his thesis with the topic “Design of a smart antenna
for cellular phones for minimal radiation absorption by the human body/ brain.”
Since December 2009, he has been a Research Assistant at the Institute for
Applied Research, University of Applied Sciences Offenburg. There, he has
been working on an industrial development project about inductive communication through metallic implant housings.

Björn Lemmer was born in 1942. He studied medicine at the University of
Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany. In 1968, he received the Dr.med. degree, graduated in medicine in 1970, and habilitation in pharmacology in 1974. In 1998,
he received the Dr.h.c. degree from the University of Bordeaux II, Bordeaux,
France.
From 1975 to 1995, he was a University professor of pharmacology at the
Institute of Pharmacology, Frankfurt. In 1995, he became an Ordinarius at the
University of Heidelberg and was the Head of the Institute of Experimental
and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology at the Medical Faculty Mannheim
of Heidelberg University until 2007; he is currently a Professor emeritus. His
research interests focused on the impact of the biological clock(s) on mechanism of regulation in basic and clinical pharmacology and toxicology. He
gave guest lectures at the Universities of Paris (Paris V, VI, XI), Bordeaux,
Guanzhou/China, Rome, and Moscow. Since 2000, he has organized the International Course on Chronopharmacology on a yearly basis. Since 2007, he has
been an Member of the Management Board of the European Medicines Agency,
London, U.K.

Leonhard M. Reindl (M’93) received the Diploma degree in physics from
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, and the Dr. sc. techn. degree from the Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1985 and
1997, respectively.
He joined the Surface Acoustic Wave Department, Siemens Corporate Technology Division, Munich, in 1985, where he was involved in the development
of surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices for signal processing and matched
filtering in radio communications, radar systems, SAW-based identification
marks, and wireless passive SAW-based sensors. In 1999, he joined the Institute of Electrical Information Technology, Clausthal University of Technology,
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany. In 2003, he joined as a Full Professor of electrical instrumentation the Institute for Microsystem Technology, Albert-Ludwigs
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. He has authored or coauthored
more than 250 papers on SAW devices and wireless passive sensor systems and
holds 45 patents. His current research interests include wireless sensor systems,
energy-harvesting systems, local positioning systems, and search and rescue
systems for people buried in disasters.
Dr. Reindl is a Member of the Technical Program Committees of the IEEE
Frequency Control Symposium, the IEEE Ultrasonic Symposium, Eurosensors,
Sensors, and the German Biannual Symposium “Sensoren und Messsysteme.”
He was an Elected Member of the AdCom of the IEEE UFFC Society from
2005 to 2007 and from 2010 to 2012.

Thomas Stieglitz (M’95–SM’09) received the Diploma degree in electrical
engineering from Technische Hochschule Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany, in
1993, and the Ph.D. and habilitation degrees from the University of Saarland,
Saarland, Germany, in 1998 and 2003, respectively.
In 1993, he joined the Fraunhofer Institute for Biomedical Engineering,
St. Ingbert, Germany, where he established the Neural Prosthetics Group. Since
2004, he has been a Full Professor for biomedical microtechnology at the
Department of Microsystems Engineering (IMTEK), Faculty of Engineering,
Albert-Ludwig-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. His research interests
include neural interfaces and implants, biocompatible assembling and packaging, and brain–machine interfaces. He has coauthored about 70 peer-reviewed
journal publications, 240 conference proceedings, and holds 12 patents. He is
Co-Founder and Advisory Board Member of CorTec GmbH, a spin-off company on neurotechnological implants.
Dr. Stiglitz is a Member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, the Materials Research Society, the German Biomedical Engineering
Society (DGBMT im VDE), where he is the Chair of the Neural Prostheses
and Intelligent Implants section and the Founding Member of the International
Functional Electrical Stimulation Society.

Dirk Jansen (M’85) was born in 1948. He received the Diploma degree in
electrical engineering from the TH Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, in 1972,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, in
1979.
Since 1986, he has been a Professor at the University of Applied Sciences
Offenburg, Offenburg, Germany, where between 1995 and 2012, he was the
Director of the Institute of Applied Research Offenburg. His research interests
include ASIC design (digital and analog), system design in VHDL, and inductive
data transmission techniques for medical and identification applications.
Dr. Jansen is a Member of EUROPRACTICE and VDE.

