648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

The LISS—A Public Database of Common Imaging
Signs of Lung Diseases for Computer-Aided
Detection and Diagnosis Research
and Medical Education
Guanghui Han, Xiabi Liu, Feifei Han, I. Nyoman Tenaya Santika, Yanfeng Zhao, Xinming Zhao∗ ,
and Chunwu Zhou

Abstract—Lung computed tomography (CT) imaging signs play
important roles in the diagnosis of lung diseases. In this paper, we
review the significance of CT imaging signs in disease diagnosis
and determine the inclusion criterion of CT scans and CT imaging
signs of our database. We develop the software of abnormal regions annotation and design the storage scheme of CT images and
annotation data. Then, we present a publicly available database of
lung CT imaging signs, called LISS for short, which contains 271
CT scans and 677 abnormal regions in them. The 677 abnormal
regions are divided into nine categories of common CT imaging
signs of lung disease (CISLs). The ground truth of these CISLs
regions and the corresponding categories are provided. Furthermore, to make the database publicly available, all private data in
CT scans are eliminated or replaced with provisioned values. The
main characteristic of our LISS database is that it is developed
from a new perspective of CT imaging signs of lung diseases instead of commonly considered lung nodules. Thus, it is promising
to apply to computer-aided detection and diagnosis research and
medical education.
Index Terms—Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD), computed tomography (CT) imaging signs, lung lesions, medical database, medical education.

I. INTRODUCTION
medical image (MI) database is beneficial to the education
and the development of medical science. The visual information in a MI database can help students to understand and

A

Manuscript received October 18, 2013; revised September 13, 2014, June
8, 2014, and March 16, 2014; accepted October 8, 2014. Date of publication
October 15, 2014; date of current version January 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under
Grant 60973059 and Grant 81171407 and Program for New Century Excellent
Talents in University of China under Grant NCET-10-0044. LISS database can
be downloaded at: http://isc.cs.bit.edu.cn/MLMR/LISS.html. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
G. Han, X. Liu, F. Han, and I. N. T. Santika are with the Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science
and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
(e-mail: hanguanghui@bit.edu.cn; liuxiabi@bit.edu.cn; hanfeifei@bit.edu.cn;
yiyamen@bit.edu.cn).
Y. Zhao and C. Zhou are with the Department of Imaging Diagnosis, Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100021,
China (e-mial: zyf24@sina.com; cjr.zhouchunwu@vip.163.com).
∗ X. Zhao is with the Department. of Imaging Diagnosis, Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100021, China
(e-mail: xinmingzh@sina.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2363131

remember related knowledge better. In the computer-aided detection and diagnosis (CAD) research, a MI database is usually
needed to train classifiers for detecting lesions or identifying
diseases. Furthermore, various CAD methods can be evaluated
effectively and fairly under a publicly available MI database.
Lung disease is one of the most serious diseases threatening
human health. For example, according to the report of the World
Health Organization (WHO), the chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease is an under-diagnosed, life-threatening disease that currently affects 64 million people worldwide, and it will become
the third leading cause of death by 2030.1 Also from the report
of WHO, lung cancer is a leading type of cancers and accounted
for 1.59 million deaths in 2012.2 The mortality of lung cancer
can be reduced if the cases are detected and treated earlier. In
the early detection of lung diseases, the computed tomography
(CT) examinations play an important role, where a crucial step
is to detect and classify lung lesions in human lung CT images.
Lung nodule is currently a most concerning type of lung lesions.
For instance, Ye et al. proposed a shape-based computer-aided
detection method of lung nodules in thoracic CT images [1],
and many other research works have been focused on the CAD
of lung nodules [2]. To support these kinds of works, several
databases of lung nodules have been constructed and made publicly available, which are described briefly as follows.
In 2000, Japanese Society of Radiological Technology (JSRT)
developed a chest radiograph database for education, training,
and research of CAD methods. The JSRT database contains
154 digital chest radiographs with lung nodules and 93 ones
without lung nodules. These chest radiographs are digitized by
a laser digitizer [3]. In 2001, the organization of lung image
database consortium (LIDC) began to develop a web-accessible
research resource for the development, training, and evaluation
of CAD methods for lung nodules. The database was combined
with the image database resource initiative (IDRI) in 2004. The
LIDC/IDRI database was completed until 2011. Finally, it contains 1018 thoracic CT scans and corresponding radiologists’
annotations. In this database, the annotation information is saved
in a special XML format and all protected health information
is removed [4]. In 2009, the Medical Center of Utrecht University and other organizations jointly developed a new database
1 http://www.who.int/respiratory/copd/en/
2 http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs297/en/

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HAN et al.: THE LISS—A PUBLIC DATABASE OF COMMON IMAGING SIGNS OF LUNG DISEASES FOR COMPUTER-AIDED DETECTION

of CT scans from a lung cancer screening trial [5]. The resultant database is called ANODE09. They further presented a
framework for the evaluation of CAD algorithms based on their
database. Since the main purpose of ANODE09 is algorithm
evaluation, it contains only 55 anonymous CT scans. Also in
2009, the Lung Test Images from Motol Environment (Lung
TIME) was developed as a publicly available database of thoracic CT scans with manually annotated pulmonary nodules
by Czech Technical University and Faculty Hospital in Motol,
Prague, Czech Republic [6]. The Lung TIME database consists
of 157 CT scans with 394 nodules. The annotation information
of Lung TIME database were stored in a XML format which is
compatible with that used in the LIDC/IDRI database.
The lung nodule is defined as a “spot” on the lung that is less
than 3 cm in diameter. Through analyzing the visual features of
lung nodules, the radiologists can make some decisions about
diseases. We regard what radiologists see in lung nodules for
diagnosing diseases as some CT imaging signs, which are also
often called “CT features,” “CT findings,” “CT patterns,” or “CT
manifestation.” The CT imaging sign is abbreviated to CIS for
brevity in this paper. Except the CISs appearing in lung nodules,
there are many other CISs. They are crucial information in the diagnosis of multiple diseases. So a main task of the radiologists is
to study the correlation between CIS and diseases. For example,
Doyle et al. found a characteristic appearance of eight major and
five minor signs of rounded atelectasis of the lung on CT images
of three patients [7]. Kaufman found that the lesion mimicked
a chondroid hamartoma on CT of calcified postinflammatory
pseudotumor in the lung [8]. Bilateral ground-glass opacities
and consolidation were found to be the two most common CISs
for novel birds-origin H7N9 influenza [9]. A lot of related works
can be found in the literature, such as in [10]–[18]. In summary,
CISs play important roles in disease diagnosis and research
works. Thus, a well-established lung CISs database will be very
useful in the medical community (this will be discussed further
in Section II). The LIDC/IDRI is a well-known database of lung
nodules, perhaps the most successful one until now. We realize
that the LIDC/IDRI database contains information of CISs, such
as calcification, texture (contains GGO, solid nodules, etc.), lobulation, speculation. However, LIDC/IDRI database is designed
for studying the lung nodules, so it only contains the CISs in
nodules. Those CISs which are not related to lung nodules,
such as obstructive pneumonia (OP), air bronchogram (AB),
bronchial mucus plus (BMP), etc., are not included. Considering that LIDC/IDRI database is developed for lung nodules
studies, and it has been accomplished at present, thus many
CISs will not be included in this database further. In addition,
if the researcher is only interested in CISs, it is not very convenient to use LIDC/IDRI database (the annotation information in
LIDC/IDRI database is organized by nodules). Based on these
facts, we think that the LIDC/IDRI database is not an “imaging
signs-centered” database. In conclusion, we think it is necessary
to construct a publicly available database of lung lesions, which
focus on CISs specifically.
In this paper, we present a publicly available database of lung
CISs, which is called LISS for short. The details of the database
are expanded as follows. Section II discusses the significance of

649

developing the databases of common categories of lung CISs.
Section III designs the database construction schema, including
inclusion criteria of CT scans and CISs, the CIS annotation software, the information storage format and the data anonymization. In Section IV, we summarize the constructed LISS database
and compare it with other related ones. We conclude in
Section V.
II. SIGNIFICANCE OF CISS DATABASE
As mentioned earlier, CISs database are crucial information
for radiologists to diagnose diseases. In conjunction with other
radiologic evaluations, CISs allow the patients to be confidently
managed without exploratory thoracotomy [7]. Centering on
CISs, a radiologist usually performs the differential diagnosis
in the following process.
Step 1: The radiologist determines whether there are lesions in
lung CT images.
Step 2: The lesions are localized.
Step 3: The CISs appearing in lesions are described and then
classified into corresponding categories.
Step 4: A suitable diagnosis or all the possible diagnoses are
obtained based on the CISs.
Step 5: If several diagnoses are obtained, the radiologist will
try to narrow down the list of diagnoses by finding further
clues, such as the visual features of diseased tissue on other
image modalities, to exclude some diagnoses. The radiologist
is ultimately left with one accurate diagnosis if the clues are
enough, otherwise the most likely diagnosis.
In the differential diagnosis process above, it is a core step to
analyze and understand the CISs appearing in lesions. However,
the correlation between CISs and diseases is very complicated.
Some CISs, such as lobulation, spiculation, pleural indentation,
GGO, etc. [10], [12], [15]–[17], are associated with malignant
lung cancer, whereas some other CISs, such as plate-like atelectasis, tree in bud, crescent sign (or air-meniscus sign), etc. [7],
[19]–[21], are associated with benign lung diseases. More difficult, a same category of CISs could be observed in the images
corresponding to different diseases and different categories of
CISs also could appear in the images from the patients with a
same disease [8], [11], [13], [16], [22]. For example, the calcification may indicate plasma cell granuloma or lung cancer.
The necessity and the difficulty of identifying CISs for disease
diagnosis suggest that a well-established and publicly available
CISs database will be very useful in the medical community, the
possible usefulness of which is discussed as follows.
1) The database and corresponding management system can
be used for aiding the radiologist in making decisions. For
example, the radiologist can retrieve the lung CT images
containing similar CIS as those appearing in the reading scan. The retrieved results are helpful to increase the
decision confidence of the radiologist.
2) The database can be used to train radiologists. It will bring
convenience to the teachers for preparing relevant courses.
The abundant visual information in the database will help

650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

students to understand and remember related knowledge
easier.
3) The database can be used for the research and development
of CAD techniques. First, it can be used for developing the
techniques for detecting and recognizing imaging signs.
Second, it will enable the valid evaluation of related CAD
techniques [21]. Finally, it could be used by the drug
administration to validate the CAD devices for approval
of clinical use [23].

III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. CT Scan Inclusion Criteria
In order to develop a database, the first thing is to determine
which information we should put into the database. Actually,
all the CT examinations and subsequent diagnostics of a patient
are valuable information for medical education and research
works, but we only collect one CT scan for a patient, because
the following facts must be considered.
1) Our purpose is not to establish a database for assessing
tumor progression or evaluating response to therapy. Thus,
it is unnecessary to record more than one scan per patient.
2) Including several CT scans of a patient at different time
in the database will increase the homology of data and
thus bring negative influences to some applications. The
scans at multiple time points will be helpful in comparing the lesion difference of the patient at different time,
for instance, assessing tumor progression or evaluating
response to therapy. However, the CT scans at multiple
time points may be similar, even present the nearly identical appearance if the CT scans are acquired from patients
during clinically stable condition. Thus, the homology
of data may result in a highly inequitable outcome for
computer-aid detection of CISs. For example, the data in
train set and test set are often required to come from different patients in the research of lesion classification, so
that the bias in measuring classification performance is
avoided.
3) It is difficult to collect all medical data of a patient in practice. For example, a patient may get medical treatments
from different hospitals in different places. In this case,
it is almost impossible to complete the task. Even so, the
database which is designed for assessing tumor progression or evaluating response to therapy must contain the
scans at multiple time points of one patient.
Second, we need to decide the section thickness to collect CT
scans. Although the state-of-the-art CT scanners are able to obtain images with 0.5 mm or even less section thickness, most of
hospitals in China (perhaps worldwide) prefer to routinely acquire thoracic CT scans with 5-mm section thickness or thicker.
There may be several reasons behind this phenomenon: 1) the
CT scanner technology moves fast, but many old model CT
scanners are still used in clinics; 2) the higher level thin-section
CT scanners are more expensive, many small and medium-scale
hospitals cannot afford them; and 3) the cost of higher level thinsection CT examination is more expensive, thus the economic

burden of patients is increased. Furthermore, a huge mass of
CT images with thick-section has been produced in the past
decades. They are valuable and should be considered in medical
education and research. Considering the above factors, we finally decide to collect CT scans with 1–5 mm section thickness,
i.e., both those thinner than 1 mm and those thicker than 5 mm
are excluded.
B. CIS Inclusion Criteria
Nearly 50 categories of CISs of lung diseases have been observed and reported by radiologists to our knowledge. It is very
difficult and unnecessary to include all the categories of CISs
in our database. We select the CISs according to the following
criteria.
1) The CIS should appear frequently in lung diseases and be
frequently discussed in medical community. We call this
kind of CISs as common CIS of Lung disease or common
CISL for short. The CISL is defined first in the paper of
Song et al. [24]. Here, we agree that definition, but slightly
modify the full name of CISL to reflect its definition more
accurately.
2) We can collect enough cases (>= 10) of each category
of CISLs. Too few CT scans will not be very useful for
analyzing and understanding the visual features of CISLs.
We finally chose nine categories of common CISLs, which
are listed and explained in the following.
1) Grand Grass Opacity: A GGO can be characterized by
the areas of hazy increased attenuation of the lung with
preservation of bronchial and vascular margins [25]. It is
associated with the adenocacinoma of lung and bronchioloalveolar carcinoma [26], [27].
2) Lobulation: A lobulation is dependent on the ingrowth of
connective tissue septa containing fibroblasts derived from
peri-thymic mesenchyme [28], which is usually associated
with malignancy lesion, though it also occurs in up to 25%
of benign nodules [29], [30]. Visually, a lobulation shows
the indentation which appears at the edge of round or oval
lesion.
3) Calcification: A calcification is caused by the deposition
of insoluble salts of calcium and magnesium. Its morphology and distribution are important for discriminating
between benign lung diseases and malignant ones. The
coarse, dense, and popcorn-like calcification indicates benign lesions, whereas the calcification located in the center
of lesions, spotted, and appearing irregularly suggests malign lesions [31]. Visually, a calcification is a punctuated
or nodular area with high density. The corresponding CT
values are usually higher than 100 Hounsfield Units (HU)
on unenhanced CT. It could be part or whole of the lesion.
4) Cavity and Vacuolus: A cavity is a gas-filled space, seen
as a lucency or low-attenuation area, within pulmonary
consolidation, a mass, or a nodule [32]. A vacuolus can be
regarded as little cavity. The vacuolus is associated with
the adenocarcinoma and bronchioloalveolar carcinoma,
whereas the cavity is associated with the tumors larger
than 3 cm [30].

HAN et al.: THE LISS—A PUBLIC DATABASE OF COMMON IMAGING SIGNS OF LUNG DISEASES FOR COMPUTER-AIDED DETECTION

5) Spiculation: Pathologically, a spiculation most commonly
correlated with a desmoplastic response in the nodule, resulting in fibrotic strands radiating into the surrounding
lung parenchyma, and it is usually associated with malignancy lesion [30].
6) Pleural Indentation: A PI is caused by the contraction
of scar affected by the tumor, which is associated with
most peripheral adenocarcinomas containing a central or
subpleural anthracotic and fibrotic focus [33]. Visually,
a PI shows that the pleural is dragged toward the lung
area by the spiculation. So the PI is also known as pleural
dragging.
7) Bronchial Mucus Plugs: A BMP can be represented by
focal opacities. Its density varies from liquefied density
to higher than 100 HU. It is associated with the allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis [34]. Visually, a BMP
shows that the intrabronchial air is replaced by the mucus.
8) Air Bronchogram: An air bronchogram is a pattern of
air-filled (low-attenuation) bronchi on a background of
opaque (high-attenuation) airless lung. The sign implies
(a) patency of proximal airways and (b) evacuation of
alveolar air by means of absorption (atelectasis) or replacement (e.g., pneumonia) or a combination of these
processes. In rare cases, the displacement of air is the
result of marked interstitial expansion (e.g., lymphoma)
[32].
9) Obstructive Pneumonia: An OP is caused by the distal
collapse lung and decreased lung volume due to proximal
bronchial blocking. It is associated with adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma [35]. Visually, an OP shows
a flabellate or cuneate area with increased density.
In general, the radiologist said that GGO, Lobulation, CV, PI
were usually indicated malignant lesion in lung, whereas BMP
mostly suggested benign lesion. As for the calcification, OP and
AB, they can be observed in either benign or malignant lesion.
Furthermore, several categories of imaging signs could appear
in one lesion in the clinical, so the radiologist has to combine
all these imaging signs together and make the final decision
(whether it is malignant or benign) based on the subjective
experience. However, the good news is that the latest computer
technique may make this analysis more objective now.
C. Scanning Parameters
The CT scans collected in our LISS database were acquired by
CT scanners of GE LightSpeed VCT 64 and Toshiba Aquilion
64. Nearly two-thirds of all the scans are from GE scanner and
the remaining from Toshiba scanner.
The scans are divided into two categories: 2-D and 3-D. For
2-D data scanning from the GE scanner, detailed acquisition
parameters are provided and listed in the row of 2-D (GE) in
Table I, where PPE means “Peak Potential Energies” (in KV),
XTC means “X ray Tube Current” (in mA), ST means “Section Thickness” (in mm); IR means “Image Resolution” and
IPS means “In-plane Pixel Spacing” (in mm). Contrarily, in 2D images from Toshiba scanner, we can only get the useful
information of image resolution (also 512 × 512). As for 3-D

651

TABLE I
ACQUISITION PARAMETERS OF CT SCANS
Type

PPE

XTC(mA)

ST(mm)

IR

IPS(mm)

2D(GE)
3D

120
120

130–350 (278)
30–440 (274)

5
1, 1.25

512∗512
512∗512

0.42–1.0(0.66)
0.60–0.87(0.72)

TABLE II
COMPARISONS OF DATABASE PARAMETERS FOR OUR LISS AND OTHER
RELATED DATABASES
Database
LIDC/IDRI
RIDER
JSRT
ANODE09
TIME1
TIME2
LISS 2D
LISS 3D

Modalities

Scans

CT
CT, PET/CT, MRI
Digital chest radiographs
CT
CT
CT
CT
CT

1018
247
55
148
9
252
19

AS

451.5
246.2
63.8
2D: 71
3D: 345

Lesions

ST(mm)

7371

0.6–5.0
0.6, 2

355
39
511
166

1.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
1.0,1.25

data scanning, both GE scanner and Toshiba scanner provide
detailed acquisition parameters, which are listed in the row of
3-D in Table I. Furthermore, for all the collected CT scans, including 2-D and 3-D ones, volumetric data are saved slice by
slice according to DICOM 3.0 standard. The corresponding acquisition parameters are saved in the metadata of each DICOM
file.
Besides the acquisition parameters of CT scans, some other
important parameters of database should also be reported for
the comprehensive understanding of it, which include image
modalities, the number of scans, the mean number of slices
per scan, and the number of lesions. These parameters of our
LISS database are listed and compared with the databases of
lung nodules in Table II, where AS denotes “average number of
slices.”
As described in Table II, the LIDC/IDRI database is the currently largest lung nodule database. The range of section thickness is wide (from 0.6 to 5 mm) [36]. So this database may be
helpful for both 2-D and 3-D lung nodule analysis. The RIDER
project evolved from the LIDC. It acquired temporally sequential images during the course of various lung cancer drug and
radiation therapy trial. The purpose of RIDER project is to evaluate tumor response to novel therapies, so it requires accurate
measurement of nodule change over time [37]. Furthermore,
the RIDER database contains multiple image modalities, such
as CT, PET/CT, and MRI. As for JSRT database, all of the
images in it are chest radiographs films digitized by a laser
digitizer [3]. With the development of CT and other imaging
technologies, the technical solution using laser scanner to digitize radiographs films is not often used currently. ANODE09
is designed for the evaluation of CAD algorithms. It has only
55 CT scans [5]. Considering the relatively small amount of CT
scans, the ANODE09 database is not suitable for training CAD
algorithms. The lung TIME database contains the CT examinations of adolescent patients, which can be used together with the
LIDC/IDRI database. The similarity among all these previous

652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

databases is that they focus on lung nodules. Alternatively, our
LISS database focuses on the CISs of lung diseases. It contains
considerable amount of CT scans and annotated CISs in them.
D. Image Annotation and Storage
1) CISLs Annotation: Except original CT scans, our database
should provide annotation information of CISLs in them, including the corresponding regions and category labels, so that
the database can be really useful. The task is manually completed by a qualified senior radiologist, a physician-in-charge
with 11 years’ experiences on radiography. As argued by
Dolejsi et al. [6], the annotations made by two radiologists may
be different with each other for the following reasons that we
agree with: 1) the true ground truth is not known, unless we wait
a sufficiently long time to evaluate the changes of the suspected
nodule, or biological samples are examined; 2) the radiologists
can have different tradeoffs between specificity and sensitivity;
and 3) the consensus search makes the annotation more robust,
but less precise. Furthermore, though the consensus panel is
a typical solution to the issue of interreader variability, it frequently reflects the opinion of the “strongest” member of the
panel, as a recognized weakness [38]. Considering this situation, we only involve one senior radiologist in the annotation,
instead of double reading. In order to reduce intrareader variability as far as possible in the annotation, the radiologist read
all the cases twice. More than one month after the first reading
and annotation, the radiologist reviews all the cases and checks
the annotation results again. The long time interval between
two readings is designed to ensure the effects of rechecking.
In addition, if the lesion extends over several slices, the slices
presenting visual abnormality obviously were selected and the
corresponding imaging signs in them were marked.
The labeling manner of CISL regions should be carefully considered. The existing labeling manner of medical database can
be grouped into two categories: detailed representation and approximate representation. The detailed representation contains
full contour and all pixels which can indicate the accurate detailed region of interest (ROI). The full contour labeling manner
is designed to mark exact boundary of a region of interest, and
it is very time-consuming and labor-consuming. So labeling a
large database in this way is very difficult. This labeling manner was adopted by the LIDC/IDRI, RIDER, ELCAP Public
Lung Database to Address Drug response, DDSM databases,
etc. The all pixels labeling manner is designed to mark all pixels which forms the ROI with specific degree of reliability, and
this labeling manner is adopted by the DRIVE database, etc.
The approximate representation contains several labeling manners, such as 1) centroid (2-D/3-D); 2) circle; 3) ellipse; and 4)
polygon. The centroid is defined by a coordinate pair/tri-tuple
of the geometric center of ROI/VOI in 2-D/3-D space, and this
is adopted by the LIDC, TIME, ELCAP Public Lung Image
Database, ELCAP Public Lung Database to Address Drug Response, DIARETDB1, etc. The circle, which can roughly cover
the ROI, is defined by the radius/diameter and centroid, and it
is adopted by the RIDER, JSRT, ANODE09, Mini-MIAS, DIARETDB1, etc. The ellipse is defined by the orientation (angle)

and length of major-axis (radius1) and minor-axis (radius2) with
centroid, and it is adopted by the DIARETDB1, etc. The polygon is defined by the point coordinates and centroid (optional),
and this can be implemented by clicking points along the boundary of ROI using a mouse pointer device, then these points can
be connected by straight line segments. The polygon labeling
manner is adopted by the SCR database and DIARETDB1, etc.
The labeling manner of CISL regions in LISS database is
decided to be rectangular bounding box. Several research works
also adopted rectangular bounding box to mark the ROI [39],
[40]. In order to mark the CISL as accurate as possible, the size
of rectangle boxes is determined as the smallest one with which
the box can cover the CISL. In general, a lesion region often
presents several CISLs, e.g., a nodule may contain speculation,
lobulation, calcification, etc., in the LIDC/IDRI database. If the
researchers study lesions at the level of CIS, it may not be very
convenient with the full contour of a lesion. For example, the
spiculation and lobulation are both boundary characteristic of
lesions. In the other hand, if the full contour is used to mark
the exact boundary of lesion region that contains several CISLs,
these CISLs cannot be distinguished from the full contour. For
example, we do not know which segment of the contour indicates
spiculation or lobulation. By comparison, it is much easier and
less ambiguous to mark the CISLs with rectangular bounding
boxes, which are more suitable for study CISLs separately.
To help the radiologist identify and label CISL regions in
CT images, we developed a software tool. This software tool is
developed in C# programming language on the .NET platform.
The open-source toolkit of VTK3 is employed in the software to
process DICOM images. The software was designed for running
on the user’s computer directly without installation process. The
main functions of this software include CT scan opening, image
displaying, window width/level adjustment, and CISL labeling.
By using the aforementioned software tool, we perform the
task of collecting and annotating CISLs in the following two
stages. In the first stage, the radiologist obtains lung CT scans
and observes the imaging signs in them through RIS-PACS system (KODAK Carestream PACS Diagnostic Profile 5.3sp1.1)
in the hospital. Those CT scans with the interested imagining
signs were selected and saved in a local hard disk. In the second stage, the radiologist uses our annotation software to open
each of saved CT scans and browse it to detect CISLs. Then,
the rectangular boxes bounding the CISLs are drawn and the
corresponding CISL categories are labeled by the radiologist. It
takes 8–10 min. to complete a case for the radiologist. Furthermore, we record not only the imaging sign regions, but also the
correlation between the regions and the corresponding slices in
the database. Thus, the database user can obtain any interested
information about the imaging sign in the CT scan.
2) Data Storage Scheme: The directory structure and CT image format which are used to save the CT Scans in LISS database
conform to the DICOM specification. The DICOM specification
defines a directory structure of four hierarchies: patient, study,
3 The Visualization Toolkit (VTK) is an open-source, freely available software system for 3-D computer graphics, image processing and visualization at
http://www.vtk.org/.

HAN et al.: THE LISS—A PUBLIC DATABASE OF COMMON IMAGING SIGNS OF LUNG DISEASES FOR COMPUTER-AIDED DETECTION

Fig. 1.

653

Specified directory structure: (a) directory structure in DICOM specification [41]; (b) directory hierarchies in our database.

series, and image. We take the directory organization illustrated
in Fig. 1(a) as an example to explain the relationship among
these four hierarchies. Study 1 and Study 2 shown in Fig. 1(a)
are two Study Directory Records, which are parts of a Directory Entity related to the Patient A. Similarly, the three Image
Directory Records (Image 1, Image 2, and Image 3) are parts
of the Directory Entity related to the Series 1. For more details
of directory hierarchies in DICOM, the reader is referred to the
DICOM specification document [41].
This multihierarchy directory structure is adapted to our
database. The resultant structure is shown in Fig. 1(b) and explained as follows, where x in “PAx,” “STx,” “SEx,” and “IMx”
represents a number, such as 1, 2, etc.
1) PAx is corresponding to patient hierarchy, which indicates
a specified patient.
2) STx is corresponding to the study hierarchy, which indicates a specified study of the corresponding patient.
Since only one CT scan is considered for a patient in our
database, as analyzed in Section A of this section, only
ST1 occurs in our database.
3) SEx is corresponding to series hierarchy, which indicates
a specified series for the corresponding study. Each SEx

is created when a CT scanning is performed in the CT
examination.
4) IMx is corresponding to the image hierarchy, which indicates a CT image file.
The annotation information for CISLs in CT scans includes
region labeling and category labeling, which are stored in text
files. The region labeling is reflected in the content of the files,
and the category labeling is reflected by the file names. Actually,
we generate an annotation text file for each category of CISLs
and name it with the category name. For example, the Lobulation.txt file records the region labeling information related to
all the Lobulation imaging sign in the database. The first line of
the text file is reserved for our annotation software and should
be ignored by database users. As for the remaining lines, each
line is corresponding with a lesion region. The line format is
defined like “PAx IMx n1 n2 n3 n4 ,” where n1 ∼ n4 are the coordinates of top-left and bottom-right points of the rectangle. For
example, “PA18 IM17 307 333 321 348” means that the 17th
slice image of the 18th scan contains a lesion region bounded
by the rectangle constrained by two points (307 333; 321 348).
If a slice image has several lesions with same CISL, multiple
lines corresponding to this slice image will appear in the text

654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE III
STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF NINE CATEGORIES OF CISLS IN LISS
CISL Category
GGO
Lobulation
Calcification
Cavity and Vacuolus
Spiculation
Pleural Indentation
Air Bronchogram
Bronchial Mucus Plugs
Obstructive Pneumonia
Total

Num of Scans

Num of Lesion Regions

25 (2D); 19 (3D)
21
20
75
18
26
22
29
16
271

45 (2D); 166 (3D)
41
47
147
29
80
23
81
18
677

file. Notice that the annotation information files are also divided
into 2-D and 3-D ones, as the files for CT scans.
By using the aforementioned annotation file, we can easily
find out all the CT scans and slice images containing a specific CISL. But it is not easy to find out category of the CISL
contained in a specific CT scan. Thus, we provide another file
in Microsoft excel format to describe the relationship between
CT scans and the categories of CISLs to make the use of our
database more convenient. We call this file as relevant file in the
following descriptions.

Fig. 2. Examples of annotated CISLs. (a) GGO. (b) Lobulation. (c) Calcification. (d) Cavity and Vacuolus. (e) Spiculation. (f) Pleural Indentation; (g)
Bronchial Mucus Plugs. (h) Air Bronchogram; (i) Obstructive Pneumonia.

E. CT Image Data Anonymization
To protect patients’ privacy, all the CT scans in our database
are made anonymous. All the values related to patients’ privacy,
except the patient name, are eliminated. As for the patient name,
it is replaced with a provisioned patient number. In this way, the
patients’ private information is removed, at the same time, we
still keep the descriptions about the relationship between CT
scans and slice images for convenient use of our database.
IV. RESULTS
A. Overview of LISS Database
As aforementioned, our LISS database contains nine categories of CISLs. The database is divided into two parts: 2-D and
3-D. The 2-D part includes all nine categories of imaging signs,
and the 3-D part involves only GGO category. In other words,
only GGO category has both 2-D and 3-D instances, whereas
other eight categories have only 2-D instances. The numbers of
CT scans and annotated regions corresponding to each category
of CISLs are summarized in Table III.
The examples of annotated CISLs are shown in Fig. 2. The
rectangle in each image indicates the region annotated by the
radiologist.
B. How to Use This Database?
All the files of our LISS database, including the CT scans
(DICOM format, anonymous), the annotation files (text), and
the relevant file (Excel), can be downloaded from the website:
http://isc.cs.bit.edu.cn/MLMR/LISS.html. These resources can
be used freely for academic research and medical education, but
they cannot be used for commercial purposes.

In some of related databases, such as the ANODE09, the
users can only access designated training images to develop their
CAD methods. The test images, which are not available to the
users, are used to evaluate the obtained methods. This strategy
makes the database useful for truly blinded evaluation of CAD
techniques, but it also brings some limitation on the use of the
database. We expect that our LISS database can be applied to not
only CAD research works, but also other fields such as medical
education, medical system evaluation, etc. So the scheme in our
database is different from the one in ANODE09, that is to say,
we do not make a distinction between training set and testing
set. The users need to point out the division of the data that they
use, in order that their findings can be verified.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a publicly available database
of Lung CT Imaging Signs, called LISS for short. The database
contains 271 CT scans, in which 677 abnormal regions corresponding to nine categories of common CT imaging signs of
lung diseases (CISLs) are detected and labeled. These categories
of CISLs include ground glass opacity, lobulation, calcification,
cavity and vacuolus, spiculation, pleural indentation, air bronchogram, bronchial mucus plugs, and obstructive pneumonia.
We have 2-D and 3-D scans for GGO, and 2-D scans for other
categories. Except original CT scans, the LISS database contains
another two types of files, annotation files saving the results of
region labeling and category labeling in scans, and a relevant file
recording the relationship between CT scans and the categories
of CISLs. By using these files, the user can conveniently find

HAN et al.: THE LISS—A PUBLIC DATABASE OF COMMON IMAGING SIGNS OF LUNG DISEASES FOR COMPUTER-AIDED DETECTION

out all CT scans and slice images corresponding with a specific
CISL or find out category of the CISL contained in a specific
CT scans.
The advantage of our LISS database is that it focuses on
CT imaging signs instead of commonly considered lung nodules. The analysis and identification of CT imaging signs are
the basis of disease diagnosis for radiologists. Thus, the study
of CT imaging signs is a main task of radiologists. The presented LISS database contains sufficient annotated CT imaging
signs and corresponding original CT scans. So it is promising to
play beneficial roles in related applications, such as providing
large database support for CAD research and medical device
validation, being helpful for medical education, etc.

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Xujiong, L. Xinyu, J. Dehmeshki, G. Slabaugh, and G. Beddoe, “Shapebased computer-aided detection of lung nodules in thoracic CT images,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1810–1820, Jul. 2009.
[2] Q. Li, “Recent progress in computer-aided diagnosis of lung nodules on
thin-section CT,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 31, no. 4/5, pp. 248–
257, Jun./Jul. 2007.
[3] J. Shiraishi, S. Katsuragawa, J. Ikezoe, T. Matsumoto, T. Kobayashi, K.
Komatsu, M. Matsui, H. Fujita, Y. Kodera, and K. Doi, “Development
of a digital image database for chest radiographs with and without a
lung nodule: Receiver operating characteristic analysis of radiologists’
detection of pulmonary nodules,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 174, no. 1,
pp. 71–74, Jan. 2000.
[4] S. G. Armato, G. McLennan, M. F. McNitt-Gray, C. R. Meyer, D. Yankelevitz, D. R. Aberle, C. I. Henschke, E. A. Hoffman, E. A. Kazerooni, H.
MacMahon, A. P. Reeves, B. Y. Croft, and L. P. Clarke, and Lung Image
Database Consortium Research Group, “Lung image database consortium:
Developing a resource for the medical imaging research community,” Radiology, vol. 232, no. 3, pp. 739–748, Sep. 2004.
[5] B. van Ginneken, S. G. Armato, 3rd, B. de Hoop, S. van Amelsvoortvan de Vorst, T. Duindam, M. Niemeijer, K. Murphy, A. Schilham, A.
Retico, M. E. Fantacci, N. Camarlinghi, F. Bagagli, I. Gori, T. Hara, H.
Fujita, G. Gargano, R. Bellotti, S. Tangaro, L. Bolanos, F. De Carlo, P.
Cerello, S. Cristian Cheran, E. Lopez Torres, and M. Prokop, “Comparing
and combining algorithms for computer-aided detection of pulmonary
nodules in computed tomography scans: The ANODE09 study,” Med.
Image Anal., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 707–22, Dec. 2010.
[6] M. Dolejsi, J. Kybic, M. Polovincak, and S. Tuma, “The lung time—
Annotated lung nodule dataset and nodule detection framework,” Proc.
SPIE, vol. 7260, 72601U, Mar. 03, 2009.
[7] T. C. Doyle and G. A. Lawler, “CT features of rounded atelectasis of the
lung,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 225–228, Aug. 1984.
[8] R. A. Kaufman, “Calcified postinflammatory pseudotumor of the lung—
CT features,” J. Comput. Assisted Tomography, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 653–655,
Jul./Aug. 1988.
[9] H.-N. Gao, H.-Z. Lu, B. Cao, B. Du, H. Shang, J.-H. Gan, S.-H. Lu, Y.-D.
Yang, Q. Fang, Y.-Z. Shen, X.-M. Xi, Q. Gu, X.-M. Zhou, H.-P. Qu, Z.
Yan, F.-M. Li, W. Zhao, Z.-C. Gao, G.-F. Wang, L.-X. Ruan, W.-H. Wang,
J. Ye, H.-F. Cao, X.-W. Li, W.-H. Zhang, X.-C. Fang, J. He, W.-F. Liang,
J. Xie, M. Zeng, X.-Z. Wu, J. Li, Q. Xia, Z.-C. Jin, Q. Chen, C. Tang,
Z.-Y. Zhang, B.-M. Hou, Z.-X. Feng, J.-F. Sheng, N.-S. Zhong, and L.-J.
Li, “Clinical findings in 111 cases of influenza A (H7N9) virus infection,”
New Eng. J. Med., vol. 368, no. 24, pp. 2277–2285, 2013.
[10] J. C. Wang, S. Sone, L. Feng, Z. G. Yang, S. Takashima, Y. Maruyama, M.
Hasegawa, S. Kawakami, T. Honda, and T. Yamanda, “Rapidly growing
small peripheral lung cancers detected by screening CT: Correlation between radiological appearance and pathological features,” Brit. J. Radiol.,
vol. 73, no. 873, pp. 930–937, Sep. 2000.
[11] S. Kawakami, S. Sone, S. Takashima, F. Li, Z. G. Yang, Y. Maruyama,
T. Honda, M. Hasegawa, and J. C. Wang, “Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia of the lung: Correlation between high-resolution CT findings and
histopathologic features,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 811–814, Nov.
2001.
[12] S. Takashima, Y. Maruyama, M. Hasegawa, A. Saito, M. Haniuda, and
M. Kadoya, “High-resolution CT features: Prognostic significance in pe-

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

655

ripheral lung adenocarcinoma with bronchioloalveolar carcinoma components,” Respiration, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 36–42, Jan./Feb. 2003.
S. Takashima, S. Sone, F. Li, Y. Maruyama, M. Hasegawa, T. Matsushita,
F. Takayama, and M. Kadoya, “Small solitary pulmonary nodules (< =
1 cm) detected at population-based CT screening for lung cancer: reliable high-resolution CT features of benign lesions,” Amer. J. Roentgenol.,
vol. 180, no. 4, pp. 955–964, Apr. 2003.
S. R. Desai, S. Veeraraghavan, D. M. Hanser, A. Nikolakopolou, N. S.
L. Goh, A. G. Nicholson, T. V. Colby, C. P. Denton, C. M. Black, R.
M. D. Ois, and A. U. Wells, “CT features of lung disease in patients
with systemic sclerosis: Comparison with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia,” Radiology, vol. 232, no. 2,
pp. 560–567, Aug. 2004.
R. M. Lindell, T. E. Hartman, S. J. Swensen, J. R. Jett, D. E. Midthun,
H. D. Tazelaar, and J. N. Mandrekar, “Five-year lung cancer screening
experience: CT appearance, growth rate, location, and histologic features of 61 lung cancers,” Radiology, vol. 242, no. 2, pp. 555–562, Feb.
2007.
M. Vazquez, D. Carter, E. Brambilla, A. Gazdar, M. Noguchi, W. D.
Travis, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, R. Yip, D. F. Yankelevitz, C. I. Henschke, and
International Early Lung Cancer Action Program Investigators, “Solitary
and multiple resected adenocarcinomas after CT screening for lung cancer:
Histopathologic features and their prognostic implications,” Lung Cancer,
vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 148–154, May 2009.
T. J. Kim, D. H. Han, K. N. Jin, and K. W. Lee, “Lung cancer detected
at cardiac CT: Prevalence, clinicoradiologic features, and importance
of full-field-of-view images,” Radiology, vol. 255, no. 2, pp. 369–376,
May 2010.
S. Sone, T. Matsumoto, T. Honda, K. Tsushima, F. Takayama, T. Hanaoka,
R. Kondo, and M. Haniuda, “HRCT features of small peripheral lung
carcinomas detected in a low-dose CT screening program,” Acad. Radiol.,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 75–83, Jan. 2010.
J. E. Kuhlman, R. H. Hruban, and E. K. Fishman, “Wegener
granulomatosis—CT features of parenchymal lung-disease,” J. Comput.
Assisted Tomography, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 948–952, Nov./Dec. 1991.
S. H. Yoon, C. M. Park, J. M. Goo, and H. J. Lee, “Pulmonary aspergillosis
in immunocompetent patients without air-meniscus sign and underlying
lung disease: CT findings and histopathologic features,” Acta Radiologica,
vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 756–761, Sep. 2011.
S. L. Aquino, G. Gamsu, W. R. Webb, and S. T. Kee, “Tree-in-bud pattern: Frequency and significance on thin section CT,” J. Comput. Assisted
Tomography, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 594–599, 1996.
B. G. Li, D. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Xian, J. Guan, K. J. Luo, Q. W. Fan, L.
Peng, and W. He, “The value of multislice spiral CT features of cavitary
walls in differentiating between peripheral lung cancer cavities and single
pulmonary tuberculous thick-walled cavities,” Brit. J. Radiol., vol. 85, no.
1010, pp. 147–152, Feb. 2012.
A. P. Reeves, A. M. Biancardi, D. Yankelevitz, S. Fotin, B. M. Keller, A.
Jirapatnakul, and J. Lee, “A public image database to support research
in computer aided diagnosis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
2009, pp. 3715–3718.
S. Li, L. Xiabi, M. Ling, Z. Chunwu, Z. Xinming, and Z. Yanfeng, “Using
HOG-LBP features and MMP learning to recognize imaging signs of lung
lesions,” in Proc. Comput.-Based Med. Syst., Rome, Italy, 2012, pp. 1–4.
G. Battista, C. Sassi, M. Zompatori, D. Palmarini, and R. Canini, “Groundglass opacity: Interpretation of high resolution CT findings,” La Radiologia Medica, vol. 106, no. 5/6, pp. 425–42, 2003.
T. Aoki, Y. Tomoda, H. Watanabe, H. Nakata, T. Kasai, H. Hashimoto, M.
Kodate, T. Osaki, and K. Yasumoto, “Peripheral lung adenocarcinoma:
Correlation of thin-section CT findings with histologic prognostic factors
and survival,” Radiology, vol. 220, no. 3, pp. 803–809, 2001.
Z.-G. Yang, S. Sone, S. Takashima, F. Li, T. Honda, Y. Maruyama, M.
Hasegawa, and S. Kawakami, “High-resolution CT analysis of small peripheral lung adenocarcinomas revealed on screening helical CT,” Amer.
J. Roentgenol., vol. 176, no. 6, pp. 1399–1407, 2001.
J. J. T. Owen, D. E. McLoughlin, R. K. Suniara, and E. J. Jenkinson, “The
role of mesenchyme in thymus development,” in Proc. Current Topics
Microbiol. Immunol., 2000, pp. 133–137.
J. J. Erasmus, J. E. Connolly, H. P. McAdams, and V. L. Roggli, “Solitary
pulmonary nodules—Part I: Morphologic evaluation for differentiation of
benign and malignant lesions,” Radio Graph., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 43–58,
2000.
C. V. Zwirewich, S. Vedal, R. R. Miller, and N. L. Müller, “Solitary
pulmonary nodule: High-resolution CT and radiologic-pathologic correlation,” Radiology, vol. 179, no. 2, pp. 469–476, 1991.

656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

[31] Y. K. Kyung Soo Lee and Steven L. Primack, “Imaging of pulmonary
lymphomas,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 168, no. 2, pp. 339–345, 1997.
[32] D. M. Hansell, A. A. Bankier, H. MacMahon, T. C. McLoud, N. L. Müller,
and J. Remy, “Fleischner society: Glossary of terms for thoracic imaging,”
Radiology, vol. 246, no. 3, pp. 697–722, 2008.
[33] T. V. Colby and C. Lombard, “Histiocytosis X in the lung,” Human Pathol.,
vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 847–856, 1983.
[34] J. J. Erasmus, H. P. McAdams, and J. E. Connolly, “Solitary pulmonary
nodules—Part II: Evaluation of the indeterminate nodule,” Radiographics,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 59–66, 2000.
[35] A. Tamura, A. Hebisawa, K. Fukushima, H. Yotsumoto, and M. Mori,
“Lipoid pneumonia in lung cancer: Radiographic and Pathological Features,” Jpn. J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 492–496, Aug. 1998.
[36] S. G. Armato, III, G. McLennan, L. Bidaut, M. F. McNitt-Gray, C. R.
Meyer, A. P. Reeves, B. Zhao, D. R. Aberle, C. I. Henschke, E. A. Hoffman,
E. A. Kazerooni, H. MacMahon, E. J. R. van Beek, D. Yankelevitz, A. M.
Biancardi, P. H. Bland, M. S. Brown, R. M. Engelmann, G. E. Laderach,
D. Max, R. C. Pais, D. P. Y. Qing, R. Y. Roberts, A. R. Smith, A. Starkey, P.
Batra, P. Caligiuri, A. Farooqi, G. W. Gladish, C. M. Jude, R. F. Munden,
I. Petkovska, L. E. Quint, L. H. Schwartz, B. Sundaram, L. E. Dodd, C.
Fenimore, D. Gur, N. Petrick, J. Freymann, J. Kirby, B. Hughes, A. V.
Casteele, S. Gupte, M. Sallam, M. D. Heath, M. H. Kuhn, E. Dharaiya, R.
Burns, D. S. Fryd, M. Salganicoff, V. Anand, U. Shreter, S. Vastagh, B. Y.
Croft, and L. P. Clarke, “The lung image database consortium, (LIDC) and
image database resource initiative (IDRI): A completed reference database
of lung nodules on CT scans,” Med. Phys., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 915–931,
Feb. 2011.

[37] S. G. Armato, III, C. R. Meyer, M. F. McNitt-Gray, G. McLennan, A. P.
Reeves, B. Y. Croft, L. P. Clarke, and R. R. Grp, “The reference image
database to evaluate response to therapy in lung cancer (RIDER) project:
A resource for the development of change-analysis software,” Clin. Pharmacol. Therapeutics, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 448–456, Oct. 2008.
[38] M. F. McNitt-Gray, S. G. Armato, III, C. R. Meyer, A. P. Reeves, G.
McLennan, R. C. Pais, J. Freymann, M. S. Brown, R. M. Engelmann, P.
H. Bland, G. E. Laderach, C. Piker, J. Guo, Z. Towfic, D. P. Y. Qing,
D. F. Yankelevitz, D. R. Aberle, E. J. R. van Beek, H. MacMahon, E. A.
Kazerooni, B. Y. Croft, and L. P. Clarke, “The lung image database consortium (LIDC) data collection process for nodule detection and annotation,”
Acad. Radiol., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1464–1474, Dec. 2007.
[39] Y. Xu, E. J. R. van Beek, H. Yu, J. Guo, G. McLennan, and E. A. Hoffman,
“Computer-aided classification of interstitial lung diseases via MDCT: 3D
adaptive multiple feature method (3D AMFM),” Acad. Radiol., vol. 13,
no. 8, pp. 969–978, Aug. 2006.
[40] Y. Lee, J. B. Seo, J. G. Lee, S. S. Kim, N. Kim, and S. H. Kang, “Performance testing of several classifiers for differentiating obstructive lung
diseases based on texture analysis at high-resolution computerized tomography (HRCT),” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 93, no. 2,
pp. 206–215, 2009.
[41] Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine, ISO 12052, 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

