IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

627

Modeling the Effect of Adverse Environmental
Conditions and Clothing on Temperature Rise
in a Human Body Exposed to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields
Stephen M. Moore, Robert L. McIntosh∗ , Steve Iskra, and Andrew W. Wood

Abstract—This study considers the computationally determined
thermal profile of a fully clothed, finely discretized, heterogeneous
human body model, subject to the maximum allowable reference level for a 1-GHz radio frequency electromagnetic field for
a worker, and also subject to adverse environmental conditions,
including high humidity and high ambient temperature. An initial
observation is that while electromagnetic fields at the occupational
safety limit will contribute an additional thermal load to the tissues,
and subsequently, cause an elevated temperature, the magnitude
of this effect is far outweighed by that due to the conditions including the ambient temperature, relative humidity, and the type
of clothing worn. It is envisaged that the computational modeling
approach outlined in this paper will be suitably modified in future studies to evaluate the thermal response of a body at elevated
metabolic rates, and for different body shapes and sizes including
children and pregnant women.
Index Terms—Computational biophysics, computational electromagnetics, electromagnetic safety standards, occupational
safety, protective clothing.

I. INTRODUCTION
HENEVER a person is exposed to a radio frequency
(RF) electromagnetic field (EMF), currents and fields
will be induced inside the body that will heat tissue due to dielectric losses. The International Commission on Nonionizing
Radiation (ICNIRP) recommend that RF-EMF-induced tissue

W

Manuscript received July 17, 2014; revised September 25, 2014; accepted
October 1, 2014. Date of publication October 13, 2014; date of current version
January 16, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. M. Moore is with the IBM Research Collaboratory for Life SciencesMelbourne, Victorian Life Sciences Computation Initiative, University of
Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia and also with the Australian Centre
for Electromagnetic Bioeffects Research, Hawthorn 3122, Australia (e-mail:
stevemoore@au1.ibm.com).
∗ R. L. McIntosh is with the Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Swinburne University, Hawthorn 3122, Australia and also with the Chief Technology Office, Telstra, Melbourne 3000, Australia and the Australian Centre
for Electromagnetic Bioeffects Research, Hawthorn 3122, Australia (e-mail:
Robert.L.McIntosh@team.telstra.com).
S. Iskra is with the Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Swinburne University, Hawthorn 3122, Australia and also with the Chief Technology Office, Telstra, Melbourne 3000, Australia and the Australian Centre
for Electromagnetic Bioeffects Research, Hawthorn 3122, Australia (e-mail:
Steve.Iskra@team.telstra.com).
A. W. Wood is with the Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Swinburne University, Hawthorn 3122, Australia and also with the Australian
Centre for Electromagnetic Bioeffects Research, Hawthorn 3122, Australia
(e-mail: awood@swin.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2362517

temperature rises do not exceed 1 ◦ C, and adherence to RF-EMF
exposure limits in international safety guidelines and standards
is generally assumed to ensure this [1], [2]. Such setting of the
exposure limits only considers the magnitude of the temperature
rise due to RF-EMF. This strategy neglects to directly consider
the environmental conditions affecting the person, such as the
ambient temperature and humidity, the clothing that the person
is wearing, and their level of physical exertion. Such factors
are taken into account through the setting of additional safety
margins but are not well quantified. This raises the question
of whether a given rise, that has no adverse effect in a comfortable environment, may possibly lead to thermal distress or
tissue damage in a thermally stressful environment. Thus, an
alternative strategy for setting RF-EMF exposure limits may
be to consider the environmental conditions, either on a temporal or durational basis. This topic is particularly pertinent
for RF-EMF workers as the safety guidelines are less stringent for those occupationally exposed to RF-EMF. The rationale for this research is consistent with the thoughts expressed
in the review of Foster and Morrissey [3] who wrote that it
would be useful to validate thermal models that incorporate
the effects of RF-EMF under varying environmental conditions
to “. . . allow RF exposure limits for occupational groups to
be considered as part of a framework of recommendations of
health agencies and industrial hygiene groups regarding physical labor in warm environments.” Furthermore, they suggested
it would be useful to understand the limits of tolerance of the
human body for RF-induced heat loads, using a more reliable
approach than extrapolation from rodent data as has been done in
setting present exposure guidelines. This paper is planned to be
the first in a series of studies and our current aim is to present
the computational framework along with validation. The human
body thermal model includes thermoregulation, the addition of
a clothing model, as well as investigating the thermal effect
of RF-EMF. Future studies will consider the influence of different body shapes and sizes including children, high levels of
activity, various RF-EMF exposure scenarios, hot winds, and
consideration of people with poor thermoregulation systems.
II. MODELS AND METHODS
A. Geometrical Modeling Review and Generation
Previous work estimating temperature variation within human
tissues has involved various levels of complexity of geometric

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 1. Sequence of steps in generating the polyhedral tissue mesh used
in the simulations, illustrating (a) raw image dataset with different tissues
(b) binarized image dataset (c) triangulated surface extracted by direct thresholding (d) cutaway illustrating the resulting polyhedral mesh.

models. One approach is the use of compartmental models,
which approximate the human body with a number of cylinders
and spheres. These compartments are then decomposed into
concentric tissue layers that may then be further discretized into
nodal points. The model of Stolwijk et al. [4], [5] is a wellknown implementation and considers four tissue types. Work
has been performed over the years [6]–[9], improving aspects
such as resolution of the discrete nodes [10], but still using
the same basic decomposition. Another approach is the use of
voxel-based models that make use of images of the human body
and classification of the voxels into different tissue types. For
example, both Bernardi et al. [11], [12] and Nelson et al. [13],
[14] have used a human body model of 2−5 mm voxel resolution and with 30 or more tissues types developed from the
visible human project [15]. One final approach is the use of
computer-aided design models or other scanning data to generate a description of the human body [16]–[19] from which an
unstructured mesh may be generated [20].
For this study, an unstructured polyhedral finite volume mesh
was generated in order to define the shape of the human body.
The geometry was based on the “Duke” member of the virtual
family dataset [21] that defines 78 tissue types. Starting from
the image dataset [see Fig. 1(a)], in-house software based on
the ITK [22] and VTK [23] libraries was used to assign a unit
intensity to all tissue and internal air voxels [see Fig. 1(b)], then
apply a direct threshold in order to extract a surface triangulation
[see Fig. 1(c)]. This surface was then used as an input to create
the unstructured mesh with the OpenFOAM [24] mesh generator
snappyHexMesh [see Fig. 1(d)]. This mesh consisted of a total
of approximately 4.6 million cells with a uniform resolution
of 3.125−mm hexahedral cells throughout the majority of the
domain and polyhedral cells around the skin boundary, which
was found to give a mesh independent solution.
B. Thermal Framework
In order to assign thermal properties of the tissues, in-house
software based on the ITK and OpenFOAM libraries was devel-

oped in order to interpolate these properties from the voxel
based virtual family dataset onto the cell centroids of the
polyhedral mesh. The interpolated properties include the density ρ[kg · m−3 ], specific heat capacity C[J · kg−1 · K −1 ], thermal conductivity k[W · m−1 · K −1 ], metabolic heat production
Qm [W · m−3 ], heat sink due to blood perfusion β[W · m−3 ·
K −1 ], and the additional heat source due to an electromagnetic
(EM) load ρ.SAR[W · m−3 ], where SAR is the specific absorption rate [W· kg−3 ]. Using the tissue classification defined in
the 1 − mm resolution Duke image dataset, the corresponding
tissue properties outlined in [25] and [26] were first assigned to
each voxel [see Fig. 2(c)], then, for each cell in the polyhedral
mesh a neighborhood search was performed to find and flag voxels, which were positioned within the cell. Using these flagged
voxels, Sheppard interpolation was then used to interpolate each
thermal property to the cell centroid [see Fig. 2(d)]. In order to
ensure that the thermal properties of the atmospheric air did not
affect the interpolated values in the skin, cells connected to the
skin boundary surface had the properties of the skin directly
assigned to them.
The height of the model was 1.80 m, surface area, 1.83 m2 ,
and volume, 0.068 m3 , all calculated from the triangulated surface extracted from the image dataset. The total mass, 72.5 kg,
metabolic rate, 119.5 W, and heat loss from blood perfusion,
481.2 W K−1 , were computed by the summation of ρ, Qm , and
β (defined at each cell centroid multiplied) by the volume of each
cell (essentially a discrete form of the integral of the properties
over the volume of the body model). The height and weight
reported in [21] for the Duke body model are 1.74 m and 70 kg,
respectively, which is in reasonable agreement. The discrepancy in height can be explained by noting that during the scan
with which the dataset was obtained the feet were extended.
The overall metabolic rate is in reasonable agreement with the
70 W · m−2 (128.1W) reported in the ASHRAE standards [27]
for a standing relaxed human, providing some confidence that
the mesh and interpolated tissue properties are within a reasonable physiological range.
For this paper, we define the thermoneutral condition as the
steady-state temperature profile of an unclothed person, standing at rest, subject to an ambient temperature of 28◦ C and 40%
relative humidity (RH). The rationale for choosing these values
follows the use of experimental data for validation purposes as
discussed in the Section A. The temperature change, ΔT (expressed in ◦ C), is defined as the difference between the steadystate temperature in a given scenario being examined and the
steady-state temperature at the thermoneutral condition. Finally,
we define core temperature as the temperature of the blood in
the circulation and its value obtained at a point in the pulmonary
artery [28].
C. Calculation of Tissue and Blood Temperature Using the
Finite Volume Method
Throughout the tissue domain, the temperature variation with
time t and space x can be described by Pennes’ bioheat equation
[4], [6], [29]
∂ρCT
= ∇ · k∇T + Qm + β(Tb − T ) − Qr + ρ · SAR
∂t
(1)

MOORE et al.: MODELING THE EFFECT OF ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND CLOTHING ON TEMPERATURE

629

Fig. 2. Cutaway of the polyhedral mesh illustrating (a) some key tissues to which temperatures are monitored (b) definition of the body compartments as used
in the Fiala thermoregulation model (the black rectangles are solely for privacy reasons and do not represent body compartments) (c) cutaway through the 1-mm
resolution Duke image dataset illustrating thermal conductivity of different tissues (d) thermal conductivity interpolated onto the polyhedral mesh (e) occupational
EM load interpolated onto the polyhedral mesh.

where T (x, t) is the tissue temperature field [K], Qm (x, t) is
the metabolic heat production [W · m−3 ], Qr (x, t) is the heat
loss through the respiratory system [W · m−3 ], β(x, t) is the
heat sink due to blood perfusion [W · m−3 ·K−1 ], and Tb (t) is
the arterial blood temperature [K]. The major heat losses in the
body occur through the skin and through the respiratory system.
Although the skin boundary surface could be segmented from
the Duke voxel dataset, the finer details of the respiratory system
such as bronchioles, alveoli, etc. could not be, as the dataset only
includes lung voxels. The implication of this is that while the
skin heat loss can be treated as a boundary condition imposed on
the bioheat equation (described in Section II-D), the respiratory
losses are treated as a source term. The particular form of these
losses was taken from Fiala et al. [30], where the evaporative
heat loss Qr e [W] and dry heat loss Qr c [W] are given by

Qr e = 4.373
Qm dV (0.028 − 6.5 × 10−5 Ta
V

Qr c

− 4.91 × 10−6 pa )

= 1.98 × 10−3
Qm dV (32.6 − 0.066 Ta

and as such is described as
ρb Cb Vb

∂Tb
=
dt


β(T − Tb )dV − Qb0

(3)

V

where ρb and Cb are the density and specific heat capacity
of the blood, respectively, and Vb is the total blood volume,
taken as 5 L. As with the respiratory losses in (2), the integral
defining the heat acquisition by the blood is taken over the
whole body and Qb0 defines this heat flow under thermoneutral
conditions, necessary in order to model the correct variation in
blood temperature [31].
The bioheat equation was solved using an in-house
OpenFOAM-based solver, discretizing the Laplacian term in
(1) with a Gauss linear corrected scheme and the unsteady term
with the Crank–Nicolson method. A custom Neumann heat flux
boundary condition was applied at the skin boundary using a
clothing model described in Section II-F. The resulting system of algebraic equations was solved at every time step using
a geometric–algebraic multigrid solver based on Gauss–Seidel
smoothing with a time step size of 10 s and a relative tolerance
of 10−9 .

V

− 1.96 × 10−4 pa )

(2)

respectively, where Ta is the ambient temperature [◦ C] and pa
the ambient partial pressure of water [Pa] and the integral of the
metabolic rate is taken over the entire body (i.e., whole-body
metabolic rate). The total respiratory loss Qr is equal to the
summation of these two losses [W · m−3 ], which was distributed
uniformly over all of the cells in the polyhedral mesh, classified
as being part of the respiratory system [see Fig. 2(a)].
Using an approach similar to [13] and [31], the arterial blood
temperature is considered to be uniform throughout the body

D. Calculation of SAR Using the Finite-Difference
Time-Domain Method
The fundamental metric for specifying RF-EMF heating is the
specific absorption rate, which can be calculated at any point in
human tissue from knowledge of the internal electric field using
SAR =

σ|E|2
ρ

(4)

where σ is the tissue conductivity [S · m−1 ], and E is the electric
field [V · m−1 ] root mean square (rms). When setting protective

630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

limits for localized tissue heating, SAR is mass averaged, in
recognition of the thermal diffusion properties of tissues. For
example, ICNIRP sets the localized exposure limit for RF-EMF
occupational workers to be 10 W·kg−1 over 10 g of contiguous tissue, in the frequency range 100 kHz–10 GHz [1]. For
the general public, the limit is reduced further to 2 W· kg−1 .
The whole-body average (WBA) SAR limit is 0.4 W·kg−1 for
occupational exposure (0.08 W · kg−1 for general public). In
this study, the induced SAR in the Duke model was calculated
using the commercially available finite-difference time-domain
(FDTD) software XFDTD [32]. The finite-difference mesh consisted of cubes with sides 2 mm in length. The ability of FDTD
methods to handle the highly irregular and heterogeneous structures in the human anatomy has made it a popular choice in
human RF-EMF modeling [33].

with an upper limit of 30 g · min−1 . Finally, the equation for
vasodilation Dl[W · K−1 ] is
Dl = 21 (tanh(0.79ΔTsk ,m − 0.70) + 1.0)ΔTsk ,m
+ 32 (tanh(3.29ΔThy − 1.46) + 1.0)ΔThy .

The model includes a variation in metabolic rate in the tissues:
Qm = Qm ,bas0 + ΔQm

Sh = 10 (tanh(0.48ΔTsk ,m + 3.62) − 1)ΔTsk ,m
(−)

− 27.9ΔThy + 1.7ΔTsk ,m

dTsk ,m
dt

− 28.6

(5)

where ΔTsk ,m [K] and ΔThy [K] are the deviation in sensitivity weighted mean skin and hypothalamic temperature, respectively, from thermally neutral conditions, with an upper limit of
350 W. The equation for vasoconstriction is Cs is
Cs = 35 (tanh(0.34ΔTsk ,m + 1.07) − 1.0)ΔTsk ,m
(−)

+ 3.9 ΔTsk ,m

dTsk ,m

which is dimensionless.
Sw[g · min−1 ] is

(6)

dt
The

equation

for

sweating

Sw = (0.8 tanh(0.59 ΔTsk ,m − 0.19) + 1.2)ΔTsk ,m
+ (5.7 tanh (1.98ΔThy − 1.03) + 6.3)ΔThy

(7)

(9)

where the deviation in metabolic rate from basal conditions is
given by
ΔQm = Qm ,bas0 × 2(

T −T 0
10

−1 )

+ Qm ,S h + Qm ,w

(10)

which includes the van’t Hoff Q10 effect, the extra metabolic
heat production from shivering, and the extra metabolic heat
production from exercise. The variation in heat sink due to
blood perfusion is given by

E. Thermoregulation Model
Given the desire to model temperature change in the tissues under conditions of thermal stress, the incorporation of a
thermoregulation model is vital if physiologically realistic results are to be obtained. There has been a significant body of
work performed in the area of thermoregulation and comfort,
with a good review of various models found in [34]. Again the
model of Stolwijk et al. [4] presents an initial effort to which
much modification and improvement has been performed over
the years. One well known and widely used model is that of
Fiala et al. [30], [35], [36], which defines control equations for
sweating, shivering, vasoconstriction, and vasodilation and validated against numerous physical experiments, and as such was
the model chosen for this study. Examples of thermal modeling applications include the response for hot conditions [13],
for RF-EMF exposure at the maximum allowable level including for adults and children [37], and at high levels of RF-EMF
exposure [14].
From Fiala et al. [36], the equation for shivering Sh[W ] is

(8)

β = β0 + μb ΔQm

(11)

where the proportionality constant μb is taken as
0.932 W · m−3 ·K−1 [4]. To incorporate the vasoconstriction
and vasodilation response the heat sink due to blood perfusion
in the skin cells is computed as
β=

β0 + aD l Dl
1 + aC s Cs · e

−D l
80

2

T s k −T s k , 0
10

(12)

where aD l and aC s are the body compartment distribution coefficients for these responses. So while the shivering, vasoconstriction and vasodilation responses affect the Qm and β fields,
respectively, the sweat rate is used as an input to the clothing
boundary condition.
One issue with the combination of a compartmental thermoregulation model with a voxel-based geometrical model is
that the thermoregulatory outputs are assigned coefficients,
which distribute a response (such as overall sweat rate, for example) to the cylindrical and spherical body compartments. To
allow for incorporation into the Duke body model, the same
body compartments were defined [see Fig. 2(b)] and the thermoregulatory outputs were first distributed evenly over these
compartments, then further distributed uniformly over the cells,
or boundary faces (depending on the thermoregulatory output)
of that body compartment.
F. Clothing Model
Under conditions of thermal stress, the sweat secreted under the clothed regions of a person will either be transported
through the various layers as water vapor, or condense back into
liquid water within one or more of the layers. This phenomenon
will affect both sensible and evaporative heat transfer through
the clothing and as such was considered to be an important
feature to capture, given the purpose of the study. There has
been a significant body of work performed in the area of measuring and modeling heat and mass transfer through clothing,
with a number databases [38] presenting thermal properties of
various fabrics and clothing ensembles. In terms of modeling
mass transport through clothing, one approach has involved developing partial differential equations describing the unsteady

MOORE et al.: MODELING THE EFFECT OF ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND CLOTHING ON TEMPERATURE

631

TABLE I
GARMENT THERMAL PROPERTIES
R c [m 2 · K · W

Garment
Polypropylene underwear
Permeable outerwear
Semi-permeable outerwear
PVC coated outerwear
1-mm interior air space
External boundary layer

Fig. 3. Illustration of the coupling between the clothing model and the polyhedral mesh. Multiple layers can be applied, defining an ensemble, and then, based
on the skin and air temperatures and partial pressures of water, the temperatures
at nodes between layers can be computed.

transport of local moisture “regain” through a fabric [39], while
other studies have developed even more detailed systems of partial differential equations describing multiphase flow [40] and
including details such as fiber orientation within a textile [7],
[41], [42].
The clothing model implemented in this study is based on the
model of Wissler and Havenith [43], which considers a clothing
ensemble to be comprised of an arbitrary number of fabric and
air layers, where nodes are defined at the boundaries between
each layer (see Fig. 3). This model includes the effect of heat
and mass transport through a clothing ensemble, and the effect
of condensation within any of its layers, while avoiding the
complexities of fiber orientation and multiphase flow within a
textile. The rate of sensible heat transfer Qc [W · m−2 ] through
a layer i is given by
Qc,i

Ti − Ti+1
=
Rc,i

(13)

where Ti [K] denotes the temperature at the ith node in the
−1
ensemble and Rc,i [m2 · K · W ] denotes the resistance to sensible heat transfer, including the effect of conduction within the
fabric layers, the additional effect of radiation within the inner
air layers and the effects of convection and radiation with the
ambient air. The rate of evaporative heat transfer Qe [W · m−2 ]
due to water transport through a layer i is given by
Qe,i =

pi − pi+1
Re,i

(14)

where pi [Pa] denotes the partial pressure of water at a node in
the ensemble and Re,i [m2 · Pa · W−1 ] denotes the resistance to
evaporative heat transfer. Using (13) and (14), a clothing ensemble can be created and the nodal temperatures and pressures
computed, based on knowledge of both the skin and ambient
temperatures and partial pressures of water. From the work of
Jones and Ogawa [44], the partial pressure of water at the skin
surface is given by
λH 2 O Sw +
psk =

1
Re,sk

pv
p1
+
Re,sk
Re,1
1
+
Re,1

(15)

−1

]

R e [m 2 · Pa · W −1 ]

0.026
0.025
0.023
0.007
0.120
0.096

3.7
5.6
18.6
1000.0
21.8
9.0

where λH 2 O is the latent heat of vaporization of water, taken as
2256 kJ · kg−1 , Re,sk is the evaporative resistance of the skin,
−1
taken as 333.3 m2 · Pa · W [30], and pv is the vapour pressure
of water, computed as
pv = e20.386−

5312
T

.

(16)

At every time step in a given simulation and over every boundary face of the polyhedral mesh, the nodal temperatures and
pressures throughout the clothing ensemble are computed by
ensuring that they satisfy the following conditions:
pi − pi+1
pi−1 − pi
=
Re,i−1
Re,i
pi = pv ,i

if pi < pv ,i
otherwise

Ti−1 − Ti
Ti − Ti+1
pi − pi+1
pi−1 − pi
−
=
−
Rc,i−1
Rc,i
Re,i
Re,i−1
Ei ≥ Ei+1

(17)

where E[kg · m−1 · s−1 ] is the rate of water transport between
nodes. These conditions produce a linear system of equations
that are subject to a nonlinear constraint, which were solved
iteratively using the Gauss–Seidel method. The skin temperature defined at the centroid of every boundary face was treated
explicitly, using the value from the previous time step with the
skin vapor pressure evaluated using (16), and then, the skin partial pressure of water evaluated using (15). After the system of
equations described by (17) for a given face had converged, the
sensible and evaporative heat flux could be computed using (13)
and (14) for the first layer (i.e., adjacent to the skin boundary)
and the total heat flux used to impose a Neumann boundary
condition in the solution of the bioheat equation

Qc,1 + Qe,1
∇T · nf =
ksk

(18)

where ksk in the denominator of (18) is the thermal conductivity
of the skin defined at the centroid of every boundary face. In
order to investigate the effects of thermal stress under a range of
environmental conditions and clothing ensembles, a subset of
the garment database presented in [45] was used (see Table I).
Boots/shoes are set to have the property PVC coated outerwear
(socks are set to permeable outerwear).

632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

III. RESULTS
A. Model Validation
Given the aim of investigating extreme environmental conditions coupled with the additional effects of electromagnetic
loads, it is important that the thermal model provide realistic
temperatures and heat fluxes, and more importantly, that the
thermoregulation mechanism produce realistic responses under
extreme conditions that match experimental data. One widely
used source of experimental data is that of Stolwijk et al. [5]
who performed a series of experiments on three young men,
subjecting them to a number of 2-h periods at increasingly
elevated ambient temperatures, while recording key temperatures and measuring weight loss (to infer sweat rate, and hence,
evaporative heat loss). These experiments were chosen for simulation in this study since the experimental conditions such as
the weight and height of the subjects, and the elevated temperatures to which they were exposed, are similar to the extreme
conditions being investigated. Since the average metabolic rates
of the subjects (who were seated in a reclined position for the
duration of the experiments) was approximately 46.5 W · m−2 ,
the metabolic rate of the Duke body model was scaled by a
factor of 0.712 in order to simulate this condition. The resulting
total metabolic rate under these conditions was 85.2 W, which
is close to the 87 W found in the model of Fiala et al. [30].
To perform the simulations, a basal temperature field is
needed under conditions of thermal neutrality, in order to provide a reference point for the thermoregulation mechanism. As
such, the bioheat equation was solved subject to an ambient
temperature of 28 ◦ C and 40% RH similar to the neutral room
used in the Stolwijk experiments, with the Qm and β fields held
constant, and allowing a period of 4 h for the temperature to
reach a steady state. We call this the thermoneutral condition
(see Fig. 4). The average skin temperature of 34.4 ◦ C and brain
temperature of 37.0 ◦ C are both in close agreement with the
model of Fiala et al. [30] and the thermoneutral conditions in
[5]. These temperatures were acquired by computing the volume
weighted mean of the temperatures in all cells within the mesh
that had been classified to be of a particular tissue region [see
Fig. 2(a)]. The average temperature in the eyes was 36.0 ◦ C,
testes, 36.1 ◦ C, marrow, 36.6 ◦ C, and core, 37.0 ◦ C. The total
evaporative heat loss was 20.8 W, which is also in reasonable
agreement with the 18.1 W found in the model of Fiala et al.
The comparison between the simulated and experimental data
is presented in Fig. 5(a)–(h), illustrating the transient rectal, tympanic, blood, and mean skin temperatures, and the metabolic
rate and evaporative heat loss throughout the 4-h period of the
experiment. As can be observed, the simulated variations in temperature show close agreement with the experimental data, and
the variations in evaporative heat loss show reasonable agreement with experimental data. Given the minor differences in
surface area and thermoneutral evaporative heat losses between
the Duke body model and the test subjects, it is not unexpected
that the whole-body evaporative heat losses differ slightly. The
major discrepancy in the validation is in the comparison between
simulated and measured mean skin temperature in the 33.3◦ C
experiment. Here, the measured skin temperature is lower than

Fig. 4. Cutaway of the Duke body model illustrating the temperature field
under conditions of thermal neutrality.

in other experiments and also lower than the simulated mean
skin temperature obtained under thermoneutral conditions, but
a similar relative variation is still observed when subject to the
elevated temperature. Most importantly, under the most extreme
conditions of 47.8 ◦ C and 27% RH the computational model is
able to accurately capture the increases in key temperatures,
providing some confidence that the Duke body model and thermoregulation mechanism are capable of providing physiologically realistic results.
In future studies, a valuable test will be to compare the model
with the experimental data of Adair and colleagues, that provide
human body temperature measurements for EM load conditions
well above the reference levels and over an extended time period.
A study of Foster and Adair [46] uses this data and shows that
the Stolwijk et al. model accurately accounts for the resultant
thermal effects.
B. Effects of EM Load, Clothing, and Ambient Conditions
In this section, we present simulations of some sample environmental conditions, in order to illustrate the relative importance of the various sources of heating; namely EM load,
clothing, and ambient conditions, but leave a more detailed
parametric study to future work.
Fig. 6 illustrates the effect of an EM load under thermoneutral conditions. The EM exposure was set to be a vertically
polarized 1−GHz plane wave. Dielectric properties (electrical
conductivity, σ, and relative permittivity, r ) for the tissues were
sourced from [47]. This frequency was selected as it is around

MOORE et al.: MODELING THE EFFECT OF ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND CLOTHING ON TEMPERATURE

633

Fig. 5. Comparison between the Duke body model and the experiments of Stolwijk et al. [5] where three young men were exposed to 2-h periods of elevated
ambient temperature and humidity. The solid curves illustrate the model outputs and the dotted curves illustrate the experimental data. Comparisons are made for
rectal, tympanic, and skin temperature, T , metabolic heat transfer Q m , and evaporative heat transfer, Q e . To enable a comparison with measured data, the total
evaporative heat loss through the skin and the total metabolic rate, are divided by the skin area, to present the data in units W · m −2 . In all experiments, the initial
ambient temperature and relative humidity were approximately 28 ◦ C and 40%, respectively. Fig. 5(a) and (b) illustrates the results from a 2-h period at 33.3 ◦ C
and 34% RH, Fig. 5(c) and (d) illustrates the results from a 2-h period at 37.5 ◦ C and 33% RH, Fig 5(e) and (f) illustrates the results from a 2-h period at 42.5 ◦ C
and 28% RH, and Fig 5(g) and (h) illustrates the results from a 2-h period at 47.8 ◦ C and 27% RH.

634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 6. Comparison of temperature in some key tissues and the core, subject
to the thermoneutral condition (28 ◦ C, 40% RH, and unclothed), with and
without the additional EM load. The EM exposure is at the maximum allowable
reference level for occupational exposure. For each tissue, values are averaged
over the entire tissue in the body.

the values used internationally for mobile phone communications. Hence, a plane wave may represent the exposure from
telecommunications infrastructure such as a mobile-phone base
station. The strength of the field was set to an input power flux
density level of 25 W · m−2 , the maximum allowable reference
level at 1 GHz for RF-EMF workers [1]. This level is set to
ensure the SAR limits are not exceeded. For this reference field
level, the WBA SAR was calculated to be 0.15 W · kg−1 and the
peak 10 g SAR was 2.3 W · kg−1 , which occurred in the ankle.
It can be observed that in the skin, brain, and core, there is a
very minor increase of approximately 0.05 ◦ C, whereas the eye
experiences the greatest increase of approximately 0.2 ◦ C. As
can be observed in Fig. 2(e), the EM load is quite heterogeneous
with relatively low heat input throughout most of the body, except for localized regions such as the eye and nasal area, hands
and legs.
Fig. 7 illustrates the effect of the two layer clothing ensemble
under thermoneutral conditions with no EM load. It can be observed that areas on the periphery of the body such as the skin
and testes experience a temperature increase of approximately
0.7 ◦ C, while areas such as the brain and core experience no
increase in temperature, qualitatively what would be expected
from the addition of clothing. One anomalous result is the eye
temperature, which experiences a decrease of approximately
0.1 ◦ C. This result is in fact due to the limitation of the thermoregulation model. As the skin temperature increases due to
the addition of clothing, minor sweating and vasodilation will
occur, but this will in fact occur uniformly over a body compartment, and weighted by the distribution coefficients of the Fiala
model. This means that there will be vasodilation and sweating
over the eyelids and since the environmental conditions have not
changed, this will ultimately lead to a reduction in temperature.
Fig. 8 illustrates the effect of environmental conditions by
comparing key temperatures under thermoneutral conditions to

Fig. 7. Comparison of temperature in some key tissues and the core, subject
to the thermoneutral condition (28 ◦ C, 40% RH, with no EM load), with and
without clothing.

Fig. 8. Comparison of temperature in some key tissues and the core, subject
to the thermoneutral condition (28 ◦ C, 40% RH, and unclothed), and an adverse condition (50 ◦ C and 70% RH, with the two layer impermeable clothing
ensemble), without the additional EM load.

those at an “extreme” condition of 50 ◦ C and 70% RH, without
clothing and with no EM load. As can be observed, the high
ambient temperature and relative humidity leads to an increase
approximately 1.3 ◦ C in the skin, and approximately 1.3 ◦ C in
the brain and core, with the largest increase of approximately
1.9 ◦ C occurring in the testes.
Finally, Fig. 9 illustrates the effect that an additional EM load
could for a person experiencing extreme ambient conditions,
while wearing a two-layer clothing ensemble. In this case, temperature increases in the key regions relative to thermoneutral
temperatures are presented. It can be observed that the EM
load presents an additional increase of approximately 0.2 ◦ C in
the skin and approximately 0.3 ◦ C in the brain and core. An

MOORE et al.: MODELING THE EFFECT OF ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND CLOTHING ON TEMPERATURE

Fig. 9. Comparison of temperature difference in some key tissues and the core,
at 50 ◦ C and 70% RH, with the two layer impermeable clothing ensemble, with
and without an additional EM load. The EM exposure is at the maximum allowable reference level for occupational exposure. ΔT represents the temperature
rise above the thermoneutral condition.

interesting result of this simulation is that the addition of EM
load has a greater effect under adverse conditions than under
thermoneutral conditions. The reason for this effect is that under
thermoneutral conditions, the body’s thermoregulation mechanism has the capability to remove the heat input from the EM
load by initiating minor vasodilation and sweating, limiting the
temperature increase. Under adverse conditions, however, the
thermoregulation mechanism’s capacity to remove heat has become exhausted, meaning that the additional thermal loads can
have a greater effect on steady-state tissue temperature.
IV. DISCUSSION
Validation of the thermal model shows close agreement with
time-series experimental data of Stolwijk et al. [5] for evaporative heat loss, mean skin temperature, and rectal and tympanic
temperatures, the later surrogates for core body temperature.
Under thermoneutral conditions, the mean skin temperature of
34.4 ◦ C and brain temperature of 37.0 ◦ C are in close agreement with the model of Fiala et al. [30]. These results provide
confidence that the thermoregulation model is capable of generating physiologically realistic results. In the adverse case (see
Fig. 9), average increases in the skin temperature were up to
1.3 ◦ C. This level is comparable to the limit suggested in [2]
and [3]. Our assessments of the effect of various influences on
this temperature change will be given in future papers. For the
EM load component, the highest increase was around 0.2 ◦ C in
the eye.
The two major limitations of the model presented in this study
are related to the thermoregulation model and the approach for
modeling the variation in blood temperature. One of the desirable features of this type of body model compared to the nodal
type models of Stolwijk et al. [4] and Fiala et al. [36] is the ability to specify detailed and localized temperature information in

635

particular parts of the body. This capability is especially important when investigating the heating due to EM loads, which
by nature is very heterogeneous, depending on geometrical and
histological factors, and can not be modeled if a body is considered to be a collection of spheres. Despite the increased fidelity
in terms of the bioheat calculation, however, for lack of better information, the thermoregulation model is still based on a
nodal/body compartment type approach, using distribution coefficients that were defined for these cylinders and spheres. One
future improvement to the model could therefore include modification of the thermoregulation distribution coefficients from
“say” discrete sweating distribution by creating a sweat gland
density field over the surface of the Duke body model based on
the most recent and experimental data [48].
The limitation with the blood temperature model lies in the
fact that fundamentally, the combination of (3) and (1) as used
in [13] and [31] does not satisfy the physical principle of conservation of energy. Under thermoneutral conditions, the arterial
blood temperature would remain constant indicating that the
left-hand side of (3) be zero. Any increase in tissue temperature (from ambient conditions, clothing, or EM load) will cause
tissue temperatures to increase, and then, the integral term over
the body on the right-hand side of (3) will become greater than
zero, leading to an increase in blood temperature. When fed
back into the bioheat equation, this increase in arterial blood
temperature will lead to an increase in tissue temperature, ultimately leading to a positive feedback cycle so that over time,
both blood and tissue temperatures can increase in an unphysical
way that violates conservation of energy. This effect is in fact
the reason for the Qb0 term in (3) and for only minor increases in
tissue temperature, this modeling approach can produce realistic results that will compare with experimental data. One future
improvement to the model could, however, be the incorporation
of a bioheat model such as that of Shrivastava et al. [49] that
satisfies conservation of energy by defining partial differential
equations (PDEs) for both blood and tissue temperature.
V. CONCLUSION
This study has described the development of a novel computational modeling environment for the thermal analysis of
a fully clothed, finely discretized, heterogeneous human body
model, subject to RF-EMF, and also subject to adverse environmental conditions, including high humidity and high ambient
temperature. An initial observation is that while EM loads at
the occupational safety limit will contribute an additional thermal load to the tissues, and subsequently, cause an elevated
temperature, the magnitude of this effect is far outweighed by
that due to the conditions including the ambient temperature,
relative humidity, and the type of clothing worn. As a result of
this preliminary investigation, we do not envisage any immediate change being required to the RF-EMF safety standards
and guidelines for RF-EMF workers subject to adverse conditions. In future studies, we aim to validate thermal models
of the human body that incorporate effects of RF heating with
varying levels of work (elevated metabolic rates), simulating the
work environment of an RF-EMF worker. Future studies will

636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

also consider the influence of different RF-EMF exposure conditions including localized and extreme exposures, hot winds,
and different body shapes and sizes including children and pregnant women. Outcomes of these studies may provide valuable
input to future revisions of RF-EMF exposure guidelines and
standards.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by a Victorian Life Sciences
Computation Initiative (VLSCI) grant VR0204 on its Peak Computing Facility at the University of Melbourne, an initiative of
the Victorian Government.
REFERENCES
[1] “International commission on non-ionizing radiation protection (ICNIRP).
guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric, magnetic, and
electromagnetic fields (up to 300 GHz),” Health Phys., vol. 74, no. 4,
pp. 494–522, Apr. 1998.
[2] IEEE Standard for Safety Levels With Respect to Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 3 kHz to 300 GHz IEEE Standard,
vol. C95.1, 2005.
[3] K. R. Foster and J. J. Morrissey, “Thermal aspects of exposure to radiofrequency energy: Report of a workshop,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 27,
pp. 307–319, 2011.
[4] J. A. Stolwijk and J. D. Hardy, “Temperature regulation in man—A theoretical study,” Pflugers Archiv Fur Die Gesamte Physiologie Des Menschen Und Der Tiere, vol. 291, pp. 129–162, 1966.
[5] J.A. Stolwijk and J.D. Hardy, “Partitional calorimetric studies of responses
of man to thermal transients,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 21, pp. 967–&, 1966.
[6] A. Gagge, J. Stolwijk, and Y. Nishi, “Effective temperature scale, based
on a simple model of human physiological regulatory response,” Ashrae
J., vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 247–262, 1971.
[7] F. Li and L. Yi, “Effect of clothing material on thermal responses of the
human body,” Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 809–827, 2005.
[8] M. Salloum, N. Ghaddar, and K. Ghali, “A new transient bioheat model
of the human body and its integration to clothing models,” Int. J. Thermal
Sci., vol. 46, pp. 371–384, 2007.
[9] E. D. Yildirim and B. Ozerdem, “A numerical simulation study for the
human passive thermal system,” Energy Buildings, vol. 40, pp. 1117–1123,
2008.
[10] C. Huizenga, Z. Hui, and E. Arens, “A model of human physiology and
comfort for assessing complex thermal environments,” Building Environ.,
vol. 36, pp. 691–699, 2001.
[11] P. Bernardi, M. Cavagnaro, S. Pisa, and E. Piuzzi, “SAR distribution and
temperature increase in an anatomical model of the human eye exposed
to the field radiated by the user antenna in a wireless LAN,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 2074–2082, Dec. 1998.
[12] P. Bernardi, M. Cavagnaro, S. Pisa, and E. Piuzzi, “Specific absorption rate
and temperature elevation in a subject exposed in the far-field of radiofrequency sources operating in the 10–900-MHz range,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 295–304, Mar. 2003.
[13] D. A. Nelson, S. Charbonnel, A. R. Curran, E. A. Marttila, D. Fiala, P. A.
Mason, and J. M. Ziriax, “A high-resolution voxel model for predicting
local tissue temperatures in humans subjected to warm and hot environments,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 131, pp. 041003-1–041003-12, 2009.
[14] D. A. Nelson, A. R. Curran, H. A. Nyberg, E. A. Marttila, P. A. Mason,
and J. M. Ziriax, “High-resolution simulations of the thermophysiological
effects of human exposure to 100 MHz RF energy,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1947–1968, Mar. 2013.
[15] M. J. Ackerman, V. M. Spitzer, A. L. Scherzinger, and D. G. Whitlock,
“The visible human data set: An image resource for anatomical visualization,” Medinfo., vol. 8, pp. 1195–1198, 1995.
[16] S. Murakami, J. Zeng, and T. Hayashi, “CFD analysis of wind environment
around a human body,” J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn., vol. 83, pp. 393–408,
1999.
[17] S. Murakami, S. Kato, and J. Zeng, “Combined simulation of airflow,
radiation and moisture transport for heat release from a human body,”
Building Environ., vol. 35, pp. 489–500, 2000.

[18] S. Tanabe, K. Kobayashi, J. Nakano, Y. Ozeki, and M. Konishi, “Evaluation of thermal comfort using combined multi-node thermoregulation
(65 mn) and radiation models and computational fluid dynamics (CFD),”
Energy Buildings, vol. 34, pp. 637–646, 2002.
[19] M. Kilic and G. Sevilgen, “Modelling airflow, heat transfer and moisture transport around a standing human body by computational fluid
dynamics,” Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, vol. 35, pp. 1159–1164,
2008.
[20] F. Li and Y. Wang, “A transient 3-D thermal model for clothed human body
considering more real geometry,” J. Comput., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 676–684,
Mar. 2013.
[21] A. Christ, W. Kainz, E. G. Hahn, K. Honegger, M. Zefferer, E. Neufeld,
W. Rascher, R. Janka, W. Bautz, J. Chen, B. Kiefer, P. Schmitt, H.-P.
Hollenbach, J. Shen, M. Oberle, D. Szczerba, A. Kam, J. W. Guag, and
N. Kuster, “The virtual family-development of surface-based anatomical
models of two adults and two children for dosimetric simulations,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 55, pp. N23–N38, 2010.
[22] (2014). [Online]. Available: www.itk.org
[23] (2014). [Online]. Available: www.vtk.org
[24] (2014). [Online]. Available: www.openfoam.org
[25] R. L. Mcintosh and V. Anderson. (2010). A comprehensive tissue properties database provided for the thermal assessment of a human at
rest. Biophysical Rev. Lett. [Online]. 05(03), pp. 129–151. Available:
http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S1793048010001184
[26] R. L. Mcintosh and V. Anderson (2013). Erratum: “A comprehensive
tissue properties database provided for the thermal assessment of a human
at rest.” Biophysical Rev. Lett. [Online]. 08(01n02), pp. 99–100. Available:
http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S179304801392001X
[27] Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy,
ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55-2010, 2010.
[28] J. Lefrant, L. Muller, J. Coussaye, M. Benbabaali, C. Lebris, N. Zeitoun,
C. Mari, G. Saissi, J. Ripart, and J. Eledjam, “Temperature measurement in
intensive care patients: comparison of urinary bladder, oesophageal, rectal,
axillary, and inguinal methods versus pulmonary artery core method,”
Intensive Care Med., vol. 29, pp. 414–418, 2003.
[29] H. H. Pennes, “Analysis of tissue and arterial blood temperatures in the
resting human forearm,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 93–122, Aug.
1948.
[30] D. Fiala, K. Lomas, and M. Stohrer, “A computer model of human thermoregulation for a wide range of environmental conditions: The passive
system,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 87, pp. 1957–1972, 1999.
[31] A. Hirata, T. Asano, and O. Fujiwara, “Fdtd analysis of human body-core
temperature elevation due to RF far-field energy prescribed in the ICNIRP
guidelines,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 5013–5023, 2007.
[32] (2014). [Online].Available: www.remcom.com.
[33] K. S. Kunz and R. J. Luebbers, The Finite Difference Time Domain Method
for Electromagnetics. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1993. [Online].
Available: http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy0738/92033535d.html
[34] Y. Cheng, J. Niu, and N. Gao, “Thermal comfort models: A review and
numerical investigation,” Building Environ., vol. 47, pp. 13–22, 2012.
[35] D. Fiala, K. Lomas, and M. Stohrer, “Computer prediction of human thermoregulatory and temperature responses to a wide range of environmental
conditions,” Int. J. Biometeorol., vol. 45, pp. 143–159, 2001.
[36] D. Fiala, G. Havenith, P. Bröde, B. Kampmann, and G. Jendritzky, “UTCIfiala multi-node model of human heat transfer and temperature regulation,”
Int. J. Biometeorol., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 429–441, May 2012.
[37] A. Hirata, T. Asano, and O. Fujiwara, “Fdtd analysis of body-core temperature elevation in children and adults for whole-body exposure,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 53, pp. 5223–5238, 2008.
[38] Z. Xiaohong, Z. Chunqin, Q. Yingming, I. Holmer, C. Gao, and K. Kuklane, “The thermal insulation difference of clothing ensembles on the dry
and perspiration manikins,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 21, pp. 085203-1–
085203-4, 2010.
[39] B. W. Jones and Y. Ogawa, “Transient response of the human-clothing
system,” J. Thermal Biol., vol. 18, pp. 413–416, 1993.
[40] C. Ye, H. Huang, J. Fan, and W. Sun, “Numerical study of heat and
moisture transfer in textile materials by a finite volume method,” Commun.
Comput. Phys., vol. 4, pp. 929–948, 2008.
[41] Y. Li and Z. Luo, “An improved mathematical simulation of the coupled
diffusion of moisture and heat in wool fabric,” Textile Res. J., vol. 69,
pp. 760–768, 1999.
[42] Y. Li and Q. Zhu, “A model of coupled liquid moisture and heat transfer
in porous textiles with consideration of gravity,” Numerical Heat Transfer
Part A, Appl., vol. 43, pp. 501–523, 2003.

MOORE et al.: MODELING THE EFFECT OF ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND CLOTHING ON TEMPERATURE

[43] E. H. Wissler and G. Havenith, “A simple theoretical model of heat and
moisture transport in multi-layer garments in cool ambient air,” Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol., vol. 105, pp. 797–808, 2009.
[44] B. W. Jones and Y. Ogawa, “Transient interaction between the human and
the thermal environment,” ASHRAE Trans., vol. 98, pp. 189–195, 1992.
[45] G. Havenith, M. G. Richards, X. Wang, P. Broede, V. Candas, E. den
Hartog, I. Holmer, K. Kuklane, H. Meinander, and W. Nocker, “Apparent latent heat of evaporation from clothing: attenuation and “heat pipe”
effects,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 104, pp. 142–149, 2008.
[46] K. R. Foster and E. R. Adair, “Modeling thermal responses in human subjects following extended exposure to radiofrequency energy,” BioMedical
Eng. OnLine, vol. 3, no. 4, P7 2004.
[47] C. Gabriel, “Compilation of the dielectric properties of body tissues at RF
and microwave frequencies,” Brooks Air Force Technical Report AL/OETR-1996-0037, 1996.
[48] N. A. Taylor and C. A. Machado-Moreira, “Regional variations in transepidermal water loss, eccrine sweat gland density, sweat secretion rates and
electrolyte composition in resting and exercising humans,” Extreme Physiol. Med., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 4-1–4-29, 2013.
[49] D. Shrivastava and J. T. Vaughan, “A generic bioheat transfer thermal
model for a perfused tissue,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 131, pp. 074506-1–
074506-5, 2009.

Stephen M. Moore received the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, in 2007, in computational fluid dynamics applied to modeling blood
flow in the brain.
Since 2007, he has been with IBM Research and
has been a Member of the IBM Research Collaboratory for Life Sciences Melbourne, Victorian Life
Sciences Computation Initiative, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

Robert L. McIntosh received the Ph.D. degree in
mathematics from the Australian National University, Canberra, Australia, in 1989, in partial differential equations.
He has been a member of the Electromagnetic
Energy Safety Research team, Telstra, Melbourne,
Australia, since 1999, developing and applying a numerical modeling environment for the study of radio
frequency dosimetry, and human body absorption and
thermal modeling. He is an Associate Investigator at
the Australian Centre for Electromagnetic Bioeffects
Research, Hawthorn, Australia.
Dr. McIntosh is a Member of the Bioelectromagnetics Society and the Australian Mathematical Society.

637

Steve Iskra received the B.E. (Hons.) degree in
electrical engineering from the University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, in 1982 and the Ph.D.
degree from RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia,
in 2012.
Since joining Telstra, Melbourne, Australia, in
1982, he has worked and published in the areas of
EMC and EMF safety. He is an Associate Investigator at the Australian Centre for Electromagnetic
Bioeffects Research, Hawthorn, Australia.
Dr. Iskra is a past Chairperson of Standards Australia (SA) Committee TE/3 (EMC), is a Member of committees SA TE/7/2
and Technical Committee TC106 WG4 of the International Electrotechnical
Commission (both in the area of human exposure to RF fields). He is a Member
of the Bioelectromagnetics Society.

Andrew W. Wood received the B.Sc. degree in
physics from Bristol University, Bristol, U.K., and
the Ph.D. degree in biophysics from London University, London, U.K.
He is currently a Professor in the Faculty of Health,
Arts and Design at Swinburne University, Hawthorn,
Australia, with a research interest in possible health
effects of electromagnetic radiation. He is a Research
Director with the Australian Centre for Electromagnetic Bioeffects Research, Hawthorn, Australia.

