736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

An Anatomically Detailed Arterial Network Model
for One-Dimensional Computational Hemodynamics
Pablo J. Blanco∗ , Sansuke M. Watanabe, Marco Aurélio R. F. Passos, Pedro A. Lemos, and Raúl A. Feijóo

Abstract—Simulation platforms are increasingly becoming complementary tools for cutting-edge cardiovascular research. The
interplay among structural properties of the arterial wall, morphometry, anatomy, wave propagation phenomena, and ultimately,
cardiovascular diseases continues to be poorly understood. Accurate models are powerful tools to shed light on these open problems.
We developed an anatomically detailed computational model of the
arterial vasculature to conduct 1-D blood flow simulations to serve
as simulation infrastructure to aid cardiovascular research. An average arterial vasculature of a man was outlined in 3-D space to
serve as geometrical substrate for the mathematical model. The
architecture of this model comprises almost every arterial vessel
acknowledged in the medical/anatomical literature, with a resolution down to the luminal area of perforator arteries. Over 2000
arterial vessels compose the model. Anatomical, physiological, and
mechanical considerations were employed for the set up of model
parameters and to determine criteria for blood flow distribution.
Computational fluid dynamics was used to simulate blood flow and
wave propagation phenomena in such arterial network. A sensitivity analysis was developed to unveil the contributions of model
parameters to the conformation of the pressure waveforms. In
addition, parameters were modified to target model to a patientspecific scenario. On the light of the knowledge domain, we conclude that the present model features excellent descriptive and
predictive capabilities in both patient-generic and patient-specific
cases, presenting a new step toward integrating an unprecedented
anatomical description, morphometric, and simulations data to
Manuscript received May 19, 2014; revised August 31, 2014 and October
15, 2014; accepted October 16, 2014. Date of publication October 22, 2014;
date of current version January 16, 2015. This work was supported in parts by
the Brazilian agencies CNPq and FAPERJ. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ P. J. Blanco is with the Computer Science Department, National Laboratory for Scientific Computing, Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation,
Av. Getúlio Vargas 333, Petrópolis 25651-075, Brazil, and also with the National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by Scientific
Computing, Brazil (e-mail: pjblanco@lncc.br).
R. A. Feijóo is with the Computer Science Department, National Laboratory for Scientific Computing, Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation,
Av. Getúlio Vargas 333, Petrópolis 25651-075, Brazil, and also with the National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by Scientific
Computing, Brazil (e-mail: feij@lncc.br).
S. M. Watanabe is with the Federal Rural University of Pernambuco UFRPE,
Av. Bom Pastor, s/n, Boa Vista, Garanhuns-PE 55292-270, Brazil and also
with the National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by
Scientific Computing, Brazil (e-mail: sansuke@uag.ufrpe.br)
M. A. R. F. Passos is with the Department of Anatomy, State University of
Rio de Janeiro, UERJ, R. São Francisco Xavier 524, Rio de Janeiro 20550900, Brazil, with the Department of Anatomy, Medical School of Petrópolis,
Av. Barão do Rio Branco 905, Petrópolis 25680-120, Brazil and also with the
National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by Scientific
Computing, Brazil (e-mail: passos@uerj.br).
P. A. Lemos is with the Heart Institute, University of São Paulo Medical
School, INCOR-FM-USP, Av. Dr. Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar 44, São Paulo
05403-000, Brazil and also with the National Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine Assisted by Scientific Computing, Brazil (e-mail: pedro.lemos@incor.usp.br).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 24 MB).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2364522

help in understanding complex arterial blood flow phenomena and
related cardiovascular diseases.
Index Terms—Blood flow, 1-D model, patient specific, vascular
anatomy, waveforms.

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE the 1950s, there have been increasing efforts to develop computational models and simulation-based techniques to assess physiological and pathophysiological conditions accounting for the multiple time scales and levels of spatial
organization present in the cardiovascular system (CVS). Applications such as diagnosis, treatment and surgical planning have
been enormously benefitted from these complementary tools
[1]–[12].
It has also been recognized in the scientific community that
an integrative approach to the modeling of the CVS would have
to be able to model and simulate the mutual interactions between phenomena taking place at these different time and spatial scales, going from genes expression to the whole organism
functioning [13]. As a consequence, it would be possible to have
at hand more adequate patient-specific diagnoses and patientgeneric treatment of cardiovascular diseases [14].
With the rapid growth in computational resources, models have evolved in sophistication from compartmental to distributed models. Although the study of several cardiovascular
diseases requires fully detailed description of the blood flow, to
date, 1-D modeling constitutes the preferred approach to simulate systemic interactions, which determine pressure and flow
rate waveforms, providing an accurate description of the behavior of the CVS at a reasonable cost.
From pioneer works studying the basic theoretical ingredients
[15]–[19], going through the early developments of topological
descriptions of the CVS [20]–[25], subsequent improvements
and alternatives [26]–[30], and finally, reaching incontestable
in vitro validations and in vivo verifications [31]–[35], as well
as in silico comparisons against 3-D models [36], 1-D models of the arterial blood flow have had a prolific existence. In
fact, the 1-D model is starting to be used as baseline model
to test data assimilation techniques for parameter estimation
[37]. Should this combination is proved successful, it can be a
powerful tool for the development of accurate patient-specific
models for surgical procedures (see, for instance, [9], [10]
and [38]).
Specifically, the features of a 1-D model can be classified in
terms of several attributes (see [34, Table 1]). This classification
can be split into two main branches: 1) modeling ingredients,
such as arterial wall behavior, shear stress formulation, treatment of the convective acceleration, outflow conditions and 2)
topological features, which basically consists of the degree of

S

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

completeness in the description of the arterial vessel connectivity in the model. Anticipating what is to come in the next
paragraphs, this paper contributes to the latter point.
A combination of the branching structure of the CVS and of
the blood flow distribution to organs is responsible for the reflections pattern. This complex architectural assembly of compliant
tapered pipes, combined with dissipation effects, yields a pressure pulse with marked differences when moving distally, from
central to peripheral arteries. The reason to develop a detailed
description of the cardiovascular network lies on multiple and
diversified motivations. Compulsorily, when a more accurate
analysis of the systemic interactions is sought, a higher definition in the vascular anatomy that defines blood flow circulation
is required.
Defining a model of the CVS implies truncating the arterial
network at a certain level. This truncation introduces natural
limitations to the model with respect to predicting hemodynamic quantities (pressure and flow) at specified locations in
the network. With a large number of arterial vessels in the definition of the vascular anatomy, it is possible to carry out investigations on both central and regional hemodynamics and their
interplay, as well as to establish the fundamental connection between the arterial architecture and the differential (and regionally distributed) blood supply within organs and other vascular
territories through perforator vessels. This sole fact constitutes
a monolithic argumentation for the development of a highly
detailed topological description of the vascular anatomy in the
CVS.
The aim of this study is to make use of available anatomical data and physiological concepts to create an unprecedented
and groundbreaking computational model of the entire arterial
network to set the groundwork to perform cutting-edge cardiovascular research supported by modeling of physical phenomena and simulation-based techniques. Hereafter, we use the
appellation ADAN model that stands for Anatomically Detailed
Arterial Network model. In the arterial topology of the ADAN
model, segments, branching points, anastomoses, and collateral
circuits are mapped into an anatomically realistic 3-D space in
compliance with the field of knowledge of descriptive anatomy.
Also, the concept of perforator arteries and vascular territories is merged with modeling entities to aid in the definition
of blood flow distribution. This results in a truly realistic and
anatomically consistent arterial organization that enables setting up, from the hemodynamics point of view, a wide range of
physiological and pathophysiological cardiovascular scenarios.
A discussion of the role of this kind of model in clinical and
modeling applications is given in the Section IX of the Supplementary Material.
With respect to the underlying mathematical model, we do not
go into unnecessary sophistication, which may obscure the novelty of this study. We make use of well-established 1-D Navier–
Stokes equations in compliant vessels and lumped Windkessel
models for the peripheral beds. Specifically, a nonlinear viscoelastic wall behavior is used with nonlinearities arising
from collagen contribution. Also, tapering in arterial vessels is
considered.

737

Criteria for the selection and determination of geometrical
parameters are exposed, as well as the criteria for the setting
of material parameters and outflow conditions. Finally, numerical results are presented, and the global features of the blood
circulation predicted by the ADAN model are discussed. These
results prove that the so-constructed model produces physiologically meaningful results, which are in agreement with published
patient records at different levels of comparison.
The model is further assessed through a detailed sensitivity analysis in which regional perturbations of model parameters are carried out to evaluate the impact on the pressure
pulse in central and peripheral arteries. At last but not least,
some of the model parameters are modified to target pressure measurements taken from a specific young subject. Such
comparisons against in vivo data from the same subject provide clear evidence of the predictive capabilities of the ADAN
model.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the arterial
network is described. In Section III, the criteria to define model
parameters is exposed. Governing equations and complementary model parameters are presented in the Sections I-IV of the
Supplementary Material. Numerical assessment of the hemodynamics in a healthy subject is presented in Section IV. The sensitivity analysis is developed in Section V, while comparisons
against patient-specific pressure measurements are performed
in Section VI. Finally, concluding remarks are outlined in
Section IX.
II. GLOBAL FEATURES OF THE ADAN MODEL
The ADAN model was outlined in 3-D space using data extracted from classical anatomical textbooks [39], [40], featuring
the average vascular anatomy of a man. Arterial pathways were
mapped aided by a digital dataset of a human skeleton as scaffold. Almost every single arterial vessel with a well-established
name according to the anatomical terminology has been included in the model. The convention employed here follows
[39], which is the International Anatomical Terminology. This
amounts to have, within the model, 1598 named arteries, plus
544 smaller vessels called perforator arteries, which ultimately
supply blood to peripheral regions. Overall, 2142 arterial vessels are in the model, considering repetitions. Arterial segments
were drawn using cubic splines in software Autodesk 3ds Max
(version 2010).
The model is 170 cm in height, with an equivalent body surface area 16488 cm2 (measured from the surface of vascular territories, see [41]). With respect to morphometry, vessel lengths
resulted naturally from combining branching/anastomotic locations, retrieved from the descriptive anatomy textbooks, and
taking into account the measures of the scaffold. In turn, the
diameter of each arterial vessel was retrieved from studies published in the literature, and processed as explained in Section III.
This resulted in a large dataset, which represents a unique data
collection complementing descriptive anatomy textbooks. The
number of specific organs (kidneys, liver, etc.) to which blood is
supplied is 28 and the number of vascular territories considered

738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

to split blood delivery to distributed organs (muscles, skin, etc.)
is 116. The full model dataset has been made publicly available
at http://hemolab.lncc.br/adan-web (see [42]).
Fig. 1, Panel (a), displays the ADAN model on top of the
human skeleton, for ease of visualization. Observe that the large
collateral circulations are present in the model. For instance, the
redundant circulation in the neck and head and the extracranial
vasculature, as well as the complex vascularization of the brain
(Panel (b)); the posterior intercostal arteries arising from the
aorta to join the anterior intercostal arteries, which arise from
the internal thoracic artery (Panel (c)); the mesenteric circuits
including the anastomotic arcades of ileal and jejunal arteries
(Panels (d) and (f)). Other instances include the patellar network
of the knee; and palmar and plantar arches, among others. In
Fig. 1, Panels (e) and (f), respectively, present a direct comparison of the vascular structures of kidneys and mesentery against
real anatomic pieces prepared in the Anatomy Department of the
Medical School of Petrópolis. Such comparison makes evident
that the complexity of the real vascular anatomy is accounted
for in the ADAN model.
It is worthwhile to highlight that the line drawing in 3-D space
was motivated by
1) the resulting undeniable visual appealing of the ADAN
model for the medical community;
2) the straightforward possibility of using the ADAN model
as an anatomical and functional atlas [42];
3) the development of enriched 1-D blood flow models to
account for curvature effects on hemodynamics [43], [44].

III. GEOMETRICAL PARAMETERS
A. Vessel Length
Vessel lengths resulted from drawing in 3-D the arterial vessels on top of the digital skeleton employed as scaffold (see
[42]). Most of the arterial vessels have multiple occurrences. In
such cases, the lengths may vary, and the range reported there
stands for such occurrence variability.

B. Lumen Radius
1) Data Sweeping: Raw data were obtained from morphometric, anatomic, clinical, and surgical studies, among others.
This comprised two kinds of data: external diameters from dissection studies, and lumen radii from imaging studies. After this
data sweeping process, the bibliographic data were organized
according to the main regions of the body. The comprehensive
list of final papers from which data were retrieved is provided
in [42].
2) Data Selection: From the raw data, the final value of
vessel diameter was defined considering the following criteria.
1) Range: Most of publications in the field report average
and standard deviation or min–max range for arterial diameters; in any case, the final arterial diameter is always
within the ranges reported in the literature.
2) Gender: When specified, data for males were selected.

3) Hierarchy: Criteria were first applied to define the diameter of larger arteries, and just after this, the diameter of
smaller vessels was defined.
4) Coherence:1 Vessel diameter always respected proximal–
distal coherence, that is, a given vessel is always larger
than branching vessels located downstream.
5) Source Data: A given radius was defined based either on
dissection studies or on imaging studies, in any case, were
these two sources of data combined.
6) Type: As with the source data, a certain radius was defined based either on internal diameter data or on external
diameter data.
7) Exceptions: In the case of lack of data, arterial diameter
was estimated using four different approaches.
a) Murray law: The relation between the radius of
the upstream vessel Ru and downstream vessels
Rd1 , Rd2 follows the power law (Murray law):
3
3
+ Rd2
.
Ru3 = Rd1
b) Neighborhood: The radius is considered to be equal
to surrounding vessels (for instance, the anterior
superior pancreaticoduodenal artery is located as
the continuation of the gastroduodenal artery and
preceding the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery,
so the average of the last two arteries was used for
the former one).
c) Similarity: The vessel radius is equal to the radius
of an anatomically similar vessel (for instance, posterior tympanic artery was considered similar to the
superior tympanic artery).
d) Image measure: The vessel radius is estimated from
the relative measure between an unknown arterial
radius and some known surrounding vessel radius
(for instance, the umbilical artery was estimated by
comparing it to the internal iliac artery).
Noteworthy, just 101 out of 1598 arterial vessels (6.3%) in
the model were exceptions.
3) Determination of Lumen Radii: In some cases, the definition of arterial caliber was based on imaging studies from
which internal diameters were retrieved, say Di . However, most
of the times, the arterial diameter was defined based on dissection studies reporting the external vessel diameter, say De .
Then, the internal radius R was finally obtained as follows:
⎧
imaging studies
⎨2Ro = Di

h
(1)
= De dissection studies.
⎩2Ro 1 +
Ro
The second formula relies on the known value of the arterial
wall thickness h, or equivalently on the known relation h/Ro ,
which in this study is related to the internal radius (see next
section).
1 The notion of upstream–downstream direction is lost when anastomoses are
present. Here, it is important to recall that anastomoses are usually formed by
small collateral vessels that connect larger arteries (for instance, the intercostal
arteries connecting the internal thoracic artery to the thoracic aorta. Hence,
at each extreme of these collateral vessels, upstream direction is dictated by
the proximal direction of the main vessel the collateral is attached to. In this
manner, collaterals satisfy coherence by being considered downstream vessels
with respect to the main vessels they branch off -at both extreme points-.

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

739

Fig. 1. Unique vascular anatomy of the ADAN model comprising: 1598 named arteries, 544 perforator vessels, blood supply to 28 specific organs, and to 116
vascular territories.

4) Arterial Tapering: Linear tapering was considered for
the larger vessels. In all cases, the definition of the tapering
was such that proximal–distal coherence was satisfied (see
Section III-B2).

C. Wall Thickness
In [26], the lumen radius Ro and wall thickness h are reported
for a large number of arterial vessels. Curve fitting of such data

740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

was performed to produce the following relation:
h
= ae(bR o ) + ce(dR o )
Ro

(2)

with a = 0.2802, b = −5.053 1/cm, c = 0.1324 and d =
−0.1114 1/cm.
IV. HEMODYNAMICS IN THE ADAN MODEL
In this section, numerical simulations are presented. Standard
governing equations for the flow of an incompressible fluid in
compliant pipes are considered in each arterial segment. Proper
coupling conditions at junctions are also postulated, as well as
terminal Windkessel models. The full set of equations is given
in Section I of the Supplementary Material. Model parameters related to arterial wall behavior and terminal models are
calibrated using criteria exposed in Sections II and III of the
Supplementary Material, respectively. The interested reader is
referred to [41] for a detailed account on the criteria to distribute
flow to organs and other vascular territories. Additional ingredients present in the numerical simulations can also be found in
the Supplementary Material.
First, we present and discuss pressure and flow waveforms.
Second, some well-known cardiovascular indexes are introduced to assess the overall cardiovascular state predicted by
the model, also performing a comparison with reference values. A word on validation/verification is given at the end of the
section.
A mechanistic discussion of the model predictions and of the
sensitivity analysis (see Section V), using for example, wave
intensity analysis [45] and decomposition of waveforms into
forward and backward travelling waves [46], is out of the scope
of this paper and will be a matter of a future contribution.
A. Pressure and Flow Rate Waveforms
The panels presented in Fig. 2 display the pressure (solid
line) and blood flow rate (dashed line) contours obtained with
the ADAN model at several arterial vessels (additional results
are reported in the Supplementary Material). The waveforms
predicted by the ADAN model through the aorta artery (Panels 8–11) follow closely results encountered in the specialized
literature.
The pressure pulse at the aortic root (Panel 8) is a typical
record, which corresponds to a healthy young subject [47], with
the characteristic concave diastolic decay [48]. At the thoracic
aorta (Panel 9), a characteristics flow waveform is predicted,
in agreement with [34]. Blood flow in the abdominal aorta
(supraceliac location, Panel 10) features a biphasic waveform
with flow reversal in early diastole, while a triphasic waveform
with forward flow in late diastole is observed in the distal part
of the abdominal aorta (infrarenal location, Panel 11), which is
in agreement with measurements in normal subjects [49].
Arterial segments supplying abdominal organs (Panels 12–
17) present characteristic waveforms, which are well predicted
by the present model according to measurements in control patients, in particular flow at the superior and inferior mesenteric
arteries (Panels 12 and 13, respectively) as well as liver vessels

(common hepatic and proper hepatic arteries, Panels 14 and 15,
respectively) [50], [51]. Specifically, low resistance flow signatures (unidirectional flow) are observed at arteries supplying
vascular beds, which require continuous blood supply such as
hepatic vessels and renal arteries (Panel 16), while high resistance patterns (alternating flow direction and reduced diastolic
flow) are observed in vascular beds such as those supplied by
the mesenteric arteries (at fasting state) and the gastric vessels
(Panels 17). The main complex of vessels supplying the lower
limb (common iliac-external iliac-femoral-popliteal-posterior
tibial, Panels 18–22) features a triphasic flow contour which
is a classical signature of the blood flow at those locations. The
pressure pulse predicted at the posterior tibial artery (Panel 22)
is very close to measurements published in [52].
With regard to the vessels supplying the brain, at the common
carotid artery (Panel 1), the flow is in close agreement with
experimental findings in [53], featuring a mixed type of flow
curve, which is the result of a low resistance signature from
the internal carotid (Panel 2), indicating continuous flow supply
as required by the brain, and a high resistance signature from
the external carotid (Panels 3), resulting in minimal diastolic
flow directed toward the extracranial region [51]. In the same
manner, flow at the vertebral and basilar arteries (Panels 4 and
5, respectively), as well as other arteries in the brain such as the
anterior cerebral artery and the pericallosal artery (Panels 7 and
6, respectively) present antegrade flow supply. A quantitative
analysis of regional brain flow distribution in the ADAN model
matches ranges reported in [54] concerning the tributary arteries
to the circle of Willis, as shown in Table I. We highlight that the
data in Table I taken from [54] were not used in the calibration
process.
Alteration of the pressure pulse as it travels along the aorta toward the lower limbs is in good agreement with results published
in [33] (see also Fig. 3). The dicrotic notch in the pressure pulse
smoothes out as we move distally, while the anacrotic pulse
becomes steeper as we move from central to distal locations. In
turn, mean, systolic, and diastolic pressures are within the values
found in healthy population. This can be seen in Fig. 3, where
the pressure pulse is shown as we move from the aortic root
to the peripheral regions, particularly toward the lower limb.
While the mean pressure decrease is of the order of 4 mmHg,
diastolic pressure reduces 10 mmHg, and systolic pressure
increases 30 mmHg. In such figure, it is evident the wave
propagation phenomenon and the increase in the steepness of
the anacrotic pulse. This pressure propagation phenomenon can
be better appreciated through the animated visualization available as Supplementary Material.

B. Input Impedance
Impedance analysis has been widely used for characterizing
the arterial system (see [47] and [55] and references therein).
Main reflection patterns are manifested in the aortic impedance,
and the oscillatory behavior is able to indicate some global
features of the arterial function, such as impedance mismatch.
The impedance Z-modulus and phase- at the aortic root was

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

Fig. 2.

Pressure (solid) and flow rate (dashed) in the main arterial segments.

741

742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE I
AVERAGE FLOW RATES IN THE TRIBUTARIES OF THE CIRCLE OF WILLIS
Avg. flow rate Q [ml/min]

Artery

CCA
VA
ICA
MCA
ACA
PCA
PcomA
BA

ADAN model

Ref. values1

429
90
257
125
70
65
3∗
151

389 (73)
96 (38)
264 (52)
150 (31)
85 (26)
66 (14)
17 (25)
131 (40)

1
: [54] on left side, mean (std. dev.). CCA: common carotid artery, VA: vertebral artery, ICA: internal carotid artery, MCA: middle cerebral artery, ACA:
anterior cerebral artery, PCA: posterior cerebral artery, PcomA: posterior communicating artery, BA: basilar artery. ∗ : direction of blood flow is from PCA
to ICA.

Fig. 4. Input impedance spectrum expressed in modulus and phase. Modulus
is nondimensionalized by the characteristic impedance Z C .

TABLE II
HEMODYNAMIC VARIABLES AND CARDIOVASCULAR INDEXES AS PREDICTED
BY THE ADAN MODEL
Index

Fig. 3. Pressure waveforms in arterial vessels as a function of their distance
to the aortic root.

computed as a function of the frequency f . Fig. 4 presents the
results up to the 14th harmonic.
Impedance at zero frequency is Z0 = 1205 dyn s/cm5 , while
characteristic impedance, taken as the average of the impedance
moduli for frequencies larger than 2 Hz, is ZC = 46 dyn s/cm5 .
These values are very close to the data reported in [47] (Z0 =
1168 ± 80 dyn s/cm5 and ZC = 45 ± 7 dyn s/cm5 ). Fig. 4
shows the relative value of the impedance to the characteristic
impedance (Z/ZC ) and the impedance phase. In general, the
model features an impedance spectrum in compliance with a
type B curve according to [47]. According to the data reported
in that work, type B curve corresponds, in average, to a 33-yearold subject.

HR [bpm]
CO [L/min]
(DBP-SBP) [mmHg]
AI A
AI C
ABI
PPA
PW V A F [cm/s]
PW V C F [cm/s]
PW V B D [cm/s]
PW V F D [cm/s]

ADAN model

Ref. values

60
6.73
(79–118)
3.77
−6.93
1.11
1.2
545
505
564
623

811
7.011
(80–114)1
[0, 15]3
[−20 , 0]4
[1.11, 1.40]2
[1.5, 1.9]5
[500, 1100]4
[550, 1100]6
[800, 1400]7
[600, 1000]7

Reference values are taken for young healthy subjects (< 30 yr) as follows:
1
: [47], mean of 11 subjects, curves type B and C. 2 : [56]. 3 : [47], [57]. 4 :
[58]. 5 : [59]. 6 : [60]. 7 : [61]. HR: heart rate, CO: cardiac output, SBP:
systolic blood pressure, DBP: diastolic blood pressure, AI: augmentation
index, ABI: ankle-brachial index. PPA: pulse pressure amplification. PW V :
pulse wave velocity. Subscripts (arteries): A: ascending aorta, B: brachial, C:
common carotid, F: femoral, D: dorsalis pedis.

C. Cardiovascular Indexes
In Section VII of the Supplementary Material, the motivationto-use and definition of several cardiovascular indexes is given.
All the values for these indexes predicted by the ADAN model
are reported in Table II. In such table, some reference values
are given. It is worthwhile to comment that all these indexes are
within the ranges corresponding to healthy young subjects. Although these data were taken from diverse reference studies,

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

TABLE III
PULSATILITY INDEX IN BRAIN ARTERIES
Artery
CCA p.
CCA d.
ICA p.
ICA d.
MCA
MCA ITB
MCA AGB
MCA PPB
MCA PB
ACA
ACA PFB
PA p.
PA d.
PCA
PCA MOB
PCA CB
BA p.
BA d.
VA p.
VA d.

D a o [cm]

PI

9.5
19
21.6
33.7
34.9
39
44.5
47.9
45.3
36.2
39.7
39.2
44.2
37.7
40
45.6
34.5
36.4
16.1
31.4

2.748
2.268
1.080
0.825
0.869
0.806
0.694
0.620
0.722
0.949
0.612
1.360
0.829
0.964
1.066
0.514
1.183
0.936
2.209
1.212

743

TABLE IV
ANATOMICAL REGIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE SENSITIVITY
ANALYSIS
PI 1
Region

SR

Subregion

Trunk

AsAo
ThAo
AbAo
In
Pe

Ascending Aorta
Thoracic Aorta
Abdominal Aorta
Intestines
Pelvis

Hi
Kn
Le
Ft

Hip Thigh
Knee
Lower Leg
Foot

1.20 (0.26)
1.13 (0.21)
1.11 (0.22)
Lower Limb
1.05 (0.36)
SR: subregion name.
1.00 (0.21)

V. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
1.04 (0.25)
1.00 (0.19)
1.12 (0.20)

D a o : distance to aortic root, PI: pulsatility index, 1 : [62] on left side, mean
(std. dev.). CCA: common carotid artery, ICA: internal carotid artery, MCA:
middle cerebral artery, ACA: anterior cerebral artery, PA: pericallosal artery,
PCA: posterior cerebral artery, BA: basilar artery, VA: vertebral artery, ITB:
inferior terminal branch, AGB: angular gyrus branch, PPB: posterior parietal
branch, PB: prefrontal branch, PFB: polar frontal branch, MOB: medial occipital branch, CB: calcarine branch, p.: proximal location, d.: distal location.

they provide a glance of the current cardiovascular state of the
ADAN model, and the consistency of the calibration criteria.
Table III reports the pulsatility index (PI) for several arteries
in the brain. These results are in close agreement with data
published in [62], according to which the present model features
pulsatility indexes, which are within the range of variability of
healthy (nondemented control) subjects. As concluded in [62],
this index can be used to assess functionality of brain circulation.
D. On Model Validation/Verification
Regarding validation, previous sections were devoted to comparing our results with multiple data published in the literature,
namely: waveforms, arterial impedance, and cardiovascular indexes. We do not claim that model validation/comparison is a
closed problem. Instead, we place our work on top of existing
validations and verifications of 1-D models, such as those reported in [31], [34], and [35] (see Section VIII, for an extended
discussion). We take this for granted, and created the unmatched
computational vascular anatomy presented here to perform numerical simulations with a machinery (1-D blood flow solvers),
which has already been proved to be reliable. This hypothesis
is reasonable because we are not at the level of capillaries, in
which suspensions introduce important effects. Yet the behavior
of the viscosity can be debatable (see Section VIII), we still rely
on the 1-D fluid mechanics governing equations. Indeed, we
aimed at showing the ability of the model in predicting physiologically realistic hemodynamic conditions at different sites of
the arterial network to simulate physical phenomena, which are
far beyond the capabilities of existing computational models of
the arterial tree.

In this section, we limit to studying the impact in the pressure waveforms caused by changes in the compliance of vessels (elastic modulus Ee ). This parameter is perturbed by a
factor θe from the baseline situation. Perturbations were defined by setting θe ∈ {1.0, 1.3, 1.6, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0}. This choice
was motivated by the fact that arterial stiffening is found to be
a characteristic present in several cardiovascular diseases (e.g.,
hypertension and aging). Baseline condition is θe = 1. Here, we
study the sensitivity with respect to perturbations of parameters
on groups of vessels belonging to different vascular regions. In
total, the parameter θe was canonically perturbed in 23 regions,
i.e., (1, . . . , 1, θe , 1, . . . , 1), being different from 1 at region k,
k = 1, . . . , 23. Here, we limit the presentation to a subset of
regions for which perturbation resulted in more expressive sensitivities. This subset of regions is displayed in Table IV (with
the corresponding abbreviations).
We stress here that the computed sensitivity is exclusively
representative of the arterial network. Evidently, arterial-cardiac
coupling is expected to be important when parameters undergo
substantial modifications.
The discussion that follows is focused on the sensitivity of
the pressure pulse throughout the path defined by the vascular
complex formed by the aorta, iliac, femoral, popliteal, tibiofibular, and posterior tibial arteries. We have chosen this path due to
the significance when assessing the systemic state by means of
different indexes (e.g. ABI, PWV, etc.) involving hemodynamic
quantities measured in these arteries.
The sensitivity is quantified in time, through the cardiac cycle,
and in space, in terms of the distance to the aortic root, as follows:
sP (t, ξ) =

P̃θ e (t, ξ) − P̃1 (t, ξ)
× 100
ΔP1 (t, ξ)
t ∈ [0, T ], ξ ∈ [0, ξm ax ]

(3)

where t is the time coordinate in the cardiac cycle of duration T ,
ξ defines the distance to the aortic root, with ξm ax the maximum
distance given by the distalmost location in the posterior tibial
artery, within the calcanean region, ΔP1 is the pressure pulse
(systolic pressure minus diastolic pressure) in the baseline condition and P̃X (t, ξ), X ∈ {1, θe } (baseline: 1 and perturbed θe ,

744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

respectively), is the mean-free pressure waveform, hereafter referred to as normalized pressure, at position ξ and through time
t. The reason to choose a normalized pressure was to reveal the
way in which reflections are maximized and/or minimized when
altering the regional arterial stiffness.
Sensitivity maps are presented in Fig. 5 (additional sensitivities are reported in the Section VIII of the Supplementary
Material). Such maps correspond to the locations for which the
maximum absolute value of sP exceeded 5% for some time instant. In these time-space maps, the first 42 cm characterize
the aorta artery, the second 51 cm correspond to the iliacfemoral complex and the last 55 cm are formed by the poplitealtibiofibular trunk-posterior tibial complex. The horizontal white
lines in Fig. 5 demarcate these regions.
Qualitatively, the sensitivity results are similar for the different values of θe . Then, we choose to present the sensitivities for
the perturbation factor θe = 4.0 because it yields more visible
changes.
According to (3), increase of the normalized pressure with
respect to the baseline condition corresponds to positive values
of sP , while decrease of the normalized pressure is represented
by negative values of sP . In Fig. 5, the white lines indicate the
isolines sP = 0.
Alterations in the stiffness of the aortic arch yield a very particular sensitivity map resembling two fingers arising from the
aortic root with an inclination given by the pulse wave velocity
[see Fig. 5(a)]. The values of sP are the largest observed in Fig. 5
for the region of the aorta and the region of the iliac-femoral
complex (larger finger). Also, the concavity of the pulse at the
aortic root is largely determined by the material behavior in
the aortic arch (smaller finger). As for the stiffening of the thoracic aorta [see Fig. 5(b)], the sP map is slightly different from
the previous case. Pressure is increased in a wider window of
time. However, unlike stiffening the aortic arch, perturbations
smooth out as we move to the popliteal-tibiofibular-posterior
tibial complex.
Stiffening of the abdominal aorta yields a completely different sP map [see Fig. 5(c)]. A single finger arises at the aortic
root, with smaller sensitivities in the aortic region than previous
cases. Right before the iliac bifurcation, the finger is split into
two fingers, which travel to the distal beds. This pattern is similar
to the one obtained from stiffening the vessels of the pelvis [see
Fig. 5(d)]. The first finger from left to right is more affected from
the stiffening of the pelvis, while the second finger is similarly
affected by stiffening the pelvic vessels or the abdominal
aorta.
Stiffening of the region of the hip and thigh [see Fig. 5(e)]
feature a sP map, which is characterized by a single finger in the
aortic region arising at the middle part of the cardiac cycle, and
two fingers arising right before the iliac bifurcation. Proximally,
in the aortic region, the sensitivity sP is larger when stiffening
the region of the hip and thigh than when stiffening the lower
leg and the foot (see Supplementary Material), and the same
holds for the iliac-femoral complex in the early finger. The sP
map when stiffening the region of the knee [see Fig. 5(f)] is
characterized by a single finger in the aortic region arising at the
middle part of the cardiac cycle, and two fingers arising right

before the iliac bifurcation. Proximally, in the aortic region, the
sensitivity sP is larger when stiffening the region of the hip and
thigh, and the same holds for the iliac-femoral complex in the
early finger.
Fig. 6(a) presents the pressure contour for three characteristic
locations each one placed in one of the regions analyzed (see
regions delimited in Fig. 5). This result is to be used as baseline
scenario for comparison against pressure contours displayed in
the rest of the plots of Fig. 6.
Note in Fig. 6(b) that the stiffening of the aortic arch has a
strong impact in the systolic pressure rise, while making more
pronounced the dicrotic notch. It also dominates the definition
of the aortic pressure range (systole-to-diastole) not only in
the aorta, but also in peripheral vessels. Instead, the stiffening of the thoracic and abdominal aorta affects mostly the mid
and late part of the systolic peak, by rounding the systolic peak
and vanishing the inflection point, respectively [see Fig. 6(c) and
(d)]. Differently from aortic arch stiffening, thoracic and abdominal aorta stiffening do not impact significantly on the amplification of the distal pressure pulse.
From this analysis (see also the Supplementary Material), it
can be concluded that the model is able to predict a wide variety
of pressure pulses at central and peripheral vessels. The same
holds for other peripheral vessels such as vessels supplying
the brain and the upper limb. These results are omitted here for
the sake of brevity.
This sensitivity analysis has been used to guide the calibration
of the ADAN model to target a patient-specific case, as will be
seen in Section VI.

VI. CALIBRATION TARGETING A PATIENT-SPECIFIC CASE
This section presents a version of the ADAN model targeted to
predict pressure contours obtained from invasive measurements.

A. Patient Description and Data Acquisition
ECG-gated pressure measurements were obtained invasively
from a 32 year-old individual with suspected coronary disease.
In [63], it is reported that arterial stiffness is increased in patients
with premature coronary disease. However, the patient’s diagnostic cardiac catheterization revealed no signs of significant
coronary obstruction. Measurement of fractional flow reserve of
an angiographically intermediate lesion confirmed the absence
of coronary stenoses. Pressure measurements were acquired using a fluid-filled cardiac catheter, which run from the femoral
artery towards the coronary ostia. In the pathway, pressure contours were acquired at the following locations: ascending aorta,
braquiocephalic trunk, left common carotid (proximal), abdominal aorta (renal level), abdominal aorta (above iliac bifurcation),
and right external iliac.
From pressure records, ten cardiac cycles where extracted for
each arterial vessel. An average pressure waveform was then
obtained.

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

745

Fig. 5. Sensitivity of the normalized pressure (sP ) throughout the vascular complex aorta-iliac-femoral-popliteal-tibiofibular-posterior tibial arteries for the case
θe = 4.0. Horizontal lines demarcate the aorta artery, the iliac-femoral and the popliteal-tibiofibular-posterior tibial complexes, respectively. Normalized pressure
increase with respect to the baseline condition corresponds to positive values of sP (toward red), and normalized pressure decrease to negative values of sP (toward
blue). White lines are the sP = 0 isolines (a) Perturbation at AscAo. (b) Perturbation at ThAo. (c) Perturbation at AbAo. (d) Perturbation at Pe. (e) Perturbation
at Hi. (f) Perturbation at Kn.

Fig. 6. Pressure contours at three characteristic locations: aorta complex, iliac-femoral complex and popliteal-tibiofibular-posterior tibial complex for the case
θe = 4.0 (see regions delimited in Fig. 5) (a) Baseline. (b) Perturbation at AscAo. (c) Perturbation at ThAo. (d) Perturbation at AbAo.

746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

B. Model Parameters
The inflow boundary condition was slightly adjusted to match
global behavior of the pressure pulse as follows:
1) the cardiac period T , which was determined from the
ECG, resulting in T = 0.92 s;
2) the averaged inflow Q̄in was scaled to match normal cardiac output according to age [64], resulting in Q̄in =
106.76 cm3 /s (i.e., 6.4 L/min);
3) the inflow upstroke was specified to match the pressure
upstroke;
4) the time at which flow reversal occurs and the magnitude
of backflow were modified to match the position and size
of the dicrotic notch.
Wall model parameters were modified to match the pressure
contour predicted by the model with those obtained invasively.
By manual inspection, and following the insight obtained with
the sensitivity analysis from Section V, the factor θe was regionally modified as reported in Table V (denomination of regions
follows Table IV). Recall that this parameter modifies the elastic
parameter Ee , which for the baseline condition is specified in
Section II of the Supplementary Material.

C. Comparison Against Patient-Specific Measurements
The comparison between pressure waveforms is presented in
Fig. 7. Overall, the agreement between the results predicted by
the ADAN model and the waveforms measured for this specific patient is promising. Remarkably, this affinity has been
achieved in a manual manner, guided (by visual inspection) by
the sensitivity analysis performed in the previous section. Future
developments involving a larger population will require a more
objective strategy for assessing and quantifying such agreement.
At the ascending aorta [see Fig. 7(a)], the predicted pressure
follows closely the measurement, both during systole and diastole. The overpressure occurring at late systole is diminished
and rounded in the ADAN model, being less sharp. The agreement of the waveforms through the abdominal aorta increases
as we move distally (see Fig. 7(b) and (c), respectively). The
agreement in those cases is better during diastolic decay, while
systole is marked by differences in the upstroke and sharpness
of the systolic peak. At the external iliac artery [see Fig. 7(d)],
the agreement is also satisfactory. The ADAN model predicts
a pressure pulse, which is consistent with the measurement in
the entire cardiac cycle. As well, the agreement is very good
at proximal locations such as the brachiocephalic trunk [see
Fig. 7(e)] and the common carotid artery [see Fig. 7(f)]. At these
locations, it is observed that both, model and patient, evolve
toward a pressure pulse, which, during systole, is more rounded
when compared with the pressure contour at the ascending aorta.
The results presented in this section are promising and constitute a small demonstration that the ADAN model is capable
of predicting patient-specific conditions, once proper data are
available. Even without any information about the inflow condition (just performing basic modifications), it has been possible
for the ADAN model to mimic the behavior of the system for
this specific patient (in the sense of the available data) with very

TABLE V
FACTOR θe AFFECTING THE WALL ELASTIC PARAMETER E e FROM THE
BASELINE CONDITION
Region
θe

AsAo

ThAo

AbAo

Hi

Or

otherwise

0.6

1.2

1.6

2.5

1.5

1.0

Or: all abdominal organs.

good agreement in view of all the uncertainties present in the
modeling process.
Discrepancies in the pressure waveforms analyzed can be
caused by mismatch between the morphometry of the ADAN
model and that of the patient, as well as by differences in the
spatial location at which data was acquired in the patient and
model results were assessed. Also, the measurement of at least
one flow rate contour in a central artery would greatly contribute
to further improving the predictive capabilities of the ADAN
model.
Again, it has to be stressed that the results have been achieved
by manual inspection of model parameters (see Table V), and
a more objective quantification of the agreement is in order.
In this regard, there is room for improving model predictions
by pursuing, for instance, a parameter estimation strategy (see
[37]).
Evidently, since no further measurements nor data about the
patient are available, the obtained parameters may not have a
direct relation with the real in vivo conditions of the patient. We
stress that several basic features of the cardiovascular system
were simplified. For instance, it is known that cardiac function
can greatly affect pressure pulse formation. This is a limitation
of the present model, as discussed in Section VIII.
VII. ANATOMICALLY DETAILED VERSUS 55-ARTERY MODELS
This section presents a qualitative and quantitative analysis of
the model predictions by contrast with a model well established
in the literature comprising the 55 major arteries. Such simplified model was successfully used in previous publications [29],
[65], as well as also as model baseline for the more detailed
model developed in [34].
The goal here is to analyze the effect of the highly detailed
anatomical vasculature in the model predictions. This analysis is
carried out in three cases: 1) the healthy condition, 2) presence
of a stenosis in the internal carotid artery (ICA), and 3) presence
of stenosis in the subclavian artery (SA).
In all tested cased, time and spatial discretization are the
same for both models. The root mean square error (RMSE) is
used to perform quantitative comparisons. Pressure RMSE is
normalized to the pressure pulse amplitude and the flow rate
RMSE is normalized to the maximum systolic flow rate value.
A. Simplified Model Calibration
The 55-artery model was constructed by truncating the
ADAN model to the 55 major arteries according to [29]. Hereafter, this model is referred to as “ADAN-55.” Calibration of
arterial wall parameters in the ADAN-55 model was performed

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

747

Fig. 7. Comparison of pressure waveforms predicted by the model and patient-specific measurements at different central arteries (a) Ascending aorta (b)
Abdominal aorta (renals) (c) Abdominal aorta (iliac) (d) External iliac (e) Braquiocephalic trunk (f) Common carotid.

using the same criteria as for the ADAN model. Consequently,
arterial lengths are the same of the ADAN model. As outflow
condition, the average flow was measured in the arteries of
the ADAN model corresponding to the terminal arteries of the
ADAN-55 model, and terminal resistances were calculated such
that this flow distribution is satisfied. Thus, in the ADAN-55
model, the total outflow is evidently a fraction of the total blood
flow (77.2% of the ADAN total inflow). To make results comparable, the remaining flow (22.8%) was considered to go to
the peripheral beds in the arms and legs within the ADAN-55
model, with a fraction proportional to the flow these vascular
regions receive. Finally, the resistances were scaled to have the
same average pressure at the aortic root.
For the terminal compliance, all Windkessel terminals of the
ADAN-55 model have a compliance such that the total compliance of the model is the same (computed using the linear
contribution of the elastin). Regional compliance is determined
proportionally to the flow. Although a more refined compliance
distribution could have been taken from the downstream vasculature in the ADAN, the present choice is taken because is a
standard hypothesis assumed in the field [29], [66].

B. Healthy Condition
In the healthy condition, both models render comparable behavior in the aorta artery as shown in Fig. 8(a)–8(d). While the
pressure contour is remarkable similar, the flow rate is similar
during systole, and differences arise during diastole caused by
the combination of reflections arriving from the periphery. At
brachial and radial arteries (see Fig. 8(e)–8(f), respectively),
the blood flow is considerably overestimated by the ADAN55 model. In such cases, the ADAN model predicts a realistic
average blood flow because of the existence of vascular territories along the pathway. As a consequence, the pressure drops
more in the ADAN-55 model as we move toward the periphery. In the lower limb [see Fig. 8(g)–(h)], the pressure contour
is similar, and the flow features differences, which can be explained by the same arguments given above for the upper limb.
Waveforms at the common carotid and internal carotid arteries are also compared in Fig. 8(i)–(j), respectively. It can be
seen that the predicted pressure pulse, mostly during systole,
differs as we move toward the brain, caused by the existence of
more arterial vessels and connections. It can be appreciated
that the ADAN-55 model overestimates the flow rate pulsatility,

748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 8. Pressure (black) and flow rate (gray) waveform comparisons between ADAN model (solid line) and ADAN-55 model (dashed line) in the healthy
condition at several arterial vessels (a) Aortic arch (distal) (b) Thoracic aorta (proximal) (c) Thoracic aorta (distal) (d) Abdominal aorta (infra-mesenteric) (e)
Brachial (f) Radial (g) Femoral (proximal) (h) Posterior tibial (i) Common carotid (j) Internal carotid (k) Renal (l) Inferior mesenteric.

more significantly at the ICA (see normal values in Table III).
Finally, waveforms at the renal artery and at the inferior mesenteric artery are compared (see Fig. 8(k)–(l), respectively). As in
the previous comparisons, the pressure predicted by both models
is in agreement except for subtle differences around the dicrotic
notch [see particularly Fig. 8(e), (j), and (l)]. As for the flow rate
contour, the differences are important at both vessels (renal and
inferior mesenteric). In the case of the renal artery, this could
be explained by the effect of downstream vasculature and configuration of arterial walls in peripheral vessels of the ADAN
model, which differs from the simple terminal model employed
in the ADAN-55 model. In turn, at the inferior mesenteric artery,
in addition to the previous explanation is the fact that inferior and superior mesenteric arteries are anastomosed (through
the marginal artery of the colon) and the blood supply to the
mesentery is accomplished by a highly intricated vascular network. This connection established a more complex hemodynamic interactions, which leads to the substantial differences
observed in Fig. 8(l).
A quantitative comparison of the results is given in Table VI
using the RMSE index [35]. The RMSE for the pressure is

TABLE VI
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON OF PREDICTIONS GIVEN BY THE ADAN AND
ADAN-55 MODELS
Artery

Aortic arch
Thoracic aorta p.
Thoracic aorta d.
Abdominal aorta
Brachial
Radial
Femoral p.
Posterior tibial
Common carotid
Internal carotid
Renal
Inferior mesenteric
Vertebral

RMSE (%)
Flow rate

Pressure

3.29
3.38
4.01
8.27
32.26
67.88
9.17
21.44
5.59
10.98
8.10
16.12
4.49

2.75
2.78
2.52
2.50
6.34
14.45
4.15
6.18
3.38
10.66
2.70
4.04
3.03

RMSE for pressure waveforms is normalized by the pulse pressure amplitude
and for the flow waveforms is normalized by the systolic flow rate, p.: proximal
location, d.: distal location.

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

749

TABLE VII
ALTERATION OF BLOOD FLOW IN THE PRESENCE OF A STENOSIS AT THE ICA
Artery

Variation of flow rate (%)
ADAN

ADAN-55

ICA l. p.
ICA r. p.
VA l. p.
VA r. p.
ECA l. p.
ECA r. p.

−75.28
39.06
25.63
23.78
2.84
0.44

−36.04
1.51
1.61
1.60
1.98
1.53

Total CBF∗

−1.50

−12.96

Variations are measured relative to the average flow in the corresponding vessel
at baseline condition. ICA: internal carotid artery, ECA: external carotid artery,
VA: vertebral artery, CBF: cerebral blood flow, l.: left, r.: right, p.: proximal.
∗
: computed as the sum of distal flow at both ICAs and both VAs.

normalized by the pulse pressure amplitude, and for the flow
rate it is normalized by the systolic flow. Both reference values
are taken at the corresponding vessel as given by the ADAN
model. The reported values support the discussion of the previous paragraph. In addition, the RMSE for the vertebral artery
(VA) is presented, which will serve for reference for the next
section.
From the results presented in this section, we can conclude
that, with proper parameter manipulation, the results predicted
by the ADAN model and by the ADAN-55 model could have
a better agreement. In next sections, we provide illustrative examples of disease, which serve as solid rationale for the development of the present ADAN model.
C. Stenosis in the ICA
In this example, we introduce a resistive model in the left
ICA calibrated such that the pressure drop in the ADAN model
is approximately 15 mmHg. This corresponds to a stenosis with
degree of constriction over 60% of the luminal diameter, as
reported in [67]. Then, the same resistive model was introduced
in the ADAN-55 model. Table VII presents the modification of
average blood flow from the baseline condition as predicted by
the ADAN model and by the ADAN-55 model. It is observed that
the neck vasculature suffers significant alteration of the blood
supply in the ADAN model, as compared with the ADAN-55
model. That is, the highly collateralized network supplying the
brain is functional to the stenosis at the ICA, resulting in a total
cerebral blood flow reduction predicted by the ADAN model of
only 1.5% when compared with the exaggerated flow reduction
of 12.96% given by the ADAN-55 model.
In Fig. 9, we compare hemodynamic variables in the left ICA
at a postobstructive location and at the left VA. Clearly, the flow
waveform is absolutely different at the ICA. The ADAN model
predicts a dampened postobstructive flow waveform (almost the
absence of flow pulse), differently from the ADAN-55 model
that displays a resistive flow signature. The drop pressure between the healthy condition and the stenosis condition in the
ADAN model is 15 mmHg, while, in the ADAN-55 model, it
is overestimated, being 37 mmHg. This is the result of the ex-

Fig. 9. Waveform comparisons between ADAN model (solid line) and
ADAN-55 model (dashed line) in the presence of a stenosis in the ICA. Pressure
(black) and flow rate (gray) are shown at the ICA (postobstructive) and at the
VA (a) Internal carotid (b) Vertebral.

TABLE VIII
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON OF PREDICTIONS GIVEN BY THE ADAN AND
ADAN-55 MODELS
Artery

ICA l.
ICA r.
VA l.
VA r.

RMSE (%)
Flow rate

Pressure

142.24
16.57
10.43
9.44

57.63
18.34
7.55
7.43

RMSE for pressure waveforms is normalized by the pulse pressure amplitude
and for the flow waveforms is normalized by the systolic flow rate. ICA:
internal carotid artery, VA: vertebral artery, l.: left, r.: right.

istence of connectivity among vessels in the ADAN model that
provides collateral pathways for the blood to reach the brain.
In Table VIII, the normalized RMSE is presented for pressure
and flow rate the ICA and the VA. It can be seen that these values increased with respect to the values reported in the healthy
condition (see Table VI) implying that the response of two models differ more in the case of disease.
As well, we analyze the collateral function by studying the
sensitivity of the blood flow to the presence of the stenosis as
given by the ADAN model. This is not possible in the ADAN-55
model for obvious reasons. Fig. 10 presents the pressure and
the flow rate at the ICA and at the VA, as well as the
modification of the hemodynamic environment at the middle
cerebral artery (MCA), the anterior cerebral artery (ACA),
the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) and posterior communicating artery (PcomA). It can be seen that the right ICA [see
Fig. 10(b)] and both VA [see Fig. 10(c) and (d)] conduct
more blood to the brain to compensate for the flow reduction
caused by the stenosis through the left ICA (see Fig. 10(a) and
Table VII). This excess of blood is then sent through the anterior communicating artery (not shown in that figure) and the left
PcomA, inverting the main direction of flow [see Fig. 10(k)], to
feed the left ACA [see Fig. 10(e)] and left MCA [see Fig. 10(g)].
From the results, it is also noticed that the right cerebral hemisphere suffers less the consequences of the stenosis than the
left hemisphere [compare Fig. 10(e)–10(f) and Fig. 10(g)–(h)],

750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 10. Collateral function as predicted by the ADAN model in the presence of a stenosis at the ICA. Pressure (black) and flow rate (gray) waveform in the
healthy (solid line) and in the case of stenosis (dashed line) (a) Internal carotid left (b) Internal carotid right (c) Vertebral left (d) Vertebral right (e) Anterior cerebral
left (f) Anterior cerebral right (g) Middle cerebral left (h) Middle cerebral right (i) Posterior cerebral left (j) Posterior cerebral right (k) Posterior communicating
left (l) Posterior communicating right.

while the posterior cerebral circulation is almost unaffected [see
Fig. 10(i)–(j)].
Clearly, the present model is a powerful tool able to provide
fundamental mechanistic insight about the regional effect of
stenoses in the cerebral circulation, and its impact on associated
diseases such as stroke and transient brain ischemia.
D. Stenosis in the SA
The existence of a severe stenosis in the SA proximal to the
VA is known to produce the so-called subclavian steal syndrome
(SSS) through which the arm “steals” blood from the brain causing vertebrobasilar insufficiency. This phenomenon is actually
due to the connection between the distal SA and the ICA through
the circle of Willis and the VA. In patients with this kind of disease, retrograde VA blood flow is observed and brain ischemia
can be produced in the case of arm exercise.
Thus, to simulate this condition, and in the same spirit of the
previous section, we consider a resistive model in the left SA
proximal to the VA, which is tuned to deliver a pressure drop

in the ADAN model of approximately 10 mmHg (actually, SSS
is suspected when the pressure difference between arms is over
20 mmHg). The same stenosis model is employed in the ADAN55 model. The pathological condition is then characterized by
a pressure difference between arms of 9.5 mmHg in the ADAN
model and 9.9 mmHg in the ADAN-55 model.
The normalized values of the RMSE for flow rate and pressure, comparing the responses of the ADAN and ADAN-55
models, at the left VA are RMSE = 101.51% and RMSE =
18.85%, respectively. These values are larger than those reported
in the healthy case (see Table VI). Particularly, the much larger
value of the RMSE in the flow waveform can be explained by the
retrograde blood flow predicted by the ADAN model, opposed
to the unrealistic antegrade flow given by the ADAN-55 model.
In Fig. 11(a), the healthy and stenosis conditions as predicted by
the ADAN model are compared. In such figure, the “steal” phenomenon during systole is effectively predicted. In addition, the
normalized RMSE for flow rate and pressure, comparing ADAN
and ADAN-55 models, at the right VA are RMSE = 24.78%

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

751

VIII. VALIDITY AND LIMITATIONS
This section is devoted to describe limitations in the modeling
approach, which could explain discrepancies between model
predictions and observations. The following sections extend the
discussion presented at the end of Section VI-C.
A. On the Description of the Cardiovascular System

Fig. 11. Pressure (black) and flow rate (gray) waveform comparisons at the VA
arteries between baseline (solid line) and SA stenosis (dashed line) conditions
as predicted by the ADAN model (a) Vertebral (left) (b) Vertebral (right).

TABLE IX
ALTERATION OF BLOOD FLOW IN BRAIN VESSELS DURING SSS
Artery

ICA l. p.
ICA r. p.
VA l. p.
VA r. p.
ACA l.
ACA r.
MCA l.
MCA r.
PCA l.
PCA r.

Variation of flow rate (%)
ADAN

ADAN-55

4.48
4.53
−105.46
65.62
1.77
1.76
0.36
0.37
−5.53
−5.50

0.55
0.56
−10.13
0.57
–
–
–
–
–
–

Variations are measured relative to the average flow in the corresponding vessel
at baseline condition. ICA: internal carotid artery, VA: vertebral artery, ACA:
anterior cerebral artery, MCA: middle cerebral artery, PCA: posterior cerebral
artery, l.: left, r.: right, p.: proximal, –: not present.

and RMSE = 15.05%, respectively. These values reflect the
difference in both models due to the increase in the blood flow
given by the ADAN model, contrary to the almost invariant flow
given by the ADAN-55 model. In Fig. 11(b), the flow increase
with respect to the healthy condition is observed at the right VA
in the case of stenosis.
The previous discussion is complemented with the results of
the ADAN model summarized in Table IX about the change
in the average blood flow (relative to the baseline condition)
provoked by the SSS in the main cerebral arteries. As in the
previous section, in the ADAN model the arteries converging
to the circle of Willis modify its function, increasing the blood
they conduct to compensate the insufficiency of the left VA, and
ultimately to provide blood to the left arm. From the results, one
sees that the major changes are in both vertebral arteries, but also
the both ICAs help to supply blood to the arm. Moreover, the
present model is capable of providing further insight in assessing
the impact of the SSS in the brain circulation. From the table,
we conclude that the anterior and middle cerebral arteries are
minimally affected by the stenoses in terms of average blood
flow, while the average blood flow is reduced around 10% in the
posterior circulation.

The present model accounts for the description of the arterial
network with an unprecedented level of morphological detail.
A natural limitation in the descriptive capabilities of the present
model is the lack of systemic coupling with other active elements in the cardiovascular system. Closed-loop models of the
circulation incorporating cardiac mechanics are known to be
relevant in shaping the pressure contour as well as in certain
pathological conditions [66], [68]–[71]. Another example is the
local compensation produced by the brain in the presence of
stenoses [72], something that was not considered in this study.
Improvement of the model depends on the kind of problem to be
addressed. However, in any case, the ADAN model represents
a baseline model to explore complex interactions with other
subsystems, such as the venous system, the cardiac function,
cerebro-spinal fluid system, central nervous system, etc.
B. On the Mathematical Modeling
Even accepting the validity of fluid mechanics equations in
extremely tiny vessels, the question that remains open is about
the modeling of viscous losses in such vessels. The present
model employs a standard Poiseuille hypothesis for the flow.
However, flow heterogeneity as well as the so-called Fahraeus
and Fahraeus–Lindqvist effects can definitely pose challenges
to develop an accurate model of effective viscosity at places (arterioles), where blood should be acknowledged as a suspension
instead of a homogeneous fluid [73]. For example, it is widely
acknowledged the shear-thinning effect caused by red blood cell
aggregation. This point deserves further study when addressing
in more detail problems related to microcirculation using 1-D
models.
In addition, mathematical modeling using 1-D equations is
limiting when trying to characterize more refined fluid dynamic
factors, such as wall shear stress and pressure drop in geometrical singularities. Improved features can be found in [34]
where a Womersley solution is employed to increase the description of the velocity profile and improve computation of
viscous losses. As well, these aspects can be improved by resorting to enriched 1-D models [74], or by using dimensionally
heterogeneous (3-D–1-D) models to simulate with high degree
of detail the hemodynamics in a specific arterial district [75],
[76].
C. On the Parameter Calibration
As in most works in the field, parameter calibration is a delicate point. The criteria employed to determine blood flow distribution is based on physiological and anatomical concepts [41].
In turn, calibration of arterial wall parameters constitutes the major uncertainty in the system. The large number of parameters in

752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

the present model makes mandatory the search for morphologic
laws to characterize parameters according to, for example, the
size of the vessels and the amount of blood they carry. This
point is starting to be addressed in the literature through the introduction of data assimilation strategies [37], [77], but further
research and validation techniques are necessary.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this study, a novel model of the arterial network featuring
high level of detail in the realization of the anatomical topology has been presented. This model, provided with stringent
anatomical and physiological criteria for the calibration of parameters, proved to deliver predictions in agreement with data
published in the specialized literature. Such predictions are not
only in terms of local flow and pressure waveforms, but also in
terms of global features such as network impedance, and wellknown cardiovascular indexes used for predicting cardiovascular diseases. Although there is still room for a refinement of the
calibration process as well as for a more comprehensive validation procedure, the presented results indicate that the basic
underlying criteria to calibrate the model parameters are satisfactory. The sensitivity analysis study performed following a regional perturbation strategy has been useful to elucidate the differential impact of model parameters in the conformation of the
waveforms in both central and peripheral arteries. Furthermore,
the agreement between model predictions and patient-specific
pressure measurements reported in this study are extremely
promising. In fact, even in such adverse scenario in terms of
available data, such comparisons provide strong evidences about
the feasibility of targeting the ADAN model to specific cardiovascular conditions.
The novel feature of the ADAN model is the extremely detailed anatomical description of the arterial network, characterizing the model as a comprehensive simulation framework that
allows to tackle, from a numerical simulation perspective, complex problems in cardiovascular research that remain poorly
understood. The ADAN model presents potential impact on
the study and characterization of cardiovascular diseases, organ
functioning, tissue microcirculatory perfusion, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and surgical planning, just to mention
some big areas of application (see Supplementary Material).
Moreover, from the modeling standpoint, in view of the intrinsic 3-D description of arterial vessels, the ADAN model
turns out to be the geometrical substrate on top of which more
accurate blood flow models can be set up, going to hierarchicalenriched 1-D- realizations, to 3-D–1-D multiscale approaches
or even full 3-D modeling (provided available computational resources grow accordingly). We strongly believe that this model
is an innovative step toward a new generation of high definition computational models to assist cutting-edge cardiovascular
research.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Nerem and J. Cornhill, “The role of fluid mechanics in atherogenesis,”
J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 102, pp. 181–189, 1980.

[2] M. Friedman et al., “Arterial geometry affects hemodynamics. A potential
risk factor for athersoclerosis,” Atherosclerosis, vol. 46, pp. 225–231,
1983.
[3] C. Zarins et al., “Carotid bifurcation atherosclerosis. Quantitative correlation of plaque localization with flow velocity profiles and wall shear
stress,” Circ. Res., vol. 53, pp. 502–514, 1983.
[4] D. Ku et al., “Pulsatile flow and atherosclerosis in the human carotid bifurcation. Positive correlation between plaque location and low oscillating
shear stress,” Arteriosclerosis, vol. 5, pp. 293–302, 1985.
[5] C. Zarins et al., “Shear stress regulation of artery lumen diameter in
experimental atherogenesis,” J. Vasc. Surg., vol. 5, pp. 413–420, 1987.
[6] M. Friedman, “A biologically plausible model of thinking of arterial intima
under shear,” Arteriosclerosis, vol. 9, pp. 511–522, 1989.
[7] E. Gao et al., “A theoretical model of cerebral hemodynamics: application
to the study of arteriovenous malformations,” J. Cerebral Blood Flow
Metabolism, vol. 17, pp. 905–918, 1997.
[8] F. Migliavacca et al., “Multiscale modelling in biofluidynamics: Application to reconstructive paediatric cardiac surgery,” J. Biomech., vol. 39,
pp. 1010–1020, 2006.
[9] G. Pennati et al., “Boundary conditions of patient-specific fluid dynamics modelling of cavopulmonary connections: Possible adaptation of pulmonary resistances results in a critical issue for a virtual surgical planning,”
Interface Focus, vol. 1, pp. 297–307, 2011.
[10] J. Revie, D. Stevenson et al., “Clinical detection and monitoring of acute
pulmonary embolism: Proof of concept of a computer-based method,”
Ann. Intensive Care, vol. 1, pp. 1–33, 2011.
[11] C. Taylor et al., “Computational fluid dynamics applied to cardiac computed tomography for noninvasive quantification of fractional flow reserve.
Scientific basis,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 61, pp. 2233–2241, 2013.
[12] C. Zarins et al., “Computed fractional flow reserve (FFT C T) derived from coronary CT angiography,” J. Cardiovasc. Trans. Res., vol. 6,
pp. 708–714, 2013.
[13] P. Hunter and P. Nielsen, “A strategy for integrative computational physiology,” Physiology, vol. 20, pp. 316–325, 2005.
[14] J. Ricotta et al., “Cardiovascular disease management: The need for better
diagnostics,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 46, pp. 1059–1068, 2008.
[15] A. Barnard et al., “Peaking of the pressure pulse in fluid-filled tubes of
spatially varying compliance,” Biophys. J., vol. 6, pp. 735–746, 1966.
[16] ——, “A theory of fluid flow in compliant tubes,” Biophys. J., vol. 6,
pp. 717–724, 1966.
[17] T. Hughes and J. Lubliner, “On the one-dimensional theory of blood flow
in the larger vessels,” Math. Biosci., vol. 18, pp. 161–170, 1973.
[18] J. Lambert, “Fluid flow in a nonrigid tube,” Ph.D. dissertation, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, Aug. 1956.
[19] Y. Kivity, and R. Collins, “Nonlinear wave propagation in viscoelastic tubes: application to aortic rupture,” J. Biomech., vol. 7, pp. 67–76,
1974.
[20] M. Anliker et al., “Nonlinear analysis of flow pulses and shock waves
in arteries. Part I: Derivation and properties of mathematical model,”
J. Appl. Math. Phys., vol. 22, pp. 217–246, 1971.
[21] ——, “Nonlinear analysis of flow pulses and shock waves in arteries. Part
II: Parametric study related to clinical problems,” J. Appl. Math. Phys.,
vol. 22, pp. 563–581, 1971.
[22] A. Noordergraaf et al., “The use of an analog computer in a circulation
model,” Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis., vol. 5, pp. 419–439, 1963.
[23] B. Schaaf and P. Abbrecht, “Digital computer simulation of human systemic arterial pulse wave transmission: A nonlinear model,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 5, pp. 345–364, 1972.
[24] M. Spencer and A. Deninson, “The square-wave electro-magnetic flowmeter. Theory of operation and design of magnetic probes for clinical
and experimental applications,” IRE Trans. Med. Electron., vol. ME-6,
no. 4, pp. 220–228, Dec. 1959.
[25] N. Westerhof et al., “Analog studies of the human systemic arterial tree,”
J. Biomech., vol. 2, pp. 121–143, 1969.
[26] A. Avolio, “Multi-branched model of the human arterial system,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 18, pp. 709–718, 1980.
[27] J. Stettler et al., “Theoretical analysis of arterial hemodynamics including the influence of bifurcations. Part I: Mathematical model and prediction of normal pulse patterns,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 9, pp. 145–164,
1981.
[28] J. Stettler et al., “Theoretical analysis of arterial hemodynamics including
the influence of bifurcations. Part II: Critical evaluation of theoretical
model and comparison with noninvasive measurements of flow patterns in
normal and pathological cases,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 9, pp. 165–175,
1981.

BLANCO et al.: ANATOMICALLY DETAILED ARTERIAL NETWORK MODEL FOR 1-D COMPUTATIONAL HEMODYNAMICS

[29] N. Stergiopulos et al., “Computer simulation of arterial flow with applications to arterial and aortic stenoses,” J. Biomech., vol. 25, pp. 1477–1488,
1992.
[30] S. Sherwin et al., “One-dimensional modelling of a vascular network in
space-time variables,” J. Eng. Math., vol. 47, pp. 217–250, 2003.
[31] J. Alastruey et al., “Pulse wave propagation in a model human arterial
network: Assessment of 1-D visco-elastic simulations against in vitro
measurements,” J. Biomech., vol. 44, pp. 2250–2258, 2011.
[32] K. Matthys et al., “Pulse wave propagation in a model human arterial
network: Assessment of 1-D numerical simulations against in vitro measurements,” J. Biomech., vol. 40, pp. 3476–3486, 2007.
[33] M. Olufsen et al., “Numerical simulation and experimental validation
of blood flow in arteries with structured-tree outflow conditions,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 28, pp. 1281–1299, 2000.
[34] P. Reymond et al., “Validation of a one-dimensional model of the systemic
arterial tree,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol., vol. 297, pp. H208–
H222, 2009.
[35] P. Reymond et al., “Validation of a patient-specific one-dimensional
model of the systemic arterial tree,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.,
vol. 301, pp. H1173–H1182, 2011.
[36] N. Xiao et al., “A systematic comparison between 1-D and 3-D hemodynamics in compliant arterial models,” Int. J. Num. Meth. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 30, pp. 204–231, 2014.
[37] D. Lombardi, “Inverse problems in 1D hemodynamics on systemic networks: A sequential approach,” Int. J. Num. Meth. Biomed. Eng., vol. 30,
pp. 160–179, 2014.
[38] F. Liang et al., “Patient-specific assessment of cardiovascular function by
combination of clinical data and computational model with applications to
patients undergoing Fontan operation,” Int. J. Num. Meth. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 30, pp. 1000–1018, 2014.
[39] W. Dauber, Pocket Atlas of Human Anatomy by Feneis, 5th ed.New York,
NY, USA: Thieme, 2007.
[40] F. Netter, Atlas of Human Anatomy, 5th ed. New York, NY, USA: Elsevier,
2011.
[41] P. Blanco et al., “Blood flow distribution in an anatomically detailed
arterial network model: Criteria and algorithms,” Biomechanics Modeling
Mechanobiol., vol. 13, pp. 1303–1330, 2014.
[42] HeMoLab, ADAN-WEB application, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://hemolab.lncc.br/adan-web
[43] A. Green and P. Naghdi, “A direct theory of viscous fluid flow in pipes I.
Basic general developments,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A, Math.
Phys. Sci., vol. 342, pp. 525–542, 1993.
[44] A. Green et al., “A direct theory of viscous fluid flow in pipes II. Flow
of incompressible viscous fluid in curved pipes,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc.
London A, Math. Phys. Sci., vol. 342, pp. 543–572, 1993.
[45] K. Parker, “An introduction to wave intensity analysis,” Med. Bio. Eng.
Comput., vol. 47, pp. 175–188, 2009.
[46] K. Parker and C. Jones, “Forward and backward running waves in the
arteries: analysis using the method of characteristics,” J. Biomech. Eng.,
vol. 112, pp. 322–326, 1990.
[47] J. Murgo et al., “Aortic input impedance in normal man: relationship to
pressure wave forms,” Circulation, vol. 62, pp. 105–116, 1980.
[48] C. Vlachopoulos and M. O’Rourke, “Genesis of the normal and abnormal
arterial pulse,” Curr. Probl. Cardiol., vol. 25, pp. 303–367, 2000.
[49] S. Bhatt et al., “Sonographic evaluation of the abdominal aorta,” Ultrasound Clinics, vol. 2, pp. 437–453, 2007.
[50] M. Revzin and J. Pellerito, “Ultrasound assessment of the mesenteric
arteries,” Ultrasound Clinics, vol. 2, pp. 477–492, 2007.
[51] M. Wood et al., “Spectral doppler signature waveforms in ultrasonography: A review of normal and abnormal waveforms,” Ultrasound Quarterly,
vol. 26, pp. 83–99, 2010.
[52] A. Bollinger et al., “Measurement of foot artery blood pressure by micromanometry in normal subjects and in patients with arterial occlusive
disease,” Circulation, vol. 53, pp. 506–512, 1976.
[53] D. Holdsworth et al., “Characterization of common carotid artery bloodflow waveforms in normal human subjects,” Physiological Meas., vol. 20,
pp. 219–240, 1999.
[54] M. Zhao et al., “Regional cerebral blood flow using quantitative MR
angiography,” AJNR Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 28, pp. 1470–1473, 2007.

753

[55] N. Westerhof and B. Westerhof, “Wave transmission and reflection of
waves. “The myth is in their use”,” Artery Res., vol. 6, pp. 1–6, 2012.
[56] F. Fowkes et al., “Ankle brachial index combined with Framingham Risk
Score to predict cardiovascular events and mortality: A meta-analysis.
Ankle Brachial Index collaboration,” J. Appl. Math. Phys., vol. 300, pp.
197–208, 2008.
[57] M. O’Rourke and J. Hashimoto, “Mechanical factors in arterial aging: A
clinical perspective,” J. Amer. College Cardiol., vol. 50, pp. 1–13, 2007.
[58] Y.-L. Liang et al., “Non-invasive measurements of arterial structure and
function: repeatability, interrelationships and trial sample size,” Clinical
Sci., vol. 95, pp. 669–679, 1998.
[59] A. Avolio et al., “Role of pulse pressure amplification in arterial hypertension: experts’ opinion and review of the data,” Hypertension, vol. 54,
pp. 375–383, 2009.
[60] W.-C. Yu et al., “Brachial-ankle vs carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity
as a determinant of cardiovascular structure and function,” J. Human
Hypertension, vol. 22, pp. 24–31, 2008.
[61] J. Sugawara et al., “Brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity: An index of
central arterial stiffness?” J. Human Hypertension, vol. 19, pp. 401–406,
2005.
[62] A. Roher et al., “Transcranial Doppler ultrasound blood flow velocity and pulsatility index as systemic indicators for Alzheimer’s disease,”
Alzheimer’s Dementia, vol. 7, pp. 445–455, 2011.
[63] B. Güngör et al., “Aortic stiffness is increased in patients with premature
coronary artery disease: A tissue Doppler imaging study,” J. Cardiol.,
vol. 63, pp. 223–229, 2014.
[64] G. de Simone et al., “Stroke volume and cardiac output in normotensive
children and adults assessment of relations with body size and impact of
overweight,” Circulation, vol. 95, pp. 1837–1843, 1997.
[65] J. Wang and K. Parker, “Wave propagation in a model of the arterial
circulation,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, pp. 457–470, 2004.
[66] F. Liang and H. Liu, “A closed-loop lumped parameter computational model for human cardiovascular system,” JSME Int. J., vol. 48,
pp. 484–493, 2005.
[67] J. Deweese et al., “Anatomic and hemodynamic correlations in carotid
artery stenosis,” Stroke, vol. 1, pp. 149–157, 1970.
[68] F. Liang et al., “Multi-scale modeling of the human cardiovascular system
with applications to aortic valvular and arterial stenoses,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 47, pp. 743–755, 2009.
[69] ——, “Biomechanical characterization of ventricular-arterial coupling
during aging: A multi-scale model study,” J. Biomech., vol. 42,
pp. 692–704, 2009.
[70] J. Mynard and P. Nithiarasu, “A 1D arterial blood flow model incorporating ventricular pressure, aortic valve and regional coronary flow using
the locally conservative galerkin (LCG) method,” Commun. Numerical
Methods Eng., vol. 24, pp. 367–417, 2008.
[71] L. Müller and E. Toro, “A global multiscale mathematical model for the
human circulation with emphasis on the venous system,” Int. J. Num.
Meth. Biomed. Eng., vol. 30, pp. 681–725, 2014.
[72] J. Alastruey et al., “Modelling the circle of Willis to assess the effects
of anatomical variations and occlusions on cerebral flows,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 40, pp. 1794–1805, 2007.
[73] A. Popel and P. Johnson, “Microcirculation and hemorheology,” Annu.
Rev. Fluid Mech., vol. 37, pp. 43–69, 2005.
[74] D. Amadori et al., “Derivation and analysis of a fluid-dynamical model
in thin and long elastic vessels,” Netw. Heterogeneous Media, vol. 2,
pp. 99–125, 2007.
[75] P. Blanco et al., “On the potentialities of 3D–1D coupled models in
hemodynamics simulations,” J. Biomech., vol. 42, pp. 919–930, 2009.
[76] P. Blanco et al., “Assessing the influence of heart rate in local hemodynamics through coupled 3D-1D-0D models,” Int. J. Num. Meth. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 26, pp. 890–903, 2010.
[77] M. Khalifé et al., “Estimating absolute aortic pressure using MRI and a
one-dimensional model,” J. Biomech., vol. 47, pp. 3390–3399, 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

