728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Development of HEATHER for Cochlear Implant
Stimulation Using a New Modeling Workflow
Phillip Tran, Andrian Sue, Paul Wong, Qing Li∗ , and Paul Carter

Abstract—The current conduction pathways resulting from
monopolar stimulation of the cochlear implant were studied by
developing a human electroanatomical total head reconstruction
(namely, HEATHER). HEATHER was created from serially sectioned images of the female Visible Human Project dataset to encompass a total of 12 different tissues, and included computer-aided
design geometries of the cochlear implant. Since existing methods
were unable to generate the required complexity for HEATHER,
a new modeling workflow was proposed. The results of the finiteelement analysis agree with the literature, showing that the injected
current exits the cochlea via the modiolus (14%), the basal end of
the cochlea (22%), and through the cochlear walls (64%). It was
also found that, once leaving the cochlea, the current travels to
the implant body via the cranial cavity or scalp. The modeling
workflow proved to be robust and flexible, allowing for meshes
to be generated with substantial user control. Furthermore, the
workflow could easily be employed to create realistic anatomical
models of the human head for different bioelectric applications,
such as deep brain stimulation, electroencephalography, and other
biophysical phenomena.
Index Terms—Bioelectric finite-element analysis, cochlear implant, current conduction, human head model.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE cochlear implant (CI) signifies an important medical
technology that has been widely used to treat hearing loss.
It works by injecting current into the cochlea to electrically
stimulate the sensory neurons [1]. Different modes of stimulation exist, with the most common schemes being monopolar
(MP) current stimulation in the form of MP1, MP2, and MP1
+ 2 modes [2]. For this, the current is passed from the intracochlear electrode to a remote ground electrode: a ball located
in the temporalis muscle (MP1), the plate on the implant body

T

Manuscript received August 17, 2014; revised October 11, 2014; accepted
October 13, 2014. Date of publication October 22, 2014; date of current version
January 16, 2015. This work was supported by the Australian Research Council
(ARC) through a Linkage Scheme (LP0776938), and Cochlear Ltd. The work
of P. Tran, A. Sue, and P. Wong was supported by the Australian Postgraduate
Award (APA). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
P. Tran, A. Sue, and P. Wong are with the School of Aerospace,
Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and
IT, The University of Sydney, Camperdown NSW 2006, Australia
(e-mail: phillip.tran@sydney.edu.au; andrian.sue@sydney.edu.au; paul.wong@
sydney.edu.au).
∗ Q. Li is with the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and IT, The University of Sydney, Camperdown
NSW 2006, Australia (e-mail: qing.li@sydney.edu.au).
P. Carter is with the School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and IT, The University of Sydney, Camperdown
NSW 2006, Australia and also with Cochlear Ltd., Macquarie University, North
Ryde NSW 2109, Australia (e-mail: pcarter@cochlear.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2364297

at the back of the head (MP2), or both (MP1 + 2) [3], [4]. However, the specific in vivo current pathways have not been studied
to date. For ideal CI stimulation, all of the current would flow
from the stimulating electrode to the return electrode via the
modiolus, thereby exciting the targeted spiral ganglion neurons
with a minimum amount of electrical power. Conversely, if the
current fails to take the ideal modiolar pathway, then the current
is described as “leaked” or lost since it does not contribute to
neural activation [5]. While the modiolar pathway is commonly
reported in the literature [6], some research has suggested other
pathways, such as the round window [6], the facial nerve [6]–[8],
the cochlear walls [9], and the jugular vein [10].
Traditional experimental techniques are impractical for investigating in vivo current pathways since obtaining the measurements would be highly invasive [11]. Computational modeling
is an effective alternative that can determine and visualize these
pathways in the context of the anatomy [12]. To date, numerous
volume conduction models have examined the current spread
within the local cochlea region [12]–[17]. These models, however, do not take into consideration the anatomical structures
outside the cochlea, which influence the boundary conditions,
and hence, current conduction pathways induced by MP stimulation. A model of the whole human head would provide insight
into this topic; unfortunately, very few head models have focused on CI stimulation. Mens et al. [9] created a simplified
human head model consisting of three layered spheres of varying radii to represent the brain, bone, and scalp regions, but
ignored some important anatomical structures. Chen et al. [18]
took a different approach by creating a more realistic anatomical model of the human head from magnetic resonance images
(MRI). However, the large voxel size of the model (3 mm ×
3 mm × 3 mm) implied that many small anatomical structures
that may be important for the current pathways were omitted.
Modeling the human head is not uncommon in other applications. Numerous models have been used to study a wide range of
bioelectric therapies, such as electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
[19], [20], electroencephalography (EEG) [21], [22], transcranial magnetic stimulation [23]–[25], and deep brain stimulation
(DBS) [26]. These models vary greatly in anatomical complexity. Similar to Mens et al. [9], some of these models simplified
the detailed anatomy of the head into layers of spheres or ellipses with different sizes to represent different tissues [26].
Others reconstructed the geometry of the head using computeraided design (CAD) [24]. Generally speaking, using anatomically realistic models can provide a factor of improvement over
those based on simplified geometries or CAD [27]. Noninvasive
scanning data, such as MRI and computed tomography (CT) images, have been used to construct head models, but the use of low

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TRAN et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF HEATHER FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANT STIMULATION USING A NEW MODELING WORKFLOW

729

resolution data only allows relatively coarse models to be generated [18], [19]. In addition, a number of studies created head
models with few tissues [20], [22], [25]. From a biophysical
perspective, the number of tissues included in the model would
also affect the accuracy of the model, with more tissues being required to produce more realistic results [21]. As noted by Potratz
et al. [11] and Lau et al. [28], it is critical to represent different
levels of anatomical details for accurate bioelectric modeling.
With these considerations, the primary purpose of this study
was to create a realistic human electroanatomical total head
reconstruction (HEATHER) to better predict the current conduction pathways during MP2 CI stimulation. This mode, with
the return electrode at the implant site, was chosen because it
is used by all major manufacturers of cochlear implants. The
increased complexity of the finite-element (FE) model required
a more robust and flexible methodology. As such, the development of a new modeling workflow was the secondary objective
of this study.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Creation of HEATHER
1) Anatomical Data Source: Serially sectioned images of
the Visible Human Project were obtained with permission from
the U.S. National Library of Medicine (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). The female dataset was chosen
because the voxel size (0.33 mm × 0.33 mm × 0.33 mm) was
smaller than that of the male dataset (1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm),
allowing for a more realistic representation of small anatomical features, such as the cochlea [29]. The first 765 images
(255 mm) of the dataset representing the head and neck were
used in this study. An example of a sectioned image passing
through the cochleae is shown in Fig. 1(a).
2) Image Processing: The images were cropped from their
original resolution (2048 pixels × 1216 pixels) to fit the head,
with a padding of 1–5 pixels beyond the extremities of the head
[see Fig. 1(b)]. The final image resolution was 530 pixels ×
645 pixels (176.67 mm × 215 mm). The cropping operation
removed irrelevant background information, such as the blue
gel used to embed the specimen, the grayscale table, and identification number. This reduced the size of the dataset, improving
computational efficiency in the subsequent steps.
The remaining blue background of the cropped images was
removed by adjusting the RGB (red, green, blue) color values
of the pixels using MATLAB (MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA,
USA). The process, suggested by Zhao et al. [30], relied on
the fact that the background gel pixels were defined by higher
green and blue color intensity values than that of red. If the
green or the blue color value was greater than the red color
value for a particular pixel, then the pixel was considered to be
a “gel” or “background” pixel, and all three color values were
adjusted to zero to make this pixel black. Tissue regions that
were affected by this process had their original color values
reinstated to ensure the information was not lost. The result is
shown in Fig. 1(b).
3) Segmentation: Segmentation was performed using
ScanIP v4.3 (Simpleware Ltd., Exeter, U.K.) and Photoshop
CS6 (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CA, USA), exposing the

Fig. 1. Image from the Visible Human Project (a) in its original state, and
(b) after cropping and processing to remove the background. (c) Segmentation
was conducted for 12 tissues (represented by different colors) to obtain the final
segmentation as shown in (d) transverse, (e) sagittal, and (f) coronal views.

tools of both programs and enabling a more flexible and efficient segmentation process. Manual and automatic techniques
were employed to complete this task in 2-D (individual images)
and 3-D (entire model). The transfer of files between ScanIP
and Photoshop involved a small number of steps using ImageJ
v1.47 (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA), and
ImageMagick v6.8.0 (ImageMagick Studios LLC). All 765 images were segmented into 12 different tissues that were deemed
to be significant in the head, as shown in Fig. 1(c)–(f). The perilymph included the cochleae and the semicircular canals, while
the nerve included only cranial nerves II, VII, and VIII.
4) Surface Modeling: Surfaces were created from the segmented dataset in ScanIP. The Stereolithography Rapid Prototyping (STL RP) surface meshing algorithm was used to create
a separate surface for each tissue that was conformal with its
adjacent structures [see Fig. 2(a)].

730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE I
ELECTRIC RESISTIVITY FOR DIFFERENT MATERIALS USED IN HEATHER
Material

Resistivity (Ω·m)

Perilymph
Gray Matter
White Matter
Cerebellum
Brainstem/Spinal Cord
Nerve
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Bone
Scalp
Blood
Eye
Sinus
Platinum
Silicone

0.7
3
7.143
6.25
6.25
2.857
0.56
76
2.38
1.6
2
16,000
1.06 × 10-7
1 × 107

see if the numerical results were the same. Specifically, the
mesh in ICEM CFD was exported as a NASTRAN data file.
B. Simulation of Cochlear Implant Stimulation

Fig. 2. (a) Transparent 3-D view of HEATHER with 12 tissues, with the
implant body and the cochlea highlighted. (b) Close-up view of the implant
body with the plate electrode highlighted in blue. (c) Close-up view of the
intracochlear electrode array inserted into the cochlea, with the 11th electrode
highlighted in yellow.

The CAD geometry of the CI24RE cochlear implant body
was obtained from Cochlear Ltd. and added to the model. Care
was taken to position the implant body in the scalp tissue behind
the ear [see Fig. 2(b)]. This location was chosen to mimic the
typical location for the implant body [3]. A simplified geometry
of the intracochlear electrode array was created using SolidWorks 2012 (Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corp., Waltham,
MA, USA), which consisted of a silicone tube that was modeled
as a semicircular sweep following the spiral path of the ipsilateral cochlea and 22 hemispherical electrodes embedded in the
carrier [see Fig. 2(c)].
5) Volume Meshing: A volumetric tetrahedral mesh was
generated in ICEM CFD 14.5 (ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg, PA,
USA) using the Octree meshing algorithm (see Fig. 3). Selective mesh refinement was achieved by prescribing the minimum
and maximum mesh size for each tissue, as well as varying the
Curvature/Proximity Based Refinement (CPBR) value.
ICEM CFD can export the resulting volumetric mesh as different formats required for different FE packages. In this paper, we consider exportation into COMSOL Multiphysics v4.3
(COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden) and ANSYS Multiphysics
14.5 (ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg, PA, USA), respectively, to
demonstrate the flexibility of the modeling workflow, and to

1) Simulation in COMSOL Multiphysics: Eight different
meshes were created using CPBR values ranging from 1 to 8 and
set up in COMSOL for a mesh convergence study. An electrical
resistivity was prescribed for each of the tissues (see Table I).
Electrical resistivity values were based on those reported in the
literature [13], [31]–[40], and assumed to be linear isotropic.
Stationary simulations were performed under the assumption
that permittivity effects were negligible. As such, the electrical
permittivity for all materials was set to a value of 1. The surface
representing the plate electrode of the implant body was electrically grounded (V = 0) [see Fig. 2(b)]. An electric current
terminal of 0.1065 mA was applied to the surface of the 11th intracochlear electrode, situated on the medial side of the cochlea,
approximately 180° rotationally from the cochleostomy [see
Fig. 2(c)]. This electrode was chosen to replicate a typical stimulus from the cochlear implant. The simulation was computed
using the direct PARDISO solver.
2) Simulation in ANSYS Multiphysics: In this platform,
only the converged mesh (CPBR = 5) was used. The
NASTRAN file was imported into the finite-element modeler
(FE modeler) module of Workbench 14.5 (ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg, PA, USA) to create a mechanical APDL input file. This file
was loaded in ANSYS Multiphysics. The flexible SOLID231
elements were used because they allowed for both linear and
quadratic tetrahedral elements. The electrical resistivity (see
Table I) and permittivity were defined for each of the different
materials for a stationary simulation. The same boundary conditions that were used for COMSOL were applied. The simulation
was computed using the direct SPARSE solver.
III. RESULTS
A. HEATHER Volume Mesh
Generation of the volume mesh in ICEM CFD took approximately 1 h on an Intel Core i7 950 desktop computer with 24
GB of RAM. Fig. 3 shows that the new meshing workflow was
successful in generating a volume mesh with a good level of

TRAN et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF HEATHER FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANT STIMULATION USING A NEW MODELING WORKFLOW

Fig. 3.

731

Sagittal section of the CPBR = 5 mesh showing different levels of zoom of the cochlea region. Regions of high and low mesh density exist.

TABLE II
MESH STATISTICS AND IMPEDANCE VALUES OBTAINED FROM SIMULATION FOR
DIFFERENT MESH REFINEMENT LEVELS
Refinement
Level
(CPBR)

Number of
Degrees of
Freedom

Number of
Elements

Average
Aspect
Ratio

Impedance (kΩ)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

564 421
690 245
958 887
1 328 174
1 605 173
1 898 342
2 240 563
2 548 192

3 309 255
4 040 556
5 611 950
7 773 340
9 348 765
11 094 983
13 084 692
14 873 116

5.142
5.182
5.046
4.969
4.962
4.964
4.958
4.934

1.852
1.873
1.885
1.886
1.888
1.888
1.885
1.885

of the average aspect ratio, the overall mesh quality improved
marginally with increasing mesh refinement.
The time taken to complete the stationary simulation in
COMSOL varied from 1 min for CPBR = 1 to 10 min for
CPBR = 8. The maximum voltage obtained from these different FE simulations varied by less than 2% and converged to a
value of 0.2011 V (1.888 kΩ) for CPBR = 5. Hence, this mesh
was used for all subsequent simulations.
C. Comparison Between COMSOL and ANSYS Results
COMSOL and ANSYS voltage and current density contour
plots are compared in Fig. 5. The contours are quite similar for
both solvers, although the images appear different due to the
continuous versus discrete nature of the COMSOL and ANSYS
plots, respectively. The maximum voltage for both simulations
was 0.2011 V (1.888 kΩ). The simulation time in COMSOL
was approximately 5 min, compared to 20 min in ANSYS. For
this reason, COMSOL was preferred as the package for all other
simulations.
D. Current Conduction Pathways

Fig. 4. Isometric view of the sectioned mesh with different levels of refinement. (a) CPBR = 1, and (b) CPBR = 8.

control and smooth transitions between regions of high mesh
density and low mesh density. The quality of the mesh was
assessed by quantifying the average aspect ratio to assure the
accuracy of the solution (see Table II) [41], [42].
B. Convergence Study
Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows two different mesh densities obtained
with CPBR values of 1 (least dense) and 8 (most dense), respectively. The number of elements and degrees of freedom
obtained through these two different levels of refinement varied
significantly, as seen in Table II. It is also noted that in terms

Current density streamlines were obtained from COMSOL,
and are shown in Fig. 6. They indicate the direction of current
flow from the stimulating electrode surface to the return electrode. The number of streamlines passing through a particular
region is indicative of the amount of current passing through that
region. As shown in Fig. 6(a), the current leaves the cochlea predominantly through three different pathways: (A) the modiolus
(14% of the current leaving the cochlea through the auditory
nerve), (B) the basal end of the cochlea (22% of the current
passing through the basal end of the scala tympani and entering
the vestibular system), and (C) the cochlea walls (the remaining
64% of the current traveling through the temporal bone). Outside of the cochlea [see Fig. 6(b)], the current conduction can
be broadly classified as flowing through either (D) the cranial
cavity, or (E) the scalp.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. HEATHER and Current Conduction Pathways
The volume conduction results revealed that a small proportion of current entered the modiolus to induce neural stimulation, before traveling to the ground through the conductive

732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 5. Contour plots for scalp surface and coronal section view at the cochlea. Plots show voltage and current density from COMSOL (continuous contours)
and ANSYS (discrete contours). Note that the contours were scaled to show the greatest dynamic range, and the scales are the same for COMSOL and ANSYS
results.

Fig. 6. Current density streamlines originating from the stimulating electrode.
(a) Close-up view of the cochlea (blue) and cochlear nerve (yellow). The current
is exiting the cochlea via the (A) modiolus, (B) basal end of the cochlea, and
(C) cochlea walls. (b) Isometric view of the head with blood vessels (red). The
current is passing through the (D) cranial cavity, and (E) scalp.

cerebrospinal fluid of the cranial cavity. The rest of the current
exited the cochlea through nonfunctional pathways, and then,
passed through the scalp to reach the ground. The pathways

found here agreed with those described in the literature [6], [9],
however the proportion of current passing through the modiolus
is much lower than that measured by Spelman et al. (60–75%)
[43]. This difference is most likely due to the broad classification of the stimulating and unstimulating paths by Spelman
et al., and the assumption that current cannot pass through the
resistive bone of the cochlear walls to leave the cochlea.
It has been reported that bioelectric simulation results are
sensitive to the tissue geometries [21] and resistivities [34], [37]
locally. One of our previous studies [44] showed that small
tissues, such as blood vessels, only had small localized effects
on the current conduction. It is speculated that large head tissues
that are in contact with the cochlea, such as bone, would have
a greater effect on the current conduction inside and outside
the cochlea. A tissue sensitivity analysis, to be conducted later
using HEATHER, will clarify this, thereby gaining quantitative
insights into the patient specific variations. In either case, it is
important for these geometries and resistivities to be modeled
accurately.
The main problem with existing cochlea sized models is that
it is difficult to assign boundary conditions that would accurately
replicate the results of a model that included larger tissues. One
possible solution to this would be to capture the geometric and
anatomic details of CI stimulation with a high-resolution cochlea
region and a lower resolution head region (a multiscale study).
Following this, the current distributions within the cochlea and
their exit paths could be analyzed more effectively.
Regardless of the geometric and anatomic complexity of the
model, it is important to validate HEATHER to ensure the simulation results are accurate and reliable. In addition, HEATHER
was created from the female dataset of the Visible Human
Project, making it a patient-specific model. The results obtained
from HEATHER should be generalizable for the population of

TRAN et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF HEATHER FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANT STIMULATION USING A NEW MODELING WORKFLOW

CI recipients in order for it to be a useful tool in the prediction
of current conduction. The validation technique proposed, to be
published later, involves the recording of scalp potentials, or
impedances, of recipients at various points on the head during
CI stimulation. The impedance across the electrode-tissue interface is expected to be 4–10 kΩ [45], [46], more than double the
value of 1.888 kΩ obtained using HEATHER. This is mainly
due to the polarization voltage being ignored in the stationary
simulation [47].
The Visible Human Project dataset contained some undesired image artifacts that made segmentation somewhat difficult.
Some small anatomical structures were missing as a result of
the acquisition process, including part of the temporal lobe of
the brain, and the chin [48]. In addition, some parts of the scalp
were deformed, these being two large vertical wrinkles on the
anterior surface of the scalp, an indent on the top of the head,
and the back of the head being flat. Manual intervention was
sometimes required to create HEATHER with a more realistic
geometry.
The segmentation of HEATHER did not include the otic capsule, a layer of dense bone surrounding the cochlea with an
average thickness of approximately 1 mm [8]. The resistivity of
the otic capsule is higher than that of typical bone [8], so the
current exiting the cochlea through the cochlea walls is possibly overestimated. Hence, the real amount of current taking the
modiolar pathway could be greater than that currently predicted
by HEATHER. Furthermore, otosclerosis is a condition where
the density, and therefore, resistivity, of the otic capsule is reduced [8], [49]. The amount of current exiting the cochlea via
the cochlea walls is expected to increase for patients suffering
from this condition [9]. This has implications for facial nerve
stimulation, as the facial nerve passes close to the cochlea spiral, in particular the geniculate ganglion [50]. As described by
Vanpoucke et al. [7] and Frijns et al. [8], facial nerve stimulation is a common side effect of current injection by the cochlear
implant, making it important to accurately model these effects
to better understand, and consequently, reduce their occurrence.
HEATHER’s simplified cochlear implant components may
have affected the current conduction results. Control of the implant body position in the scalp tissue was restricted because
limited tools were available for moving parts in ICEM CFD.
As such, a trial-and-error procedure was required to ensure that
the implant body was not exposed. It was also assumed that the
simplified intracochlear electrode array geometry would not impact on the far-field current conduction pathways. To investigate
the effects of the electrode array geometry on current conduction within the cochlea, a high-resolution model of the cochlea
would be required.
B. Modeling Workflow
The various processes of the modeling workflow led to the
use of multiple software packages in this study. The packages
described in this paper were chosen based on their availability
and popularity. In other words, it would be possible to follow
a similar procedure accommodating other programs and tools.
In addition, the use of multiple software packages meant that
many steps were involved in the data transfer between different

733

Fig. 7. Close-up view of the white matter mesh with different levels of refinement. (a) CPBR = 1, and (b) CPBR = 8. Fragmentation of the mesh is evident
in the pointed region.

programs. While each of these steps was relatively simple, the
entire process could be slower than ideal.
Many meshing programs allow the user to vary the mesh density in different regions of the model. From this study, it was
found that ICEM CFD was more robust and provided greater
control over mesh density for different parts of the head model.
This proved to be especially useful for HEATHER, as both
coarse and fine anatomical details were desired. Small structures, such as the platinum electrodes of the intracochlear electrode array, required a fine mesh to properly capture the geometry. On the other hand, a coarse mesh was sufficient to represent
the geometry of larger structures. Meshing in this way provided
a combination of accuracy in the regions that were deemed critically important, and efficiency in overall computational cost.
Controlling the mesh density was achieved by varying the
CPBR value in ICEM CFD. The CPBR value defined the number of elements representing curved regions, and therefore, the
total number of elements and degrees of freedom in HEATHER.
Small, detailed anatomical structures, such as blood vessels and
white matter, were affected more than large structures. As shown
in Fig. 7(a) and (b), some regions of the white matter are fragmented with low mesh density (CPBR = 1), but are connected
with a high mesh density (CPBR = 8). These considerable
changes in mesh density did not result in significant changes
in the impedance (<2%), suggesting the discretization was well
converged. In addition, the average element aspect ratio obtained
for the different meshes did not change significantly (<5%).
However, it has been suggested that meshes with an average
aspect ratio greater than 5 may have issues with accuracy [51],
providing a reason for selecting the CPBR = 5 mesh.
In some instances, the fragmentation could not be resolved
by generating a denser mesh in ICEM CFD. Various components of the mesh became disjointed, often forming very small
parts with as few as one element. Assigning properties to these
parts was problematic as each part required manual inspection,
and the user’s knowledge and familiarity with the dataset and
segmentation. In addition, jagged edges were formed in regions
where more than two components came together when meshing
in ICEM CFD. While this was acceptable for the model used
in this study, it may create undesirable concentrations for other
applications.
The FE mesh was exported into two different FE packages
to test the flexibility and feasibility of the modeling workflow. ICEM CFD was capable of exporting various file types,

734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

allowing different FE packages to be used, such as ABAQUS.
The results from the two tested models in COMSOL and ANSYS were identical to three significant figures, which crosschecked the correctness and accuracy. The voltage and current
density distributions, as well as the maximum voltage measurements, were the same.
Although the modeling workflow was used to create
HEATHER for electric conduction induced by a CI, other applications could also take advantage of it. For example, the
modeling workflow can easily be adapted to other areas, such as
DBS and EEG, where electric conduction in a head model is critical. It is projected that the flexibility of the modeling workflow
not only applies for different simulation packages, but also for
simulations targeting other physical quantities. This includes,
but is not limited to, structural (head impact), magnetic (MRI
examination), thermal, and coupled physics (cell phone radiation). The user can create an anatomical model, with relevant
implant geometries if required, and be able to mesh and solve
the specific problem efficiently.
V. CONCLUSION
A new modeling workflow was proposed in this study. The
procedure proved to be robust and flexible for the creation of
patient-specific finite element (FE) models. The new workflow was used to create HEATHER for modeling monopolar
(MP) stimulation of the cochlear implant (CI). Three major
pathways were identified for current to leave the cochlea during CI stimulation, which match well with those described in
the literature. Two current conduction pathways through the
head were also identified. It is possible to study different aspects of CI stimulation with HEATHER for better design and
implementation of CI arrays. The established workflow also
makes it possible to create better models for many other applications with different physics. Additionally, different programs
can be accommodated in each stage of the proposed modeling
workflow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the U.S. National Library of
Medicine (National Institutes of Health) for providing access to
the Visible Human Project datasets that were used to produce
the model described here.
REFERENCES
[1] B. S. Wilson and M. F. Dorman, “Cochlear implants: A remarkable past
and a brilliant future,” Hearing Res., vol. 242, no. 1–2, pp. 3–21, 2008.
[2] B. S. Wilson and M. F. Dorman, “The design of cochlear implants,” in
Cochlear Implants: Principles & Practices, J. K. Niparko, Ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009.
[3] G. M. Clark, Cochlear Implants: Fundamentals and Application. R. T.
Beyer, Ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[4] F. G. Zeng, S. Rebscher, W. Harrison, X. Sun, and H. Feng, “Cochlear
implants: System design, integration, and evaluation,” IEEE Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 1, pp. 115–142, Nov. 2008, DOI: 10.1109/RBME.2008.2008250
[5] J. H. Schulman, D. I. Whitmoyer, J. C. Gord, and P. Strojnik, “Multichannel cochlear implant system including wearable speech processor” U. S.
Patent 5 603 726, Feb. 18, 1997.
[6] A. G. Micco and C. P. Richter, “Tissue resistivities determine the current
flow in the cochlea,” Curr. Opin. Otolaryngo., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 352–355,
2006.

[7] F. Vanpoucke, A. Zarowski, J. Casselman, J. Frijns, and S. Peeters, “The
facial nerve canal: An important cochlear conduction path revealed by
Clarion electrical field imaging,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 282–
289, 2004.
[8] J. H. M. Frijns, R. K. Kalkman, and J. J. Briaire, “Stimulation of the facial
nerve by intracochlear electrodes in otosclerosis: a computer modeling
study,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 1168–1174, 2009.
[9] L. H. M. Mens, G. Huiskamp, T. Oostendorp, and P. van den Broek,
“Modelling surface potentials from intracochlear electrical stimulation,”
Scand. Audiol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 249–255, 1999.
[10] P. Tran, Q. Li, and P. Carter, “Finite element modeling of current flow
from cochlear implant stimulation,” in Proc. IASTED Int. Conf. Modelling,
Simulation, Identification, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2011, pp. 436–442.
[11] C. Potratz, S. Petersen, A. Grünbaum, and U. van Rienen, “Challenges
in bio-electromagnetic modeling,” presented at the 2010 URSI Int. Symp.
Electromagn. Theory, Berlin, Germany, Aug. 16–20, 2010, pp. 344–347.
[12] G. Girzon, “Investigation of current flow in the inner ear during electrical
stimulation of intracochlear electrodes,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng.
and Comp. Sci., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 1987.
[13] C. C. Finley, B. S. Wilson, and M. W. White, “Models of neural responsiveness to electrical stimulation,” in Cochlear Implants: Models of the
Electrically Stimulated Ear, J. M. Miller, and F. A. Spelman, Ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1990, pp. 55–96.
[14] J. H. M. Frijns, J. J. Briaire, and J. J. Grote, “The importance of human cochlear anatomy for the results of modiolus-hugging multichannel
cochlear implants,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 340–349, 2001.
[15] T. Hanekom, “Three-dimensional spiraling finite element model of the
electrically stimulated cochlea,” Ear Hearing, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 300–315,
2001.
[16] C. T. M. Choi, W. D. Lai, and Y. B. Chen, “Optimization of cochlear
implant electrode array using genetic algorithms and computational neuroscience models,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 639–642,
Mar. 2004.
[17] P. Wong, Q. Li, and P. Carter, “Incorporating vascular structure into electric
volume conduction models of the cochlea,” in Proc. IEEE EMBS Conf.
Biomed. Eng. Sci., Langkawi, Malaysia, 2012, pp. 694–699.
[18] K. Chen, Q. Li, W. Li, H. Lau, A. Ruys, and P. Carter, “Three-dimensional
finite element modeling of cochlear implant induced electrical current
flows,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Computational Intelligence for
Measurement Systems and Applications, Hong Kong, China, May 11–13,
2009.
[19] S. Bai, C. Loo, A. Al Abed, and S. Dokos, “A computational model of
direct brain excitation induced by electroconvulsive therapy: comparison
among three conventional electrode placements,” Brain Stimul., vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 408–421, 2012.
[20] W. H. Lee, Z. D. Zeng, T. S. Kim, A. F. Laine, S. H. Lisanby, and A. V.
Peterchev, “Regional electric field induced by electroconvulsive therapy in
a realistic finite element head model: Influence of white matter anisotropic
conductivity,” NeuroImage, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2110–2123, 2012.
[21] C. Ramon, P. H. Schimpf, and J. Haueisen, “Influence of head models on
EEG simulations and inverse source localizations,” Biomed. Eng. Online,
vol. 5, no. 10, 2006.
[22] D. Güllmar, J. Haueisen, and J. R. Reichenbach, “Influence of anisotropic
electrical conductivity in white matter tissue on the EEG/MEG forward
and inverse solution. A high-resolution whole head simulation study,”
NeuroImage, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 145–163, 2010.
[23] M. Nadeem, T. Thorlin, O. P. Gandhi, and M. Persson, “Computation of
electric and magnetic simulation in human head using the 3-D impedance
method,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 900–907,
Jul. 2003.
[24] T. A. Wagner, M. Zahn, A. J. Grodzinsky, and A. Pascual-Leone, “Threedimensional head model simulation of transcranial magnetic stimulation,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1586–1594, Sep. 2004.
[25] M. Chen and D. J. Mogul, “Using increased structural detail of the cortex
to improve the accuracy of modeling the effects of transcranial magnetic
stimulation on neocortical activation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57,
no. 5, pp. 1216–1226, May 2010.
[26] P. F. Grant and M. M. Lowery, “Electric field distribution in a finitevolume head model of deep brain stimulation,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 31,
no. 9, pp. 1095–1103, 2009.
[27] F. Vatta, F. Meneghini, F. Esposito, S. Mininel, and F. Di Salle, “Realistic and spherical head modeling for EEG forward problem solution: A
comparative cortex-based analysis,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2010,
pp. 972060-1–972060-11, 2010.

TRAN et al.: DEVELOPMENT OF HEATHER FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANT STIMULATION USING A NEW MODELING WORKFLOW

[28] H. Lau, A. J. Ruys, P. Carter, X. Wang, and Q. Li, “Subject specific
modelling of electrical conduction in the body: A case study,” J. Biomim.
Biomat. Tissue Eng., vol. 10, pp. 43–53, 2011.
[29] E. Erixon, H. Högstorp, K. Wadin, and H. Rask-Andersen, “Variational
anatomy of the human cochlea: Implications for cochlear implantation,”
Otol. Neurotol., vol. 30, pp. 14–22, 2009.
[30] Y. Zhao, C. J. Tao, X. L. Tian, and X. S. Tang, “A new segmentation
algorithm for the visible human data,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Shanghai, China, 2005, pp. 1646–1649.
[31] P. M. Bonovas, G. A. Kyriacou, and J. N. Sahalos, “A realistic three
dimensional FEM of the human head,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 65–76, 2001.
[32] R. N. Holdefer, R. Sadleir, and M. J. Russell, “Predicted current densities
in the brain during transcranial electrical stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 117, no. 6, pp. 1388–1397, 2006.
[33] L. A. Geddes and L. E. Baker, “The specific resistance of biological
material—A compendium of data for the biomedical engineer and physiologist,” Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 271–293, 1967.
[34] J. Haueisen, C. Ramon, M. Eiselt, H. Brauer, and H. Nowak, “Influence of
tissue resistivities on neuromagnetic fields and electric potentials studied
with a finite element model of the head,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol.
44, no. 8, pp. 727–735, Aug. 1997.
[35] P. Schimpf, J. Haueisen, C. Ramon, and H. Nowak, “Realistic computer
modelling of electric and magnetic fields of human head and torso,” Parallel Comput., vol. 24, no. 9–10, pp. 1433–1460, 1998.
[36] S. K. Law, “Thickness and resistivity variations over the upper surface of
the human skull,” Brain Topogr., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 99–109, 1993.
[37] M. R. Bashar, Y. Li, and P. Wen, “Effects of local tissue conductivity on
spherical and realistic head models,” Australas. Phys. Eng. S., vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 233–242, 2010.
[38] K. A. Awada, D. R. Jackson, S. B. Baumann, J. T. Williams, D. R. Wilton,
P. W. Fink, and B. R. Prasky, “Effect of conductivity uncertainties and
modeling errors on EEG source localization using a 2-D model,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 1135–1145, Sep. 1998.
[39] S. B. Baumann, D. R. Wozny, S. K. Kelly, and F. M. Meno, “The electrical
conductivity of human cerebrospinal fluid at body temperature,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 220–223, Mar. 1997.
[40] D. Halliday, R. Resnick, and K. S. Krane, Physics, vol. 2, 5th ed. New
York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2002.
[41] D. L. Logan, A First Course in the Finite Element Method, 4th ed. Toronto,
Canada: Thomson, 2007.
[42] P. M. Knupp, “Achieving finite element mesh quality via optimization of
the Jacobian matrix norm and associated quantities. Part I—A framework
for surface mesh optimization,” Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng., vol. 48, no. 3,
pp. 401–420, 2000.
[43] F. A. Spelman, B. M. Clopton, and B. E. Pfingst, “Tissue impedance and
current flow in the implanted ear. Implications for the cochlear prosthesis,”
Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol., vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 3–8, 1982.
[44] P. Tran, P. Wong, A. Sue, Q. Li, and P. Carter, “Influence of blood vessel
conductivity in cochlear implant stimulation using a finite element head
model,” presented at the IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
Osaka, Japan, Jul. 03–07, 2013.
[45] M. L. Hughes, K. R. V. Werff, C. J. Brown, P. J. Abbas, D. M. R. Kelsay,
H. F. B. Teagle, and M. W. Lowder, “A longitudinal study of electrode
impedance, the electrically evoked compound action potential, and behavioral measures in Nucleus 24 cochlear implant users,” Ear Hearing,
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 471–486, 2001.
[46] G. Paasche, F. Bockel, T. Tasche, A. Lesinski-Schiedat, and T. Lenarz,
“Changes of postoperative impedances in cochlear implant patients: the
short-term effects of modified electrode surfaces and intracochlear corticosteroids,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 639–647, 2006.
[47] C. R. Butson and C. C. McIntyre, “Tissue and electrode capacitance
reduce neural activation volumes during deep brain stimulation,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 116, no. 10, pp. 2490–2500, 2005.
[48] V. Spitzer, M. J. Ackerman, A. L. Scherzinger, and D. Whitlock, “The
visible human male: a technical report,” J. Amer. Med. Inform. Assn.,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 118–130, 1996.
[49] A. Bozorg Grayeli, C. Saint Yrieix, Y. Imauchi, F. Cyna-Gorse, E. Ferrary, and O. Sterkers, “Temporal bone density measurements using CT in
otosclerosis,” Acta Otolaryngol., vol. 124, no. 10, pp. 1136–1140, 2004.
[50] R. Ramsden, L. Rotteveel, D. Proops, S. Saeed, A. van Olphen, and E.
Mylanus, “Cochlear implantation in otosclerotic deafness,” Adv. Otorhinolaryngol., vol. 65, pp. 328–334, 2007.
[51] J. T. Mottram, and C. T. Shaw, Using Finite Elements in Mechanical
Design. Berkshire, U.K.: McGraw-Hill, 1996.

735

Phillip Tran received the B.E. (Mech. Eng.
(Biomed.)) (Hons I) degree and the B.Sc. (Adv) degree in chemistry from The University of Sydney,
Camperdown, Australia, in 2010. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering at the same university in conjunction with
Cochlear Ltd.
His research interests include computational modeling of the human head for cochlear implant stimulation.

Andrian Sue received the B.E. (Mech. Eng.
(Biomed.)) (Hons I) degree and the B.Med.Sc. degree from The University of Sydney, Camperdown,
Australia, in 2010. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering at the same
university in conjunction with Cochlear Ltd.
His research interests include computational modeling of electrode–tissue interfaces.

Paul Wong received the B.E. (Mech. Eng. (Biomed.))
(Hons I) degree and the B.Com. degree in finance
from The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia, in 2010. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering at the same
university in conjunction with Cochlear Ltd.
His research interests include computational modeling of the cochlea for cochlear implant stimulation.

Qing Li received the Ph.D. degree in aerospace engineering from The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia, in 2000.
Following Ph.D., he was a Postdoctoral Research
Fellow at Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, before returning to The University of Sydney, in 2001 as
an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow. He was a Senior
Lecturer at James Cook University, Townsville, Australia, in 2004, and then, at The University of Sydney
in 2006. He became an Associate Professor in the
School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic
Engineering, The University of Sydney, in 2010. He is currently an ARC Future
Fellow and Professor in biomedical engineering at The University of Sydney.
His current research interests include computational modeling, biomechanics, biomaterials, scaffold tissue engineering, crashworthiness, and design optimization.

Paul Carter received the B.S. degree in physics with
solid state electronics from the University of Exeter,
U.K., in 1982, and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics at the University of Southampton, Southampton,
U.K., in 1987.
He was a Test Engineer at Texas Instruments
and worked under a one-year research contract with
Plessey Electronics Research PLC, Romsey, U.K., in
the area of testing high-density MOS RAMs.
In 1987, he became a Teacher in the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia. After five years at the University, he
joined Cochlear Ltd., Sydney, Australia, where he works in the area of cochlear
implant electrodes and the safety of electrical stimulation.

