842

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Electropermanent Magnetic Anchoring
for Surgery and Endoscopy
Josef Tugwell, Philip Brennan, Conor O’Shea, Kilian O’Donoghue, Timothy Power, Michael O’Shea,
James Griffiths, Ronan Cahill, and Padraig Cantillon-Murphy∗

Abstract—The use of magnets for anchoring of instrumentation in minimally invasive surgery and endoscopy has become of
increased interest in recent years. Permanent magnets have significant advantages over electromagnets for these applications; larger
anchoring and retraction force for comparable size and volume
without the need for any external power supply. However, permanent magnets represent a potential hazard in the operating field
where inadvertent attraction to surgical instrumentation is often
undesirable. The current work proposes an interesting hybrid approach which marries the high forces of permanent magnets with
the control of electromagnetic technology including the ability to
turn the magnet OFF when necessary. This is achieved through the
use of an electropermanent magnet, which is designed for surgical
retraction across the abdominal and gastric walls. Our electropermanent magnet, which is hand-held and does not require continuous power, is designed with a center lumen which may be used
for trocar or needle insertion. The device in this application has
been demonstrated successfully in the porcine model where coupling between an intraluminal ring magnet and our electropermanent magnet facilitated guided insertion of an 18 Fr Tuohy needle
for guidewire placement. Subsequent investigations have demonstrated the ability to control the coupling distance of the system
alleviating shortcomings with current methods of magnetic coupling due to variation in transabdominal wall thicknesses. With
further refinement, the magnet may find application in the anchoring of endoscopic and surgical instrumentation for minimally
invasive interventions in the gastrointestinal tract.
Index Terms—Electromagnets, electropermanent magnets
(EPMs), endoscopy, magnetic coupling, magnets, minimally
invasive surgery.

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETIC coupling in surgery and endoscopy facilitates coupling and anchoring across the abdominal wall
and, in the case of permanent magnets, eliminates any electrical
power requirements.

M

Manuscript received June 6, 2014; revised September 4, 2014 and October
15, 2014; accepted October 21, 2014. Date of publication October 29, 2014;
date of current version February 16, 2015. This work was supported by the
FP7 Marie Curie Reintegration Award 268328, entitled “Smart Mag Solutions.”
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J. Tugwell, P. Brennan, C. O’Shea, K. O’Donoghue, T. Power, M. O’Shea, and
J. Griffiths are with the School of Engineering, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland (e-mail: Josef.tugwell@umail.ucc.ie; phil8240@hotmail.com; conor.
oshea@umail.ucc.ie; kilianod@rennes.ucc.ie; T.Power@ucc.ie; mike.oshea@
ucc.ie; j.griffiths@ucc.ie).
R. Cahill is with the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
(e-mail: cahillra@gmail.com).
∗ P. Cantillon-Murphy is with the School of Engineering, University College
Cork, Cork, Ireland (e-mail: padraig@alum.mit.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2366032

A. Clinical Background
The use of magnetic coupling has been reported in a variety of
clinical settings. Magnet-assisted resection and dissection have
been demonstrated by a number of groups, and magnetic assistance has been proposed in single-site laparoscopic surgery
access and manipulation of internal targets. One of the first and
most developed magnetic assistance systems is the University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Centre system called Magnetic
Anchoring and Guidance System (MAGS) [1]–[9]. The original MAGS was mainly for camera manipulation in abdominal
surgery. However, the system has since been demonstrated in
assisting with porcine nephrectomy [6] and urological procedures [9]. The system is also purely passive (i.e., relies solely
on permanent magnetic Neodymium Iron Boron (NdFeB) coupling) and has no electromagnetic component. In 2011, MAGS
was evaluated for coupling distance [5] and a best-case drop-off
threshold distance of 4.78 cm was established (defined using a
nominal load of 39 g). To date the system has only been tested in
porcine and human cadaveric models [8]. However, it remains
the most advanced and best tested magnetic system developed
specifically for magnetic anchoring in surgery procedures. In
a 2013 study, Salerno et al. have demonstrated a method for
increasing possible coupling distance using a novel shape memory alloy (SMA) actuator which deploys as a cylinder via either
a transabdominal trocar or a natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery port. The SMA actuator is activated in vivo,
changing to a triangular-shaped configuration, provides a larger
area for magnetic coupling and a stable base for robot modules.
This work has been demonstrated in vitro via a plastic phantom
and in vivo in the porcine model [10]. Other work includes that
of the Development Endoscopy Laboratory at Harvard who have
demonstrated removal of pancreatic and biliary stents in pigs by
means of magnetic coupling [11], [12]. Kume et al. demonstrated porcine laparoscopic cholecystectomy [13] and colonic
resection [14] with the aid of magnetic retraction. The Hospital
de Clı́nicas in Buenos Aires has reported the clinical use of magnetized instruments (NdFeB) for single-site laparoscopy [15],
[16]. Clinical investigation of single-port laparoscopic colectomy was demonstrated to be safe and effective with the aid
of magnetic retraction by Uematsa et al. [17] while single-site
laparoscopy investigations by Cho et al. have been limited to canine ileocecectomy (resection of the lower small intestine) [18].
In one of the only clinical examples of an electromagnet used
for coupling, Kobayashi et al. [19] demonstrated the use of the
Pentax-developed magnetic anchoring system. The magneticanchor guided endoscopic submucosal dissection (MAG-ESD)
procedure was performed with 25 patients under conscious

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TUGWELL et al.: ELECTROPERMANENT MAGNETIC ANCHORING FOR SURGERY AND ENDOSCOPY

843

sedation and all tumors were resected en bloc, without any
perforations or severe uncontrollable bleeding.
B. Electropermanent Magnets
Electropermanent magnets (EPMs) are solid state, permanent
magnet devices which can be turned ON and OFF using short,
momentary, pulses of energy. EPMs have been demonstrated
as actuators for millimeter scale modular robotic systems [20],
controllers for valves in fluid robotic systems [21], and as actuators in optical MEMS switches [22]. The primary advantage of
electropermanent magnetic technology in clinical applications
is stronger magnetic attraction of permanent magnets compared
to electromagnets of a similar form factor, while eliminating the
undesired magnetic “pollution” by enabling on/off operation.
The ability to instantaneously change the strength of the magnet, dependent on the required coupling distance would help to
alleviate current issues of possible damage to a patients intervening tissue [5], [10].
This paper demonstrates the application of a fully controllable electropermanent magnetic coupling system between a
permanent magnet inside of the porcine stomach and an EPM
for external manipulation. The current realization provides a
mechanical working channel alleviating possible ambiguity in
current procedures that necessitate transabdominal incisions,
such as is typical in the placement of percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy (PEG) tubes [23].

Fig. 1. Photograph of external EPM with Delrin casing and internal magnet
actuator (internal magnet) with ruler for scale. Section A refers to schematic
section as shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c).

C. Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy
PEG is a technique employed by surgeons to introduce an
enteral feeding tube into the stomach via the abdomen. It is one
of the most common techniques employed by clinicians in cases
where patients are unable to feed themselves [24]. Due to the
ambiguity of the current procedures significant complications
can occur, particularly the laceration of organs such as the colon
that are unknowingly present between the abdomen and stomach walls [25], [26]. Although the system may find application
in a number of clinical settings (e.g., laparoscopic camera anchoring, tethering of clips, etc.), the original aim of the EPM
magnet developed in this study was to simplify coupling across
the abdominal and stomach walls at the beginning of the PEG
procedure.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
The realization of a functional, switchable EPM for transabdominal magnetic coupling was subject to a number of design
constraints.
1) The EPM and internal magnet should couple with sufficient force at distances appropriate to human intraabdominal wall thicknesses (>2 cm).
2) The magnetic flux permeating from the EPM should be
able to be close to zero to facilitate decoupling.
3) The internal magnet should be endoscopically deployed.
4) The system should ideally be operated using one hand.

Fig. 2. (a) Photograph representing the layout of the EPM core with interior
NdFeB ring, exterior Alnico 5 ring and solenoid all shown; (b) The external
magnet relies on permanent electromagnetic (or electropermanent) magnet technology. In the off-state, by matching the materials carefully, the total flux (Φ A
being the flux component from the Alnico and Φ N being the flux component
from the NdFeB) is contained within the system via the two steel shunts and
there is little or no coupling to the external magnet. In the on-state (c) a pulse
of electrical current in the coil is used to flip the direction of magnetization of
the Alnico but not the NdFeB material. The flux from the two magnetic cores
are added together and couple with the internal magnet actuator. The external
magnet can be turned back off by complimentary pulse of current in the opposite
direction.

A. Magnet Design
Two magnets were used in the investigation. The internal
magnet actuator (internal magnet) consisted of a Parylenecoated N52-grade neodymium–iron–boron ring with a residual
magnetic strength of 1.48 Tesla (HKCM Engineering e.K, Eckernförde, Germany) shown in Fig. 1. The ring’s dimensions were
18 mm outer diameter (OD), 13 mm inner diameter (ID), and
10 mm H. The second, external magnet is an EPM as detailed
in Figs. 1 and 2.
The EPM consists of a core of permanent magnet material
contained within a solenoid. The permanent magnet core can

844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

either be either a volume of homogenous semihard magnetic
material (i.e., one with a relatively low value of magnetic coercivity) or more typically, an arrangement of two magnetic
materials with significantly different values of coercivity. The
EPM described consists of two concentric ringed cores shown
in Fig. 2, composed of N40 grade neodymium–iron–boron and
Alnico 5, each with approximate remnant flux densities of 1.26
Tesla (Ningbo Newland International Trade Co. Ltd., Ningbo,
China). These cores are capped on either end by two annular ring
“shunts” made from low-carbon, ferromagnetic steel. A single
current pulse in the coil aligns the dipoles in the Alnico with
the NdFeB magnetization direction resulting in an addition of
the flux from the two cores ΦA and ΦN , which emanates from
the device in the on-state [see Fig. 2(c)] coupling to magnetic
targets in the surrounding environment. A pulse in the opposite direction aligns the poles of the Alnico in opposition to the
NdFeB. The magnetic flux is then confined by the steel shunts,
and circulates within the magnetic system. The effective external field of the device in this case approaches zero and this is
referred to as the “off-state” [see Fig. 2 (b)].
The finite element method for modeling the design or rare
earth permanent magnet devices has proven to be valid and a
cost-effective method to optimize designs and identify problems
prior to construction [27]–[29]. Design of the magnetic system
presented was performed using incremental finite element analysis using the FEMM 4.2 software [30]. The ID of the working
channel was fixed to 8 mm based on current PEG tube diameters
[26], the maximum height and diameter of the system were fixed
to 60 and 40 mm, respectively, based on weight and acceptable
distance from the abdomen for tools in the working channel. An
automated batch simulation was performed varying all other dimensions with different selected magnetic materials to find the
most appropriate geometry of the system. Each geometry was
simulated and tested for holding force using a block integral of
force on the internal magnet, at a distance of 25 mm in both
the off-sate and on-state. All systems with zero holding force in
the off-state were considered, and the geometry with the maximum force in the on-state was chosen. The resultant optimized
EPM dimensions were 40 mm OD, 8 mm ID, and 60 mm height
(H) with resultant volumes of 3.95 × 10−5 m3 for Alnico and
3.26 × 10−5 m3 for NdFeB (a ratio of 1.21:1) determined as optimum from the batch simulations. The device, which weighed
approximately 1.5 kg, was connected to a power supply for
ON/OFF operation. The external magnet incorporated a Hall
Effect magnetic field sensor which indicated by a lighted LED
on the top surface of the magnet when coupling had occurred to
the internal magnet.
B. Electronic Control
The ON/OFF control of the EPM is controlled via current
pulses to the solenoid. To fully demagnetize and remagnetize
the Alnico 5 volume, a saturating magnetic core intensity of
3–5 times its 55 kA/m coercivity is required throughout the
entire volume [31]. Based on simulations performed in FEMM,
a current pulse with a peak of 20 A using 740 turns of AWG20
copper wire is required.

Fig. 3.

Bench top evaluation experiment for defining coupling range.

The transitory pulse, control of the magnetic field, and the
large inductance of the solenoid (∼14 mH, 3.9 Ω) facilitates the
use of an undriven, RLC circuit to deliver the required energy.
4.4 mF of electrolytic capacitance is used to give an approximately critically damped response with a damping factor of
1.16, ensuring sufficient pulse width to ensure no undesirable
oscillation in the induced magnetic field. Capacitors are charged
directly from a bench top power supply via a current limiting power resistor. Pulse polarity and switching is facilitated
by a simple H-Bridge circuit using four, discrete power MOSFETS (IRF640NPBF from International Rectifier, El Segundo,
CA, USA). Control of the H-bridge was achieved using an
ATTINY13 microcontroller unit (Atmel Corp., San Jose, CA,
USA). Total galvanic isolation between the low voltage control circuitry and the high voltage H-bridge circuit is achieved
using optocouplers and isolated point of load dc/dc converters
thus ensuring maximum safety to the operator in the clinical
environment.
With respect to heating of the coil from the induced current
pulse, assuming that all of the energy from the capacitor is discharged through the coil and neglecting any cooling effects from
the coil geometry, the maximum heat increase of the solenoid
is 0.3 K for a single switching pulse. The switching cycle is
intended to be on the order of minutes; thus, heating effects can
be neglected.
III. EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES AND RESULTS
A. Bench Top Evaluation
The system was evaluated in the bench top setting to investigate the maximum coupling distance achievable with the system
in the on-state and the minimum decoupling distance achievable
with the system in the off-state; the experimental setup is shown
in Fig. 3. The purpose of the test was to define a working range
of intraabdominal thicknesses for the system.
Maximum coupling distance was defined as the largest vertical distance which the EPM was able to lift and hold the internal
magnet (weight 9 g) via attractive magnetic force from a rest
position. Minimum coupling distance was defined as the minimum vertical distance between the EPM and the actuator at
which the attractive force was not sufficient to lift the actuator
from a rest position.

TUGWELL et al.: ELECTROPERMANENT MAGNETIC ANCHORING FOR SURGERY AND ENDOSCOPY

Fig. 4. Graph demonstrating tangential flux at a vector along the axis of the
EPM (r = 0), as per convention described in the inset figure. The plot shows
simulation and experimental data for the device in the on-state and off-state.

845

Fig. 5. Graph showing force on the internal magnet against displacement from
the EPM. Five separate experiments were performed for both the on and offstate; resulting in the mean, maximum and minimum forces measured at each
point.

Maximum coupling distance achieved was 82 mm. The
minimum decoupling distance achieved was 20 mm. This
corresponds to the minimum distance achieved between the
internal magnet and a solid piece of mild steel, indicating that
the attraction in the off-state is exclusively due to the field from
the internal magnet.
B. Field Experiments
To investigate the ability to reduce any magnetic pollutant while not in use, the field generated by the system in
the on-state and off-state was measured. A GM-08 hand-held
gaussmeter (Hirst Ltd., Cornwall, U. K.) was used. The meter is calibrated for ±1% accuracy at 20 °C with a sensitivity
of 0.1 mT. Three tests were performed on separate days following a separate cycle of magnetization and demagnetization
on each day. The experimental results are plotted in Fig. 4 and
compared with the FEMM simulations. The mean of the absolute error between the simulation and experimental results is
0.58 mT with a standard deviation of 1.08 mT. The peak field
strength measured in the on-state was 69 mT, and the peak field
strength measured in the off-state was 13.75 mT.
C. Force Experiments
To characterize the coupling distances of the system, the coupling forces over distance between the EPM and the internal
magnet actuator in both the on-state and off-state was investigated. This was realized using a TA.HDPlus Texture Analyzer
(Texture Technologies, Hamilton, MA, USA) fitted with a 5-kg
load cell. The system was controlled using a desktop computer
running Texture Exponent v3.2. The EPM was clamped in place,
and the actuator was connected to the load cell via a Delrin
hanger. The separation distance between the EPM and actuator
was progressively increased, and the associated tensile force was
measured on the load cell. The results from this experiment were
compared with results from a finite element analysis simulation
using FEMM 4.2. These are presented in Fig. 5 where good correlation is seen between the finite element analysis simulations
and experimental results. An effective range of 20–82 mm is
confirmed with a force of 0.09 N (∼9 g) measured on the actuator at displacements of 19.4 mm in the off-state and 84.1 mm
in the on-state. The maximum coupling distance achieved us-

Fig. 6. Graph demonstrating controllability of a stable magnetic coupling
force. The contours show the force decay over distance for the system following
varying current pulses. The solid, horizontal line is used as an example to
demonstrate the ability of the system to sustain a continuous force of 0.5 N
(approximately 50 g) over a wide range of coupling distances.

ing the actuator with a total of 39 g weight (including actuator
weight) was 47.6 mm compared to the maximum achieved by
the MAGS system of 47.8 mm.
As discussed in Section I, one of the major issues with using
permanent magnets for transabdominal coupling is the inherent “fixed” magnetic strength of a particular piece of magnetic
material. This is at conflict with the variance in intraabdominal
thickness that exists in human anatomy and will result in either
magnets that are too strong, increasing the risk of tissue damage,
or magnets that are too weak, leading to poor coupling.
A second experiment was performed using the same equipment to demonstrate the controllability of the system to maintain a particular force over a wide range of coupling distances.
Fig. 6 shows the force versus distance of the system, following
magnetizing current pulses of varying peak values. To demonstrate the controllability of the system, a horizontal dashed
line is shown corresponding to a nominal holding force of
0.5 N simulating coupling with an in vivo instrument weighing
approximately 50 g.
The plot shows that by adjusting the magnitude of the peak
magnetizing current the system can maintain a coupling force
of 0.5 N over a separation of 15.7 to 43.1 mm. Clearly, the
minimum coupling distance is constrained by the strength of

846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

the magnetic material used for the internal magnet. Decreasing
the strength of the magnetic material used for the internal magnet
will also decrease the lower constraint of the working range.
D. Preclinical Evaluation
The preclinical evaluation of the system was achieved in the
porcine model under full anesthetic and tracheal intubation.
The investigation was approved by both the Irish Department
of Health and UCC animal experimentation ethics committee.
The model was a female Landrace pig weighing 18.1 kg and
was sedated for the duration of the procedure. A canuala was
inserted into an ear vein, and the animal was anesthetized with
a bolus, followed by a continuous infusion of sodium pentobarbitonel (induction 30 mg/kg, dose to effect; with maintenance
of 6 mg/kg/h i.v.). End-tidal carbon dioxide, arterial blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and core body temperature were monitored
using a SurgiVetAdvisorVital Signs Monitor (Smiths Medical,
Dublin). The animal was euthanized immediately following the
procedure by anesthetic overdose.
A previously proposed internal magnet delivery system [32]
was used for internal magnet delivery whereby the internal magnet was deployed by positioning the magnetic ring over an annular balloon, fabricated in-house, which was attached to the
distal end of a slim 6-mm endoscope (BF-1T160 from Olympus
Corp.). The deployment of the internal magnet into the animal’s stomach was supplemented using a suture fastened to the
magnet ex vivo. This was necessitated by an unexpectedly narrow porcine esophagus which resulted in moderate resistance
in passing the internal magnet through the lower esophageal
sphincter.
Successful coupling and decoupling between the external
EPM and internal magnet was easily achieved in vivo at a variety of angular displacements between the internal magnetic ring
and EPM. Following coupling, the working channel produced
between the EPM and internal magnet was used for percutaneous puncturing using a Tuohy needle (18 Fr). A flexible guide
wire was transabdominally inserted via the magnetic working
channel and snared via the channel of the endoscope before
being retracted back through the esophagus mimicking the beginning of a PEG feeding tube placement procedure as shown in
Fig. 7. A visual inspection of the coupling site using the endoscope determined that some bruising of the stomach tissue had
occurred.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have demonstrated a novel and innovative method marrying the advantages of permanent magnet and
electromagnetic technology in a single device for use in surgical and endoscopic anchoring. The approach is successfully
demonstrated in vivo in the porcine model with similar coupling performance with a 39-g payload to that reported by the
MAGS team. Coupling distances in the study are clinically significant and may represent a key enabler for progress in magnetic anchoring beyond current norms. In addition, a number
of limitations presented themselves during the in vivo study. A
small animal resulted in an esophagus which was too narrow for

Fig. 7. In vivo experiment; (b) the internal magnet is coupled with the EPM;
(c) percutaneous puncturing using a Tuohy needle is guided via the working
channel of the coupled EPM/internal magnet (d) A guidewire is introduced and
endoscopically snared, the guide wire can be seen being delivered externally in
(a).

facile deployment of the internal magnet. This was overcome
by augmented leveraging of the internal magnet by guidewire
deployment. A second finding was that the force from the external magnet was too strong for the intraabdominal thickness
of the particular porcine model. This resulted in bruising to the
inside of the stomach. To address this issue, the experiments
shown in Fig. 6 were subsequently undertaken. A high degree
of control over the strength of the EPM was subsequently established by varying the current pulse magnitude, resulting in
a magnetic coupling system that can be tailored to particular
intraabdominal thicknesses or specific tool weights.
Due to the relatively large size of the colon [33]–[35] and the
close correlation between abdominal wall thickness and BMI
[36], future iterations of the device should seek to magnetize
the EPM to a value such that coupling only occurs at a known
minimum displacement between the internal magnet and EPM.
This may alleviate the risk of pinching the colon in between
the stomach and abdomen wall, thus reducing the possibility of
adverse events during PEG tube placements.
As discussed in Section I, in addition to an aid for PEG procedures, the device may also find applications in the area of
minimally invasive surgery. As the number of ports used for a
surgery is being reduced down to one or even zero (with natural orifice methods), some fundamental problems are encountered. Restrictions in instrument manipulation and difficulties
in obtaining good triangulation between an image source, instrumentation, and the operating area have become increasingly
prevalent due to the “inline” nature of entry to the operating
area. A coupling system such as the one presented could facilitate better triangulation by allowing separation of in vivo
instruments without further incisions.
The concentric, annular ring design of this device has facilitated in vivo confirmation of the ability to provide magnetically
coupled working channels to aid percutaneous intraabdominal
access, such as in reverse trocar and PEG placement. However,
this shape does not lend itself to maximization of possible field

TUGWELL et al.: ELECTROPERMANENT MAGNETIC ANCHORING FOR SURGERY AND ENDOSCOPY

strength for a given volume. This is due to the demagnetization
effect of the shape of the Alnico and also the inherent loss in
effective flux linkage coupling area. Future work will focus on
combining the demonstrated controllable field with a more ideal
geometry to increase the possible coupling forces in the clinically relevant range. Further investigation into the use of high
permeability shielding to both reduce the magnetic pollution
during the on-state operation and also increase the strength of
the field in the active area of the device will also be pursued.
V. CONCLUSION
This study may represent a key enabler for progress in magnetic coupling in surgery and endoscopy beyond the current
state of the art which relies on permanent magnets. Permanent magnets present beneficial weight to magnetic strength
ratios and zero power dissipation and have so far become the
prominent method of transabdominal coupling. However the
inability to switch the coupling magnetic field OFF and ON,
lack of control and the effects of unwanted magnetic “pollution” in an operating room setting have mitigated against their
widespread use.
The use of electropermanent magnetic technology in this
study addresses these issues and should provide a platform from
which a smarter, controllable method of magnetic coupling can
be achieved over the range of clinically relevant transabdominal
thicknesses, thus facilitating improved anchoring performance,
versatility, and reliability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. McManamon, T. RuaneO’Hara, and V. Mehigan at the Biological Service Unit, University College Cork, for their excellent and careful work during
the study. They would also like to thank Dr. D. Meeker for providing the open source finite elements software, FEMM to the
community and for his always prompt and considered answers
to any correspondence.

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

REFERENCES
[1] N. A. Arain, J. A. Cadeddu, S. L. Best, T. Roshek, V. Chang, D. C. Hogg,
R. Bergs, R. Fernandez, E. M. Webb, and D. J. Scott, “A randomized
comparison of laparoscopic, magnetically anchored, and flexible endoscopic cameras in performance and workload between laparoscopic and
single-incision surgery,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1170–1180,
Apr. 2012.
[2] I. S. Zeltser, R. Bergs, R. Fernandez, L. Baker, R. Eberhart, and J. A.
Cadeddu, “Single trocar laparoscopic nephrectomy using magnetic anchoring and guidance system in the porcine model,” J. Urol., vol. 178,
no. 1, pp. 288–291, 2007.
[3] I. S. Zeltser and J. A. Cadeddu, “A novel magnetic anchoring and guidance
system to facilitate single trocar laparoscopic nephrectomy,” Current Urol.
Rep., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 62–64, Jan. 2008.
[4] S. L. Best and J. A. Cadeddu, “Use of magnetic anchoring and guidance systems to facilitate single trocar laparoscopy,” Current Urol. Rep.,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 29–32, 2010.
[5] S. L. Best, R. Bergs, M. Gedeon, J. Paramo, R. Fernandez, J. A. Cadeddu,
and D. J. Scott, “Maximizing coupling strength of magnetically anchored
surgical instruments: How thick can we go?” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 25,
no. 1, pp. 153–159, 2011.
[6] S. L. Best, R. Bergs, D. J. Scott, R. Fernandez, L. B. Mashaud, and
J. A. Cadeddu, “Solo surgeon laparo-endoscopic single site nephrectomy

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]

847

facilitated by new generation magnetically anchored and guided systems
camera,” J. Endourol., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 214–218, 2012.
S. L. Best, W. Kabbani, D. J. Scott, R. Bergs, H. Beardsley, R. Fernandez, L. B. Mashaud, and J. A. Cadeddu, “Magnetic anchoring
and guidance system instrumentation for laparo-endoscopic single-site
surgery/natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery: Lack of histologic
damage after prolonged magnetic coupling across the abdominal wall,”
Urology, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 243–247, 2011.
R. A. Joseph, N. A. Salas, M. A. Donovan, P. R. Reardon, B. L. Bass,
and B. J. Dunkin, “Single-site laparoscopic (SSL) cholecystectomy in
human cadavers using a novel percutaneous instrument platform and a
magnetic anchoring and guidance system (MAGS): Reestablishing the
‘critical view,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 149–153, 2012.
S. L. Best and J. A. Cadeddu, “Development of magnetic anchoring
and guidance systems for minimally invasive surgery,” Indian J. Urol.,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 418–422, 2010.
M. Salerno, S. Tognarelli, C. Quaglia, P. Dario, and A. Menciassi, “Anchoring frame for intra-abdominal surgery,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 360–370, 2013.
P. Cantillon-Murphy, M. Ryou, S. N. Shaikh, D. Azagury, M. Ryan,
C. C. Thompson, and J. H. Lang, “A magnetic retrieval system for stents
in the pancreaticobiliary tree,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 8,
pp. 2018–2025, Aug. 2010.
M. Ryou, P. Cantillon-Murphy, S. N. Shaikh, D. Azagury, M. B. Ryan,
J. H. Lang, and C. C. Thompson, “Magnetic pancreaticobiliary stents and
retrieval system: Obviating the need for repeat endoscopy (with video),”
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 888–892, 2012.
M. Kume, H. Miyazawa, F. Abe, W. Iwasaki, H. Uchinami, S. Shibata,
T. Sato, and Y. Yamamoto, “A newly designed magnet-retracting forceps
for laparoscopic cholecystectomy in a swine model,” Minimally Invasive
Therapy Allied Technol., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 251–254, 2008.
M. Kume, H. Miyazawa, W. Iwasaki, F. Abe, H. Uchinami, and
Y. Yamamoto, “The use of magnetic anchors in the bowel lumen for laparoscopic anterior resection of rectosigmoid colon in pigs: With video,”
World J. Surg., vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 2425–2428, 2008.
G. Dominguez, L. Durand, J. De Rosa, E. Danguise, C. Arozamena, and
P. A. Ferraina, “Retraction and triangulation with neodymium magnetic
forceps for single-port laparoscopic cholecystectomy,” Surg. Endoscopy,
vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1660–1666, 2009.
B. E. Padilla, G. Dominguez, C. Millan, and M. Martinez-Ferro, “The
use of magnets with single-site umbilical laparoscopic surgery,” Seminars
Pediatric Surg., vol. 20, pp. 224–231, 2011.
D. Uematsu, G. Akiyama, A. Magishi, J. Nakamura, and K. Hotta, “Singleaccess laparoscopic left and right hemicolectomy combined with extracorporeal magnetic retraction,” Diseases Colon Rectum, vol. 53, no. 6,
pp. 944–948, 2010.
Y. B. Cho, C. H. Park, H. C. Kim, S. H. Yun, W. Y. Lee, and H.-K. Chun,
“Single-incision laparoscopic surgery in a survival animal model using a
transabdominal magnetic anchoring system,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 25,
no. 12, pp. 3934–3938, 2011.
T. Kobayashi, T. Gotohda, K. Tamakawa, H. Ueda, and T. Kakizoe, “Magnetic anchor for more effective endoscopic mucosal resection,” Jpn. J.
Clin. Oncol., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 118–123, 2004.
A. N. Knaian, “Electropermanent magnetic connectors and actuators: Devices and their application in programmable matter,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst., Technol., Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2010.
A. D. Marchese, C. D. Onal, and D. Rus, “Soft robot actuators using
energy-efficient valves controlled by electropermanent magnets,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., 2011, pp. 756–761.
C.-H. Ji, Y. Yee, J. Choi, S.-H. Kim, and J.-U. Bu, “Electromagnetic
2 times; 2 MEMS optical switch,” IEEE J. Select. Top. Quantum Electron.,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 545–550, May 2004.
S. P. Schrag, R. Sharma, N. P. Jaik, M. J. Seamon, J. J. Lukaszczyk,
N. D. Martin, B. A. Hoey, and S. P. Stawicki, “Complications related
to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes. A comprehensive
clinical review,” J. Gastrointestin Liver Dis., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 407–418,
Dec. 2007.
A. J. Wiesen, K. Sideridis, A. Fernandes, J. Hines, A. Indaram, L. Weinstein, S. Davidoff, and S. Bank, “True incidence and clinical significance
of pneumoperitoneum after PEG placement: A prospective study,” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 886–889, 2006.
R. Guloglu, K. Taviloglu, and O. Alimoglu, “Colon injury following percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube insertion,” J. Laparoendoscopic
Adv. Surg. Tech., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 69–72, Feb. 2003.

848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

[26] N. Patwardhan, K. McHugh, D. Drake, and L. Spitz, “Gastroenteric fistula
complicating percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy,” J. Pediatric Surg.,
vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 561–564, 2004.
[27] N. Shirazee, A. Basak, T. Nakata, and N. Takahashi, “Analysis of permanent magnet lifting devices using finite elements,” IEEE Trans. Magn.,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 2211–2214, Mar. 1997.
[28] A. Boglietti, M. Chiampi, D. Chiarabaglio, and M. Tartaglia, “Finite element analysis of permanent magnet motors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 25,
no. 5, pp. 3584–3586, Sep. 1989.
[29] Z. Q. Zhu, G. W. Jewell, and D. Howe, “Finite element analysis in the
design of permanent magnet machines,” in Proc. IEE Seminar Current
Trends Use Finite Elements Electromech. Des. Anal., 2000, pp. 1/1–1/7.
[30] D. Meeker, User’s Manual. Virginia, USA: FEMM 4.2, 2009.
[31] A. Fitzgerald, A. E. Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley, and S. Umans, Electric Machinery. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2003.
[32] D. Cronin, T. Lambe, and P. Cantillon-Murphy, “A magnetic coupling
to improve placement of gastroenteral feeding tubes,” in Proc. 5th Annu.
Conf. Biomed. Electron. Devices, Vilamoura, Portugal, Feb. 2012, vol. 5,
pp. 138–142.

[33] J. H. Jones and M. Chapman, “Definition of megacolon in colitis,” Gut,
vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 562–564, 1969.
[34] D. Sahani and A. Samir, Abdominal Imaging: Expert Radiology Series.
New York, NY, USA: Elsevier, 2010.
[35] T. Yamada, D. H. Alpers, L. Laine, C. Owyang, and D. W. Powell, Textbook
of Gastroenterology, vol. 1, 2. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins, 1999.
[36] M. P. Milad and M. F. Terkildsen, “The spinal needle test effectively measures abdominal wall thickness before cannula placement at laparoscopy,”
J. Amer. Assoc. Gynecol. Laparoscopists, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 514–518,
Nov. 2002.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

