IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

717

Characterization of Macrolesions Induced by
Myocardial Cavitation-Enabled Therapy
Yiying I. Zhu, Douglas L. Miller, Member, IEEE, Chunyan Dou, and Oliver D. Kripfgans∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Intermittent high intensity ultrasound pulses with circulating contrast agent microbubbles can induce scattered cavitation caused myocardial microlesions of potential value for tissue
reduction therapy. Here, computer-aided histological evaluation of
the effective treated volume was implemented to optimize ultrasound pulse parameters, exposure duration, and contrast agent
dose. Rats were treated with 1.5 MHz focused ultrasound bursts
and Evans blue staining indicates lethal cardiomyocytic injury.
Each heart was sectioned to provide samples covering the entire
exposed myocardial volume. Both brightfield and fluorescence images were taken for up to 40 tissue sections. Tissue identification
and microlesion detection were first done based on 2-D images to
form microlesion masks containing the outline of the heart and the
stained cell regions. Image registration was then performed on the
microlesion masks to reconstruct a volume-based model according
to the morphology of the heart. The therapeutic beam path was
estimated from the 3-D stacked microlesions, and finally the total
microlesion volume, here termed macrolesion, was characterized
along the therapeutic beam axis. Radially symmetric fractional
macrolesions were characterized via stepping disks of variable radius determined by the local distribution of microlesions. Treated
groups showed significant macrolesions of a median volume of
87.3 μL, 2.7 mm radius, 4.8 mm length, and 14.0% lesion density
compared to zero radius, length, and lesion density for sham. The
proposed radially symmetric lesion model is a robust evaluation for
myocardial cavitation-enabled therapy. Future work will include
validating the proposed method with varying acoustic exposures
and optimizing involved parameters to provide macrolesion characterization.
Index Terms—Cavitation microlesions, cavitation therapy,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), myocardial macrolesion,
therapeutic ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
YPERTROPHIC cardiomyopathy (HCM), involving enlargement and hyperplasia of the myocardium, occurs in
at least one out of 500 people. Sudden death is the most visible and unpredictable consequence of HCM, occurring without
warning signs or symptoms. It has been reported that HCM is

H

Manuscript received May 9, 2014; revised August 14, 2014 and October
9, 2014; accepted October 10, 2014. Date of publication October 22, 2014;
date of current version January 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by
the National Institutes of Health under Grant 1-R01-HL-114595-01. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
Y. I. Zhu is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: zhuyiy@umich.edu).
D. L. Miller and C. Dou are with the Department of Radiology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail:
douglm@umich.edu; chunyand@med.umich.edu).
∗ O. D. Kripfgans is with the Department of Radiology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail:
oliver.kripfgans@umich.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2364263

the most common cause of sudden death in young people, and
is the most frequent cause of sudden death in US competitive
athletes [1]. Although pharmacologic therapies have exhibited
significant positive effects, there remain substantial undesired
side effects, leaving approximately one third of patients as candidates for myocardial reduction [2].
The definitive treatment for HCM is surgical myectomy [3],
which involves resection of a small portion of the interventricular septum (SP) at its base. Less-invasive alternatives have been
explored using a variety of techniques, most commonly an endovascular procedure. However, the need for permanent pacing,
the inability to address concomitant anatomic abnormalities and
the uncertainty about the long-term effects of having caused substantial myocardial necrosis and scaring are undesirable. Other
approaches such as thermal ablation [4] or histotripsy [5] reduce
cardiac tissue by accumulating ultrasonic focal lesions.
For decades, ultrasonic bioeffects from microbubble inertial
cavitation have been discussed for their therapeutic potentials
[6]. Concurrent studies have investigated cavitation-induced microvessel and cell injuries [7]. A novel technique using contrast
echocardiography using higher than diagnostic pressure amplitudes, named myocardial cavitation-enabled therapy (MCET),
is hypothesized to induce a fractional macrolesion with sparse
and histologically definable microlesions, which in turn shrink
the diseased heart muscle without substantial scaring [8].
Currently, therapeutic ultrasound has great potential in
medicine as a noninvasive method to treat tumors, promote
hemostasis, and treat other diseases due to its ability to penetrate
deeply and deposit thermal or mechanical energy at a specific
site with submillimeter accuracy. Various imaging modalities,
including X-ray, computed tomography, magnetic resonance
imaging, and ultrasound imaging, can provide precise targeting and therapy monitoring [9].
Passive cavitation imaging has been demonstrated for potential use with continuous-wave high-intensity focused ultrasound
thermal ablation [10] and for pulsed-wave ultrasound therapy insonations [11]. A system for microbubble-mediated sonothrombolysis utilizing therapy guidance and cavitation imaging has
been developed [12].
MCET is performed under the guidance of echocardiography.
Ventricular premature complexes and blood pressure can provide temporal feedback [13], while inertial cavitation mapping
combined with anatomical imaging could delineate the spatial
accumulation of cardiomyocytic response.
To evaluate the effectiveness of MCET treatment and modulate its treatment parameters, such as ultrasound amplitude,
contrast dose, and treatment duration, an evaluation scheme
is needed for characterizing microlesions. In previous studies,

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

myocardial necrosis [8], [14] was evaluated qualitatively by visual identification and scoring of Evans blue-stained cells in
frozen histological slices [15]. However, visual scoring only
yields a limited 1-D descriptor, i.e., scalar information of damaged cells assessed for each tissue slice, which is far from adequate to describe a comprehensive treatment outcome for tuning
therapeutic inputs. For example, a qualitative score of 58,790
more than 23,560 helped making relative judgments about the
optimum exposure parameters, but it gave no information about
the amount of tissue reduction. Thus, an objective and quantitative scoring is needed to precisely determine treatment outcome
and volume-based treatment. Spatial distribution evaluation is
essential to ultimately develop a safe and effective therapeutic
application.
Numerous methods have been devised for cellular and histological analysis. Molecular imaging, defined as the visual representation, characterization, and quantification of biological
processes at cellular and subcellular levels, could be used to noninvasively detect and monitor cancer treatments [16]. It enables
tumor localization, spatial visualization of specific molecular
markers, and biological processes that influence tumor behavior
and/or response to therapy [17].
Regarding cellular microscopy, computational imaging provides multidimensional and quantitative image analysis, enabling mathematical modeling of cell biology. Employed
process steps include image acquisition and preprocessing, registration, segmentation, volume rendering, etc. [18]. Image segmentation, including thresholding, region growing, and clustering, plays an important role in characterizing contents of medical
images [19].
This paper describes a scheme for MCET characterization in
acute preclinical studies. A computer-aided histological evaluation of MCET-induced macrolesions has been implemented to
quantify treatment outcome. The point of the presented method
is to provide the volumetric macrolesion determination to approximate the expected amount of tissue reduction, which was
not available from the qualitative visual score. Two-dimensional
brightfield and fluorescence images were evaluated by an algorithm, which automatically identified microlesions, and characterized the volume-oriented fractional macrolesion. Subsequently, this method can be applied to optimize ultrasound
pulse parameters, exposure duration, and contrast agent dose
for MCET treatment of HCM, which would require up to 25%
vol–vol tissue reduction in some myocardial areas.
II. METHOD
A. Animal and Tissue Preparation
In concomitant research designed to optimize the timing of
pulses for MCET, tissue samples were collected and prepared
for histological evaluation. For this study, these samples were
utilized for development of computer-aided evaluation. Briefly,
in vivo animal procedures were conducted on 20 male Sprague–
Dawley rats (Charles River, Wilmington, MA, USA) and five
sham rats weighing 331 ± 33 g under the approval and guidance of the University Committee on Use and Care of Animals. All rats in the treated group were injected with Definity
(Lantheus Medical Imaging, Inc., N. Billerica, MA) at a rate of

5 μL/kg/min. MCET was performed with 2 ms period 4 kHz PRF
1.5 MHz ultrasound burst of five cycle pulses at 4.0 MPa peak
rarefactional pressure amplitude by use of a 1.9 cm diameter
and 3.8 cm focus single element therapy transducer, triggered at
one beat out of four heart beats. The therapeutic transducer was
focused approximately 0.5 cm into the myocardium [13]. While
the distance to the myocardium might change a few millimeters,
the effect of choice of cardiac phase was studied in Miller et al.
[21] and found to be not significant. Before being exposed to
5 minutes of therapy, all rats were injected with Evans blue,
which has been proven to be a dependable stain for histological
determination of cell necrosis [22].
After being frozen in compound (Tissue-Tek, Sakura Finetek
USA, Inc., Torrance, CA, USA) on dry ice, each heart was
dissected to provide samples covering the entire exposed myocardial volume. Up to 40 sections, 10 μm thick, for each heart
were cut every 200 μm into the sample to cover about 5 mm of
the dissected portion of the heart. Two hundred micron spacing
was set to avoid possible overlap of stained cardiomyocytes in
adjacent sections and thoroughly sample the cardiac volume.
However, it should be noted that some stained cells present in
between sections were not actually observed, but assumed by
extrapolation to have the same fractional lesion area over the
190 μm unsampled space.
B. Cardiomyocyte Scoring
Besides the proposed automatic characterization scheme, visual scoring and measurement of troponin I in plasma were
performed to evaluate cardiomyocyte injuries. Visual scoring
was based on Evans blue staining as described previously [13].
Troponin I was analyzed from plasma samples collected one
day after euthanasia with an ELISA assay kit (Rat Cardiac Tn-I
(ultra sensitivity), Life Diagnostics, Inc., West Chester, PA,
USA). This cardiac enzyme is a sensitive indicator of cardiac
injury in rodents [20].
C. Microscope Image Acquisition
To enable computer-aided evaluation, both brightfield and fluorescence images were obtained for each tissue-section through
a microscope camera system (SPOT Flex, Diagnostic Instruments, Inc., Sterling Heights, MI, USA) via fluorescent stereomicroscopy (Leica MZ FLIII, Leica Microscopy Systems, Ltd.,
Heerbrugg, Switzerland) with a high resolution and large field
of view objective (Leica Plan APO 1.6×, Leica Microsystems,
Ltd., Heerbrugg, Switzerland). The images were acquired as 16
bit 4,096 by 4,096 RGB, covering the entire tissue sections. One
image set of treated myocardium at the approximate midpoint
of the treated zone is shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b); a sham image
set is shown in Fig. 1(c) and (d). Macrolesion is a volume defined as a bulk of the microlesions within the target area, where
a microlesion was defined simply as a local collection of one or
a few damaged cardiomyocytes. An example showing macrolesion projection in 2-D is identified by MaL shown in Fig. 1(a).
Left ventricle (LV), right ventricle (RV), and septum (SP) are
also labeled. The damaged cardiomyocytes in scattered microlesions appear stained light blue in the brightfield image, together
with erythrocytes and other cells associated with the colocated

ZHU et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF MACROLESIONS INDUCED BY MYOCARDIAL CAVITATION-ENABLED THERAPY

719

Fig. 1. Evans blue staining indicated injured cardiomyocytes for microscope assessment as shown in (a) within an area noted by MaL (macrolesion), where
also LV (left ventricle), RV (right ventricle), and SP (septum) are labeled. An example tissue section of treated heart muscle is shown in (a) brightfield and (b)
fluorescence. The damaged cardiomyocytes in scattered microlesions appear stained light blue in the brightfield image, together with erythrocytes and other cells
associated with the colocated microvascular hemorrhage, as shown in (a). The damaged cardiomyocytes specifically appear fluorescent red in the relatively high
contrast fluorescence image as shown in (b). The therapeutic ultrasound beam indicated by the white arrow in (b) is estimated from the lesion cloud as described
in the text (US: ultrasound). Similarly, (c) brightfield image and (d) fluorescence image of an example tissue section of a sham case are shown. The background
fluorescence includes a few bright spots due to cell overlap, arterial walls, and other autofluorescent normal structures.

microvascular hemorrhage, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The damaged
cardiomyocytes specifically appear fluorescent red in the relatively high contrast fluorescence image as shown in Fig. 1(b).
In contrast, normal heart tissue appears grayer in the brightfield
image and darker in the fluorescence image. The therapeutic
ultrasound beam path projected onto the 2-D image is estimated
from the lesion cloud as shown in Fig. 1(b). Brightfield images
were taken using auto exposure to provide morphologic information and fluorescence images were taken using a constant
exposure to provide constant and quantitative lesion contrast
information.
D. Cardiomyocyte Modeling
An average cross-sectional area (AC ) for one cardiomyocyte
sliced in a tissue section was estimated based on a mathemat-

TABLE I
SINGLE CARDIOMYOCYTE GEOMETRY MODEL
Parameter

Abbreviation

Value

Unit

Cell length
Cell width
Cell depth

l
w
d

113.4 ± 0.8
28.9 ± 0.4
17.6 ± 0.4

μm
μm
μm

ical model, which then gave an approximation of the number
of stained cells by dividing the total injured area by the estimated AC . A cardiac myocyte cell was geometrically modeled as an elliptic cylinder with cell dimensions summarized
in Table I based on previous work [23]. The left ventricular
wall comprises three strands of different longitudinal alignment:

720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Top view of an elliptic cylinder cell intersected with the cutting plane
at an angle of θ. The cutting edge is GH.

intersects with the elliptic cylinder
x2
y2
+ 2 =1
2
w
d

(4)

with −w ≤ x ≤ w, −d ≤ y ≤ d, intersects with the cutting
line
Fig. 2. Illustration of a heart tissue slice plane intersecting with different
layers of the ventricular wall. (a) Schematic diagram for three elliptic-cylinder
modeled cardiomyocytes oriented differently for each layer: blue for superficial
(S), green for middle (M), and red for deep (D) layer. (b) Schematic diagram for
the orientation of cardiomyocytes in each layer: blue for superficial (S), green
for middle (M), and red for deep (D) layer.

superficial (subepicardial) noted as S, middle noted as M, and
deep (subendocardial) noted as D. The myocyte model approximated the superficial “layer” at an angle of 15° with respect to
the long axis of the left ventricular inlet, occupying 25% of the
wall thickness, the middle “layer” circumferentially arranged
occupying 56% of the wall thickness, and the deep “layer” radiating longitudinally accounting for 19% of the wall thickness
[24].
As illustrated in Fig. 2, a slice plane intersects with layers
of different cell orientation, resulting in variable cross-sectional
areas. The average cross-sectional cell area AC is then given by
AC = AS PS + AM PM + AD PD

(1)

where ĀS , ĀM , and ĀD are average areas for the three layers: S,
M, and D. PS , PM , and PD are the fractional volume percentages
of each layer for the overall wall thickness, namely PS = 25%
PM = 56%, and PD = 19%.
For the superficial layer, we assumed that the cutoff plane did
not reach the edge so that the cross section was always strictly
an ellipse. Thus, cross-sectional areas for superficial and deep
layers were both considered as ellipses
w
d
AS = π ·
o ·
2 cos15 2 cos15o
w d
AD = π · · .
2 2

(2)
(3)

For the middle layer, the intersection plane was always a
rectangle with length equal to l, and width GH as depicted in
Fig. 3 and determined by the orientation that the cutting plane

y = tanθ · x + h

(5)

with 0 ≤ x ≤ π/2, 0 ≤ y ≤ hm ax (θ) at points G (x1 , y1 ) and
H (x2 , y2 ), if and only if x, y have real solutions. For a certain
cutting angle θ, the maximum value that h could achieve is when
the cutting line is tangent to the ellipse. Thus, hm ax is a function
of θ. Thus, the length of the cutting edge GH, LG H , is a function
of θ and h as follows:
LG H (h, θ) =

(x1 (h, θ) − x2 (h, θ))2 + (y1 (h, θ) − y2 (h, θ))2 . (6)
We assume that θ and h are uniformly distributed variables
within their range, i.e.

2
0 ≤ θ ≤ π2
π,
(7)
p(θ) =
0, π2 < θ < 2π

1
h m a x (θ ) , 0 ≤ h ≤ hm ax (θ),
p(h) =
(8)
0,
otherwise.
where p indicates the probability density function for p(θ) and
p(h). The average cross-sectional area ĀM in this case is
AM = l · LG H .
where

(9)


LG H =


LG H (h, θ)P (h, θ)dhdθ
θ ,h

π /2



=

h m a x (θ )

LG H (h, θ)P (h)P (θ)dhdθ.
0

(10)

0

Finally, given the previous relationships, an average crosssectional area, ĀC , of 2,399 μm2 can be computed. The pixel
size for all 2-D digital images is 15.7 μm2 . Thus, one cell occupies approximately 2,399 μm2 /15.7 μm2 /pixel, that is 153 pixel
in the acquired images. An approximation for the number of
stained cardiomyocytes could then be inferred.

ZHU et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF MACROLESIONS INDUCED BY MYOCARDIAL CAVITATION-ENABLED THERAPY

Fig. 4.

721

Flowchart for the overall method of macrolesion characterization.

Fig. 5. Threshold mask as shown in (b) and an edge-detected mask as shown in (c) were obtained simultaneously from a normalized brightfield (BF) image as
shown in (a). Fusion of these resulted in the tissue mask as shown in (d).

E. Lesion Characterization
To reduce computation complexity and save computation
memory, the red channel, of all the data was first extracted.
All the images were preprocessed to remove uneven illumination and zero padded ready for registration before feeding
into the lesion characterization processing. Background illumination for both brightfield images and fluorescence images
was estimated using a Gaussian low-pass filter [25], which was
then subtracted from the original images. The normalized images were processed following the steps shown in Fig. 4. The
main steps to characterize macrolesions include: 1) tissue detection; 2) microlesion detection; 3) image registration and 3-D

stacking; 4) therapeutic beam estimation; and 5) macrolesion
characterization.
Tissue detection and microlesion detection were first done
based on 2-D images to form microlesion masks, which contain
the morphologic information of the heart as well as stained cell
regions. Image registration was then performed on microlesion
masks to reconstruct a volume-based model according to the
morphology of the heart. The therapeutic beam was estimated
from the 3-D stacked microlesions, and finally a macrolesion
was characterized along the therapeutic beam.
Step 1: Tissue detection. The main objective in this step is to
segment the tissue portion based on morphologic information

722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 7. Three-dimensional stacking of registered image masks allows for visualization of the employed 3-D model, where the red heart tissue surface outline
is rendered as a result from step 1 (tissue detection), black marks symbolize
downsampled microlesions detected in step 2, and the therapeutic ultrasound
beam (blue line) is characterized from least square fitting of the microlesion
cloud (see text for more details).

Fig. 6. Automatic threshold for fluorescence image has been used to detect
microlesions shown masked on the brightfield image in (b) compared to original
brightfield image in (a). Note: images were zoomed in.

from brightfield images in order to constrain the subsequent
characterization. Brightfield images [see Fig. 1(a) and (c)] were
downsampled first to be segmented and then upsampled back
after segmentation to decrease computational load. A threshold
mask as shown in Fig. 5(b) and an edge-detected mask as shown
in Fig. 5(c) were obtained simultaneously from a normalized
brightfield image as the example shown in Fig. 5(a), which was
then fused together giving the tissue mask as shown in Fig. 5(d).
Step 2: Microlesion detection. Starting with an initial guess of
10% for the lesion density, two lesion masks were obtained from
thresholding brightfield and fluorescence images. An automatic
threshold, described later, for the fluorescence image was then
determined from the statistics of pixel values within the mutual
mask of the two lesion masks. An example of a lesion mask on
top of a zoomed original brightfield image Fig. 6(a) is shown in
Fig. 6(b) illustrating the morphologies of the detected lesions.

Step 3: Image registration and 3-D stacking. In order to
process volume-based characterization, 2-D lesion masks were
stacked to 3-D according to the information provided through
neighboring brightfield images from the tissue slide stack, i.e.,
by means of the transformation information from rigid image
registration. Stacking registered mask images allows for visualization of the employed 3-D model as shown in Fig. 7, where the
red contour is rendering the tissue edges as resulting from step
1, and black marks symbolize microlesions detected in step 2.
The inner red oval shape is the exclusion representing the inner surface of the LV. For the purpose to visualize the overall
effect of treatment, high-resolution image showing the detailed
morphology of individual cell is unnecessary; thus, 32 times
downsampled microlesions symbolized by black marks are displayed representing the trend of lesion density. However, the
full resolution is used for characterization.
Step 4: Therapeutic beam estimation. The therapeutic beam
vector shown as a blue line with an arrow in Fig. 7 was characterized by least square line fitting from the detected microlesions,
excluding autofluorescing blood vessels and other nonmicrolesion microstructures, which were considered as noise.
Step 5: Macrolesion characterization. The stacked 3-D heart
model was resliced along the therapeutic beam in 800-μm-thick
steps. Note that the reslices here are not tissue-sections but
slices perpendicular to the identified ultrasound beam. At each
position along the beam axis, a disk was characterized as illustrated in Fig. 8(a): each such slice was first populated with a
20-mm-diameter disk coaxial to the beam; each disk was then
progressively reduced in size until a certain microlesion quantity
was reached from a dynamic threshold, the criterion of which
is explained below. Disks were characterized individually and
then stacked together resulting in a final macrolesion as shown
in Fig. 8(b).
To determine the dynamic radius mentioned earlier, a dynamic percentage value of overall stained cells within a maximum slice volume is computed. The threshold is a piecewise
function of total number of stained cells and is shown in Fig. 9.
Here

ZHU et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF MACROLESIONS INDUCED BY MYOCARDIAL CAVITATION-ENABLED THERAPY

723

Fig. 8. Schematic diagram of the procedure for macrolesion characterization. The stacked 3-D heart model was resliced along the therapeutic beam in 800-μmthick steps. At each position along the beam axis noted by a blue “x”, a disk was characterized as illustrated in (a). Each disk started with a 20 mm diameter and
coaxial to the beam and is graphically identified as the most outer dash circle; the disk diameter was then progressively reduced as the red arrow implies until a
certain microlesion quantity was reached from a dynamic threshold (see Fig. 9). The resulting disk then characterizes the local macrolesion slice and is shown
in yellow, surrounded by black solid line. The yellow cylinder-like volume as in (b), i.e., stacked disks, is defined as a macrolesion, characterized by a dynamic
thresholding algorithm for counting enclosed microlesions for each disk step as illustrated in (a) (US: ultrasound).

Fig. 9. For a stained cell number cutoff threshold of 30, the autoadjusted
threshold is plotted as a function of counted stained cells. If only 20 stained
cells are counted within the current axial slice, then the macrolesion radius is
set such that approximately 80% of the counted stained cells are enclosed.

if N ≥ N0 , T = T0 ;
if N < N0 , T = max(T0 (1 − exp(−N )), T0 ),
where N indicates the total number of stained cells detected,
N0 is a cutoff threshold for piecewise function, and T indicates
the percentage threshold for radius selecting with a constant T0
as a maximum. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the example here sets
N0 = 30, T0 = 95%.
The in vivo point spread function (PSF) of the therapeutic
beam was characterized as a function of space by first sampling

Fig. 10. Characterized macrolesion visualization: the same as Fig. 7, additionally the resulting volumetric macrolesion is shown as yellow disks along
the therapeutic beam. Note that it did not include the distal cloud of microlesions. The inclusion criteria were chosen to reject volumes with less than 10%
microlesion density. In a chronic study, we plan to explore what microlesion
density will cause significant tissue reduction.

along the therapeutic beam interrogating coaxial cylinders of
λ (1 mm) diameter and quarter λ length. Then, at the point of
maximum axial lesion density, the lateral direction was sampled with coaxial rings of one-eighth λ width and quarter λ
height.

724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 11. Example set of images showing the characterized macrolesion projected back onto its original 2-D microscopy images with dashed lines indicating
stacked cross-sectioned cylinders and tissue boundary derived from brightfield
tissue detection.

III. RESULTS
A. Lesion Visualization
A radially symmetric macrolesion was characterized via stepping disks of various radius determined by the local distribution
of microlesions. An example is shown in Fig. 10.
An example of a 3-D macrolesion intersecting with one of
the original 2-D microscopy images is shown in Fig. 11 with
a delineated boundary indicating macrolesion projection and
tissue boundary characterized from brightfield tissue detection.
B. Group Comparison
As described in a concomitant study [13], the treated group
of rats was subdivided into three groups, with five rats in each

Fig. 12. Characterized features of macrolesions are compared to the measurement of troponin I in plasma samples taken one day after the treatment. The
treated group was subdivided into three subgroups being treated at different
time points of the cardiac cycle: R wave (RR, end diastole), R wave plus 1/3
of the R to R interval (RR/3, end systole), and R wave plus 2/3 of the R to R
interval (2RR/3, mid-diastole).

group. They were treated at three different time points of the
cardiac cycle: at the onset of R wave (RR, end diastole), at
the R wave plus one-third of the R to R interval (RR/3, end
systole) and at the R wave plus two thirds of RR (2RR/3, middiastole). Results for macrolesions characterized for all 20 rats
are presented in Fig. 12 using boxplots. For each box, the central

ZHU et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF MACROLESIONS INDUCED BY MYOCARDIAL CAVITATION-ENABLED THERAPY

725

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF RESULTS

Macrolesion volume
[μL]
Cardiac troponin I
[ng/mL]
Lesion density in
macrolesion volume
[%]
Mean radius in
macrolesion volume
[mm]
Length of
macrolesion volume
[mm]

Sham (5)

RR (5)

RR/3 (5)

2RR/3 (5)

Treated (15)

0

81.1

84.8

120.7

87.3

0

1.1

0.9

0.7

0.9

0

10.8

13.7

16.2

14.0

0

2.5

2.7

2.7

2.7

0

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.8

Median values summarized for Fig. 12 for sham group, treated groups (RR, RR/3, and
2RR/3) of five rats in each at different exposure time with respect to a cardiac cycle and all
treated rats of 15.

mark is the median, the edges of the box are the 25th and 75th
percentiles, the whiskers extend to the most extreme data points
not considered outliers, and outliers are plotted individually. The
normal range was defined as greater than q3 + 1.5 (q3 − q1 ) or
smaller than q1 − 1.5 (q3 − q1 ), where q1 and q3 are the 25th
and 75th percentiles, respectively. Corresponding median values
for treated groups are reported in Table II. The results show no
significant variation between treated groups, which agree with
the visual scoring results from the concomitant study.
The summarized results for the treated group of 15 rats
compared to sham group show significant macrolesions with
a median volume of 87.3 μL of 14.0% lesion density, 2.7 mm
macrolesion radius, and 4.8 mm macrolesion length compared
to zero lesion density, radius, and length for the sham group. This
overall result was consistent with the measurements of troponin,
which were also indicative of total cardiomyocyte necrosis.
C. Point Spread Function
The in vivo PSF of the therapeutic beam in terms of lesion
density was characterized for one rat affected by an extreme long
therapeutic path through the myocardium, as shown in Fig. 13.
IV. DISCUSSION
This computer-aided histological evaluation appears to provide robust characterization of the macrolesion formed by the
accumulation of microlesions based on the following considerations.
A. Therapeutic Beam Estimation
Occurrence of cavitation events induces the here observed
damage to cardiac myocytes. It is expected that the lesion density
would be uniform within the beam profile, where the acoustic
pressure exceeds the cavitation threshold, assuming that the contrast agent in the myocardium is uniformly distributed. However,
lesion uniformity could be disrupted by variable superthreshold
acoustic pressures, which may injure more than one cell per
cavitation event. Hence, we expect the lesion density trend of

Fig. 13. In vivo PSF of the therapeutic beam as assessed in terms of lesion density along the axis of the treatment transducer. Top: lesion density
within macrolesion along the therapeutic beam axis; bottom: lateral cut through
macrolesion at axial maximum (indicated as an “x” on the top).

the microlesion to be dictated by the acoustic beam profile as
well as processes involving motion of the myocardium. For example, breathing motion leads to smearing out the accumulation
effect of the treatment, which then is not shaped strictly according to therapeutic beam. Thus, in turn, the therapeutic beam
estimation is affected. A decreasing trend of the lesion density
was observed along the axial direction, possibly due to acoustic attenuation caused by contrast agents in the LV. The lateral
PSF profile was obtained at the maximum of the axial response,
which was regarded as the volume of interest of the therapy. The
in vivo PSF –6 dB lateral width of approximately 2.8 mm agrees
reasonably with the 3.5 mm beam diameter of the therapy transducer as obtained from a free-field water tank calibration. The
in vivo lateral beam width may be affected by aberration distortion of the sound wave propagating through overlying tissue
layers, thus narrowing the beam diameter with pressure amplitudes above the threshold required for cavitation. Additionally,
acoustic attenuation will reduce the in situ pressure amplitude
and also narrow the beam cross section containing pressure amplitudes required for microlesion creation.
B. Cardiomyocyte Model Validation
A total of 160 manually selected cells according to the
morphology appearing in brightfield images were taken an

726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

average to obtain estimation of area for a cell of 2,719 μm2
versus 2,398 μm2 from the theoretical geometric model. The
12% deviation of the estimation model from the selected estimation comes from bias on selecting large identifiable cells on
the manual side and the variation from the cell orientation from
the modeling side.
C. Cardiomyocyte Cell Scoring Validation
The Evans blue staining found in frozen sections, one day
after therapy, identifies lethally injured cells resulting from microlesions [8], [9]. Therefore, the total determination of the
macrolesion as a fraction of the tissue volume provides a first
approximation to the amount of tissue reduction expected from
the treatment. The desired reduction would be about 20%, which
could be expanded beyond the single focus treatment described
here by moving the beam to provide the needed therapeutic reduction in larger (i.e., human) hearts. The simple visual scoring
of the stained cells provides only a qualitative measure of the microlesion effect, particularly for high densities of microlesions
seen in the treatments intended for therapeutic tissue reduction,
which only approximate the more accurate image analysis values (see Fig. 14). In addition, the qualitative visual scores fail to
give a total fractional reduction throughout the treated volume,
which is provided by the reconstruction of the volume and the
macrolesion determination.
The cell identification scheme counts pixels rather than cells
assuming an overall constant statistical mean multiplier for pixel
to cell size conversion, by which the pixel counting and subsequent area to number of cells conversion is independent of the
at times complicated cell morphology. The automatic scheme of
stained cell identification seems reasonable compared to visual
scoring as shown in Fig. 14. The cases of large accumulations
of stained cells were often difficult to score visually resulting in
qualitative results rather than actual cell count. In contrast, the
proposed computer-based characterization method is objective
and quantitative and overcomes the limitation of large number
of cells.
D. Lesion Characterization Criterion
The volume estimation of macrolesions considered local lesion density as well as total lesion number. Additionally, a dynamic radius cutoff criterion was used that depends on the number of the stained cells. Using a constant threshold for stained
cell intensity would not affect the shape of a well-generated
dense lesion due to the large number of microlesions in the
macrolesion volume, but would affect a sparse macrolesion due
to its low number density of microlesions. Thus, a dynamic
threshold was introduced.
V. CONCLUSION
A computer-aided 3-D objective evaluation scheme has been
developed to characterize macrolesions, including lesion size
and lesion density, for MCET to reduce myocardial tissue, based
on brightfield and fluorescence images as available in acute
preclinical studies. The radially symmetric model employed to

Fig. 14. Two examples of comparison on visual cell scoring and automatic
scoring derived from the proposed computer-based quantification method with
the cardiomyocyte model. The proposed method gives an area-based estimation
of stained cell number instead of a subjective judgment based on microlesion
morphology.

characterize macrolesion density is feasible for the study using a single focused beam. This methodology reduces visual
scoring ambiguity and provides a volume oriented, quantitysensitive therapy evaluation. The significance of characterized
macrolesion compared to sham group demonstrates that the
evaluation scheme is robust against noise. Future implementations of MCET involve formulating a set of optimized treatment
parameters to create a desired total volume reduction based on
lesion density within the target volume. In particular, we are
interested in the microlesion density and macrolesion size, as
both determine the anticipated myocardium reduction. The proposed evaluation scheme could possibly assist quantifying other
therapeutic applications resulting in sparse effects, such as drug
delivery, gene therapy, and blood brain barrier opening.
REFERENCES
[1] B. J. Maron and M. S. Maron, “Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,” Lancet,
vol. 381, pp. 242–255, Jan. 19, 2013.
[2] A. J. Marian, “Contemporary treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,”
TX Heart Inst. J., vol. 36, pp. 194–204, 2009.
[3] S. R. Ommen, “Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,” Curr. Problems Cardiol.,
vol. 36, pp. 409–453, Nov. 2011.

ZHU et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF MACROLESIONS INDUCED BY MYOCARDIAL CAVITATION-ENABLED THERAPY

[4] R. Otsuka, K. Fujikura, Y. Abe, K. Okajima, T. Pulerwitz, D. J. Engel,
R. Muratore, J. A. Ketterling, A. Kalisz, R. Sciacca, C.Marboe, G. Yi,
J. Wang, S. Homma, “Extracardiac ablation of the left ventricular septum
in beating canine hearts using high-intensity focused ultrasound,” J. Amer.
Soc. Echocardiogr., vol. 20, pp. 1400–1406, Dec. 2007.
[5] Z. Xu, A. Ludomirsky, L. Y. Eun, T. L. Hall, B. C. Tran, J. B. Fowlkes,
and C. A. Cain, “Controlled ultrasound tissue erosion,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 726–736,
Jun. 2004.
[6] D. L. Miller, M. A. Averkiou, A. A. Brayman, E. C. Everbach, C. K. Holland, J. H. Wible, and J. R. Wu, “Bioeffects considerations for diagnostic
ultrasound contrast agents,” J. Ultrasound Med., vol. 27, pp. 611–632,
Apr. 2008.
[7] H. Chen, A. A. Brayman, A. P. Evan, and T. J. Matula, “Preliminary
observations on the spatial correlation between short-burst microbubble oscillations and vascular bioeffects,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 38,
pp. 2151–2162, Dec. 2012.
[8] D. L. Miller, P. Li, D. Gordon, and W. F. Armstrong, “Histological characterization of microlesions induced by myocardial contrast echocardiography,” Echocardiography, vol. 22, pp. 25–34, Jan. 2005.
[9] S. Vaezy, M. Andrew, P. Kaczkowski, and L. Crum, “Image-guided acoustic therapy,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 375–390, 2001.
[10] M. Gyongy and C. C. Coussios, “Passive spatial mapping of inertial cavitation during HIFU exposure,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 1,
pp. 48–56, Jan. 2010.
[11] K. J. Haworth, T. D. Mast, K. Radhakrishnan, M. T. Burgess,
J. A. Kopechek, S. L. Huang, D. D. McPherson, and C. K. Holland, “Passive imaging with pulsed ultrasound insonations,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 132, pp. 544–553, Jul. 2012.
[12] F. Vignon, W. T. Shi, J. E. Powers, E. C. Everbach, J. J. Liu, S. J. Gao,
F. Xie, and T. R. Porter “Microbubble cavitation imaging,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 60, pp. 661–670, Apr. 2013.
[13] D. L. Miller, C. Dou, G. E. Owens, and O. D. Kripfgans, “Optimization of ultrasound parameters of myocardial cavitation microlesions for
therapeutic application,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 40, pp. 1228–1236,
2014.
[14] D. L. Miller, P. Li, C. Dou, D. Gordon, C. A. Edwards, W. F. Armstrong,
“Influence of contrast agent dose and ultrasound exposure on cardiomyocyte injury induced by myocardial contrast echocardiography in rats,”
Radiology, vol. 237, pp. 137–143, 2005.
[15] D. L. Miller, C. Y. Dou, and B. R. Lucchesi, “Are ECG premature complexes induced by ultrasonic cavitation electrophysiological responses
to irreversible cardiomyocyte injury?” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37,
pp. 312–320, Feb. 2011.
[16] R. Weissleder, “Scaling down imaging: Molecular mapping of cancer in
mice,” Nature Rev. Cancer, vol. 2, pp. 11–18, Jan. 2002.
[17] R. Weissleder, “Molecular imaging in cancer,” Science, vol. 312,
pp. 1168–1171, May 26, 2006.
[18] R. Eils and C. Athale, “Computational imaging in cell biology,” J. Cell
Biol., vol. 161, pp. 477–481, May 12, 2003.
[19] D. L. Pham, C. Xu, and J. L. Prince, “Current methods in medical image
segmentation,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 2, pp. 315–337, 2000.
[20] P. J. O’Brien, D. E. C. Smith, T. J. Knechtel, M. A. Marchak, I. PruimboomBrees, D. J. Brees, D. P. Spratt, F. J. Archer, P. Butler, A. N. Potter,
J. P. Provost, J. Richard, P. A. Snyder, and W. J. Reagan, “Cardiac troponin
I is a sensitive, specific biomarker of cardiac injury in laboratory animals,”
Lab. Animals, vol. 40, pp. 153–171, Apr. 2006.
[21] D. L. Miller, C. Dou, G. E. Owens, and O. D. Kripfgans, "Timing of highintensity pulses for myocardial cavitation-enabled therapy", J. Therapeutic
Ultrasound, vol. 2, p. 20, 2014
[22] C. J. Baker and N. M. Mock, “An improved method for monitoring celldeath in cell-suspension and leaf disc assays using Evans blue,” Plant Cell
Tissue Organ Culture, vol. 39, pp. 7–12, Oct. 1994.
[23] V. Bassien-Capsa, J. C. Fouron, B. Comte, and A. Chorvatova, “Structural,
functional and metabolic remodeling of rat left ventricular myocytes in
normal and in sodium-supplemented pregnancy,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol.
69, pp. 423–431, Feb. 1, 2006.
[24] S. Y. Ho, “Anatomy and myoarchitecture of the left ventricular wall in
normal and in disease,” Eur. J. Echocardiogr., vol. 10, pp. iii3–iii7, Dec.
2009.
[25] F. Qu, D. Ren, X. Liu, Z. Jing, and L. Yan, “A face image illumination quality evaluation method based on Gaussian low-pass filter,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. Intell. Syst., 2012,
pp. 176–180.

727

Yiying I. Zhu received the Bachelor of Science in
electrical engineering degrees from the Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China, and the University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K., in 2011. She received the Master of
Science Engineering degree in electrical engineering
systems from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, in 2013, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Biomedical Engineering.
She has been a Graduate Student Research Assistant in the Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, since 2013,
with research interests in ultrasound-related microbubble activities, cavitation
monitoring and image-guided cavitation-induced therapy.

Douglas L. Miller (M’98) was born in Steubenville,
OH, USA, in 1947. He received the B.Sc. and M.S.
degrees from Ohio State University, Columbus, OH,
in 1969 and 1971, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Vermont, Burlington, VT,
USA, in 1976, all in physics.
He worked in the area of biological effects of ultrasound at the University of Vermont, Department
of Physics, from 1976 to 1987. From 1987 to 1998,
he worked on ultrasonic bioeffects and bioelectromagnetics research in the Battelle Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory as a Staff Scientist. He is currently a Research Professor in
the Radiology Department, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, pursuing research on biological effects and therapeutic applications
of medical ultrasound.
He is a member of the Radiological Society of North America, and a fellow of
the Acoustical Society of America and of the American Institute of Ultrasound
in Medicine, which presented him the Pioneer Award 2006.

Chunyan Dou received the M.D. degree from the
Norman Bethune University of Medical Sciences,
Changchun, China, in 1982.
From 1983 to 1996, she was a Staff Doctor and
Associate Professor in the Department of Pediatrics,
and from 1997 to 2000 as a Professor in the Central
Research Laboratory of the Clinical Hospital of the
Bethune University of Medical Sciences Changchun.
She is currently a Research Laboratory Specialist Associate in the Department of Radiology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, working on biological effects associated with contrast ultrasound.

Oliver D. Kripfgans (S’00–M’03) received the
Diplom degree in physics from the University of
Saarbrücken, Saarbrücken, Germany, in 1996.
During his graduate studies (1989–1996), he was a
Research Assistant in the Department of Ultrasound,
Fraunhofer Institute for Biomedical Engineering, St.
Ingbert, Germany. His work included industrial as
well as biomedical ultrasound, mostly related to microbubble detection and characterization. His doctoral work (Ph.D. 2002) in the Applied Physics Program at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, included the interaction of microbubbles and -droplets with ultrasound, therapeutic, and diagnostic ultrasound as well as acoustic material properties and acoustic
sensors. Since 2003, he is a faculty member in the Department of Radiology
at the University of Michigan, working on 2-D CMUT ultrasound arrays, 3-D
B-mode imaging, and 3-D Color Doppler, microbubble generation and drug
delivery via acoustic droplet vaporization, as well as cavitation induced and
enhanced therapies.
Dr. Kripfgans is a member of the Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft, the
Acoustical Society of America, and the American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine.

