680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Implantable Flexible Pressure Measurement System
Based on Inductive Coupling
Cristina C. Oliveira∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Alexandra T. Sepúlveda, Nuno Almeida, Student Member, IEEE,
Brian L. Wardle, José Machado da Silva, Member, IEEE, and Luı́s A. Rocha, Member, IEEE

Abstract—One of the currently available treatments for aortic
aneurysms is endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR). In spite of
major advances in the operating techniques, complications still occur and lifelong surveillance is recommended. In order to reduce
and even eliminate the commonly used surveillance imaging exams,
as well as to reduce follow-up costs, new technological solutions
are being pursued. In this paper, we describe the development,
including design and performance characterization, of a flexible
remote pressure measurement system based on inductive-coupling
for post-EVAR monitoring purposes. The telemetry system architecture and operation are described and main performance characteristics discussed. The implantable sensor details are provided and
its model is presented. Simulations with the reading circuit and the
sensor’s model were performed and compared with measurements
carried out with air and a phantom as media, in order to characterize the telemetry system and validate the models. The transfer
characteristic curve (pressure versus frequency) of the monitoring
system was obtained with measurements performed with the sensor
inside a controlled pressure vacuum chamber. Additional experimental results which proof the system functionality were obtained
within a hydraulic test bench that emulates the aorta. Several innovative aspects, when compared to the state of the art, both in the
sensor and in the telemetry system were achieved.
Index Terms—Carbon nanotubes, inductive-coupling, pressure
sensors, remote monitoring, stent-graft.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE measurement of aneurysms’ intrasac pressure has
been reported as a reliable technique to monitor
post-endovascular repair (post-EVAR) of abdominal aortic
aneurysms (AAA) using prosthetic stent-grafts. The stent-graft

T

Manuscript received September 6, 2013; revised August 30, 2014; accepted
October 6, 2014. Date of publication October 22, 2014; date of current version
January 16, 2015. This work was supported by the European Regional Development Fund through the COMPETE Programme (operational programme for
competitiveness) and national funds through Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology) in the framework
of projects MIT-Pt/EDAM-EMD/0007/2008, PTDC/EEI-ELC/1838/2012, and
grants SFRH/BD/81476/2011 (C. C. Oliveira) and SFRH/BD/42922/2008 (A.
T. Sepúlveda). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ C. C. Oliveira is with the INESC TEC, Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal (e-mail: cristina.oliveira@fe.up.pt).
A. T. Sepúlveda and L. A. Rocha are with the Institute for Polymers and
Nanocomposites/I3N, Universidade do Minho, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal
(e-mail: xanasepulveda@dep.uminho.pt; lrocha@dei.uminho.pt).
N. Almeida was with the Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto,
4200-465 Porto, Portugal (e-mail: nunocmalmeida@gmail.com).
B. L. Wardle is with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail:
wardle@mit.edu).
J. M. da Silva is with the INESC TEC, Faculdade de Engenharia da Universidade do Porto, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal (e-mail: jms@fe.up.pt).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2363935

is placed in situ via insertion through the femoral arteries up
to the aortic lumen to fit tightly in the bulged or ballooned
AAA fraction [1]. This procedure avoids the standard procedure
based on open surgery, still mandatory in some cases, but much
more invasive than the EVAR approach. Nevertheless, some
post-surgery problems, such as endoleaks, graft migration, stent
fracture, and enlargement of the aneurysm sac may occur, which
require regular monitoring/surveillance and behavioral analysis
to avoid the rupture of AAAs and to prevent reinterventions [2].
The pressure in the walls and in the aneurysm sac is one of
the most important indicators for post-EVAR patients monitoring. Direct intrasac pressure measurement outperforms imaging
techniques in ascertaining either the complete AAA exclusion
or the need for future interventions [3].
Remote pressure monitoring systems [4] and results of clinical observation using these systems have been published [5],
which show that the use of wirelessly accessed pressure sensors
provide useful post-EVAR endovascular leaks observation and
help guiding clinical therapy. Until now, two remote pressure
sensors have been tested in clinical trials: the EndoSure Sensor
(CardioMEMS, Atlanta, GA, USA) and the ImPressure Sensor
(Remon Medical Technologies, Caesarea, Israel) [6]. The ImPressure sensor is hand sewed to the outside of a stent-graft
and is activated by ultrasound waves from a hand-held probe.
In spite of ultrasound being safe and widely used for medical
imaging, the measurement requires the use of an ultrasonic gel
and direct contact between the skin and the transducer. Another
drawback is the high reflection of ultrasound in air–tissue and
tissue–bone interfaces, which may lead to difficult communication with the sensor placed in the aneurysm sac. The EndoSure
system consists of a simple resonant circuit and a sophisticated
external antenna and receiver. The APEX trial demonstrated the
efficacy of the EndoSure sensor. This sensor is delivered into
the aneurysm sac through its own sheath—adding thus more
complexity to the EVAR procedure—and is placed completely
separate from the aortic endograft. This way, there is no control
on the position of the sensor and it is not possible to have more
than one sensor in a patient due to the space it occupies [4].
The existing sensors are randomly placed in the aneurysm
sac and only provide information regarding pressure on a single
point. We believe that joining sensing capabilities to a stent-graft
will benefit the future of EVAR with a more robust technology
that enables the placement of more than one sensor, increasing
the sensitivity of the measurements and simplifying the deployment procedure.
The alternative being proposed here relies on a flexible capacitive sensor fabricated using aligned carbon nanotubes (ACNTs) embedded in a flexible substrate of polydimethylsiloxane

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

OLIVEIRA et al.: IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PRESSURE MEASUREMENT SYSTEM BASED ON INDUCTIVE COUPLING

Fig. 1.

Schematic of the reader circuit.

(PDMS), a transparent, nontoxic, and biocompatible silicone
elastomer. The implantable device (hereafter the pressure sensor) comprises this capacitive sensor and an inductor (antenna)
forming together an LC resonant circuit (see Fig. 1). Integrating these pressure sensors within the stent is possible because
they can be folded and collapsed together with the stent-graft
without sacrificing its structure. Also, given its dimensions, it
is possible to actually deploy a cluster of sensors, all already
integrated in the stent-graft, each one being identifiable by its
own specific resonant frequency. The deployment and monitoring of a cluster of sensors allows obtaining a more accurate
observation of the pressure distribution in the aneurysm sac and
improves reliability as more than one measurement is obtained
simultaneously.
As the working distances between the external reader and
pressure sensors are on the order of ∼5 cm, frequencies above
50 MHz should be avoided, preference given to those below
20 MHz (15 to 20 cm penetration depth ensured). This also
ensures operation in the antennas near-field [7], where the electromagnetic induction is more efficient. In what concerns protection of the biologic tissues, heat dissipation must be minimized.
As tissues’ conductivities increase at higher frequencies, lower
frequencies are then preferable. However, frequencies below
the megahertz range would require larger LC components for
the antenna and sensor. In addition, the quality factor of the
inductive coupling decreases at low RF frequencies due to skin
reflection [8].
This paper addresses the design of the telemetry system, i.e.,
the wireless pressure sensors and external reading circuit. The
electrical model derived for the sensor is presented, and characterization results obtained with simulations performed using
the electrical model are compared with those obtained experimentally. The performance of the overall pressure measurement
system is evaluated resorting to setups that enable the extraction
of the sensors characteristic and emulate the end use of the system. The achieved results are discussed in terms of the system’s
performance and innovation compared to the state of the art.
II. MONITORING SYSTEM OVERVIEW
A. Telemetry System
The telemetry system comprises an external reader, capable of energizing the passive pressure sensors and detecting
the sensor’s oscillation frequency, a signal conditioning block

681

having a transformer, an instrumentation amplifier (IA), and a
low-pass filter (LPF), as well as a high-speed data acquisition
board (ADC) which also provides the interface with a personal
computer (see Fig. 1). The sensor receives energy and reflects
back its oscillation frequency by means of inductive coupling.
Its components can be modeled as passive elements: a variable
capacitor Cs , whose value changes with the applied pressure,
connected to an inductor Ls , implementing a parallel resonant
circuit. The reader resorts to a magnetically isolated twin circuit
(see in Fig. 1 the circuit included in a dark gray shadowed box)
added to the top part of the reader that communicates with the
sensor (see in Fig. 1 the circuit included in a light gray shadowed
box) in order to provide a differential detection of the reflected
oscillation. The sensor’s oscillation frequency is obtained after
detecting the vo –vto differential signal using a transformer.
The oscillation frequency [see (1)] is defined by the sensor’s
capacitance and inductance, as well as the coupling factor k
[see (2)], which depends on the reader’s coil radius rr , the
sensor’s coil radius rs , and the distance between both x, as
demonstrated in [9]. The k value can be estimated using the data
(exact positions and distances of the aorta) from imaging exams
that EVAR candidates typically take before the procedure [10]
fosc =

2π

k= √



1
(1 − k 2 )Ls Cs

r2 r2
s r
.
rs rr ( x2 + rr2 )3

(1)
(2)

The oscillation frequencies are extracted from the frequency
spectrum of the captured signal. The frequency spectrum is obtained after a preprocessing step to compensate for noncoherent
sampling and the decaying envelope amplitude of the sensor’s
damped oscillatory response. This step comprises the envelope
detection and signal segmentation, followed by smoothing the
transient envelope using a Hanning window. The fundamental
frequency is extracted from the Fourier transform (by interpolating the frequency domain) [11]. Spectral parameters, such as
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and spurious-free dynamic range
are used to evaluate the accuracy of the frequency detection, allowing to disregard measurements where the sensor’s response
is not detected, and providing indication on the quality of the
inductive link to the user. Preliminary experimental results obtained with the reader circuit prove its ability to energize an
LC network (circuit with the same electrical characteristics of
the pressure sensor) and capture the oscillation frequency with
good accuracy [12], [13].
B. Pressure Sensors
The main specifications required for the implantable device
(pressure sensor), namely dynamic range, resolution and accuracy, can be retrieved from the maximum values of blood
pressure in the human body, required accuracy and maximum
errors admitted by the legislation for pressure measurement
devices [14]. Taking into account that the cardiac cycle can
reach as fast as 180 bpm (3 Hz), and that the change of rate is
below 120 ms, the pressure monitoring system needs to present

682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

TABLE I
DIMENSIONS OF THE SENSORS ANTENNAS

Fig. 2.

C4

C6

C8

S4

S6

S8

Geometry
d o u t [mm]
d i n [mm]
Ntu rn s
diel [mm]

circle
16.3
10.5
15
4

circle
17.5
12.5
13
6

circle
18.8
14.5
11
8

square
16.3
10.3
15
4

square
17.5
12.3
13
6

square
18.5
14.3
11
8

Pressure sensor transfer characteristic.

Fig. 4.
Fig. 3.

Parameters

Electrical model of the pressure sensor.

Overview of the pressure sensor’s structure and cross section.

a bandwidth of around 80 Hz. For the aortic aneurysm pressure
measurement, the sensor should show a dynamic range between
20 mmHg (∼2.67 kPa) and 250 mmHg (∼33.3 kPa), referring to
the atmospheric pressure, a 1-mmHg resolution and an absolute
accuracy below 5 mmHg [15].
The flexible capacitive sensors are fabricated using A-CNTs
embedded in a flexible substrate of PDMS, a transparent, nontoxic and biocompatible silicone elastomer, forming a dielectric
which is hermetically sealed at ambient pressure [16]–[18].
Fig. 2 shows the measured sensor capacitance versus pressure transfer characteristic. Although the blood pressure in the
aneurysm sac ranges from 100 to 130 kPa, the pressure sensors
were only tested for pressures between 0 and 100 kPa due to
technological constraints. The sensor’s response fits very well
with that predicted by the analytic model [17] and shows relatively good linearity, especially in the region close to the sensor’s
reference—atmospheric pressure.
Prototypes of the antennas (inductors) attached to the capacitive sensors (see Fig. 3) were fabricated using a DuPont Kapton
polyimide film in two different geometries (square and circle).
For each geometry, antennas of three sizes were fabricated in
order to evaluate different dielectric dimensions (pressure sensor membrane): 4 mm, 6 mm, and 8 mm. The antenna is formed
with two stacked inductors, one on each side of the polyimide
film, interconnected with a via on the outer segment.
The polyimide film has a 50-μm thickness and the copper
traces show a 35-μm thickness. All antennas’ coils are made
with 0.1 mm width traces spaced by 0.1 mm. The three arches
between the inductor’s coils and the membrane have a 0.25 mm
thickness and are spaced by 1.125 mm. The distance between the
inner turn and the largest arch is 0.15 mm for the square antennas
and 0.25 mm for the circle antennas. Table I displays the outer
and inner diameters dimensions (dout and din ), the number of
turns (Nturns ), as well as the dielectric size (diel—diameter in
the case of circles, side in the case of squares).

TABLE II
SENSORS COMPONENTS VALUES
Parameters

C4

C6

C8

S4

S6

S8

L s [μH]
R p [Ω]
C p [pF]
C l [pF]
C s [pF]

4.62
3.58
1.91
19.15
2.23

4.30
3.37
1.86
18.57
5.01

3.74
3.09
1.76
17.48
8.90

5.41
3.99
2.31
33.63
2.83

5.04
3.87
2.22
32.30
6.38

4.45
3.58
2.02
29.44
11.33

III. PRESSURE SENSOR MODEL
The sensor’s inductor characteristics differ from conventional
on-chip inductors or near-field communication RFID antennas,
and therefore, a specific electrical model was developed (see
Fig. 4). Each layer forms a resonant circuit comprising an inductance Ls , the parasitic series resistance Rp , and the parasitic
capacitance Cp due to the capacitance formed between the traces
of the inductor. A parasitic capacitance Cl , formed between the
top and bottom layers traces, is also connected in parallel with
the sensor’s capacitance Cs .
The sensors’ parameters presented in Table II were analytically calculated using the device’s dimensions. The expressions
for the calculations of planar spiral inductances presented in [19]
were used for the estimation of the inductance of each layer Ls .
The total inductance of the dual-layer planar inductor Ltotal
is almost four times higher than a single-layer inductor with
the same dimensions Ltotal ∼
= Ls(top layer) + Ls(b ottom layer) +
2M . By design, the current flows in the same direction on both
layers. This effect plus the proximity and the via interconnecting the inductors assures
 the mutual inductance M to be almost
equal to Ls (M = ks Ls(top layer) Ls(b ottom layer) ∼
= Ls ) [9].
The capacitances for the sensor Cs , the parasitic capacitance
between the antenna’s layers Cl , and the parasitic capacitance
of each layer Cp were estimated using the expression for a
parallel plate capacitor.

OLIVEIRA et al.: IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PRESSURE MEASUREMENT SYSTEM BASED ON INDUCTIVE COUPLING

683

TABLE III
OSCILLATION FREQUENCIES FOR ± 1PF SENSORS’ CAPACITANCE VARIATION
f o s c [MHz]

C4

C6

C8

S4

S6

S8

C s −1 pF
Cs
C s +1 pF
Δf

8.04
7.86
7.69
0.352

7.95
7.79
7.63
0.323

8.07
7.92
7.78
0.286

5.68
5.60
5.52
0.154

5.71
5.64
5.57
0.139

5.93
5.86
5.79
0.139

Simulations using Agilent ADS were performed to estimate
the antenna’s total inductance, the expected self-resonant frequencies (SRF), and the sensor’s oscillation frequency fosc .
For antenna characterization purposes, the sensors capacitance
Csensor was discarded from the model, and an S-Parameter simulation was performed to extract SRF and the total inductance of
the antennas (at 1 MHz). For the determination of the sensor’s
oscillation frequency, the circuit shown in Fig. 1 was simulated (transient analysis) after replacing the simple RLC sensor
model by that shown in Fig. 4. The coupling coefficient k established between the reader and the sensor was adjusted in the
simulations for all the sensors for a range of distances between
0 and 50 mm (steps of 5 mm), considering the reader antenna
to be a spiral square with a 50-mm side length. As a transient
simulation is performed, a fast Fourier transform of the signal
on node vout (reader circuit) is computed to extract the sensor’s
frequency. The results from these simulations will be confronted
with experimental measurements in Section V.
To evaluate if the effect of the parasitic layer capacitance
masks the change of the sensor’s capacitance, a simulation was
performed for a variation of the sensors capacitance Cs of ±
1 pF, considering a distance between the antennas of 10 mm.
Table III displays the variation in frequency (Δf ) caused by a
change of 2 pF, which is actually the expected variation of the
sensor’s membrane capacitance for the working pressure range
(see Fig. 2).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
This section describes the experiments, as well as the respective setups, performed to characterize the sensors and the complete monitoring system performance. All the results presented
here will be discussed in terms of the system’s performance and
compared with the simulation results in the next section.
A. Sensor Antennas
Prior to the assembly of the A-CNTs membranes on the flexPCB, the inductance (at 1 MHz) and the SRF of the antennas
were measured with a vector network analyzer. These values
will be compared with the values obtained from the S-Parameter
simulations in Section V.

Fig. 5. Sensors’ oscillation frequencies measured with the telemetry system
after pressure variations performed within a vacuum chamber.

pressure sensors, placed also inside the chamber, were used to
record reference values for comparison purposes. Results from
the measurements with sensors C4, C6, S4, and S6 are presented
in Fig. 5.
C. Effects of Distance and Biological Tissue in the
Frequency Detection
Since the final application of the system is to read from sensors implanted inside the human body, further experiments were
performed in order to assess the behavior of the system in the
presence of biological tissue between the antenna and the sensor. A tissue emulating solution (phantom) with electrical (conductivity and permittivity) characteristics similar to the muscle
tissue made according to the recipes presented in [20] was used.
First, measurements using air as the medium between the reader
and the sensor antennas were carried out for different distances
ranging from 3 to 25 mm in steps of 5 mm. The emulating
solution was poured in a beaker in order to achieve the desired
height, corresponding to the distance between the reader and the
sensor. The reader antenna was placed under the beaker and the
sensor was inserted in a hermetically sealed bag for protection
and laid on top of the phantom solution.
The curves presented in Fig. 6 show the variation of the
measured oscillation frequencies of the different sensors, for a
range of distances between the sensor and the reading antenna
with air and phantom as the dielectric.
D. Hydraulic Test Bench

B. Experimental Results Obtained Using a Vacuum Chamber
The performance of the flexible sensors to different pressures
and their use with the telemetry system were evaluated using
a vacuum chamber. The sensors were subjected to different
pressures by applying a pressure varying from 100 to 200 kPa.
The output of the reader circuit was recorded, while commercial

A hydraulic test bench that emulates the aorta was built to
test the wireless pressure sensors and the reader system. This
model includes the following elements:
1) an electric 2/2-way solenoid valve, connected to a tap
water, to simulate the cardiac cycle;
2) a tube to connect the valve to the aneurysm region;

684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 8.

Diagram of the hydraulic test bench.

Fig. 6. Measured frequencies of all the sensors with air and phantom as
dielectric.

Fig. 9. Pressure measured with a commercial pressure sensor (dotted line)
and oscillation frequency from the flexible pressure sensor (solid line), while
the water tap was being opened and closed as in the cardiac cycle.

Fig. 7.

Stent-graft and the pressure sensor placed on top of the graft.

3) an aneurysm region made with a flexible inflatable material;
4) a stent-graft made with a metal spiral to mimic the stent
and a PET material to mimic the graft sewed and placed
inside the aneurysm (see Fig. 7);
5) a square 6 × 6 mm (S6) wireless pressure sensor placed
on top of the stent-graft;
6) a commercial pressure sensor (MPXV5100GC6U from
Freescale) placed in the tube right before the aneurysm
emulating region (a hole was made in the tube to place
the sensor) connected to an acquisition board (NI DAQ
USB–6008);
7) the wireless reader system with the reader antenna placed
on the aneurysm emulating region.
A diagram of the complete setup is displayed in Fig. 8. The
goal of this experiment was to compare the performance of the
developed pressure sensor with a commercial pressure sensor.
Fig. 9 displays the measured pressure and oscillation frequency

during one trail. In this experiment, the measurements were
performed while gradually opening and closing the water tap
for six times, to mimic the cardiac cycle.
V. DISCUSSION
The next sections discuss the telemetry system performance in
terms of the accuracy of the sensor’s electrical model, the effect
of distance and biological tissue in the frequency detection, the
sensor’s transfer characteristic curve, and sensors performance
in the hydraulic test bench.
A. Accuracy of the Sensor’s Electrical Model and the Effect of
Distance and Biological Tissue in the Frequency Detection
Table IV provides a comparison between the simulated and
measured parameters of the pressure sensors, such as the antennas’ inductance and SRF, and the sensors oscillation frequency
after the assembly of the A-CNTs membranes.
The measured inductance value Lm eas is lower than the simulated value Lsim . However, the antenna is not purely inductive, since the overlap of the top and bottom coils introduces a
significant parasitic capacitance, which is responsible for this

OLIVEIRA et al.: IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PRESSURE MEASUREMENT SYSTEM BASED ON INDUCTIVE COUPLING

TABLE IV
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE SIMULATED AND MEASURED PARAMETERS OF
THE PRESSURE SENSORS (INDUCTANCE, SRF, AND OSCILLATION FREQUENCY)

TABLE V
REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS FOR THE FREQUENCY–PRESSURE CHARACTERISTIC
FUNCTIONS OF EACH SENSOR

Results

C4

C6

C8

S4

S6

S8

Coeff.

L s i m [μH]
L m e a s [μH]
SRF s i m [MHz]
SRF m e a s [MHz]
f s i m [MHz]
f m e a s [MHz]

18.67
15.05
8.28
7.89
7.86
6.32

17.33
13.36
8.72
7.96
7.79
6.43

15.03
—
9.63
—
7.92
12.01

22.17
18.08
5.82
6.23
5.60
5.19

20.61
16.12
6.15
6.33
5.64
5.09

18.08
12.78
6.86
7.36
5.86
—

c1
c2
c3

difference, that is, it translates into a measured SRF of the antenna (SRFm eas ) lower than the simulated value (SRFsim ).
Also, the measured oscillation frequency fm eas , for a distance
of 10 mm between the sensor and the reading antenna, is lower
than that expected from the simulated model fsim , due to the
fact that during the assembly of the A-CNTs onto the flex PCB
using a special conductive glue, extra parasitic capacitance and
resistance are inserted, which cannot be calculated.
The presence of the biological tissue causes a significant
shifting of the received signal frequency. This can be due to the
change of the medium permittivity to magnetic induction, also
affected by the quality factor, as has been reported in [21] and
[22]. Regardless of this frequency shifting, when comparing the
detected signals in the presence and absence of the phantom,
these showed SNRs and amplitude characteristics that allowed
an easy detection of the sensor’s resonant frequency, in the
different cases.
Furthermore, the variation of the detected frequency tends
to stabilize after the first 20 mm, meaning that the coupling
coefficient k has little influence on the oscillation frequency for
distances higher than 20 mm. Since the distance between the
abdominal section of the aorta where the stent-graft is placed
and the anterior abdominal wall skin is expected to be always
higher than 20 mm [23], the system’s performance will not be
drastically compromised by the effect of the distance and the
biological tissue.
B. Sensors’ Transfer Characteristics
The transfer characteristics of the pressure sensors obtained
with the telemetry system have a very defined shape, despite the
presence of some small fluctuations in the smaller sensors (see
Fig. 5). Equation (3) gives the polynomial relating oscillation
frequency with pressure fosc (p) obtained for sensors C4, C6,
and S4 after fitting the measured frequencies with a multiple
linear least-squares regression as a function of pressure:
fosc (p) = c1 p2 + c2 p + c3 p.

(3)

The data from sensor S6 could be fitted with a linear leastsquares regression due to its more linear behavior [see (4)]:
fosc (p) = c1 p + c2 .
Table V displays the regression coefficients.

(4)

685

C4

C6

S4

S6

1.591
−821.228
6357389.276

−9.303
1646.296
6330888.228

−0.926
106.485
5210008.700

−391.698
5185966.492
–

Fig. 10. Transfer function of sensor S6 for the region of interest with the
region of pressures in the aneurysm sac expected for a stent-graft without an
endoleak (normal) filled in green and for a stent-graft with an endoleak filled in
red.

Sensor S6 presents the highest sensitivity in the region of interest, with a frequency variation of approximately 14.981 kHz
between 100 and 130 kPa. This result was expected since the
square sensor has an A-CNT membrane (sensing element) with
larger area. The pressure inside the aneurysm sac is expected
to be below 40 mmHg (105.33 kPa) in a successfully excluded
AAA after the EVAR procedure. If there is an endoleak, the
aneurysm sac pressure rises to the levels of the patient arterial
blood pressure (ABP), typically between 70 mmHg (109.33 kPa)
diastolic and 200 mmHg (126.66 kPa) [3]. Hence, the purpose
of our sensors is to distinguish between these two situations.
Fig. 10 displays the expected pressure in the aneurysm sac in
the normal state (no endoleak), as well as in the presence of endovascular leakage, and compares them with the performance
of sensor S6 for the region of interest. A value of 2.28 Hz on
average was obtained for the noise of the sensor plus the complete reading system (resolution of the system) was measured
for all the sensors. These data show that for this initial sensor
version (not optimized and with large parallel capacitances that
greatly reduces sensitivity), it would still be possible to detect
endoleaks.
C. Sensors Performance in a Hydraulic Test Bench
Although a manual control of the water tap was used and thus
there was some uncertainty in the pressure levels, still a variable
pressure profile could be obtained that allows us to evaluate the
sensor performance. Since the oscillation frequency is inversely

686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

proportional to the capacitance [see (1)], the highest oscillation
frequencies correspond to the lowest pressures (when the water
tap is closed). There is a slight delay between the measured
pressure and the corresponding frequency shift, which is due
to the location of the sensors. Since the water first goes to
the commercial sensor and after to the aneurysm sac where the
wireless pressure sensor is inserted, the pressure changes are first
detected by the commercial sensor, as it is observable in Fig. 9.
Also, the detected frequency seems to take longer to reach the
values for lower pressures, in opposite to what happens within
the commercial sensor that shows faster responses to lower
pressures—as the aneurysm emulating sac accumulates water
its flux goes from laminar to turbulent.
These proof-of-concept experiments demonstrate the suitability of the small, flexible, and passive sensor along with the
readout telemetry system to detect pressure variations.
D. Telemetry System Calibration
The telemetry system is being improved in order to include a
fault detection system, taking advantage of other physiological
signals like the electrocardiogram and ABP, and resorting to
measurements of the power and impedance seen from the reader
circuit to diagnose deviations in the LC values of the pressure
sensor [24], [25]. The reliability of the telemetry system can be
further improved by placing a sensor with a fixed LC value,
i.e., one whose Cs value is not affected by the pressure inside
the aortic sac. Taking the measured oscillation frequency for
this LCref and comparing with (1), the deviation between the
measured and expected frequencies can be used to calibrate the
remaining sensors, whose responses are affected by the presence
of human tissue and tilting. This calibration can be done right
after the placing of the stent-graft.
VI. CONCLUSION
A surveillance mechanism, based on the measurement of the
pressure in an aneurysm sac, is an attractive solution to detect
possible post-EVAR problems. The pressure measurement system proposed here demonstrates that, after a refinement of the
involved technological developments, a simple yet effective and
reliable surveillance of post-EVAR is feasible and can be of
added value in the treatment of aneurysms. The experimental
measurements obtained with the sensors and readout electronics prototypes developed in the lab have shown good agreement
with those expected from theoretical computations and simulation results. The tests performed with a hydraulic model validate
the proposed telemetry system functionality and shows its feasibility to be integrated into a stent-graft. As pressure sensors
are flexible, more than one monitoring sensor can be attached to
the stent-graft and the normal procedure to place the stent-graft
can be used, as opposed to what happens with the EndoSure
solution that requires the insertion of another catheter for the
placement of one sensor. Also the EndoSure system resorts to
more complex circuitry and algorithms to perform a frequency
sweep and extract the pressure measured by the sensor, while
the proposed reading circuit is fairly simple and enables the ac-

quisition of the pressure values from all the sensors at the same
time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to Prof. J. G. Mendes from the Departamento de Engenharia Mecânica, Faculdade de Engenharia
da Universidade do Porto for assistance with the experiments
using the hydraulic model.

REFERENCES
[1] The United Kingdom EVAR Trial Investigators, “Endovascular versus
open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm,” New England J. Med.,
vol. 362, no. 20, pp. 1863–1871, 2010.
[2] B. Katzen and A. MacLean, “Complications of endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms: A review,” Cardiovasc. Interventional Radiol.,
vol. 29, pp. 935–946, 2006.
[3] B. Sonesson, N. Dias, M. Malina, P. Olofsson, D. Griffin, B. Lindblad, and
K. Ivancev, “Intra-aneurysm pressure measurements in successfully excluded abdominal aortic aneurysm after endovascular repair,” J. Vascular
Surg., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 733–738, 2003.
[4] F. Springer, R. W. Günther, and T. Schmitz-Rode, “Aneurysm Sac pressure measurement with minimally invasive implantable pressure sensors:
An alternative to current surveillance regimes after EVAR?” Cardiovasc.
Interventional Radiol., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 460–467, 2008.
[5] C. J. Parsa, M. A. Daneshmand, B. Lima, K. Balsara, R. L. McCann, and
G. C. Hughes, “Utility of remote wireless pressure sensing for endovascular leak detection after endovascular thoracic aneurysm repair,” Ann.
Thoracic Surg., vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 446–452, 2010.
[6] R. Milner, K. Kasirajan, and E. L. Chaikof, “Future of endograft surveillance,” Seminars Vascular Surg., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 75–82, 2006.
[7] K. Fotopoulou and B. Flynn, “Wireless powering of implanted sensors using RF inductive coupling,” Proc. 5th IEEE Conf. Sens., 2006,
pp. 765–768.
[8] U. Jow and M. Ghovanloo, “Modeling and optimization of printed spiral
coils in air, saline, and muscle tissue environments,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 339–347, Oct. 2009.
[9] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and Identification, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, Jul. 2003.
[10] J. A. Kaufman, S. C. Geller, D. C. Brewster, C. M. Fan, R. P. Cambria,
G. M. LaMuraglia, J. P. Gertler, W. M. Abbott, and A. C. Waltman,
“Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms current status and
future directions,” Am. J. Roentgenol., vol. 175, no. 2, pp. 289–302, 2000.
[11] H. Okawara, “SSC applied serial ATA signal generation and analysis by
analog tester resources,” in Proc. Int. Test Conf., 2009, pp. 1–9.
[12] C. Oliveira, N. Almeida, and J. Machado da Silva, “Inductive coupling system for endovascular aneurysm repair monitoring,” Stud. Health Technol.
Informat., vol. 177, pp. 101–106, 2012.
[13] C. Oliveira, N. Almeida, and J. Machado da Silva, “A stent-graft endoleakage monitor: Telemetry system based on inductive-coupling transmission
for implantable pressure sensors,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd Portguese Meeting
Bioeng., 2013, pp. 1–4.
[14] “Blood pressure measurement devices (sphygmomanometers)-accuracy,”
U.S. Dept. Health Human Services, Washington, DC, USA, Rep. CPG
7124.23, Feb. 18, 2005.
[15] J. Potkay, “Long term, implantable blood pressure monitoring systems,”
Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 10, pp. 379–392, 2008.
[16] A. T. Sepúlveda, F. Fachin, R. Guzmán de Villoria, B. L. Wardle, J. C.
Viana, A. J. Pontes, and L. A. Rocha, “Nanocomposite flexible pressure
sensor for biomedical applications,” Procedia Eng., vol. 25, pp. 140–143,
2011.
[17] A. T. Sepúlveda, R. Guzmán de Villoria, J. C. Viana, A. J. Pontes,
B. L. Wardle, and L. A. Rocha, “Flexible pressure sensors: Modeling and
experimental characterization,” Procedia Eng., vol. 47, pp. 1177–1180,
2012.
[18] A. T. Sepúlveda, R. Guzmán de Villoria, J. C. Viana, A. J. Pontes,
B. L. Wardle, and L. A. Rocha, “Full elastic constitutive relation of
non-isotropic aligned-CNT/PDMS flexible nanocomposites,” Nanoscale,
vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 4847–4854, Jun. 2013.

OLIVEIRA et al.: IMPLANTABLE FLEXIBLE PRESSURE MEASUREMENT SYSTEM BASED ON INDUCTIVE COUPLING

[19] S. S. Mohan, M. del Mar Hershenson, S. P. Boyd, and T. H. Lee, “Simple
accurate expressions for planar spiral inductances,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 1419–1424, Oct. 1999.
[20] G. Hartsgrove, A. Kraszewski, and A. Surowiec, “Simulated biological
materials for electromagnetic radiation absorption studies,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 29–36, 1987.
[21] A. Ingelman-Sundberg and E. Odeblad, “Radio frequency absorption in
tissues with special reference to diagnostic applications in gynaecology,”
BJOG: Int. J. Obstetrics Gynaecol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 940–945, 1965.
[22] M. Yvanoff and J. Venkataraman, “A feasibility study of tissue characterization using LC sensors,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 57, no. 4,
pp. 885–893, Apr. 2009.
[23] M. Narendran and M. S. Baggish, “Mean distance between primary trocar insertion site and major retroperitoneal vessels during routine laparoscopy,” J. Gynecologic Surg., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 121–127, 2002.

687

[24] C. Oliveira and J. da Silva, “Fault detection system for a stent-graft endoleakage monitor,” in Proc. 18th Int. Mixed-Signals, Sens. Syst. Test
Workshop, 2012, pp. 17–21.
[25] C. C. Oliveira and J. Machado da Silva, “Towards a dependable cardiovascular surveillance system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Health Informat.,
Jan. 2014, pp. 118–121.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

