408

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Enhancing Predictive Accuracy of Cardiac
Autonomic Neuropathy Using Blood Biochemistry
Features and Iterative Multitier Ensembles
Jemal Abawajy, Senior Member, IEEE, Andrei Kelarev, Morshed U. Chowdhury,
and Herbert F. Jelinek, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Blood biochemistry attributes form an important
class of tests, routinely collected several times per year for many
patients with diabetes. The objective of this study is to investigate
the role of blood biochemistry for improving the predictive accuracy of the diagnosis of cardiac autonomic neuropathy (CAN)
progression. Blood biochemistry contributes to CAN, and so it is a
causative factor that can provide additional power for the diagnosis
of CAN especially in the absence of a complete set of Ewing tests.
We introduce automated iterative multitier ensembles (AIME) and
investigate their performance in comparison to base classifiers and
standard ensemble classifiers for blood biochemistry attributes.
AIME incorporate diverse ensembles into several tiers simultaneously and combine them into one automatically generated integrated system so that one ensemble acts as an integral part of
another ensemble. We carried out extensive experimental analysis
using large datasets from the diabetes screening research initiative
(DiScRi) project. The results of our experiments show that several
blood biochemistry attributes can be used to supplement the Ewing
battery for the detection of CAN in situations where one or more
of the Ewing tests cannot be completed because of the individual
difficulties faced by each patient in performing the tests. The results show that AIME provide higher accuracy as a multitier CAN
classification paradigm. The best predictive accuracy of 99.57%
has been obtained by the AIME combining decorate on top tier
with bagging on middle tier based on random forest. Practitioners
can use these findings to increase the accuracy of CAN diagnosis.
Index Terms—Blood biochemistry attributes, cardiac autonomic neuropathy (CAN), ensemble classifiers, iterative multitier
ensembles.

I. INTRODUCTION
IABETES is one of the major causes of cardiovascular
complications (coronary artery disease, peripheral arterial disease, and stroke), making it a leading cause of morbidity
and mortality worldwide [1]. Diabetic cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy (CAN) is a condition associated with damage to the

D

Manuscript received July 28, 2014; revised September 27, 2014; accepted
October 9, 2014. Date of publication October 20, 2014; date of current version
December 31, 2015. This work was supported by a Deakin-Ballarat Collaboration Grant.
J. Abawajy, A. Kelarev, and M. Chowdhury are with the Parallel and
Distributed Computing Lab, Deakin University, Geelong 3220, Australia
(e-mail: jemal@deakin.edu.au; andreikelarev-deakinuniversity@yahoo.com;
muc@deakin.edu.au).
H. F. Jelinek is with the Charles Sturt University, Albury 2640, Australia
(e-mail: HJelinek@csu.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2363177

autonomic nervous system innervating the heart and linked to an
increased risk of arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death. As CAN
is linked to an increased risk of arrhythmia and sudden cardiac
death in diabetic patients [2]–[4], early detection of CAN is of
utmost importance especially in people with diabetes. The conventional noninvasive Ewing test battery [3] commonly used for
identifying CAN is a complex and time-consuming task that depends on many factors. The predictive capability of the Ewing
test battery is still limited due to the inherent insensitivity to
patients that are not symptomatic and is often not suitable for
elderly patients as well as patients who suffer from comorbidities such as heart or respiratory disease [5]. This indicates that
a more advanced noninvasive and automated approach for the
diagnosis of CAN should be explored.
The development of automated machine learning techniques
for the analysis of medical data collected from diabetes patients is particularly valuable for the continuous monitoring of
various parameters and conditions associated with diabetes disease comorbidities and progression [6], [7] as well as identifying
CAN [5]. Accurate automated machine learning techniques have
implications for planning of timely treatment, which can lead to
improved wellbeing of the patients and a reduction in morbidity
and mortality associated with cardiac arrhythmias in diabetes.
In [5], the authors investigated the problem of finding optimal
combinations of Ewing tests for the diagnoses of CAN based
on decision trees and the optimal decision path finder procedure introduced in [8] as a contribution to the general direction
of planning and scheduling of tests for disease diagnosis [9].
Visual aids facilitating the applications of the outcomes have
also been proposed, which is also a valuable contribution to the
topic of information extraction and visualization for medical applications considered, for example, in [10]. However, there are
many situations when some of the Ewing tests can be counter
indicated, and at the same time, the outcomes of other valuable
tests may be already available for some patients, which motives
this study.
This paper is devoted to a cross-sectional study of the possibility and effectiveness of enhancing the predictive accuracy of the
diagnosis of CAN using various models. The innovation of this
study is that it explores the use of blood biochemistry attributes
and a combination of Ewing battery tests in conjunction with
the application of machine learning techniques for enhancing
the predictive accuracy of CAN. This is the first paper concentrating on the investigation of the effectiveness of using blood
biochemistry features to improve the predictive accuracy of the

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ABAWAJY et al.: ENHANCING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY OF CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY USING BLOOD BIOCHEMISTRY

diagnosis of CAN in situations where some Ewing tests are missing. Blood biochemistry tests for many patients may already be
known since they are routinely collected several times per year
for people with diabetes. Therefore, it would be an advantage
if practitioners could use these tests to increase the accuracy of
classification of CAN, especially if the full set of Ewing tests is
not available. Furthermore, to improve the accuracy of classifications, we introduce automated iterative multitier ensembles
(AIME), which are hierarchical ensemble classifiers incorporating diverse ensembles into several tiers simultaneously and
combining them into one integrated system so that middle-tier
ensembles acts as an integral part of the top-tier ensemble.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II-B, the proposed AIME classifier is introduced. In Section II-A, we present
the methodology and the blood biochemistry attributes used in
this study. Sections III and IV discuss the experimental setup as
well as the results and discussions of experiments comparing the
effectiveness of base classifiers, standard ensemble classifiers,
and AIME. The conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Materials
In this section, we present the blood biochemistry attributes
used in this study. The dataset originates from the diabetes complications screening research initiative (DiScRi) project by Jelinek et al. [11]. DiScRi is a very large and unique dataset
containing a comprehensive collection of tests related to CAN.
It contains data on over 200 variables from over 2000 patients.
DiScRi is a diabetes complications screening programme in
Australia, where members of the general public participate in a
comprehensive health review, consisting of tests including various blood biochemistry attributes, Ewing battery, retinal scans,
peripheral nerve function, and various parameters derived from
electrocardiogram (ECG) recordings. The dataset has also been
used in data mining applications in [11] and [12]. Note that
ECG data have been shown to be important in the applications
of machine learning methods for the detection of diseases and
timely medical intervention [13], [14].
The blood biochemistry attributes used in this study and
available in the DiScRi dataset are listed in Tables I and II
according to their grouping as oxidative stress associated attributes and cholesterol blood biochemistry attributes. The collection and analysis of data in the project has been approved
by the Ethics in Human Research Committee of the university. The participants were instructed not to smoke and refrain
from consuming caffeine containing drinks and alcohol for 24 h
preceding the tests as well as to fast from midnight of the previous day until tests were completed. The measurements were
conducted from 9:00 AM until 12 midday and were recorded
in the DiScRi database along with various other clinical data.
Reported incidents of a heart attack, atrial fibrillation and palpitations were also recorded. The most important set of attributes
recorded for CAN determination is the Ewing battery [2], [3],
[15]. There are five Ewing tests in the battery: changes in heart
rate dealing with lying to standing, deep breathing, and valsalva
manoeuvre and changes in blood pressure associated with hand

409

TABLE I
OXIDATIVE STRESS ASSOCIATED MARKERS
Notation

Attribute

8OHdG
Atherogenic index
C5a
CRP
D-DIMER
GFR
GSH
HbA1c (%)
Hcy(mmol/L)
metHb%
IL-6
Screening glucose

Endothelial dysfunction marker
The log relationship between triglycerides and HDL in the blood
Indicates clotting of material in blood vessel
C reactive protein—biomarker for inflammation associated with
heart disease
Indicates unclotting of material in blood vessel
Estimated glomerular filtration rate indicating kidney
dysfunction
Glutathione is an antioxidant in the body, it fights free radicals
that damage blood vessels and nerves
Indicates blood sugar level control over time
Homocyteine—damage to blood vessel lining also associated
with atherosclerosis
It is an antioxidant
Inflammatory marker (interleukin 6)
Level of glucose in the blood

TABLE II
CHOLESTEROL BLOOD BIOCHEMISTRY MARKERS
Notation
HDL(mmol/L)
LDL(mmol/L)
MDA

TC(mmol/L)
TC/HDL ratio
Triglyceride(mmol/L)

Attribute
High-density lipoprotein
Low-density lipoprotein
Malondealdehyde—indicates
change in cholesterol and possible
atherosclerosis
Total cholesterol
Ratio of total cholesterol to
high-density lipoprotein
Level of triglyceride in the blood

TABLE III
FIVE TESTS OF THE EWING BATTERY IN THE DISCRI DATABASE
Notation
LSHR
DBHR
VAHR
HGBP
LSBP

Attribute
Lying to standing heart rate change
Deep breathing heart rate change
Valsalva manoeuvre heart rate change
Hand grip blood pressure change
Lying to standing blood pressure change

grip and lying to standing listed in Table III. Here, we deal with
the original classification of CAN progression with five classes
introduced in [2]and [3]: normal, early, definite, severe, and
atypical.
Performing all five Ewing tests takes time and is not always
possible for all patients. For instance, the hand grip test may
not be performed due to arthritis. The lying to standing tests
often cannot be performed due to mobility challenges and some
patients have conditions where forceful breathing required in
the valsalva manoeuvre is contra-indicated. Further, clinicians
sometimes have an idiosyncratic preference for one test or sequence of tests over another, [16]. Although the time to perform
all five tests, at around 20–30 min, is not long, this is sometimes
difficult to achieve in the context of a busy practice. These issues
result in CAN risk assessments being made in practice on the
basis of only a subset of Ewing tests.

410

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

collection of their base classifiers automatically given just one
instance of a base classifier. Likewise, all middle-tier ensembles
can be generated automatically by the top-tier ensemble given
only one instance of a middle-tier ensemble. Top-tier ensemble
generates its middle-tier classifiers and executes these in exactly
the same way as base classifiers. Similarly, each middle-tier ensemble applies its method to combine its base classifier. Our
experiments show that AIME are effective if diverse ensembles
are combined at different tiers of the AIME.
III. EXPERIMENTS
Fig. 1.

Multitier ensemble classifiers.

For discussion of the outcomes of our experiments we use
notation for the DiScRi attributes listed in Tables I, II, and
III. The same notation is used in the original DiScRi database.
Several expert editing rules were used to reduce the number of
missing values in the database. These rules were determined
during discussions with the experts maintaining the database.
When it is difficult for a patient to pass one of the standard Ewing
battery tests, it may be possible to use blood biochemistry tests
to increase the combined predictive accuracy of classification.
Determination of appropriate tests to be used for this has already
been considered in the literature [17]. This paper investigates
the use of blood biochemistry attributes to increase the accuracy,
given that some tests may not be able to be performed at all.
B. Automated Iterative Multitier Ensembles
In this section, we introduce the proposed AIME classifiers.
The AIME classifiers automate the process of generating a large
multilevel ensemble system and make it easy to combine diverse
ensemble methods into one scheme. Many different multitier
procedures using base classifiers (not ensembles) on several
levels were explored previously, for example, in [18]. Effective
ensemble techniques have been developed for various medical
applications, for example, in [19]. However, the iterative method
of automatic generation and training employed by the AIME
has not been considered in the literature before. AIME can be
implemented in the Weka SimpleCLI command line even though
they can be very large.
Large automatically generated AIME are illustrated in Fig. 1.
The directions of arrows in the diagram indicate the flow of
data. As illustrated in Fig. 1. Although AIME belong to the general hierarchical multilevel and multistage approach [18], [19],
AIME are a new construction in this framework, since it includes
two different ensemble techniques on two tiers and uses them
iteratively to generate the whole classification system automatically. This can enable practitioners to test many options before
choosing the most appropriate one. Also, AIME classifiers can
include two different ensemble techniques on two levels, thereby
combining the strengths of their methods. Moreover, the whole
system may involve a large number of base classifiers, since
various middle-tier ensemble classifiers can generate the whole

In the experiments, we evaluated the performance of base
classifiers, standard ensemble classifiers, and AIME for the
Ewing battery and blood biochemistry features of the DiScRi
dataset. We tested many preliminary base classifiers available
in Weka [20] and have chosen a representative sample for a series of complete tests with outcomes presented in this paper. We
chose these base classifiers, because they performed well for the
DiScRi dataset during our initial testing and represent several
essential categories of classifiers. The base classifiers selected
for thorough tests in this paper are decision table [21], J48 [22],
LibSVM [23], NBTree [24], NNge [25], random forest [26],
and SMO [27]. We also used random forest attribute selection
based on the mean decrease of the Gini index implemented in
Rattle [28], [29]. Similarly, we tested many ensemble classifiers and chose a number that performed better for our dataset,
and carried out a complete series of tests. Thus, we have investigated the performance of the following standard ensemble
classifiers: bagging [30], boosting [31], dagging [32], decorate
[33], grading [34], multiboost [35], [36], and stacking [37].
We used standard ten-trial tenfold cross validation to assess
the performance of various base classifiers, standard ensemble
classifiers, and AIME. First, we tested the performance of decision table, LibSVM, NBTree, NNge, random forest, and SMO
for all subsets of the Ewing battery, which is the set of the most
important attributes. All of these base classifiers are available
in Weka. The performance of LibSVM and SMO depend on its
kernel. We used these with the polynomial kernel that performed
better for our dataset. We used accuracy as the main measure
of performance essential for guiding the clinicians and broadly
used in clinical practice. The accuracy is defined for the whole
classifier as the percentage of all patients classified correctly.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results of our experiments demonstrate that random forest
consistently outperforms all other classifiers for all of subsets
of the Ewing attributes. To illustrate these results, we include
Fig. 2 for all base classifiers tested on the best subset of four
Ewing attributes combined with blood biochemistry attributes.
More details for random forest are given in Fig. 3 representing tests of random forest for all subsets of one Ewing attribute
combined with blood biochemistry attributes. Fig. 4 summarizes the tests of random forest for all subsets of four Ewing
tests combined with blood biochemistry attributes. Note that,
we obtained complete outcomes for other base classifiers similar

ABAWAJY et al.: ENHANCING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY OF CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY USING BLOOD BIOCHEMISTRY

411

Fig. 4. Accuracy of random forest for blood biochemistry attributes combined
with sets of four Ewing tests.
Fig. 2. Accuracy of base classifiers for blood biochemistry attributes combined with four Ewing tests DBHR, LSHR, VAHR, LSBP.

to Figs. 3–5, but we do not include these additional details, since
Fig. 2 is sufficient to demonstrate the main conclusions.
Fig. 5 contains tests of random forest for the subset of all
heart rate Ewing tests and the subset of all blood pressure Ewing attributes combined with blood biochemistry attributes. We
used Wilcoxon signed-rank test to provide statistical assessment of the effectiveness of blood biochemistry attributes in
their ability to enhance the accuracy of classifications of CAN.
The test was used to compare the accuracies of classifications
obtained by the base classifiers listed previously for various subsets of the Ewing attributes and the accuracy of classifications
obtained by the base classifiers after adding a particular blood
biochemistry attribute to the subset. At 95% significance level,
we found that 8OHdG, C5a, Hcy, MDA, Atherogenic index,
CRP, GFR, Screening glucose, and IL-6 produced improvement; D-DIMER, GSH, HbA1c, metHb, TC, and Triglyceride
were shown not to be associated to the class variable, and there
were insufficient data to establish significance of the other features at this level.
A. Performance of Random Forest

Fig. 3. Accuracy of random forest for blood biochemistry attributes combined
with Ewing tests.

In this experiment, we used random forest attribute selection
based on the mean decrease of the Gini index. It produced an
attribute ranking as presented in Fig. 6. We tested the performance of random forest for all sets beginning with the most
significant attribute and adding more attributes in the order of
their significance while the accuracy continued to increase as
shown in Fig. 7.
This demonstrated that the best subset of Ewing tests combined with blood biochemistry attributes consists of DBHR,
VAHR, screening glucose, LSHR, HGBP, atherogenic index,

412

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 7.

Accuracy of random forest for subsets of the most significant attributes.

Fig. 5. Accuracy for random forest for blood biochemistry attributes combined
with heart rate Ewing attributes and blood pressure Ewing tests.

Fig. 8. Accuracy of base classifiers for the best subset of Ewing tests and
blood biochemistry attributes.

Fig. 6. Random forest attribute ranking for Ewing battery and blood biochemistry attributes.

MDA, GFR, HDL. We tested all base classifiers for this set. The
results of these experiments are given in Fig. 8. Many patients,
especially those with diabetes, are on hypolipidemic treatment.
In DiScRi database the atherogenic index and HDL were measured for all patients. The results indicate that despite medication use of some of the participants, the atherogenic index
remains an important marker. This is also substantiated since
the experiments have shown that HDL is important, whereas it
is well known that HDL forms a part of the equation defining
atherogenic index.
Although malondealdehyde MDA is not measured on routine
basis in current clinical practice, it was measured for all patients
in DiScRi database. The results of our experiments show that
this marker is useful for the assessment of CAN. It is a marker
of lipid beta-oxidation and it may make sense to include it in
the future risk assessment. The outcomes show that random
forest remains the best classifier for this set of attributes. Thus,
in all our tests random forest has consistently performed as the
very best base classifier for all sets of attributes of the DiScRi
database.

ABAWAJY et al.: ENHANCING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY OF CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY USING BLOOD BIOCHEMISTRY

413

the second tier after applications of decorate based on random
forest in the first tier. In the second option, decorate was used
in the second tier to combine the results of bagging applied to
random forest as a base classifier. The very best predictive accuracy of 99.57% has been obtained by the AIME combining
decorate on top tier with bagging on middle tier based on the
random forest.
V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 9. Accuracy of ensemble classifiers for the best subset of Ewing tests and
blood biochemistry attributes.

Fig. 10. Accuracy of AIME for the best subset of Ewing tests and blood
biochemistry attributes.

B. Standard Ensemble Classifiers
In this experiment, we used the SimpleCLI in Weka to
investigate the performance of standard ensemble classifiers
in their ability to achieve further improvement to performance. We tested the following ensemble classifiers: adaboost,
bagging, dagging, decorate, grading, multiboost, and stacking. The tests have shown that the outcomes remained better
when random forest was used as a base classifier for these
ensemble classifiers. We conducted complete set of evaluations for ensemble classifiers based on random forest and
included them in Fig. 9. Adaboost, bagging, decorate, and
multiboost performed better than other standard ensemble
classifiers.
C. Performance of Multitier Ensemble Classifiers
For the four ensemble classifiers that performed well in
the previous step, we investigated all their multitier combinations. The experimental results comparing the performance of multitier ensemble classifiers are presented in
Fig. 10.
These results show that several multitier combinations of ensemble classifiers made additional improvements and produced
very good outcomes. The very best result was obtained by two
options combining bagging and decorate into one multitier ensemble classifier. The best accuracies have been achieved by the
bagging and decorate. In the first option, bagging was used in

In this paper, we presented an approach based on blood
biochemistry and iterative multitier ensembles for enhancing
accuracy of CAN. The AIME automatically generate large classification systems, where diverse ensemble techniques are incorporated and integrated. They have not been considered in
the literature before. The automatic generation facility makes it
easy to set up and execute these, even though they can be very
large. Our work has shown that such large multitier classifiers
are quite easy to use and can be applied to improve classifications, if diverse ensembles are combined at different tiers. The
best outcomes were obtained by the new AIME incorporating
bagging and decorate. Our experiments demonstrate that several blood biochemistry attributes can be used to supplement
the Ewing battery and improve the predictive accuracy for the
detection of CAN in situations where one or more of the Ewing
tests cannot be completed because of the individual difficulties
faced by each patient in performing the tests. The most significant blood biochemistry attributes for the diagnosis of CAN
progression are screening glucose, atherogenic index, MDA,
GSH, and HDL. For blood biochemistry attributes of the DiScRi
dataset random forest consistently performed better than other
base classifiers. Random forest significantly outperformed other
base classifiers for the DiScRi dataset, and decorate improved
its outcomes more than other ensemble classifiers did. Feature
selection based on the ranking obtained by the random forest
achieved further improvement and was used to find a good set
of blood biochemistry attributes to be used when some Ewing
tests are missing.
We evaluated the performance of base classifiers, standard
ensemble classifiers, and AIME for the Ewing battery and
blood biochemistry features of the DiScRi dataset. New construction of integrated multitier AIME performed better than
the base classifiers and standard ensemble classifiers for the
blood biochemistry features of the DiScRi dataset when it combined diverse ensembles in different tiers. The best outcomes for
blood biochemistry attributes of the DiScRi database have been
obtained by the AIME combining bagging and decorate. These
methods can be recommended for the monitoring of CAN progression in situations where the energy and memory used are
not an issue. When it is very important to conserve the energy
and use less memory, as it is the case, for example, in mobile
applications, then random forest can be recommended, since
it has also produced excellent outcomes. Using random forest
attribute selection and AIME has made it possible to achieve a
serious improvement in performance compared with outcomes
obtained in previous publications using only basic decision trees
for classification.

414

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank M. Omer, H. Al-Aubaidy,
and the two anonymous reviewers.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Eleni, C. V. Georga, D. A. Protopappas, M. Michela, Z. Ivana, and
P. Demosthenes, “Multivariate prediction of subcutaneous glucose concentration in type 1 diabetes patients based on support vector regression,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 71–81,
Jan. 2013.
[2] D. J. Ewing, J. W. Campbell, and B. F. Clarke, “The natural history of
diabetic autonomic neuropathy,” Quart. J. Med., vol. 49, pp. 95–100,
1980.
[3] D. J. Ewing, C. N. Martyn, R. J. Young, and B. F. Clarke, “The value of
cardiovascular autonomic function tests: 10 years experience in diabetes,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 8, pp. 491–498, 1985.
[4] A. H. Khandoker, H. F. Jelinek, and M. Palaniswami, “Identifying diabetic patients with cardiac autonomic neuropathy by heart rate complexity
analysis,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 8, pp. 1–12, 2009.
[5] A. Stranieri, J. Abawajy, A. Kelarev, S. Huda, M. Chowdhury, and
H. F. Jelinek, “An approach for Ewing test selection to support the clinical
assessment of cardiac autonomic neuropathy,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 58,
pp. 185–193, 2013.
[6] B. H. Cho, H. Yu, K.-W. Kim, T. H. Kim, I. Y. Kim, and S. I. Kim, “Application of irregular and unbalanced data to predict diabetic nephropathy
using visualization and feature selection methods,” Artif. Intell. Med.,
vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 37–53, 2008.
[7] A. C. R. Simon, F. Holleman, W. T. Gude, J. B. L. Hoekstra, L. W. Peute,
M. W. M. Jaspers, and N. Peek, “Safety and usability evaluation of a
web-based insulin self-titration system for patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 59, pp. 23–31, 2013.
[8] C. L. Chi, N. K. Street, and C. Katz, “A decision support system
for cost-effective diagnosis,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 50, pp. 149–161,
2010.
[9] C. Marinagi, C. Spyropoulos, C. Papatheodorou, and S. Kokkotos,
“Continual planning and scheduling for managing patient tests in hospital laboratories,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 139–154,
2000.
[10] H. F. Jelinek, D. J. Cornforth, and K. Blackmore, “Visualisation in
biomedicine as a means of data evaluation,” J. Vis., vol. 14, pp. 353–359,
2011.
[11] H. F. Jelinek, C. Wilding, and P. Tinley, “An innovative multi-disciplinary
diabetes complications screening programme in a rural community: A description and preliminary results of the screening,” Australian J. Primary
Health, vol. 12, pp. 14–20, 2006.
[12] H. F. Jelinek, A. Khandoker, M. Palaniswami, and S. McDonald, “Heart
rate variability and QT dispersion in a cohort of diabetes patients,” Comput.
Cardiol., vol. 37, pp. 613–616, 2010.
[13] J. H. Abawajy, A. V. Kelarev, and M. Chowdhury, “Multistage approach
for clustering and classification of ECG data,” Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed., vol. 112, pp. 720–730, 2013.
[14] F. Marzbanrad, Y. Kimura, K. Funamoto, R. Sugibayashi, M. Endo,
I. Ito, M. Palaniswami, and A. Khandoker, “Automated estimation of
fetal cardiac timing events from doppler ultrasound signal using hybrid
models,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1169–1177,
Jul. 2014.
[15] D. J. Ewing and B. F. Clarke, “Diagnosis and management of diabetic autonomic neuropathy,” Brit. Med. J., vol. 285, pp. 916–918,
1982.
[16] D. Ewing, J. Campbell, A. Murray, J. Neilson, and B. Clarke, “Immediate
heart-rate response to standing: Simple test for autonomic neuropathy in
diabetes,” Brit. Med. J., vol. 1, pp. 145–147, 1978.
[17] O. May and H. Arildsen, “Assessing cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy
in diabetes mellitis: How many tests to use?” J. Diabetes Complications,
vol. 14, pp. 7–12, 2000.
[18] R. Islam and J. Abawajy, “A multi-tier phishing detection and filtering
approach,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 36, pp. 324–335, 2013.
[19] Y.-H. Lee, P. J.-H. Hu, T.-H. Cheng, T.-C. Huang, and W.-Y. Chuang, “A
preclustering-based ensemble learning technique for acute appendicitis
diagnoses,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 58, pp. 115–124, 2013.
[20] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and
I. H. Witten, “The WEKA data mining software: An update,” SIGKDD
Explorations, vol. 11, pp. 10–18, 2009.

[21] R. Kohavi, “The power of decision tables,” in Proc. 8th Eur. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 1995, pp. 174–189.
[22] R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. San Mateo, CA, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
[23] R.-E. Fan, P.-H. Chen, and C.-J. Lin, “Working set selection using second order information for training SVM,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6,
pp. 1889–1918, 2005.
[24] R. Kohavi, “Scaling up the accuracy of Naive-Bayes classifiers: A
Decision-Tree hybrid,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, 1996, pp. 202–207.
[25] I. Witten and E. Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools
and Techniques. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier/Morgan Kaufman,
2011.
[26] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001.
[27] S. Keerthi, S. Shevade, C. Bhattacharyya, and K. Murthy, “Improvements
to Platt’s SMO algorithm for SVM classifier design,” Neural Comput.,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 637–649, 2001.
[28] G. Williams, “Rattle: A data mining GUI for R,” R J., vol. 1, pp. 45–55,
2009.
[29] G. Williams, Data Mining with Rattle and R: The Art of Excavating Data
for Knowledge Discovery (Use R!). New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2011.
[30] L. Breiman, “Bagging predictors,” Mach. Learn., vol. 24, pp. 123–140,
1996.
[31] Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire, “Experiments with a new boosting algorithm,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 1996, pp. 148–156.
[32] K. M. Ting and I. H. Witten, “Stacking bagged and dagged models,” in
Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 1997, pp. 367–375.
[33] P. Melville and R. J. Mooney, “Creating diversity in ensembles using
artificial data,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 6, pp. 99–111, 2005.
[34] A. K. Seewald and J. Fuernkranz, “An evaluation of grading classifiers,” in Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 2189. Berlin, Germany: Springer, pp. 115–124,
2001.
[35] E. Bauer and R. Kohavi, “An empirical comparison of voting classification algorithms: Bagging, boosting, and variants,” Mach. Learn., vol. 36,
pp. 105–139, 1999.
[36] G. I. Webb, “MultiBoosting: A technique for combining boosting and
wagging,” Mach. Learn., vol. 40, pp. 159–196, 2000.
[37] D. H. Wolpert, “Stacked generalization,” Neural Netw., vol. 5,
pp. 241–259, 1992.

Jemal H. Abawajy (SM’11) received the Ph.D degree in electrical engineering from Fraunhofer Institute for Laser Technology. He is currently a full
Professor and the Director of the Parallel and Distributing Computing Lab, Deakin University, Burwood, Australia. He was a member of the organizing
committees for more than 300 international conferences serving in various capacities including chair
and general cochair. He has published more than
300 refereed articles, supervised numerous Ph.D. students to completion and is on the editorial boards of
many journals.

Andrei Kelarev received the Ph.D. degree from Ural
State University, Russia in 1989. He worked as an Associate Professor in the University of Wisconsin and
University of Nebraska in the USA and as a Senior
Lecturer in the University of Tasmania in Australia.
He was a Chief Investigator of a large Discovery grant
from Australian Research Council and was a member
of the program committees of several conferences.
He is working for a research grant at the Parallel and
Distributed Computing Lab, Deakin University, Burwood, Australia. He is an author of two books and
203 journal articles, and an editor of five international journals.

ABAWAJY et al.: ENHANCING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY OF CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY USING BLOOD BIOCHEMISTRY

Morshed U. Chowdhury received his Ph.D. degree in Computing from Monash
University, Australia in 1999. He is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Burwood, Australia. He has more than 12
years of industry experiences and has published more than one hundred research
papers. He has organized a number of international conferences and served as a
member of program committees of several international conferences.

415

Herbert Jelinek received the Ph.D. degree in Neuroscience from the University of Sydney. He is an Associate Professor at Charles Sturt University (CSU), a
honorary Clinical Associate Professor with the Australian School of Advanced Medicine, Macquarie
University, Sydney, Australia, and a member of the
Centre for Research in Complex Systems at CSU.
He has been organizing a rural diabetes complications screening research project for over ten years
in Australia and has published widely in ECG signal
processing and diabetic retinopathy image analysis as
well as data mining applications of biomarkers associated with diabetes disease
progression.

