IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1231

A Microwave Imaging-Based Technique to Localize
an In-Body RF Source for Biomedical Applications
Rohit Chandra∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Anders J Johansson, Member, IEEE, Mats Gustafsson, Member, IEEE,
and Fredrik Tufvesson, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In some biomedical applications such as wireless capsule endoscopy, the localization of an in-body radio-frequency (RF)
source is important for the positioning of any abnormality inside
the gastrointestinal tract. With knowledge of the location, therapeutic operations can be performed precisely at the position of
the abnormality. Electrical properties (relative permittivity and
conductivity) of the tissues and their distribution are utilized to
estimate the position. This paper presents a method for the localization of an in-body RF source based on microwave imaging.
The electrical properties of the tissues and their distribution at
403.5 MHz are found from microwave imaging and the position of
an RF source is then estimated based on the image. The method
is applied on synthetic noisy data, obtained after the addition of
white Gaussian noise to simulated data of a simple circular phantom, and a realistic phantom in a 2-D case. The root-mean-square
of the error distance between the actual and the estimated position
is found to be within 10 and 4 mm for the circular and the realistic
phantom, respectively, showing the capability of the proposed algorithm to work with a good accuracy even in the presence of noise
for the localization of the in-body RF source.
Index Terms—Body area network (BAN), calibration, capsule
endoscopy, localization, microwave imaging.

I. INTRODUCTION
ODAY there is an increased use of wireless technology
for medical diagnosis that is supported by miniaturization of the application specific integrated circuits (ASICs). The
technology has led to improved diagnostic tools especially for
inspecting diseases inside the human body. Wireless capsule
endoscopy (WCE) is an example of such a medical diagnostic tool, which has evolved from the wireless technology and
miniaturization of the ASICs.
Endoscopy is a medical procedure used to examine and inspect the interior of the body, e.g., diagnosing gastrointestinal
(GI) tract diseases. In the conventional endoscopy, a long flexible fiber tube is inserted through the mouth or the rectum to
transmit light to illuminate the organ under inspection to view it
through a lens system. However, this procedure may cause pain
and discomfort due to relatively large diameter of the fiber tube.

T

Manuscript received February 1, 2014; accepted October 24, 2014. Date
of publication October 24, 2014; date of current version April 17, 2015. This
work was supported by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ R. Chandra is with the Department of Electronics and Telecommunication,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway
(e-mail: rohit.chandra@ntnu.no).
A. J Johansson, M. Gustafsson, and F. Tufvesson are with the Department
of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Lund 221 00,
Sweden (e-mail: anders.j.johansson@eit.lth.se; mats.gustafsson@eit.lth.se;
fredrik.tufvesson@eit.lth.se).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2367117

Furthermore, sedation may be required for the entire period of
the endoscopy. Moreover, this method of the endoscopy is incapable of reaching the entire small intestine due to its complex
anatomy [1]. These limitations of the conventional endoscopy
can be overcome by the use of WCE [1], [2]. A wireless capsule
endoscope is a swallowable pill-like wireless device containing
an electronic circuitry with a radio-frequency (RF) transmitter,
light emitting diodes for illumination, and a miniature camera
that captures images while it passes through the GI tract. The
images are sent through the body tissues to external sensor antennas located on the body. The sensor data are stored in an
external device for offline analysis.
Once the images are analyzed and the abnormality or any
disease is detected, therapeutic operations may be performed at
the location of the abnormality, which can be identified from the
location of the captured image. However, due to the complex
tissue environment of the human body in which the capsule is
moving, accurate localization is a challenging task. The methods used for the localization of the capsule are usually based
on measurements of low-frequency magnetic fields or electromagnetic (EM) waves as reviewed in [1]. Both methods have
their advantages and challenges. One of the advantages of the
localization methods based on the low-frequency magnetic field
strength is that the magnetic signal can pass through the body
with low attenuation as the tissues are nonmagnetic. Challenges
include interference from the earth’s magnetic field and the
magnetic field produced by the magnetic material present in
the surrounding. These may require an additional equipment
for analysis of the magnetic signal for the localization. On the
other hand, systems based on EM waves can reuse the EM signal radiated by the capsule without any additional equipment.
However, a tradeoff has to be made in choosing the right frequency of EM signals as high-frequency EM signals, which
have high precision of localization, also have higher attenuation
than the low-frequency EM signals having a low precision of
localization.
One of the frequency bands that can be used for capsule localization is the 403.5-MHz MedRadio band. The reason for
using the 403.5-MHz MedRadio band is that it has relatively
low attenuation of the EM waves through the human tissue.
Further, the maximum radiated power is limited to 25 μW [3].
However, the bandwidth of 5 MHz assigned to the MedRadio
band is not sufficient for resolving the multipath components,
occurring due to reflections from the several layers of the tissues.
Hence, time-based localization methods like time of arrival and
time difference of arrival are hard to use. These methods may
be used with ultrawideband due to the large bandwidth [4]. Additionally, methods based on angle of arrival is also challenging

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1232

due to the presence of multipath components. Hence, methods
that have been used so far in low frequencies are generally based
on the received signal strength (RSS) [5]–[16]. Typically, the
first step in the RSS-based methods is to estimate the distance
of the capsule from the receiver antennas located on the abdomen
[7], [8]. A signal propagation model is used, which relates the
RSS with the distance between the in-body RF source and the
receiver antennas. After these distances are known, trilateration
is employed to calculate the coordinates of the capsule. However, the RSS methods suffer from poor localization accuracy
and need a propagation model that varies from person to person
due to the complex radio wave absorption properties of the human tissue. In [9], instead of using the propagation model, Shah
et al. presented an algorithm based on a look-up table, where
the offline measurements are carried for different positions of
the capsule inside a phantom and stored in the look-up table.
Later on during the experiment, the RSS is compared with the
closest value in the look-up table for the position estimation.
This method is specific to the phantom used, and thus, may not
give good accuracy in a practical human measurement scenario.
In [17], we presented a localization method for WCE based on
the phase difference of the signal received at different frequencies at the same receiver antenna, and a nonlinear least-square
iterative estimation method. Localization error within 1 cm was
obtained for the noise-free simulated data of different homogeneous and heterogeneous phantoms. The method is suitable
for the localization in a case of high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
but is sensitive to noise. As the method is based on the phase
difference at different frequencies, the presence of noise might
affect the phase of the received signal, decreasing the accuracy.
Moreover, another limitation as pointed out in this paper is that it
assumes homogeneous electrical properties of the body in the localization algorithm. For an improved localization, the electrical
properties of tissues are required. Furthermore, the distribution
of tissues varies from person to person, and different organs of
the GI tract have different electrical properties. In general, most
of localization algorithms assume that the electrical properties
of the body are available which, e.g., can be obtained through
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as discussed in [16]. However, MRI is not a cost-effective method and may be costlier
than the WCE. Another method is computed tomography (CT),
which is also costly, and uses X-rays, which are ionizing, and
hence, poses health risk [18].
A cost-efficient solution to image the body is microwave
imaging or tomography. Microwave imaging has low health
risk as nonionizing EM field is used [19]. Microwave imaging
involves solving inverse electromagnetic problems to find the
electrical properties of the object of interest by using the scattered electric field data. Microwave imaging of the biological
bodies is well studied [20]–[25]. An iterative numerical method
for microwave imaging is developed and studied for objects having electrical properties close to that of bone, muscle, and fat in
[20]. In [21], an algorithm for microwave imaging is developed
and implemented on a numerical human thorax and on measurement data of a human arm at 434 MHz. An iterative microwave
imaging algorithm is demonstrated on experimental data of a human arm collected by a 2.33-GHz circular microwave imaging

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

scanner using the 2-D transverse magnetic (TM) polarization.
The feasibility of using microwave tomography for whole body
imaging is shown in [23] by doing measurements on a dog. A
biomedical imaging algorithm is demonstrated on experimental data of a human forearm, and synthetic data of brain and
breast models for the 2-D TM polarization in [24]. A pilot study
to image the human forearms by collecting scattering data at
0.8–1.2 GHz of several person is presented in [25]. These presented research efforts demonstrate the capability of microwave
imaging to estimate the electrical properties of the body.
In this paper, we use microwave imaging to estimate the electrical properties (relative permittivity and conductivity) and the
distribution of the tissues inside a body at 403.5 MHz using external receiver antennas placed close to the body or on-body both
as receivers and transmitters in an alternating manner. Once the
image of the body is obtained in this calibration step, a priori
information about the electrical properties of the body and/or
the body anatomy is used to find all the possible positions for
the in-body RF source and the signal is recorded from these
possible positions by the on-body antennas. After calibration,
the root-mean-square error (RMSE) between these recorded signals and the signal obtained from the in-body RF source from
an unknown location during the measurement is calculated. The
position of the RF source having the minimum RMSE is the
estimated position. The algorithm is applied on synthetic data
obtained from finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) simulations of a simple phantom and an anatomically realistic phantom
where noise has been added to the simulated data.
It should be noted that the objective of using microwave
imaging in the algorithm is not to obtain a detailed image of the
body but to obtain an electromagnetic model of the body that
can be used in the positioning step. The main contributions of
this paper are: 1) development of an algorithm using EM waves
at 403.5 MHz for the localization of an in-body RF source;
2) using cost-effective microwave imaging in the algorithm for
localization and tracking of in-body RF sources as in WCE,
which is demonstrated for the first time (to best of our knowledge); and 3) implementing the algorithm on FDTD simulated
data of heterogeneous phantoms in the presence of white Gaussian noise in 2-D cases with a localization error within 10 mm.
In this paper, we have focused on the in-body localization of
the RF source for WCE, however, it should be noted that there
are other applications where in-body localization of the RF
source might be of interest and the proposed algorithm could be
used. As, for example, in [26], localization of an RF source for
deep brain implants is presented. In [27], a magnetic tracking
system for radiation therapy by using an implanted magnetic
transponder in the tumor is presented. The implanted magnetic
transponder is replaced by an RF source in [28] for tumor localization and tracking in radiation therapy and is shown to be
faster and more accurate than magnetic-based methods.
This paper is organized as following. Section II discusses
the three-step localization algorithm. The formulation of the
microwave imaging problem is reintroduced in Section II-A1.
Section II-A2 discusses the solution to the inverse microwave
imaging problem. The implementation of the algorithm on the
data obtained from the simulation of the numerical phantoms is

CHANDRA et al.: MICROWAVE IMAGING-BASED TECHNIQUE TO LOCALIZE AN IN-BODY RF SOURCE FOR BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS

described in Section III. The localization results are presented
in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM
The localization algorithm is a three-step process consisting
of: microwave imaging; calculation of the electric field from
possible locations inside the imaged body; and measurement
and localization. These are described as follows.
A. Microwave Imaging
In the first step, which can be seen as a calibration step, the
body is imaged using a microwave imaging technique, which is
discussed in the subsequent sections. The purpose of microwave
imaging is to find an electromagnetic model of the internal body,
which gives an estimate of how different tissues with different
electrical properties are distributed.
1) Formulation of Microwave Imaging: In this section, a microwave imaging technique based on the Levenberg–Marquardt
method developed in [29] is outlined for completeness. The
algorithm belongs to iterative Newton-type algorithms, where
the cost function is iteratively approximated with a quadratic
form at the contrast (that depends on the electrical properties
of the body) obtained from the previous iteration step. Many
other imaging algorithms also belonging to Newton-type are
equivalent if similar regularization techniques are utilized [30].
Being a Newton-type algorithm, Levenberg–Marquardt method
has an advantage in terms of lower number of iterations required for convergence [30] and is shown to work effectively
for imaging biomedical bodies, where the contrast is high [29].
However, other non-Newton-type like algorithms like contrast
source inversion [24] can also be used.
Let us consider a case where there are M antennas placed
around an inhomogeneous body that is to be imaged. The complete system (antennas and the body to be imaged) is inside a
homogeneous medium, which acts as a matching medium to
reduce the reflections and also as an absorber by reducing the
on-body creeping waves. Each antenna transmits signal one at
a time and the electric field is recorded by the other M − 1 antennas. Let r = (x, y) denote the coordinates of a spatial point
in a 2-D plane. For the coordinates r of any spatial point in the
imaging domain, a contrast function is defined as
s(r ) = ω 2 μ0 ε(r ) − ω 2 μ0 εext

(1)

which is the difference between the squared wavenumber at
a spatial point r and the exterior medium. In (1), εext is the
complex permittivity of the external medium and ε(r ) is the
complex permittivity at r given by


σe (r )
ε(r ) = ε0 εr (r ) − j
(2)
ωε0




where εr (r ) is the relative permittivity, σe (r ) is the conductivity at position r , ε0 is the permittivity of free space, and ω is
the angular frequency.
In the following description, index t = 1, 2, 3, ..., M represents a snapshot when the tth antenna is transmitting and others
are receiving. The number of receiver antennas per snapshot is

1233

M − 1. The total electric field et in the imaging domain satisfies
the following integral equation [29]:

i
s(r )et (r )G(r, r )dr
(3)
et (r) = et (r) +
b o dy

where G is the 2-D Green’s function for the TM polarization
(2)
given by G(r, r ) = (−j/4)H0 (kext |r − r |) and eit is the inci(2)
dent field. H0 is the Hankel function of zeroth order and second
kind and kext is the wavenumber in the exterior medium. The
= et − eit on the receiver antennas with
scattered field escatt
t
position coordinates rrx n with n = 1, 2, ..., M − 1 is given by

escatt
(r
)
=
s(r )et (r )G(rrx n , r )dr .
(4)
rx n
t
b o dy

Equations (3) and (4) define a forward scattering problem when
the contrast s of the body and the incident field eit are known
quantities. The inverse scattering problem consists of solving
the unknown contrast s for a set of scattered field measurement,
which is a complex problem as it involves solving nonlinear
and ill-posed equations. For practical purposes, the area under
investigation is discretized into N cells, where the contrast is
assumed to be constant within the cell. In matrix notation, the
discretized form of (3) is written as [29]
[I − Gr S]et = eit

(5)

and for the scattered field (4) on the receiver antenna locations
= Gscatt
Et s
escatt
t
t

(6)

where s = [s1 , ...sN ]T is a vector containing the contrast of
N cells, et = [et,1 , ..., et,N ]T is the vector of unknown total field in the N cells when the tth transmit antenna is
active, eit = [eit,1 , ..., eit,N ]T is the vector of incident field
=
on N cells for the tth transmit antenna, and escatt
t
(rrx 1 ), ..., escatt
(rrx M −1 )]T is the receive field vector at
[escatt
t
t
the M − 1 receiver antennas for the tth transmit antenna. [.]T denotes the transpose operation, Gr is N × N integrated Green’s
is (M − 1) × N integrated Green’s funcfunctions, and Gscatt
t
tions. Integration of the Green’s function is performed over a
disk instead of a square as the analytical expression for the disk
is available [31]. S and Et are diagonal matrices with [S]j j = sj
and [Et ]j j = eit,j for j = 1 to N . As the electric field is used in
the algorithm, in the rest of this paper, field refers to the electric
field.
2) Solution to the Inverse Problem: With the measured scattered field available, an estimate of the contrast ŝ for all the cells
can be found by minimizing the error between the measured
scattered field and the scattered field obtained from (6). In the
least-square sense it is
ŝ = min||F(s) − escatt ||2
s

(7)

where F(s) is a complex valued nonlinear vector function of
the scattered field for contrast s and escatt is a vector formed
by combining the measured vectors of the scattered field from
all the transmit antennas. The error is minimized iteratively
by finding the contrast for the next iteration from the current

1234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

iteration k as discussed in the following.
∗

∗

D DΔsk = D

Δescatt
k

(8)

where [.]∗ denote conjugate transpose. D is the M (M − 1) × N
derivative matrix of F(s) with respect to s and is formed by
gathering the Dt for each of the transmit antenna, where Dt is
given by
Dt = Gscatt
[I − SGr ]−1 Et .
t

(9)

Moreover, Δsk = sk +1 − sk and
=
− F(s)k ,
where Δsk is used to denote the step length.
Equation (8) is ill posed due to the large condition number
of the matrix D∗ D, which needs to be inverted in order to find
Δsk . Hence, the problem is regularized using the Tikhonov
regularization as [29]
Δescatt
k

escatt
k

[D∗ D + gk I]Δsk = D∗ Δescatt
.
k

(10)

The regularization enhances the convergence as the step length
Δsk shortens with an increase in gk . Further, it controls the
condition number of D∗ D. The weight gk is chosen empirically
as [29]
gk = αk

trace[D∗ D] ||F(s)k − escatt
||2
k
2
N
||escatt
||
k

(11)

where the initial value of the weight αk is empirically chosen.
αk is updated at each iteration depending upon the normalized
||2 /||escatt
||2 as [29]
field error Ek = ||F(s)k − escatt
k
k
αk +1 = αk if Ek − Ek −1 < −0.1 Ek
αk +1 = αk /2 if − 0.1 Ek ≤ Ek − Ek −1 ≤ 0.1 Ek
αk +1 = 2αk if Ek − Ek −1 > 0.1 Ek .

(12)

The initial value of αk influences the convergence. Further, at
each step, the contrast is checked such that εr m i n ≤ εr (r ) ≤
εr m a x and σe m i n ≤ σe (r ) ≤ σe m a x , where εr m i n and εr m a x are
the minimum and the maximum values of the relative permittivity of the tissues at the used frequency, respectively. Similarly,
σe m i n and σe m a x are the minimum and the maximum values of
the conductivity of the tissues. These values are known for the
tissues of the body and used as a priori information. If the relative permittivity or the conductivity of any spatial position r
goes outside these bounds, they are overwritten with the maximum value if they are greater than the maximum value, or with
the minimum value if they are below the minimum values. The
iteration is stopped either if the minimum acceptable error is
achieved or the difference between the errors of two iterations
is below a threshold.
B. Calculation of Field From Possible Locations Inside the
Imaged Body
Once the image of the body is obtained, in the second step,
two types of a priori information can be used to find the possible positions of an RF source depending upon the quality of
the image. The first a priori information is the electrical properties of the tissues. For example, in the capsule endoscopy case,
the capsule can only be in the GI tract (small intestine, large

intestine, etc.) whose electrical properties are different from
that of fat, bone, or any other tissues. This a priori information can be used if the tissues are clearly distinguishable in the
image. However, usually the presence of noise and low difference between the electrical properties of the certain tissues can
make it difficult to distinguish them in the image. In such cases,
a priori information from the basic human anatomy can be used.
As, for example, according to basic human anatomy only the
front portion of the abdomen is occupied by the small intestine. At certain parts of the human body, a large proportion is
occupied by the muscle tissue and it might become difficult to
distinguish between the muscle and the small intestine lumen
having almost identical electrical properties. In such cases, the
information from the basic human anatomy can be used to find
the possible location of the small intestine in the image. Once
these locations are identified in the image, a virtual RF source
is placed at all the possible cell positions in the image and
the received signal is calculated at the external on-body receiver
antennas. The a priori information is used to reduce the computational complexity of the algorithm. The placement of the
virtual RF source could be done at all the cell positions but at
a cost of increased computational complexity. The placement
of the virtual RF source is done at the center of P cells, where
P ≤ N is the number of cells calculated from the a priori information.

C. Measurement and Localization
In the third step, using the same setup as in the imaging
step, the field is recorded by the external M antennas when
the in-body RF source is located at an unknown location inside
the actual body. The root-mean-square-error Ẽj between these
received field values and the field received by the M antennas
when the virtual RF source is at the P cells is calculated as


M
 1 
||Ri a c t u a l − R(j,i) i m a g e d ||2
Ẽj = 
M i=1

(13)

where j = 1 to P , Ri a c t u a l is the received field at the ith receive
antenna from the unknown location of the RF source inside
the actual body, and R(j,i) i m a g e d is the received field at the
ith receiver antenna when the virtual RF source is placed at
the jth cell in the imaged body as discussed in Section II-B.
The estimated position is the center of the nth cell such that
Ẽn ∈[1,P ] = min(Ẽj |j =1 to P ). Note that it is not just the field
amplitude, which is compared but also the phase, as Ri a c t u a l
and R(j,i) i m a g e d are complex field values.
The internal organs may change the shape with time or the
sensor position might get displaced over the time. Hence, the
imaging step has to be repeated every time before a new position
estimate is made. This reduces a possible error in the location
of the capsule due to the change in the shape of the intestine
or movement of the sensors over the time as the estimate in the
position would be made with respect to the changed positions
of the sensors and/or the internal organs.

CHANDRA et al.: MICROWAVE IMAGING-BASED TECHNIQUE TO LOCALIZE AN IN-BODY RF SOURCE FOR BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Fig. 1. Phantoms with electrical properties: (a) circular phantom where different colors illustrate the different tissues with different electrical properties
(b) relative permittivity in the Billie phantom (c) conductivity in the Billie
phantom.

III. ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION
This section presents the numerical phantoms, simulation
setup, and other parts in the implementation of the localization algorithm developed in the previous section. The algorithm
is implemented for a 2-D TM illumination case.
A. Numerical Phantoms
The localization algorithm is tested on synthetic field data
generated by FDTD simulations [33] of a simple heterogeneous
phantom, and a realistic heterogeneous phantom named Billie
of a 11-year old female from the virtual family project [34]. The
applicability of the FDTD method for microwave imaging is
shown in [35], where good agreement between the experimental data and the FDTD model was achieved. The simple phantom
[see Fig. 1(a)] is a circular cylinder placed in the xy-plane with
the electrical properties constant along the z-axis. The radius
of the phantom is 13 cm with two more circular cylinders embedded in the bigger cylinder to make it heterogeneous. The
radius of these small cylinders are 4 cm [shown with brown
color in Fig. 1(a)] and 3 cm [shown with blue color in Fig. 1(a)].
The electrical properties of the 4-cm cylinder are εr = 66 and
σe = 1.8 S/m representing small intestine and the electrical
properties of the 3-cm cylinder is εr = 47, close to that of skin
at 403.5 MHz. The rest of the phantom has electrical properties of the muscle (εr = 57.1 and σe = 0.8 S/m). The electrical properties of the different tissues for Billie are assigned at
403.5 MHz as shown in Fig. 1(b) for εr and in Fig. 1(c) for σe
at the level of the antennas.
B. Simulation Setup
The simulations are done in SEMCAD-X [32], which is based
on the FDTD method. Electrical properties of muscle tissue
are assigned to the external matching medium for the circular
phantom. For Billie, electrical properties of skin are assigned
to the external medium to match with the outermost tissue. In
practical cases, the matching medium can be in the form of a belt

1235

or a vest with sufficient thickness where the external antennas
can be embedded. However, the actual design of such medium is
out of the scope of this paper. For making the imaging problem
close to a 2-D problem, a 1-mm thick slice of the phantom along
the z-axis is considered. The simulation boundary along the
z-axis is terminated with a perfect electrical conductor boundary
condition, whereas along the other axes, it is terminated by an
uniaxial perfectly matched layer with the absorbing boundary
conditions. A sinusoidal signal at 403.5 MHz from a current
source oriented along the z-axis with current amplitude Ic =
1 A is considered as a transmitted signal in the simulations.
Hence, all field levels are relative to 1 A and a realistic current
level would be much lower to satisfy the power level of 25 μW
in the MedRadio band. A 2-D field sensor is considered as a
receiver antenna. The source and the sensor antennas are located
around the body at an equal interval of 5° in a circle for the
circular phantom, and in an ellipse close to the body for Billie.
Hence, the total number of antennas is M = 72. One at a time,
the current source located at one of the sensor positions is active
and the field is recorded by the other 71 sensors. It should
be noted here that illuminating the body to be imaged with
many sources relaxes the nonlinear inverse problem to some
extent as the data set from which the contrast in retrieved is
increased [29]. Hence, the number of antennas is chosen to be
large, and antenna optimization is out of scope of this paper and
is left for future work as we here aim for a proof of concept
only. However, we have done a preliminary investigation in this
regard, which is discussed in Section IV-C.
C. Microwave Imaging
A recorded scattered field by an object is required for microwave imaging. However, any measurement setup can only
record the total field. To get the scattered field, the field values
are recorded in the presence and in the absence of the phantom. The field values recorded in the presence of the phantom
is the total field. The field values recorded in the absence of the
phantom but with the matching medium is the total incident
field. To these field values, white Gaussian noise is added for
making the data more realistic, as following. The noise level is
set so that the mean SNR of all sensors is 20 dB when a source
is located at the center of the phantom. To calculate the noise
power, an additional simulation is done by placing the source at
the center of the phantom and calculating the field at the receiver
sensors. The noise power is then calculated as
	M
1
2
i=1 |Ri |
M
(14)
Ns =
10SNR/10
where Ri is the received field at the ith sensor when the source is
placed at the center of the phantom. The additive white Gaussian
noise is


Ns
(r1 + jr2 )
(15)
n=
2
where r1 and r2 are random numbers with the Gaussian distribution. Two different matrices of the noise of size (M − 1) × M
are created using (15) and added to the simulated total field and
the simulated total incident field to create noisy field values.

1236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 2. Imaged body showing (a) estimated relative permittivity of the circular
phantom, and (b) estimated conductivity (in S/m) of the circular phantom,
(c) estimated relative permittivity of Billie, and (d) the estimated conductivity
(in S/m) of Billie. The image has been obtained with SNR = 20 dB level of
noise.

The scattered field is calculated by subtracting the noisy total
incident field from the noisy total field as
total
i
escatt
m ,n |noisy = em ,n |noisy − em ,n |noisy

(16)

where m = 1 to M − 1 = 71, n = 1 to M = 72, etotal is
the total field calculated in the presence of the phantom, and
ei is the total incident field calculated in the absence of the
phantom. Using these noisy scattered field values escatt
m ,n |noisy ,
the measured scattered vector escatt used in (7) is formed.
For the imaging problem, the circular phantom is discretized
in N = 349 cells and Billie in N = 1091 cells. The initial values
of the relative permittivity and the conductivity for all the cells
are taken as that of the matching medium (εr = 57.1 and σe =
0.8 S/m for circular phantom and εr = 46.7 and σe = 0.7 S/m
for Billie). The cell size at 403.5 MHz in the exterior medium
is  λext /8 × λext /8 for the circular phantom, and λext /19 ×
λext /19 for Billie. A finer resolution for Billie is chosen due
to several thin tissue layers. Further, the cell size provides a
tradeoff between the convergence time and the resolution of the
image. The objective of the imaging problem is to find εr and
σe for each of the cells such that (7) is satisfied. The incident
field is modeled by a 2-D current line source having the current
amplitude Ic = 1 A (same as that used for the simulations) to
calculate the total field value in N cells as [36]
(ωμ0 Ic ) (2)
H0 (kext |r − rt |)
(17)
4
where r is the coordinates of the center of the cell and rt is
the coordinates of the transmit antennas for t = 1 to 72. The
initial value of αk in (11) is chosen as 100. Convergence for
the circular phantom is achieved in the ninth iteration and for
the Billie in the fourth iteration. The image obtained is shown
in Fig. 2. The values of εr m i n = 47, εr m a x = 66, σe m i n = 0.1,
and σe m a x = 1.8 are used for the circular phantom. For the Billie
eit (r) = −

phantom, εr m i n = 11.6, εr m a x = 71, σe m i n = 0.08, and σe m a x =
1.9 are used. It can be seen that the relative permittivity of the
imaged body is in close agreement with the original phantom.
However, there is an error in the conductivity, which is higher
at the cells having low conductivity. This is explained by the
larger magnitude of the real part than the imaginary part of the
complex permittivity [37], [38]. Hence, during the estimation,
the noise affects the imaginary part (from which σe is extracted)
to a greater extent than the real part (from which εr is extracted)
resulting in higher error in the conductivity than the relative
permittivity. However, as mentioned earlier, the objective is not
to get an enhanced image but to get an approximate estimate of
the electrical properties of the body. Moreover, it is indicated in
Section IV that a good localization accuracy is obtained with the
estimated electrical properties. Hence, no further investigations
were done to improve the conductivity.
Once the image with the approximate electrical properties
of each cells is obtained, a priori information about the tissues and/or human anatomy can be used for placing the virtual
RF source. For example, a priori information about the relative permittivity is used for the simple circular phantom. In
this case, we consider that the RF source can only be located
in the tissues with εr = 66, which is that of the small intestine. Since there will always be some error in the imaged body
for the estimation of the electrical properties, the RF source
should be positioned at all the locations within a permittivity range to provide some margin. We chose this range to be
62 ≤ εr ≤ 66. Doing a search for all cells within this range of
the relative permittivity, it is found that there are P = 61 cells
out of 349 cells within it. The imaged body is reconstructed in
SEMCAD-X with the exterior medium. The source is then
placed at the center of all these 61 cells, one at a time, and
the field values are recorded by the 72 sensors located on the
body. These recorded field values are stored to be compared
with the field values from the RF source at an unknown location. The importance of the a priori information in reducing the
computational complexity can be seen as the scan has to be done
in only 61 cells out of 349 cells. For Billie, the small intestine
has lumen whose electrical properties are close to muscle tissue,
which occupies most of the portion as seen in Fig. 1(b). Thus,
for Billie, the a priori information about the human anatomy,
that the small intestine will be mostly at the front part of the abdomen, is considered. Hence, the virtual RF source is placed in
about 341 cells at the front portion of the body and the received
field values are recorded.
In the circular phantom, the current source is placed at a random position inside the circle with εr = 66 and σe = 1.8 S/m
and the field values by the 72 external sensors are recorded.
In Billie, the current source is placed in the small intestine lumen and the field values are recorded. Noise is added according
to (15) to these field values recorded by the external sensors
to make the field data noisy and more realistic. The RMSE is
calculated between these noisy field values and the field values calculated by the placement of the current source at the 61
cell positions in the reconstructed imaged body for the circular
phantom, and at the 341 cell positions for the imaged Billie,
for all the receiver sensors according to (13). To generate the

CHANDRA et al.: MICROWAVE IMAGING-BASED TECHNIQUE TO LOCALIZE AN IN-BODY RF SOURCE FOR BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS

1237

Fig. 3. Summary of the localization algorithm. N is the total cells in the reconstructed phantom and P is the cells in which the virtual source is placed after
using a priori information. Different steps of the algorithm are shown inside the dash boxes.

statistics, the process is repeated for 46 positions of the source
inside the circular phantom and 75 positions for Billie phantom.
Furthermore, for each of these source positions, the search algorithm is run for 100 realizations of the noisy field data. The
complete localization algorithm is summarized in Fig. 3.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Fig. 4 shows the plots for the magnitude and the phase of the
noisy received field by all the on-body sensors from a particular
location inside the original phantoms (see Fig. 4(a) and (b)
for the circular phantom, and Fig. 4(c) and (d) for Billie). The
figure also shows the magnitude and the phase of the received
field values by the external sensors from the cell having the least
RMSE. As can be seen in the figure, the two field values are in
good agreement resulting in a low RMSE.
To evaluate the performance of the localization error, the
cumulative distribution function (CDF) and root-mean-square of
the error distance derr for the different locations of the source
is calculated for 100 realizations of the noisy data. The CDF
describes the probability of the error distance variable Derr to
have a value less than or equal to error distance derr and is written
as P (Derr ≤ derr ). The error distance derr is defined as
derr =



(xtrue − x̂)2 + (ytrue − ŷ)2

(18)

where (xtrue , ytrue ) are the coordinates of the true position of
the RF source, and (x̂, ŷ) are the coordinates of the estimated
position, which is the same as the coordinates of the center of
the cell with the minimum RMSE Ẽ. The CDF for 46 positions
of the RF source for the circular phantom, and for 75 positions
of the RF source inside Billie for 100 realizations of the noisy
data is shown in Fig. 5. The smaller cell size results in a low
error for Billie. The effect of the cell size on the localization
error is further discussed in Section IV-B. Furthermore, the
root-mean-square of the error distances (RMSd err ) for all the
source positions Q = 46 for the circular phantom and Q = 75

Fig. 4. Field from the source at the 30th position inside the circular phantom:
(a) magnitude and (b) phase. Field from the source at the 40th position inside the
Billie phantom: (c) magnitude and (d) phase. The values shown have noise added
to them with SNR = 20 dB and |E| is relative to 1-A source. The magnitude
and the phase of the calculated field by the entire on-body sensors from the
virtual RF source located in the cell having minimum RMSE is also shown.

for Billie is calculated for 100 realizations of the noisy data as

RMSd err


 Q
1
=
d2 .
Q i=1 erri

(19)

RMSd err for 100 realizations of the noisy data is shown in Fig. 6.
The RMSd err lies in the range of 0.93–1.01 cm for the circular
phantom, whereas it is in the range of 0.37–0.4 cm for Billie.
The values of RMSd err indicate that the proposed algorithm is
capable of localizing the in-body RF source within millimeter
range accuracy even in the presence of noise. Further, smaller
cell size increases the accuracy but at the cost of increased
computational complexity, which is discussed in Section IV-B.
Though the algorithm is implemented for a 2-D case, a 3-D
implementation can be extended by series of a 2-D measurement
or using a 3-D microwave imaging algorithm.

1238

Fig. 5. Cumulative distribution function of the distance error for the circular
phantom and Billie.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 7. True path and the estimated path for the source inside the small intestine
of Billie.

Fig. 8. Cumulative distribution function for the error distance with the estimated electrical properties versus when it is assumed homogeneous and equal
to the external medium.

Fig. 6. Root mean square of the distance error for different source positions
calculated on 100 realizations of the noisy data for (a) circular phantom, and
(b) Billie.

To test the tracking ability of the algorithm, the source is
moved inside the Billie intestine at 32 positions along a random
path and the field values are recorded by the sensors. To these
recorded field values, noise is added and the algorithm is used
to estimate the path. The true path and the estimated path is
shown in Fig. 7. A good agreement between the true path and
the estimated path is obtained indicating the possibility of the
algorithm to track the moving capsule. Again, it should be noted
that though the tracking ability of the algorithm is evaluated for
a 2-D case, a 3-D extension should be possible, and will be
targeted in our future work.
In next sections, some of the factors that influence the localization error is discussed. These are discussed for the realistic
phantom, Billie, by plotting cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of the error distance. The CDF is plotted for the error

Fig. 9. Cumulative distribution function for the distance error with varying
cell size.

distance for 75 unknown positions of the source for 100 realizations of the noisy data.
A. Imaging
As discussed in the introduction, the electrical properties of
the tissues are required for the improved localization and is
obtained through microwave imaging in this paper. The CDF
of the error distances is plotted when the body is imaged and
the electrical properties are estimated against a case when the
electrical properties of the body is assumed to be homogeneous,
more specifically equal to the external medium. The CDF of the
distance error is shown in Fig. 8. The mean error distance is
0.32 cm with the estimated electrical properties as compared to
the 0.44 cm when the homogeneous body is assumed. Hence,
there is an improvement in the localization with the estimated

CHANDRA et al.: MICROWAVE IMAGING-BASED TECHNIQUE TO LOCALIZE AN IN-BODY RF SOURCE FOR BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS

1239

TABLE I
TYPICAL EXECUTION TIME WITH VARYING CELL SIZES
Cell size

Imaging

FDTD Simulation

Estimation†

λe x t /10
λe x t /15
λe x t /19
λe x t /25

3 min
28 min
17 min
43 min

6.8 h
15 h
56 h
126 h

3s
7s
10 s
17 s

†

Estimation time is for one position of the source in the imaged body

electrical properties. However, the difference is not that significant due to the fact that the numerical body model used at the
level of the antennas is more or less homogeneous as can be seen
in Fig. 1(b). It should be noted that in reality, human body is
a complex environment and assuming homogeneous electrical
properties is not a good approximation for in-body propagation,
and hence, the determination of the electrical properties of the
body is required.
B. Size of the Cell
To investigate the effect of the cell size on the localization
error, CDF of the distance error is plotted with varying cell size
for the Billie phantom as shown in Fig. 9. The different cell
sizes for which the simulations are done are λext /10, λext /15,
λext /19, and λext /25, where λext is the wavelength in the external medium. In general, smaller cell size results in lower errors
as the chance that the unknown position is near to the cell center
increases. However, the localization error also depends upon
the position of the unknown source, i.e., if the unknown source
position is close to the center of a cell, then the error will be
low, even if the cell size is large. This is the reason for the trend
observed in the CDF of the λext /10, which, for some cases,
have lower error than λext /15. The time complexity increases
as higher number of cells takes longer time in the imaging algorithm, FDTD simulations, and the estimation step. The time
taken for different steps of the localization method with different cell sizes is presented in Table I. The imaging algorithm
is run on a computer with Intel(R) Core (TM) i7 − 2600 CPU
at 3.40-GHz processor, 16-GB RAM, and 64-bit operating system. The same computer is used for estimating the position.
The FDTD simulations in SEMCAD-X of the imaged body in
run on a different computer with Dual-Core AMD Opteron at
2.60-GHz processor, 16-GB RAM, and 64-bit operating system. The imaging time shown in the table is for the imaging
algorithm to converge. The time complexity of the imaging algorithm increases with the cell size, however, for λext /15 cell
size, it is more than λext /19. The reason for this being is that
it took 15 iterations for the imaging algorithm to converge. The
FDTD simulation time to calculate the field from all the possible locations increases with the cell size as number of cell
increases in the region in which the virtual RF source is placed.
Further, the estimation time also increases with small cell size
for the same reason that the comparison of the received signal from an unknown position is done at higher number of cell
locations.

Fig. 10. Cumulative distribution function for the distance error with varying
number of the sensors.

C. Number of Antennas
Increasing the number of sensors that act both as receiver
antennas and transmit antennas can relax the inverse microwave
imaging problem to some extent [29]. For M sensors placed
on the body, the total dataset is M × M − 1. Hence, theoretically M should be as large as possible. However, for practical
applications, increasing the number of antennas is not possible due to the finite size of the antenna. Further, the mutual
coupling between the antennas will also increase with more antennas, which should be avoided as it will increase the error in
measured scattered field. This limits the number of antennas that
can be used. For the results presented in this paper, M = 72 was
chosen by placing antennas in an interval of 5° around the body.
We did a preliminary investigation by reducing the number of
the sensors to 50%, i.e., to 36 sensors, by placing the antennas
at an interval of 10° around the Billie body in an elliptical pattern. The CDF of the error distances is plotted in Fig. 10 with
72 sensors and 36 sensors for a cell size of λ/19. It can be seen
that decreasing the number of sensors, increased the error distances slightly. However, the decrease in the number of sensors
has more impact on the imaging algorithm as it can diverge if
not stopped at a proper iteration.
V. CONCLUSION
A localization algorithm based on microwave imaging for an
in-body RF source at 403.5 MHz was presented. The developed
algorithm is a three-step process. In the first step, the body was
imaged to obtain the approximate electrical properties and the
distribution of the tissues. In the second step, a priori information regarding the electrical properties of the different tissues
and/or anatomy of the body was used to find all the possible
placement positions of the RF source. The a priori information
was used to reduce the computational complexity. A virtual RF
source was then placed at these positions and the electric field
recorded by the external sensors was stored to be used in the
third step. In the third step, the same setup was used that was
used for the imaging. The RMSE between the field received by
all the external sensors and the field recorded in the second step
was calculated. The position of the RF source having the least
RMSE was the estimated position. The algorithm was tested on
the FDTD simulated data of two phantoms, a simple circular
phantom and a realistic phantom for the 2-D TM polarization

1240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

after addition of white Gaussian noise and using SNR = 20 dB.
The cumulative distribution function of the error distance, defined as the distance between the true position and the estimated
position, was plotted. The mean error distance for the circular phantom was 9 mm and that for the realistic phantom was
3 mm. The cell or the pixel size of the imaged circular phantom
was larger than the realistic phantom. The effect of the cell size
on the localization error was investigated for different cell sizes
of the imaged realistic phantom. It was found that in general, the
localization error decreases with a decrease in the cell size. However, the time complexity of the algorithm increases with the
smaller cell size. The values of the error distance indicate that
the proposed algorithm could be useful for localization of the
in-body RF source in biomedical applications like WCE.
The main advantages of the algorithm can be summarized
as follows: 1) it does not use a predefined signal propagation
model, which is difficult to standardize due to different anatomy
and tissue thickness of different people, 2) through microwave
imaging, it eliminates the need for costly MRI scans or ionizing
CT-scans to estimate the tissue electrical properties, 3) it is not
user specific as imaging the body is a part of the algorithm, and
4) the same setup used for receiving the signal from the capsule
can be used for microwave imaging to determine the electrical
properties.
Through the results presented in this paper, we have a proof
of concept that using a localization method based on microwave
imaging gives a localization error in the millimeter range for
in-body localization of an RF source. Future work include extending the method for 3-D cases, which also require antenna
optimization both in terms of number and placement pattern. A
preliminary investigation indicated a slight increase in the localization error when the antenna number was reduced by 50%
but had a larger impact on the imaging algorithm, which tends
to diverge if not stopped at the proper iteration in such a case.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research work has been done as a part of the project, Wireless Communication for Ultra Portable Devices (UPD) funded
by Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research. The authors
would also like to thank E. Toth at the Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, for discussions regarding the application
and practical aspects of wireless capsule endoscopy.
REFERENCES
[1] T. D. Than, G. Alici, H. Zhou, and Weihua Li, “A review of localization
systems for robotic endoscopic capsules,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 2387–2399, Sep. 2012.
[2] G. Ciuti, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario, “Capsule endoscopy: From current achievements to open challenges,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 4,
pp. 59–72, Oct. 2011.
[3] Subpart E-Technical Regulations. Part 95-Personal Radio Services. Title
47:Telecommunication. Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. (2014, 7
Oct.). [online]. Available: www.ecfr.gov.
[4] D. Manteuffel and M. Grimm, “Localization of a functional capsule for
wireless neuro-endoscopy,” in Proc. Biomed. Wireless Technol., Netw.,
Sens. Syst., Jan. 2012, pp. 61–64.
[5] K. Pahlavan, G. Bao, Y. Ye, S. Makarov, U. Khan, P. Swar, D. Cave,
A. Karellas, P. Krishnamurthy, and K. Sayrafian, “RF Localization for
Wireless Video Capsule Endoscopy”, Int. J. Wireless Inf. Netw., vol. 19,
pp. 326–340, 2012.

[6] K. Arshak, F. Adepoju, and D. Waldron, “A review and adaptation of
methods of object tracking to telemetry capsules,” Int. J. Intell. Comput.
Med. Sci. Image Process, vol. 1, pp. 35–46, 2007.
[7] K. Arshak and F. Adepoju, “Adaptive linearized methods for tracking a
moving telemetry capsule,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Ind. Electron., 2007,
pp. 2703–2708.
[8] D.Fischer, R. Shreiber, G. Meron, M. Frisch, H. Jacob, A. Glukhovsky,
and A. Engel, “Localization of the wireless capsule endoscope in its
passage through the GI tract,” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 53,
p. AB126, 2001.
[9] T. Shah, S. M. Aziz, and T. Vaithianathan, “Development of a tracking
algorithm for an in-vivo RF capsule prototype,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electr.
Comput. Eng., 2006, pp. 173–176.
[10] W. Lujia , H. Chao, T. Longqiang , L. Mao, and M. Q. H. Meng, “A novel
radio propagation radiation model for location of the capsule in GI tract,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rob. Biomimetics, 2009, pp. 2332–2337.
[11] W. Lujia, L. Li , H. Chao, and M. Q. H. Meng, “A novel RFbased propagation model with tissue absorption for location of the GI
tract,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010,
pp. 654–657.
[12] W. Yi, F. Ruijun, Y. Yunxing, U. Khan, and K. Pahlavan, “Performance
bounds for RF positioning of endoscopy camera capsules,” in Proc. IEEE
Top. Conf. Biomed. Wireless Technol., Netw., Sens. Syst., pp. 71–74, 2011.
[13] H. Jinlong, Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, Y. Fu, F. Zhao, L. Yang, and G. Rong,
“Design and implementation of a high resolution localization system for
in-vivo capsule endoscopy,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Dependable Auton.
Secure Comput., 2009, pp. 209–214.
[14] Z. Le, Z. Yongxin, M. Tingting, H.Jinlong, and H. Hao, “Design of 3D
positioning algorithm based on RFID receiver array for in vivo microrobot,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Dependable, Auton. Secure Comput.,
2009, pp. 749–753.
[15] L. Zhang, Y. Zhu, T. Mo, J. Hou, and G. Rong, “Design and implementation
of 3D positioning algorithms based on RF signal radiation patterns for in
vivo micro-robot,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Body Sens. Netw., 2010, pp. 255–260.
[16] M. Pourhomayoun, Z. Jin, and M. Fowler, “Accurate localization of inbody medical implants based on spatial sparsity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 590–597, Feb. 2014.
[17] R. Chandra, A. Johansson, and F. Tufvesson, “Localization of an RF source
inside the Human body for wireless capsule endoscopy,” in Proc. 8th Int.
Conf. Body Area Netw., pp. 48–54, Sep. 2013.
[18] A. B. de Gonzalez, M. Mahesh, K. P. Kim, M. Bhargavan, R. Lewis, F.
Mettler, and C. Land, “Projected cancer risks from computed tomographic
scans performed in the United States in 2007,” Arch. Internal Med., vol.
169, no. 22, pp. 2071–2077, 2009.
[19] S. Semenov, “Microwave tomography: Review of the progress towards
clinical applications,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 367, pp. 3021–3042,
2009.
[20] N. Joachimowicz, C. Pichot, J-P. Hugonin, “Inverse scattering: An iterative
numerical method for electromagnetic imaging,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 1742–1753, Dec. 1991.
[21] J. J. Mallorqui, N. Joachimowicz, A. Broquetas, and J. Bolomey, “Quantitative images of large biological bodies in microwave tomography by using
numerical and real data,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 23, pp. 2138–2140,
1996.
[22] A. Abubakar, P. M. van den Berg, and J. J Mallorqui, “Imaging of
biomedical data using a multiplicative regularized contrast source inversion method,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 50, no. 7, pp.
1761–1771, Jul. 2002.
[23] S. Y. Semenov, R. H. Svenson, A. E. Bulyshev, A. E. Souvorov, A. G.
Nazarov, Y. E. Sizov, V. G. Posukh, A. Pavlovsky, P. N. Repin, A. N.
Starostin, B. A. Voinov, M. Taran, G. P. Tatsis, and V. Y. Baranov, “Threedimensional microwave tomography: Initial experimental imaging of animals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 55–63, Jan. 2002.
[24] P. Mojabi and J. LoVetri, “Microwave biomedical imaging using the multiplicative regularized Gauss-Newton inversion,” IEEE Antennas Wireless
Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 645–648, May 2009.
[25] C. Gilmore, A. Zakaria, S. Pistorius, and J. Lo Vetri, “Microwave imaging
of human forearms: Pilot study and image enhancement,” Int. J. Biomed.
Imag., vol. 2013, pp. 673027-1–673027-17, 2013.
[26] D. Manteuffel, P. A. Hoeher, and M. Mehdorn, “Evaluation of RF localization for deep brain implants,” in Proc. 5th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag.,
Apr. 2011, pp. 2372–2376.
[27] W.-F. Loke, T.-Y. Choi, T. Maleki, L. Papiez, B. Ziaie, and B. Jung,
“Magnetic tracking system for radiation therapy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 223–231, Aug. 2010.

CHANDRA et al.: MICROWAVE IMAGING-BASED TECHNIQUE TO LOCALIZE AN IN-BODY RF SOURCE FOR BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS

[28] M. Pourhomayoun, M. Fowler, and J. Zhanpeng, “A novel method for tumor localization and tracking in radiation therapy,” in Proc. 46th. Asilomar
Conf. Sig. Syst. Comp., Dec. 2012, pp. 1637–1640.
[29] A. Franchois and C. Pichot, “Microwave imaging-complex permittivity
reconstruction with a Levenberg-Marquardt method,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 203–215, Feb. 1997.
[30] P. Mojabi, “Investigation and development of algorithms and techniques
for microwave tomography,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comp. Eng.,
Univ. Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 2010.
[31] J. Richmond, “Scattering by a dielectric cylinder of arbitrary cross section
shape,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 334–341, May
1965.
[32] SEMCAD-X, Full-wave 3D electromagnetic and thermal simulation software, Schmid & Partner Engineering AG, Zeughausstrasse 43, 8004
Zürich, Switzerland.
[33] K. Yee, “Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems involving
Maxwell’s equations in isotropic media,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 302–307, May 1966.
[34] A. Christ, W. Kainz, E. G. Hahn, K. Honegger, M. Zefferer, E. Neufeld,
W. Rascher, R. Janka, W. Bautz, J. Chen, B. Kiefer, P. Schmitt, H.-P.
Hollenbach, J. Shen, M. Oberle, D. Szczerba, A. Kam, J. W. Guag, and N.
Kuste, “The Virtual Family Development of anatomical CAD models of
two adults and two children for dosimetric simulations,” Phy. Med. Bio.,
vol. 55, no. 2, pp. N23–N38, Jan. 2010.
[35] A. Fhager, S. K. Padhi, and J. Howard, “3D image reconstruction in
microwave tomography using an efficient FDTD model,” IEEE Antennas
Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 1353–1356, Dec. 2009.
[36] R. F. Harrington, Field Computation by Moment Methods. New York, NY,
USA: MacMillan, 1968.
[37] P. M Meaney, N. K Yagnamurthy, and K. D Paulsen, “Pre-scaled twoparameter Gauss Newton image reconstruction to reduce property recovery imbalance,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, pp. 1101–1119, 2002.
[38] P. Mojabi and J. LoVetri, “A prescaled multiplicative regularized GaussNewton inversion,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 59, no. 8,
pp. 2954–2963, Aug. 2011.

Rohit Chandra (S’09) received the B.Tech. and
M.Tech. degrees (Integrated) from the Indian Institute
of Technology, Roorkee, India, in 2008 and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in 2014 with the thesis on antennas, wave propagation, and localization in wireless
body area networks.
From 2008 to 2009, he worked on LTE protocol stack for Samsung India Software Operations,
Bangalore, India. He is currently an ERCIM Alain
Bensoussan Postdoctoral Fellow at Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. His research interest
includes antennas and propagation for medical implants and on-body devices,
and medical applications of microwave imaging.
Dr. Chandra received the SEMCAD-X student research award in 2011 and
2012.

1241

Anders J Johansson (M’03) received the Masters,
Lic.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in 1993, 2000,
and 2004, respectively.
From 1994 to 1997, he was with Ericsson Mobile
Communications AB developing transceivers and antennas for mobile phones. Since 2005, he has been an
Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical
and Information Technology, Lund University. His
research interests include antennas and wave propagation for medical implants as well as antenna systems and propagation modeling for MIMO systems. He is involved as one of
the researchers in the NeuroNano Research Center at Lund University, where
he is responsible for the development of the telemetry part of the project. Since
2012, he has been responsible for the design of the Low-Level Radio Frequency
(LLRF) systems of the European Spallation Source, to be built in Lund.

Mats Gustafsson (M’05) received the M.Sc. degree
in engineering physics in 1994 and the Ph.D. degree
in electromagnetic theory in 2000, both from Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.
He was a Docent in 2005 and a Professor of Electromagnetic Theory in 2011 at Lund University. He
cofounded the company Phase Holographic Imaging
AB in 2004. His research interests include scattering
and antenna theory and inverse scattering and imaging with applications in microwave tomography and
digital holography. He has written more than 75 peer
reviewed journal papers and more than 90 conference papers.
Prof. Gustafsson received the Best Antenna Poster Prize at EuCAP 2007, the
IEEE Schelkunoff Transactions Prize Paper Award 2010, and the Best Antenna
Theory Paper Award at EuCAP 2013. He serves as an IEEE AP-S Distinguished
Lecturer for 2013–15.

Fredrik Tufvesson (SM’10) received the Ph.D. degree in 2000 from Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
After two years at a start-up company, he joined the
Department of Electrical and Information Technology at Lund University, where he is currently a Professor of radio systems and also managing the Wireless Propagation Group. His main research interests
include channel modeling, measurements and characterization for wireless communication, with applications in various areas such as massive MIMO, UWB,
millimeter wave communication, distributed antenna
systems, vehicular communication systems, and radio-based positioning. He has
authored and coauthored around 50 journal papers and 100 conference papers.

