IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

29

Integration of Personalized Healthcare Pathways
in an ICT Platform for Diabetes Managements:
A Small-Scale Exploratory Study
Giuseppe Fico, Alessio Fioravanti, Maria Teresa Arredondo, Joe Gorman, Chiara Diazzi, Giovanni Arcuri,
Claudio Conti, and Giampiero Pirini

Abstract—The availability of new tools able to support patient
monitoring and personalized care may substantially improve the
quality of chronic disease management. A personalized healthcare
pathway (PHP) has been developed for diabetes disease management and integrated into an information and communication technology system to accomplish a shift from organization-centered
care to patient-centered care. A small-scale exploratory study was
conducted to test the platform. Preliminary results are presented
that shed light on how the PHP influences system usage and performance outcomes.
Index Terms—Diabetes, ehealth, information and communication technologies, personalized healthcare pathway (PHP).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE exponential growth of healthcare costs, together with
rapidly increasing demand, is steering the health sector [1].
One of the main research and business challenges for modern
healthcare systems is the combined demand for higher treatment quality and reduced costs. In recent years, several research projects have been carried out based on the concepts of
personalized healthcare [2]–[4]. Personalized patient-centered
healthcare services, with increased individualized treatment,
through the utilization of standard clinical protocols, may represent a solution, especially for chronic diseases [5], [6]. Advances in information and communication technology (ICT)
make possible the continuous development and improvement
of telemedicine platforms and decision support systems (DSS)
for diagnosis, treatment, and management of different illnesses
[7]–[9]. eHealth solutions can provide the foundation for the

T

Manuscript received June 25, 2014; revised September 23, 2014; accepted
October 28, 2014. Date of publication November 6, 2014; date of current version December 31, 2015. This work was supported in part by the European
Commission under the METABO and MOSAIC Projects under Grant 216270
and Grant 600914.
G. Fico, A. Fioravanti, M. Teresa Arredondo are with the Life Supporting Technologies Group, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040
Madrid, Spain (e-mail: gfico@lst.tfo.upm.es; afioravanti@lst.tfo.upm.es;
mta@lst.tfo.upm.es).
J. Gorman is with SINTEF ICT, 7034 Trondheim, Norway (e-mail:
joe.gorman@sintef.no).
C. Diazzi is with the Unit of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio
Emilia, Italy, and is also with the Azienda USL of Modena, Italy. (e-mail:
chiara.diazzi@unimore.it).
G. Arcuri, C. Conti, and G. Pirini are with the Azienda Unitá Sanitaria Locale di Modena, 41121 Modena, Italy (e-mail: g.arcuri@ausl.mo.it;
c.conti@ausl.mo.it; g.pirini@ospfe.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2367863

deployment of efficient and innovative healthcare means and
procedures in which health is viewed as a continuous process
where the patient’s role, as well as the corresponding expected
actions, must be clearly identified. Treatment personalization
requires that general healthcare practices, disease management
guidelines, therapy schemes and follow-ups must all be adapted
to the chronic patient’s particular conditions and clinical status
[5], [6], [10]. Current research and development work in the area
aims to devise techniques based on guidelines and decision support services that enhance and optimize patient care and quality
of medical care by incorporating recommendations for specific
conditions in the design of applications and platforms [11]–[14].
Diabetes is a representative case of a chronic disease with
pandemic dimensions. Its treatment requires regular interactions between patients and healthcare providers, as well as full
patient engagement in following and adopting healthy lifestyles
[15]–[18]. Considerable difficulties for the effective management of this disease arise from the variety and complexity of
the variables and parameters involved, such as control of dietary
habits, exercise, correct medication intake, dosage, and timing,
all intimately coupled to the monitoring of variables such as
sugar level, blood pressure, blood lipids, and condition of the
feet and eyes [19]. Such systemic complexity suggests the use
of ICT tools to address it from a patient centric, personalized
care point of view [16]. According to the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) [20], any diabetes disease management plan
should be “formulated as a collaborative therapeutic alliance
among the patient and family, the physician, and other members of the health care team.” Such a management plan should
include tools based on concepts of individualization, ongoing
support, and patient progress control, all within a framework of
diabetes disease self-management education [18], [21]. Guidelines for such type of actions were delineated in the National
Standards for Diabetes Self-Management Education [17].
“Clinical pathways” (CPWs) are efficient instruments that
have been used since the 1980s to guide evidence-based healthcare [22]. CPWs have been put into practice internationally and
are used today as medical care guidelines, protocols, or models
to define patients’ care road maps. They stipulate the details of
local structures and time frames, specify key events, such as
clinical exams and assessments, and address recommendations
[5], [23], [24]. The use of CPWs greatly facilitates in carrying
out, improving and optimizing clinical treatments by detailing “what to do, when to do it, by whom, and where the task
should be performed” [25], [26]. The concept of adaptation has

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

30

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

recently been introduced into CPWs [27]–[31]. Among the more
salient benefits of CPWs are: improved patient involvement in
treatment procedures, reduced hospitalization times, improved
overall medical quality, reduced medical costs, reduced incidence of poor practices, and the provision of educational training tools. CPWs also offer the possibility of dynamic treatment
adaptation to patients’ clinical progression [1], [5], [23], [24],
[28], [29], [32]. Some systems and software packages based
on the CPW’s underlying ideas have been developed in recent
years, and there are already several studies on the subject [1],
[5], [23], [29], [30].
Considering the current status of this field, it appears that
healthcare delivery and management for diabetic patients would
greatly benefit from an ICT-based platform that could provide
as many of the following characteristics as possible: 1) Continuously monitor the patient’s general status; 2) monitor blood glucose impact factors, such as lifestyle and environment; 3) provide personalized alerts based on the patient’s individual characteristics; 4) integrate with patient’s personal healthcare program
to adjust therapy for optimal treatment delivery; 5) use standard
clinical protocols of medical practice; 6) incorporate medical
know, how; 7) handle of exceptional situations during treatment;
8) allow treatment reconfiguration and modification; 9) offer
dynamic adaptation of CPWs; 10) support self-management education; 11) incorporate decision support services.
This paper presents a personalized healthcare pathway (PHP)
concept that aims to satisfy the aforementioned characteristics,
in the form of an ICT system for diabetes disease management
developed in the “METABO” research framework. The project
was started with the aim of providing physical and virtual spaces
to address the needs of health practitioners to implement more
effective care provision, and empower patients to become coproducers of their own health care. The METABO platform was
deployed in four hospitals, and was then tested within the framework of a clinical exploratory study to assess its potential. This
paper describes the steps that brought to the definition of the
PHP and to the integration in the METABO control panel (CP),
the tool created for the carers. It presents an evaluation of the
CP by a group of experts and then it gathers results related to
the usage of the system during the study. The patient interfaces’
development process has been already described [33]. In the
next section, we explain the process that led to the definition of
the PHP, and how it was implemented and embedded into the
system. We then describe how the platform was evaluated, the
metrics used to gather results. Finally, we discuss the obtained
results and summarize the main conclusions drawn.
II. METHODS
A. The METABO Platform
The system, already described in [15] and [34], includes a
desktop application for the physician, the CP and a personal
monitoring device (PMD) for the patient. The PMD allows patients to check prescribed treatment (consisting of drug regime,
frequency of glucose monitoring, physical activity, diet and recommended calories per day, and education and goals achievement), and to collect metabolic data, including food and drug

Fig. 1. T1DM graphics (upper forms); T2DM drug intake; goal achievements
and feedback modules (lower forms).

intake, physical activity (through the combined use of a pedometer and a wearable energy expenditure continuous monitoring
device, the SenseWear Pro Armband), discrete glycemic values
(by fingersticks), and continuous subcutaneous glucose concentration (by continuous glucose monitoring system, CGMS).
Based on treatment plans and the inserted data, the system delivers automated feedback consisting of alerts, reminders, and
motivational messages in real time and periodically (over three
and seven days period). Communication with care providers
was also possible through a dedicated chat system. The PMD
allowed the patient to display a variety of metabolic data in
an easy-to-understand graphical format in order to improve the
interpretation of responses to treatment, food, and lifestyle adjustments. A variety of PMD applications (see Fig. 1) were developed for type 1 and type 2 diabetes following a user-centered
design, based on the identification of two archetypical patients
(called “PERSONAS”).
1) Ana, Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) Young Patient
Insulin Treated: Most frequent tasks are related to the insertion of medical and biographical data. The functionalities provided by METABO resemble the actions that the patient is used
to perform, like the paper diaries or notebooks where patients
take note of their measurements and comments. Therefore, “Ana
patients” have a fast and easy access to the data insertion functionalities. Patients can access the diary and graphics areas from
the home screen, but graphics and diary are not shown directly
on the home screen. Feedback takes place in the form of messages that are related with the correct usage and insertion of the
information in the PMD.
2) George, Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) Elderly Patient: The focus is not only on data insertion, but on education and empowerment to adopt a healthier lifestyle. Patients
with similar characteristics to George—most elderly T2DM
patients—are usually not insulin dependent, suffer a number
of comorbidities, and have a complex medication regime. The
application provides educational content (validated and defined
by the clinician personnel of METABO), aiming to empower patients to change their routines and to adopt a healthier lifestyle.

FICO et al.: INTEGRATION OF PHP IN AN ICT PLATFORM FOR DIABETES MANAGEMENT:

31

iterative cycles that resulted in the definition of: 1) six focus areas or METABO segments; 2) a PHP; and 3) the METABO CP
as a standard framework for diabetes disease management.
B. Definition of the METABO Segments

Fig. 2. Process steps in the development, refinement, and validation of the
holistic diabetes management technological platform METABO (DDM = Diabetes disease management).

Measurements insertion is still present but the expected frequency insertion is less and it is guided by the application. The
interaction is, therefore, mainly application-driven, that is to say
it is to be expected that it will often be initiated by the application through messages and reminders about realizing an activity
(like reading educational material, doing a prescribed exercise,
and taking the medication). Both Ana and George intervention
subgroups were provided with two devices: A smartphone, as
data insertion functionalities should be done as soon as the event
(food and drug intake, glycemic measurements) takes place (indoors and outdoors); a desktop device called patient panel, as
sensor management and data visualization (graphics and charts,
educational content and messages) are tasks that are usually
carried out when patients are at home, where bigger screens
offer advantages for both type of users, augmenting the limited display of the mobile software application. The CP is a
client-based patient-management platform through which care
providers can access all the relevant information about their patients in a structured fashion, to tailor treatments and define care
plans. The platform consisted of a central server (implemented
according to the service-oriented architecture approach) managing the CPs installed in the clinical centers and the PMDs used
by the patients. Security and legal aspects were addressed; information was anonymized and encrypted, and transmitted through
secure communications channels, with each center authorized
to manage only their patients. The system was customized in
Spanish, Italian, and Czech.
The system was developed using an iterative process whose
schematic flowchart is presented in Fig. 2. It involved defining
requirements, concepts, mock-ups, and prototypes, their subsequent refinement and validation through focus groups, faceto-face interviews, and usability tests with end-users (patients
and care providers) in the role of coproducers. An adaptation
of goal-oriented design (a methodology that combines ethnographic techniques, interviews with stakeholders, user models,
scenario design, and a core set of interaction principles and models) was applied throughout the whole process, by means of three

In the first cycle, the strategy comprised defining a
situation/problem-oriented vision of diabetes aiming to address
most of the issues of diabetic patients and general practitioners
have to deal with when defining treatment plans. This categorization focused not only on classification of the patients’
phenotypes but also on specific situations in which patients may
develop specific needs [35]. The following segmentation was
chosen on the basis of the obtained results.
1) Changes in the Environment: This segment is dedicated
to the study of the conditions in which the users are exposed
to changes (in time, space, meal habits, life rhythms) in their
usual environment, no matter what these changes are, so that
they cause a disruption in their treatment routine.
2) Physical Activity: Its Effect on Glucose Metabolism and
Diabetes Control: Reaction to exercise in diabetics is tightly
related to the insulin level in blood of the patients in the period
immediately before to the physical activity. Depending on this
and on the type and intensity of the activity, the metabolic adjustments may be the desired ones or not and, thus, the results
of physical activity will influence blood glucose levels. It may,
therefore, be important to monitor vital signs before, during,
and after exercise sessions requiring a considerable amount of
effort by the patients.
3) Sudden Hypoglycemic Events: The autonomic nervous
system reacts with sympathetic overactivation leading to symptoms such as shivers, sweating, change in reaction time, tachycardia, anxiety, etc. They usually alert the patient to check blood
glucose and to undertake adequate counteractions. However, as
the disease advances, the phenomenon of “hypoglycaemia unawareness” emerges. There are circumstances in which patients
are able to overcome these episodes but prevention is still crucial.
4) Lack of Motivation: Many factors may cause treatment
nonadherence, leading to unstable metabolic states that will
have long-term health consequences. Some of the most influential psychological variables intervening in the process are
depression, disease denial, anxiety, cognitive alterations, stress,
lack or distorted social support, etc. Education and motivation
play an important role in keeping patients committed to therapy, helping them to modify or adjust their daily activities and
general lifestyle.
5) Unstable Diabetes Control: This segment addresses the
case of patients who cannot reach metabolic stability even when
the best available treatment strategy has been put in place.
6) Comorbidity Disease Management: When the diabetic patient is affected by a second disease (comorbidity) which might
or might not be directly related to diabetes, the basic common
features that the METABO platform provides are: 1) glucose
measurement, using either a continuous glucose sensor-based
monitoring system or manual means; 2) information acquisition related to the patient’s lifestyle through interaction with

32

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

a user application: food intake, drug intake, physical activity
schedules, etc.; 3) information acquisition related to complications and comorbidities interacting with the diabetic disease;
4) measurement of variables related to the patient’s treatment
evolution, such as weight and body fat percentage; 5) a DSS to
enhance patient empowerment.
C. Definition of the PHP
In this second cycle, the requirements and scenarios of each
segment, as well as the common features, were used to define the
PHP, which is the “engine” for implementing effective strategies
to be executed by the platform. A standard pathway was taken as
the central reference to which personalization was added based
on the specific research performed within each segment.
1) The Standard Pathway: Five milestones were defined, taking the 2008 ADA Guidelines [36] as the main reference.
Although the guidelines are focused on T2DM, they were
generalized to serve as a framework for T1DM as well.
Furthermore, we added a zero phase (M0) to address prediagnostic activities: M0—prediagnostic phase—General
practitioners prescribe visits for patients suspected of suffering from diabetes. M1—diagnostic phase—The patient
makes the first contact with a diabetic clinic or diabetes
department, undergoes routine lab tests, is visited by
a dietician, and then by an endocrinologist. The patient
undergoes every scheduled examination in turn, both laboratory tests and professional medical advice. Finally, a
diagnosis is made. M2—education phase— Medical staff
teaches the patient how to behave regarding glucose level
maintenance, exercise, nutrition, medication, and possible
complications; they also explain the importance of regular reviews. M3—treatment management phase—Patients
are requested to manage their disease through food intake, drug intake, glycaemic level monitoring, and physical activity. M4— complication risk management—Visits
to specialists are planned in order to prevent or manage
complications. M5—maintenance phase—Routine pathway for patient follow up. The endocrinologist can request
medical advice, modify treatment, and plan visits.
2) Personalization of the Healthcare Pathway: In addition to
the ADA recommendations, we have added 18 personalized scenarios to the CPW milestones (contained in the
left rectangle of Fig. 3(a). They are combinations of the six
segments with three diabetes cases: type1 and type 2—not
insulin treated, and type 2, insulin treated. Relationships
between scenarios and milestones were defined with the
advice of a wide group of clinicians. The mind map chart
shown in Fig. 3(a) contains the results of this process:
The left rectangle contains all 18 METABO SCENARIOS
(6 segments × 3 types of Diabetes). The right rectangle
contains all the milestones of the STANDARD PATHWAY, as specified in Section II-B1. The central rectangle contains the SPECIFIC RELATIONSHIPS between
scenarios and CPW milestones, tagged XX-YY, where
XX identifies a scenario and YY identifies a milestone.
For instance, in the “standard pathway” in the education

Fig. 3. (a) “Mind map” chart containing the results of the process that resulted
in the definition of the PHP. (b) CPW personalization flow.

phase (M2), all patients are trained in terms of disease
understanding, lifestyle issues or dietetic referral facilitations. However, if the patient is classified as belonging
to “changes in the environment” (segment 1) and has diabetes type 1 (case A), the “specific pathway” (1A-M2)
will assign further educational content, like “special education in correct diet with ethnic food” and “what to do in
case of air travel to countries in other zones.” In the treatment phase (1A-M3), the PMD will offer the possibility
of delivering a “travel plan” tool providing advice about
the amount of drugs patients should take with when travelling. The next phase was to build a clear framework and
the rules to design the CPW. First, a bottom-up analysis
of all the relationships was carried out, identifying the activities related to each segment, as well as those common
to the same milestone.
The activities were gathered as an attribute of each milestone.
The results of this analysis are represented by the “standard
pathway.” The remaining activities belonging to each relationship identify the “specific pathway” for each “segment.” Finally,
we defined the “classification criteria” used to decide which specific scenario each patient belongs to.
Personalization of care is based on the following concepts,
represented in Fig. 3(b): 1) at a starting point, a proper characterization is requested about the specific scenario a patient
belongs to; this means that the endocrinologist during the M1
phase may try to find out what is the most relevant scenario the
patient can belong to. This also means that a specific pathway
will be set, as a specialization of the standard one, in order to fulfil the precise need of the patient’s scenario. In cases where that
it is not possible, the standard pathway will be applied; 2) the
physician, based on other specific characteristics of the patient
(e.g., type and level of physical activity done, weight, height,
etc.) begins a second step of pathway personalization, refining
for instance the scenario’s specific agenda or changing threshold
values for acquired parameters, tailoring the METABO system
as much as possible to the patient; 3) the platform offers the
physician a variety of tools for customizing the pathway, with
the aim of allowing adaptation of the CPW to the specific initial

FICO et al.: INTEGRATION OF PHP IN AN ICT PLATFORM FOR DIABETES MANAGEMENT:

conditions, and to events or situations that may subsequently
arise. This means that the system is first tailored to the patient
(static adaptability) and then progressively adapted (dynamic
adaptability) during treatment driven both by the events alerted
by the METABO system and by the physician.
The process of PHP personalization follows a structured sequence. Initially, characterization of patients belonging to a specific scenario is requested. During the M1 phase, the endocrinologist classifies the patient into a predominant segment—the
one that best fits the patient’s clinical characteristics. This is
done on the basis of a few key parameters, which means an
immediate identification of a specific pathway, related to the
given scenario (e.g., physical exercise T2DM-IT care pathway).
The default pathway is the standard one. The physician may
now refine the chosen care pathway in order to address specific
patient needs or other situational context variables. This means
that it is possible to define for each scenario a specific CPW,
which consists of a dedicated sequence of steps (M2, M3, M4,
and M5). With the onset of special events (i.e., the change in
the lifestyle, complications, clinical parameter values out of the
defined range), the physician can change the patient’s initial assigned CPW by using dedicated tools, delivered on the CP. The
assignment of the CPW automatically generates the necessary
changes in the CP and, if accepted by the treating physician,
on the PMD. After this initialization phase, the patient is followed by clinicians using the CP and the CPW can be tailored
according to the data acquired.
D. Integrating the PHP in the METABO CP
In the third cycle, the PHP was integrated in the professional
CP. The relationships and events defined for the PHP were transformed into algorithms and rules for the CP. As an example,
the classification criterion of the “physical exercise” scenario
is: Frequency = 3–7 d/w and duration time = 30–60 min and
Intensity = 55–80% HR Max. The specific pathway for sudden hypoglycemia suggests that, for milestone 3, “glycaemia
self-check should be done up to six times per day” or “use of
CGMS.” The main menu provides a list of patients that can be
used to carry out triage based on condition severity. Information is provided per patient, specifying name, surname, types of
diabetes, alerts, and unread messages (coming from the patient
or the system). Once a patient has been selected, the first screen
(shown in Fig. 4) provides information about the patient general
status (complications and comorbidities, past visits, upcoming
appointments, and recommendations provided by the system),
messages sent to or received from the patient, and messages that
the patient application has generated (alert and feedback messages related to the care plan adherence). The milestones are
implemented as sequential tabs that the care professional has
to go through when using the CP: (M1) diagnosis and classification: After a first manual classification using a questionnaire
form, a scenario is recommended by the system based on data
gathered by the PMD; (M2) education: The care provider can
prescribe educational content (suggested by the system according to the selected scenario and personal data) and quizzes to be
answered using the patient application. Quizzes are composed

33

Fig. 4. Follow-up process structure implemented in the CP. The tabs in the
upper part are based on the five milestones. In the lower part, the system
suggestions about the scenario and the educational documents to send.

using questions related to the topics assigned to the patient,
using a library of questions for each topic, sorted into three
levels (beginner, medium, and advanced). Each quiz contains
nine questions, all at the same level. The default level is beginner. If the user successfully completes four consecutive quizzes
with correct responses to more than 80% of the questions, the
level increases. If more than two consecutive quizzes have a
score less than 40%, or if the educational module has not been
used in the course of the last month, the level decreases. (M3)
Treatment management: This tab is the most important one and
is divided into two main parts. In the first part, the carer can
insert data related to a visit, view tables and graphs of selected
parameters (based on data been sent by the patient or inserted
by the carer), and check compliance with treatment plans. In
the second part, the doctor can prescribe treatment. Based on
that, the patient application can check whether the patient is following the prescribed treatment and send messages to patients
in the form of reminders (if they are failing to insert information in the application) or recommendations (e.g., if they are in
some way not complying with the treatment plan). The doctor
can provide guidance and instructions about glucose measurements, use of drugs, diet, exercise, and goals the patient should
aim for. (M4) Complication risk management: This involves
looking out for and possible diagnosis of diabetes complications and comorbidities, and referrals to relevant specialists.
The role of this module is to act as a link with other hospitals
or departments involved in patient management. (M5) Maintenance: This is achieved by using the system to review patient
progress at regular intervals. It allows them to view the information, prioritized, and classified according to visit schedules
and alarms generated by patient conditions.
III. STUDY DESCRIPTION AND PARTICIPANT RECRUITMENT
Two assessments were performed: The first based on collecting the views of key stakeholders but without actual use of the
system, and the second based on pilot validation through actual

34

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

use of the system. In the first assessment, the PHP and the CP
were presented to a panel of 11 experts and stakeholders (eight
males–three females, age 53 (±9)), with a mean of 24 (±9)
years of work experience, at five clinical health centers and university hospital centers, including one HIS administrator, five
endocrinologists, one medical officer and diabetologists, two
R&D project hospital directors, one health level seven (HL7)
national expert, and one academic professor and epidemiology
expert. In the second assessment, the platform was used for eight
months in a clinical trial in four different public hospital clinical
settings in Parma, Modena, Prague, and Madrid. The system was
used by a total of 24 health care professionals (7 males–18 females, age 41 ± 11), including 20 physicians, two nutritionists,
two nurses, and one professor; with a mean of 17 (±11) years of
work experience, 12 (48%) of them carrying out research activities beyond clinical practice. Fifty-four patients were involved
in the clinical trial, 27 of them using the platform for four consecutive weeks, and 27 following standard care practices. The
study was a multicenter, multinational, open-label, randomized,
two-parallel-group exploratory study comparing the continuous
use of the METABO system with standard care without the
use of METABO. Execution of the pilot was quasi-sequential:
The first center was Madrid (February–April 2012), then Modena (April–August 2012), Parma and Prague (June–September
2012). Of the 27 patients using the system and available in the
CP, that is the focus of this paper, 12 were T2DM (five insulin
treated and seven not insulin treated, age 50 ± 10) and 15 T1DM
(age 37 ± 10). Stratification of the groups was done by diabetes
type (Stratum 1: type 1 diabetic subjects, using the “Ana” PMD;
Stratum 2: type 2 diabetic subjects, using the “George” PMD).
All the ethical committees accepted the study protocol and all
patients signed an informed consent before entering the study.
The aim of this study was to provide an exploratory analysis
of the usability of the METABO system (PMD + CP), its acceptability by patients and care professionals, and its impact on
clinically relevant parameters in T1DM and T2DM patients.
IV. METHODS FOR DATA ACQUISITION AND MEASUREMENT
The first assessment (collecting views of key stakeholders)
used structured interviews and ad hoc questionnaires to assess
the PHP potential for use in prototype implementation. The second assessment (pilot validation) used log files from the trials;
it registered and analyzed the following aspects of user behavior: 1) System “usage” by patients was calculated as the ratio
of the number of interactions with the system required by the
prescribed treatment to the number of interactions that were
actually recorded. “Usage,” expressed as a percentage between
0% and 100%, provides an indicator of whether the METABO
system is being used as expected. 2) Patient “compliance” was
assessed using an ad hoc formula that measures the extent to
which the values and frequency of insertion of data entered
into the PMD concerning blood glucose, physical activity levels, food and drug intake, are in accordance with what has
been prescribed by the treating professionals (TPs). The compliance ratio was presented as a percentage between 0% (no
compliance at all) and 100% (fully compliance). 3) The total

number of interactions and time spent using the software were
registered for all patients and medical doctors, as a way of measuring the effort invested by METABO users during the pilot
phase. For health care professionals, the values were divided
by the number of patients under care to provide a normalized
comparison amongst different test centers. We then analyzed,
for the various scenarios that were assigned, how the suggestions provided using the PHP rules were followed by users.
4) Usability was assessed through questionnaires measuring
user experience [37], perceived usefulness [38] and organizational task adequacy (a custom-made questionnaire).
V. RESULTS
A. Collecting Views of Stakeholders
Validation of the platform’s professional tools was based on
interviews and questionnaires involving a panel of experts in the
fields of HIS and HL7, as well as hospital R&D directors. The
resulting opinions and suggestions were gathered and used as
design guidelines for the implementation of the prototypes. The
advice collected in this way can be categorized as follows.
1) Platform Design: The experts provided some comments
about the functionality of the PHP platform regarding the concept’s usefulness, and about how the structure of the different
milestones facilitates patient follow-up. They also mentioned
the tool’s usefulness for type 2 patient treatment, proposing improvements to better address complications and comorbidities.
The experts also offered suggestions about additional treatment
characteristics that their opinion should be included in the platform. The most important of these were: 1) include treatment
of patients at risk of developing diabetes; 2) extended educational content to cover prevention of other pathologies and
complications, focusing on the benefits of a healthy lifestyle;
3) detect possible complications and provide suitable assistance
to patients; and 4) include diabetes prevention tools. They also
recommended that the DSS should integrate accurate standards
and guidelines, as well as internationally accepted complication
detection tests combined with other chronic disease management systems. They ought to be revised often for possible upgrades. A few experts suggested that the DSS should not make
decisions at all but only provide recommendations.
2) Performance and Features: While most experts indicated
that they liked the tool’s general look and feel, they also made
suggestions about system performance features that in their
opinion would be worth addressing during final implementation. The most important of these were: provide support to other
appropriate devices or tools, implement a back-up system, be
capable of stand-alone operation without direct connectivity to
electronic health records and personal health records systems,
allow manual access to data for revisions and changes, provide straightforward views of information, make patient history
available, and clearly indicate sources of data.
3) Target users: The experts made observations about the
type of users to be included in the treatment process. Most
considered that the platform should satisfy the needs of other
actors involved in patient care, like nurses, nutritionists, physical
activity experts, and primary care personnel.

FICO et al.: INTEGRATION OF PHP IN AN ICT PLATFORM FOR DIABETES MANAGEMENT:

35

TABLE I
SEGMENTS ASSIGNED TO THE PATIENTS DURING THE STUDY

Fig. 5.

CP Interactions per module.

Segments

T1DM

T2DM

Sudden hypoglycemic events
Unstable diabetes control
Physical activity
Comorbidity disease
Environmental changes
Lack of motivation

1 + (2)
4
1 + (1)

(2)
1
1 + (3)
(3)
(2)
1

TABLE II
ADHERENCE ACCORDING TO AREA OF FOCUS
Segments
Sudden hypoglycemic events
Unstable diabetes control
Physical activity
Comorbidity disease
Environmental changes
Lack of motivation

Fig. 6.

CP Interactions per patient.

B. Pilot Validation.
1) System Interaction: A log-file analysis was carried out
to determine which CP modules medical doctors interact with
most often. The results shown in Fig. 5 indicate that the most
used sections/tabs were “prescriptions” and “clinical data,” with
about 90% usage. The results for other sections were: “patient
data and tools” (3%), “patient lifestyle (5%), “educational messages” (2%) and “complications” (0%). The “complications”
tab was not used at all because the experiment did not include
connections to other clinical departments and/or specialists. Another important issue was the amount of time medical doctors
spent using the application, specifically the CP.
Fig. 6 shows CP usage time per patient. In the first week of
testing, the mean time needed to look after one patient in the CP
was between 3 and 10 min (blue line). In extreme cases, doctors
needed up to 20 min (as seen in the green line), or only some
seconds (as seen in the red line). This range of values seems
reasonable considering that standard monthly visits can take up
to 1 h and that, according to focus groups, TPs would expect
to use the CP for a period of about 10 min for each patient.
After familiarization with the CP, all values decreased steadily,
including the maximum, which dropped to below the 5 min (see
Fig. 6). This indicates that medical doctors increase learning
with time, and progressively improve their efficiency.
2) Scenarios: Out of the 27 patients, nine of them were explicitly assigned to a scenario by the TPs (possible explanations
can be: 1) the treating physician does not know the patient very

−

(3)
(2)

CMPL. AVR. (%)
87.5
84.7
84.3
89.2
86.5
93.1

well, and for this he can assign only three segments—physical
exercise, co-morbidities, environmental changes—-as the other
three would need a deeper knowledge of the patient; 2) the duration of the pilot for each patient was very limited—four weeks
each patient—and this limits also the selection of a segment;
3) there was not a predominant segment, according to the doctor’s opinion). The other 18 (see Table I) have been suggested
by the system and analyzed by us a posteriori, so as to correlate
the CPW recommended by the system with the actual treatment
established by the doctor. Table I shows the “segments” assigned
to T1DM and T2DM patients.
3) Compliance: Patients’ adherence to treatment was assessed by comparing the first two weeks to the last two. Results
show increased compliance in diet (from 85% to 90%), physical
exercises (from 87% to 90%), glycemic control (82% to 84%),
and drug intake (86% to 90%). Overall adherence was compared
to focus area (see Table II): the segment with highest compliance
was “lack of motivation,” followed by “comorbidities.” Educational level assigned and quizzes performance: patients’ level
of knowledge increased. 62% of the quizzes were answered by
T2DM patients and 65% of the educational content assigned by
physicians in the “educational message” section coincided with
the topics suggested by the system. Furthermore, on average,
T2DM (5 patients, 49 quizzes, 38.75%) passed from beginner
to advanced level (in 75% of cases), while T1DM (4 patients, 31
quizzes, 61.25%) passed from beginner to medium level only
(in 50% of cases).
4) Glucose Monitoring System Recommendations: The correlation between the prescriptions suggested by the system according to the pathway associated to the patient and the real
treatment prescribed by the doctor for glucose monitoring was
analyzed. 82.4% of the daily prescriptions made for glucose
monitoring corresponded to the ones suggested by the platform.
5) Messages: T2DM patients were more active on chatting
with their TP (60.3%, 70 messages) than T1DM patients (39.7%,

36

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE III
MESSAGES SENT FROM INTERVENTION GROUP ACCORDING TO THE
ASSOCIATED FOCUS AREA
Segments

Exchanged messages

Sudden hypoglycemic events
Unstable diabetes control
Physical activity
Comorbidity disease
Environmental changes
Lack of motivation

35
12
21
15
16
17

46 messages). The “sudden hypoglycemic” event was the most
active regarding message sending (see Table III).
6) User Experience: The CP achieved satisfactory evaluation, the quality criterion was met, all values were above the
threshold of 3/5 (p < 0.05). Perceived usefulness was also above
the 3/5 threshold (p < 0.05).
7) Organizational Task Adequacy: This questionnaire was
not one factorial. Thus, each item was considered separately.
Generally, METABO seems to have a rather good fit into the
existing routines. However, there are four items, among 17, that
scored below the middle of the scale, these are: the system
requires many changes in existing work processes, does not
allow medical doctors to spend more time on their patients and
does not reflect existing administration processes well. There
are other aspects that differ between countries: in Italy, there are
more concerns about organizational and jurisdictional aspects,
while in Spain, concerns are about the “nonmedical tasks” this
system can imply, while they are not scared of legal and ethical
aspects. In the Czech Republic, there is belief that the system
may improve doctor–patient relationships, but at the same time,
there is a more general skepticism about the system, even if with
less severity of judgment than the others.
VI. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have described the most desirable features
that an ICT healthcare delivery platform should offer for diabetic patients’ treatment. The combination of user-centered
design techniques, clinical guidelines and monitoring technologies have resulted in a holistic technological platform to support
health professionals and empower patients taking responsibility over the disease. We designed such a platform based on a
definition of a PHP that targets those desirable characteristics.
The implementation of the PHP into an electronic tool was
approached on a user interaction perspective first and, on top
of it, rules and algorithms were added; for this reason, our
paper is complementary to computerized clinical guidelines.
We focused more on identifying which were the sequential and
logical steps (of the guidelines) to convert them into interaction
flows, rather than transforming the contents into hierarchy and
rules for automatic reasoning.
The categorization of the patient in scenarios is an important
aspect of our approach. The complexity of diabetes pathophysiology and the relatively high number of environmental factors
influencing daily metabolic profile make it impossible to clearly

define a “single” diabetic patient and, in turn, a “single” scope
for the system. In fact, every patient is a different case and responds in a different way to the disease. For these reasons, we
tried to define a situation/problem-oriented vision of the disease in order to focus its features and try to address most of
the issues the diabetic patients and physicians have to deal with
while treating the disease. According to a review of eHealth
frameworks achieving impact in healthcare [39], positive values
are represented by multifactor, multimodel, multitheoretic, and
multidisciplinary approaches, often underestimated in research.
Limitations reside in the lack of clarity in identifying target
groups and stakeholders. In the system definition and design
phases, the authors stress the need to involve stakeholders in
discussing the problem, defining the healthcare improvements,
and extract the corresponding requirements for a desired system. As research methods, they recommend focus groups, business model canvas, and critical decision system software. Our
approach is in line with the recommendations and methods indicated in this roadmap. However, the preliminary categorization
of the diabetes problem into scenarios is a distinctive feature
of our method, and helped us to form a better definition of
the problem. We did not find any similar approaches defined in
the literature: papers in the field focus on clinical characterization of the problem and on definition of the patient phenotype.
The implementation resulted in a new definition of PHP that
show trends that may provide important benefits, such as improvement of overall medical quality, enhancement of patient
involvement in treatment procedures, and the possibility to provide dynamic treatment adaptation. Usability testing and user
experience results indicate that most TPs consider that this new
platform is in general a very useful tool for diabetes disease management, treatment, and patient follow-up that may positively
impact on medical quality improvement (given the observed increases and high level of adherence and knowledge gained) and
facilitates substantial reductions of poor practices, hospitalization times, and medical costs in general. According to the needs
identified during the focus groups, our goal was not to provide
extra time for TPs, and the usage time per patient seems to confirm that. Concerning the number of visits, our system allows
remote monitoring of diabetic patients and can have an impact in
terms of avoiding unnecessary visits, while increasing the number of visits in cases where they are crucially needed. It also
facilitates patients’ classification according to specific patient
disease history, treatment individualization, patients’ involvement, ongoing support of disease education tools, and management of most of the aspects related to lifestyle changes. All of
these are highly desirable characteristics, as recommended by
the ADA [20]. The results obtained about patients’ treatment
adherence, educational performance, and patients’ interaction
with the TP, indicate a significant increase in physical exercise
and diet follow-up, as well as good comparative results in overall
adherence versus focus area with average compliance of over
80%. This means that the system generates a clear beneficial
involvement of the patient with the treatment process. Regarding educational tools, results indicate that patients had a high
level of interaction with the system’s educational content, and
that they considerably improved their level of knowledge about

FICO et al.: INTEGRATION OF PHP IN AN ICT PLATFORM FOR DIABETES MANAGEMENT:

the disease’s management and treatment. We also gathered significant information related to the interaction between TP and
patients in the context of the platform. These results indicate
that patients used the system mostly to interact with the TP, but
also in the event of sudden hypoglycemic events, and frequently
for physical activity recommendations or consultations. Further
research work, which will focus on the clinical endpoints of
the METABO study, will tell us if the trends observed here are
confirmed.
VII. CONCLUSION
The METABO platform supports personalized ICT-based
health management of diabetic patients in their living environments. The preliminary test results indicate the feasibility,
acceptance, and potential effectiveness of this platform. The
PHP had an influence on how the CP was designed and on the
rules used to create the different DSS components. Personalization, customization, and constancy of the care process have
been assessed. This ICT platform has proven to be both useful
and usable, as rated by users, and has allowed us to draw clear
representations of users’ behaviors. Learning has had the effect
of decreasing the number of interactions and usage time with
the progression of the pilot.
Review and assessment of the results obtained from the different tests carried out with both TP and diabetic patients, allow
us to conclude that, in general, the designed system substantially fulfills the beneficial characteristics expected. A complete
pilot evaluation is underway and will be described in a forthcoming study. Further research needs to be carried out about the
collected information, correlating the technical data with the
usability results, and the clinical outcomes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the METABO Consortium
for the contributions to this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Adeyemi, E. Demir, and T. Chaussalet, “Towards an evidence-based
decision making healthcare system management: Modeling patient pathways to improve clinical outcomes,” Decision Support Syst., vol. 55, no.
1, pp. 117–125, 2013.
[2] R. Bellazzi, G. Bensa, E. Brugués, E. Carson, C. Cobelli, D. Cramp, G.
D’Annunzio, P. De Cata, A. De Leiva, T. Deutsch, P. Fratino, C. Gazzaruso,
T. Garcia-Olaya, E. J. Gomez, F. Harvey, P. Ferrari, C. Harras Friedrich, M.
E. Hernando, M. Kamel Boulos, C. Larizza, H. Luddeke, M. Luebker, A.
Maran, G. Nucci, F. Ortı́z, C. Pennati, A. Ruodsari, M. Rigla, K. Schutte,
and M. Stefanelli, “Multi-access services for the management of diabetes
mellitus: The M2DM project,” in Proc. AMIA Symp., 2002, p. n.974.
[3] PIPS project—Sixth framework programme, information society technologies (IST). (2004–2008). [Online]. Available: http://cordis.europa.eu
[4] M. Harris and J. Habetha, “The myheart project: A framework for personal health care applications,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 34, pp. 137–140,
2007.
[5] D. Alexandrou, I. Skitsas, and G. Mentzas, “A holistic environment for
the design and execution of self-adaptive clinical pathways,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 108–118, Jan. 2011.
[6] D. Riaño, F. Real, J. A. López-Vallverdú, F. Campana, S. Ercolani, P.
Mecocci, R. Annicchiarico, and C. Caltagirone, “An ontology-based personalization of health-care knowledge to support clinical decisions for
chronically ill patients,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 429–446,
2012.

37

[7] A. Honka, K. Kaipainen, H. Hietala, and N. Saranummi, “Rethinking
health: ICT-enabled services to empower people to manage their health,”
IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 119–39, Nov. 2011.
[8] S. G. Mougiakakou, C. S. Bartsocas, E. Bozas, N. Chaniotakis, D. Iliopoulou, I. Kouris, S. Pavlopoulos, A. Prountzou, M. Skevofilakas, A.
Tsoukalis, K. Varotsis, A. Vazeou, and K. Zarkogianni, “SMARTDIAB:
A communication and information technology approach for the intelligent
monitoring, management and follow-up of type 1 diabetes patients,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 622–633, May 2010.
[9] C. Lee and M. Wang, “A fuzzy expert system for diabetes decision support
application,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. B, Cybern., vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 139–153, Feb. 2011.
[10] N. Lasierra, A. Alesanco, S. Guillén, and J. Garcı́a, “A three stage
ontology-driven solution to provide personalized care to chronic patients
at home,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 516–529, 2013.
[11] M. Peleg, Y. Shahar, and S. Quaglini, “Making healthcare more accessible,
better, faster, and cheaper: The mobiguide project,” Eur. J. ePractice: vol.
20, pp. 5–20, Nov. 2013.
[12] A. Hatsek, Y. Shahar, M. Taieb-Maimon, E. Shalom, D. Klimov, and
E. Lunenfeld, “A scalable architecture for incremental specification
and maintenance of procedural and declarative clinical decision-support
knowledge,” Open Med. Inform. J., vol. 4, pp. 255–277, 2010.
[13] A. Latoszek-Berendsen, H. Tange, H. J. van den Herik, and A. Hasman, “From clinical practice guidelines to computer-interpretable guidelines: A literature overview,” Method Inform. Med., vol. 49, pp. 550–570,
2010.
[14] M. Lugtenberg, L. Brandt, I. Kunnamo, R. Shiffman, and J. Burgers,
“Using computerized decision support systems to improve the uptake of
guidelines: Perspectives from different countries,” BMJ Quality Safety,
vol. 22, pp. A6–A7, 2013.
[15] A. Guillén, J. Colás, G. Fico, and S. Guillén, “METABO: A new paradigm
towards diabetes disease management. An innovative business model,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med., Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 3554–3557.
[16] M. Buranarach, N. Thatphithakkul, A. Kawtrakul, S. Wongrochananan,
N. Kulnawan, and W. Jiamjarasrangsi, “Development of service systems
to support diabetes patient self-management using a personalized service
framework,” Annu. SRII Global Conf., 2011, pp. 363–370.
[17] L. Hass, M. Maryniuk, J. Beck, C. Cox, P. Duker, L. Edwards, E. Fisher,
L. Hanson, D. Kent, L. Kolb, S. McLaughlin, E. Orzeck, J. Piette, A.
Rhinehart, R. Rothman, S. Sklaroff, D. Tomky, and G. Youssef, “National
standards for diabetes self-management education and support,” Diabetes
Care, vol. 36, pp. S100–S108, Jul. 2012.
[18] H. Holdman and K. Lorig, “Patient Self-management: A key to effectiveness and efficiency in care of chronic disease,” Public Health Reports,
vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 239–243, May/Jun, 2004.
[19] E. H. Wagner, “Chronic disease management: What will it take to improve
care for chronic illness?” Eff. Clin. Pract., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2–4, 1998.
[20] American Diabetes Association, “Standards of medical care in diabetes–
2013,” Diabetes Care, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. S11–S66, 2013.
[21] E. H. Wagner, B. T. Austin, C. Davis, M. Hindmarsh, J. Schaefer, and
A. Bonomi, “Improving chronic illness care: Translating evidence into
action,” Health Aff. (Millwood), vol. 20, pp. 64–78, 2001.
[22] L. Kinsman et al. (2010). What is a clinical pathway? Development of a
definition to inform the debate. BMC Med. [Online]. vol. 8, no. 1, p. 31.
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1741–7015–8–31.
[23] T. Rotter, T. Rotter, E. James, P. Snow, and J. Willis, “Clinical pathways:
Effects on professional practice, patient outcomes, length of stay and
hospital costs (Review),” Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., vol. 3, no. 3,
2010, doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006632.pub2
[24] D. Hindle and A. Yazbeck, “Clinical pathways in 17 European union
countries: A purposive survey,” Aus. Health Rev., vol. 29, no. 1,
pp. 94–104, 2005.
[25] B. Hunter and J. Segrott, “Re-mapping client journeys and professional
identities: A review of the literature on clinical pathways,” Int. J. Nursing
Studies, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 608–625, 2008.
[26] S. Bryan, S. Holmes, D. Prostlethwaite, and N. Carty, “The role of integrated care pathways in improving the client experience,” J. Prof. Nursing,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 77–79, 2002.
[27] D. Colaert, “Bringing the pieces together,” presented at the RIDE Project:
Towards Semantic Interoperability eHealth Workshop, Brussels, Belgium,
2007.
[28] Z. Hu, J. Li, T. Zhou, H. Yu, M. Suzuki, and K. Araki, “Ontology-based
clinical pathways with semantic rules,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 4, pp.
2203–2212, 2012.
[29] Z. Huang, X. Lu, and H. Duan, “Using recommendation to support adaptive clinical pathways,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, pp. 1849–1860, 2012.

38

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

[30] S. Abidi and H. Chen, “Adaptable personalized care planning via a semantic web framework,” presented at the 20th Int. Congr. European Federation
Medical Informatics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2006.
[31] W3C Semantic Web Health Care and Life Sciences Interest Group
[Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/hcls/homepage-2005–
2007.
[32] P. Melillo, M. Bracale, N. De Luca, and L. Pecchia, “Classification tree for
risk assessment in patients suffering congestive heart failure via long-term
heart rate variability,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 727–733, May 2013.
[33] G. Fico, A. Fioravanti, M. T. Arredondo, J. P. Leuteritz, A. Guillén, and
D. Fernandez, “A user centered design approach for patient interfaces to
a diabetes IT platform,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2011,
pp. 1169–1172.
[34] A. Guillén, J. Colas, G. Fico, D. Ardigó, and D. Fernandez, “Shift from
physician-driven care to patient-managed self monitoring and care for
chronic diseases related to metabolic disorders,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. Conf., 2010, pp. 6854–6857.
[35] L. Pecchia, J. Martin, A. Ragozzino, C. Vanzanella, A. Scognamiglio,
L. Mirarchi, and S. Morgan, “User needs elicitation via analytic hierarchy process (AHP). A case study on a CT scanner,” BMC Med. Inform.
Decision Making, vol. 13, no. 1, p.n.2, Jan. 5, 2013.
[36] American Diabetes Association. (2008). Standards of medical care in
diabetes [Online]. Available: http://care.diabetesjournals.org.
[37] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology,” MIS Quart., vol. 13, pp. 319–339, Sep.
1989.
[38] M. Hassenzahl, M. Burmester, and F. Koller, “AttrakDiff: Ein fragebogen
zur messung wahrgenommener hedonischer und pragmatischer qualität,”
in Mensch & Computer—Interaktion in Bewegung, Z. Ziegler, G. Szwillus
(Eds.). Stuttgart, Germany: Teubner, 2003, pp. S.187–S.196.
[39] J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, H. C. Ossebaard, S. M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and E. R. Seydel, “A holistic
framework to improve the uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,”
J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 13, no. 4, p. e111, Oct.–Dec. 2011. URL:
http://www.jmir.org/2011/4/e111/
Giuseppe Fico received the M.Sc. degree in electronic engineering with specialization in biomedical engineering from the Universitá degli Studi di
Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, and MAst. degree in biomedical engineering from the Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
He is an expert in applying engineering methods
to health and wellbeing. He is a Manager of international research projects and initiatives in the health
sector, and a Coordinator of the health area for the
LST group at UPM.

Alessio Fioravanti received the M.Sc. degree in computer science engineering from Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy.
He is an expert in information platforms and
technologies for monitoring chronic disease patients
through intelligent biomedical wear, wireless technologies, and mobiles platforms.

Maria Teresa Arredondo received the M.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from Technical University
of Tucuman, Argentina, the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication from Technical University of Valencia,
Spain.
She is a full Professor of bioengineering at Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM). She is a Director
of the LifeStech group, of the Vodafone chair and of
Latin-America Affairs at UPM. Her research interests
include ambient intelligence frameworks, human factors and platforms for better health, social inclusion,
and disease management.

Joe Gorman received the B.Sc (Hons.) degree in
computing science from University of Glasgow, Scotland.
He works at SINTEF in Norway, but was a Visiting
Professor at the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
from 2011 to 2013. His research interests include
software engineering and the use of mobile IT solutions in health and Ambient Assisted Living.

Chiara Diazzi received her medical degree from
the Universitá degli Studi di Modena and Reggio
Emilia, Italy, where she is currently employed as
young researcher in the field of endocrinology and
metabolism. She is also working with the AUSL Modena as a freelance. She is an expert in endocrinology
and diabetes. Her research interests include management of diabetes, study of pituitary function, and thyroid cancer.

Giovanni Arcuri received the Master’s degree in
biomedical engineering from University of Bologna,
Italy and second level specialization degree in clinical engineering from University of Trieste, Italy.
He has worked as an Executive Clinical Engineer
in AUSL Modena, Modena, Italy since 2001, and
since 2011, he has been the head of hospitals biomedical equipment. Since 2009, he has been a Professor in
“Medical Informatics and Telemedicine’s Networks”
at Bologna University, Bologna, Italy.

Claudio Conti is a Biomedical Engineer and Master in Clinical Engineer from University of Bologna,
Italy. His main research interests include evaluation,
installation and maintenance of complex medical device systems in critical areas.

Giampiero Pirini received the M.Sc. degree in electronic engineering from University of Bologna, Italy
and the Master’s degree in clinical engineering from
University of Trieste, Italy.
He has been an Executive Clinical Engineer of the
Clinical Engineer Operative Unit of AUSL Modena,
Modena, Italy, and now in the Head of the Clinical
Engineering Department of the two public Healthcare Institution (University Hospital and Territorial
Healthcare Institution) of the province of Ferrara, Ferrara Italy. He is also the Coordinator of the Regional
Biomedical Team of Emilia-Romagna Region and he is a Member of several
technical-scientific committees for the evaluation of biomedical technologies,
medical devices, and innovations in the Emilia Romagna region.

