IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

399

Using Boolean Logic Modeling of Gene Regulatory
Networks to Exploit the Links Between Cancer
and Metabolism for Therapeutic Purposes
Osama A. Arshad, Student Member, IEEE, Priyadharshini S. Venkatasubramani, Student Member, IEEE,
Aniruddha Datta, Fellow, IEEE, and Jijayanagaram Venkatraj

Abstract—The uncontrolled cell proliferation that is characteristically associated with cancer is usually accompanied by alterations in the genome and cell metabolism. Indeed, the phenomenon
of cancer cells metabolizing glucose using a less efficient anaerobic process even in the presence of normal oxygen levels, termed
the Warburg effect, is currently considered to be one of the hallmarks of cancer. Diabetes, much like cancer, is defined by significant metabolic changes. Recent epidemiological studies have shown
that diabetes patients treated with the antidiabetic drug Metformin
have significantly lowered risk of cancer as compared to patients
treated with other antidiabetic drugs. We utilize a Boolean logic
model of the pathways commonly mutated in cancer to not only
investigate the efficacy of Metformin for cancer therapeutic purposes but also demonstrate how Metformin in concert with other
cancer drugs could provide better and less toxic clinical outcomes
as compared to using cancer drugs alone.
Index Terms—Cancer, combination therapy design, diabetes,
Metformin, Warburg effect.

for fast proliferating cancer cells, is available. Added to this
scenario are the hyperinsulinemic [3] environment in T2D and
increased gene expression of glycolytic enzymes in cancer [4],
permitting an ideal microenvironment for tumor cells. Consequently, the connection of metabolic alterations in both diseases
has juxtaposed these two conditions at the clinical, biological,
and genetic levels [5]–[7].
Epidemiological studies have also demonstrated a positive
association between T2D and the risk of cancer and cancerrelated mortality [8]. Moreover, the diabetic drug Metformin has
been shown to have a direct anticancer activity against breast
and other cancers [9]. We exploit the association between T2D
and cancer to develop a testable theoretical framework for cancer therapy design involving Metformin and chemotherapeutic
drugs.
A preliminary version of this paper has been published as a
conference abstract [10].

I. INTRODUCTION
ANCER has traditionally been described as a condition
that evolves via a multistep process accumulating mutations with six essential genetic alterations or hallmarks leading
to changes in cell physiology including genomic instability and
increased mutability [1]. However, recently aerobic glycolysis
or the “Warburg effect,” where cancer cells switch to glycolysis (an event common in normal cells when there is a lack of
oxygen) even when oxygen is available, which is an alteration
in the metabolic phenotype, has been added as a seventh hallmark [2]. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) on the other hand
has been described as a group of metabolic diseases in which
a person has high blood sugar, either because the body does
not produce enough insulin, or the cells do not respond to the
insulin that is produced. There is thus a metabolic shift in T2D
where abundant blood glucose, a key biological fuel essential

C

Manuscript received July 19, 2014; revised September 22, 2014; accepted
October 30, 2014. Date of publication November 6, 2014; date of current version December 31, 2015. This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant ECCS-1068628.
O. A. Arshad, P. S. Venkatasubramani, and A. Datta are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail: oarshad@tamu.edu; priya26@tamu.edu;
datta@ece.tamu.edu).
J. Venkatraj is with the College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail:
jvenkatraj@cvm.tamu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2368391

II. BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Cancer cells exhibit unique metabolic characteristics. In this
section, we discuss the features of tumor cell metabolism and
look at how targeting altered tumor cell metabolism through
Metformin might afford a therapeutic opportunity.
A. Cancer Cell Metabolism
Cancer cells are known to exhibit characteristic alterations in
their metabolic activity [11]–[14]. Metabolism in normal cells
differs in aerobic and anaerobic conditions. In the presence of
oxygen, nonmalignant cells convert glucose to pyruvate through
a multistep process called glycolysis. The pyruvate that is produced is transported to the mitochondria, the power house of
the cell. The mitochondria then oxidize the pyruvate via a process called oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to generate
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP is the energy currency of
the cell and is capable of storing large amounts of energy in its
phosphoanhydride bonds. When the supply of oxygen is limited
however, the cells shunt the pyruvate away from the mitochondria and convert it to lactate. Otto Warburg observed in the
1920s an anomalous characteristic of tumor cell metabolism
that cancer cells even in the presence of oxygen opt for the latter route, i.e., irrespective of the extracellular levels of oxygen,
cancer cells continue to metabolize glucose to lactate instead of
utilizing mitochondrial OXPHOS. This peculiar characteristic

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

400

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

of cancer cell metabolism is called “aerobic glycolysis” or the
“Warburg effect” [15].
On the face of it, the Warburg effect is counterintuitive as
it is a highly inefficient method for energy production: for every molecule of glucose, glycolysis generates two molecules of
ATP whereas OXPHOS produces 34 molecules. Cancer cells
presumably have a high demand for energy so the metabolic
switch to aerobic glycolysis does not seem rational. There are a
number of reasons for this switch, the most important of which is
that it allows cancer cells to divert the intermediate bimolecular
products of the glycolytic chain toward biosynthetic pathways.
Normal cells, in the quiescent state, produce energy as efficiently as possible. However, a cancer cell is tuned to incessant
growth and proliferation. Toward this end, the tumor cells instead of metabolizing glucose with the goal of efficient energy
generation divert the nutrients toward anabolic processes that
will provide the necessary substrates for cell growth. Aerobic
glycolysis allows cells to divert intermediates toward biomass
accumulation. In order to make up for the inefficiency of aerobic
glycolysis, the cancer cells take up much larger amounts of glucose. Indeed, enhanced glucose uptake and the accompanying
increased glycolytic flux is a universal metabolic alteration in
cancer, and forms the basis of the positron emission tomography
scan technique for cancer detection. Another advantage of aerobic glycolysis is that it confers better survivability in an oxygen
starved (hypoxic) environment, conditions which are common
in tumor tissue [16].
One of the principal mechanisms behind the switch to aerobic glycolysis is the constitutive expression of the Hypoxia
Inducible Factor 1 (HIF-1), which is a transcription factor ordinarily activated by hypoxic stress [14], [17]. HIF-1 drives
many of the metabolic adaptations in cancer [13], [18]. First,
it increases the uptake of glucose by upregulating the glucose
transporters. Second, it increases glycolytic flux by activating
enzymes in the glycolytic pathway. Third, it shunts pyruvate
away from the mitochondria (pyruvate enters the tricarboxylic
acid (TCA) cycle in the mitochondria through conversion to
acetyl-CoA. This reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). HIF-1 inhibits PDH by activating PDH kinase
1 thereby slowing the entry of pyruvate into the TCA cycle).
Finally, HIF-1 activates the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase A
which catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to lactate, and upregulates monocarboxolate transporter 4 to discharge the lactate
into the extracellular matrix (ECM). This leads to the acidification of the ECM milieu which in turn promotes metastasis.
Therefore, HIF initiates a transcriptional cascade which acts as
a key driver of the metabolic adaptation of cancer cells.
In addition to the Warburg effect, another major facet of the
metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells is increased “de novo
fatty acid synthesis,” a process where the cells synthesize the
requisite lipids in-house rather than relying on the circulating
exogenous supply from the blood stream as normal cells do [19].
The endogenous synthesis of lipids requires citrate which is derived from the TCA cycle. To sustain the TCA cycle, the depleted
citrate is replenished through a process called anaplerosis [13].
Sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) is a master
transcriptional regulator of genes involved in de novo lipid and

sterol biosynthesis [20]. Enhanced expression of SREBP has
been shown to correlate with breast cancer progression [19].
Thus, fundamental alterations in tumor cell metabolism include aerobic glycolysis and de novo lipid synthesis with HIF-1
and SREBP as key markers of the metabolic reprogramming
that takes place in cancer cells.
B. Metformin and Cancer
Altered tumor metabolism is of paramount importance for
sustained uncontrolled cell growth, a vulnerability that can be
exploited for therapeutic intervention [14], [19]. In the context of
targeting cancer metabolism, the widely used antidiabetic drug
Metformin has garnered attention for its potential anticancer
properties suggesting a role for this drug in cancer therapy and
prevention [21]–[24]. Tumor cells have a voracious appetite for
glucose. Metformin suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis which
reduces glucose levels thereby diminishing the tumor fuel supply. The principal mechanism of action of Metformin is the
activation of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), the cellular energy sensor which when activated
switches on ATP-generating pathways and diminishes energyconsuming biosynthetic processes thereby curtailing proliferation. Activation of AMPK by Metformin phosphorylates the
tuberous sclerosis complex which in turn inhibits the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex, the master stimulator of protein synthesis and cell growth.
In view of the central role of energy metabolism in cell proliferation, we investigate the therapeutic value of Metformin
for cancer treatment. Moreover, there are several other potential
benefits of adding Metformin to cancer therapy regimens. It is
an FDA approved stable oral agent with a long history of use,
is widely available, has an extremely low toxicity profile, and is
very inexpensive [25].
III. THERAPY DESIGN
Cancer is an umbrella term for a set of diseases characterized by a break down in cell cycle control that allows cells to
escape the usual controls on cell proliferation and survival. In
[26], the authors take the view that in essence, it is a disease
that results in aberrant signaling caused by breakdown(s) in the
normal signaling pathway of a given cell, and therefore, it can
be meaningfully treated or managed through remedying the effect of such breakdown(s). By adopting a similar approach, we
consider the signaling pathways commonly mutated in cancer,
map the biological pathway information to a digital circuit which
is then used to determine the possible fault locations and devise
an appropriate therapeutic scheme.
A. Pathway Model
Mutations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Ras/MEK/ERK
(MAPK) signaling pathways are common in breast cancer malignancies with frequent genetic alteration in several key players
from these pathways [27], [28]. These pathways are activated
via growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases and regulate cell
metabolism, survival, and growth. A schematic representation

ARSHAD et al.: USING BOOLEAN LOGIC MODELING OF GENE REGULATORY NETWORKS TO EXPLOIT THE LINKS BETWEEN CANCER

Fig. 1.

401

Schematic diagram of pathways commonly mutated in breast cancer.

of these pathways is given in [26]. To this schematic, we add the
pathway segment incorporating the transcription factors HIF-1
and SREBP. This leads us to our signaling pathway model of
Fig. 1. The black and red lines in the diagram indicate relationships which are activating and inhibitory, respectively.
The red boxes show breast cancer drugs and their points of
intervention in the pathway. The cancer drugs in our model
are “targeted molecular therapies,” agents which act with great
specificity on particular molecules in the signal transduction
network known to be important in cancer [29]–[32]. The cancer
drugs are Lapatinib (a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor of EGFR
and ERBB2) [29]–[32], Trastuzumab (a monoclonal antibody
targeting ERBB2) [29]–[32], Cixutumumab (anti-IGF1R monoclonal antibody) [33], U0126 (MAPK pathway inhibitor targeting MEK) [34], [35], and LY294002 (PI3K/Akt pathway
inhibitor targeting PIK3CA) [30]–[32].
Genes exhibit switch-like on/off behavior and thus a gene regulatory network (GRN) can be modeled with a Boolean circuit
[26]. The marginal interactions amongst genes represented by
the signal transduction network can be translated to an equiva-

lent Boolean network. For example, if either of two genes say
A or B can activate a third gene C, then this component of the
GRN can be represented by an OR gate with inputs A and B
and output C. Using such a procedure outlined in [26] of translating the interactions of different genes in a signaling network
to a logic circuit, we can model the pathways in Fig. 1 with
a Boolean circuit, to arrive at Fig. 2. In this circuit, there are
nine outputs, six of which are transcription factors (marked in
yellow) and the remaining (which are not colored) reflect the
activation status of some key proteins from our target signaling
pathways.
B. Fault Locations and Drug Intervention Points
In normal cells, cell division is under extremely tight control
and cells only divide to form further cells if they receive external signals to do so. These external signals that stimulate a
cell to divide are called growth factors or mitogens. Cancer is
characterized by a breakdown in cell signaling in which cells
are set-free from the usual controls on cell-cycle progression

402

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

breast cancer [27], mutates to PIK3CA oncogene, the encoded
PIK3CA oncoprotein can become constitutively active and start
perpetually signaling to the downstream proteins. In that case,
even if there is no mitogenic signaling from the outside, the
cell will be stimulated to divide. Such constitutive activation
of PIK3CA can be modeled as a stuck-at-1 fault. Similarly,
mutation in the PTEN tumor suppressor can cause a cell to ultimately undergo uncontrolled cell division, and possibly turn
cancerous. Such a fault that renders PTEN inactive corresponds
to a stuck-at-0 fault. Thus, cancer is a disease of aberrant cell
signaling caused by failures in the signaling pathways which can
be represented as stuck-at faults in the network. For simplicity,
we consider single stuck-at faults. From the network in Fig. 2,
we identify 27 possible fault locations illustrated in Fig. 3 with
the “stuck-at-1” faults in black numerals and the “stuck-at-0”
faults in red.
The intervention points in the Boolean circuit for the cancer
drugs are shown in Fig. 4. Since the cancer drugs of Fig. 1, with
the exception of Metformin, break or stop the effect of the kinase
(to which they bind) on the molecules further downstream of
the signaling cascade, a drug of this type can be modeled as
an inverted input to an “AND” gate at the point of intervention
[26]. As discussed in Section II, Metformin however acts as an
activator of the AMPK, overcoming the dysregulation of AMPK
in cancer. Thus, in order to incorporate the effect of Metformin
in our Boolean network, its action is modeled via the activation
of AMPK.
C. Fault Classification
In this section, we group the faults identified in Fig. 3 into
different classes of equivalent faults based on their output to the
nonproliferative input. The input and output vectors are defined
as follows:
IN P U T = V = [EGF, HBEGF, IGF, N RG1, P T EN ]
OU T P U T = [F OS-JU N, SP 1, SRF -ELK1,
SRF -ELK4, SREBP, HIF -1,
BCL2, BCL2L1, CCN D1].

Fig. 2.

Boolean circuit model.

and continue to grow and proliferate even in the absence of
mitogenic signaling. Such abnormalities in the signaling network can be modeled as stuck-at faults where a point in the
network is permanently fixed (stuck) at a particular value of either 1 (stuck-at-1 fault) or zero (stuck-at-0 fault) corresponding,
respectively, to the constitutive (perpetual) activation or inactivation of a gene [26]. For example, in cancerous cells, the
proto-oncogenes can get mutated to become oncogenes or a tumor suppressor gene can lose its braking function. For instance,
if the PIK3CA proto-oncogene, a gene frequently mutated in

Each input can take on binary values. We set the input vector
to [00001] which corresponds to the growth factors being absent
and the tumor suppressor PTEN being active, i.e., nonproliferation. For each of the 27 faults that may cause cancer, the output
is tabulated in Fig. 5(a). Fault location zero corresponds to the
fault-free case.
Based on the outputs, the faults can be grouped together
into classes of equivalent faults. Faults which produce identical
output for the same input test vector are equivalent. From the
outputs in Fig. 5(a), the sets of equivalent faults for the test
vector V = [00001] are shown in Fig. 5(b).
D. Simulation Results for Drug Intervention
The total number of drugs is 6, so we define a binary drug
vector of length 6 with each component having a value of either
1 if the corresponding drug is applied, and zero if it is not.

ARSHAD et al.: USING BOOLEAN LOGIC MODELING OF GENE REGULATORY NETWORKS TO EXPLOIT THE LINKS BETWEEN CANCER

Fig. 4.

Fig. 3.

Possible fault locations.

Thus, there are a total number of 26 = 64 possible drug vectors
representing all the possible drug combinations. For each of the
27 faults that may cause cancer, the simulation determines the
output for every drug combination and maps the output to a real
number indicating the extent of proliferation. The drug vector
is defined as follows:
DRU G V ECT OR = [M etf ormin, Lapatinib,
T rastuzumab, Cixutumumab,
U 0126, LY 294002].

403

Drug intervention locations.

The input and output vectors are defined as before in the
previous section. Again, for the simulation, we set the input
vector to [00001], i.e., a nonproliferative input. For this input,
we expect all the outputs comprising proliferative transcription
factors, metabolic adaptation markers, cell-cycle progression
and antiapoptotic proteins to be deactivated or turned off and
indeed, for the fault-free scenario, this is certainly the case.
However, faults in the signaling network can cause a proliferative (nonzero) output even for the nonproliferative input. Our
objective is to nullify the effect of the faults by targeted drug
intervention to produce an output as close to [000000000] and as
far away from the extremely proliferative output [111111111]
as possible.

404

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 6.

Drug vector response.

Fig. 5. (a) Output vector for all single stuck-at faults with input V = [00001].
(b) Equivalent fault groups for input V = [00001].

To quantify the degree of abnormal behavior, we define a
transformation as in [26] to map the 29 = 512 output vectors to
the continuous real number scale. Since the first six components
of the output vector are transcription factors, and the remaining
are the activation status of some proteins, these two groups of
outputs have different biological significance and are encoded
separately. Defining N1 to be the number of active transcription
factors and N2 to be the number of active remaining outputs, the
transformation below maps in a many-to-one fashion the output
vector to a real number:
Output = [a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i]
N1 = [a + b + c + d + e + f ]
N2 = [g + h + i]
P = N1 × N2
S = N1 + N 2
ψ(output) = αP + (1 − α)S
where αε(0, 1) is a free design parameter that defines the convex
combination of the sum and product of N1 and N2 . It determines
the relative weights assigned to the sum and product. Since

there is no obvious reason to assign greater weight to the sum
or product term relative to the other, we assign equal weights by
selecting a value for α that is right in the middle of the parameter
space. Hence, α is chosen to be 0.5 for the simulation. Thus, we
have Ψ = 0.5(N1 N2 + N1 + N2 ). Note that this is a nonlinear
cost function with a product term N1 N2 . As a consequence, this
transformation produces a higher cost (for the same number of
total active output components), when genes from both groups
in the output vector are expressed compared to the situation
when only one group in isolation is trying to drive proliferation.
This makes sense as we expect that the extent of proliferation
will be higher when both sets of genes, which when deregulated
play important complementary roles toward unchecked proliferation, are simultaneously active. It is pertinent to point out,
however, that the results that follow are not predicated on the
exact definition of the mapping.
The function Ψ’s values for all possible faults and drug combinations are shown in Fig. 6 with the fault locations and drug
vectors along the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively.
The outputs are color-coded on a scale with red representing extreme proliferation and green nonproliferation. The color codes
used are listed on the right side of Fig. 6. Again fault location
zero corresponds to the fault-free case.
We would like to drive as many of the faults toward green
(nonproliferation) as possible using as few of the cancer drugs as

ARSHAD et al.: USING BOOLEAN LOGIC MODELING OF GENE REGULATORY NETWORKS TO EXPLOIT THE LINKS BETWEEN CANCER

we can since these drugs have toxic side effects. From Fig. 6, we
can immediately see the benefit of Metformin. It mitigates the
effect of faults 7–12, which are faults in the insulin/insulin-like
growth factor (IGF) signaling pathway and the PI3K/AKT pathway, the pathway involved in regulating cell metabolism. From
the previous section, these faults are classified in the same fault
group and it is for this class of faults that we expect Metformin to
show therapeutic benefit, i.e., Metformin should ameliorate the
effect of faults that lead to the deregulation or hyperactivation of
the PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis. Indeed, Metformin has been shown
to overcome the dysregulation of the PI3K pathway by suppression of mTOR through AMPK activation in breast cancer cells.
A number of studies have indicated the antitumorigenic effects
of Metformin in multiple cancer cell lines including breast cancer with the use of Metformin as an anticancer agent now being
evaluated in clinical trials [21], [24], [36]–[38]. Moreover, one
of the most common ways in which the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway can be deregulated in breast cancer is the loss of PTEN,
the negative regulator of this cascade, an event found in up to
40% of breast tumors [39]. Metformin has been shown to delay
the onset of tumors in PTEN-negative mice [40]. Experimental studies have also demonstrated the benefit of Metformin in
combination with chemotherapeutic agents and provided a rationale for Metformin as part of combination therapy for breast
cancer [41]. All in all, our simulation results with respect to
the therapeutic benefit of Metformin for cancer seem to be in
concordance with the literature.
Note that no drug vector has any effect on fault 18. This makes
sense as fault 18 corresponds to a mutation in the ERK1/ERK2
protein. This fault is downstream of all the drugs in our pathway
model, so no drug combination is able to counteract the effect
of this particular fault. In addition, the faults 13–15 produce
an all zero output, i.e., these faults are “undetectable” as they
generate the same output as the fault-free case. Since we are
only concerned with faults that can induce cancer, we do not
have to worry about these particular faults as they produce a
nonproliferative output.
The best two-drug vector in terms of driving faults toward
green is 100010, the combination of Metformin and U0126.
However, considering cancer drugs only (i.e., excluding Metformin) the best drug vector is 000011, i.e., the drug combination
of U0126 and LY294002 is the best two drug combination of
cancer drugs. If to this combination we add Metformin, we see
we get an even better result as more of the faults are driven
toward green. This better outcome is obtained at minimal additional cost as in contrast to cancer drugs, Metformin is inexpensive and does not have adverse side-effects. We conclude that
incorporating Metformin in the mix for cancer therapy can lead
to improved outcomes.
Therefore, it seems that U0126 and LY294002 along with
Metformin should be a potent combination therapy for breast
cancer. We thus propose that a cancer combination therapy of
U0126 or some other MEK (mitogen-activated protein kinase)
inhibitor and LY294002 along with Metformin can lead to better therapeutic results. The exact same cancer drug combination
of U0126 and LY294002 has been proposed as a therapeutic
approach in the prevention and treatment of human melanoma

405

[42]. Furthermore, recently a similar drug combination that targets the MAPK and PI3K pathways has shown promising results
for Rhabdomyosarcoma [43]. Since these very signaling pathways are the most frequently deregulated signaling cascades
in human breast cancer [27] [28], it is reasonable to expect
the previous drug combination to be effective for breast cancer malignancies. The fact that our model prediction regarding
the therapeutic potential of Metformin is in consonance with
the literature and that the proposed cancer drug combination
has shown promising results in other cancers with frequent
mutations in the same pathways suggests that this particular
cancer therapeutic regimen warrants further investigation. In
any case, our results indicate at a minimum that incorporating
the metabolism-targeting drug Metformin in the cancer therapy
cocktail should give better outcomes compared with the use of
cancer drugs alone.
Thus, by computer simulation of the Boolean logic equivalent model of the critical gene regulatory pathways of breast
cancer, we have been able to demonstrate the benefit of Metformin use in cancer therapy which suggests a role for this drug
in combination with cancer drugs. The theoretical results presented herein regarding the potential benefits of including the
metabolism targeting drug Metformin as part of a combination
cocktail therapy for cancer ultimately need to be validated via
actual experiments on cancer cell lines.
The work presented here has some limitations. One of the
major impediments to the success of therapeutic intervention
in cancer is the presence of feedback signaling. Any attempt
to counter the deregulation of a particular signaling pathway
by administering targeted therapy is counteracted in cancer
by exploiting the redundancy in the cellular signaling network
through the compensatory activation of feedback loops which
ultimately limit the potency of any attempted therapeutic intervention [44]. Furthermore, a tumor population is generally
heterogeneous in that it is comprised of a number of different
subpopulations that harbor distinct mutations with the result that
no two cancers are completely alike [45]. As a consequence, different subpopulations require different treatments. These issues
of tumor heterogeneity and feedback signaling are complex research problems in their own right but need to be addressed,
i.e., a comprehensive system model needs to incorporate these
considerations. Some preliminary progress in this direction has
been made [46], [47].
IV. CONCLUSION
Cancer cells are known to show atypical metabolic characteristics: an “Achilles’ heel” [13] that provides a therapeutic
opportunity. We have investigated via simulations the benefit of
targeting tumor cell metabolism by using the antidiabetic drug
Metformin. The biological pathways involved in cell growth and
metabolic regulation were mapped to a Boolean network. The
equivalent digital circuit was used to identify locations at which
faults could occur and categorize them into equivalent classes
based on their output. We incorporated the drug intervention
points into our model allowing us to test different combination therapies in terms of their efficacy in mitigating the effects

406

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

of faults in the network. We have shown that incorporating
Metformin in the therapeutic regimen can lead to better outcomes. We predict that a combination therapy of Metformin
and cancer drugs will lead to improved cancer therapy design.
One of our long term objectives is to experimentally validate
such predictions using cancer cell lines.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Hanahan and R. Weinburg, “Hallmarks of cancer: The next generation,”
Cell, vol. 144, no. 5, pp. 646–674, 2011.
[2] S. Yeung, S. Pan, and M. Lee, “Roles of p53, Myc and HIF-1 in regulating
glycolysis —The seventh hallmark of cancer,” Cellular Mol. Life Sci.,
vol. 65, no. 24, pp. 3981–3999, 2008.
[3] P. Wysocki and B. Weirusz-Wysocka, “Obesity, hyperinsulinemia and
breast cancer: Novel targets and a novel role for metformin,” Expert Rev.
Mol. Diagnostics, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 509–519, 2010.
[4] U. G. Sattler, F. Hirschhaeuser, and W. F. Mueller-Kleiser, “Manipulation
of glycolysis in malignant tumors: Fantasy or therapy?” Curr. Med. Chem.,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 96–108, 2010.
[5] E. Giovannucci, D. Harlan, M. Archer, R. Bergenstal, and L. Habel, “Diabetes and cancer: A consensus report,” Diabetes Care, vol. 33, no. 7,
pp. 1674–1685, 2010.
[6] S. Schott, A. Schneeweiss, and C. Sohn, “Breast cancer and diabetes
mellitus,” Exp. Clin. Endrocol. Diabetes, vol. 118, no. 10, pp. 673–677,
2010.
[7] P. Vigneri, F. Frasca, L. Sciacca, G. Pandini, and R. Vigneri, “Diabetes
and cancer,” Endocrine Relat. Cancer, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1103–1123,
2009.
[8] D. H. Cohen and D. Leroith, “Obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cancer:
The insulin and IGF connection,” Endocrine Relat. Cancer, vol. 19,
pp. F27–F45, 2012.
[9] A. Vazquez-Martin, C. Oliveras-Ferraros, S. Cufi, B. Martin-Castilo, and
J. Menendez, “Metformin and energy metabolism in breast cancer: From
insulin physiology to tumour-initiating stem cells,” Curr. Mol. Med.,
vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 674–691, 2010.
[10] O. Arshad, P. Venkatasubramani, A. Datta, and J. Venkatraj, “Exploiting the cancer and diabetes metabolic connection for therapeutic purposes,” presented at the IEEE International Workshop on Genomic Signal Processing and Statistics, Houston, TX, USA, Nov. 2013,
p. 44.
[11] A. J. Levine and A. M. Puzio-Kuter, “The control of the metabolic switch
in cancers by oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes,” Science, vol. 330,
no. 6009, pp. 1340–1344, 2010.
[12] J. M. Cantor and D. M. Sabatini, “Cancer cell metabolism: One hallmark many faces,” Cancer Discovery, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 891–898,
Oct. 2012.
[13] R. J. Deberardinis, J. J. Lum, G. Hatzivassiliou, and C. B. Thompson,
“The biology of cancer: Metabolic reprogramming fuels cell growth and
proliferation,” Cell Metabolism, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 11–20, Jan. 2008.
[14] G. Kroemer and J. Pouyssegur, “Tumor cell metabolism: Cancer’s
Achilles’ heel,” Cancer Cell, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 472–482, 2008.
[15] O. Warburg, “On the origin of cancer cells,” Science, vol. 123,
pp. 309–314, 1956.
[16] I. Papandreou, “HIF-1 mediates the adaptation to hypoxia by actively
downregulating mitochondrial oxygen consumption,” Cell Metabolism,
vol. 3, pp. 187–197, 2006.
[17] M. C. Brahimi-Horn, J. Chiche, and J. Pouyssegur, “Hypoxia signaling controls metabolic demand,” Curr. Opin. Cell Biol., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 223–229, Apr. 2007.
[18] J. Kim, I. Tchernyshyov, G. L. Semenza, and C. V. Dang, “HIF-1 mediated
expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase: A metabolic switch required
for cellular adaptation to hypoxia,” Cell Metabolism, vol. 3, pp. 171–185,
Mar. 2006.
[19] A. Schluze and A. Harris, “How cancer metabolism is tuned for proliferation and vulnerable to disruption,” Nature, vol. 491, pp. 364–373,
Nov. 2012.
[20] K. Duvel, J. L. Yecies, S. Menon, P. Raman, A. I. Lipovsky, A. L. Souza,
E. Triantafellow, Q. Ma, R. Gorski, S. Cleaver, M. G. Vander Heiden, J. P.
MacKeigen, P. M. Finan, C. B. Clish, L. O. Murphy and B. D. Manning,
“Activation of a metabolic gene regulatory network downstream of mTOR
complex 1,” Mol. Cell, vol. 39, pp. 171–183, 2010.

[21] M. A. Pierotti, F. Berrino, M. Gariboldi, C. Melani, A. Mogavero, T. Negri,
P. Pasanisi, and S. Pilotti, “Targeting metabolism for cancer treatment and
prevention: Metformin, an old drug with multi-faceted effects,” Oncogene,
vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 1475–1487, Mar. 2013.
[22] C. Belda-Iniesta, O. Pernia, and R. Simo, “Metformin: A new option in cancer treatment,” Clin. Transl. Oncol., vol. 13, pp. 363–367,
Jun. 2011.
[23] B. J. Quinn, H. Kitagawa, R. M. Memmott, J. J. Gills, and P. A. Dennis,
“Repositioning metformin for cancer prevention and treatment,” Trends
Endocrinol. Metabolism, vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 468–480, Sep. 2013.
[24] R. Dowling, P. Goodwin, and V. Stambolic, “Understanding the benefit of Metformin use in cancer treatment,” BMC Med., vol. 9, no. 33,
2011.
[25] B. Liu, Z. Fan, S. M. Edgerton, X. Deng, I. N. Alimova, S. E. Cind,
and A. D. Thor, “Metformin induces unique biological and molecular
responses in triple negative breast cancer cells,” Cell Cycle, vol. 8, no. 13,
pp. 2031–2040, Jul. 2009.
[26] R. Layek, A. Datta, M. Bittner, and E. Dougherty, “Cancer therapy design
based on pathway logic,” Bioinformatics, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 548–555,
2011.
[27] A. Hollestelle, F. Elstrodt, and J. H. A. Hagel, “Phosphatidylinositol-3OH kinase or RAS pathway mutations in human breast cancer cell lines,”
Mol. Cancer Res., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 195–201, 2007.
[28] R. J. Shaw and L. C. Cantley, “Ras, PI(3)K and mTOR signaling controls
tumor cell growth,” Nature, vol. 441, pp. 424–430, May 2006.
[29] R. H. Alvarez, V. Valero, and G. N. Hortobagyi, “Emerging targeted
therapies for breast cancer,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 28, pp. 3366–3379,
2010.
[30] C. Schlotter, U. Vogt, H. Allgayer, and B. Brandt, “Molecular targeted
therapies for breast cancer treatment,” Breast Cancer Res., vol. 10,
no. 211, 2008.
[31] R. J. Lee, A. C. Armstrong, and A. M. Wardley, “Emerging targeted
combinations in the management of breast cancer,” Breast Cancer, vol. 5,
pp. 61–72, 2013.
[32] R. Munagala, F. Aqil, and R. C. Gupta, “Promising molecular targeted therapies in breast cancer,” Indian J. Pharmacol., vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 236–245, 2011.
[33] K. P. McKian and P. Haluska, “Cixutumumab,” Expert Opin. Investigational Drugs, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1025–1033, 2009.
[34] J. V. Duncia, J. B. Santella, C. A.Higley, W. J. Pitts, J. Wityak, W. E.
Frietze, F. W. Rankin, J. Sun, R. A. Earl, A. C. Tabaka, C. A. Teleha, K. F.
Blom, M. F. Favata, E. J. Manos, A. J. Daulerio, D. A. Stradley, K. Horiuchi, R. A. Copeland, P. A. Scherle, J. M. Trzaskos, R. L. Magolda, G. L.
Trainor, R. R. Wexler, F. W. Hobbs and R. E. Olson, “MEK inhibitors: The
chemistry and biological activity of U0126, its analogs, and cyclization
products,” Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., vol. 8, no. 20, pp. 2839–2844, 1998.
[35] H. Fukazawa, K. Noguchi, Yuko Murakami and Y. Uehara, “Mitogenactivated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) inhibitors
restore anoikis sensitivity in human breast cancer cell lines with a constitutively activated extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway,” Mol.
Cancer Therapeutics, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 303–309, 2002.
[36] C. W. Song, H. Lee, R. P. M. Dings, B. Williams, J. Powers, T. Dos Santos,
B.-H. Choi, S. Schott, and H. J. Park, “Metformin kills and radiosensitizes
cancer cells and preferentially kills cancer stem cells,” Nature Sci. Rep.,
vol. 2, no. 362, 2012.
[37] Y. K. Choi and K.-G. Park, “Metabolic roles of AMPK and metformin in
cancer cells,” Mol. Cells, vol. 36, pp. 279–287, Oct. 2013.
[38] A. M. Gonzalez-Angulo and F. Meric-Bernstam, “Metformin: A therapeutic opportunity in breast cancer,” Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 16,
pp. 1695–1700, 2010.
[39] G. Perez-Tenorio, L. Alkhori, B. Olsson, M. A. Waltersson, B. Nordenskjold, L. E. Rutqvist, L. Skoog, and O. Stal, “PIK3CA mutations and
PTEN loss correlate with similar prognostic factors and are not mutually
exclusive in breast cancer,” Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 13, pp. 3577–3584,
2007.
[40] X. Huang, S. Wullschleger, N. Shpiro, R. V. A. McGuire, K. Sakamoto,
Y. L. Woods, W. McBurnie, S. Fleming, and D. R. Alessi, “Important role
of the LKB1–AMPK pathway in suppressing tumorigenesis in PTENdeficient mice,” Biochem. J., vol. 412, pp. 211–221, 2008.
[41] H. A. Hirsch, D. Ilioupolis, P. N. Tsichlis, and K. Struhl, “Metformin
selectively targets cancer stem cells and acts together with chemotherapy
to block tumor growth and prolong remission,” Cancer Res., vol. 69, pp.
7507–7511, 2009.
[42] B. Bedogni, S. M. Welford, A. C. Kwan, J. Ranger-Moore, K. Saboda and
M. B. Powell, “Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and mitogenactivated protein kinase kinase 1/2 prevents melanoma development and

ARSHAD et al.: USING BOOLEAN LOGIC MODELING OF GENE REGULATORY NETWORKS TO EXPLOIT THE LINKS BETWEEN CANCER

[43]

[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]

promotes melanoma regression in the transgenic TPR as mouse model,”
Mol. Cancer Therapeutics, vol. 5, pp. 3071–3077, 2006.
J. Renshaw, K. R. Taylor, R. Bishop, M. Valenti, A. D. Brandon, S.
Gowan, S. A. Eccles, R. R. Ruddle, L. D. Johnson, F. I. Raynaud, J. L.
Selfe, K. Thway, T. Pietsch, A. D. Pearson and J. Shipley, “Dual blockade
of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR (AZD8055) and RAS/MEK/ERK (AZD 6244)
pathways synergistically inhibits rhabdomyosarcoma cell growth in vitro
and in vivo,” Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 19, no. 21, pp. 5940–5951,
Nov. 2013.
J. S. Logue and D. K. Morrison, “Complexity in the signaling network:
Insights from the use of targeted inhibitors in cancer therapy,” Genes
Develop., vol. 26, pp. 641–650, 2012.
C. E. Meacham and S. J. Morrison, “Tumor heterogeneity and cancer cell
plasticity,” Nature, vol. 501, pp. 328–337, 2013.
A. K. Mohanty, A. Datta, and V. Venkatraj, “A model for cancer tissue
heterogeneity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 966–974,
Mar. 2014.
S. Sridharan, R. Layek, A. Datta, and J. Venketraj, “Boolean modeling
and fault diagnosis in oxidative stress response,” BMC Genomics, vol. 13,
no. Suppl. 6, p. S4, 2012.

Osama A. Arshad received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from the Ghulam Ishaq Institute
of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi, Pakistan, and the M.Eng. degree in electrical engineering
from Texas A&M University, College Station, TX,
USA, where he is currently working the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering, where he is also a Research
Assistant at the Center for Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering.
His research interests include genomic signal processing and computational biology.

Priyadharshini S. Venkatasubramani received the
B.Tech. degree in instrumentation and control engineering from the National Institute of Technology,
Jalandhar, India, in 2010, and the M.Tech. degree in
instrumentation from the Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India, in 2012. She is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA.
She is also a Research Assistant in the Department
of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University.
Her research interests include genomic signal processing, statistical modeling,
and machine learning.

407

Aniruddha Datta received the B.Tech degree in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, in 1985, the M.S.E.E. degree from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale,
IL, USA, in 1987 and the M.S. (applied mathematics)
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 1991.
In August 1991, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, where he is currently the J. W. Runyon, Jr.
’35 Professor II, and the Director for the Center for
Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering. His areas of interest include adaptive control, robust control, PID control, and genomic signal processing. He has authored or coauthored 5 books and more than 100 journal
and conference papers on these topics. He has served as an Associate Editor
of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL (2001–2003),
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN AND CYBERNETICS—
PART B (2005–2006), and is currently serving as an Associate Editor of the
EURASIP Journal on Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, the IEEE Journal of Biomedical and
Health Informatics, and IEEE Access.

Jijayanagaram Venkatraj received the B.V.Sc. degree in veterinary medicine from Madras Veterinary
College, Chennai, India, in 1979, and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees from New York University, New York,
NY, USA, in 1987, and 1992, respectively.
The laboratory experiments for his thesis “Molecular Studies in Fanconi’s Anemia” were accomplished at Rockefeller University Hospital, New
York, NY, USA. He was a clinical fellow in human
genetics and underwent clinical training for Board
Certification in human clinical molecular and cytogenetic diagnosis and counseling at the Department of Medical Genetics, College
of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, from 1993–1996.
During this time, he was also a Project Member of the first NIH funded Human
Genome Project to map and sequence human chromosome 13 at the Department
of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University. He has been a Diplomat of the American Board of Medical Genetics,
since 2000, and is currently a Clinical Associate Professor in the Department
of Veterinary Integrated Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. His research interests include genomic basis of cancer development and resistance to chemotherapy specifically
in breast cancer.

