766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Monitoring Cerebral Hemodynamics Following
Optogenetic Stimulation via Optical
Coherence Tomography
Farid Atry, Seth Frye, Thomas J. Richner, Sarah K. Brodnick, Alana Soehartono, Justin Williams, Member, IEEE,
and Ramin Pashaie∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this article, spectral domain optical coherence tomography is used to measure the hemodynamic response induced
by optogenetic stimulation in the somatosensory cortex of transgenic mice. By analyzing the 3-D angiograms and Doppler measurements produced by coherence tomography, we observed significant increase in blood flow as a result of increased vessel diameter
and blood velocity following optical stimulation of cortical neurons.
Such distinct responses were not observed in control experiments
where the brain of wild-type mice were exposed to the same light
pulses.
Index Terms—Functional monitoring and imaging, laser
Doppler velocimetry, medical and biological imaging, optical coherence tomography, optogenetics.

I. INTRODUCTION
ORTICAL blood flow and neuronal activation are two
fundamentally coupled processes that regulate functions
in the brain. It is well understood that neuronal activity is intimately coupled to hemodynamic signals in the central nervous
system [1], [2]. However, the mechanisms that are involved in
neurovascular coupling or functional hyperemia, at the molecular or system level, are still not completely identified. To assess
neurovascular coupling, specifically in cortical regions, we need
mechanisms to stimulate neurons in large-scale networks and
simultaneously monitor the induced hemodynamic signals. For
this purpose, we combined optogenetic neurostimulation with
spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) in

C

Manuscript received June 17, 2014; revised September 7, 2014 and October 8, 2014; accepted October 11, 2014. Date of publication October 31,
2014; date of current version January 16, 2015. This work was supported by
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency MTO under the auspices of
Dr. Jack Judy through the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center, under
Pacific Grant/Contract N66001-12-C-4025, by the University of Wisconsin Research under Grant 101X172, Grant 101X213, and Grant 101X254, and also by
NARSAD Young Investigator Award under Grant #20610. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
F. Atry, S. Frye, and A. Soehartono are with the Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53211 USA (e-mail: fatry@uwm.edu; futuramafrye@gmail.com;
alanamau001@e.ntu.edu.sg).
T. J. Richner, S. K. Brodnick, and J. Williams, are with the Laboratory for
Optical and Computational Instrumentation and Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA (e-mail:
richner@uw.edu; sarah.kathryn21@gmail.com; jwilliam@cae.wisc.edu).
∗ R. Pashaie is with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Department, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53211 USA (e-mail:
pashaie@uwm.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2364816

an integrated platform, which allows us to optically stimulate
cells inside the field of view (FOV) and simultaneously monitor
changes in vessel diameter and blood velocity.
Optogenetics is an emerging neuromodulation modality in
which specific cell types of interest are genetically targeted to
produce light-activated proteins [3]–[7]. Once these proteins are
expressed, the activity of the targeted cells can be manipulated
with high spatial and temporal resolution by exposing the cells
to appropriate wavelengths [8]. Advent of optogenetics in recent
years has provided the opportunity to selectively modulate the
activity of cells in the large networks of the brain and study the
contribution of each cell type in functional hyperemia.
In previous publications, optogenetics is combined with other
imaging modalities, such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), to study neurovascular coupling in small rodents [9]–[12]. The fMRI data that are presented before provide
insight to the global and local distribution of blood-oxygenationlevel-dependent (BOLD) signal following optogenetic stimulation of a specific neuronal subpopulation. Nonetheless, the spatial and temporal resolution of fMRI is always the major shortcoming of the technology. Moreover, the BOLD signal does not
contain detailed information about the induced changes in blood
velocity or vasodynamics separately. In some advanced studies
in recent years, multiphoton imaging is used to investigate functional hyperemia at the cellular level [13], [14]. In multiphoton
imaging, cellular activity (neurons and astrocytes) and hemodynamic signals are both recorded optically via fluorescence
imaging. Adding optical stimulation to this combination can
make the experimental design significantly complicated. SDOCT provides a mechanism to image vascular network with
high resolution and measure velocity simultaneously in-vivo via
Doppler tomography. Few other relatively less complex optical
imaging methods, such as intrinsic optical signal imaging (IOS)
and laser speckle imaging (LSI) [15], or laser Doppler perfusion monitoring/flowmetry [16]–[18], are also tested to record
hemodynamic signals in the brain. While these devices are less
expensive and relatively easy to use during surgeries, in terms
of image quality, they do not match SD-OCT.
SD-OCT is a fast, noninvasive, and high-resolution tomography technique [19]–[21] that is used to image semitransparent
biological tissue of few millimeters thickness (see [22]–[27]). It
has been successfully used to monitor blood flow and vasculature structure in vivo (see [28]–[32]) and is capable of tracking
variations in hemodynamics with better spatial and temporal resolution compared to most functional imaging modalities. The

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ATRY et al.: MONITORING CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS FOLLOWING OPTOGENETIC STIMULATION VIA OCT

767

Fig. 1. Schematic of the SD-OCT system used in the optogenetic stimulation study. The beams of a broadband infrared superluminescence diode and a red
aiming laser are coupled in the sample and reference arms using a variable fiber coupler. The red laser beam is employed for visual targeting only and is not
used for the imaging purposes. Using the variable coupler, we adjust the percentage of the optical power, which is coupled in each arm of the interferometer. For
optical stimulation of the brain tissue, a cold mirror is integrated in the sample arm that reflects the beam of a blue laser toward the objective lens. The blue laser
is controlled by a computer and generates 15-Hz light pulses when the laser is activated.

wavelengths that are commonly used in SD-OCT are far from
those used for stimulation or fluorescence imaging. As a result,
it is possible to combine SD-OCT with other optical techniques
to investigate the signaling pathways involved in functional hyperemia. While OCT data acquisition are currently limited to
superficial brain areas such as cortex, new advances in this
field, including the addition of ultrawideband supercontinuum
lasers and line CCD cameras with better sensors (in terms of the
number of photodetectors in the array and sensitivity of each
detector), will make it possible in near future to significantly
improve the spatial resolution, depth of focus, and the scan rate
of these imaging systems and potentially covers the whole brain
tissue of small rodents such as mice. Therefore, optical coherence tomography can become the superior technology in this
field.
By combining optogenetics and SD-OCT technologies, we
were able to record an average of 20% increase in diameter and
100% increase in blood flow inside the middle cerebral artery
(MCA) and neighboring vessels in response to optical stimulation of neurons in the cortex of transgenic mice. Observed
changes in blood flow were repeatable and gradually returned
back to baseline once the stimulating light pulses were removed.
Optical stimulation of wild-type mice produced less than 10%
change in diameter and blood flow, which is comparable to the
intrinsic periodic fluctuations observed in a nonstimulated cortical tissue [13]. The hardware design and software algorithms
are discussed in Section II, and experimental protocols are explained in Section III. Results are included in Section IV, and
concluding remarks are summarized in Section V.

II. SYSTEM DESIGN
We designed a custom SD-OCT to record cerebral hemodynamic signals in mice. The system utilizes a 200-nm wideband
light source with a central wavelength of 1300 nm (THORLABS
LS200B) that delivers 10 mW of optical power at the tip of a
single-mode fiber. In this design, the interference patterns are
projected onto a 1024 pixel InGaAs line CCD (GOODRICH
LDH2, maximum read rate of 91 900 lines/s) through a transmission grating (Wasatch Photonics, 1145 lines/mm), see Fig. 1.
The system possesses an axial resolution of 5 μm in air. The
optogenetic stimulation path is integrated into the sample arm of
the SD-OCT system via a cold mirror, which reflects the beam
of a blue laser (LaserGlow 473 nm, 100 mW), while it transmits
the infrared light to deliver both beams to the objective lens.
The objective is a 10x telecentric lens, which has 160-μm depth
of focus and lateral resolution of 4 μm.
At each transverse position, the interference pattern is
recorded using the line CCD camera. The complex depth profile
(A-scan) is obtained by applying a nonuniform resampling algorithm [21] to the recorded interference pattern and taking the
Fourier transform of the output. Negative frequencies are canceled out and A-scans are stacked together to produce complex
cross-sectional tomographs (B-scans), which are used next to
generate velocity profiles or three-dimensional angiograms.
A. Velocity Measurement
One of the widely used techniques for velocity measurement in OCT is based on Kasai’s method, which was originally

768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

developed to measure the Doppler frequency shift introduced
by the blood flow in the envelop of ultrasound echo signals [33].
Kasai et al. estimated the Doppler shift by calculating the mean
angular frequency of the power spectrum of the envelope signals. A similar approach has been used in the OCT to measure
the Doppler shift [34], [35]. In 2008, Szkulmowski et al. [36]
reported a new procedure to achieve high-sensitivity velocity
measurements by frequency analysis of A-scans recorded over
time from the same position. In this algorithm, after applying the
Fourier transform to the data, the frequency with the maximum
intensity is introduced as the Doppler shift. Under the assumptions of additive Gaussian noise (AWGN) and ergodicity, it is
shown [37] that the peak frequency would be the maximum
likelihood estimator (MLE) of the Doppler frequency shift and
variance of the MLE will approach the Cramer Rao lower band
(CRLB). Investigations of Chan et al. [37] show in practice
due to the decorrelation noise introduced by the red blood cells
moving in and out of the voxel, the AWGN assumption would
not be valid anymore. Also, the MLE is sensitive to outliers and
in low signal-to-noise ratio, its variance will be far above the
CRLB. In such conditions, Kasai’s estimator will outperform the
MLE [37]. Consequently, in our measurements, we estimate the
Doppler shift by calculating the mean of angular frequency, as
discussed later. For Doppler measurements, the tissue is sampled
at 1500 A-scans per mm. Therefore, consecutive A-scans have
more than 90% overlap, and it can be assumed that these scans
are recorded from the same position. To calculate the velocity at
depth z and lateral position x, after zero padding and taking the
Fourier transform of B(z, x − 3 : x + 3), the weighted average
of the frequencies, ωa , is calculated. For each frequency component, the weight is the partial energy at that frequency. To increase the velocity sensitivity, weight of stationary tissue (zero
frequency) is preset to zero. Then, velocity (v) is calculated
by
v(z, x) =

ωa (z, x)
.
2πΔt

(1)

Variable Δt in this equation is the time difference between
consecutive A-scans, which in our experiment is set to 25 μs. At
the positions where the energy of the complex signal is at the
noise level, the velocity is considered to be zero.
B. Angiography
Three-dimensional angiograms are obtained by developing
a phase sensitive technique similar to the method proposed in
[38] in which ten B-scans were recorded from each cross section. To remove suprapixel motion, a local motion compensation
algorithm was developed which divides the B-scan into groups
of five A-scans, and for each group estimates the motion by
finding the maximum correlation. Then, subpixel motion is estimated by finding the overall phase change between the two
corresponding A-scans in the two recordings. Afterward, the
cross-sectional angiogram at transverse position x and depth z
is calculated by
|B 1 (z, x) − B 2 (z, x)|
b + |B 1 (z, x)| + |B 2 (z, x)|

(2)

where B 1 and B 2 are two B-scans recorded from the same cross
section. The parameter b is a positive number that suppresses
the noise when B-scans are very small and is empirically set to
b = 2× < |B 1 (z, x)| + |B 2 (z, x)| >(z ,x) .

(3)

In this equation, the operator < ... >(z ,x) computes the mean
value over z and x. The normalization cancels out the effects of
inherent depth dependent sensitivity roll-off in SD-OCT imaging [39] and ensures that the dynamic range of all pixel intensities in an angiogram is limited to the interval between 0 and 1. To
build a 3-D volumetric angiogram, each cross section is scanned
ten times before moving to the next cross section providing 45
(combination of 2 out of 10) cross-sectional angiograms for each
position. Average intensity for each cross-sectional angiogram
is used as a noise and/or motion distortion measure and ten angiograms that have the least distortion are selected and averaged
to produce the final cross-sectional angiogram for that position.
The cross-sectional images are then stacked to produce a 3-D
volumetric angiogram. A 3-D blurring kernel is applied to the
stack of cross-sectional angiograms to reduce the speckles before performing a 2-D maximum intensity projection of the 3-D
angiogram.
III. EXPERIMENTS
The optogenetic stimulation study was performed on 13 mice,
five with a standard cranial window during a terminal procedure
preparation and eight implanted chronically with a reinforced
thinned-skull window [40] and [41]. All animals produced similar results, although only results from the latter group are reported here since their neural tissue showed reduced signs of
cerebral edema and were more hemodynamically stable due in
part to the thinned-skull cranial window [42]. Keeping a thin
layer of bone on top of the brain not only prevents exposure of
dura matter to air, which reduces inflammation in comparison
with standard cranial window surgeries, but also reduces intrinsic mechanical pulsations of the brain by maintaining intracranial hydrostatic pressure. For thinned-skull experiments, five
transgenic T hy1 :: ChR2/H134R − Y F P mice (ChR2) from
Jackson Laboratories (stock number 012350) and three wildtype mice were used. The H134R variation of the ChR2 gene
was chosen for larger photocurrents due to its slower closing
kinetics [43]. Along with the ChR2 mice, three wild-type mice
were also used as control animals. In vivo, experiments were approved and performed under the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Each
animal was implanted with a thinned-skull cranial window and
glass coverslip [40], and given at least three days for recovery before imaging. During implantation, the mice were administered
buprenorphine (50 μg/kg SC) and anesthetized with isoflurane
(1.5–2.0% in oxygen). The scalp was retracted and the skull was
fixed to a titanium plate and mounted to a fixed post. A 3 mm × 3
mm area of skull was thinned and a 3-mm-diameter glass cranial
window was installed. During SD-OCT imaging and scanning
procedures, the mice were anesthetized with Ketamine (25–100
mg/kg SC) and dexmedetomidine (0.05–0.5 mg/kg SC).

ATRY et al.: MONITORING CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS FOLLOWING OPTOGENETIC STIMULATION VIA OCT

Fig. 2. Dilation of cerebral vessels during optogenetic stimulation in a ChR2
mouse. (a) Bright field image taken with a CCD camera of a ChR2 mouse. (b)
Maximum intensity projection of 3-D angiogram of (a). A1 shows the MCA
and A2 is one of its branches. The red color specifies the difference between
the angiogram taken before and the angiogram recorded during the optogenetic
stimulation. The intensity of the red color is proportional to the percent change
in pixel intensity from before to during stimulation. (c) and (d) provide a closer
view of the angiograms before and during the stimulation, respectively. The
images show noticeable increase in the vessel diameter.

During imaging sessions, to optically stimulate the brain, a
473-nm laser was pulsed at 15 Hz delivering an average power
of 18 mW. The laser beam was focused onto a 1.7-mm-diameter
spot for a calculated optical intensity of ∼8 mW/mm2 . The
hemodynamic response to the optical stimulation was monitored
using 3-D angiograms and 2-D cross section velocity profiles.
IV. RESULTS
To monitor the effect of stimulation on the vessel diameters, the FOV was adjusted to include one branch of the MCA.
Two consecutive 3-D angiogram covering the same 2 mm × 2
mm area were then recorded, one without and one with optical
stimulation. To ensure repeatability and to validate the observed
hemodynamic responses, this sequence was repeated at least two
times for the wild-type animals and three times for the ChR2
mice within the same FOV for each animal. Fig. 2(b) shows an
angiogram of one of the ChR2 mice where the red color represents areas in which vessel diameters were modulated during
the stimulation. Panels (c) and (d) in the same figure compare
the angiogram of the smaller FOV [which is marked by a square
in panel (b)] before and after optical stimulation, respectively.
To quantify observed changes, segments of the main vessels
were selected [red boxes in Fig. 2(c) and (d)] and the fractional
change in the vessel diameter was calculated by averaging the
fractional change along the vessel inside the box.

769

While 3-D angiograms reveal changes in the diameter of the
blood vessels over a large area during optogenetic photostimulation, they do not provide high-temporal resolution images
to be used for quantification of the blood flow variations. To
study rapid transitional changes in blood flow, we made 2-D
cross-sectional Doppler measurements of the main arteries and
veins inside the FOV up to 45 s; 4 s of prestimulation followed
by 10 s of stimulation; and 16–31 s of poststimulation. For the
main vessels in the cross section, the normalized blood flow
was calculated using the 2-D Doppler data where the average
of blood flow in the first 4 s was used as the baseline. Blood
flow in each vessel was estimated by summing the velocity of
all the pixels inside a bounding box surrounding the vessel’s
cross section. To relate this value with the actual flow, the vessel’s angle with respect to the laser beam and the cross-sectional
plane, as well as the voxel overlap, need to be known. However,
assuming these parameters are constant over time, they will
not affect the normalized blood flow. In addition to the flow,
the maximum velocity for each vessel was calculated and then
normalized to the baseline velocity. Maximum velocity in the
vessel cross section was calculated by averaging the three pixels
with the highest velocity inside the bounding box, which helped
to reduce the noise level. A moving-averaging filter was then
applied to the flow and velocity signals to suppress fluctuations
caused by the heartbeat. We conducted 8 to 10 trials per mouse
and averaged the result to reduce the effect of nonsynchronous
fluctuations in the velocity and flow. Both blood flow and blood
velocity in ChR2 mice showed a rapid increase shortly after optical stimulation, while wild-type animals showed a relatively
flat response to stimulation. Examples of normalized flow and
velocity from ChR2 mouse recorded from the MCA branches
A1 and A2 [labeled in Fig. 2(b)] are shown in Fig. 3(a). Panel (a)
in Fig. 4 presents velocity profiles of these vessels before(left),
during(middle), and after(right) stimulation. Each of the velocity profiles were averaged over the last 4 s within their respective
durations. The velocity profiles for the vessels A1 and A2 show
noticeable increases in the vessel diameter and blood velocity
confirming the results indicated in Figs. 2(b) and 3(a). Similar
changes were observed in most of the vessels we investigated
in our study, and the results show repeatable patterns of change
in the blood flow and velocity in the ChR2 animals following
the optogenetic stimulation. We had few discrete observations
where we noticed minimum reduction in blood flow after optical
stimulation.
The hemodynamics of five ChR2 mice and three control animals are summarized in Fig. 4(b) and (c). Fig. 4(b) compares
fractional change observed in blood flow and blood velocity inside main vessels after 10 s of stimulation. For ChR2 animals, an
average of 100% increase in flow and 35% increase in velocity
were recorded, whereas in control experiments, the maximum
change in flow and velocity were less than 10%. In these measurements, vessels with velocity out of the dynamic range of
our SD-OCT were excluded. Fig. 4(c) presents the diameter
changes in wild-type versus ChR2 mice. With this method, it
was possible to observe, on average, more than 20% change
in the diameter of main cerebral vasculature for ChR2 mice
and less than 1% change for wild-type animals. Moreover, our

770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Fluctuation in the blood velocity and blood flow in a ChR2 mouse in response to optical neurostimulation. (a) Blood flow and velocity change in A1 and
A2 in response to optical stimulation. The vertical lines specify the beginning and end of the stimulation period. Blood velocity and flow are normalized to the
baseline value (average of the corresponding data during the first 4 s of recording). (b) Example of flow and velocity response for control animal.

TABLE I
FRACTIONAL CHANGES OF HEMODYNAMIC SIGNALS IN CONTROL AND
TRANSGENIC ANIMALS, (WILCOXON TEST DOUBLE-SIDED P-VALUES:
p Δ F , p Δ V , p Δ D < 0.036)
Control
ΔF
ΔV
ΔD
Transgenic
ΔF
ΔV
ΔD

Fig. 4. Hemodynamic response of transgenic mice compared with the control
animals. (a) Shows the velocity profile for A1 and A2, before (left), during
(middle) and 22 s after (right) stimulation. To remove fluctuations, the profiles
were averaged over 4 s for each of the profiles. (b) Shows fractional change
in flow and velocity for control and ChR2 mice after 10 s of stimulation.
(c) Quantitative comparison of fractional change in the vessel diameter after
stimulation for three control and two ChR2 mice.

observations demonstrate that the intensity of hemodynamic response in ChR2 mice varies from vessel to vessel; however, in
general, larger fractional changes occurred in smaller vessels.
Table I summarizes the numerical data for both control and transgenic animals. In this table, ΔF and ΔV are fractional changes
in the blood flow and velocity, with respect to the baselines, 10 s
after stimulation. The baseline for blood flow and velocity were

animal#1

animal#2

animal#3

0.0368
0.0148
0.0263

0.0108
−0.0009
0.0078

0.0421
0.0256
−0.0051

animal#1

animal#2

animal#3

animal#4

animal#5

1.8765
0.6026
0.2486

3.6960
0.9885
0.2772

0.8271
0.3104
0.1462

0.8289
0.3403
0.1987

0.4979
0.3508
0.1039

obtained by averaging these values during a 4 s period before
stimulation. ΔD in the table represents fractional change in the
vessel diameter after stimulation with respect to the baseline diameter, which was calculated from the 3-D angiogram recorded
before each stimulation. During 3-D data acquisition, the stimulating light pulses were applied over the whole period of the
scan.
There are a few subtle points that are crucial in the analysis of
these observations. In these experiments, skull is not removed
and only shaved to be as thin as about 50 μm roughly. As a result,
the optical power drops significantly before reaching the brain
tissue. Nevertheless, the irradiance, 8 mW/mm2 , in these experiments is comparable or in most cases less than what is prescribed
in the previously published literature. For example: Kanh et al.
[11] have reported irradiance of 300 mW/mm2 at the tip of
an unjacketed fiber with diameter of 200 μm, which translates
9.4 mW of optical power. Desai et al. [10] have used 5–10 mW
of blue light power (irradiance of 150– 300 mW/mm2 ). The irradiance in Lee’s manuscript is in the range of 85 mW/mm2 [9].

ATRY et al.: MONITORING CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS FOLLOWING OPTOGENETIC STIMULATION VIA OCT

A comprehensive model to estimate the optical power required
for optogenetic stimulation and prediction of light distribution
in the brain tissue is presented in [44]. The other important fact
is that Doppler-based velocimetry technique is not able to detect
the lateral component of the blood velocity and what is measured in the OCT data are the axial component of the velocity.
Therefore, the velocity and flow measurements are not the actual blood velocity and flow but proportional to these values.
If we assume that the angle of vessel with respect to the scanning beam has not changed during the measurements, the OCT
Doppler velocimetry can be used to detect fractional changes in
blood velocity and flow. Srinivasan et al. [45] have proposed a
method to measure blood flow regardless of the vessel angle, but
it requires 3-D velocity measurements which is time consuming and does not allow to achieve the high-temporal resolution
velocity measurements, which are required in this study.
By definition, flow is the blood volume passing through the
vessel’s cross section. Therefore, any change in the blood flow
is caused by the change in the vessel cross-sectional area and/or
change in the blood velocity. In our measurements, we observed
up to 2.7 times increase in velocity and up to 50% increase in
diameter. As a result, we have observed up to 2.7 × 1.52 = 6
times increase in the blood flow. It is important to clarify that the
diameter increase reported here is the lateral diameter. The axial diameter can increase more or less compared with the lateral
diameter. The average vasodilation we are reporting (20%) is
comparable to the average dilation reported by Drew et al.(17%)
[13] in response to sensory stimulation, which is measured via
multiphoton fluorescence microscopy. In another observation,
Radhakrishnan and Srinivasan reported [46] OCT measurements of vessel dilation in rats following electrical forepaw
stimulation and observed 34.6–55.2% increase in the diameter
of arteries which is comparable to our observation. Drew et al.
[13] also reported 81.8% peak velocity change during 30 s of
sensory stimulation in the capillaries with average size of 3.2 μ,
which is again in the range of our observation for the velocity
increase after 10 s of optogenetic neurostimulation measured
in capillaries of diameter 10 μ or higher. Therefore, based on
this comparison, the scale of hemodynamic signals generated
by optogenetic and sensory stimulation are reasonably close.
Compared with some previous studies, the hemodynamic reaction to optogenetic stimulation is stronger in our observations
that can be justified if we appreciate the fact that: 1) We are
using low irradiance but more intense optical power exposing a
larger area. Therefore, we stimulated a larger population of neurons which has translated to stronger hemodynamic response
compared with the small local photostimulation conducted by
other researchers, [15], [18]. 2) Another determining factor is the
difference between the variables that are measured to monitor
hemodynamics in our experiments versus other published reports. Optical and Doppler coherence tomography that are used
in our experiments provide high lateral/axial spatial resolution.
OCT is able to provide depth-resolved velocity measurements.
Its resolution allows us to measure velocity of even single red
blood cell. However, to provide a 3-D map, tremendous amount
of data should be recorded which slows down the process compared with techniques such as LSI, IOS [15] or laser Doppler

771

flowmetry (LDF) [18]. Nonetheless, in comparison, SD-OCT is
still a more powerful method. LDF inherently has low lateral
resolution compared with OCT and only provides a rough estimation of the overall velocity change within the FOV. LDF is a
useful device in measuring the blood perfusion inside a tissue
volume, while OCT measures blood velocity inside each individual vessel. Therefore, direct comparison of the data can be
misleading. On the other hand, IOS measures only the blood
volume in the tissue and not the blood velocity. The IOS data
can be more helpful if combined with blood flow measurements
to develop a clear picture of changes in hemodynamics.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a systematic procedure to directly control the neural activity by optical neurostimulation
of cortex and monitor its impact on the hemodynamic signals
in transgenic mice. Results of these experiments confirm that
an increase in neural activity leads to vasodilation as well as
increased blood velocity in branches of the MCA. Using reinforced thinned-skull windows allowed the animals to recover
after surgery and also suppressed the potential brain pulsations
during data recording; improving the quality of the images and
precision of the measurements. Our observation showed minimal, often imperceptible, blood flow and velocity responses to
optical stimulation in wild-type mice. This suggests that the observed changes in hemodynamics are mostly due to the increase
in neural activity induced by optical stimulation. Further studies
combining the SD-OCT and optogenetics will enable a cell typespecific analysis of neurovascular coupling with high spatial and
temporal resolution. This approach, with the addition of blood
oxygenation imaging, could be used to create rich datasets for
studying the BOLD signal in great detail. The current methods
could provide new insights into neurological diseases involving
cerebral vasculature such as epilepsy and stroke.
REFERENCES
[1] N. K. Logothetis and B. A. Wandell, “Interpreting the BOLD signal,”
Annu. Rev. Physiol., vol. 66, pp. 735–769, 2004.
[2] G. C. Petzold and V. N. Murthy, “Role of astrocytes in neurovascular
coupling,” Neuron, vol. 71, pp. 782–797, 2011.
[3] E. S. Boyden, F. Zhang, E. Bamberg, G. Nagel, and K. Deisseroth,
“Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical control of neural activity,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1263–1268, 2005.
[4] F. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Brauner, J. F. Liewald, K. Kay, N. Watzke, P. G.
Wood, E. Bamberg, G. Nagel, A. Gottschalk, and K. Deisseroth, “Multimodal fast optical interrogation of neural circuitry,” Nature, vol. 446, no.
7136, pp. 633–639, 2007.
[5] B. V. Zemelman, G. A. Lee, M. Ng, and G. Miesenbock, “Selective photostimulation of genetically ChARGed neurons,” Neuron, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 15–22, 2002.
[6] K. Deisseroth, “Optogenetics,” Nature Methods, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 26–29,
2011.
[7] L. Fenno, O. Yizhar, and K. Deisseroth, “The development and application
of optogenetics,” Annu. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 34, pp. 389–412, 2011.
[8] R. Pashaie, P. Anikeeva, J. H. Lee, R. Prakash, O. Yizhar, M. Prigge,
D. Chander, T. Richner, and J. Williams, “Optogenetic brain interfaces,”
IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 7, pp. 3–30, Apr. 2014.
[9] J. H. Lee, R. Durand, V. Gradinaru, F. Zhang, I. Goshen, D. S. Kim,
L. E. Fenno, C. Ramakrishnan, and K. Deisseroth, “Global and local fMRI
signals driven by neurons defined optogenetically by type and wiring,”
Nature, vol. 465, pp. 788–792, 2010.
[10] M. Desai, I. Kahn, U. Knoblich, J. Bernstein, H. Atallah, A. Yang,
N. Kopell, R. L. Buckner, A. M. Graybiel, C. I. Moore, and E. S. Boyden,

772

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

“Mapping brain networks in awake mice using combined optical neural
control and fMRI,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 105, no. 3, pp. 1393–1405, 2011.
I. Kahn, M. Desai, U. Knoblich, J. Bernstein, M. Henninger, A. M. Graybiel, E. S. Boyden, R. L. Buckner, and C. I. Moore, “Characterization of the
functional MRI response temporal linearity via optical control of neocortical pyramidal neurons,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, no. 42, pp. 15086–15091,
Oct. 2011.
I. Kahn, U. Knoblich, M. Desai, J. Bernstein, A. M.Graybiel, E. S. Boyden, R. L. Buckner, and C. I. Moore, “Optogenetic drive of neocortical
pyramidal neurons generates fMRI signals that are correlated with spiking
activity,” Brain Res., vol. 1511, pp. 33–45, May 2013.
P. J. Drew, A. Y. Shih, and D. Kleinfeld, “Fluctuating and sensory-induced
vasodynamics in rodent cortex extend arteriole capacity,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci., vol. 108, no. 20, pp. 8473–8478, 2011.
A. Y. Shih, J. D. Driscoll, P. J. Drew, N. Nishimura, C. B. Schaffer,
and D. Kleinfeld, “Two-photon microscopy as a tool to study blood flow
and neurovascular coupling in the rodent brain,”J. Cerebral Blood Flow
Metabolism, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1277–1309, 2012.
N. A. Scott and T. H. Murphy, “Hemodynamic responses evoked by neuronal stimulation via channelrhodopsin-2 can be independent of intracortical glutamatergic synaptic transmission,” PLoS ONE, vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 1–10, Jan. 2012.
A. Nimmerjahn, E. Mukamel, and M. Schnitzer, “Motor behavior activates
Bergmann glial networks,” Neuron, vol. 62, pp. 400–412, May 2009.
J. Schummers, H. Yu, and M. Sur, “Tuned responses of astrocytes and
their influence on hemodynamic signals in the visual cortex,” Science,
vol. 320, pp. 1638–1643, Jun. 2008.
A. L. Vazquez, M. Fukuda, J. C. Crowley, and S.-G. Kim, “Neural and
hemodynamic responses elicited by forelimb- and photo-stimulation in
channelrhodopsin-2 mice: Insights into the hemodynamic point spread
function,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 24, no., 11, pp. 2908–2919, 2014,
doi:10.1093/cercor/bht14.
A. F. Fercher, C. K. Hitzenberger, G. Kamp, and S. Y. El-Zaiat, “Measurement of intraocular distances by backscattering spectral interferometry,”
Opt. Commun., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 43–48, 1995.
M. Wojtkowski, R. Leitgeb, A. Kowalczyk, A. F. Fercher, and T. Bajraszewski, “In vivo human retinal imaging by Fourier domain optical
coherence tomography,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 457–463, 2002.
S. H. Yun, G. J. Tearney, B. E. Bouma, B. H. Park, and J. F. de Boer,
“High-speed spectral-domain optical coherence tomography at 1.3 μm
wavelength,” Opt. Exp., vol. 11, no. 26, pp. 3598–3604, 2003.
N. A. Nassif, B. Cense, B. H. Park, M. C. Pierce, S. H. Yun, B. E. Bouma,
G. J. Tearney, T. C. Chen, and J. F. De Boer, “In vivo high-resolution
video-rate spectral-domain optical coherence tomography of the human
retina and optic nerve,” Opt. Exp., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 367–376, 2004.
Z. Yaqoob, J. Wu, E. J. McDowell, X. Heng, and C. Yang, “Methods
and application areas of endoscopic optical coherence tomography,” J.
Biomed. Opt., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 063001-1–063001-19, 2006.
S. Meissner, L. Knels, A. Krueger, T. Koch, and E. Koch, “Simultaneous three-dimensional optical coherence tomography and intravital microscopy for imaging subpleural pulmonary alveoli in isolated rabbit
lungs,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 054020-1–054020-6, 2009.
A. M. Davis, F. G. Rothenberg, N. Shepherd, and J. A. Izatt, “In vivo
spectral domain optical coherence tomography volumetric imaging and
spectral Doppler velocimetry of early stage embryonic chicken heart development,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 3134–3143, 2008.
L. An, J. Chao, M. Johnstone, and R. K. Wang, “Noninvasive imaging of
pulsatile movements of the optic nerve head in normal human subjects
using phase-sensitive spectral domain optical coherence tomography,”
Opt. Lett., vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1512–1514, 2013.
V. J. Srinivasan, H. Radhakrishnan, J. Y. Jiang, S. Barry, and A. E. Cable,
“Optical coherence microscopy for deep tissue imaging of the cerebral
cortex with intrinsic contrast,” Opt. Exp., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2220–2239,
2012.
S. Makita, Y. Hong, M. Yamanari, T. Yatagai, and Y. Yasuno, “Optical
coherence angiography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 14, no. 17, pp. 7821–7840, 2006.
R. K. Wang, S. L. Jacques, Z. Ma, S. Hurst, S. R. Hanson, and A. Gruber, “Three dimensional optical angiography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 15, no. 7,
pp. 4083–4097, 2007.
Z. Zhi, W. Cepurna, E. Johnson, T. Shen, J. Morrison, and R. K. Wang,
“Volumetric and quantitative imaging of retinal blood flow in rats with
optical microangiography,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 579–591,
2011.
J. Lee, W. Wu, J. Y. Jiang, B. Zhu, and D. A. Boas, “Dynamic light
scattering optical coherence tomography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 20, no. 20,
pp. 22262–22277, 2012.

[32] V. J. Srinivasan, E. T. Mandeville, A. Can, F Blasi, M Climov, A.
Daneshmand, J. H. Lee, E. Yu, H. Radhakrishnan, E. H. Lo, S. Sakadzic,
K. Eikermann-Haerter, and C. Ayata, “Multiparametric, longitudinal optical coherence tomography imaging reveals acute injury and chronic
recovery in experimental ischemic stroke,” PloS One, vol. 8, no. 8, pp.
e71478-1–e71478-13, 2013.
[33] C. Kasai, K. Namekawa, A. Koyano, and R. Omoto, “Real-time two dimensional blood flow imaging using an autocorrelation technique,” IEEE
Trans. Sonics Ultrasonics, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 458–464, May 1985.
[34] R. Leitgeb, L. F. Schmetterer, M. Wojtkowski, C. K. Hitzenberger,
M. Sticker, and A. F. Fercher, “Flow velocity measurements by frequency
domain short coherence interferometry,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Biomed. Opt.,
2002, pp. 16–21.
[35] V. X. D. Yang, M. L. Gordon, B. Qi, J. Pekar, S. Lo, E. Seng-Yue, A. Mok,
B. C. Wilson, and I. A. Vitkin, “High speed, wide velocity dynamic range
Doppler optical coherence tomography (Part I): System design, signal
processing, and performance,” Opt. Exp., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 794–809,
2003.
[36] M. Szkulmowski, A. Szkulmowska, T. Bajraszewski, A. Kowalczyk,
and M. Wojtkowski, “Flow velocity estimation using joint spectral and
time domain optical coherence tomography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 16, no. 9,
pp. 6008–6025, 2008.
[37] A. C. Chan, E. Y. Lam, and V. J. Srinivasan, “Comparison of kasai autocorrelation and maximum likelihood estimators for doppler optical coherence tomography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1033–1042,
Jun. 2013.
[38] V. J. Srinivasan, J. Y. Jiang, M. A. Yaseen, H. Radhakrishnan, W. Wu, S.
Barry, A. E. Cable, and D. A. Boas, “Rapid volumetric angiography of
cortical microvasculature with optical coherence tomography,” Opt. Lett.,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 43–45, 2010.
[39] T. Bajraszewski, M. Wojtkowski, M. Szkulmowski, A. Szkulmowska,
R. Huber, and A. Kowalczyk, “Improved spectral optical coherence tomography using optical frequency comb,” Opt. Exp., vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 4163–4176, 2008.
[40] P. J. Drew, A. Y. Shih, J. D. Driscoll, P. M. Knutsen, P. Blinder,
D. Davalos, K. Akassoglou, P. S. Tsai, and D. Kleinfeld, “Chronic optical
access through a polished and reinforced thinned skull,” Nature Methods,
vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 981–984, 2010.
[41] J. I. Szu, M. M. Eberle, C. L. Reynolds, M. S. Hsu, Y. Wang, C. M.
Oh , M. S. Islam, B. H. Park, and D. K. Binder, “Thinned-skull cortical
window technique for in vivo optical coherence tomography imaging,” J.
Visualized Exp., vol. 69, p. e50053, 2012, doi:10.3791/50053.
[42] H.-T. Xu, F. Pan, G. Yang, and W.-B. Gan, “Choice of cranial window
type for in vivo imaging affects dendritic spine turnover in the cortex,”
Nature Neurosci., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 549–551, 2007.
[43] J. Y. Lin, M. Z. Lin, P. Steinbach, and R. Y. Tsien, “Characterization
of engineered channel rhodopsin variants with improved properties and
kinetics,” Biophysical J., vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 1803–1814, 2009.
[44] M. Azimipour, R. Baumgartner, Y. Liu, S. Jacques, K. Eliceiri, and
R. Pashaie, “Extraction of optical properties and prediction of light distribution in rat brain tissue,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 075001-1–
075001-11, Jul. 2014, doi:10.1117/1.JBO.19.7.075001.
[45] V. J. Srinivasan, S. Sakad, I. Gorczynska, S. Ruvinskaya, W. Wu, J. G.
Fujimoto, and D. A. Boas, “Quantitative cerebral blood flow with optical
coherence tomography,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2477–2494, 2010.
[46] H. Radhakrishnan and V. J. Srinivasan, “Compartment-resolved imaging
of cortical functional hyperemia with OCT angiography,” Biomed. Opt.
Exp., vol. 4, no. 8, pp. 1255–1268, 2013.

Farid Atry received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from the Amirkabir University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2002, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of
Tehran, Tehran, in 2005. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department, University of WisconsinMilwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA.
After finishing his Master program, he was with
the industry on audio/image signal compression and
time series prediction for several years. His current
research interests include developing optical coherent tomography and fluorescence tomography techniques.

ATRY et al.: MONITORING CEREBRAL HEMODYNAMICS FOLLOWING OPTOGENETIC STIMULATION VIA OCT

773

Seth Frye received the B.S. degree in physics from
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee,
WI, USA, in 2011, where he is currently working
toward the M.S. degree in electrical engineering.
His interests include creating tools to study neural
circuits and image cerebral vasculature using optical
coherence tomography, optogenetics, and fluorescent
imaging.

Alana Soehartono received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees both from the University of WisconsinMilwaukee (UWM), Milwaukee, WI, USA, in 2011
and 2013, respectively.
Her Master thesis research was concentrated on
the design of optical coherence tomography (OCT)
system and the development of signal processing
algorithms for OCT. Her research interests include
biomedical imaging and sustainability and appropriate technology. Her undergraduate research work included detection of fiber waviness in composite structures and natural fiber reinforced composites under Dr. Rani El-Hajjar, and imaging oxygen saturation using photoacoustic microscopy under Dr. Hao Zhang.
She also has been involved with the student chapter of Engineers Without Borders at UWM since 2008, serving as a Cochair from March 2010 to December
2011 working on implementing water distribution systems in Guatemala.

Thomas J. Richner received the B.S. degrees in
mathematics from Northland College, Ashland, WI,
USA, and in biomedical engineering from Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA, in 2006 and
2008, respectively. He received the M.S. degree in
biomedical engineering in 2010 from the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, where he is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include electrocorticography, optogenetics, and neural interfacing.

Justin Williams (M’02) received the B.Sc. degrees
in mechanical engineering and in engineering physics
from South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD,
USA, in 1995 and 1996, respectively. He received the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in bioengineering in 2001
from Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
From 2002 to 2003, he was a jointly appointed Research Fellow in the Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and a
Research Scientist in the Department of Neurological
Surgery, University of Wisconsin, where his research
interests include neurosurgical applications of neural engineering devices. He
joined the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA, in 2003. He is currently the Vilas Distinguished
Achievement Professor in Biomedical Engineering and Neurological Surgery
at the University of Wisconsin. His research interests include BioMEMS, neuroprostheses, and functional neurosurgery.

Sarah K. Brodnick was born in Elkhorn, WI, USA,
in 1983. She received the B.A. degree in zoology from
the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,
USA, in 2005.
In 2005, she joined the Wisconsin National Primate Research Center as an Animal Research Technician; and in 2007, she became an Associate Research
Specialist in the Anatomy Department for the University of Wisconsin-Madison. From 2008 to 2009,
she shared joint Research Specialist Positions in the
Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering Departments also at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Since 2009, she has
been a Full Time Lab Manager for Justin Williams lab, University of WisconsinMadison. Her current research interests include micro-ECoG and other neural
interface device fabrication, glial responses to implanted neural devices, neural
prosthetics, in vivo imaging, and device signal interpretation.
Ms. Brodnick has been a Member of the Society for Neuroscience since
2009. She received the 2012–2013 Critical Compensation Fund Award at the
University of Wisconsin Madison for her work in the Williams Lab.

Ramin Pashaie (M’07) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran, in 1998; the M.S. degree in fields
and waves from the Khaje Nasir Tousi University of
Technology, Tehran, in 2001; and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical and systems engineering from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, in 2007
under supervision of Professor Nabil Farhat.
After Ph.D. degree, he joined Karl Deisseroth lab
as a Postdoctoral Scholar at Stanford University, CA,
USA. During his postdoctoral training, his research
interests include technology development for optical modulation of neural activities using the tools of photonics and molecular genetics. In September 2009,
he joined the Electrical Engineering Department at the University of WisconsinMilwaukee, Milwaukee, WI, USA, as an Assistant Professor and the Director of
the Bioinspired Sciences and Technology Laboratory where his research is about
optical interrogation of the dynamics of large-scale neural networks mostly in
the brain cortical regions. In particular, his current research interests include
the implementation of neuroprosthetic devices to extract details of information
processing in cortical networks and the nonlinear dynamics of cortical columns.

