1098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

An Automated Statistical Shape Model
Developmental Pipeline: Application
to the Human Scapula and Humerus
Tinashe Mutsvangwa, Member, IEEE, Valérie Burdin∗ , Member, IEEE, Cédric Schwartz,
and Christian Roux, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents development of statistical shape
models based on robust and rigid-groupwise registration followed
by pointset nonrigid registration. The main advantages of the
pipeline include automation in that the method does not rely on
manual landmarks or a regionalization step; there is no bias in
the choice of reference during the correspondence steps and the
use of the probabilistic principal component analysis framework
increases the domain of the shape variability. A comparison between the widely used expectation maximization-iterative closest
point algorithm and a recently reported groupwise method on publicly available data (hippocampus) using the well-known criteria
of generality, specificity, and compactness is also presented. The
proposed method gives similar values but the curves of generality and specificity are superior to those of the other two methods.
Finally, the method is applied to the human scapula, which is a
known difficult structure, and the human humerus.
Index Terms—Humerus, scapula, statistical shape model (SSM).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE use of statistical shape models (SSMs) of bony structures abounds in the medical imaging literature with applications from orthopedic surgical planning [1]–[3], biomechanics
research [4] to 3-D shape reconstruction from single [5] and biplanar images [6], [7]. Their ubiquity lies in their ability to model
biological shapes, which on the top of being highly variable
between individuals can also be highly complex. Examples of
complex shapes in the human body include bony structures such
as the vertebrae, pelvis, and the scapula. While there has been
several reports on the development of SSMs for the pelvis
[8]–[10] and also vertebrae [11]–[13] there has to date, however,
been little reported on a global, dense-correspondence-based

T

Manuscript received March 3, 2014; revised July 14, 2014 and September 29,
2014; accepted October 29, 2014. Date of publication November 6, 2014; date
of current version March 17, 2015. This work was supported by the Université
Européenne de Bretagne under Grant 246554 (FP7-PEOPLE-COFUND 2008)
and Institut Mines Télécom.
T. Mutsvangwa was with Télécom Bretagne, 29238 Brest, France. He is now
with the Biomedical Engineering Division, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town 7700, South Africa (e-mail: Tinashe@gmail.com).
C. Schwartz is with the Laboratory for Human Motion Analysis, University
of Liége, 4000 Liége, Belgium (e-mail: cedric.schwartz@ulg.ac.be).
∗ V. Burdin is with the Telecom Bretagne, Institut Mines-Telecom, 29238
Brest, France, and also with the French National Institute for Health and Medical
Research, 75654 Paris, France (e-mail: valerie.burdin@telecom-bretagne.eu).
C. Roux is with the Centre Ingénierie et Santé, Ecole des mines de
Saint-Etienne, Institut Mines-Telecom, 42023 Saint-Etienne, France (e-mail:
christian.roux@mines-stetienne.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2368362

SSM of the human scapula. And while the human humerus may
not be as complex a shape, there is also scarce literature on
the SSMs of this structure. Together with the clavicle, these
three structures form the shoulder complex and SSMs of the
first two structures may be beneficial to the understanding of
the shoulder, improve shoulder computer-guided surgery, and
also provide a digital morphometric adjunct to clinical studies
of the shoulder. After many reports on the lower limbs, some
clinicians and engineers are beginning to report on studies of
the more difficult upper limbs [14]–[17].
The basic approach used in making an SSM is to establish
the pattern of “legal” variation in the shape and spatial relationships of the structures. Statistical analysis via principal
component analysis (PCA) is used to give a parameterization of
this variability, providing an appropriate representation of shape
and allowing shape constraints to be applied [18]. This type of
modeling facilitates a 3-D morphometric analysis to reveal the
important shape parameters and also how multiple parameters
change together, rather than focusing on one parameter at a
time. Prior to extracting statistical information from the sample,
however, the instances have to be brought into correspondence.
This is central to the generation of SSMs for surfaces as it directly affects the model quality. According to [19], a definition
of meaningful correspondence depends on the task at hand.
This can range from the simpler case of identifying portions of
the shapes that are geometrically similar, to the more complex
problem of relating elements that represent the same parts or
serve the same function on the shapes. These matching parts
however, may differ significantly in their geometry, structure
within the context of the whole shape, or even topology. This
makes the traditional landmarking for establishing correspondence impractical, tedious, and error prone, and the majority of
work in an SSM development is centered on establishing reliable methods for automated dense correspondence of objects
[20]. Registration, thus, becomes the most viable methodology
to obtain such dense correspondence.
Closely related to the correspondence problem is the issue of
the most representative shape of the collection of objects. This
is important for selecting a reference topology during the establishment of correspondence. Selecting one specific instance
from the sample leads to the obvious problem of bias induced by
the choice of reference shape. This is true even if the procedure
is repeated a second time with the mean shape as reference in a
bootstrapping framework [20]. Only by examining a whole set
of shapes of a class of objects, one can learn which are the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MUTSVANGWA et al.: AUTOMATED STATISTICAL SHAPE MODEL DEVELOPMENTAL PIPELINE

important features [21]. The obvious solution is a groupwise
registration framework for establishing correspondences [22]–
[24]. In addition, because of this dependence on registration,
the quality of the registration plays a critical role in the SSM
developmental pipeline.
It is common in the computational anatomy community to
assess the computed correspondences in terms of the quality of
the SSMs that they generate [19]. The models are evaluated on
criteria such as generality, specificity, or compactness [18], [19],
[24], [25], with the assumption that accurate correspondences
lead to accurate models. Briefly, generality measures a model’s
capability to represent unseen instances of the species of the object modeled. Specificity is an evaluation of the model’s ability
to generate instances of the object that are close to those in the
training set. Finally, compactness is the ability to use fewer parameters to cover more shape instances in the training sets [26].
While these criteria are commonly reported in the literature, a
comparative platform is needed for the validation of methodology and for collaborative efforts by other research groups. In this
regard, a recent development has been the Statismo framework
for PCA-based statistical modeling [27].
In this paper, we report on an integrated pipeline for building automated unbiased global SSMs, which we will call the
iterative median closest point-Gaussian mixture model (IMCPGMM) method. We present a comparison of the IMCP-GMM
with other state-of-the-art methods using hippocampus data
available in the public domain. SSMs of the scapula and humerus
for morphometric as well as segmentation purposes are presented as these are structures of interest in our research. The
scapula is especially focused on, as to date, attempts to build
models of the structure have evaded automation, as in [28],
which required manual landmarking to initialize the B-splinebased nonrigid registration. Another reported attempt [29] did
not presented a truly global model, as it required watershed segmentation in order to constrain the anatomical correspondence.
The contributions of this study include the followings.
1) The presentation of IMCP-GMM, which utilizes the opensource tools, VTK [30], ITK [31], [32], and Statismo [27],
and consensus solutions for each of the key steps.
2) A comparison of IMCP-GMM with other state-of-the-art
methods namely the recently reported group-wise GMMbased registration [24] and the widely used expectation
maximization-iterative closest point algorithm EM-ICP
[33] as implemented in [24]. Here, a common dataset of
42 hippocampi facilitated a direct comparison of models.
3) The presentation of a global, unbiased SSM of a complex
bone, namely the human scapula.
4) For completeness, an application of IMCP-GMM to the
human humerus, a structure for which there is no report
of an SSM in the literature.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
is the materials and methodology presenting the pipeline developmental process. This includes the establishment of an unbiased reference shape (see Section II-B), the establishment
and refinement of correspondence across each structure’s sample population (see Section II-C), and finally, the development
of the SSMs using probabilistic principal component analysis
(PPCA) (see Section II-D). The results (see Section III) present

1099

for comparative purposes, an evaluation of model quality via
the three model evaluation criteria of generality, specificity,
and compactness on publicly available hippocampi data (see
Section III-A). Next, the details of the development of SSMs
of the scapula and humerus are presented including some
experiments on the assessment of registration quality (see
Section III-B1)); assessment of the correspondence quality
via supervised tracking of specific anatomical landmarks (see
Section III-B2)); a brief look at the stability of an unbiased
reference shape (see Section III-B3)) and presentation of the
scapula and humerus models (see Section III-B4)). Section IV
follows with the discussion of results and limitations of the proposed pipeline. Finally, Section V presents the conclusion of the
report.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Materials
The following terms are defined to make for easier understanding: 1) object refers to the humerus, the scapula, or
the hippocampus as a structure under investigation and 2) instance refers to a sample member of one or the other of these
three objects.
The humerus data consisted of 28 humeri dry bone instances
from the same side and the scapulae dry bones consisted of
13 right-sided and 14 left-sided instances. All bones were inspected for signs of trauma and only those exhibiting no trauma
were included in the imaged sample. To our knowledge, the
bones did not belong to the same patients and show a great
deal of anatomical and size variability. The scapulae were collected over a number of years for medical demonstration purposes and we were not able to acquire information about the
donors. The bone data were imaged using the SIEMENS SOMATOM Definition AS (Siemens Medical Solutions, Forchheim, Germany) at the CHU Brest. The CT imaging resolution
was 0.96 mm × 0.96 mm × 0.6 mm. The dry bones were acquired from the Anatomy department at the CHU Brest, France.
To facilitate a comparison of IMCP-GMM and other state-ofthe-art methods, publicly available, CT data on 42 Hippocampi
were obtained [34].
The preprocessing and segmentation of all data was
performed in Amira v5.4.3 (Visage Imaging: http://www.
vsg3d.com/). The left-side scapulae data were mirrored in software to be right sided in the development of the SSM. For
each segmented CT volume, a 3-D surface mesh was extracted
from the labeled images. The meshes were then smoothed and
remeshed to have isotropic vertices. The vertex count for both
the scapula and humerus was set at N = 15000. For the hippocampi, the number of vertices was set at N = 6000.
B. Developing an Unbiased Reference Shape
An unbiased reference shape issued from the whole sample
basis is a crucial step in obtaining an SSM through an automated
landmark-less process. This mean-virtual shape (MV shape) as
we will call it, is built by two successive group-wise registrations: 1) a rigid registration using IMCP, then 2) a nonrigid
registration using CPD.

1100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

1) Establishing an Intrinsic Consensus Shape Using IMCP:
The procedure presented in this section for establishing an
intrinsic consensus shape sics relies on two successive steps:
1) the mutual registration of all the instances in the basis and
2) the emergence of a consensus shape.
The IMCP was used to perform the registration of all the
instances. A detailed description of the algorithmic concepts
behind the IMCP can be found in two previous papers [35],
[36]. A brief overview of the IMCP algorithm is presented in
the following.
It should be emphasized that in the previous work utilizing
IMCP [35]–[37], the instances to be registered did not have size
differences. Indeed the use of the algorithm was for obtaining a
consensual shape from the same object acquired in different positions (instances) for tracking motion. However, in this study,
there is a big variation in the sizes of different scapulae and
humeri (instances). To remove the effect of size in the registration, the centroid size of each instance was used to scale it
to unit size prior to the application of IMCP. Centroid size is
the square root of the sum of squared distances of the set of
vertices, from their centroid. Centroid size is used in geometric
morphometrics because it is approximately uncorrelated with
every shape variable when vertices are distributed around mean
positions by independent noise, which is the case using isotropic
meshes. An important point to note is a good initialization of instances needed to be performed. In this study, the initialization
was performed through alignment of all instances using their
principal axes of inertia.
1) Commonly used matching-based algorithms select a specific reference from the sample as a reference object. However,
this practice necessarily introduces a bias in the registration.
The originality of the IMCP algorithm is the simultaneous registration of all the instances using a median shape. The IMCP
is an iterative algorithm based on two interleaved processes
working simultaneously. The first process estimates a median
shape. Each single instance is sequentially considered as a mobile cloud and is put in correspondence with other instances of
the basis. For each point of the moving instance, the matching
neighbor points are used to calculate a virtual corresponding
point building the superimposed virtual shapes. Furthermore,
using a Tukey W-estimator [38], each single point is given a
weight representing its reliability. Consequently, the superimposed virtual shapes progressively converge toward the same
rigid object. However, this median description remains implicit
as the consensus of the instances is a dense unorganized cloud
of weighted points [see Fig. 1 (left)]. The median shape cannot,
therefore, be used directly. In this report, the very same concept
of information ”redundancy” expected in multiple instances of
the same biological “shape” species and the consensus of the
dataset with weights of reliability was used to provide a median shape of the objects being investigated. The hypothesis
is that this interinstance registration using only very reliable
correspondences should provide a sort of “intrinsic consensual
shape” of the object.
2) The second process consists of the refinement of the location of the individual virtual cloud of points obtained at the
end of the IMCP registration in order to extract an intrinsic

Fig. 1. (Left) Result of the IMCP process for the scapulae data. It is a super
dense cloud of the most reliable points in the dataset. (Center) Intrinsic consensual shape, which is an oriented manifold from the unorganized points of the
super resolution cloud. The manifold exhibits indentations and other artifacts
and necessitates some refinement to obtain a smooth surface. (Right) Application of CPD in which each of the original instances is nonrigidly registered on
the intrinsic consensus shape, and the resultant shapes averaged, produces the
MV shape, which forms reference shape for all further steps.

consensual cloud of points. Each point of the median cloud
has a weight that can be interpreted as the probability that the
point is representative of the Gaussian disturbance of the virtual
form outcome of the consensus of all the registered objects. The
goal of the merging process is, therefore, to converge toward
a cloud of points for which the average weight would be as
high as possible. We used the Laplacian filter, which is one of
the most favored techniques employed for the elimination of
noise in a mesh. With this filter, a filtered point converges to
the barycenter of its direct neighbors. The displacement of the
points can also depend on specific weights given to each of them
[39]. To achieve our goal, the nonreliable points should move
to areas of higher reliability. Thus, each point is given a global
weight based on both its intrinsic reliability (weight from the
IMCP process) and from the reliability of its neighborhood (an
unreliable point should not move if its neighborhood is even
less reliable). At the end of the iterative process, the consensus
shape represents a more reliable shape, which would, therefore,
be, within Gaussian disturbance, equivalent to the underlying
form of structure. Further details of the merging process used in
the IMCP are provided in [37].
The end results of the IMCP process are the intrinsic consensus shape (sics ), which is the merged super dense cloud
converted into an oriented manifold (with point wrap routine of
Amira) (see Fig. 1) and the associated set of rigidly registered
and size normalized instances.
2) Establishing an MV Shape Using CPD: A nonrigid registration of the original instances for each object on their
respective intrinsic consensus shapes served the purpose of refining these shapes. The recently developed and current stateof-the-art point set registration method called CPD [40], [41]
was utilized for the nonrigid registration. Adopting the nomenclature from [42], let s be a point cloud consisting of N points
xi ∈ R3
s = [xT1 , . . . , xTN ]T ∈ R3N .

(1)

Let the intrinsic consensus shape sics be the reference, to
which, we register all the instances {si }Ii=1 to, where I = 42
for the hippocampi, 27 for the scapulae and 28 for the humerus.
The CPD process assumes the mobile points, i.e., the points
of each instance si represent GMM centroids which can be fit

MUTSVANGWA et al.: AUTOMATED STATISTICAL SHAPE MODEL DEVELOPMENTAL PIPELINE

1101

onto the target points, sics by maximizing the likelihood. Optimization is provided through an EM algorithm with the added
constraint of forcing the GMM centroids to move coherently
thereby preserving the topological structure of the objects. The
displacement function v for a particular mobile instance mesh,
is defined as
ŝi = si + v(si )

(2)

with si as the initial centroid positions of the instance, ŝi
and v, respectively, are obtained by minimizing the following
energy function:
E(ŝi ) = −

K

k =1

log

N

n =1

e2 
1

x k −y n
σ



2

+

λ
φ(v)
2

(3)

where φ(v) is a regularization to ensure the displacement field
must be smooth. xk denotes a point on the reference mesh sics
and yn , a point of the transformed mesh ŝi , respectively. K and
N refer to the number of vertex points within the reference and
transformed mesh, respectively. The parameter λ determines
the tradeoff between data fitting and smoothness of the deformation field and was determined empirically. The first use of
nonrigid registration was to register each of the instances for
both the scapula and the humerus on their respective intrinsic
consensus shapes. The instance data used were the rigidly registered and size-normalized instances post-IMCP (see Fig. 1 left
and center images). The mean of the data after this initial nonrigid registration was obtained. The effect of this procedure was
to remove the small indentations from the point wrap process
and smooth out the virtual shapes and the resultant shape will
be called the MV shape in each case (see Fig. 1 right image
for the scapula example). This MV shape formed an excellent
reference shape for the next component of nonrigid registration
in which it was deformed to each of the instances to sample the
instances. This is because the MV shape can be considered to
be a structural base for the species of objects being investigated;
it is unbiased toward any particular instance’s topology since
developmentally, it is calculated from the majority of redundant
points of the whole ensemble of instances. As we will see, all
the variation exhibited by the species of objects in the sample
can, thus, be treated as variation from this MV shape.
C. Correspondence Transference from MV Shape to Original
Instances Using CPD
The next step taken was to deform the MV shape using CPD to
sample each of the instances and transfer correspondence across
the sample. This deformation of an MV shape toward each of
the original instances, guaranteed that all instances would be
in correspondence. In addition, since the MV shape was constructed from the consensus of all the instances, it represented a
nonbiased reference with points of the highest reliability across
the sample. An important point to note is the instances used in
each case (for each object) were the original pre-IMCP rigidly
registered objects. That is to say, the sampling by the MV shape
was on the original data instances albeit, rigidly aligned. This
facilitated the inclusion of real size again for the analysis of the

Fig. 2. Four vertex illustration of the effect of iterative application of CPD on
the MV shape toward the original shape. (Left): Many-to-one correspondence
often occurs with CPD but the (Center): presents an averaging of the vertex
positions of the MV current estimate and the current “corresponding” vertex
positions in the original surface. This generally has the effect of creating a better
intermediate surface for the next iteration of correspondence transference and
results in the (Right): a more anatomically aligned MV estimation of the original
surface.

registration error that followed. The end results were the MV
estimates in correspondence throughout the basis.
In the implementation of CPD by [43], an output correspondence vector C for the corresponding points in the target object
is provided after the CPD process. However, [44] note that CPD
suffers from many-to-one correspondences between points of
these moving and target point sets. In particular, there is no
direct constraint to force a point on one mesh to have a corresponding point in another. This may result in the algorithm
being unable to find the correct anatomical matching in some
configurations. Indeed, an analysis of the correspondence vector
showed this many-to-one effect on the correspondence values
(see Fig. 2 left). However, the correspondence vector information could still be used in order to refine the correspondence
transference procedure. A greater surface to surface intimacy
between the deformed MV shape and its respective original instance was established by iteratively applying CPD while also
utilizing the correspondence vector information. After an iteration of CPD, intermediate positions of the current MV estimates
vertices were obtained by averaging the positions just after that
deformation with the positions of corresponding vertices on
the original instances obtained in the correspondence vector.
These intermediate positions were used as the moving points
in the next iteration of CPD. After several iterations, a better anatomical estimation of the original instance by the MV
estimate was achieved while still guaranteeing topological correspondence (see Fig. 2). Typical cycles of CPD application
are shown using an example of one scapula (see Fig. 3). This
multiple CPD iteration approach was used incorporated into the
pipeline to improve on the results obtained using a single CPD
iteration. Four iterations were deemed sufficient to obtain the
MV estimates from original instances.
D. Developing SSMs With Size Using PPCA
The MV estimates of each of the instances were now considered the primary data for PCA. Each of these MV estimates
was a mesh in dense correspondence (15000 vertex points per
bone structure and 6000 points for the Hippocampus) with other

1102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

size. The model with size was developed from the MV estimates directly. For the model without size, normalization was
performed in Amira so that all data including the MV estimates
were of unit scale. The rest of the subsequent analyses were
exactly the same for both sets of bone models. In the case of the
hippocampi data, only the without-size models are presented
below as part of the model quality evaluation. All models were
developed using the open-source toolkit Statismo [27].
III. RESULTS

Fig. 3. (Left) Example original instance in gold with the MV shape superimposed on top in transparent green. (Center) Transference of correspondence
using the MV shape over several iterations for an example scapula. (Right) Final
result is the MV estimate of the original instance (shown as MV final).

instances and their respective MV shape. An alignment step was
performed where all the instances were rigidly aligned to their
respective MV shapes using the fixed correspondences. This
process is similar to Procrustes alignment [45]. By modeling the
variation across these samples, shape models of the bones could
be developed. A succinct low-dimensional generative model for
valid shape new instance is
snew = ᾱ +

c


λr γr

(4)

r =1

where snew is a new artificially generated instance, ᾱ is the
mean of the sample of input MV estimates, r is the rth principal
component, c is the total number of components, and finally, λr
and γr are the rth eigenvalue and eigenvector from the model.
This PCA model assumes that all the probability mass is concentrated on the subspace spanned by the principal components.
This means that the probability of an object that does not strictly
lie in this subspace is zero. This however, may not be the case in
practice since an object might be a valid and likely instance of
the class and still not lie exactly on that subspace [27], [44]. This
may on one hand happen since this subspace is only approximated from a finite number of examples, but also because the
data itself is usually noisy. To alleviate this problem, PPCA is a
suggested substitute [27]. PPCA provides a well-defined probabilistic interpretation, by assuming a small amount of noise on
the examples. The new generative model then becomes
snew = ᾱ +

c


λr γr + ε

(5)

r =1

where ε ∼ ℵ(0, σ 2 ). By virtue of the added Gaussian noise
term, this model now defines a valid probability distribution on
the whole of the high-dimensional subspace. The probability of
an instance now depends on the distance from this subspace, i.e.,
the objects that are far away are less likely than those instances
that are closer to the space. It can be shown that when σ 2 goes to
0, then a standard PCA model is obtained [27].
The reference shape was the MV shape, which defined the
discretization and mesh topology. Two sets of models were developed for each bone structure, one with size and one without

A. Comparison of the IMCP-GMM Pipeline With other
State-of-the-Art Algorithms Using Hippocampus Data
The well-established measures of compactness, generality,
and specificity were used to measure the quality of shape models [18], [24], [26], [33], [46] on hippocampi data. Briefly, compactness C measures a model’s ability to use as few parameters
as possible to cover the same variance and is calculated as
C(R) =

R


λr

(6)

r =1

where λr is the rth largest eigenvalue and C(R) is the cumulative variance of the first R principal components. The Generality
G(R) measures a model’s ability to represent unseen instances
of the class of object. This property is fundamental as the goal
of building a model is to fit the model to new examples and
if a model is overfitted to the training set, it will be unable to
generalize to unseen examples. Generality is given by
G(R) =

N
1  
|s (R) − si |2
N i=1 i

(7)

where N is the number of instances si (R) is the best model
reconstruction of the instance si from the model built excluding
si with R principal components. Finally, Specificity measures
the model’s ability to generate instances of the species of objects
similar to those in the training set and is given by
S(R) =

N
1 
|srandomj (R) − sj |2
N j =1

(8)

where srandomj (R) are shape examples randomly generated using R principal modes and sj is the nearest member
of the training set to srandomj . For comparative purposes, in
the study presented here, the range of the probability of the random sample P (srandomj ) had to be greater than probability of
a sample drawn from within three times the standard deviation of
the first principal component in a full instance model. This limited valid samples to those in the same range used in [24].
Further, the aforementioned measures were evaluated using the
same metrics of root mean square (rms) and Hausdorff distances between instantiated model objects and target objects.
The results of the evaluation were then superimposed on those
extracted from [24]. Through this process, a direct comparison
of model quality between the group-wise GMM and EM-ICP
(both selected for best results in the mode quality evaluation)
with IMCP-GMM proposed here was possible on the same data.

MUTSVANGWA et al.: AUTOMATED STATISTICAL SHAPE MODEL DEVELOPMENTAL PIPELINE

1103

Fig. 5. Point-to-surface distances distribution for both bones. (Left) After a
single CPD iteration and (right) after four iterations of CPD using the method described in Section II-C . Please note that the vertical axes are using a logarithmic
scale.

Fig. 4. (Top left) G(R) (Hausdorff), Top right: G(R) (rms), (bottom left)
C(R), and finally, (bottom right) S(R) of the models from three methods for the
hippocampi. The standard errors were calculated as described in [46].

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF REGISTRATION ERROR STATISTICS: THIS IS THE AVERAGE OF ALL
MEASUREMENTS ACROSS THE SAMPLE
Scapula (mm)

The results of all three methods are shown in Fig. 4. The model
developed with IMCP-GMM has a better generality for both
distance metrics than those from the group-wise GMM and
EM-ICP methods. In addition, IMCP-GMM produces a hippocampus model with a better specificity than the other two. In
terms of compactness, IMCP-GMM produced a model, which
lies in between the two other methods. The IMCP-GMM, thus,
outperformed the other two methods in generality and specificity and performed slightly better than group-wise GMM and
slightly worse than EM-ICP in the test for compactness.

Humerus (mm)

1 Iteration

4 Iteration

1 Iteration

4 Iteration

0.58
0.51
0.78
5.22

0.10
0.13
0.16
2.46

0.45
0.38
0.59
3.00

0.10
0.11
0.15
1.41

Mean
Standard deviation (STD)
Root mean square (RMS)
Hausdorff
Average edge length

1.51

1.62

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF REGISTRATION ERROR STATISTICS: THIS IS THE AVERAGE OF ALL
MEASUREMENTS ACROSS THE SAMPLE

B. Application of Pipeline to Scapula and Humerus

Landmark

1) Assessing Registration Quality: In general CPD performs
well but a quantitative assessment of the registration results was
required. This was because the described pipeline was very
sensitive to how well the MV shape estimated the original instances. The point-to-surface distribution of distances between
the MV estimate of an instance and the original instance were
calculated. For each vertex of one surface, the closest point on
the other surface was computed and the following measures
were computed: 1) rms distance and 2) Hausdorff distance [47].
The original instance surface was always used as the reference surface as these calculations of surface distance measures
are asymmetric. The results presented are for both bones after
one iteration of CPD (see Fig. 5 left) and after four iterations of
CPD (see Fig. 5 right). The Hausdorff distance measures were
halved on average by repeated iterations of CPD (see Table I).
The rest of the distance measures showed, on average, a five-fold
reduction in magnitude between one and four iterations of CPD.
All distance measures except for the Hausdorff distance were in
the submillimeter range after multiple iterations of CPD.
2) Assessing Correspondence Quality: The objective of this
test was to test the correspondence transference. Only humerus
data were used in the assessment of correspondence quality.
This was purely because there were anatomical landmarks in
the humerus sample that could be more consistently identified

Lateral condyle
Medical condyle
Anterior lesser tubercle

% agreement
89
100
100

as extreme points of curvature than on the scapula data. Three
easily identifiable landmarks, the medial and lateral condyles
and lesser tubercle were selected on a decimated MV shape of
the humerus with 1000 vertices. The MV shape was deformed
in the manner described previously toward the original humerus
instances with 15000 vertices. The indices of the vertices describing the three landmarks were then compared between the
humerus MV shape and the MV estimations of each of the original instances. To obtain the exact vertex indices of the landmarks
in their general areas of location, the following procedures was
performed: 1) obtain the vertex normals for each of the vertices, 2) obtain the Gauss curvature of the vertices, and 3) the
landmarks are those with the highest Gauss curvature and normals most perpendicular to the long axis of the humerus. The
results of the correspondence assessment of three humerus landmarks are shown in Table II. Only one landmark had less than
100% agreement in indices across the humerus sample and this
was the lateral condyle with two instances, which did not have
the same index for this landmark.

1104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 6. The left figure is a color-coded distance map of the difference between
the MV shape created with left-sided scapula only and the one made using all
the scapulae available. The right figure is the same for the right-sided scapula
although mirrored to the same side, to facilitate a direct comparison.

Fig. 8. Pattern of variation for the first principal components of the withsize models for both the humerus and the scapula. Although there are some
morphological differences, the first principal component of these models is
clearly related to size.

Fig. 7. Top left: G(R) (Hausdorff), Top right: G(R) (rms), Bottom left: S(R)
and finally, Bottom right: C(R) of the scapula with-size model.The standard
errors were calculated as described in [46].

3) Stability of MV Shape: The mean point-to-surface distances between a model created with 14 left-sided scapulae and
all 27 scapulae were calculated. The same was done for the
13 right-sided scapulae and the color-coded distance results for
both sets are presented (see Fig. 6).
4) SSMs: An assessment of model quality using generality,
specificity, and compactness was performed for the with-size
scapula shape model. We included the with-size results only
(see Fig. 7) as we intended to show the model reconstruction
quality for a structure having a high anatomical variation and
also large size differences. As expected, the Haussdorf distances
(maximum value of 9.0 mm and minimum of 5.3 mm) were
higher for the generality measure than the rms values (maximum value 1.9 mm and minimum of 1.0 mm). The Specificity
for this scapula model ranged from 1.4 mm to a maximum
value of 1.6 mm. Looking at the Compactness, the contribution
by the first principal component alone claims close to 60% of
total variation (see Fig. 7 bottom right). The first seven principal components account for 90% of the variation. As expected
the with-size models, the first principal components, with the
largest variation contributions represent scale-related changes
in the shapes of both bone structures. This can be seen in the
configurations between −3 and +3 standard deviations either

Fig. 9. Pattern of shape variation for the first three principal components of
the without-size models for the scapula. Each principal component is shown in
four views with the variation shown as two superimposed shapes three standard
deviations from the either side of the mean shape.

side of the mean shape for both the scapula and the humerus
for the with-size models (see Fig. 8). To illustrate some of the
shape variation patterns of the without-size scapula SSM, we included the shape warping of the first three principal components
from −3 and +3 standard deviations about the mean shape (see
Fig. 9).
IV. DISCUSSION
The comparison of the IMCP-GMM with group-wise GMM
and EM-ICP using generality, compactness, and specificity
shows that the pipeline performs as well as, and sometimes

MUTSVANGWA et al.: AUTOMATED STATISTICAL SHAPE MODEL DEVELOPMENTAL PIPELINE

better than the other two. The scapula model quality assessment
was also reported on although no comparative studies could be
done due to lack of such work in the literature as of this report.
It is hoped that with the introduction of the Statismo framework,
our scapula model may be tested against those reported in the
literature using common data. The scapula model quality results
presented here, however, are encouraging and show a with-size
scapula model that is compact (it takes seven components only
to represent 90% of the total shape variation in the model) and
also specific (all S(R) values are below 1.65 mm). The rms
values from the Generality measure also show low values for
G(R) with a resting value after 23 principal components of
1.0 mm. As expected, the Hausdorff distance results for G(R)
are higher than those for rms distances and this can be explained
by the high anatomical variability of the scapula across the human population. We purposely presented the with-size scapula
model to illustrate the modeling capacity of IMCP-GMM even
when presented with such a known complex structure as the
human scapula. Work is ongoing to adding more instances to
our scapula basis for more exhaustive tests on model quality.
We did not include such an assessment for the humerus as we
feel that this bone structure lends itself quite easily to proposed
pipeline.
A new correspondence test was introduced in which the index of vertices of known extreme landmarks on the humerus
was tracked. By using curvature and normals to determine the
landmarks, the error associated with manual landmarking was
eliminated allowing for a confident assessment of the tracking
of landmark index across the humerus sample. In this regard,
the modeling pipeline performed reasonably well in its ability
to assign correspondence to the correct landmarks across the
sample. The humerus example used here was an ideal case and,
such kind of testing would be more difficult for a structure like
the scapula. However, the determination of correspondences
between unstructured point sets is especially difficult when one
shape features a certain structural detail and the other one does
not [35]. This is particularly true of the scapula which exhibits,
at least in our dry bone dataset, structural details in some areas
on some sample instances, totally lacking in others, for example,
the supra-scapula notch. This often resulted in fairly low mean
and rms point-to-surface distances but some considerably larger
values for the Hausdorff distances (see Fig. 5) during the nonrigid registration process to establish correspondence. However,
the multiple applications of CPD resulted in an improved registration, and therefore, more localized correspondence across
the samples. The tracking of landmarks identified by the International Society of Biomechanics [48] could be advantageously
used for a systematic assessment of the scapula correspondence
and future work will be focused on reporting such kind of tracking of landmarks.
The importance of the MV shape was in obtaining a nonbiased
underlying reference structure from which real-world instances
can be considered noisy perturbations of the MV shape. This
does present a limitation on the IMCP-GMM pipeline in that MV
shape may be different depending on the particular dataset being
used and also size of the sample. In light of this, the stability of
the MV shape becomes critical and an exhaustive test of how

1105

stable this shape is with varying number of instances will have
to be conducted in future as a part of assessing model quality.
However, a preliminary test was performed using the dry bone
scapula data as scapulae from both sides of the human shoulder
were available. The acromion process was the only anatomical
region with a high level of variability. This is expected as there
has been report of the variability of this structure across the
population [49]. In the study presented here, this is in fact one of
the major modes of variation in the scapula model presented here
(see Fig. 9). Thus, from this preliminary test the all-instance MV
shape was considered to be relatively stable.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper introduces an IMCP-GMM-based pipeline for creating SSMs, which has been shown to produce promising results
for three structures of varying complexity. The main advantages
in the pipeline include automation in that the method does not
rely on manual landmarks or a regionalization step; there is no
bias in the choice of reference thanks to a robust group-wise correspondence registration, and the use of the PPCA framework
increases the domain of the shape variability. A comparison of
the methodology has also been performed with publicly available data and the proposed pipeline has proven to be equal to
or better than two state-of-the-art methods through commonly
used criteria: generality, specificity, and compactness. However,
the hippocampus is a relatively less complex structure than the
scapula and the humerus, and thus, we also presented results
using the same measures for a complex structure, the human
scapula. Future work will focus on extending the validation of
the scapula model using an expanded basis to get a better understanding of the scapula model quality. In addition, the SSMs
will be fit on real patient data for segmentation and morphologic
analysis purposes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. B. Borotikar of Télécom
Bretagne for his valuable contribution toward improving the
quality of this manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Stindel, J. L. Briard, S. Lavallée, F. Dubrana, S. Plaweski, P. Merloz,
C. Lefévre, and J. Troccaz, “ Bone morphing: 3D reconstruction without
pre- or intraoperative imaging—Concept and applications,” in Navigation
and Robotics in Total Joint and Spine Surgery. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2004, pp. 39–45.
[2] K. T. Rajamani, M. A. Styner, H. Talib, G. Zheng, L. P. Nolte, and
M. A. G. Ballester, “Statistical deformable bone models for robust 3D
surface extrapolation from sparse data,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 99–109, 2007.
[3] G. Zheng, X. Dong, K. T. Rajamani, X. Zhang, M. Styner,
R. U. Thoranaghatte, L.-P. Nolte, and M. G. Ballester, “Accurate and
robust reconstruction of a surface model of the proximal femur from
sparse-point data and a dense-point distribution model for surgical navigation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2109–2122, Dec.
2007.
[4] G. Gomes, S. Van Cauter, M. De Beule, L. Vigneron, C. Pattyn, and
E. Audenaert, “Patient-specific modelling in orthopedics: From image to
surgery,” in Biomedical Imaging and Computational Modeling in Biomechanics. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2013, pp. 109–129.

1106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

[5] G. Zheng, S. Gollmer, S. Schumann, X. Dong, T. Feilkas, and
M. A. González Ballester, “A 2D/3D correspondence building method
for reconstruction of a patient-specific 3D bone surface model using
point distribution models and calibrated x-ray images,” Med. Image Anal.,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 883–899, 2009.
[6] H. Lamecker, T. H. Wenckebach, and H.-C. Hege, “Atlas-based 3D-shape
reconstruction from x-ray images,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. Pattern
Recog., 2006, vol. 1, pp. 371–374.
[7] Z. Zhu and G. Li, “Construction of 3D human distal femoral surface models using a 3D statistical deformable model,” J. Biomechanics,
vol. 44, no. 13, pp. 2362–2368, 2011.
[8] S. Thompson, G. Penney, D. Buie, P. Dasgupta, and D. Hawkes, “Use of
a CT statistical deformation model for multi-modal pelvic bone segmentation,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 6914, pp. 69 141O-1–69 141O-10, 2008.
[9] D. C. Barratt, C. S. Chan, P. J. Edwards, G. P. Penney, M. Slomczykowski,
T. J. Carter, and D. J. Hawkes, “Instantiation and registration of statistical
shape models of the femur and pelvis using 3D ultrasound imaging,” Med.
Image Anal., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 358–374, 2008.
[10] H. Seim, D. Kainmueller, M. Heller, H. Lamecker, S. Zachow, and
H.-C. Hege, “Automatic segmentation of the pelvic bones from CT data
based on a statistical shape model,” in Proc. Conf. Visual Comput. Biomed.,
2008, pp. 93–100.
[11] M. Becker, M. Kirschner, S. Fuhrmann, and S. Wesarg, “Automatic construction of statistical shape models for vertebrae,” in Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. New York, NY, USA:
Springer, 2011, pp. 500–507.
[12] M. Elias de Oliveira, C. Reutlinger, G. Zheng, C. Hasler, and P. Buchler,
“Statistical shape modeling of pathological scoliotic vertebrae: A comparative analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2010,
pp. 5939–5942.
[13] H. Mirzaalian, M. Wels, T. Heimann, B. M. Kelm, and M. Suehling, “Fast
and robust 3D vertebra segmentation using statistical shape models,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2013, pp. 3379–3382.
[14] P. Boileau, R. Sinnerton, C. Chuinard, and G. Walch, “Arthroplasty of the
shoulder,” J. Bone Joint Surg., vol. 88, no. 5, pp. 562–575, 2006.
[15] C. Schwartz, F. Leboeuf, O. Rémy-Néris, S. Brochard, M. Lempereur,
and V. Burdin, “Using merged kinematic and anatomical data to evaluate
humeral motion estimation: A pilot study,” Comput. Methods Biomechanics Biomed. Eng.: Imag. Visualization, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 43–47,
2013.
[16] F. Lebailly, L. Lima, A. Clairemidi, B. Aubert, S. Guerard, Y. Chaibi,
J. De Guise, C. Fontaine, and W. Skalli, “Semi-automated stereoradiographic upper limb 3D reconstructions using a combined parametric and
statistical model: A preliminary study,” Surgical Radiologic Anatomy,
vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 757–765, 2012.
[17] C. Schwartz, F. Leboeuf, O. Rémy-Néris, S. Brochard, M. Lempereur,
and V. Burdin, “Detection of incoherent joint state due to inaccurate
bone motion estimation,” Comput. Methods Biomechanics Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 165–174, 2013.
[18] M. A. Styner, K. T. Rajamani, L.-P. Nolte, G. Zsemlye, G. Székely,
C. J. Taylor, and R. H. Davies, “Evaluation of 3D correspondence methods
for model building,” in Information Processing in Medical Imaging. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2003, pp. 63–75.
[19] O. Van Kaick, H. Zhang, G. Hamarneh, and D. Cohen-Or, “A survey
on shape correspondence,” Comput. Graphics Forum, vol. 30, no. 6,
pp. 1681–1707, 2011.
[20] T. Heimann and H.-P. Meinzer, “Statistical shape models for 3D medical image segmentation: A review,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 543–563, 2009.
[21] T. F. Cootes, S. Marsland, C. J. Twining, K. Smith, and C. J. Taylor,
“Groupwise diffeomorphic non-rigid registration for automatic model
building,” in Computer Vision—ECCV. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2004, pp. 316–327.
[22] S. Granger, and X. Pennec, “Multi-scale em-icp: A fast and robust approach for surface registration,” in Computer Vision—ECCV (Lecture
Notes in Computer Science), A. Heyden, G. Sparr, M. Nielsen, and
P. Johansen, Eds. Berlin, Germany, Springer, Jan. 1, 2002, vol. 2353,
ch. 28, pp. 418–432.
[23] S. K. Balci, P. Golland, M. Shenton, and W. M. Wells, “Free-form bspline deformation model for groupwise registration,” in Proc. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, vol. 10, 2007, pp. 23–30.
[24] A. Rasoulian, R. Rohling, and P. Abolmaesumi, “Group-wise registration of point sets for statistical shape models,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 2025–2034, Nov. 2012.

[25] H. Hufnagel, X. Pennec, J. Ehrhardt, N. Ayache, and H. Handels, “Computation of a probabilistic statistical shape model in a maximum-a-posteriori
framework,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 314–319, 2009.
[26] Z. Su, “Statistical shape modelling: automatic shape model building,”
Ph. D. thesis, University College London, London, U.K., 2011.
[27] M. Luthi, R. Blanc, T. Albrecht, T. Gass, O. Goksel, P. Buchler, M. Kistler,
H. Bousleiman, M. Reyes, and P. C. Cattin, “Statismo—A framework for
PCA based statistical models,” Insight J., vol. 1, pp. 1–18, 2012.
[28] Y. M. Yang, D. Rueckert, and A. M. Bull, “Predicting the shapes of bones
at a joint: Application to the shoulder,” Comput. Methods Biomechanics
Biomed. Eng., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 19–30, 2008.
[29] M. Mayya, S. Poltaretskyi, C. Hamitouche, and J. Chaoui, “Scapula
statistical shape model construction based on watershed segmentation
and elastic registration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2013,
pp. 101–104.
[30] W. Schroeder, K. Martin, and B. Lorensen, The Visualization Toolkit, Third
Edition, Kitware Inc., Clifton Park, NY, USA.
[31] L. Ibanez, W. Schroeder, L. Ng, and J. Cates, The ITK Software Guide:
The Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit, Kitware Inc., Clifton
Park, NY, USA, vol. 5, 2003.
[32] T. S. Yoo, M. J. Ackerman, W. E. Lorensen, W. Schroeder, V. Chalana,
S. Aylward, D. Metaxas, and R. Whitaker, “Engineering and algorithm
design for an image processing API: A technical report on ITK—The
insight toolkit,” Studies Health Technol. Informat., pp. 586–592, 2002.
[33] H. Hufnagel, X. Pennec, J. Ehrhardt, N. Ayache, and H. Handels, “Generation of a statistical shape model with probabilistic point correspondences
and the expectation maximization-iterative closest point algorithm,” Int.
J. Comput.-Assisted Radiol. Surg., vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 265–273, 2008.
[34] M. Styner, I. Oguz, S. Xu, C. Brechbühler, D. Pantazis, J. J. Levitt,
M. E. Shenton, and G. Gerig, “Framework for the statistical shape analysis
of brain structures using SPHARM-PDM,” Insight J., no. 1071, pp. 242–
250, 2006.
[35] J.-J. Jacq, T. Cresson, V. Burdin, and C. Roux, “Performing accurate joint
kinematics from 3D in vivo image sequences through consensus-driven
simultaneous registration,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 5,
pp. 1620–1633, May 2008.
[36] J.-J. Jacq, C. Schwartz, V. Burdin, R. Gerard, C. Lefevre, C. Roux, and
O. Remy-Neris, “Building and tracking root shapes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 696–707, Mar. 2010.
[37] C. Schwartz, “Contribution to the development of a common representation space for morphofunctional analysis of the upper limb: Application
to the glenohumeral joint,” (in french), Ph.D. thesis, Télécom Bretagne,
Brest, France, 2009.
[38] P. J. Rousseeuw, and A. M. Leroy, Robust Regression and Outlier Detection. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1987.
[39] K. Fujiwara, “Eigenvalues of Laplacians on a closed riemannian manifold
and its nets,” Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 123, no. 8, pp. 2585–2594, Aug.
1995.
[40] A. Myronenko, X. Song, and D. J. Sahn, “Maximum likelihood motion
estimation in 3D echocardiography through non-rigid registration in spherical coordinates,” in Functional Imaging and Modeling of the Heart. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 427–436.
[41] A. Myronenko and X. Song, “Point set registration: Coherent point drift,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2262–2275,
Dec. 2010.
[42] M. Koch, S. Bauer, J. Hornegger, and N. Strobel, “Towards deformable
shape modeling of the left atrium using non-rigid coherent point drift
registration,” in Bildverarbeitung für die Medizin. New York, NY, USA:
Springer, 2013, pp. 332–337.
[43] A. Myronenko, “Non-rigid image registration: Regularization, algorithms
and applications: A dissertation,” Ph.D. thesis, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR, USA, 2010.
[44] B. Combés, B., and S. Prima, “An efficient em-icp algorithm for symmetric consistent non-linear registration of point sets,” in Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. New York, NY, USA:
Springer, 2010, pp. 594–601.
[45] J. C. Gower, “Generalized procrustes analysis,” Psychometrika, vol. 40,
no. 1, pp. 33–51, 1975.
[46] R. H. Davies, C. J. Twining, T. F. Cootes, and C. J. Taylor, “Building 3D
statistical shape models by direct optimization,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 961–981, Apr. 2010.
[47] N. Aspert, D. Santa Cruz, and T. Ebrahimi, “Mesh: Measuring errors
between surfaces using the Hausdorff distance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Multimedia Expo., 2002, vol. 1, pp. 705–708.

MUTSVANGWA et al.: AUTOMATED STATISTICAL SHAPE MODEL DEVELOPMENTAL PIPELINE

[48] G. Wu, F. C. van der Helm, H. D. Veeger, M. Makhsous, P. V. Roy,
C. Anglin, J. Nagels, A. R. Karduna, K. McQuade, X. Wang, F. W. Werner,
and B. Buchholz, “Isb recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate
systems of various joints for the reporting of human joint motion—Part
II: Shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 981–992, 2005.
[49] G. P. Nicholson, D. A. Goodman, E. L. Flatow, and L. U. Bigliani, “The
acromion: Morphologic condition and age-related changes. A study of
420 scapulas,” J. Shoulder Elbow Surg., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 1996.

Tinashe Mutsvangwa (M’13) received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical/electronic engineering and the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering
all from the University of Cape Town, Cape Town,
South Africa in 2003, 2005, and 2009, respectively.
He is currently a Lecturer in Biomedical Engineering and Health Innovation and Design, University of
Cape Town.
Dr. Mutsvangwa received the Research Based University Chair of Excellence Fellowship from 2012–
2014.

Valérie Burdin (M’98) received the M.Sc. degree
in mathematics (1986) from the University of SaintEtienne, Saint-Etienne, France and the Ph.D. degree
in telecommunications and signal processing (1992)
from the University of Rennes I, Rennes, France.
She joined the Institut Mines-Telecom, Telecom
Bretagne, Brest, France, in 1997, as an Associate Professor, and then, a Full Professor from 2013 onwards.
She is involved in research projects in advanced medical image processing at the INSERM U1101 Laboratory (LaTIM). She works with the Department of
Orthopedics Surgery, and since 2005, with the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Hospital of Brest, Brest. Her current research interests include motion
analysis and 3-D modeling of musculoskeletal systems with a focus on the collaboration between anatomical and kinematical data. This morpho-functional
approach implies methodological aspects as 3-D data registration, segmentation, and statistical models. She is a author or coauthor of more than 80 papers
and two book chapters.
Pr. Burdin is a member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, the French Society of Biomedical Engineering, and the French Society
for Movement Analysis in Adults and Children. She is involved in the organization of the IEEE EMBS International Summer School on Biomedical Imaging,
being held every two years in Brittany, France.

1107

Cédric Schwartz received the M.Sc. degree in
biomedical engineering from the Université de Technologie de Compiégne, Compiégne, France in 2005
and the Ph.D. degree in information and communication technologies and sciences from Telecom Bretagne, Brest, France in 2009.
After working as a “Marie Curie” researcher at the
University of Aalborg, Denmark, he joined in 2010,
the University of Liége, Belgium, where he is currently in charge of the Laboratory for Human Motion
Analysis. His current research interests include motion analysis and musculoskeletal modeling.

Christian Roux (F’05) received the Agregation degree in physics from the Ecole Normale Superieure,
Cachan, France, in 1978 and the Ph.D. degree
from the Institut National Polytechnique, Grenoble,
France, in 1980.
He was with Institut Télécom - Télécom Bretagne
from 1982 till 2013 as an Associate Professor, and
then, from 1987 onwards as a Professor. He has been
a Visiting Professor with the Medical Image Processing Group, Department of Radiology, University of
Pennsylvania (1992–1993), and a Distinguished International Research Fellow with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Calgary, Canada (1996 and 2003). He is the founding Director of the
Laboratoire de Traitement de l’Information Medicale, INSERM U650/U1101.
His research interests include advanced medical information processing, and
spatial, temporal and functional information modeling and analysis in medical
images, with applications in various medical domains including orthopedics,
gastroenterology ophthalmology, cardiology and nuclear medicine. He has published more than 200 papers, holds ten patents and is the cofounder of spin-off
companies in orthopedic computer-assisted surgery.
Dr. Roux was an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL
IMAGING and the Chairman of its Steering Committee (1993–2003), member of
the Editorial board of the IEEE TRANSACTION ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
and of the PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, and is a founding member of the Editorial Board of the IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS
J-BHI. He is the founding cochairman of the IEEE EMBS International Summer School on Biomedical Imaging held every other year in France, which is
now recognized as a worldwide reference. He served as President of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society in 2001. He played a seminal role
in the creation of IEEE ISBI International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
in 2002. In 2004, he became a Senior Advisor with the French Ministry of Research and in 2006 Program Officer with the French National Research Agency
in the area of Technologies for Health. In 2009, he became the Dean for Research with Telecom Bretagne and he joined Ecole des Mines de Saint-Etienne
in 2013, where he is a Senior Vice-President for Research and Innovation. He
is a Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering
(AIMBE) and International Academy for Medical and Biological Engineering
(IAMBE).

