890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Characterization of Force and Torque Interactions
During a Simulated Transgastric
Appendectomy Procedure
Saurabh Dargar, Student Member, IEEE, Cecilia Brino, Student Member, IEEE, Kai Matthes,
Ganesh Sankaranarayanan, Member, IEEE, and Suvranu De∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We have developed an instrumented endoscope grip
handle equipped with a six-axis load cell and measured forces and
torques during a simulated transgastric natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery appendectomy procedure performed in
an EASIE-R ex vivo simulator. The data were collected from ten
participating surgeons of varying degrees of expertise which was
analyzed to compute a set of six force and torque parameters for
each coordinate axis for each of the nine tasks of the appendectomy procedure. The mean push/pull force was found to be 3.64 N
(σ = 3.54 N) in the push direction and the mean torque was
3.3 N · mm (σ = 38.6 N · mm) in the counterclockwise direction
about the push/pull axis. Most interestingly, the force and torque
data about the nondominant x and z axes showed a statistically
significant difference (p < 0.05) between the expert and novice
groups for five of the nine tasks. These data may be useful in
developing surgical platforms especially new haptic devices and
simulation systems for emerging natural orifice procedures.
Index Terms—Haptic interface, human factors, surgery, virtual
reality.

I. INTRODUCTION
UCH advancement made in the field of surgery has focused on minimizing the invasiveness of surgical access
techniques. The introduction of minimally invasive surgery has
revolutionized the mainstream surgical community. A further
development in the direction of reducing invasiveness is the

M

Manuscript received May 1, 2014; revised July 23, 2014, September 18,
2014, and November 2, 2014; accepted November 3, 2014. Date of publication
November 12, 2014; date of current version February 16, 2015. This work was
supported by NIH/NIBIB under Grants 5R01EB010037-01, 1R01EB00936201A2, 2R01EB005807-05A1, and 1R01EB014305-01A1. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
S. Dargar is with the Biomedical Engineering Department and also with
the Center for Modeling, Simulation and Imaging in Medicine, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: dargas@rpi.edu).
C. Brino is with the Mechanical Engineering Department and also with the
Center for Modeling, Simulation and Imaging in Medicine, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: brinoc@rpi.edu).
K. Matthes is with the Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 USA
and also with the Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail:
kai.matthes@childrens.harvard.edu).
G. Sankaranarayanan is with the Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and
Nuclear Engineering and also with the Center for Modeling, Simulation and
Imaging in Medicine, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA
(e-mail: sankag@rpi.edu).
∗ S. De is with the Center for Modeling, Simulation and Imaging in Medicine
and also with the Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail:
des@rpi.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2369956

natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES). The
primary goal behind NOTES is to be an incision-less procedure,
with no external scarring and minimized patient trauma [1].
In a NOTES procedure, access to the target organ is obtained
by either breaching the lumen of the stomach, colon or cervix
through the natural orifices such as the mouth, vagina or anus
[2], [3].
While there is significant enthusiasm around the development of NOTES procedures [4]–[7], a cautioned approach is
necessary to mitigate patient safety concerns that plagued the
introduction of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the early 1990s.
This is particularly important due to the relatively low human
experience, lack of long term follow-up data and the high complexity of the procedure that requires multiple skill sets including flexible endoscopy and surgery. Maneuvering a flexible
endoscope in a pure NOTES procedure requires critical scope
handling skills to safely approach the target organ while breaching the respective lumen [8] and proper lumenal closure [9].
Despite the momentum the NOTES technique has gathered, the unavailability of specialized equipments and dedicated
platforms have hampered the widespread clinical adoption of
NOTES [10]. However, the NOTES procedure is continually
evolving with initially envisioned procedures such as cholecystectomy and appendectomy now giving way to a variety of newer
techniques such as peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) [11],
endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) [12], [13], transanal
rectal resection [14], and endoscopic full thickness resection
[15]. Thus, continuing NOTES-based research work is a critical
endeavor, even today.
To address the emerging concerns of NOTES procedures, a
working group called Natural Orifice Surgery Consortium for
Assessment and Research was formed and a 2005 whitepaper
published by the consortium lays out eight major issues that the
community must address to enable safe introduction of NOTES
to the clinic [16]. Two of these include development of effective training paradigms and a surgical platform. Understanding
the force and torque interactions with the endoscope is critical
for both. This force and torque data can be used to develop
performance metrics as well as aid in establishing the design
requirements for the development of a surgical training and
simulation platform.
Previous work by Trejos et al. studied the force and torque interactions between the endoscopic tool and target tissue during
NOTES [17]; however, there is no prior work studying the interactions between the user’s hand and endoscopic tool in a NOTES

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DARGAR et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF FORCE AND TORQUE INTERACTIONS

procedure. Trejos et al. conducted experiments to measure the
forces needed to manipulate tissues during a NOTES procedure.
They performed a transgastric and transperineal appendectomy
on two porcine models with specially instrumented tools, which
had strain gauges at the tooltip to measure the applied forces
on the tissue. Their study showed that a force of 8 and 16 N
is required for transgastric and transperineal approaches, respectively. Characterizing the tool-tissue interactions provides
an understanding of tissue effects and not the forces felt by
the user as the endoscope is flexible, not rigid. The forces and
torques on the user’s hand are important from the perspective of
designing a reliable surgical platform or interface for surgical
simulation. Hence, the hand–tool interactions must be measured
independently.
Studies have been conducted to measure the forces applied
by a surgeon’s hand on the endoscope during colonoscopy procedures [18]. The device used an inner tube attached to the
colonoscope and an outer tube for holding with the user’s hand.
Appropriately mounted strain gauges housed between the tubes
measured the forces. They measured a peak pushing force of
43 N and a pulling force of 17 N and a clockwise (CW) torque
of 0.8 N · m and anticlockwise torque of 1 N · m. Though this
device was developed to measure forces at the hand while operating an endoscope, it was large and needed to be completely
opened to move along the scope. In comparison, the forces applied at the tool handle in traditional laparoscopic surgery are
found to be in the range of 0–10 N and 0–100 N · mm of torque
[19].
Interestingly, prior works have shown haptic interactions to
be reliable differentiators of skill, most prominently in laparoscopic procedures. Rosen et al. used Markov models to develop
a performance scale based on force and torque signatures from
the tool–tissue interactions [20]. Trejos et al. developed several force-based metrics to classify skill and showed strong
correlation between experience and the force-based metrics for
laparoscopic tools [21]. Hwang et al. used a combination of
laparoscopic tool tip position and force/torque information to
develop measures of motor performance [22].
The same force and torque data can be used as reference
data to develop surgical simulation platforms, particularly haptic devices. There are a variety of parameters used to define
performance specifications of haptic devices, such as force output range and resolution [23]. Studying the specific force/torque
interactions for a given procedure can serve as application specific reference datasets for haptic device design. Haptic devices
for simulation of endoscopic procedures have been developed
before [24]. The two degrees of freedom haptic device developed by Samur et al. was designed specifically for colonoscopy
simulations. Yi et al. developed a 2 DOF colonoscopy simulator
with a specialized haptic interface to transfer force feedback
through a long and flexible tube for colonoscopy procedures
[25]. Ikuta et al. designed the portable virtual endoscope system for colonoscopy simulations using friction rollers and a
rubber ball as actuators to render force feedback [26]. Commercial devices for colonoscopic/endoscopic procedures are also
available. The EndoVR system available from CAE Healthcare
provides modules for gastrointestinal and bronchial assessment

891

Fig. 1. (a) EASIE-R simulator with ex-planted pig organs and access ports.
(b) EASIE-R simulator with the molded belly.

[27]. The haptic system provides active force feedback during
insertion and removal of the scope from the mannequin. The GI
mentor from Simbionix USA Corp. provides a comprehensive
endoscopic medical simulator and has been evaluated as a virtual endoscopy simulator for gastrointestinal procedures [28],
[29]. Since realistic force feedback is critical for efficient training using surgical simulators, studying the actual force/torque
interactions becomes important for determining the required
performance specifications of haptic devices for surgical
simulations.
In this paper, our objective is to develop a novel device to measure the taskwise forces and torques felt and applied at the user’s
hand during a simulated transgastric appendectomy procedure.
The data help us understand the range of forces and torques encountered during this procedure in an ex vivo simulator to serve
as a reliable indicator for skill-level differentiation for some of
the tasks and reference data for development of haptic devices
for flexible endoscopy-based procedural simulators.
II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Apparatus
A validated ex vivo simulator EASIE-R (Endosim LLC, Hudson, MA, USA) with ex-planted pig tissues has been used in
this study. The EASIE-R model has been tested extensively at
various national and international NOTES courses and at the
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
(SAGES) learning center since 2008 as a simulation model for
NOTES procedures [30], [31]. The simulator consists of intact
ex-planted pig organs arranged in a manner to resemble a human’s internal anatomy and has ports that mimic the natural
orifices such as esophageal and anal access, in order to allow
for access into the peritoneal cavity. Specimens are attached to
an adapter, which threads into the esophageal portal or colon
portal. This also provides a secure link to fix a portion of the
specimen in place, which can be seen in Fig. 1. The remainder
of the specimen is secured in place with stainless steel alligator

892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 2. Demonstrator holding the flexible endoscope. One hand holds the
endoscope handle while the other holds the shaft of the endoscope.

clips that are fixed to the tray. In this study, the gastric port was
used to perform the transgastric NOTES appendectomy.
The EASIE-R tray is made from washable plastic and is 26 in
L × 15.5 in W × 6 in H in size with a 1.24 in threaded esophageal
and 1.5 in threaded colon portal to mimic natural orifices. The
tray has a 6.5 in molded esophageal section that keeps the esophagus tissue elongated and straight in place. In Fig. 1(a), the tray
is covered with a clear plastic sheet for demonstration purposes
only; during the procedure, the tray is covered with a 16.5 in
L × 13.5 in W × 6 in H “molded belly” as seen in Fig. 1(b).
B. Instrumentation Hardware
During NOTES, the user performs the procedure by holding
a flexible endoscope with one hand and the end effector control
dials with the other, as shown in Fig. 2. The hand used to hold the
flexible endoscope’s insertion tube is the sole source of human
applied force to the endoscope for maneuvering. It is at this point
of hand contact that we are interested in measuring the forces
and torques applied by the user. There are no commercially
available devices that can readily allow for the measurement
of forces and torques exerted on a flexible endoscope. Thus,
in order to facilitate the measurement of forces while creating
minimal obstruction to the user, a customized instrumented load
cell handle was designed.
The handle was prototyped using additive manufacturing
techniques. Fig. 3(a) shows the CAD model of the load cell
handle with all the assembled components labeled. It consists
primarily of an outer contact surface for the surgeon labeled
as the “handle tube,” and an inner contact for the endoscope,
labeled as the “scope attachment.” The interface between the inner and outer layers is solely through the load cell. This allows
unhindered transmission of forces/torque from the user’s hand
to the endoscope, in turn allowing the load cell to measure the
force/torque applied by the user’s hand. Hence, the force/torque
being recorded is only due to the user’s interaction with the handle. The load cell is secured in place with an aluminum cover on
the “handle tube” to prevent any undesired moments. The endoscope is secured onto the “scope attachment” using a simple
1/4-in set screw, which is firmly tightened to prevent any slip. A
4 mm clearance between the “hand screw” and the hole in the
outer “handle tube” was provided to prevent any interference.

Fig. 3. (a) CAD model of device attached to endoscope. (b) Front view of
force/torque recording device.

Fig. 3(b) shows the final manufactured load cell handle, which
was used to conduct the studies.
This device has been designed to be user friendly and minimally obstructive during the course of the procedure. The handle
tube is designed ergonomically to allow a strong and firm grip
on the scope handle. The user has the ability to slide the endoscope handle up and down the endoscope on the fly by a simple
adjustment of the “hand screw” as labeled in Fig. 3(a). This is
an important feature if the user desires to reposition the device
for better control over the flexible endoscope during the procedure. A simple adjustment to the “hand screw” by the thumb
loosened or tightened the location of the handle, making repositioning straightforward. Alignment markings on the handle and
flexible endoscope were used to ensure the same orientation
throughout all trials.
For accurate and high precision force and torque data measurement, the device has been instrumented with a small six-axis
load cell (Nano 17 from ATI Industrial Automation, Apex, NC,
USA), which senses the force and torque about the three axes.
The force sensor can accurately measure forces up to 50 N in
the x- and y-directions and up to 70 N in the z-direction, with a
maximum of 500 N · mm of torque about all three axes. In Fig. 4,
we can see the orientation of the three axes with respect to the
load cell handle, with the push and pull direction being along the
Y-axis and the torque (CW and counterclockwise (CCW)) being
about the Y-axis. The Nano 17 load cell is interfaced with an
ATI analog-to-digital converter unit (ADC unit). The ATI ADC
unit is then read using a National Instruments USB Data Acquisition (NI USB 6210). The National Instruments USB Data
Acquisition unit communicates with ATI’s proprietary software
at 62.5 Hz to resolve the analog voltages into forces/torques using a device-specific calibration file from ATI. A generic digital

DARGAR et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF FORCE AND TORQUE INTERACTIONS

893

TABLE II
TASK ANALYSIS APPROACH TO THE DATA SEGMENTATION

Fig. 4. Schematic identifying the coordinate system of the six-axis load cell
with respect to the location of the user’s hand while manipulating the endoscope.

TABLE I
TASKS FOR A TRANSGASTRIC NOTES APPENDECTOMY PROCEDURE
1. Insertion
2. Enter stomach and insufflate
Gastrotomy
3. Advance and articulate electrosurgery tip
4. Advance and inflate radial expansion balloon
5. Pass through gastric wall
6. Exposure and assessment of appendix
7. Dissection and division of appendix
8. Removal of appendix
9. Closure

video recorder was also used to record the endoscopic video for
each procedure to be used later during the data analysis.
C. Study Design and Data Collection
At the 2013 annual SAGES conference in Baltimore, MD,
USA, we performed an Institutional Review Board approved
study using the EASIE-R simulator and the instrumented load
cell handle. After agreeing to the verbal consent, the subjects
were instructed to perform a transgastric NOTES appendectomy
procedure.
Before each procedure, the subject was informed of the design and nature of the load cell handle being instrumented on the
double channel flexible endoscope. This was done to make the
subject aware of the visibly attached device such that it would
minimally impact how they usually interact with a flexible endoscope. Once the handle was attached to the endoscope, they
were given a timeout to get comfortable with holding the handle
and were instructed on how to loosen the setscrew in order to
move the handle up and down the scope as necessary.
The subjects were then informed of the key tasks (see Table I)
to be accomplished during the procedure. This transgastric appendectomy procedure involves inserting the endoscope through
the esophagus until it reaches the stomach where an incision is
made to reach the peritoneal cavity (gastrotomy) after which the
endoscope is driven to the appendix. Once the appendix is removed, the specimen is then retrieved through the stomach and
the gastric cavity. The endoscope is then inserted again to close
the hole in the stomach (gastrotomy closure). It is to be noted
that while performing appendectomy, the tools are inserted
through a special channel while the scope is used to control the

Task/Subtask

Start time

End time

1. Insertion

Scope is inserted into
esophagus
Scope enters stomach

Scope reaches end of
esophagus
Scope reaches location of
gastrotomy

Electrosurgery tool
appears on screen
Expansion balloon
appears on screen
Balloon is pushed
through incision
Grasper appears in the
screen
Electrosurgery loop
appears in the view
Cut is complete

Electrosurgery tool is
taken out of the screen
Expansion balloon
inflation is completed
Scope enters peritoneal
cavity
Endoloop is threaded on
appendix
Cut is complete

2. Enter stomach and
insufflate
Gastrotomy
3. Advance and articulate
electrosurgery tip
4. Advance and inflate
radial expansion balloon
5. Pass through gastric wall
6. Exposure and assessment
of appendix
7. Dissection and division of
appendix
8. Removal of appendix
9. Closure

First grasper appears in
the view

Appendix is outside the
esophagus
Last clip has been applied

TABLE III
PARAMETERS CALCULATED FOR EACH TASK SEGMENT
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Maximum CW torque about the (x, y, z) axes
Maximum CCW torque about the (x, y, z) axes
RMS torque about the (x, y, z) axes
Maximum force along the (x, y, z) direction
Maximum force along the (−x, −y, −z) direction
RMS force along the three directions

endoscope tip position and also provide proper traction to manipulate tissues.
D. Data Segmentation
Our primary approach to characterizing the appendectomy
procedure has been using a task analysis method that is clinically relevant. In order to provide a consistent basis for segmentation of each subject’s procedure, we used the tasks given
in Table I as a guide to create task segments. The start and end
of each task segment was clearly defined as shown in Table II.
Each video was studied to determine the respective start and stop
time points for each task; the time markers were then used to
segment the collected force data. Prior to conducting the studies, we performed calibration experiments between the video
recorder and the force sensor. The force data were collected at
a fixed sampling rate throughout the study. The system clocks
of the force recording computer and the endoscopic unit were
synchronized to the same timeserver to assure reliability on the
time stamps. Using the task start/stop times, the data were segmented in MATLAB, which was then further used to compute
various parameters.
E. Calculated Parameters
With all the data segmented, each task segment was then processed to compute a set of parameters as shown in Table III.
Before computing the metrics, a 10 Hz low-pass Butterworth
filter was applied to mitigate any noise components due to

894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

interference while preserving the frequency components of human motion, as voluntary limb movements have a bandwidth
of less than 10 Hz [32], [33]. From Fig. 4, we can see the orientation of the three axes with respect to the load cell while
in use, thus clearly indicating the push/pull (−y/+y), up/down
(−z/+z), and left/right (−x/+x) directions of each axis.
F. Statistical Analysis
After segmentation of the subject’s data, the experts and
novices were placed into their respective separate groups. In
order to assess the differences, a two-tailed Mann–Whitney U
test was performed on each parameter of each task using SPSS
(SPSS IBM, New York, USA) software. Given the nonnormality
of the data, the Mann–Whitney U test was an appropriate tool
to identify whether the computed parameters within each task
showed a statistically relevant difference or not.
III. RESULTS
The study was conducted with ten subjects with two distinct
skill groups, experts (n = 6) and novices (n = 4). Subjects were
classified as expert if they were an endoscopist or had previously
performed a NOTES procedure, while a novice was someone
with only laparoscopic experience. The parameters listed in
Table III were computed for each task, as outlined in Table I.
The results have been displayed in the following format; first, we
present the characterization of the complete procedure’s haptic
interaction and then the results of the parameters (see Table III)
for each of the nine tasks while comparing experts and novices.

Fig. 5. Histograms of the forces applied by all users (experts and novices)
during all of the nine tasks which comprise the NOTES appendectomy
procedure.

A. Complete Procedure Force and Torque Characterization
The primary approach to characterizing the interactions for
the appendectomy procedure has been to analyze the distribution
of forces and torques along all three axes. Before using a task
decomposition approach to analyzing the data, we studied the
distribution of forces and torques for all subjects over the course
of the procedure. In Figs. 5 and 6, we can see the distribution of
applied forces and torques along the x, y, and z axes for the full
course of the procedure.
Along the x-axis, we see a skewed distribution of leftward
and rightward forces (median −0.46 N, mode −1.56 N). A
small number of occurrences (0.8% of all occurrences) of high
rightward forces of greater than 20 N can be seen, while the
leftward forces only go up to 14 N. Along the y-axis, the force
distribution is fairly skewed with the majority of applied forces
in the push direction (median −2.55 N, mode −13 N), with
the high force values of up to 25 N only present in the push
direction. The forces along the z-axis show a slightly skewed
distribution toward the down direction (median −0.48 N, mode
−1.66 N). The up and down forces do not exceed 10 and 11.5 N
in magnitude, respectively.
The same approach was taken in analyzing the distribution
of torques about their respective axes and is shown in Fig. 6.
The torque about the x-axis shows a plateau like distribution,
with the majority of torques being in the CW direction up
to 200 N · mm (median 39.99 N · mm, mode 36.1 N · mm).

Fig. 6. Histograms of the torques applied by all users (experts and novices)
during all of the nine tasks which comprise the transgastric appendectomy
procedure.

The CCW torque begins to drop off significantly with only
a fraction of the number of occurrences above 100 N · mm of
torque. The torque about the y-axis (push/pull axis) shows a normal distribution with a uniform application of CW and CCW

DARGAR et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF FORCE AND TORQUE INTERACTIONS

895

Fig. 7. Time-series plot comparing the force signatures of an expert and novice
for task #4 which includes the placement of the deflated radial expansion balloon
and eventual inflation to increase the size of incision in the gastric wall.

Fig. 8. Time-series plot comparing the torque signatures of an expert and
novice for task #4 which includes the placement of the deflated radial expansion
balloon and eventual inflation to increase the size of incision in the gastric wall.

torques ranging up to 200 N · mm (median −3.26 N · mm, mode
−10.11 N · mm). Applied torques about the z-axis shows an interesting bimodal distribution (median −11.13 N · mm, mode 17
and −152.49 N · mm). The majority of CW occurrences peak
at 75 N · mm with a fraction of occurrences above 75 N · mm.
The majority of the torque appears to be in the CCW direction
with a fairly consistent occurrence of torques between 25 and
100 N · mm, eventually peaking at 210 N · mm.
Fig. 7 shows the time-series plot of measured force for expert
subject 1 and novice subject 2 during the insertion and inflation of the saline-based radial expansion balloon (task #4). As
a reference, negative values indicate force along the negative
direction of the axis and positive values indicate forces long the
positive direction of the axis.
The expert and novice show minimal activity of force in the
x and z axes, while the forces along the push/pull (y-axis) are
the dominant forces throughout the task. The comparison of
push/pull forces between experts and novice shows an interesting difference, primarily in the instances of high forces along
the y-axis. In the experts plot, we can see push/pull forces of up
to ∼10 N until we get to the 65 s mark, where the push force
jumps to ∼22 N indicating the expert has pushed the inflated
balloon into the previously made incision (task #3) and is poised
for the final push to pass through the gastric wall in task #5. In
the push/pull plot of the novice, we can see multiple occurrences
of push forces between 5 and 20 N. The multiple occurrences
indicate the user tried multiple times to appropriately align the
balloon in the previously made incision, and finally managed to
at the 225-s mark. It is also to be noted that the expert user spent
100 s on the task while the novice spent ∼500 s on the same
task.
In Fig. 8, we have compared the applied torques for the
same expert and novice subjects. The expert is seen to apply

∼200 N · mm of torque consistently throughout the task. However, at the 65-s mark when the user was able to place the
balloon correctly, we can see some unique torqueing behavior. There is no applied torque about the push/pull axis but
the scope is torqued CW about the x-axis and CCW about the
z-axis. A similar trend cannot be seen with the novice subject,
where majority of the torqueing is seen about the push/pull
(y-axis) with ∼150 N · mm CW and ∼200 CCW torque. The
force and torque time-series plots of subject 1 (expert) and subject 2 (novice) were representative of the variation of force and
torque as a function of time, primarily the task duration and thus
were chosen to illustrate the difference in experts and novices.
B. Taskwise Parameter Comparison for Skill Differentiation
The parameters listed in Table III were calculated for each
subject’s tasks, after which the subjects were grouped into their
respective skill levels. In Fig. 9(a)–(r), we show a comparison
of each of those parameters for each of the listed tasks required
to complete the procedure. For the box plots indicating force
parameters (peak and RMS), the positive(+)/negative(−) signs
indicate force directionality, while in the torque parameter plots
the positive (+) sign indicates CW torque and the negative (−)
sign indicates CCW torque. A Mann–Whitney U test was performed on each parameter of each task to identify statistically
significant differences. The null hypothesis stated that the two
datasets from the expert and novice were from the same population. A p < 0.05 would allow us to reject the null hypothesis
with 95% confidence and accept the alternate hypothesis that the
two datasets from experts and novices were statistically different. However, not at all parameters showed statistically different
results. The parameters within each task that were significant
have been marked with a red asterisk (∗ ) in Fig. 9(a)–(r).

896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 9. (a)–(r) Plots compare the peak and RMS force/torque parameters between experts and novices for each of the nine tasks of the NOTES appendectomy
procedure. (a) and (b) Task #1: insertion of endoscope through the esophagus. (c) and (d) Task #2: entry into stomach and insufflation. (e) and (f) Task #3: create
gastric wall incision using electrosurgical tip. (g) and (h) Task #4: placement and inflation of controlled radial expansion balloon. (i) and (j) Task #5: push inflated
controlled radial expansion balloon through the gastric incision. (k) and (l) Task #6: exposure and assessment of the appendix. (m) and (n) Task #7: dissection and
division of appendix. (o) and (p) Task #8: removal of appendix from location of dissection to outside gastric port. (q) and (r) Task #9: gastric closure of incision
using closure clips.

DARGAR et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF FORCE AND TORQUE INTERACTIONS

Scope insertion into the gastric port through the esophagus
primarily requires the user to push the endoscope linearly while
providing some torque if necessary. In Fig. 9(a), we see a plot
showing the differences in forces being applied by the user
during the scope insertion task. The dominant force is seen
along the push (−y) direction with experts exerting forces up to
∼14 N (median 11.3 N) and novices exerting forces up to ∼17 N
(median 8.59 N). The experts apply a median force of 5.4 N on
the left (−x) direction while the novices apply a much lower
median force of 1 N (p = 0.03). The experts apply a median
force of ∼1.3 N in the up (+z) direction, much smaller than the
novice’s median force of 6.1 N (p = 0.02).
Fig. 9(c) compares the force parameters for the experts and
novices during the insufflation of the stomach as the user navigates to the gastrotomy site. The force along the +x direction
for the novices shows a larger range of 1.3–27.8 N, while the
experts forces range between 0.3 and 2 N (p = 0.03).
During task #3 when the electrosurgical tool is being used to
make the first incision in the gastric wall, there is not much activity ongoing with regards to manipulating the scope. The only
time for manipulation is if the user desired to reposition the
scope. Fig. 9(e) shows that the median push force (−y) for the
experts is (8.8 N) as compared to the novice (6.4 N); however,
the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.17). The
torque parameters shown in Fig. 9(f) are extremely scattered
with no noticeable trend in the torque interactions. Inconsistencies arise since majority of haptic interactions occur using
the electrosurgical tool through the endoscopic working channel
and not through the load cell handle (i.e., no manipulation to the
whole endoscope). Thus, no parameters were able to statistically
differentiate between the skill groups during task #3.
The task of inflating the radial expansion balloon with saline
(task #4) requires prepositioning of the deflated balloon in the
previously made incision during task #3. It is placed such that
the center of the balloon coincides with the gastric wall leaving
half of the balloon inside and the other half outside. The force
interactions during repositioning are shown in Fig. 9(g). A critical interaction is pushing of the scope into position while having
to torque it to obtain the correct orientation. Once again, task #4
was not able to show any statistically significant skill-dependent
differences.
As soon as the radial expansion balloon has been aligned
in the correct location, it is inflated and pushed through the
incision in the gastric wall (task #5). Fig. 9(i) shows the experts
and novices applied ∼13 N of force in the push (−y) direction to
get the endoscope through the incision. The plot also shows that
only the novices pivoted the handle toward the right (+x) while
pushing through, shown by a median of 15 N force in the right
(+x) direction. Fig. 9(j) shows that experts applied a 34 N · mm
torque about the x-axis while novices applied a 132.1 N · mm
torque about the same axis. A statistically significant difference
between the two skill groups was not detected.
Once the endoscope is within the peritoneal cavity, the users
located the appendix and began the process of removing it by
ligating using an endoloop inserted through the working channel. Thus, the only primary interaction with the load cell handle
is during advancement of the scope. For task #6, Fig. 9(k) shows

897

TABLE IV
RESULTS OF MANN–WHITNEY U TEST
Task name

Parameter

Scope insertion (#1)

Max force +Z
Max force –X
Max force +X
Max force +Z
RMS force Z
CW torque Z
CCW torque X
Max force +X
RMS force X
RMS force Y

Enter stomach & insufflate (#2)
Exposure of appendix (#6)

Dissection and division of appendix (#7)
Gastric closure (#9)

p-Value
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.01

that both experts and novices performed substantial push (−y)
interactions (9.2 and 12.3 N median forces, respectively) during the procedure. The novices applied a median up (+z) force
of 4.8 N while experts applied a much smaller 0.6 N median
up force (p = 0.01). A significant difference is also seen in the
RMS force along the z direction (p = 0.01). Fig. 9(l) overall
illustrates the torque applied during this task. Novices applied
a much higher CW torque (∼70 N · mm) about the z-axis than
the experts (∼20 N · mm) (p = 0.01). A significant difference in
CCW torque about the x-axis during assessment of the appendix
was also observed (p = 0.01).
In Fig. 9(m) during task #7, we can see that the push (−y)
axis is the dominant axis of force interaction with the scope
(expert: 11.7 N; novice: 7 N). The force along the up (+x)
direction illustrates a difference, with experts applying a median
of 2.5 N and novices applying a median of ∼5 N (p = 0.01).
Fig. 9(n) shows high CW torques about the x-axis (ranging up
to ∼200 N · mm) and CCW torques about the z-axis (ranging up
to ∼200 N · mm) (p = 0.06).
Once the appendix was divided from the base, it was removed
and retrieved (task #8). Fig. 9(o) shows the push/pull (−y/+y)
axis as the dominant axis of force interactions with both experts
and novices applying 6.7 and 7.2 N of median push force and
6.6 and 4.4 N of median pull force, respectively. However, no
parameter statistically differentiated the two skill groups.
Fig. 9(q) and (r) shows the force and torque interactions during the application of the clips (task #9). Tools using the endoscopes internal channels were used to perform the application
of the clips on the open incision of the gastric wall. Both experts
and novices apply ∼9.4 N of push force (−y) during the task,
and 4 and 2.9 N of pull force (+y), respectively. The significant differentiating factor during the clip application was the
RMS forces about the x and y axes. Experts were observed to
be applying higher RMS forces along the x (p = 0.03) and y
(p = 0.01) axes. Table IV provides a summary of the statistically significant results of the two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test
performed on each parameter for all nine of the tasks that make
up the NOTES appendectomy procedure.
IV. DISCUSSION
The nature of the NOTES procedure requires surgeons to have
a high degree of skill in maneuvering the endoscope, not only to

898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

gain visualization but also to reach the target organ and achieve
proper lumenal closure. The series of manipulations required
in order to achieve the desired endoscopic behavior is fairly
complex. The goal of our study was to collect force and torque
data in a simulated transgastric appendectomy procedure, as a
whole and also during specific tasks and subtasks. The data
were also able to reliably serve as a tool for skill differentiation
between the expert and novice groups for five out of the nine
tasks that constitute the transgastric appendectomy procedure.
Using the instrumented handle, we were able to measure the
force and torque along/about all three (x, y, z) axes. From Fig. 4,
we can see that the y-axis is the primary push/pull axis along
which the scope is inserted and retracted, while the x and z
axes represent the directions of the scope looping and bending.
The results from Section III-A provided us critical information
in assessing the range and distribution of force and torque for
the various types of manipulations. The result for each axis
illustrates the general tendency of manipulation along/about that
particular axis.
The comparison of the measured parameters given in Table III
across all tasks for novices and experts shows an interesting picture of skill differentiation. Despite the y-axis (push/pull) being
the primary axis for scope manipulation, none of the y-axis parameters were able to show statistically significant differences.
Only the gastric closure step (task #9) was able to distinguish
the two skill groups using a y-axis parameter. Proper lumenal
closure after the target organ has been operated upon is currently a challenge in NOTES procedures. Expert surgeons were
able to skillfully place the endoscope at the correct target view
location, while they used the smaller channels to perform the
clip application and repeat for all three clips. Novices were unable to gauge the desired positioning and as a result applied
a wide range of translational forces in trying to achieve that
goal. This statistically relevant differentiation observed in the
RMS force along the y-axis demonstrates the feasibility of using translational forces in identifying skill for lumenal closure in
this experimental setup. A post hoc power analysis determined
that the tasks that did not show a differentiation in skill were
deficient in their power (minimum requirement 80%) and thus
were unable to statistically differentiate the two skill groups.
The remaining skill differentiating parameters were from axes
perpendicular to the primary x-axis and z-axis. The forces and
torques about the x and z axes represent the twisting and looping behavior of the user while manipulating the scope. This
observation can be explained by the presence of nonspecific
movement the experts perform to manipulate the endoscope.
Nonspecific interactions refer to the application of torque and
force about/along x and z axes onto the endoscope. These interactions are not to necessarily rotate or translate the endoscope,
but to leverage the current shape/orientation of the endoscope to
better position them for a translation/rotation motion in the very
next step. From the results in Table IV, we can see that the steps
#1, #2, #6, #7, and #9 show a variety of statistically significant
parameters (p < 0.05) related to the x and z axes. It is expected
that such nonspecific endoscopic interactions be seen only in
experts, as they already possess the endoscope handling skills,
which novices do not yet possess.

From the results, we have observed that experts employ a
combination of endoscopic manipulations about the dominant
(y-axis) and nondominant axes (x and z). The parameters, which
are capable of differentiating skill, depend heavily on the nature
of task at hand. This indicates that depending on the nature of
the task, the variation of the measured parameters can possibly
be used to understand the presence or absence of skill.
The computed parameters for each task of the procedure also
forms a comprehensive dataset, which can be employed in the
development of flexible endoscopy-based procedural simulators, for one task or the whole procedure. With the evolution
of NOTES procedures leading to new flexible endoscopy-based
techniques such as POEM, ESD, transanal rectal resection, and
endoscopic full thickness resection, this comprehensive dataset
serves as a valuable reference for the community intending to
develop effective training paradigms and surgical platforms.
While this extensive dataset provides an idea of what forces and
torques may be expected during an actual NOTES procedure on
a human patient, pig tissue properties, particularly for this ex
vivo model, might be different from in vivo human tissue and
the actual numerical values may be different. However, given
the wide variability of tissue properties among patients, as well
as within the same patient with age, disease state, and other variables, we expect our data and the insights obtained from them
to be useful. As a result, for the foreseeable future, this comprehensive dataset holds the potential to facilitate better training
in a variety of flexible endoscopy procedures by furthering the
research and development of surgical simulation systems.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we designed and developed an ergonomic grip
handle equipped with a six-axis load cell to measure the force
and torque interactions during a simulated transgastric NOTES
appendectomy procedure. The procedure was performed by ten
participating surgeons of varying skill levels on the EASIE-R
ex vivo simulator. The data provided a detailed picture of the
distribution of force and torques applied by all ten participating
surgeons spanning the whole simulated NOTES appendectomy
procedure. The mean push/pull force was found to be 3.64 N
(σ = 3.54 N) in the push direction and the mean torque was
3.3 N · mm (σ = 38.6 N · mm) in the CCW direction about the
push/pull axis. The force and torque interaction data were then
further processed to compute a set of six unique parameters
for each of the coordinate axes. The parameters were then analyzed for each of the nine tasks of the appendectomy procedure. Within the experimental constraints of our setup, we were
also able to distinguish skill level based on characterizing and
comparing the haptic interaction data of experts and novices.
Most interestingly, the force and torque data about the nondominant x and z axes showed a statistically significant difference
(p < 0.05) between the expert and novice groups for five of the
nine tasks. The comprehensive dataset also aims to serve as a
detailed reference for the design and development of flexible
endoscopy-based surgical simulation and training systems. In
the future, we intend on continuing this study on the two skill
groups to increase our sample size and eventually attain more

DARGAR et al.: CHARACTERIZATION OF FORCE AND TORQUE INTERACTIONS

899

power to differentiate the skill groups based on force and torque
interactions.

[14] P. Sylla, D. W. Rattner, S. Delgado, and A. M. Lacy, “NOTES transanal
rectal cancer resection using transanal endoscopic microsurgery and laparoscopic assistance,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1205–1210,
2010.
[15] K. Ikeda, C. A. Mosse, P.-O. Park, A. Fritscher-Ravens, M. Bergström,
T. Mills, H. Tajiri, and C. P. Swain, “Endoscopic full-thickness resection:
Circumferential cutting method,” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 64,
no. 1, pp. 82–89, 2006.
[16] D. E. Bowman, “ASGE/SAGES working group on natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery: White paper October 2005,” Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 199–203, 2006.
[17] A. L. Trejos, S. Jayaraman, R. V. Patel, M. D. Naish, and C. M. Schlachta,
“Force sensing in natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery,” Surg.
Endoscopy, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 186–192, 2011.
[18] M. C. Mosse, T. Mills, G. Bell, and C. Swain, “Device for measuring the
forces exerted on the shaft of an endoscope during colonoscopy,” Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 186–190, 1998.
[19] G. Picod, A. C. Jambon, D. Vinatier, and P. Dubois, “What can the operator
actually feel when performing a laparoscopy?” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 95–100, Oct. 2004.
[20] J. Rosen, B. Hannaford, C. G. Richards, and M. N. Sinanan, “Markov
modeling of minimally invasive surgery based on tool/tissue interaction
and force/torque signatures for evaluating surgical skills,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 579–591, May 2001.
[21] A. L. Trejos, R. V. Patel, R. A. Malthaner, and C. M. Schlachta, “Development of force-based metrics for skills assessment in minimally invasive
surgery,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 28, pp. 2106–2119, 2014.
[22] H. Hwang, J. Lim, C. Kinnaird, A. Nagy, O. Panton, A. Hodgson, and
K. Qayumi, “Correlating motor performance with surgical error in laparoscopic cholecystectomy,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 651–655,
2006.
[23] H. Z. Tan, M. A. Srinivasan, B. Eberman, and B. Cheng, “Human factors
for the design of force-reflecting haptic interfaces,” Dyn. Syst. Control,
vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 353–359, 1994.
[24] E. Samur, L. Flaction, and H. Bleuler, “Design and evaluation of a novel
haptic interface for endoscopic simulation,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 301–311, Fourth Quarter 2012.
[25] S. Yi, H. Woo, W. Ahn, J. Kwon, and D. Lee, “New colonoscopy simulator
with improved haptic fidelity,” Adv. Robot., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 349–365,
2006.
[26] K. Ikuta, K. Iritani, J. Fukuyama, and M. Takeichi, “Portable virtual endoscope system with force and visual display,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., vol. 1, 2000, pp. 720–726.
[27] CAE Healthcare. (2014, Jun. 27) [Online]. Available: http://www.
caehealthcare.com/
[28] Simbionix | To Advance Clinical Performance. (2014, Jun. 27) [Online].
Available: http://simbionix.com/
[29] A. Ferlitsch, P. Glauninger, A. Gupper, M. Schillinger, M. Haefner,
A. Gangl, and R. Schoefl, “Evaluation of a virtual endoscopy simulator for training in gastrointestinal endoscopy,” Endoscopy, vol. 34, no. 9,
pp. 698–702, 2002.
[30] M. Gromski, F. Alkhoury, S. Lee, and K. Matthes, “Evaluation of NOTES
hands-on courses by surgeons at the SAGES Annual Meeting Learning
Center,” presented at the 12th World Congress of Endoscopic Surgery,
National Harbor, MD, USA, vol. 24, 2010, p. 229.
[31] S. Tsuda, K. Matthes, and A. Derevianko, “Validation of a high-fidelity
NOTES simulator for team training,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 24, p. 227,
2010.
[32] S. A. Wall and W. Harwin, “A high bandwidth interface for haptic human
computer interaction,” Mechatronics, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 371–387, Jun.
2001.
[33] E. Kunesch, F. Binkofski, and H.-J. Freund, “Invariant temporal characteristics of manipulative hand movements,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 78, no. 3,
pp. 539–546, 1989.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Endosim LLC (Hudson, MA,
USA) and W. Thibaudeau (Endosim LLC) for helping them in
collecting the data. Dr. K. Matthes has ownership in Endosim
LLC.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Rattner and A. Kalloo, “ASGE/SAGES Working Group on Natural Orifice Translumenal Endoscopic Surgery: October 2005,” Surg. Endoscopy,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 329–333, Jan. 2006.
[2] R. D. Pai, D. G. Fong, M. E. Bundga, R. D. Odze, D. W. Rattner, and C. C.
Thompson, “Transcolonic endoscopic cholecystectomy: A NOTES survival study in a porcine model (with video),” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 428–434, Sep. 2006.
[3] C. Rolanda, E. Lima, J. M. Pêgo, T. Henriques-Coelho, D. Silva,
I. Moreira, G. Macedo, J. L. Carvalho, and J. Correia-Pinto, “Thirdgeneration cholecystectomy by natural orifices: Transgastric and transvesical combined approach (with video),” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 65,
no. 1, pp. 111–117, Jan. 2007.
[4] M. S. Wagh and C. C. Thompson, “Surgery insight: Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery—An analysis of work to date,” Nature Clin.
Pract. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 386–392, Jul. 2007.
[5] R. Zorron, C. Palanivelu, M. P. Galvão Neto, A. Ramos, G. Salinas,
J. Burghardt, L. DeCarli, L. Henrique Sousa, A. Forgione, R. Pugliese,
A. J. Branco, T. S. Balashanmugan, C. Boza, F. Corcione, F. D’Ávila,
N. Arturo Gómez, P. A. Galvão Ribeiro, S. Martins, M. Filgueiras,
K. Gellert, A. Wood Branco, W. Kondo, J. Inacio Sanseverino, J. A.
G. de Sousa, L. Saavedra, E. Ramı́rez, J. Campos, K. Sivakumar, P. S. Rajan, P. A. Jategaonkar, M. Ranagrajan, R. Parthasarathi, P. Senthilnathan,
M. Prasad, D. Cuccurullo, and V. Müller, “International multicenter trial
on clinical natural orifice surgery—NOTES IMTN Study: Preliminary
results of 362 patients,” Surg. Innov., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 142–158, Jun.
2010.
[6] R. Sotelo, R. de Andrade, G. Fernández, D. Ramirez, E. Di Grazia,
O. Carmona, O. Moreira, A. Berger, M. Aron, M. M. Desai, and I. S.
Gill, “NOTES hybrid transvaginal radical nephrectomy for tumor: Stepwise progression toward a first successful clinical case,” Eur. Urol., vol. 57,
no. 1, pp. 138–144, Jan. 2010.
[7] C. Palanivelu, P. S. Rajan, M. Rangarajan, R. Parthasarathi, P.
Senthilnathan, and M. Prasad, “Transvaginal endoscopic appendectomy
in humans: A unique approach to NOTES—World’s first report,” Surg.
Endoscopy, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1343–1347, Mar. 2008.
[8] K. Roberts, D. Solomon, R. Bell, and A. Duffy, “‘Triangle of safety’:
Anatomic considerations in transvaginal natural orifice surgery,” Surg.
Endoscopy, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 2963–2965, May 2013.
[9] B. F. Santos and E. S. Hungness, “Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic
surgery: Progress in humans since white paper,” World J. Gastroenterol.,
vol. 17, no. 13, pp. 1655–1665, 2011.
[10] A. Arezzo, C. Zornig, H. Mofid, K.-H. Fuchs, W. Breithaupt, J. Noguera,
G. Kaehler, R. Magdeburg, S. Perretta, and B. Dallemagne, “The EURONOTES clinical registry for natural orifice transluminal endoscopic
surgery: A 2-year activity report,” Surg. Endoscopy, vol. 27, no. 9,
pp. 3073–3084, 2013.
[11] H. Inoue, H. Minami, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Sato, M. Kaga, M. Suzuki, H.
Satodate, N. Odaka, H. Itoh, and S. Kudo, “Peroral endoscopic myotomy
(POEM) for esophageal achalasia,” Endoscopy, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 265–
271, 2010.
[12] T. Oyama, A. Tomori, K. Hotta, S. Morita, K. Kominato, M. Tanaka,
and Y. Miyata, “Endoscopic submucosal dissection of early esophageal
cancer,” Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., vol. 3, no. 7, pp. S67–S70, 2005.
[13] T. Gotoda, H. Yamamoto, and R. M. Soetikno, “Endoscopic submucosal
dissection of early gastric cancer,” J. Gastroenterol., vol. 41, no. 10,
pp. 929–942, 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

