IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

1457

Adhesive RFID Sensor Patch for Monitoring
of Sweat Electrolytes
Daniel P. Rose, Student Member, IEEE, Michael E. Ratterman, Daniel K. Griffin, Linlin Hou,
Nancy Kelley-Loughnane, Rajesh R. Naik, Joshua A. Hagen, Ian Papautsky, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Jason C. Heikenfeld∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Wearable digital health devices are dominantly found
in rigid form factors such as bracelets and pucks. An adhesive
radio-frequency identification (RFID) sensor bandage (patch) is
reported, which can be made completely intimate with human skin,
a distinct advantage for chronological monitoring of biomarkers in
sweat. In this demonstration, a commercial RFID chip is adapted
with minimum components to allow potentiometric sensing of solutes in sweat, and surface temperature, as read by an Android
smartphone app with 96% accuracy at 50 mM Na+ (in vitro tests).
All circuitry is solder-reflow integrated on a standard Cu/polyimide
flexible-electronic layer including an antenna, but while also allowing electroplating for simple integration of exotic metals for sensing
electrodes. Optional paper microfluidics wick sweat from a sweat
porous adhesive allowing flow to the sensor, or the sensor can be
directly contacted to the skin. The wearability of the patch has
been demonstrated for up to seven days, and includes a protective
textile which provides a feel and appearance similar to a standard
Band-Aid. Applications include hydration monitoring, but the basic capability is extendable to other mM ionic solutes in sweat (Cl− ,
K+ , Mg2+ , NH4 + , and Zn2+ ). The design and fabrication of the
patch are provided in full detail, as the basic components could be
useful in the design of other wearable sensors.
Index Terms—Biosensor, flexible electronics, radio-frequency
identification (RFID).

I. INTRODUCTION
WEAT is one of few examples of noninvasively accessed
biofluids, with potential advantages in measurement of inflammatory biomarkers compared to saliva [1] and potentially

S

Manuscript received June 19, 2014; revised September 10, 2014; accepted
November 6, 2014. Date of publication November 11, 2014; date of current
version May 18, 2015. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Air ForceAir Force Research Labs and the National Science Foundation (EECS EAGER,
#1347725). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
D. P. Rose, M. E. Ratterman, D. K. Griffin, and I. Papautsky are with
the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computing Systems, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA (e-mail: rosedp@mail.uc.edu;
ratterme@mail.uc.edu; griffid6@mail.uc.edu).
L. Hou was with the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221
USA. She is now with Intel Corporation, Hillsboro, OR 97124 USA (e-mail:
linlin.hou@gmail.com).
N. Kelley-Loughnane, R. R. Naik, and J. A. Hagen are with the Air Force
Research Labs, Dayton, OH 45233 USA (e-mail: nancy.kelley-loughnane@
us.af.mil, rajesh.naik@us.af.mil, joshua.hagen.1@us.af.mil).
∗ J. C. Heikenfeld is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computing Systems, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA (e-mail:
heikenjc@ucmail.uc.edu).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 1 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2369991

superior time-resolved (chronological) readings of biomarker
concentrations compared to saliva and urine. Sweat access
can be locally stimulated using FDA-approved iontophoresis (Wescor Macroduct), and recent tattoo-like sweat-sensing
demonstrations further include measurement of lactate, ammonium, and sodium [2]–[4]. A particularly attractive application
could be hydration and heat-stress monitoring through electrolyte balance (e.g., Na+ and K+ ) for athletes, military personnel, first-responders, and others working in extreme conditions.
Electrolyte sensing is of further value, because the high salinity of sweat can confound other biomarker readings; hence,
electrolyte concentrations need to be base-lined. Realizing such
wearable sensors could be achieved in several ways, including wearable textiles [5], tattoos [3], [6], [7], and form-factors
such as those seen commercially in digital bracelet products
such as Nike+ and Fitbit. However, a complete wireless sensor
with wearability comparable to a simple Band-Aid that is low
cost, robust, communicates with smartphones, and exhibits a design which automatically lends itself to maximum time-resolved
readings of sweat has not yet been demonstrated.
A wearable, medical-grade adhesive radio-frequency identification (RFID)-enabled sensor patch is reported, which is conformal to the shape of the human body, and therefore minimizes
dead volumes of sweat which would otherwise limit chronological measurements. Adaptation of a commercial RFID chip
is achieved with minimum components to allow potentiometric
sensing of electrolytes in sweat as well as skin surface temperature, and could be of use for hydration and heat-stress monitoring. The patch is battery-free, powered, and read wirelessly
by an Android smartphone and custom-app. From in vitro solution to smartphone readout, a dynamic range of 235–255 mV
is achieved with 20–70 mM range and 96% accuracy in the
detection of Na+ concentration. All circuitry is solder-reflow
integrated on a standard Cu/polyimide flexible-electronic layer
including conventional components such as an antenna, but also
allowing electroplating for simple integration of exotic metals
for ion-selective sensing electrodes. The sensing electrodes can
be folded over to be in direct contact with skin, or paper microfluidics can be used to wick sweat from the skin and to the
sensors. The wearability of the patch has been shown up to
seven days, and includes a protective textile which provides a
feel and appearance similar to a standard Band-Aid or transdermal patch. This paper outlines a complete integration of the
key materials, electronics, microfluidics, and ergonomics, required for a wearable sweat sensing patch, paving the way for
future wearable sweat sensor development and in vivo testing.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

B. Communication
For communication, most modern smartphones have, or
will have, the capability to establish wireless connections and
transfer data via a near-field communication RFID protocol.
The patch is designed to operate on the standard ISO-15693
as a vicinity device. This provides the desired versatility in
communication through stand-alone RFID readers as well as
customizable applications (“apps”) for RFID-enabled Android
smartphones. The ubiquity of smartphones provides an easily
accessible computing platform with increased memory/storage
capabilities, thereby eliminating the need for on-patch data logging and the additional circuitry, cost, size it would require.
C. Flexible and Wearable

Fig. 1. Device photographs (a) shown on body and (b) to illustrate electronic
and sensor features.

Applications include hydration monitoring, but the basic capability is extendable to other mM solutes in sweat (Cl− , K+ ,
Mg2+ , NH4 + , and Zn2+ ). Full details of the design and fabrication of the patch are reported, as the basic components could
be of use to other wearable sensor applications. A preliminary
version of this paper has been initially accepted as proceedings
of IEEE EMBC’14.
II. TOP-LEVEL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
A. Patch Size
Two patch sizes were chosen and demonstrated. The smaller
size (∼25 × 60 mm2 ) of a typical Band-Aid was used for high
user acceptance. A larger 70 × 40 mm2 patch was also demonstrated, a size similar to bandage that might be placed over a
knee. To allow a maximally thin form factor, potentially longer
shelf-life, and low cost, the patch was designed for battery-free
RFID (inductively powered) operation. RFID requires ∼10–20
loops of a coiled antenna to power the electronics (depending
on patch size). The resulting area interior to the coil is more
than sufficient for placement of the necessary electronics and
the sensor electrodes (as shown in Fig. 1). The larger of the two
patch antenna sizes was found to be more resilient to variations
in antenna fabrication (antenna resonance), and provides greater
reliability in communication. Patches even smaller than those
demonstrated here are possible (see online supplemental file on
antenna design).

Flexibility is of paramount concern in wearable electronics,
along with strength and durability. The flexible printed circuit
board is built from Dupont Pyralux—a combination of flexible,
conformal polyimide, and a thin copper foil. The high heat
tolerance of the polyimide allows for electronics to be attached
by solder reflow. Furthermore, solder reflow allows surfacemount packaging which eliminates need for through-holes that
would result in protrusions that would cause discomfort when
the patch is worn. For packaging and skin adhesion, a survey
of numerous medical-grade textiles from 3M was conducted to
determine which materials would provide maximum adhesion to
the wearer’s skin and high durability to protect the patch itself.
Double-sided medical adhesive tape was used below the patch,
whereas above the patch, a medical textile covering was added
to protect the patch and improve visual aesthetics (all shown in
Fig. 1).
D. Basic Electronics and Programming Functionality
The system-level block diagram shown in Fig. 2 illustrates
the system-level layout of the patch functionality beginning and
ending with communication between the reader device and the
patch. The reader device initiates the communication and requests identification from the patch. The patch responds by load
modulating the inductive coupling between itself and the RFID
reader. Custom commands for programming include reading,
writing to memory registers, sensor configuration, power management, and other functionalities not required for this present
work.
The primary chip in the patch is a small Melexis MLX90129
RFID transponder chip which has both basic sensor and energy
harvesting capabilities. The chip functionality is explained in
detail here, because its use could be adapted to a large variety
of other sensor applications. A significant amount of programming development was required to enable a smartphone to turn
the RFID chip into an electrolyte sensor. With further reference to Fig. 2, the sensor protocol manages tasks assigned to
the MLX90129’s sensor pins such as input connections, voltage
output to external sensors, and enabling the internal temperature sensor. Four input pins provide differential measurement of
potential from externally connected sensors (e.g., ion-selective
electrodes (ISEs) in this work). Two internal connections can

ROSE et al.: ADHESIVE RFID SENSOR PATCH FOR MONITORING OF SWEAT ELECTROLYTES

Fig. 2.

1459

System-level block diagram.

enable the output of the onboard temperature sensor to be used
as input into the multiplexer. Configuration of the multiplexer
determines which inputs are passed to the first-programmable
gain amplifier (PGA). If enabled, the digital-to-analog converter
(DAC) can set the offset used in the optional second PGA. The
12-bit ADC converts the amplified sensor outputs for storage in
digital memory until the DAC converts the digital measurements
for analog transmission to the reader.
Battery-free operation is achieved by utilizing energy harvesting circuitry of the MLX90129 which utilizes the induced
current of the incoming electromagnetic waves from the reader
to power the entire patch. To facilitate the power demands of the
various IC processes, an external capacitor and diode are added
for charge storage. The siphoned charge is used to complete
low power processes during brief interruptions or absences of
induced current from the reader device. Battery independence
improves the potential shelf-life of such patches.
III. DETAILED FABRICATION—ELECTRONICS
A. Flexible Circuit Board
Fabrication begins at the flexible electronic circuit board (see
Fig. 3) with a sheet of Dupont Pyralux AC (18-μm-thick Cu
foil clad to 12 μm Kapton). A 127 × 101.6 mm2 substrate is
first cut from the bulk Pyralux roll. As the integrity of the copper surface is imperative, great care must be taken to minimize
creases, dimples, and other surface imperfections. Therefore,
even during substrate cleaning, the substrate is supported by a
rigid silicon carrier. The substrate is cleaned of any residual oils,
fingerprints or other contaminants by submerging it in a 120 °C
alkaline solution of Na2 CO3 (9.2 wt%), 50% NaOH (4.6 wt%),
Triton X-100 (surfactant, 0.2 wt%), and reverse osmosis (RO)
H2 O (86.0 wt%). The sample is left in the solution for a minimum of 10 min and agitated approximately every 2–3 min, and

Fig. 3. Circuit layer layout detailing antenna coil geometry and electronics
placement.

1460

then rinsed thoroughly in RO water. Once rinsed and dried in N2 ,
the substrate is then placed in a bath of reagent grade H2 SO4
(10 wt%) for 5 min to remove the manufacturer’s antitarnish
coating and prepare the sample for lithography. As before, the
copper is thoroughly rinsed in RO water and dried in N2 .
To pattern the Cu, Shipley S1818 positive tone, liquid photoresist is coated on the copper substrate using traditional spincoat techniques. For the spin-coat process, the substrate is
bonded to 6 in silicon wafer using a droplet of water, smoothed
via a plastic blade for uniform pressure, and held in place by
capillary adhesion.
The S1818 resist is spun first at 500 r/min for 30 s and then at
2500 r/min for 60 s to achieve a target thickness between 2 and
2.5 μm (a thicker resist is more durable during the etching process). The substrate and the Si carrier are then “soft” baked in
an oven set at 100 °C for 150 s. The carrier and copper substrate
are removed from the oven and allowed to cool briefly before
masking and 365 nm UV exposure at 150 mJ/cm2 for 25 s. Developing of the resist is accomplished by placing the substrate
and carrier for 45 s into an agitated ∼21 °C bath of Microposit 351 photoresist developer diluted with RO to a 1:4 (v/v)
ratio. This solution is slightly more aggressive than the more
common 1:5 ratio; however, the higher concentration developer
performs better at removing the exposed photoresist from the
nonuniform features of the copper surface and therefore results
in a more consistent etch time and cleaner etch results. During
development of the photoresist, the Si carrier detaches from the
substrate so that great care must be taken during rinsing and
drying of the substrate after development.
Etching of the exposed copper is accomplished by an air
bubble agitated acid bath in which the substrate is secured with
PTFE screws to a plastic acrylic carrier and submerged vertically
positioned for 30 s. The acid bath is comprised of a diluted
reagent HCl solution (30 wt%) and diluted solution of 30%
H2 O2 (3 wt%) combined at a ratio of 2:1 by volume. After
etching is complete, the substrate and carrier are thoroughly
rinsed in a spray of RO water for a minimum of 60 s and dried
using compressed N2 . The substrate is then carefully removed
from the acrylic carrier and placed on the Si wafer for photoresist
stripping. The S1818 photoresist is removed by submerging the
sample and Si carrier in a bath of full concentration Shipley 351
photoresist developer. The bath is manually agitated once every
30 s for 5 min or until all the photoresist has been removed
from the Cu surface. A final rinse and dry step is performed and
electrical continuity tests are used to verify the integrity of the
antenna coil traces, sensor electrode traces, and other critical
connections.
B. Plating of Sensor Electrodes
The sensors are fabricated in two steps: one before and one
after the electronic chip attachment. In the first step, the working
and reference electrodes of the sensor [see Fig. 4(a)] are fabricated by electrodeposition of Pd and Ag on the previously defined bare copper electrodes (see Fig. 3). This is accomplished
using plating solutions from Technic, Inc., and deposition at
∼5 mA/cm2 anodic current for 90 s with a Pt wire auxiliary

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 4. (a) ISE fabrication and (b) raw sensor potential for several concentrations of Na+ in water (measured independent of the patch and its circuitry).

electrode to sustain the current. The reference electrode fabrication is then completed by chloridization of the Ag layer in
1 M KCl with a 3 mA/cm2 anodic current for 30 s to form the
reference.
C. Chip Attachment
Before chip attachment, the inductance of the antenna coil is
measured to determine the needed values of the tuning capacitors shown in Fig. 4. An alloy of Sn/Ag (96.5/3.5%) no-clean
solder paste (Superior Flux & Mfg. Co. P/N: 3033-85) is applied to each pad using an air-metered syringe dispenser, or
higher volume fabrication by stencil printing. The chips are
then placed, and also an insulated jumper wire (see Fig. 3) is
placed to connect to the outer loop of the coil. The flex circuit
board is then placed in a programmable, convection reflow oven
that applies a heating profile according to the solder supplier
specification. The reflow oven is connected to a pressurized N2
gas supply, which is used to purge the sample chamber and
prevent oxidation of the Cu surfaces.
D. Hermetic Sealing of Electronics
In applications where fluid contact could occur, such as sweat
sensing, the electronics must be hermetically sealed. This is easily achieved by masking the sensor electrodes with Kapton Tape
(silicone adhesive), and conformally coating the flexible circuit
and electronics with 10 s of μm of Parylene C polymer dielectric using a Specialty Coating Systems 2010 Lab Coater. Ideally,
this is performed before sensor functionalization, to ensure that
the Kapton masking tape does not damage or contaminate the
final sensor surfaces.

ROSE et al.: ADHESIVE RFID SENSOR PATCH FOR MONITORING OF SWEAT ELECTROLYTES

1461

E. Sensor Functionalization
Onto the plated sensor electrodes, the polymer ionophore
(ion-selective) membrane is cast [see Fig. 4(a)]. This is performed after chip attachment because the high temperature required for chip solder reflow would damage the polymer membranes. The membrane solution was cast carefully over the
working electrode using a modified screen printing process.
The membrane was made from a cocktail of sodium ionophore
X, bis(2-ethylhexyl) sebacate (DOS), potassium tetrakis
(p-chlorophenyl)borate (KTpC1PB), PVC, and cyclohexanone,
then manually mixed together until the PVC was fully dissolved.
The cast membranes were left to air dry for 8 h, then coated two
more times to ensure adequate coverage of the electrodes and to
passivate any pores in the membrane that could cause shorting
to the electrodes [8], [9].
The Na+ sensor is based on a traditional ISE, but which has
been miniaturized in this paper. The Na+ -selective ionophore
membrane establishes a difference in potential across the
electrode–ionophore barrier corresponding to the Na+ concentration, enabling a simple potentiometric measurement. The
level of Na+ in the solution is given by the Nernst equation:
E = E0 + S log(X), where E is the measured electrode potential, E0 is the reference electrode potential, S is the sensitivity, and X is the concentration of Na+ ions in solution.
Although in this work only sensing of Na+ is demonstrated,
sensing of other ions in sweat (Cl− , K+ , Mg2+ , NH4 + , and
Zn2+ ) could be demonstrated using appropriate commercially
available ionophores from Sigma-Aldrich.

Fig. 5. Device layer integration: (a) cross section, (b) top view, and (c) profile
of completed device.

F. Substrate Cutting
The patch is a wearable sensor, and therefore, all unused portions of gas/liquid impermeable polyimide substrate film should
be removed to provide skin access, and to improve breathability
of the final patch. Cutting is performed using a Universal Laser
Systems VLS3.50 CO2 laser cutter. The areas that are trimmed
include area outside the antenna coil, and the unused interior
portion, including the electroplating leads (see Fig. 3).
IV. INTEGRATION—ELECTRONICS, TEXTILES, SKIN
ADHESIVES, AND MICROFLUIDICS
As shown in Fig. 5, the final device integration involves from
the bottom up: skin adhesives, electronics, paper microfluidics,
and a vapor porous top adhesive textile. All of these layers
are laser cut. The bottom, double-sided adhesive layer is 3M
Double-Coated Polyester Tape (P/N: 1567) and cut to a 1 mm
offset larger than the trimmed flex circuit layer. An array of
circular pores is also laser cut in the bottom adhesive layer to facilitate sweat transmission to the sensor. The microfluidic paper
layer is interior to the coil and surrounds the sensor electrodes
and electronics. If the sensors are placed face-up (away from
skin), then they are covered by the paper layer to bring sweat
to the sensors. Extensive wearability studies have not been performed with the patch in this initial demonstration, and in the
event that further breathability is needed by skin areas covered
by flexible circuit substrate, then the paper-microfluidics layer

can simply be integrated beneath the electronics layer to provide
horizontal transport of vapor or fluid. The top protective layer is
cut from 3M Tan Polyurethane Tape (P/N: 9834T) with singlesided adhesive. This layer is cut to the same outer dimensions
as the bottom adhesive layer to provide an edge sealed seam for
the completed patch.
Multilayer integration is assisted by a custom alignment jig
and vacuum forming/bonding table (1 atm. pressure). The bottom layer is affixed to a waxed paper carrier as shown in Fig. 5(c).
The flex circuit’s sensor electrodes are then folded back and underneath its traces so that the active area of the sensor will be
facing the skin. The flex circuit is placed on top of the bottom
adhesive layer using the vacuum placement tool. Next, the microfluidic paper layer is placed between the coil and the rest
of the circuitry. Finally, the top protective layer is aligned and
placed by vacuuming, sealing the circuit and sensor within. A
final communication test with the RFID reader is performed to
verify operation, and the sweat sensor is ready for programming
and use.
V. EXPERIMENTAL TESTING AND RESULTS
A. Wearable Antenna Performance
The assembled RFID circuit was tested to ensure that the
resonate frequency was near enough to the target frequency of

1462

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Calibration curve showing sensitivity and linearity of patch to Na+ .

13.56 MHz that the device would communicate with the reader.
A supplemental information document is provided with the online materials for this paper, detailing the finer details of the
antenna design and tuning. To confirm antenna tuning, a vector network analyzer (VNA) was connected to an ISO standard
calibration loop-probe, per ISO10373-7, to enable contactless
measurement of the patch’s frequency response. The VNA displays the loop-probe’s reflection coefficient by measuring the
S-parameter S11 as a function of frequency. A reduction in
the reflection measured by the VNA correlates to an increase
in transmission of the electromagnetic waves at a specific frequency, via absorption of the radiated energy by a tuned and
coupled device. Successful tuning of the flexible RFID circuit
was confirmed by a reduction of S11 by −2.9 dB at 13.56 MHz.
With a reader RF power of ∼0.5 W, this tuning was also shown
to be adequate to inductively power the electronics and enable
RF communication. Patch communication was shown in wearable format, including arm placement which induces curvature
on the entire patch.
B. Sensor and Electronics Performance
The patch and sensors were characterized in vitro by pipetting of various NaCl concentration solutions onto the patch
sensor. Fig. 4(b) illustrates sensor response as Na+ concentration increased from 20 to 70 mM. As expected, the sensor
output increased with analyte concentration, exhibiting stable
response at each concentration. At each concentration change,
the sensor responded rapidly, with approximately 30 s response
time. The standard curve, developed by measuring response of
a stand-alone sensor in the 20–70 mM Na+ range against the
commercial ISE from Denver Instruments (300741.1), exhibited a correlation coefficient of 0.99 (data not shown). These
results clearly suggest that our sensor exhibits acceptable and
predictable behavior for measurement of Na+. Fig. 6 shows the
sensor calibration curve derived from testing ten patches. As
expected, the patch-integrated sensors exhibited a predictable
linear response, with the correlation coefficient of 0.92. The
range of 10–90 mM was chosen to ensure the detection range
would be ±10 mM beyond physiologically relevant ranges for
hydration monitoring [10], [11].

Fig. 7.

Patch results for concentration variations from 20 to 70 mM NaCl.

Sensitivity of the sensor in the integrated patch was
0.3 mV/mM, which was slightly lower than that the commercial sensor sensitivity of 0.5 mV/mM or approximately
25 mV/decade of Na+ concentration. While at first glance
this suggests a sub-Nernstian behavior, we tested the standalone sensors, and obtained sensitivity of approximately
57 mV/decade of Na+ in the 10–90 mM concentration range,
indicating that the sensor exhibits Nernstian behavior. Similar
results have been reported for Na+ ISEs by others [8]. Thus,
the apparent lower sensitivity of the patch-integrated sensors
appears to be due to the limitations of the ADC on the RFID
patch. The ADC reference voltage is set by the MLX90129’s
internal regulator, from which two values may be selected—
normal reference of 3.1 V, or low-volt reference of 2.1 V. The
minimum voltage of the chip’s coil input is such that provided
the chip powers ON, the internal regulator will supply a stable reference to the ADC. However, since the sampling rate
for the converter is slow (<3 Hz) for the desired accuracy, the
stabilization of the reference electrode on a specific voltage is
impaired. The sampling rate used in Fig. 7 is approximately
3 Hz to achieve maximum resolution, while the maximum sampling rate of the device is approximately 435 Hz at the lowest
conversion resolution.
Accuracy is an important characteristic for a sensor and measures how close the sensor is able to determine the true value of
a given concentration. To measure accuracy of our RFID Na+
sensor, we repeatedly measured 50 mM of NaCl (n = 7), which
was expected to yield 185 mV based on the calibration curve.
Response of our patch was measured to be 177 ± 5 mV. These
results show that at 50 mM NaCl, our patch sensor exhibits
96% accuracy. Precision is another important characteristic for
a sensor and in essence it illustrates sensor variability. From
the experimental data, the patch sensor exhibited 28% precision. However, precision is not provided for commercial ISEs,
and the needed values will depend on application. Even simple
measurement of trending (increase or decrease) of Na+ itself
is valuable, as Na+ concentration predicts sweat rate as it increases by 10s of mM in concentration with increasing sweat
rate. This patch therefore can be utilized even in its current form
as an athletic exertion sensor, for example.
To further explore the potential for continuous monitoring in
sweat, concentration of NaCl was varied repeatedly every 4 min

ROSE et al.: ADHESIVE RFID SENSOR PATCH FOR MONITORING OF SWEAT ELECTROLYTES

TABLE I
PRELIMINARY PATCH SPECIFICATIONS
Specification
Size
Wearability
Sensors
Expanded capability
Low-volume BOM
Max data
Reader power
Frequency
Na+ range
Na+ accuracy
Na+ precision
Temperature range

Value
61 × 25 × 1.2 mm3 (min)
72 × 42 × 2 mm3 (typical)
Adheres for up to 7 days.
2 (max)
Available battery and microcontroller connect.
$6.00/patch—Volumes of 1–10.
3.5 Kbits
0.5 W (typical)
13.56 MHz
10–90 mM
±5 mM (96%) at 50 mM
28%
−40 to +105 °C (full range)

from 20 to 70 mM over a period of 45 min. Na+ concentration
in sweat can vary from 20 to 70 mM depending on body hydration status [10], [11]. As shown in Fig. 7, the sensor exhibited
good repeatability and stability during this measurement. The
average high measurement was 255 mV, which corresponds
to 70 mM based on the calibration curve. The coefficient of
variation across the six high concentration measurements was
CV = 0.1%, indicating excellent repeatability. Similarly, the
five low concentration measurements yielded approximately
237 mV, with CV = 0.8%. The response time at low concentration was slower, and is a function of the mass transport across the
sensor ion-selective membrane. As with most electrochemical
sensors, stability of the reference electrode can be an issue and
can lead to the inability to collect stable data. Our sensor exhibited only a slight drift (±3 mV/5 mM); however, by increasing
sampling frequency and averaging the values, we were able to
compensate for this difference. Future work will involve further stabilizing of the Ag/AgCl reference electrode to increase
stability of the measured values. Collectively, these results suggest that the developed sensor is suitable for sweat electrolyte
monitoring.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The primary objective of this paper was to demonstrate
the complete integration of the components and functionality
needed for a low-cost and highly self-contained sweat sensor.
A collection of key performance data and cost-estimates is provided in Table I. The most expensive single component is the
Melexis RFID chip, at <$2 in volume purchasing right now.
The remainder of the components and fabrication procedures
for the patch are rather simple and implementable on most flexible and printed electronics manufacturing lines. Therefore, the
basic patch presented here could be speculated at this time to
meet the economic considerations of a disposable commercial
product.
The key question in the applied value for this work is in terms
of performance. The performance for the existing patch is shown
to be adequate and accurate for basic sensing at physiological
relevant levels in sweat, and would increase in performance
with higher sampling frequency, improved power management,

1463

sensor signal conditioning, and conversion efficiency of the analog sensor inputs. Establishing the basic functionality shown in
this paper is important, because numerous other ionophores
and ISEs, or measurements, could be integrated with the patch,
allowing a broader range of applications for the sensor. The current sensor measures Na+ , and using the second sensor port to
measure K+ would be intended to explore ratios of electrolytes
in relation to hydration (hence, the term, “electrolyte balance”).
Other ions of interest include Cl− , Mg2+ , and NH4 + , which
expand the physiological readings that could be made from
human sweat. Devices such as this, and others [4], [12]–[15],
could mark the beginning of an entirely new way of monitoring human physiology and performance. Wearable and wireless
devices that are unobtrusive to the user fill a critical gap in the
technology needed to collect real-time data on the health status
of our most precious assets—people.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank T. Gerten, Senior Biologist
at 3M, for guidance and sampling of skin adhesives.

REFERENCES
[1] G. Cizza, A. H. Marques, F. Eskandari, I. C. Christie, S. Torvik, M. N.
Silverman, T. M. Phillips, and E. M. Sternberg, “Elevated neuroimmune
biomarkers in sweat patches and plasma of premenopausal women with
major depressive disorder in remission: The POWER study,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 907–911, 2008.
[2] M. J. Buono, C. S. White, and K. P. Connolly, “Cholinergic sensitivity of
the eccrine sweat gland in trained and untrained men,” J. Dermatol. Sci.,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 33–37, 1992.
[3] T. Guinovart, A. J. Bandodkar, J. R. Windmiller, F. J. Andrade, and
J. Wang, “A potentiometric tattoo sensor for monitoring ammonium in
sweat,” Analyst, vol. 138, no. 22, pp. 7031–7038, 2013.
[4] A. J. Bandodkar, D. Molinnus, O. Mirza, T. Guinovart, J. R. Windmiller,
G. Valdés-Ramı́rez, F. J. Andrade, M. J. Schöning, and J. Wang, “Epidermal tattoo potentiometric sodium sensors with wireless signal transduction for continuous non-invasive sweat monitoring,” Biosens. Bioelectron.,
vol. 54, pp. 603–609, 2014.
[5] S. Coyle, K. T. Lau, N. Moyna, D. O’Gorman, D. Diamond, F. Di
Francesco, D. Costanzo, P. Salvo, M. G. Trivella, D. E. De Rossi,
N. Taccini, R. Paradiso, J. A. Porchet, A. Ridolfi, J. Luprano, C. Chuzel,
T. Lanier, F. Revol-Cavalier, S. Schoumacker, V. Mourier, I. Chartier,
R. Convert, H. De-Moncuit, and C. Bini, “BIOTEX—Biosensing textiles for personalised healthcare management,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 364–370, Mar. 2010.
[6] A. J. Bandodkar, V. W. S. Hung, W. Jia, G. Valdés-Ramı́rez, J. R.
Windmiller, A. G. Martinez, J. Ramı́rez, G. Chan, K. Kerman, and
J. Wang, “Tattoo-based potentiometric ion-selective sensors for epidermal pH monitoring,” Analyst, vol. 138, no. 1, pp. 123–128, 2013.
[7] W. Jia, A. J. Bandodkar, G. Valdes-Ramirez, J. R. Windmiller, Z. Yang,
J. Ramirez, G. Chan, and J. Wang, “Electrochemical tattoo biosensors
for real-time noninvasive lactate monitoring in human perspiration,” Anal.
Chem., vol. 85, no. 14, pp. 6553–6560, 2013.
[8] S. Walsh, D. Diamond, J. McLaughlin, E. McAdams, D. Woolfson,
D. Jones, and M. Bonner, “Solid-state sodium-selective sensors based
on screen-printed Ag/AgCl reference electrodes,” Electroanalysis, vol. 9,
no. 17, pp. 1318–1324, 1997.
[9] F. Phillips, K. Kaczor, N. Gandhi, B. D. Pendley, R. K. Danish, M. R.
Neuman, B. Toth, V. Horvath, and E. Lindner, “Measurement of sodium
ion concentration in undiluted urine with cation-selective polymeric membrane electrodes after the removal of interfering compounds,” Talanta,
vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 255–264, 2007.
[10] M. J. Patterson, S. D. R. Galloway, and M. A. Nimmo, “Variations in regional sweat composition in normal human males,” Exp. Physiol., vol. 85,
no. 6, pp. 869–875, 2000.

1464

[11] T. Verde, R. J. Shephard, P. Corey, and R. Moore, “Sweat composition
in exercise and in heat,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1540–1545,
1982.
[12] J. Weber, A. Kumar, A. Kumar, and S. Bhansali, “Novel lactate and
pH biosensor for skin and sweat analysis based on single walled carbon
nanotubes,” Sens. Actuators B: Chem., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 308–313, 2006.
[13] B. Schazmann, D. Morris, C. Slater, S. Beirne, C. Fay, R. Reuveny,
N. Moyna, and D. Diamond, “A wearable electrochemical sensor for the
real-time measurement of sweat sodium concentration,” Anal. Methods,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 342–348, 2010.
[14] M. Strauss, C. Reynolds, S. Hughes, K. Park, G. McDarby, and R. W.
Picard, “The handwave bluetooth skin conductance sensor,” in Proc. 1st
Int. Conf. Affective Comput. Intell. Interaction, 2005, pp. 699–706.
[15] M.-Z. Poh, N. C. Swenson, and R. W. Picard, “A wearable sensor for
unobtrusive, long-term assessment of electrodermal activity,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1243–1252, May 2010.

Daniel P. Rose (S’14) is a native of Cincinnati,
OH, USA. He is a graduate of LaSalle High School
(1999) and received the Bachelor of Science degree in
physics from the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
in 2012.
From 2005 to 2008, he served as a Rifleman in
United States Marine Corps as part of Company E,
d
2 Battalion, 6th Marine Regiment, 2d Marine Division, including a deployment to Fallujah, Iraq, in
2007. During the summers of 2009 and 2010, he was
an undergraduate Research Assistant for the NanoMaterials Physics Group, headed by Profs. Howard Jackson and Leigh Smith
at the University of Cincinnati, and was a Teaching Assistant for undergraduate
physics laboratory courses during the academic years. In 2011 and 2012, he was
a Research Intern with electrofluidic display developers Gamma Dynamics. He
is currently a Graduate Research Assistant at the University of Cincinnati as a
member of Prof. Jason Heikenfeld’s Novel Devices Lab.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Linlin Hou received the B.S. degree in measure control technology and instruments and the M.S. degree in optical engineering from the University of
Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai,
China, in 2002 and 2006, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, in 2012.
She was previously with the Novel Devices Laboratory led by Dr. Heikenfeld at the University of
Cincinnati from 2012 to 2013 as a Postdoctoral Researcher. She is currently with Intel, Portland, OR,
USA, as a Process TD Engineer.

Nancy Kelley-Loughnane received the B.S. degree
in chemistry from the University of New Hampshire,
Durham, NH, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in biochemistry from Boston College, Boston, MA, USA.
She served as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center in
2001. She is currently an Air Force Research Biochemist and the Technical Advisor for Human Signatures Branch within the 711 Human Performance
Wing at the Air Force Research Laboratory, WrightPatterson Air Force Base, Dayton, OH, USA. Her
research integrates her expertise in the fields of synthetic biology, protein chemistry, genomics, bioinformatics, and molecular biology. She leads a multidisciplinary research team focused on enhancing human performance through the
identification of key biological signatures and the development of sensors to
detect critical and operationally relevant physical and cognitive performance
indicators.

Michael E. Ratterman is originally from Indianapolis, IN, USA. He received the Bachelor of Science
degree in electrical engineering (EE) from the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, in 2009.
During this time, he received the Best of EE Award as
a member of his Senior Project Development Team
at the Cincinnati Tech Expo for their project “Smart
Heart.”
Previously, he served aboard the USS Providence
(SSN-719) as an Electrician’s Mate (Nuclear) where
he was qualified in electric plant operation as well
as submarine casualty response tactics. He is currently a Graduate Research
Assistant at the University of Cincinnati as a member of Prof. Ian Papautsky’s
Bio Micro Systems Lab. His research interests include optical-gas sensing, embedded firmware design, and electrochemistry.

Rajesh R. Naik received the B.S. degree in microbiology from the University of Bombay, Mumbai,
India, and the Ph.D. degree in biological sciences from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA.
He is the Research Team Leader for biological materials research in the Functional Materials Division,
Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force
Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base, Dayton, OH, USA. His group conducts research
in the area of bionanotechnology and biomimetics
with focus on biosensing and bioelectronics.
Dr. Naik is a Fellow of the Air Force Research Laboratory, Royal Society of
Chemistry, and SPIE.

Daniel K. Griffin is currently working toward the
Bachelor’s degree in computer engineering at the
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
He was involved on numerous projects with the
Novel Device Laboratory at the University of Cincinnati and 711th Human Performance Wing at Wright
Patterson Air Force Base Research Laboratories.
Mr. Griffin has received numerous awards during
his college career, including the national Goldwater
scholarship for excellence in the sciences, engineering, and mathematics. Other awards include the University of Cincinnati EECS Mantei Mae Award for his freshman, sophomore,
and prejunior years.

Joshua A. Hagen received the B.S. degree in chemical engineering and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in materials engineering from the University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, in 2000, 2004, and
2006, respectively.
He is currently with the Air Force Research Labs
in the 711th Human Performance Wing at Wright
Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, OH, USA. He
leads a research group in Human Centric Sensor Systems with a focus on total physiological monitoring
for applications ranging from personalized performance to the medical mission space.

ROSE et al.: ADHESIVE RFID SENSOR PATCH FOR MONITORING OF SWEAT ELECTROLYTES

Ian Papautsky (S’96–A’00–M’03–SM’08) received
the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA, in 1995, and
the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, in 1999.
He is currently a Professor in the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computing Systems, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, and the
Director of the BioMicro Systems Laboratory. He
is the Director of Ohio Center for Microfluidics Innovation and Co-Director of the newly formed NSF
Center for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics.
His current research interests focus on developing disposable microfluidic labon-a-chip systems and bio/chemical sensors for point-of-care applications.

1465

Jason C. Heikenfeld (S’98–M’01–SM’06) received
the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, in 1998 and 2001,
respectively.
After cofounding his first startup company, he
returned to the University of Cincinnati as a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computing Systems. His university laboratory, The
Novel Devices Laboratory, www.ece.uc.edu/devices,
is currently engaged in electrofluidic device research
for biosensors, beam steering, lab-on-chip, displays,
and electronic paper.
Dr. Heikenfeld has been awarded NSF CAREER and is both an AFOSR and
Sigma Xi Young Investigator. He is a senior member of the Society for Information Display, a member of SPIE, a member of ASEE, a Fellow of the National
Academy of Inventors, and a Fellow of the University of Cincinnati Academy
for Teaching and Learning. In addition to his scholarly work, he launched two
additional companies which are now active; he is an award winning educator,
and has lead the creation of programs and coursework at the University of
Cincinnati that foster innovation, entrepreneurship, and an understanding of the
profound change that technology can have on society.

