IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

231

Analysis of the Chaotic Characteristics of Human
Colonic Activities and Comparison of Healthy
Participants to Costive Subjects
Li Lu, Guozheng Yan, Kai Zhao, and Fei Xu

Abstract—Constipation is a common yet distressing disease that
has high rates of morbidity and impacts patients’ quality of life.
However, there is no perfect method to distinguish costive patients
from healthy subjects. Is there chaos in human colonic activities?
Are there any differences for the chaos indicators of colonic activities between healthy and costive subjects? Can these indicators distinguish patients with constipation from healthy subjects?
To answer these questions, colonic pressure data from 16 healthy
subjects and 48 patients with constipation were analyzed using
the chaos theory. Three chaotic indicators [i.e., the largest Lyapunov exponent (LyE), correlation dimension (CorDim), and Kolmogorov entropy (KoEn)] were calculated and compared between
groups with the Wilcoxon rank sum test. As a result, the LyE was
greater than zero and the CorDim was fractioned, which showed
that human colonic activities have clear chaotic characteristics.
Statistically significant differences were observed between groups
for CorDim (p < 0.05), whereas LyE did not show statistically
significant differences between groups. The chaotic indicator of
CorDim was able to differentiate between patients with constipation and healthy subjects. The chaos theory provides a new method
for learning the nonlinear dynamics of human gastrointestinal
activities.
Index Terms—Chaos theory, correlation dimension, Kolmogorov entropy, largest Lyapunov exponent, phase space
reconstruction.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONSTIPATION is a common yet distressing disease globally. Estimates of population prevalence range from nearly
9% in the Asian Pacific region to 27% in Western countries [1]–
[4]. Although the diagnosis of constipation and its subtypes is
made on symptoms, a more precise and accurate characterization of the underlying mechanism(s) requires physiologic tests
of colorectal function, especially in patients who are not responding to simple measures such as fiber supplements and
over-the-counter laxatives [5]. Various diagnostic measures including defecography, magnetic resonance imaging, anorectal
manometry, measures of colonic transit, and colonic manometry
can help to recognize constipation [6]–[17]. However, defecography has the drawbacks of radiation exposure, interobserver
bias, patient embarrassment, and inconsistent methodology [5].

C

Manuscript received August 2, 2014; revised September 30, 2014; accepted
November 11, 2014. Date of publication November 20, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015.
The authors are with the Institute of Medical Precise Engineering & Intelligent Microsystems, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
(e-mail: luxiaoli0402@163.com; gzhyan@sjtu.edu.cn; zhao_kai@sjtu.edu.cn;
xufeianhuihefei@126.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2371073

Magnetic resonance imaging has the disadvantages of high cost
and lack of standardization, which limit its routine use [5];
manometry limits the patients’ mobility and can cause skin
irritation or infections [18]. The above problems led to the development of novel noninvasive monitoring systems like the
wireless power capsule (WPC) from the SmartPill Corporation
and the multiparameter medical information noninvasive detection system (MMI-NDS) that we designed in a previous work.
The MMI-NDS can successively collect human gastrointestinal
(GI) pressure, temperature, and pH under normal physiological
conditions; analyze data; and evaluate GI function. Patients do
not need to do a bowel cleanse before the exam and could walk
freely during the test. The MMI-NDS is much more tolerable
for patients. In this manuscript, the GI data were obtained using
the MMI-NDS [19].
Based on GI physiology information, researchers have used
a variety of methods to evaluate GI motility. Colonic transit
time (CTT) and GI transit time (GTT) have been applied to
assess colonic motility in the literature [20]–[24]. However, the
CTT and GTT cannot differentiate patients with normal transit
constipation (NTC) from healthy subjects because patients with
NTC have normal CTT or GTT. Rao et al. analyzed 21 patients
with slow-transit constipation (STC) and 20 healthy controls
using colonic manometry and found that constipated patients
showed fewer pressure waves and lower area under the curve (p
< 0.05) than did controls during the day, but not at night [25].
Hagger et al. studied ten healthy volunteers and eight females with slow-transit idiopathic constipation using colonic
manometry; they found that the frequencies of high-amplitudepropagated contractions and low-amplitude complexes were all
reduced in chronic idiopathic constipation [26]. However, participants must clear their bowels before colonic manometry, and
the data from the sensors cannot characterize the GI dynamics
in a normal physiological state. Kloetzer et al. [27] used the
motility index (MI), number of contractions (Ct), and area under the pressure curve to analyze the GI data from 71 healthy
participants and 42 gastroparetic subjects. They found significant differences in MI and Ct between healthy and gastroparetic
subjects. However, the GI data were not filtered before analysis,
which may have led to unreasonable conclusions on some level.
Box dimension was used to analyze the colonic pressure data
from a healthy subject in the literature [28]. The results showed
that colonic activities were fractal with a noninteger fractal dimension. However, the authors did not analyze the difference
for the box dimension of colonic pressure data between healthy
and constipated subjects.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

232

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Multiparameters medical information noninvasive detection system.

In addition to a low degree of differentiation and inability to
replicate GI motility under normal physiological conditions, all
of the aforementioned studies were limited to STC and did not
include patients with NTC. In this manuscript, constipation was
divided into three groups: NTC, the first kind of STC (STC1),
and the second kind of STC (STC2). The first and second types
of STC are classified according to the number of contractions
per hour. Because the colon normally contracts an average of
227 times per hour, STC with more than 227 colon contractions
per hour is classified as STC2 [19] and as STC1 with fewer than
227 contractions per hour.
As mentioned earlier, the researchers and clinicians have used
multiple methods to diagnose constipation; however, the diagnostic results have been less than ideal. There are two possible
explanations for difficulty diagnosing constipation: 1) constipation is caused by multiple mechanisms, and colonic motor disturbances in chronic constipation are incompletely understood
[5], [29] and 2) because GI activities are nonlinear, linear analysis methods cannot accurately characterize the nonstationary
properties of GI activities. In recent decades, chaos as a nonlinear analysis method has been the subject of much scholarly
interest and has been widely observed in turbulence, seismographic activities, brain waves, human movement, and missile
systems [30]–[36]. However, as far as we know, no published
studies analyze human GI activities using the chaos theory. We
choose the chaos theory to analyze human GI activities for three
reasons. First, chaos is deterministic and presents pseudorandom
rather than purely stochastic behavior [31]; GI activities seem to
be random, but they are not completely random in motion; they
are generated by a deterministic system and can be described
by chaos. Second, GI activities are nonlinear, while the chaotic
indicators [i.e., largest Lyapunov exponent (LyE), correlation
dimension (CorDim), and Kolmogorov entropy (KoEn)] enable
us to quantitatively describe the nonlinear behavior. Third, investigations of chaotic activities in physiologic systems suggest that changes in nonlinear dynamic measures may indicate
states of pathophysiological dysfunction, which suggests that
the chaos theory might be applied to diagnose physiological
disorders [30].

The contributions of this paper can be summarized in four
main aspects.
1) To better monitor the human GI tract, we designed the
MMI-NDS and solved the designed challenges of reducing system size and power consumption, and improving
the measurement accuracy of the sensors. A detailed description of MMI-NDS is given in Section II.
2) Existing methods for analyzing human GI activities have
many disadvantages; thus, we proposed a comprehensive
method combined with wavelet transform, chaos theory,
and Wilcoxon rank sum tests to analyze human GI pressure data and compare the results between different types
of constipation and normal control. The proposed method
is presented in Section III. The implementation results are
given in Section IV.
3) Section V describes why STC was divided into two types
and explains the results.
4) The conclusions are given in Section VI, as part of which
we summarize the work in this paper and make an outlook
for future works in this field.
II. MATERIALS
A. System Description
GI pressure data were obtained by the MMI-NDS that we developed. The MMI-NDS consisted of three parts; a swallowable
capsule, a portable recorder, and a workstation (see Fig. 1). The
capsule incorporated three sensors for pressure, temperature,
and pH as well as microantenna, batteries, and a printed circuit
board of application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC). The device can monitor the pressure, temperature, and pH of the entire
GI tract under normal physiological conditions at a sampling frequency of 0.83 Hz. GI pH information may be used to diagnose
gastric reflux, gastritis, and other diseases, and it can help determine the device’s location within the GI tract. The temperature
information may be used to diagnose diseases associated with
abnormal temperature. In addition, accurate pressure measurements require temperature sensors for compensation. GI pressure information can be used to diagnose constipation, irritable

LU et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE CHAOTIC CHARACTERISTICS OF HUMAN COLONIC ACTIVITIES AND COMPARISON

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF MICRO SENSORS AND COMPARISON WITH
WIRELESS MOTILITY CAPSULE DEVELOPED BY SMART PILL

Range

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Capsule Size
Battery Life

Designed by us

Developed by Smart Pill

pH: 0–14 pH units
Temperature: 34–42 °C
Pressure: 70–150 kPa
pH: ±0.25 pH units
Temperature: ±0.25 °C
Pressure: ±0.15 kPa

pH: 1–9 pH units
Temperature: 20–40 °C
Pressure: 0–350 mmHg
pH: ±0.5 pH units
Temperature: ±1 °C
Pressure: 0–99 mmHg ±5 mmHg
100–350 mmHg ±10%
of applied pressure
unknown
unknown
unknown
2613 mm
120 h

pH: 46 mV/pH
Temperature: 23.36 mV/°C
Pressure: 0.23 mV/kPa
25 × 11 mm
136 h

bowel syndrome, gastric hypomotility, and similar disorders.
The recorder can read the data transmitted from the capsule in
real time and store them on the multimedia card (MMC). The
data can then be downloaded to a computer through the universal serial bus interface after the experiment. The collected
data from the sensors can be processed at the workstation. The
process includes displaying the pressure, temperature, and pH
curves for the GI tract, filtering, extracting the characteristic
value, evaluating the information, and providing a preliminary
diagnosis.
In order to extend the working time of the capsule and improve the measurement accuracy of the sensors, we designed a
low-power controlling and processing ASIC that included a very
large scale integration architecture of three-stage clock management, power management, and an 18-bits full-differential input
Sigma-Delta analog-to-digital converter [37]. Thanks to the lowpower design of the system, the capsule can work normally for
a minimum of 136 h with three 1.5-V 22-mA button batteries.
To reduce the volume of the capsule, we also designed three
sensors for pressure, temperature, and pH [37]. The performance
parameters of the sensors and a comparison of these parameters
to those of the wireless motility capsule developed by SmartPill
Corporation are shown in Table I [38].
B. Participants
Between March 2011 and April 2014, colonic motor functions
were evaluated using MMI-NDS in 122 subjects in accordance
with all ethical issues and regulatory requirements related to
human experiments. Of the participants, 106 were patients with
constipation.
The 16 healthy subjects had no gastrointestinal diseases as
determined with the Mayo Gastrointestinal Disease Screening
Questionnaire. The 106 costive patients had been previously
diagnosed with constipation with 1) symptoms of hard stools,
straining, sensation of anorectal obstruction, or sensation of incomplete evacuation or 2) a documented abnormal scintigraphy.
The aim of this study was to determine the differences in
colonic motility between healthy and costive subjects in order
to provide a reference for the diagnosis of constipation; thus,
the following three categories of patients were excluded.

233

1) Patients (n = 12) with neurologic or other diseases related
to colonic dysmotility (e.g., gastric hypomotility, diabetes
mellitus, inflammatory bowel disease, spinal cord injury,
and Parkinson’s disease) were excluded from this study.
2) Man et al. found that ageing had a great impact on the
intestinal immune system [39]. In addition, older people
suffer from a decline in the immune system function,
which affects the gut’s ability to tolerate ingested nutrients
or resident microbiota, and these factors contribute greatly
to the increased morbidity and mortality rates within older
populations [39]. To eliminate the influence of age on
the analysis results, subjects aged over 50 (n = 41) were
excluded.
3) Two patients without complete data were also excluded.
To ensure that each group had the same number of participants
to facilitate comparison, 16 healthy subjects, 16 patients with
NTC, 16 patients with STC1, and 16 patients with STC2 were
selected from the remaining 67 subjects to participate in the
study.
C. Preparation of Subjects
After 8 h of nocturnal fasting, participants consumed 100 g
of rice, 200 g of vegetables, 60 g of eggs, and 100 g of fruit;
they then swallowed the capsule with 100 ml of warm water
[19]. The participants were permitted to sit down, take a walk,
or lie down in a room and repeated the aforementioned meal
after 6 h. The subjects were not allowed to do intense exercises
like jogging, weight lifting, or aerobics.
III. METHODS
Data analysis in this paper was divided into the following
steps: colonic pressure data acquisition, data filtering, feature
extraction, and information evaluation.
A. Colonic Pressure Data Acquisition
In order to extract the colonic pressure data from the GI pressure data measured by the MMI-NDS, the GI pressure data
were divided into three sections—gastric, small intestine, and
colonic pressure data—according to GI pH information. Gastric
residence time of the capsule is defined as the interval from the
time of ingestion to the time of an abrupt rise in pH profile, usually >3-pH units from the acidic gastric baseline to the alkaline
duodenum [22]. Capsule passage from the ileum into the cecum
is determined when an abrupt pH decrease of at least 1-pH unit
is observed for at least 90 min after entry from the stomach into
the small intestine [40]. According to the aforementioned pH
information, the gastrointestinal pressure data were divided into
three parts, as shown in Fig. 2.
B. Data Filtering
In this paper, data filtering was fulfilled using an adjusted threshold method and wavelet transform [40]. To tighten
the manuscript’s focus, the filtering methods will not be repeated here. Readers interested in these should refer to the
literature [40].

234

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Gastrointestinal pressure data segmentation based on gastrointestinal
pH information.

C. Feature Extraction
Feature extraction was accomplished by extracting three
chaotic indicators—namely, the largest Lyapunov exponent,
correlation dimension, and Kolmogorov entropy—using phase
space reconstruction.
The following sections were performed for the nonlinear
time-series analysis: 1) phase space reconstruction; 2) largest
Lyapunov exponent estimation; 3) correlation dimension; and
4) Kolmogorov entropy calculation.
1) Phase Space Reconstruction: To probe whether chaos exists in the gastrointestinal pressure data, the phase space needed
to be reconstructed, which was done according to the delay coordinate method proposed by Takens and Packard [41]. Here,
we define the GI pressure sequence x(i), i = 1, 2, . . . , N, and
the reconstruct m-dimension state vector Xi as follows:
Xi = x(i), x(i + τ ), x(i + 2τ ), . . . , x(i + (m − 1)τ )

(1)

where τ is the time delay and m is the embedding dimension.
τ and m play important roles in phase space reconstruction. If
τ and m are too large, they add complexity and increase the
data needed for the experiment [42]. If they are too small, the
complex nature of the matter may not be captured in the phase
space [42].
There are three methods to find a proper delay time: 1) the
autocorrelation function; 2) the average mutual information;
and 3) the correlation integral [43]. Because the autocorrelation
function describes only linear correlations and because the correlation integral needs more data, average mutual information
was selected for this paper.
One of the most commonly used methods for determining
the embedding dimension is the false nearest neighbors (FNN).
However, this method could be affected by noise level of the time
series data, data size, sampling interval, and many other factors
[44]. Thus, the analysis results obtained using FNN are not
entirely reliable. Cao has put forward a modified FNN method

that compensates for the shortcomings of the FNN [31]. The
Cao method was used in this paper to calculate the embedding
dimension.
2) Largest Lyapunov Exponent: The most popular method
of identifying the presence of chaotic behavior is the largest
Lyapunov exponent, which quantifies the divergence of nearby
trajectories in the phase space [45]. A positive value for the
largest Lyapunov exponent indicates the presence of chaos in
the system. There are three methods of calculating the largest
Lyapunov exponent: the Wolf method, the Jocobian method,
and the small sets method. The Wolf method is suitable for
time series without noise that also have small vector in tangent
space with highly nonlinear evolution; the Jocobian method is
suitable for time series with significant noise and linear evolution
[44]. The small sets method can obtain reliable results for both
the small and large datasets, and has the merits of numerical
efficiency and easy implementation [31]. The small sets method
is considered to be the best method for calculating the LyE and
was used in this paper.
For the discrete time series X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn whose length is
n, its phase points are Yi = (xi , xi−1 , . . . , xi+(m −1) ). All of the
N = n − (m − 1)τ phase points are chosen as the reference
points to analyze the near orbits diverge from exponents in the
chaotic motion [44]. The initial orbital distance at time i is

m
1 
δ0i = ||Yi − Yir || = 
(xi−(k −1)τ − xir −(k −1)τ )2 (2)
m
k =1

where Yi and Yir are the reference phase point and the phase
point, respectively.
As the deviation of the nearby trajectories in the chaotic system has the characteristic of exponential deviation [44], so
δs = δ0 eλs

(3)

where δs is orbital distance and s is the deviation distance. Then
λ=

ln δs
ln δ0
ln(δs /δ0 )
=
−
s
s
s

(4)

where λ is the required largest Lyapunov exponent.
If the number of phase points is equal to N, the average value
of the total deviation distance is
δ̄s =

N
1  i
δ .
N i=1 s

(5)

Then, we can draw the curve of ln δ̄s ∼ s, the slope of the
linear part of the curve is λ.
3) Correlation Dimension: The correlation dimension measures the complexity or irregularity of a trajectory in phase
space, which can be classified as a zero-dimensional fixed
point, a 1-D limit cycle, a 2-D quasi-periodic torus, or a fractaldimensional chaotic trajectory [46]. The higher the correlation
dimension, the more complex of the behavior. One of the most
commonly used methods for calculation of the correlation dimension is to calculate the distances between the pairs of points
in the phase space [47], i.e., sij = ||xi − xj ||. For a discrete
time series, {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, with the length equal to N, there

LU et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE CHAOTIC CHARACTERISTICS OF HUMAN COLONIC ACTIVITIES AND COMPARISON

235

Fig. 3. Results of data filtering. Fig. 3(a) is the raw data of pressure data evolves over time. Fig. 3(b) is the filtered data filtering by the adjusted threshold method.
Then the filtered data were filtered again using wavelet transform, as shown in Fig. 3(c).

will be N (N − 1)/2 pairs. The correlation function is defined
as follows:
C(r) =

N
−1 
N

2
H(r − ||xi − xj ||)
N (N − 1) i=1 j =i+1

(6)

where r is the radius of the hypersphere around the data point
being examined and H denotes the Heaviside step function [47].
The correlation function has the characteristic of exponent law.
As r → 0, there is
lim C(r) = ard .

r →0

(7)

Then, the correlation dimension is defined as follow:
d = lim

r →0

log C(r)
.
log r

(8)

4) Kolmogorov Entropy: Kolmogorov entropy quantifies the
rate of loss of information about the state of a dynamic system as
it evolves over time [46]. Kolmogorov entropy of random behavior is infinity, whereas Kolmogorov entropy of chaotic systems
is finite. Therefore, a finite and positive entropy value indicates
the presence of chaos in the system. To focus on identifying
a chaotic system, the calculation of Kolmogorov entropy will
not be repeated here. For detailed descriptions of calculation
procedures, please refer to the literature [48].
D. Information Evaluation
The obtained information was evaluated by comparing the
chaotic indicators between different groups with the Wilcoxon
rank sum test.
IV. RESULTS
To identify whether chaos existed in the colonic activities and
to determine differences among the chaotic indicators of healthy
and costive subjects, colonic pressure data from 16 healthy subjects and 48 patients with constipation were analyzed using the
chaos theory. Because the collected data had been contaminated such noise as breathing, coughing, electromagnetic, etc.,
an adjusted threshold method and wavelet transform were used
to remove these noise [37]. Next, the phase space was recon-

structed, and the chaotic indicators were estimated. Finally, the
information was evaluated using the Wilcoxon rank sum test.
A. Data Filtering
The raw data on colonic pressure as it evolved over time
are illustrated in Fig. 3(a). As can be seen in the figure, some
outliers existed in the raw data. These outliers were filtered
by the adjusted threshold method, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The
threshold method can only remove large abnormal data, but
high-frequency noise in the data may still exist [37]. To remove
high-frequency noise, the Daubechies wavelet with a decomposing tree of level 3 was applied [37]. The filtered result with
the wavelet transform is shown in Fig. 3(c).
B. Feature Extraction
1) Phase Space Reconstruction: The delay time τ and the
embedding dimension were calculated using average mutual
information and Cao method, respectively. Fig. 4(a) shows the
average mutual information for the colonic pressure data of
one healthy subject. From the figure, the delay time is the first
minimum (τ = 8). Fig. 4(b) presents the calculated result of the
embedding dimension for the same pressure data using the Cao
method. The saturation embedding dimension was found to be
m = 8.
2) Estimation of the Chaotic Indicators: The three chaotic
indicators were estimated using the delay times and the embedding dimensions. Fig. 4(c) shows the calculated result of the
largest Lyapunov exponent when τ = 8 and m = 8. Although
Fig. 4(c), displays many jumps in the curve, the jumping points
of the midpoint followed an expected linear increase toward the
flat regions. The slope value was the largest Lapunov exponent
(LyE = 0.0072) obtained after linear fit. Fig. 4(d) shows the
correlation function when the embedding dimension, m, ranges
from 5 to 14; while Fig. 4(e) shows the correlation dimension.
From Fig. 4(e), the correlation dimension increases with the
embedding dimension up to a certain value, and then, saturates beyond that value. The saturated value is 3.26 (CorDim =
3.26), which indicates the existence of chaotic behavior in human colonic activities. Fig. 4(f) shows the Kolmogorov entropy
versus the embedding dimension in which the first minimum is
reached at KoEn = 0.02.

236

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 4. Analysis results for colonic pressure data of one healthy subject using chaos theory. Fig. 4(a)–(c) are the calculated results of time delay, embedding
dimension and the largest Lyapunov exponent, respectively. Fig. 4(d) and (e) are correlation function and the correlation dimension with different embedding
dimensions respectively. Fig. 4(f) is the Kolmogorov entropy versus the embedding dimension.

C. Information Evaluation
Information evaluation was completed by comparing the
chaotic indicators between different groups using the Wilcoxon
rank sum test. Fig. 5 shows the distributions of LyE, CorDim,
and KoEn for different groups. The line inside the box marks
the median, whiskers mark the 10th and 90th percentiles, and
the plus signs mark the outlying points [30].
According to the results from the Wilcoxon rank sum test,
there was a statistically significant difference in the correlation
dimensions between healthy subjects and all types of costive
subjects (p < 0.05); a statistically significant difference was not
observed for the largest Lyapunov exponent between groups.
The patients with STC2 had the highest correlation dimensions
for colonic pressure, whereas the patients with STC1 had the
lowest correlation dimensions. The Kolmogorov entropy indicated a statistically significant difference between healthy subjects and patients with normal transit constipation (p = 0.04)
and patients with STC2 (p < 0.01); by contrast, there was no
statistically significant difference between healthy subjects and
patients with STC1.
As shown in Table II, the fifth percentile of normal subjects’
CorDim, KoEn, and LyE were 2.5943, 0.0125, and 0.0036, respectively. About 42% of the patients with constipation had
CorDim below the fifth percentile of the normal range. Of patients with NTC and STC1, 44% and 81%, respectively, had
CorDim below the fifth percentile of the normal range. The 95th
percentile of normal subjects’ CorDim was 3.4544. About 38%
of the STC2 subgroup had CorDim above the 95th percentile of
the normal range.
D. Results Comparison With Other Literatures
The results were compared with those in the literature [49]
and [50], as shown in Table III. In our analysis, the raw data

Fig. 5. Distributions of LyE, CorDim, and KoEn for different groups. The line
inside the box marks the median, whiskers mark the 10th and 90th percentiles,
and the plus signs mark the outlying points.

LU et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE CHAOTIC CHARACTERISTICS OF HUMAN COLONIC ACTIVITIES AND COMPARISON

237

TABLE II
PERCENT OF PATIENTS WITH SIGNIFICANTLY ABNORMAL CHAOS INDICATORS FOR HEALTHY SUBJECTS, PATIENTS WITH NORMAL TRANSIT
AND PATIENTS WITH STC

Healthy, n = 16
Constipation, n = 48
NTC, n = 16
STC1, n = 16
STC2, n = 16

Colonic chaos indicators Impairment < 5th percentile of normals

Colonic chaos indicators > 95th percentile of normals

CorDim (< 2.5943)

KoEn (< 0.0125)

LyE (< 0.0036)

CorDim (> 3.4544)

KoEn (> 0.1165)

LyE (> 0.0166)

5
42
44
81
0

5
0
0
0
0

5
25
31
31
13

5
13
6
0
38

5
23
13
19
38

5
13
6
13
19

CorDim, correlation dimension; KoEn, Kolmogorov entropy; LyE, largest Lyapunov exponent

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF THE ANALYSIS RESULTS WITH OTHER LITERATURES
Results in this paper
Test instrument
Filtering
Characteristic parameter
Discrimination abilities

Features

MMI-NDS
Yes
CorDim
NTC(< 2.5943)
44%
STC1(< 2.5943)
81%
STC2(>3.4544)
38%
Can distinguish NTC, STC1, STC2 from normals

Results in [49]
WPC
No
CTT (hours)
NTC

Not include

STC(>59)
18%
Can not distinguish NTC from normals

Results in [50]
WPC
No
Ct(< 36/h)
MI(< 10.57)
Gastro
17%
24%
Idiopathic
15%
19%
Diabetic
20%
33%
Can distinguish gastro from normals

MMI-NDS, multiparameter medical information noninvasive detection system; WPC, wireless power capsule; CorDim, correlation dimension; CTT, colonic transit
time; Ct, number of contractions; MI, motility index; NTC, normal transit constipation; STC, slow transit constipation; STC1, the first Kind of STC; STC2, The
second kind of STC.

were filtered by an adjusted threshold method and wavelet transform; these were not filtered in the literature [49], [50], which
may have led to unreliable results to some extent. Forty-four
percent of patients with NTC and 81% of patients with STC1
were identified with the characteristic parameters of CorDim
and a cutoff value 2.5943 in this paper. In the literature [49],
only 18% of patients with STC were identified using CTT and
a cutoff value of 59 h. Of patients with STC2, 38% were identified with CorDim and a cutoff value 3.4544 in this paper;
only 17% of gastroparetic patients were identified using number of contractions and a cutoff value 36/h in the literature [50].
Although the subjects were different, our analysis methods could
identify more costive patients compared to the other methods in
the literature [49], [50].
V. DISCUSSION
Because STC could have two causes (i.e., 1) fewer highamplitude propagated contractions and reduced phasic contractile responses to a meal and/or to pharmacologic stimuli; or
2) increased nonpropagated or retrogradely propagated sigmoid
or rectal phasic pressure activity [1]), and the mechanism behind
these two reasons is different, STC was divide into two types
(STC1 and STC2) in this paper.
Colonic motor disturbances in chronic constipation are heterogeneous and incompletely understood [49]; the existence of
chaos in human colonic activities and the differences in colonic
motility between healthy and costive patients are not clear. The
purpose of this paper was to identify whether chaos existed in
human colonic activities and to determine the differences in
chaos indicators between healthy and costive subjects to provide a reference for the diagnosis of constipation. The results

showed that chaotic characteristics were clearly existed in human colonic activities because of the positive largest Lyapunov
exponent and the finite correlation dimension.
Significant differences were observed for correlation dimensions between healthy controls and all types of costive subjects.
Moreover, the correlation dimensions of colonic activities of
patients with STC2 were the largest, followed by those of the
healthy subjects; colonic activities of patients with STC1 were
related to the minimum correlation dimensions. The correlation
dimensions measured the complexity or irregularity of the behavior. The larger the correlation dimension, the more complex
of the behavior. That is, the colonic activities of patients with
STC2 were the most complex, followed by those of the healthy
subjects; colonic activities of patients with STC1 were the least
complex. Recent studies have confirmed that some patients with
STC exhibit a significant reduction of phasic colonic motor activity, gastro-colonic and morning waking responses, and the
number of high-amplitude propagated contractions compared
to healthy subjects [5]; others exhibit an increased of nonpropagated or retrogradely propagated sigmoid or rectal phasic pressure activity [1]. This may explain why the colonic activities of
patients with STC2 were the most complex, followed by those of
the healthy subjects, and why colonic activities of patients with
STC1 were the least complex. Studies in healthy controls have
demonstrated an increase in the motility index, area under the
curve, or high-amplitude propagating-contractions frequency in
response to a meal; by contrast, patients with constipation have
displayed a diminished or absent meal response [51]. This may
explain why there was a statistically significant difference for
CorDim between healthy subjects and patients with NTC.
The largest Lyapunov exponent can quantify the exponential
divergence of initially close statespace trajectories and estimate

238

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

sensitivity in the dynamical system [31]. Although constipated
patients have GI problems, their GI sensitivity under the initial
conditions was similar to that of healthy subjects. This may
explain why there was not a statistically significant difference
for the largest Lyapunov exponent between groups.
Kolmogorov entropy quantified the disordered degree of the
system. Patients with STC had more nonpropagated or retrogradely propagated waves, which behave randomly and impede
colonic flow [1]. The GI motility of healthy subjects can push
food, fluids, and ultimately waste through GI tract [52]. The GI
activities of healthy subjects are ordered. Patients with STC1
have fewer peristaltic waves compared to healthy subjects; these
waves move slowly, but are ordered. This may explain why
there was a statistically significant difference between healthy
subjects and patients with STC2 for the Kolmogorov entropy,
whereas there was no statistically significant difference between
healthy subjects and patients with STC1.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we described the MMI-NDS with a low-power
controlling and processing ASIC that can record the differences
of pressure profiles between healthy and costive subjects. Then,
we studied the chaotic characteristics of human colonic activities
in 16 healthy subjects and 64 patients with constipation. The
following observations were obtained.
1) Human colonic activities displayed clear chaotic
characteristics.
2) There were statistically significant differences for the correlation dimension between groups, and the correlation
dimension was able to differentiate patients with constipation from healthy subjects.
3) There were significant differences between healthy subjects and patients with STC2 for the Kolmogorov entropy,
whereas no statistically significant difference was observed between healthy subjects and patients with STC1.
The aforementioned results build the basis for our future studies characterizing the MMI-NDS under these conditions. However, the analysis in the current form is very basic. Developing
a classification model using multisensor information and calculating the chaotic indicators (e.g., Hurst exponents) using new
emerging methods will be our future goal.

REFERENCES
[1] A. E. Bharucha, J. H. Pemberton, and G. R. Locke, “American gastroenterological association technical review on constipation,” Gastroenterology, vol. 144, no. 1, pp. 218–238, Jan. 2013.
[2] J. Tack, “Current and future therapies for chronic constipation,” Best Pract.
Res. Clin. Gastroenterol., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 151–158, Feb. 2011.
[3] J. Tack and S. Muller-Lissner, “Treatment of chronic constipation: Current
pharmacologic approaches and future directions,” Clin. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 502–508, May 2009.
[4] G. F. Longstreth, W. G. Thompson, W. D. Chey, L. A. Houghton, F.
Mearin, and R. C. Spiller, “Functional bowel disorders,” Gastroenterology,
vol. 130, no. 5, pp. 1480–1491, Apr. 2006.
[5] S. S. C. Rao and K. Meduri, “What is necessary to diagnose constipation?” Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 127–140,
Feb. 2011.

[6] S. C. Celine, K. Edith, and D. Jean-Nicolas, “Radiologic evaluation of
pelvic floor disorders,” Gastroenterol. Clin. North Amer., vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 553–567, Sep. 2008.
[7] W. G. Elshazly, A. E. A. E. Nekady, and H. Hassan, “Role of dynamic
magnetic resonance imaging in management of obstructed defecation case
series,” Int. J. Surg., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 274–282, 2010.
[8] S. S. C. Rao, R. Ozturk, and L. Laine, “Clinical utility of diagnostic tests
for constipation in adults: A systematic review,” Amer. J. Gastroenterol.,
vol. 100, no. 7, pp. 1605–1615, Jul. 2005.
[9] M. Gupta, J. Holub, K. Knigge, and G. Eisen, “Constipation is not associated with an increased rate of findings on colonoscopy: Results from a
national endoscopy consortium,” Endoscopy, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 208–212,
Mar. 2010.
[10] P. G. Dinning and C. Di Lorenzo, “Colonic dysmotility in constipation,”
Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 89–101, Feb. 2011.
[11] V. Vitton, V. Vronique, V. Pascal, B. Marc, C. Valrie, D. Olivier, B. Michel,
and G. Jean-Charles, “Dynamic anal endosonography and MRI defecography in diagnosis of pelvic floor disorders: Comparison with conventional defecography,” Dis. Colon. Rectum, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1398–1404,
Nov. 2011.
[12] A. M. Vlieger, M. M. van den Berg, C. Menko-Frankenhuis, M. E. J.
Bongers, E. Tromp, and M. A. Benninga, “No change in rectal sensitivity
after gut-directed hypnotherapy in children with functional abdominal
pain or irritable bowel syndrome,” Amer. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 105, pp.
213–218, Oct. 2009.
[13] M. Camilleri, N. K. Thorne, Y. Ringel, W. L. Hasler, B. Kuo, T. Esfandyari,
A. Gupta, S. M. Scott, R. W. Mccallum, H. P. Parkman, E. Soffer, G. E.
Wilding, J. R. Semler, and S. S. C. Rao, “Wireless pH-motility capsule
for colonic transit: Prospective comparison with radiopaque markers in
chronic constipation,” Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 22, no. 8, pp.
874-e233, Aug. 2010.
[14] H. M. Xu, J. G. Han, Y. Na, B. Zhao, H. C. Ma, and Z. J. Wang,
“Colonic transit time in patient with slow-transit constipation: Comparison
of radiopaque markers and barium suspension method,” Eur. J. Radiol.,
vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 211–213, Aug. 2011.
[15] S. Singh, S. Heady, E. Coss-Adame, and S. S. C. Rao, “Clinical utility
of colonic manometry in slow transit constipation,” Neurogastroenterol.
Motility, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 211–213, Jun. 2013.
[16] V. Giorgio, V. Giorgio, O. Borrelli, V. V. Smith, D. Rampling, J. Köglmeier,
N. Shah, N. Thapar, J. Curry, and K. J. Lindley, “High-resolution colonic
manometry accurately predicts colonic neuromuscular pathological phenotype in pediatric slow transit constipation,” Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 70–77, e8–e9, Jan. 2013.
[17] P. A. Bampton and P. G. Dinning, “High resolution colonic manometry—
What have we learnt?—A review of the literature 2012,” Curr. Gastroenterol. Rep., vol. 15, pp. 328–312, Jun. 2013.
[18] P. Valdastri, S. Rossi, A. Menciassi, V. Lionetti, F. Bernini, F. A. Recchia,
and P. Dario, “An implantable ZigBee ready telemetric platform for in
vivo monitoring of physiological parameters,” Sens. Actuat. A,Phys., vol.
142, pp. 369–378, Jan. 2008.
[19] L. Lu and G. Z. Yan, “A study of human colonic motility in healthy and
constipated subjects,” Comput. Method Biomec., to be published.
[20] S. Wagener, K. R. Shankar, R. R. Turnock, G. L. Lamont, and C. T. Baillie,
“Colonic transit time—What is normal?,” J. Pediatr. Surg., vol. 39, no. 2,
pp. 166–169, Feb. 2004.
[21] D. Timm, H. Willis, W. Thomas, L. Sanders, T. Boileau, and J. Slavin,
“The use of a wireless motility device (SmartPill) for the measurement
of gastrointestinal transit time after a dietary fibre intervention,” Brit. J.
Nutri., vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1337–1342, May 2011.
[22] S. Maqbool, H. P. Parkman, and F. K. Friedenberg, “Wireless capsule
motility: Comparison of the smartpill GI monitoring system with scintigraphy for measuring whole gut transit,” Digestive Diseases Sci., vol. 54,
no. 10, pp. 2167–2174, Oct. 2009.
[23] K. Tran, R. Brun, and B. Kuo, “Evaluation of regional and whole
gut motility using the wireless motility capsule: Relevance in clinical
practice,” Therapeutic Adv. Gastroenterol., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 249–260,
Oct. 2012.
[24] B. Kuo R. W. Mccallum, K. L. Koch, M. D. Sitrin, J. M. Wo, W. D. Chey,
W. L. Hasler, J. M. Lackner, L. A. Katz, J. R. Semler, G. E. Wilding, and
H. P. Parkman, “Comparison of gastric emptying of a nondigestible capsule to a radio-labelled meal in healthy and gastroparetic subjects,” Alimentary Pharmcol. Therapeutics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 189–196, Jan. 2008.
[25] S. S. Rao, P. Sadeqhi, J. Beaty, and R. Kavlock, “Ambulatory 24-hour
colonic manometry in slow-transit constipation,” Amer. J. Gastrointerol.,
vol. 99, no. 12, pp. 2405–2416, Dec. 2004.

LU et al.: ANALYSIS OF THE CHAOTIC CHARACTERISTICS OF HUMAN COLONIC ACTIVITIES AND COMPARISON

[26] R. Hagger, D. Kumar, M. Benson, and A. Grundy, “Colonic motor activity
in slow-transit idiopathic constipation as identified by 24-h pancolonic
ambulatory manometry,” Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 15, no. 5,
pp. 515–522, Oct. 2003.
[27] L. Kloetzer, W. D. Chey, R. W. Mccallum, K. L. Koch, J. M. Wo, M.
Sitrin, L. A. Katz, J. M. Lackner, H. P. Parkman, G. E. Wilding, J. R.
Semler, W. L. Hasler, and B. Kuo, “Motility of the antroduodenum in
healthy and gastroparetics characterized by wireless motility capsule,”
Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 527–533, May 2010.
[28] R. G. Yan and X. D. Guo, “Nonlinear fractal dynamics of human colonic
pressure activity based upon the box-counting methos,” Comput. Method
Biomec., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 660–668, Jun. 2013.
[29] K. Ravi, A. E. Bharucha, M. Camilleri, D. Rhoten, T. Bakken, and A. R.
Zinsmeister, “Phenotypic variation of colonic motor functions in chronic
constipation,” Gastroenterology, vol. 138, no. 1, pp. 89–97, Jan. 2010.
[30] JJ. Jiang, Y. Zhang, C. McGilligan, “Chaos in voice, from modeling to
measurement,” J. Voice, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 2–17, Mar. 2006.
[31] D. X. Yang, P. X. Yang, and C. G. Zhang, “Chaotic characteristic analysis
of strong earthquake ground motions,” Int. J. Bifurcat. Chaos, vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 1–16, Mar. 2012.
[32] D. X. Yang, Z. J. Liu, and J. L. Zhou, “Chaos optimization algorithms
based on chaotic maps with different probability distribution and search
speed for global optimization,” Commun. Nonlinear Sci., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 1229–1246, Apr. 2014.
[33] Z. G. Huang, W. Dong, H. L. Duan, and H. M. Li, “Similarity measure
between patient traces for clinical pathway analysis: Problem, method,
and applications,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 4–14, Jan. 2014.
[34] J. B. Gao, J. Hu, and W. W. Tung, “Complexity measures of brain wave
dynamics,” Cogn. Neurodyn., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 171–182, Jun. 2011.
[35] N. Stergiou and L. M. Decker, “Human movement variability, nonlinear
dynamics, and pathology: Is there a connection?” Human Movement Sci.,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 869–888, Jan. 2011.
[36] J. W. Liang, S. L. Chen, and C. M. Yen, “Identification and verification of
chaotic dynamics in a missile system from experimental time series,” Int.
J. Syst. Sci., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 700–713, Apr. 2013.
[37] L. Lu, G. Z. Yan, K. Zhao, F. Xu, Z. W. Wang, and P. P. Jiang, “An
implantable telemetry platform system with ASIC for in vivo monitoring
of physiological parameters,” IEEE Sens. J., to be published.
[38] “pH.p capsule operational specifications,” The smartpill corporation,
Buffalo, NY, USA, Sep. 2003.
[39] A. L. Man, N. Gicheva, and C. Nicoletti, “The impact of ageing on the
intestinal epithelial barrier and immune system,” Cell Immunol., vol. 289,
no. 1–2, pp. 112–118, Jun. 2014.
[40] L. Lu, G. Z. Yan, K. Zhao, F. Xu, Z. W. Wang, and P. P. Jiang, “Human
gastrointestinal data analysis based on wavelet transform-fractal algorithm
characterized by wireless capsule,” Biomed. Eng., App. Bas. C, to be
published.
[41] D. H. Xia, S. Z. Song, and J. H. Wang, “Determination of corrosion
types from electrochemical noise by phase space reconstruction theory,”
Electrochem. Commun., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 88–92, Feb. 2012.
[42] I. Nejadgholi, M. H. Moradi, and F. Abdolali, “Using phase space reconstruction for patient independent heartbeat classification in comparison
with some benchmark methods,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 41, no. 6,
pp. 411–419, Jun. 2011.
[43] R. Khatibi, B. Sivakumar, M. A. Ghorbani, O. Kisi, K. Kocak, and
D. F. Zadeh “Investigating chaos in river stage and discharge time series,” J. Hydrol., vol. 414–415, no. 11, pp. 108–117, Jan. 2012.
[44] B. Yu, C. M. Huang, Z. H. Liu, H. P. Wang, and L. L. Wang, “A chaotic
analysis on air pollution index change over past 10 years in Lanzhou,
Northwest China,” Stoch. Environ. Res. Risk Assess., vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 643–653, Jul. 2011.
[45] M. A. Ghorbani, O. Kisi, and M. Aalinezhad, “A probe into the chaotic
nature of daily streamflow time series by correlation dimension and largest
Lyapunov methods,” Appl. Math Model, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 4050–4057,
Dec. 2010.
[46] J. J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, and C. McGilligan, “Chaos in voice, from modeling
to measurement,” J. Voice, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 2–17, Jun. 2005.
[47] J. W. Liang, S. L. Chen, and C. M. Yen, “Identification and verification of
chaotic dynamics in a missile system from experimental time series,” Int.
J. Syst. Sci., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 700–713, Apr. 2013.
[48] P. Grassberger and I. Procaccia, “Estimation of Kolmogorov entropy from
a chaotic signal,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 45, pp. 2591–2593, 1983.

239

[49] K. Ravi, A. E. Bharucha, M. Camilleri, D. Rhoten, T. Bakken, and A. R.
Zinsmeister, “Phenotypic variation of colonic motor functions in chronic
constipation,” Gastroenterology, vol. 138, no. 1, pp. 89–97, Jan. 2010.
[50] B. Kuo, M. Maneerattanaporn, A. A. Lee, J. R. Baker, S. M. Wiener,
W. D. Chey, G. E. Wilding, and W. L. Hasler, “Generalized transit delay
on wireless motility capsule testing in patients with clinical suspicion of
gastroparesis, small intestinal dysmotility, or slow transit constipation,”
Digestive Diseases Sci., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 2928–2938, Oct. 2011.
[51] P. G. Dinning, T. K. Smith, and S. M. Scott, “Pathophysiology of colonic
causes of chronic constipation,” Neurogastroenterol. Motility, vol. 21,
pp. 20–30, Dec. 2009.
[52] R. G. Yan and X. D. Guo, “Nonlinear fractal dynamics of human colonic
pressure activity based upon the box-counting method,” Comput. Method
Biomec., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 660–668, Jun. 2013.

Li Lu received the B.S. degree in physical engineering from HuangHuai University, Zhumadian, China,
in 2008 and the M.S. degree in physical engineering from Zhenzhou University, Zhenzhou, China, in
2011. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Instrument Science and
Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
Her research interests include wireless communication, design of the micromedical device, digital IC
design, microsensor, and data processing.

Guozheng Yan received the Ph.D. degree from the
Jilin University of Technology in 1993.
He received a Postdoctoral Fellow position in the
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
He is currently a Professor at Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include medical precision instrument engineering.

Kai Zhao received the B.S. degree from the Department of Technique of Measuring Control and
Instrument, Shenyang University of Technology,
Shenyang, China, in 2005 and the M.S. degree
from the Department of Detection Technology and
Automation Devices, Guangxi University, Guangxi,
China, in 2009. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree at the Department of Instrument Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai, China.
His research interests include wireless communication, design of the micromedical device, digital IC design, microsensor, and
medical information processing.

Fei Xu received the B.S and M.S degrees from the
Department of Technique of Measuring Control and
Instrument, Wuhan University, Hubei, China, in 2010
and 2012, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Instrument Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include wireless communication, biomedical electronics, digital IC design,
microsensor, and data processing.

