1108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Anatomy-Guided Dense Individualized and Common
Connectivity-Based Cortical Landmarks
(A-DICCCOL)
Xi Jiang, Student Member, IEEE, Tuo Zhang, Dajiang Zhu, Kaiming Li, Hanbo Chen, Jinglei Lv, Xintao Hu,
Junwei Han, Dinggang Shen, Lei Guo, and Tianming Liu∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Establishment of structural and functional correspondences of human brain that can be quantitatively encoded
and reproduced across different subjects and populations is one
of the key issues in brain mapping. As an attempt to address
this challenge, our recently developed Dense Individualized and
Common Connectivity-based Cortical Landmarks (DICCCOL)
system reported 358 connectional landmarks, each of which possesses consistent DTI-derived white matter fiber connection pattern that is reproducible in over 240 healthy brains. However, the
DICCCOL system can be substantially improved by integrating
anatomical and morphological information during landmark initialization and optimization procedures. In this paper, we present
a novel anatomy-guided landmark discovery framework that defines and optimizes landmarks via integrating rich anatomical,
morphological, and fiber connectional information for landmark
initialization, group-wise optimization and prediction, which are
formulated and solved as an energy minimization problem. The
framework finally determined 555 consistent connectional landManuscript received April 20, 2014; revised July 16, 2014; accepted August
15, 2014. Date of publication November 20, 2014; date of current version
March 17, 2015. The work of T. Liu was supported by the NSF CAREER
Award (IIS-1149260), NIH R01 DA-033393, NIH R01 AG-042599, and NSF
CBET-1302089. The work of L. Guo was supported by NSFC 61273362 and
NSFC 61333017 and the work of T. Zhang and J. Lv was supported by the
China Government Scholarship and the Doctorate Foundation of Northwestern
Polytechnical University. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
X. Jiang is with the Cortical Architecture Imaging and Discovery Lab, Department of Computer Science and Bioimaging Research Center, The University
of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA (e-mail: superjx2318@gmail.com).
T. Zhang is with the School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China, and also with the Cortical Architecture Imaging
and Discovery Lab, Department of Computer Science and Bioimaging Research Center, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA (e-mail:
zhangtuo.npu@gmail.com).
D. Zhu and H. Chen are with the Cortical Architecture Imaging and Discovery Lab, Department of Computer Science and Bioimaging Research Center, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA (e-mail: dajiang.
zhu@gmail.com; cojoc.chen@gmail.com).
K. Li and J. Lv are with the School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072 China, and with the Cortical Architecture
Imaging and Discovery Lab, Department of Computer Science and Bioimaging
Research Center, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA (e-mail:
likaiming@gmail.com; lvjinglei@gmail.com).
X. Hu, J. Han, and L. Guo are with the School of Automation, Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072 China (e-mail: xintao.hu@gmail.com;
junweihan2010@gmail.com; guolei.npu@gmail.com).
D. Shen is with the Department of Radiology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA (e-mail: dinggang_shen@med.unc.edu).
∗ T. Liu is with the Cortical Architecture Imaging and Discovery Lab, Department of Computer Science and Bioimaging Research Center, The University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA (e-mail: tliu@cs.uga.edu).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org. (File size: 1 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2369491

marks. Validation studies demonstrated that the 555 landmarks
are reproducible, predictable, and exhibited reasonably accurate
anatomical, connectional, and functional correspondences across
individuals and populations and thus are named anatomy-guided
DICCCOL or A-DICCCOL. This A-DICCCOL system represents
common cortical architectures with anatomical, connectional, and
functional correspondences across different subjects and would
potentially provide opportunities for various applications in brain
science.
Index Terms—Anatomy, cortical landmarks, DTI, fMRI, structural connectivity.

I. INTRODUCTION
STABLISHMENT of structural and functional correspondences of human brain across different subjects and populations is one of the important issues in the brain mapping
field. For several decades, three major categories of approaches
have been largely adopted in the brain mapping field to establish
the correspondences of brain regions across individuals, and remarkable successes have been achieved by those approaches.
The first category is brain image registration algorithms (e.g.,
[1]–[9]). In general, brain image registration methods are mainly
concerned with morphological correspondences across individuals. The second category is cortical parcellations (e.g., [10]–
[13]). These cortical parcellation approaches typically designed
certain criteria to define cortical region boundaries with the aim
of establishing correspondences during parcellation of multiple
brains. The third category is manual/semiautomatic regions of
interests (ROI) analysis (e.g., [14]–[16]). The ROI-based correspondence establishment methods are usually suitable for specific application scenarios.
Alternatively, several recent studies attempted to define and
discover consistent and common brain cortical landmarks with
intrinsic structural and functional correspondences across different subjects and populations [16]–[21]. In particular, several multimodal DTI/fMRI studies [16]–[24] have demonstrated
the close relationships between DTI-derived fiber connection
patterns and brain functions. This provides direct supporting
evidence to the connectional fingerprint concept [25], which
premises that each brain’s cytoarchitectonic area has a unique
set of extrinsic inputs and outputs that largely determines
the functions that each brain area performs. Based on these
principles, we developed and validated a data-driven connectional landmark discovery approach dubbed as: Dense Individualized and Common Connectivity-based Cortical Landmarks

E

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JIANG et al.: ANATOMY-GUIDED DENSE INDIVIDUALIZED AND COMMON CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL LANDMARKS (A-DICCCOL)

1109

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF FIVE DIFFERENT DATASETS
Datasets

Fig. 1. Initialization of a corresponding DICCCOL landmark located on the
left precentral gyrus in three example brains via linear registration [21]. The
landmark is highlighted by yellow bubble. The landmarks highlighted by the
white boxes in first two brains are located in the left precentral gyrus (highlighted
by red), while the landmark highlighted by the black box in third brain is located
in the left postcentral gyrus (highlighted by green).

(DICCCOL) in [21], which identified 358 consistent connectional landmarks. The basic idea was to optimize the localizations of each initial DICCCOL landmark in individual
brains by maximizing the group-wise consistency of their DTIderived white matter fiber connectivity patterns [21]. Our validation studies have demonstrated that the DICCCOLs provide
reasonably good intrinsically established correspondences
across subjects and populations, and these 358 DICCCOLs have
been released online at http://dicccol.cs.uga.edu.
However, the DICCCOL system reported in [21] merely
considers the DTI-derived fiber connectivity pattern consistency across different subjects as the metric during landmark
identification and can be substantially improved by integrating
additional meaningful anatomical, morphological, and fiber
connectional information during the landmark identification.
Moreover, the landmark initialization for the DICCCOL was
merely based on randomly sampled grid points in a template
brain. Each grid of initialized landmarks in the template brain
was then registered to other brains via linear registration, and
the landmark optimization was performed afterward [21]. However, anatomical interindividual variability sometimes misleads
the process of normalization. For example, in some brains, the
central fissure stops higher than the usual and misleads the registration of the pre- and postcentral gyri. As a consequence, the
same corresponding landmark might be misplaced in certain
brains. This scenario is illustrated in Fig. 1 as an example. Here,
we initialized a corresponding landmark located on the left precentral gyrus (shown as yellow bubble) in three example brains
from the template brain via linear registration. It is apparent that
the landmark initializations for the first two brains were reasonably accurate (roughly located on the left precentral gyrus),
but the initialization for the third brain was wrong (located on
the left postcentral gyrus). Therefore, the following landmark
optimization procedure would have difficulty in finding consistent fiber connection patterns for these inconsistently initialized
landmarks due to image registration error caused by anatomical interindividual variability and would potentially miss this
possibly consistent landmark.
In this paper, we substantially improved the identification
framework of our original DICCCOL system in [21] and introduced the anatomy-guided DICCCOL or A-DICCCOL. Our
major improvements are: first, instead of randomly sampled grid
points in a template brain as the initialized landmarks in original
DICCCOL system [21], we initialized the connectional land-

No. of
Subjects

Types

Functional
Activation
Maps

Model/
Testing
Brains

#1

23

DTI, one
T-fMRI scan

Working memory

#2

13

DTI, five
T-fMRI
scans

#3
# 4 (HCP)
#5

20
68
5

DTI
DTI
HARDI

Emotion, empathy,
fear, semantic
decision making,
working memory
None
None
None

10 out of 23:
Model; the
others:
Testing
Testing

Testing
Testing
Testing

marks on corresponding gyri/sulci under anatomical guidance
for each brain to improve the accuracy of landmark initialization
and thus facilitate the landmark optimization and discovery procedure. Second, instead of merely considering the DTI-derived
fiber connection pattern similarity as the metric in the previous
DICCCOL system, we added meaningful anatomical, structural
connection pattern homogeneity, and spatial information during
the group-wise landmark optimization procedure. Specifically,
in this paper, three new constraints including anatomical, structural connection pattern homogeneity, and spatial constraints,
as well as the previous adopted structural connection pattern
similarity constraint, were jointly modeled and integrated together to optimize the landmark locations within individual
brains. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness and meaningfulness of those newly added constraints in
seeking group-wise consistent and corresponding connectional
landmarks in individual brains. Third, we applied the proposed
connectional landmark discovery procedures on higher angular
resolution diffusion imaging (HARDI) data and recently publicly released Human Connectome Project (HCP) high-quality
DTI data (Q1 release) [26], and via different fiber tracking software tools to examine the consistency of the DTI-derived connectional landmarks, which is another validation improvement
than the previous DICCCOL system. Our proposed framework
finally identified 555 new and consistent connectional landmarks, called the anatomy-guided DICCCOL or A-DICCCOL
here. Extensive validations based on DTI, HARDI, and fMRI
datasets have demonstrated that the 555 landmarks are reproducible, predictable, and exhibit reasonably accurate anatomical, connectional, and functional correspondences across individuals and populations.
II. DATA ACQUISITION AND PREPROCESSING
In this paper, we used five different multimodal
DTI/HARDI/fMRI datasets for initialization, optimization,
determination, prediction, and validation of A-DICCCOL landmarks, as summarized in Table I. In particular, we randomly selected ten subjects with DTI data from Dataset #1 as the model
brains (see Fig. 2) for landmark initialization and the following group-wise optimization and identification. The remaining

1110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the computational framework for the A-DICCCOL landmark identification. Step 1: landmark initialization; Step 2: landmark optimization (four constraints are highlighted by the green boxes, respectively); Step 3:
landmark determination; Step 4: landmark prediction.

subjects from Datasets #1–#5 were used as the testing brains (see
Fig. 2). In brief, Dataset #1 included 23 healthy adult students
recruited under IRB approval. Working memory [27] task-based
fMRI (T-fMRI) and DTI scans were acquired for these participants at the University of Georgia (UGA) Bioimaging Research
Center (BIRC) under IRB approval. Dataset #2 included the DTI
and five T-fMRI scans of 13 healthy young adults recruited at
UGA BIRC under IRB approval. The scans were performed on
a GE 3T Signa MRI system using an eight-channel head coil at
the UGA BIRC. The five T-fMRI scans were based on in-house
verified paradigms including emotion [28], empathy [29], fear
[29], semantic decision making [30], and working memory [27]
tasks, which were also detailed in [21]. Dataset #3 included 20
elderly healthy subjects recruited and scanned at the UGA BIRC
under IRB approval. DTI dataset was acquired using the same
imaging parameters as those in Datasets #1 and #2. Dataset #4
included 68 subjects from recently publicly released large-scale
HCP high-quality DTI data (Q1 release) [26]. Dataset #5 included full-brain coverage HARDI images acquired from five
adult subjects using a Siemens 3T Trio MR Scanner at UNC
Chapel Hill [31]. The details of acquisition parameters and preprocessing steps of the five datasets are referred to supplemental
materials and [32], [33].
III. A-DICCCOL IDENTIFICATION
Fig. 2 summarizes the flowchart of the computational framework for the A-DICCCOL identification. In total, there are four
major steps as shown by the numbers: landmark initialization,
landmark optimization, landmark determination, and landmark
prediction. Details will be covered in the subsequent sections.
A. Landmark Initialization
As mentioned in Section I and detailed in [21], the landmark
initialization for our previous DICCCOL system was only based
on randomly sampled grid points (2056) in a template brain.
Then, each grid of initialized landmarks in the template brain
was registered to other subjects using the linear registration
algorithm FSL FLIRT [35], and landmark optimization was
performed afterward [21]. However, the accuracy of landmark initialization across different subjects might be affected
due to the anatomical interindividual variability, and thus, the

landmark optimization procedure might be hampered. In this ADICCCOL discovery framework, we refined the landmark initialization procedure by initializing corresponding landmark on
the same gyrus/sulcus under anatomical guidance across different subjects to improve the accuracy of landmark initialization
and thus to facilitate the landmark optimization and discovery
procedure.
Specifically, first, as mentioned in Section II, ten subjects
were randomly selected from Dataset #1 as the group of model
brains (see Fig. 2) for landmark initialization and the following
group-wise optimization and determination. It is noted that we
randomly selected one of the ten model brains as the template,
and other model brains were linearly registered to it so that
their global shape differences were removed, and their cortical surfaces were in the same space for comparison and landmark initialization. Second, for each model brain, the roughly
anatomically corresponding landmarks on the cortical surfaces
were interactively labeled by two experts and further checked by
the third expert according to the brain template used in the BrainVoyager Brain Tutor (http://www.brainvoyager.com). Specifically, for each clearly identifiable major gyrus/sulcus, a certain
number (ranging from 3–20) of landmarks were selected at cortical surface mesh vertices that are roughly distributed evenly
along the gyral ridge/sulcal valley [36] and are sufficiently dense
to ensure the full coverage of the whole gyral ridge/sulcal valley.
In total, we interactively labeled 594 corresponding landmarks
that fully cover the whole major gyral ridge/sulcal valley for
each of the ten model brains. It should be noted that the number of initialized landmarks that fully cover the whole major
gyral ridge/sulcal valley (here 594) does not affect the following group-wise landmark optimization result, since redundant
landmarks are automatically merged during the optimization
procedure (detailed in Section III-C). It should also be noted
that our aim was not to accurately locate the anatomical correspondence of each landmark due to the highly variability of cortical folding patterns even within the same gyrus/sulcus across
different subjects. We just enforced the roughly macroanatomical (gyri/sulci scale) correspondence for the landmarks to improve the accuracy of landmark initialization compared to the
previous DICCCOL system and further to preserve the same
anatomical identity of roughly corresponding landmarks during landmark optimization. Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the brain
template with labeled major gyri/sulci and the initialized landmarks on gyri/sulci of one model brain, respectively. Fig. 3(c)
shows all initialized 594 corresponding landmarks of three example model brains. These landmarks with rough anatomical
correspondences served as the initial locations for group-wise
optimization in the next step.
B. Structural Connection Pattern Homogeneity
Our prior studies [14], [18], [24] have demonstrated that the
structural connection profile of an ROI could be highly nonlinear, that is, a slight change to the location, size, or shape
of the ROI could significantly alter its DTI-derived fiber connection patterns. Therefore, this high nonlinearity could cause
uncertainties and instabilities in the discovery of consistent and

JIANG et al.: ANATOMY-GUIDED DENSE INDIVIDUALIZED AND COMMON CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL LANDMARKS (A-DICCCOL)

Fig. 3. Visualization of initialized landmarks on the model brains. (a) The
brain template with labeled major gyri, and the corresponding initialized landmarks of one example model brain. (b) The brain template with labeled sulci,
and the corresponding initialized landmarks of the same model brain in (a).
Note that the initialized landmarks on corresponding gyri/sulci in (a) and (b)
are highlighted in the same color with the brain template. (c) All 594 initialized
landmarks in three example model brains.

reproducible connectional landmarks. In this paper, we systematically examined the DTI-derived fiber structural connection
pattern linearity/homogeneity of the cortical surface in detail.
Specifically, first, for each cortical mesh vertex, we extracted
the DTI-derived white matter fiber bundles emanating from it
to represent its structural connection pattern. Second, we used
our recently developed trace-map model [18], [37] to quantitatively represent the fiber bundles. To be self-contained, the
trace-map model projects a fiber bundle into a point distribution
pattern on the standard surface of a unit sphere. One hundred
forty four sample points are then set up on the standard sphere
surface, and the point density of each sample point is calculated.
Thus, a trace map is represented as a 144-dimension histogram
vector, and each dimension is the point density information of
a specific sample point. In this way, the problem of quantitatively comparing the similarities of fiber bundles is effectively
converted to comparing the similarities of 144-dimension tracemap vectors [18], [37]. The major advantage of the trace-map
model is its capability of accurately and compactly modeling
global fiber shape patterns, while allowing for normal local
shape variations [18], [37]. Third, for each cortical mesh vertex,
we defined its structural connection pattern homogeneity as the
similarity between its trace map and the trace maps of its morphological neighboring vertices (3-ring cortical surface mesh,
i.e., about 30 vertices). Specifically, the similarity is calculated
by the Kendall’s coefficient of concordance [38]. Assume that
kij is the location of vertex j in subject i, and tr(kij ) is the 144dimension trace map of kij . Assume that there are Q vertices in
the neighborhood of kij , and they are regarded as the object q to
be ranked. Each of 144 dimensions of trace map is considered
as a judge p [38], and the number of judges is denoted by P (P
= 144). Define object q is given the rank rq ,p by judge p, and
tk is the number of tied ranks in kth of m groups of ties. The
Kendall’s coefficient of concordance of kij is defined as
  12 Q (P rq ,p )2 − 3P 2 Q (Q + 1)2
q =1
p=1

. (1)
W kij =
3
P 2 (Q3 − Q) − P m
k =1 (tk − tk )

1111

Fig. 4. Illustration of structural connection pattern homogeneity. (a) and (b)
Initialized landmark (highlighted by red bubbles) within roughly corresponding
regions (highlighted by black boxes) in two model brains. (c) and (d) Zoomed
views of the roughly corresponding regions within the black boxes in (a) and (b).
Cortical regions are color-coded by structural connection pattern homogeneity
values. The color bar is in the bottom right. The vertices with local maximum
of homogeneity and other example vertices in the 1-ring, 3-ring and 5-ring
neighborhood are shown in red, yellow, green, and purple bubbles, respectively.
The fiber shape patterns of the vertices in the left panel are shown in the right
panel.

The higher the Kendall’s coefficient of concordance value,
the more homogeneous the structural connection pattern of the
vertex.
We calculated the structural connection pattern homogeneity
values by (1) for all vertices of ten model brains. As shown in
Fig. 4(c) and (d), we can see that there are vertices (highlighted
by red bubbles) with local maximum of structural connection
pattern homogeneity within the roughly corresponding cortical regions across different subjects. Moreover, we defined the
distance of trace maps [21] as
N



D(tr, tr ) =

i=1

(tri − tri )2
N

(2)

where tr and tr are two 144-dimension trace maps, tri and tri
are ith elements of tr and tr , and N is the number of trace-map
dimensions (N = 144). We found that the structural connection
patterns among the vertices with local maximum of structural
connection pattern homogeneity (red bubbles) across the ten
model brains have less trace-map distance, i.e., are more similar than those among the vertices in the morphological neighborhood (e.g., in the 1-ring, 3-ring, and 5-ring surface mesh
neighborhood, highlighted by yellow, green, and purple bubbles, respectively, in Fig. 4(c) and (d) of the vertices with local
maximum of structural connection pattern homogeneity. More
results are in Supplemental Figs. 1 and 2. These results suggest
that there are local structural connection pattern homogeneity
peaks within the specific roughly corresponding cortical regions
across different subjects, and importantly, these peaks exhibit
more similar structural connection patterns compared to their
morphological neighborhood. As illustrated previously, the high
nonhomogeneity of structural connection profile of a ROI could
cause uncertainties and instabilities in the discovery of consistent connectional landmarks [14], [18], [24]. Therefore, in this
paper, we assumed that the identified corresponding connectional landmarks should tend to locate at the structural connection pattern homogeneity peaks in its local morphological
neighborhood for all subjects. Our premise is that those corresponding connectional landmarks which locate at the structural
connection pattern homogeneity peaks tend to have less nonhomogeneity and more reproducibility, in that the cortical regions
on which they locate have more homogeneous and stable fiber

1112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

connection patterns, as well as intersubject correspondences.
We will integrate the structural connection pattern homogeneity
information, which was not considered in our previous DICCCOL system, into our A-DICCCOL landmark optimization
procedure which will be detailed in the following section.
C. Landmark Optimization
With the availability of initialized cortical landmarks in
Section III-A, the next step of landmark identification is to
perform landmark optimization by searching all possible combinations of candidate landmark locations within their local morphological neighborhoods in different model brains and seeking
the optimal solution with the specific constraints. In our previous
DICCCOL system, we only considered the DTI-derived fiber
connection pattern similarity, which was defined as the distance
of 144-dimension trace maps [21], as the constraint during landmark optimization to seek the optimal solution of group-wise
fiber connection pattern consistency. In this paper, we substantially improved the landmark optimization procedure by adding
three new meaningful constraints. First, the corresponding landmarks across different model brains should locate on the same
clearly identifiable gyrus/sulcus before and after optimization
in order to preserve the same macroanatomical identity, as discussed in Section III-A. Second, the corresponding landmarks
should tend to locate at the vertices with local maximum of
structural connection pattern homogeneity within the morphological neighborhood, as discussed in Section III-B. Third, the
landmark should move within the morphological neighborhood
of its initial location with a predefined size during optimization
to preserve the globally spatial correspondence on the cortical
surface [16]. These three new constraints/information, as well
as the DTI-derived fiber connection pattern similarity constraint
adopted in previous DICCCOL system [21], were jointly modeled and integrated together to perform landmark optimization.
The goal is to search all possible combinations of candidate
landmark locations within their local morphological neighborhoods in different model brains and to seek the optimal solution
of minimizing the group-wise variance of these four jointly
modeled profiles.
Specifically, assume that there are M model brains, k̃ij is the
initialized location (mesh vertex) of landmark j in brain i, and
kij is the candidate location in its morphological neighborhood
Ck̃ j (k̃ij ∈ Ck̃ j . The maximum principal curvature of kij is repi
i

≥ 0, j ∈ gyrus
[13] and it is used as the
resented by pk j
i
< 0, j ∈ sulcus
anatomical constraint.
First, Es (j) is defined as the structural connection pattern
similarity constraint to ensure that the corresponding landmark
j across M model brains have similar structural connection pattern, which was also adopted in our previous DICCCOL system
[21]
 
 
  
ES (j) = var tr k1j , tr k2j , ..., tr kij

≥ 0, j ∈ gyrus
pk j
i
< 0, j ∈ sulcus

(3)

where tr(kij ) is the 144-dimension vector representing the trace
map of kij as detailed in Section II-D. var(·)is the variance
among all trace-map vectors.
Second, EH (j) is defined as the structural connection pattern homogeneity constraint to ensure that the corresponding
landmark j across M model brains should tend to move toward
the location with local maximum of structural connection pattern homogeneity within its morphological neighborhood Ck̃ j
i
as detailed in Section III-B. After calculating the Kendall’s coefficient of concordance W kij for kij based on (1),

M 
 

≥ 0, j ∈ gyrus
j
1 − W ki
, pk j
(4)
EH (j) =
i
< 0, j ∈ sulcus.
i=1

Third, ED (j) is defined as the landmark spatial constraint to
ensure that the landmark j moves within Ck̃ j during the optimizai
tion procedure to preserve the globally spatial correspondence
on the cortical surface, which is similar to the spatial constraints
used in our recent work [16].

M



≥ 0, j ∈ gyrus
j
j
(5)
dist ki , k̃i , pk j
ED (j) =
i
< 0, j ∈ sulcus
i=1

where dist(·) is the Euclidean distance between kij and k̃ij .
Mathematically, the group-wise variance of these four jointly
modeled profiles is modeled as the energy E that we aim to
minimize as follows based on (3)–(5):
E (j) = λ1 ES (j) + λ2 EH (j) + λ3 ED (j)

≥ 0, j ∈ gyrus
pk j
i
< 0, j ∈ sulcus.

(6)

Here, we have weights λ1 + λ2 + λ3 = 1 (λ1 ,λ2 , and λ3 are
between 0 and 1). Note that we adopted the grid search and tenfold cross validation on ten model brains to find the optimal set
of weights λ1 ,λ2 , and λ3 which have the least trace-map variance
defined in (3) across ten model brains for each landmark. Then,
we searched all possible combinations of candidate landmark
locations kij within their local morphological neighborhoods
Ck̃ j to seek the optimal solution of minimizing E(j).
i
The energy E(j) minimization was solved as follows. For
each iteration, by searching the whole-space of landmarks candidate locations kij in different model brains for one corresponding landmark j, we could find an optimal combination
of landmark locations that minimized E(j). The convergence
criterion is that the Euclidean distance of landmark locations
between two consecutive iterations is less than or equal to ε (ε
= 2 mm, since the Euclidean distance between two adjacent surface mesh vertices is about 2 mm). Notably, for each iteration,
if the distance between two neighboring landmarks that are to
be optimized is less than or equal to a predefined threshold td
(td = 2 mm, since the distance between two adjacent surface
mesh vertices is about 2 mm) across all model brains, we labeled
these two landmarks as “merged,” randomly discarded one of
them in all model brains and only optimized the left one in the
next iteration. In our implementation, we considered about 30
candidate locations (3-ring neighborhood) for each initialized
landmark. The whole algorithm is summarized below.

JIANG et al.: ANATOMY-GUIDED DENSE INDIVIDUALIZED AND COMMON CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL LANDMARKS (A-DICCCOL)

Algorithm I: Landmark Optimization
j
1: Initialization: k̃0i
is the manually initialized location of
landmark j in subject i, iteration number t = 0.
2: argmink j E(j), kij ∈ Ck̃ j
i

0i

i

ti

3: t = t + 1, k̃tji = kij
4: argmink j E(j), kij ∈ Ck̃ j
j
5: If ||k̃tji − k̃t−1
|| > ε
i
6: repeat 3,4
7: end

D. Landmark Determination and Prediction
To examine and ensure the reproducibility of the identified
cortical landmarks, we randomly divided the ten model brains
equally into two groups and performed landmark optimization
in Section III-C separately. As a result, two independent groups
of optimized corresponding connectional landmarks were obtained. Then, for each optimized corresponding landmark in all
of the ten model brains in two groups, we evaluated its consistency using both quantitative (trace-map distance and fiber
connection pattern homogeneity values) and qualitative (visual
inspection) methods similar as in [21] and [16]. In brief, for each
corresponding landmark, we calculated the trace-map distance
defined in (2) between any of the two brains within each of
the two groups, and the mean trace-map distance of two groups
were assessed to verify the similarity of the landmark across
groups of brains [21]. We also assessed the average fiber connection pattern homogeneity values of the landmark in all model
brains to verify if it increased after optimization. Meanwhile, we
used in-house large-scale visualization tool [19] to visually confirm that the landmark preserved the same anatomical identity
after optimization across all model brains. We also checked the
fiber connection patterns in all model brains of two groups. If the
landmark in any of the ten model brains has substantially different fiber shape patterns than others according to [21] and [16]
based on quantitative (trace-map distance and fiber connection
pattern homogeneity values) or qualitative (visual inspection)
measurements, this landmark is discarded. Finally, we retained
555 connectional landmarks which exhibit reasonably accurate
anatomical and connectional consistency across all ten model
brains and named these 555 landmarks as A-DICCCOL. The
visualizations of all 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks have been
released online at http://dicccol.cs.uga.edu.
With the identified 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks, we were
motivated to predict all 555 landmarks in a single subject’s
brain to verify the reproducibility and predictability of the
A-DICCCOL landmarks. The prediction of A-DICCCOL landmarks in a testing brain was similar as the landmark optimization procedure in the Section III-C. First, the testing brain was
linearly registered to the same space of the model brains via
FSL FLIRT, and thus, the A-DICCCOL landmarks in one of the
model brains were roughly initialized in the testing brain. Second, the landmark optimization procedure in Section III-C was
applied to the testing brain based on the optimized A-DICCCOL
landmark locations in ten model brains. Since we already had

1113

the optimized locations of 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks in the
ten model brains, we kept those optimized landmark locations
in all model brains unchanged and only optimized those in the
testing brain by minimizing the energy E defined in (6) across
11 brains (ten model brains and the testing brain). Thus, the
landmark prediction procedure is fast and efficient. Specifically,
assume m1 , m2 , . . . , m10 are the ten model brains and mn is a
testing brain, respectively. The landmark prediction algorithm
is summarized below. It is clear that even though the performance of the prediction algorithm is dependent on the number
of candidate locations in Ck̃ j of mn , it can be finished within
0n
linear time since the locations of A-DICCCOL landmarks of ten
model subjects are unchanged. In practice, predicting all 555 ADICCCOL landmarks in a testing brain takes around 30 min on
a conventional computer at current stage.
Algorithm II: Landmark Prediction
1: mn is linearly registered to m1 and 555 landmarks in m1
are roughly initialized in mn . k̃0j n is the initial location of
landmark j in mn .
2: Construct the new group, including m1 , m2 , . . . , m10 and
j
j
j
, k̃02
, . . . ,k̃010
be unchanged.
mn . Keep k̃01
j
3: argmink nj E (j) , kn ∈ Ck̃ j
0n

4: knj with least E(j) is the predicted location of landmark
j in mn .

IV. RESULTS
The results section includes four sections as follows.
Section IV-A demonstrates the reproducibility and predictability of the 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks. Section IV-B validates
the consistency and stability of 555 landmarks based on HARDI
data and using different fiber tracking software tools. Section
IV-C focuses on the functional annotations of A-DICCCOL
landmarks via T-fMRI data. Section IV-D compares the functional annotation accuracies by 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks
and by image registration algorithms.
A. Reproducibility and Predictability of A-DICCCOL
We optimized and determined 555 consistent and corresponding A-DICCCOL landmarks in ten model brains as detailed in
Section III-C and III-D and further predicted 555 landmarks in
all testing brains in Datasets #1–#4 (see Table I) with DTI data
(including the publicly released large-scale HCP high-quality
DTI data (Q1 release) in Dataset #4) to examine the reproducibility and predictability of 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks.
Fig. 5(a) shows the optimized 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks
(yellow bubbles) in three model brains. As an example, three
of 555 landmarks are randomly selected (highlighted by three
enlarged color bubbles, respectively) for all model brains to examine their anatomical, structural connection pattern similarity,
and homogeneity consistency across different subjects in detail.
First, Fig. 5(b) shows the DTI-derived fiber connection patterns
of the three example landmarks across the three model brains
in Fig. 5(a). By visual inspection, the fiber connection patterns

1114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 6. One example of 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks. Row 1–3 show the fiber
structural connection patterns of the same landmark before optimization in four
model brains, after optimization in four model brains, and in four testing brains,
respectively. The landmarks are shown by the yellow bubbles.

Fig. 5. 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks in model brains [see Fig. 5(a)–(d)] and
testing brains [see Fig. 5(e)–(h)], respectively. (a) and (h) Optimized 555 landmarks in three model brains and three testing brains, respectively. Three example
corresponding A-DICCCOL landmarks (highlighted by enlarged color bubbles)
are selected for all model brains and testing brains. (b) and (e) DTI-derived fiber
connection patterns of the three example landmarks across the three model
brains and three testing brains, respectively. In each figure, each row represents
a corresponding landmark in three model brains/testing brains. (c) Optimized
locations (color bubbles) and initial locations (white bubbles) of the three landmarks on the three model brains’ cortical surfaces which are color-coded by
structural connection pattern homogeneity value. Each row represents a corresponding landmark in three model brains. The color bar is at the bottom.
(d) Optimized locations (color bubbles) and initial locations (white bubbles)
of the three landmarks on the three model brains’ cortical surfaces which are
color-coded by the maximal principal curvature value. Each row represents a
corresponding landmark in three model brains. The color bar is at the bottom. (f)
Predicted locations (color bubbles) of the three landmarks on the three testing
brains’ cortical surfaces which are color-coded by structural connection pattern
homogeneity value. Each row represents a corresponding landmark in three
testing brains. The color bar is at the top. (g) Predicted locations (color bubbles)
of the three landmarks on the three testing brains’ cortical surfaces which are
color-coded by the maximal principal curvature value. Each row represents a
corresponding landmark in three testing brains. The color bar is at the top.

of the same landmark across three model brains are similar.
Quantitatively, the average trace-map distance calculated by (2)
is 2.08, 2.18, and 2.15 within and across two groups of all
ten model brains, respectively, which are considered as quite
low [18], [21]. Moreover, the consistency of fiber structural
connection pattern of corresponding landmarks across different subjects is significantly improved and shows group-wise
consistency after landmark optimization than that of initialization, as illustrated in Fig. 6. To illustrate the effectiveness of
fiber connection patterns, we also performed cortical registration via FreeSurfer based on the initialized locations of 555
A-DICCCOL landmarks on the ten model brains. In this way,
we obtained a new set of 555 landmarks for each brain. Then, for

each pair of corresponding landmarks based on cortical registration and the A-DICCCOL system, we calculated the Euclidean
distance between the two landmarks. On average, the distance
of all 555 landmarks across ten model brains is 1.54 mm, indicating that the 555 A-DICCCOL landmark locations indeed
moved after adding meaningful fiber connection patterns constraints than merely anatomical constraints to improve the fiber
connection correspondence. Second, in Fig. 5(c), the cortical
surfaces are color-coded by structural connection pattern homogeneity values as illustrated in Section III-B. We can see that
after landmark optimization, the three landmarks all converged
to the locations (highlighted by the colored bubbles, respectively) with higher structural connection pattern homogeneity
values than that of their initial locations (white bubbles), respectively. Supplemental Fig. 3 shows the mean structural connection pattern homogeneity values of all 555 landmarks in all
ten model brains before and after optimization. We can see that
mean homogeneity value increases after landmark optimization.
Third, in Fig. 5(d), the cortical surfaces are color-coded by the
maximum principal curvature value to indicate the gyri/sulci
identity [13]. We can see that after optimization, the locations
of three landmarks all maintained the same anatomical profiles
as their initial locations, respectively. Finally, all of the 555 ADICCCOL landmarks were evaluated and confirmed to possess
the anatomical, structural connection pattern consistency across
all model brains. The visualizations of structural connection
patterns of all 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks have been released
online at http://dicccol.cs.uga.edu.
Moreover, Fig. 5(h) shows the predicted 555 A-DICCCOL
landmarks (yellow bubbles) in randomly selected three testing
brains. The same three of 555 landmarks as in model brains
[see Fig. 5(a)] are also selected (highlighted by the same three
enlarged color bubbles, respectively) for the testing brains to
examine their anatomical, structural connection pattern similarity, and homogeneity consistency across model brains and

JIANG et al.: ANATOMY-GUIDED DENSE INDIVIDUALIZED AND COMMON CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL LANDMARKS (A-DICCCOL)

testing brains in detail. First, Fig. 5(e) shows the DTI-derived
fiber connection patterns of the same three landmarks across the
three testing brains in Fig. 5(h). By visual inspection, the fiber
connection patterns of the same landmark across three testing
brains [see Fig. 5(e)] as well as three model brains [Fig. 5(b)]
are similar. Quantitatively, the average trace-map distance calculated by (2) is 2.14 within the three testing brains, which is
similar as those in model brains and are considered as quite
low [18], [21]. Second, in Fig. 5(f), the cortical surfaces are
color-coded by structural connection pattern homogeneity values. We can see that the predicted three landmarks are all at
the locations (highlighted by the colored bubbles, respectively)
with high structural connection pattern homogeneity values in
its morphological neighborhood, respectively. Note that the initial locations (white bubbles) of landmarks in model brains [see
Fig. 5(c)] which are used to illustrate the effectiveness of our
landmark optimization procedure are not shown in the testing
brains in Fig. 5(f). Third, in Fig. 5(g), the cortical surfaces
are color-coded by the maximum principal curvature value to
indicate the gyri/sulci identity [13]. We can see that the locations of three predicted landmarks all maintained the same
anatomical profiles as those in model brains [Fig. 5(d)], respectively. Note that the initial locations (white bubbles) of
landmarks in model brains [see Fig. 5(d)] which are used to
illustrate the effectiveness of our landmark optimization procedure are not shown in the testing brains in Fig. 5(g). Moreover,
Fig. 7 shows the fiber structural connection patterns of two examples of 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks in both model brains
and testing brains of Datasets #1–#4 (see Table I) (including the
publicly released large-scale HCP high-quality DTI data (Q1 release) in Dataset #4), respectively. We can see that the predicted
A-DICCCOL landmarks possess structural connection pattern
consistency across model brains and different testing brains including the publicly released HCP high-quality DTI data (Q1
release). More examples are in Supplemental Fig. 4. Finally,
all of the 555 predicted A-DICCCOL landmarks were evaluated and confirmed to possess the structural connection pattern
consistency across all model brains and about 120 testing brains
(see Section II) including the publicly released HCP high-quality
DTI data (Q1 release), indicating that the A-DICCCOL system
is reproducible, predictable, and reasonably represents common
cortical architectures with anatomical and structural connection
pattern consistency across different subjects and populations.
B. Consistency of Landmarks in HARDI Data and Using
Different Fiber Tracking Software Tools
In this section, we examined the consistency of 555 DTIderived A-DICCCOL landmarks in HARDI data (Dataset #5 in
Table I) because of its superior quality and capability of dealing with crossing fibers [39]. Moreover, since our A-DICCCOL
landmarks identification depends on fiber structural connection
patterns which might be affected by different fiber tracking
strategies and software tools, we adopted five different fiber
tracking software toolkits or parameter settings which more adequately account for crossing fibers [34] on HARDI data to
examine the consistency of the 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks.

1115

Fig. 7. (a) and (b) Two examples of 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks in both
model brains and testing brains of four different datasets (see Table I), respectively. Note that Dataset #4 is the publicly released large-scale HCP high-quality
DTI data (Q1 release). In each figure, the first column shows the fiber structural
connection patterns of the same corresponding landmark in three example model
brains, respectively. The second to fifth rows are the fiber structural connection
patterns of the same predicted A-DICCCOL landmark in three example testing
brains of Datasets #1–#4 (see Table I), respectively. The landmarks are shown
by the yellow bubbles.

Note that these validations were not considered in our previous DICCCOL system [21]. Specifically, first, we initialized
555 optimized A-DICCCOL connectional landmarks on all five
brains with HARDI data by linear registration (FSL FLIRT).
Second, five different fiber tracking software toolkits or parameter settings (including MRtrix [40] with three parameter settings (fiber bundle number is 10 000, 50 000, and 100 000,
respectively), MEDINRIA based on q-ball imaging, and
DTIStudio) were adopted to perform streamline fiber tracking
on the HARDI data, respectively. Third, the landmark optimization procedure in Section III-C was applied to the five brains
based on different fiber tracking software tools, respectively.
Fig. 8 shows the covisualization of 555 optimized landmarks
based on DTI/HARDI data and using different fiber tracking
software tools, respectively. Quantitatively, we mapped all 555
landmarks in ten model brains and five HARDI brains using different fiber tracking software tools to the same space via linear
transformation and calculated the mean distance of any pair of
locations for each corresponding landmark. The overall mean

1116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 8. Covisualization of 555 optimized landmarks based on different fiber
tracking software tools and using HARDI data, respectively. (a) 555 optimized
landmarks (orange bubbles) on the five model brains based on DTI data and
MEDINRIA software. (b) 555 optimized landmarks on the five HARDI brains
using different fiber tracking software tools are highlighted by red, yellow,
green, blue, and purple bubbles, respectively.

distance for all landmarks is 4.37 mm, which is relatively small.
In conclusion, the 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks are reasonably
stable and consistent across subjects using DTI/HARDI data
and different fiber tracking software tools.
C. Functional Annotations of A-DICCCOL
Similarly as in [21], the major objective of performing functional annotations of A-DICCCOL landmarks in this section is
to demonstrate that A-DICCCOL landmarks with reasonably
consistent anatomical, fiber structural connection pattern similarity, and homogeneity consistency also possess corresponding functional localizations. Specifically, first, similar to those
in [18], [21], and [24], both group-level and individual-level
fMRI activation peaks were detected by the traditional and
well-established general linear model (GLM) via FSL FEAT
and selected based on the five different task fMRI datasets in
Section II (working memory, emotion, fear, semantic decision
making, and empathy). Second, the group-level activation peaks
were transformed back to each individual subject’s space using
the transformations derived from structural registrations via the
FSL FLIRT [35]. The activation peaks that existed in both the
group-wise map and individual map (defined if the distances between closest peaks are less than 8 mm) and were generated by
the traditional and well-established GLM method can be used
as the benchmark functional locations for each of brain activation maps [21]. Supplemental Fig. 5 shows one example of
the group-level and individual-level fMRI activation peaks derived from the working memory task-based functional activation
maps. In total, we identified 46 functional activation peaks from
the five task-based functional activation maps. Third, as the 555
A-DICCCOL landmarks were identified in the DTI image space,
all fMRI-derived functional peaks were mapped to the DTI space
using the transformations derived from corresponding fMRI to
DTI image registrations via the FSL FLIRT [24], [35]. Finally,
we mapped each corresponding fMRI-derived functional peak
to 555 A-DICCCOL maps via similar methods in [21]. More
details are in supplemental materials. It is interesting that 46
A-DICCCOL landmarks were annotated and consistently colocalized in one or more 46 identified functional activation peaks
across different subjects and/or populations as shown in Fig. 9.
To quantitatively evaluate the functional annotation accuracy of

Fig. 9. Functional annotations of A-DICCCOL landmarks based on 46 fMRIderived functional activation peaks (a) and (e). (a) Semantic decision making,
(b) emotion, (c) empathy, (d) fear, and (e) working memory activation map,
respectively. In each figure, the functional activation peaks are highlighted by
white bubbles, while the corresponding annotated A-DICCCOL landmarks are
highlighted in other color bubbles. The mean distance and standard deviation
between each pair of functional activation peak and annotated landmark are
shown in the histogram in the bottom panel, in which the horizontal axis indexes
activation peaks and the vertical axis represents the distance (mm). (f) All of the
functionally annotated landmarks and the mean distance and standard deviation
of each functional activation map.

the A-DICCCOLs, we measured the Euclidean distance between
each annotated A-DICCCOL landmark and corresponding functional activation peak and reported the results in Fig. 9. Figs.
9(a) and (e) represents the results for semantic decision making
[see Fig. 9(a)], emotion [see Fig. 9(b)], empathy [see Fig. 9(c)],
fear [see Fig. 9(d)], and working memory [see Fig. 9(e)] activation map, respectively. In each figure, the functional activation
peaks are highlighted by white bubbles, while the corresponding annotated A-DICCCOL landmarks are highlighted in other
colors. The mean distance and standard deviation between each
pair of functional peak and annotated landmark are shown in the
histogram. The mean distances for the five functional activation
maps are 6.27, 5.68, 6.38, 5.91, and 6.33 mm, respectively.
Fig. 9(f) shows all of the functionally annotated A-DICCCOL
landmarks, and the mean distance and standard deviation of each
activation map are illustrated in the histogram. On average, the
distance is 6.11 mm. The distances of each pair of functional
activation peak and annotated A-DICCCOL landmark in all subjects are shown in Supplemental Fig. 6. Furthermore, we measured the functional annotation accuracy of the same identified
functional activation peaks by our previous DICCCOL [21] to
have a comparison with A-DICCCOL. Specifically, for previous
DICCCOL, the mean distances for the five task fMRI datasets
are 6.50, 6.12, 5.93, 6.25, and 6.41 mm, respectively. On average, the distance is 6.24 mm. We can see that A-DICCCOL has
higher functional annotation accuracy than previous DICCCOL.
Moreover, we compared the mean distance of each functional
activation peak of all five functional activation maps with the

JIANG et al.: ANATOMY-GUIDED DENSE INDIVIDUALIZED AND COMMON CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL LANDMARKS (A-DICCCOL)

corresponding annotated A-DICCCOL landmark before and after optimization and generated by a random perturbation. The
results are 6.78, 6.11, and 7.12 mm, respectively, indicating that
in general, our optimized A-DICCCOL landmarks have better functional annotation accuracy than the landmarks before
optimization or generated by a random perturbation. In conclusion, for each of the annotated 46 A-DICCCOL landmarks,
it is reasonably consistently colocalized with a specific functional activation peak across most of the subjects, indicating
that the A-DICCCOL system which has anatomical and structural connection pattern consistency also reasonably represents
functional correspondences across different subjects and populations.
D. Comparisons With Image Registration Algorithms
We compared the functional annotation accuracies of functional activation peaks by our A-DICCCOL landmarks and with
those by five representative different volumetric/surface registration algorithms. For volumetric registration, we adopted four
algorithms including one linear (FSL FLIRT [35]) and three nonlinear ones (FSL FNIRT [41], ANTS [5], and HAMMER [3]).
For surface-based registration, we used the FreeSurfer nonlinear
algorithm [42]. The working memory functional activation map
regions [see Fig. 9(e)] were used as the benchmark for comparisons here. Specifically, the A-DICCCOL annotation error is
defined as the mean Euclidean distance between each pair of the
annotated A-DICCCOL landmark and corresponding functional
activation peak. The image registration based annotation error is
defined as the mean Euclidean distance between the transformed
fMRI activation peaks from individual brains to the MNI standard space via different registration methods and the centers of
these multiple brains’ transformed fMRI activation peaks. The
detailed results are summarized in Supplemental Fig. 7. The
average annotation errors in all subjects by the six methods (our
A-DICCCOL landmarks, FLIRT, FNIRT, ANTS, HAMMER,
and FreeSurfer) are 6.33, 7.76, 8.01, 7.74, 7.73 and 7.16 mm,
respectively. The results show that our A-DICCCOL landmarks
have higher functional annotation accuracy than these five image registration algorithms. It should be pointed out that the
above compared image registration algorithms were designed
for anatomical alignments, but not specifically for cortical landmark localization. If those image registration algorithms are
optimized by taking the advantage of multimodal data in the future, their accuracies for landmark localization could be better
than what was reported in this paper.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel approach that identified 555 connectional cortical landmarks that turn out to
be reproducible, predictable, and exhibit reasonably accurate
anatomical, fiber connection pattern similarity, and homogeneity consistency across individuals and populations. We initialized the connectional landmarks under anatomical guidance,
added meaningful anatomical, structural connection pattern
homogeneity, and spatial information into the following groupwise landmark optimization procedure, and applied the pro-

1117

posed connectional landmark discovery procedures on recently
publicly released large-scale HCP high-quality DTI dataset, as
well as HARDI data via different fiber tracking software tools
to examine the consistency and stability of the DTI-derived
connectional landmarks. Moreover, a portion of the connectional landmarks were functionally annotated by five functional
activation maps derived from task fMRI datasets, demonstrating the reasonably functional correspondences of our connectional landmarks. We named these 555 connectional landmarks,
which were generated by different and substantially improved
strategies and procedures from our previous DICCCOL system
[21], as anatomy-guided DICCCOL or A-DICCCOL. This ADICCCOL system can be potentially used to report, integrate,
transfer, and compare different measurements of the structural
and functional properties of the brain, e.g., morphological measurements derived from structural MRI data and functional measurements derived from resting state fMRI data [20].
The presented A-DICCCOL system can be possibly further
improved in the following directions in the future. First, we covisualized A-DICCCOL and previous DICCCOL on the same
brains and found that there are ten landmarks overlapped (Supplemental Fig. 8). Our interpretations are: 1) the A-DICCCOLs
were interactively initialized along the gyral ridge/sulcal valley, while the initialization of previous DICCCOL was merely
based on randomly sampled grid points and did not integrate rich
anatomic information as we discussed in Section I in detail. In
this way, the A-DICCCOL system can discover many landmarks
on the gyral crowns and sulci fundi, which the previous DICCCOL initialization procedure based on linear registration could
have possibly missed. 2) There are potentially previous DICCCOL landmarks located in the banks between gyral crowns and
sulcal fundi that cannot be discovered by A-DICCCOL. Since
the proposed A-DICCCOL system and our previous DICCCOL
system use different discovery routines, the spatial localization
difference between these two sets of landmarks is reasonable.
In the future, we can potentially integrate parts of the strategies adopted in these two systems together to identify more
consistent connectional landmarks. We believe that the identified 555 landmarks in A-DICCCOL are still a portion of all
consistent landmarks across human brains. For example, the random initialization used in our previous DICCCOL system might
be implemented prudentially to complement the interactive initialization in our A-DICCCOL system by considering landmark
initialization positions in the banks in-between the gyral crowns
and sulcal fundi. In this case, additional consistent connectional
landmarks can be possibly discovered in cortical regions that
A-DICCCOL has not considered. Moreover, there might potentially be more consistent cortical landmarks to be identified and
discovered in the future, if we improve our discovery procedures
in other aspects. For instance, an improvement we can possibly
make is to integrate additional constraints into the optimization
procedure, e.g., functional homogeneity [43], in the future.
Second, the functional annotations of A-DICCCOL landmarks are still far from being comprehensive and systematic. In
this work, we used five T-fMRI datasets to explore the functional
correspondences and annotations of a small portion of these
555 DTI-derived consistent landmarks. Though the preliminary

1118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

results are encouraging, in the future, more specific, largescale task fMRI datasets should be designed and performed
for the purpose of functional annotation of our A-DICCCOL
landmarks, since the five T-fMRI datasets used in this paper
were not aiming for functional annotation purpose initially, thus
only annotated a small subset of all 555 A-DICCCOL landmarks. In addition, we can consider leveraging existing rich
fMRI literature and existing databases such as the BrainMap
data [44] to perform functional annotations of the discovered ADICCCOL landmarks. As a result, the functional meanings of
the A-DICCCOL landmarks can be then interpreted and applied
in neuroscience applications. Once the anatomical, DTI-derived
fiber structural connection pattern, and functional correspondences of the A-DICCCOL landmarks are established across
individuals and populations, the A-DICCCOL system will offer
a general platform to examine functional interaction [45] and
dynamics [46] of the brain.
This paper has been focused on the presentation of methodologies and validation studies of the A-DICCCOL system, and
the potential of its application in neuroscience and neuroimaging fields will be left to our future studies. For instances, the ADICCCOL-based representation of large-scale reasonably common structural cortical architecture may provide opportunities
for many basic science and clinical applications such as mapping human brain connectomes [21], [47]–[51] and elucidations
of possible large-scale connectivity alterations in brain diseases
[20], [52]–[55]. In short, the A-DICCCOL-based representation
of reasonably common cortical architecture offers a principled
approach and a generic platform to share, exchange, integrate,
and compare multimodal neuroimaging datasets across laboratories, and we predict that public release of our A-DICCCOL
system (http://dicccol.cs.uga.edu) will stimulate and enable various collaborative efforts in brain sciences, as well as contributing to data-driven discovery brain imaging studies. For instance,
different labs and researchers can contribute their multimodal
DTI and fMRI datasets to further perform functional annotations and validation of those A-DICCCOL landmarks in healthy
brains and tailor them toward different brain disease populations
(e.g., [20]), for the purpose of studying functions and dysfunctions of the human brain.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank C. Faraco and L. S. Miller
for sharing the working memory task design and the associated
DTI/T-fMRI data.
REFERENCES
[1] P. M. Thompson and A. W. Toga, “A surface-based technique for 1336
warping 3-dimensional images of the brain,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1–16, Aug. 1996.
[2] B. Fischl, D. H. Salat, E. Busa, and M. Albert, “Whole brain segmentation:
Automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain,”
Neuron, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 341–355, 2002.
[3] D. Shen and C. Davatzikos, “HAMMER: hierarchical attribute matching
mechanism for elastic registration,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21,
no. 11, pp. 1421–1439, Nov. 2002.

[4] D. C. Van Essen and D. L. Dierker, “Surface-based and probabilistic
atlases of primate cerebral cortex,” Neuron, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 209–225,
2007.
[5] B. B. Avants, C. L. Epstein, M. Grossman, and J. C. Gee, “Symmetric
diffeomorphic image registration with cross-correlation: Evaluating automated labeling of elderly and neurodegenerative brain,” Med. Image Anal.,
vol. 12, pp. 26–41, 2008.
[6] H. Jia, G. Wu, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “ABSORB: Atlas building by
self-organized registration and bundling,” NeuroImage, vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 1057–1070, 2010.
[7] P. Yap, J. H. Gilmore, W. Lin, and D. Shen, “POPTRACT: Populationbased tractography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1829–
1840, Oct. 2011.
[8] P. Zhang and T. F. Cootes, “Automatic part selection for groupwise registration,” Inform. Process. Med. Imag., vol. 6801, pp. 85–96, 2011.
[9] A. J. Asman and B. A. Landman, “Characterizing spatially varying performance to improve multi-atlas multi-label segmentation,” Inform. Process.
Med. Imag., vol. 6801, pp. 85–96, 2011.
[10] M. E. Rettmann, X. Han, C. Xu, and J. L. Prince, “Automated sulcal
segmentation using watersheds on the cortical surface,” NeuroImage,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 329–344, 2002.
[11] J. B. H. Behrens, T. E. J. Robson, M. D. Drobnjak, I. Rushworth,
M. F. S. Brady, J. M. Smith, S. M. Higham, and D. J. Matthews, “Changes
in connectivity profiles define functionally distinct regions in human medial frontal cortex,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 101, pp. 13335–13340,
2004.
[12] S. Jbabdi, M. W. Woolrich, and T. E. J. Behrens, “Multiple-subjects
connectivity-based parcellation using hierarchical dirichlet process mixture models,” NeuroImage, vol. 44, pp. 373–384, 2009.
[13] G. Li, L. Guo, J. Nie, and T. Liu, “Automatic cortical sulcal parcellation
based on surface principal direction flow field tracking,” NeuroImage,
vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 923–937, 2009.
[14] T. Liu, “A few thoughts on brain ROIs,” Brain Imag. Behav., vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 189–202, 2011.
[15] R. A. Poldrack, “The future of fMRI in cognitive neuroscience,” NeuroImage, vol. 62, pp. 1216–1220, 2011.
[16] K. Li, L. Guo, D. Zhu, X. Hu, J. Han, and T. Liu, “Individual functional
roi optimization via maximization of group-wise consistency of structural
and functional profiles,” Neuroinformatics, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 225–242,
2012.
[17] T. Zhang, L. Guo, K. Li, C. Jing, X. Hu, G. Cui, L. Li, and T. Liu,
“Predicting functional cortical ROIs via DTI-derived fiber shape models,”
Cerebral Cortex, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 854–864, 2012.
[18] D. Zhu, K. Li, C. Faraco, F. Deng, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, H. Chen, L. Guo,
S. Miller, and T. Liu, “Discovering dense and consistent landmarks in the
brain,” Inform. Process. Med. Imag., vol. 22, pp. 97–110, 2011.
[19] K. Li, L. Guo, C. Faraco, D. Zhu, H. Chen, Y. Yuan, J. Lv, F. Deng,
X. Jiang, T. Zhang, X. Hu, D. Zhang, L. S. Miller, and T. Liu, “Visual
analytics of brain networks,” NeuroImage, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 82–97, 2012.
[20] K. Li, D. Zhu, L. Guo, Z. Li, M. E. Lynch, C. Coles, X. Hu, and
T. Liu, “Connectomics signatures of prenatal cocaine exposure affected
adolescent brains,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 2494–2510,
2012.
[21] D. Zhu, K. Li, L. Guo, X. Jiang, T. Zhang, D. Zhang, H. Chen, F. Deng,
C. Faraco, C. Jin, C. Wee, Y. Yuan, P. Lv, Y. Yin, X. Hu, L. Duan,
X. Hu, J. Han, L. Wang, D. Shen, L. S. Miller, L. Li, and T. Liu, “DICCCOL: Dense individualized and common connectivity-based cortical
landmarks,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 786–800, 2013.
[22] Z. M. Saygin, D. E. Osher, K. Koldewyn, G. Reynolds, J. D. Gabrieli, and
R. R. Saxe, “Anatomical connectivity patterns predict face selectivity in
the fusiform gyrus,” Nat. Neurosci., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 321–327, 2011.
[23] C. J. Honey, O. Sporns, L. Cammoun, X. Gigandet, J. P. Thiran, R. Meuli,
and P. Hagmann, “Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity
from structural connectivity,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, no. 6,
pp. 2035–2040, 2009.
[24] K. Li, L. Guo, C. Faraco, D. Zhu, D. Deng, T. Zhang, X. Jiang, D. Zhang,
H. Chen, H. Hu, L. S. Miller, and T. Liu, “Individualized ROI optimization
via maximization of group-wise consistency of structural and functional
profiles,” Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 23, pp. 1369–1377, 2010.
[25] R. E. Passingham, K. E. Stephan, and R. Kotter, “The anatomical basis of
functional localization in the cortex,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 3, no. 8,
pp. 606–616, 2002.
[26] K. Uğurbil, J. Xu, E. J. Auerbach, S. Moeller, A. T. Vu, J. M. DuarteCarvajalino, C. Lenglet, X. Wu, S. Schmitter, P. F. Van de Moortele,
J. Strupp, G. Sapiro, F. De Martino, D. Wang, N. Harel, M. Garwood,

JIANG et al.: ANATOMY-GUIDED DENSE INDIVIDUALIZED AND COMMON CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL LANDMARKS (A-DICCCOL)

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]

[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]
[39]

[40]
[41]

L. Chen, D. A. Feinberg, S. M. Smith, K. L. Miller, S. N. Sotiropoulos,
S. Jbabdi, J. L. Andersson, T. E. Behrens, M. F. Glasser, D. C. Van Essen,
E. Yacoub, WU-Minn HCP Consortium, “Pushing spatial and temporal
resolution for functional and diffusion MRI in the human connectome
project,” Neuroimage, vol. 80, pp. 80–104, 2013.
C. C. Faraco, N. Unsworth, J. Langley, D. Terry, K. Li, D. Zhang,
T. Liu, and L. S. Miller, “Complex span tasks and hippocampal recruitment during working memory,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 773–787,
2011.
D. Sabatinelli, P. J. Lang, M. M. Bradley, V. D. Costa, and A. Keil, “The
timing of emotional discrimination in human amygdala and ventral visual
cortex,” J. Neurosci., vol. 29, no. 47, pp. 14864–14868, 2009.
D. D. Langleben, J. W. Loughead, K. Ruparel, J. G. Hakun,
S. Busch-Winokur, M. B. Holloway, A. A. Strasser, J. N. Cappella, and
C. Lerman, “Reduced prefrontal and temporal processing and recall of
high “sensation value” ads,” NeuroImage, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 219–225,
2009.
N. A. Dennis, J. N. Browndyke, J. Stokes, A. Need, J. R. Burke,
K. A. Welsh-Bohmer, and R. Cabeza, “Temporal lobe functional activity and connectivity in young adult APOE 34 carriers,” Alzheimer’s &
Dementia, vol. 6, pp. 303–311, 2010.
J. Nie, L. Guo, K. Li, Y. Wang, G. Chen, L. Li, H. Chen, F. Deng, X. Jiang,
T. Zhang, L. Huang, C. Faraco, D. Zhang, C. Guo, P. Yap, X. Hu, G. Li,
J. Lv, Y. Yuan, D. Zhu, J. Han, D. Sabatinelli, Q. Zhao, L. S. Miller, B. Xu,
P. Shen, S. Platt, D. Shen, X. Hu, and T. Liu, “Axonal fiber terminations
concentrate on gyri,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2831–2839,
2012.
T. Liu, H. Li, K. Wong, A. Tarokh, L. Guo, and S. Wong, “Brain tissue
segmentation based on DTI data,” NeuroImage, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 114–
123, 2007.
T. Liu, J. Nie, A. Tarokh, L. Guo, and S. Wong, “Reconstruction of
central cortical surface from mri brain images: Method and application,”
NeuroImage, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 991–1002, 2008.
P. Fillard, M. Descoteaux, A. Goh, S. Gouttard, B. Jeurissen, J. Malcolm, A. Ramirez-Manzanares, M. Reisert, K. Sakaie, F. Tensaouti, T. Yo,
J. F. Mangin, and C. Poupon, “Quantitative evaluation of 10 tractography
algorithms on a realistic diffusion MR phantom,” Neuroimage, vol. 56,
no. 1, pp. 220–234, 2011.
M. Jenkinson and S. M. Smith, “A global optimisation method for robust
affine registration of brain images,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 143–156, 2001.
F. Deng, X. Jiang, D. Zhu, T. Zhang, K. Li, L. Guo, and T. Liu, “A
functional model of cortical gyri and sulci,” Brain Struct. Funct., vol. 219,
pp. 1473–1491, 2014.
D. Zhu, K. Li, C. Faraco, F. Deng, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, H. Chen, L. Guo,
L. Miller, and T. Liu, “Optimization of functional brain rois via maximization of consistency of structural connectivity profiles,” NeuroImage,
vol. 59, pp. 1382–1393, 2011.
S. Siegel and N. J. Castellan, Jr., Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1988,
p. 266.
D. S. Tuch, T. G. Reese, M. R. Wiegell, N. Makris, J. W. Belliveau, and
V. J. Wedeen, “High angular resolution diffusion imaging reveals intravoxel white matter fiber heterogeneity,” Magn. Res. Med., vol. 48, no. 4,
pp. 577–582, 2002.
J. D. Tournier, F. Calamante, and A. Connelly, “MRtrix: Diffusion tractography in crossing fiber regions,” Int. J. Imag. Syst. Technol., vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 53–66, 2012.
M. Jenkinson, C. F. Beckmann, T. E. Behrens, M. W. Woolrich, and S. M.
Smith, “FSL,” Neuro Image, vol. 62, pp. 782–790, 2012.

1119

[42] B. Fischl, M. I. Sereno, R. B. Tootell, and A. M. Dale, “High-resolution
intersubject averaging and a coordinate system for the cortical surface,”
Human Brain Mapping, vol. 8, pp. 272–284, 1999.
[43] R. C. Craddock, G. A. James, P. E. Holtzheimer III, X. P. Hu, and
H. S. Mayberg, “A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 33, no. 8,
pp. 1914–1928, 2012.
[44] A. R. Laird, S. B. Eickhoff, F. Kurth, P. M. Fox, A. M. Uecker,
J. A. Turner, J. L. Robinson, J. L. Lancaster, and P. T. Fox, “ALE metaanalysis workflows via the BrainMap database: Progress towards a probabilistic functional brain atlas,” Neuroinformatics, vol. 3, pp. 23, 2009.
[45] J. Sun, X. Hu, X. Huang, Y. Liu, K. Li, X. Li, J. Han, L. Guo, T. Liu, and
J. Zhang, “Inferring consistent functional interaction patterns from natural
stimulus FMRI data,” in press, NeuroImage, 2012.
[46] X. Hu, L. Guo, D. Zhang, K. Li, T. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Han, and T. Liu,
“Assessing the dynamics on functional brain networks using spectral graph
theory,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2011, pp. 2144–2149.
[47] R. Williams, “The human connectome: just another ‘ome,” Lancet Neurol.,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 238–239, 2010.
[48] D. N. Kennedy, “Making connections in the connectome era,” Neuroinformatics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 61–62, 2010.
[49] B. B. Biswal, M. Mennes, X. N. Zuo, S. Gohel, C. Kelly, S. M. Smith,
C. F. Beckmann, J. S. Adelstein, R. L. Buckner, S. Colcombe,
A. M. Dogonowski, M. Ernst, D. Fair, M. Hampson, M. J. Hoptman,
J. S. Hyde, V. J. Kiviniemi, R. Kötter, S. J. Li, C. P. Lin, M. J. Lowe,
C. Mackay, D. J. Madden, K. H. Madsen, D. S. Margulies,
H. S. Mayberg, K. McMahon, C. S. Monk, S. H. Mostofsky, B. J. Nagel,
J. J. Pekar, S. J. Peltier, S. E. Petersen, V. Riedl, S. A. Rombouts,
B. Rypma, B. L. Schlaggar, S. Schmidt, R. D. Seidler, G. J. Siegle,
C. Sorg, G. J. Teng, J. Veijola, A. Villringer, M. Walter, L. Wang,
X. C. Weng, S. Whitfield-Gabrieli, P. Williamson, C. Windischberger,
Y. F. Zang, H. Y. Zhang, F. X. Castellanos, and M. P. Milham, “Toward
discovery science of human brain function,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. United
States Amer., vol. 107, no. 10, pp. 4734–4739, 2010.
[50] K. R. Van Dijk, T. Hedden, A. Venkataraman, K. C. Evans, S. W. Lazar,
and R. L. Buckner, “Intrinsic functional connectivity as a tool for human
connectomics: Theory, properties, and optimization,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 297–321, 2010.
[51] P. Hagmann, L. Cammoun, X. Gigandet, S. Gerhard, P. E. Grant,
V. Wedeen, R. Meuli, J. P. Thiran, C. J. Honey, and O. Sporns, “MR
connectomics: Principles and challenges,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 194,
pp. 34–45, 2010.
[52] M. K. Suvak and L. F. Barrett, “Considering PTSD from the perspective
of brain processes: A psychological construction approach,” J. Trauma
Stress., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 3–24, 2011.
[53] B. C. Dickerson and R. A. Sperling, “Large-scale functional brain network
abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease: Insights from functional neuroimaging,” Behav. Neurol., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 63–75, 2009.
[54] W. W. Seeley, R. K. Crawford, J. Zhou, B. L. Miller, and M. D. Greicius,
“Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks,”
Neuron, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 42–52, 2009.
[55] K. Supekar, V. Menon, D. Rubin, M. Musen, and M. D. Greicius, “Network
analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease,”
PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 4, no. 6, p. e1000100, 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

