322

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Laryngeal Tumor Detection and Classification
in Endoscopic Video
Corina Barbalata and Leonardo S. Mattos, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The development of the narrow-band imaging (NBI)
has been increasing the interest of medical specialists in the study
of laryngeal microvascular network to establish diagnosis without
biopsy and pathological examination. A possible solution to this
challenging problem is presented in this paper, which proposes an
automatic method based on anisotropic filtering and matched filter to extract the lesion area and segment blood vessels. Lesion
classification is then performed based on a statistical analysis of
the blood vessels’ characteristics, such as thickness, tortuosity, and
density. Here, the presented algorithm is applied to 50 NBI endoscopic images of laryngeal diseases and the segmentation and
classification accuracies are investigated. The experimental results
show the proposed algorithm provides reliable results, reaching
an overall classification accuracy rating of 84.3%. This is a highly
motivating preliminary result that proves the feasibility of the new
method and supports the investment in further research and development to translate this study into clinical practice. Furthermore, to our best knowledge, this is the first time image processing
is used to automatically classify laryngeal tumors in endoscopic
videos based on tumor vascularization characteristics. Therefore,
the introduced system represents an innovation in biomedical and
health informatics.
Index Terms—Blood vessel segmentation, computer-aided diagnosis, laryngoscopy, lesion detection, narrow-band imaging (NBI),
shape analysis, visual biopsy.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATHOLOGICAL changes to blood vessel networks are
observed as a consequence of many laryngeal diseases.
Even the tiniest lesions alter the surrounding vasculature both
physiologically and morphologically [1]. Therefore, assessment
of the blood vessels can play an important role in detecting a
wide range of diseases.
Detecting lesions in the larynx at early stages is one of the
most important factors involved in the successful disease treatment [2]. About 10% of the precancerous lesions are transformed into squamous cells carcinomas [3], which are one of
the most common types of head and neck cancer [4]. Detection and treatment applied at an early disease stage can provide

P

Manuscript received June 9, 2014; revised November 7, 2014; accepted
November 20, 2014. Date of publication November 25, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This work was supported in part by the European
Union Seventh Framework Program FP7/2007-2013 - Challenge 2 - Cognitive
Systems, Interaction, Robotics - under Grant μRALP - n2 88233.
C. Barbalata was with the VIBOT Erasmus Mundus Masters Program: University of Burgundy, University of Girona and Heriot-Watt University. Now she
is with Ocean Systems Laboratory, Heriot-Watt University, Riccarton, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, Scotland, U.K. (e-mail: corina.barbalata@gmail.com).
L. S. Mattos is with the Department of Advanced Robotics, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 16163 Genova, Italy (e-mail: leonardo.mattos@iit.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2374975

Fig. 1. (a) Detection of laryngeal tumors in white-light endoscopic video
(a) can be a hard task prone to misclassification. (b) NBI offers augmented
visualization of blood vessels, which can be used to improve the detection and
classification process. The pictures show the same vocal cord tumor observed
under the two conditions.

highly favorable results, having a five-year surviving rate between 80% and 90% [4]. However, false cancer detection is also
present in modern diagnosis, which is often linked to a natural anxiety of specialists to avoid overlooking cancer at earlier
stages [5]. To assist in this process, scientists have been investing a great deal of effort to improve pretreatment evaluation and
to provide intraoperative data on the pathologies [6].
In order to obtain the histopathology of an abnormality, the
analysis of endoscopic images may be one of the most accessible methods. Such images can potentially be used for lesion
detection and classification, as proposed in this paper. However,
standard imaging techniques such as white-light endoscopy
typically offer limited information about the laryngeal tissue.
Narrow-band imaging (NBI), on the other hand, can offer an
interesting alternative to achieve this goal.
The NBI is an optical technology that enhances the practitioners capability to detect and diagnose lesions through endoscopic
inspection [7]. It allows better characterization of tissues with
the use of a filtered-spectrum illumination system that optimizes
the scattering and absorbance of the light in tissue [8]. In NBI,
wavelengths in the visible spectrum are filtered from the illumination source, with the exception of narrow bands in the blue and
green spectrum centered, respectively, at 415 ηm and 540 ηm.
These wavelengths coincide with peaks in the absorption spectrum of oxyhemoglobin, so blood vessels are pronounced when
viewed in NBI mode [9]. Consequently, the great advantage of
this technology over white-light imaging comes from the improved contrast when visualizing microblood vessels and their
patterns, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
This paper presents a novel processing framework for the
automatic detection and classification of laryngeal lesions based
on the segmentation and analysis of blood vessel networks in
NBI endoscopic video.

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BARBALATA AND MATTOS: LARYNGEAL TUMOR DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION IN ENDOSCOPIC VIDEO

323

Fig. 2. Image processing goals and challenges. Noise, specular reflections,
motions artifacts and focus issues create major challenges for the selection of
regions of interest and especially for the detection of microblood vessels.

The most relevant articles in this area are those of Laitakari
et al. [10] and Deepti et al. [11]. The former developed a software to compute the size, shape, and structure of laryngeal
tumors. The system combined light microscopy with image processing techniques for obtaining quantitative measurements. It
was shown advantageous over other techniques for its ability to
use small specimens, perform routine processing, and for allowing the preservation of the tissue architecture and cell morphology [10]. However, its main disadvantage, which is also that of
other cell analysis systems, is the fact that a tissue sample has to
be extracted from the patient, posing risks related to bleeding,
pain, and infection [4].
In this paper, we propose a different approach based on
anisotropic and matched filters (MFs), morphological analyses, and a classification process. The developed algorithm is
shown to constitute a promising new method for the detection
and diagnosis of laryngeal lesions. A detailed description of
this new method is presented as follows: Section II describes
the proposed algorithms for segmentation of suspect abnormalities, blood vessel extraction, and classification of lesions in
NBI images. Experiments and results are presented in Section
III, followed by discussions in Section IV. Finally, Section V
presents conclusions and future research opportunities.

Fig. 3.

Overview of the video processing framework.

A. Preprocessing
From the point of view of image processing, endoscopic imaging creates major challenges for achieving a computer-aided
system for the identification and classification of laryngeal lesions. These include issues related to image stability and focus
(or lack of thereof). In fact, the lack of focus characteristic can be
considered one of the main disadvantages of using endoscopes
for imaging the larynx. When the endoscope is too close or too
far from the mucosa, out-of-focus blur is produced. In addition,
sensor noise is significant in this application. This type of noise
comes from the CCD or CMOS sensors used to acquire the NBI
images [12]. Consequently, image preprocessing and denoising are required to obtain reliable results from the automatic
diagnosis system.
In this research, preprocessing focused at removing noise
and specular reflections from the raw endoscopic video images.
Bilateral filter was chosen for noise removal because it preserves
and enhances features that are useful in consecutive processing
stages.
The bilateral filter, as defined in [13], is given by

II. METHODOLOGY
The proposed system is fully described in this section, which
presents: 1) the preprocessing algorithms responsible for removing noise and specular reflection areas from the NBI endoscopic
images; 2) the region of interest (ROI) segmentation algorithm
responsible for locating suspect areas within the images; 3) the
vessel detection algorithm responsible for blood vessels segmentation; and 4) the classification algorithm responsible for
generating a probability of malignancy based on morphological
and statistical analyses of blood vessels.
Some of the major challenges faced by the processing algorithms in this application are illustrated in Fig. 2. To cope with
these challenges, the processing framework presented in Fig. 3
is proposed, where each component implements methods carefully selected and developed from state-of-the-art algorithms as
described below.

BF[I]p =

1 
Gσ s ( p − q )Gσ r ( Ip − Iq )Iq
Wp

(1)

q ∈S

where p represents the current pixel and q represents the
pixel position of the neighbors, S is the set of all possible image
locations (spatial domain), R is the set of all possible pixel values
(range domain), σs and σr represent the amount of filtering of
image I, Gσ s is the spatial Gaussian weight, Gσ r is the range
Gaussian weight, and Wp represents the normalization factor
defined by

Wp =
Gσ s ( p − q )Gσ r ( Ip − Iq ).
(2)
q ∈S

In this application, a second preprocessing stage had to be
implemented to remove specular reflections.

324

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Specular reflections tend to appear as bright regions in the
endoscopic images. However, their location and size do not
respect any pattern. Specular reflections can range from very
small regions to large areas, making their segmentation a challenging task. Large specular regions can, in addition, overlap
potentially malignant tissue. Consequently, in order to avoid
eliminating image regions that may be lesions, the following
rationale was used: If the area of a specular region was deemed
too large (based on an empirical limit), it was considered an
abnormality and was not removed.
Lehmann [14] proposed the use of the HSV color space for
this task, arguing that in the medical field reflections have intense brightness and low saturation. We agree with these observations and note that the algorithm has also the advantage
of being computationally fast. Therefore, the algorithm implemented here used adaptive thresholding in the HSV color space.
This was done according to the following thresholds computed
in runtime for each image processed:
thS = 0.35 · Sm ax

(3)

thV = 0.7 · Vm ax

(4)

where Sm ax and Vm ax represent, respectively, the maximum
saturation and the maximum intensity in the input image, thS
represents the threshold for the saturation channel, and thV is the
threshold for the value channel. The coefficients in (3) and (4)
were obtained through a tuning process based on relative operating characteristic (ROC) curves based on the training database
image set, which offer a graphical representation of the relationship between the algorithm’s true positive rate and false positive
rate for a varying parameter, allowing the selection of values for
the best algorithm performance.
During the development of this algorithm, a close analysis of
endoscopic NBI videos of the larynx showed similarities in the
color-space between specular reflections and lesions. Therefore,
to avoid a decrease in accuracy of the whole system, specular
regions were considered to be always smaller (in area) than
lesions. This corroborated the rationale of using a threshold to
confirm detected regions as specular reflections, leading to the
definition of a threshold based on the following equation:
SR = {pS ∩ pR | ∀pS , pR ∈ {0, 1}}

with the enlargement of the ROI by three pixels to allow better
reconstruction. In addition, the color behind each reflection is
assumed constant and similar to the neighboring pixels, so a
filling scheme that preserves texture was implemented for this
task.
The complete algorithm used for specular reflections detection and removal is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Specular Reflections Removal
IMG = original RGB image
HSV = convert IMG to HSV image
H, S, V = split HSV image in component channels
Sm ax = maximum(S)
Vm ax = maximum(V)
thS = threshold S using (3)
thV = threshold V using (4)
& = logic AND operator
SV = thS &thV = produce binary mask
G = threshold magnitude of gradient using (6)
SR = SV&G = apply mask to image G
SRlength = find number of ROI in SR
for i = 1 to SRlength do
area = size(SRlength [i])
if (area > limit) then
eliminate ROI from SR
end if
end for
SRF = dilate(SR) by 3 pixels
for each IMG(i, j) do
if SRF(i, j) > 0 then
neg = set of IMG(i, j)neighbors ∈ SRF
n = size(neg)
if n = 0 then
continue
end if

IMG(i, j) = n1 (m ,n )∈neg IMG(m, n)
SRF(i, j) = 0
end if
end for

(5)

where pS is set to 1 if the pixel p presents a specular component lower than the threshold thS , defined in (3). Otherwise, pS
is set to 0. The term pR is defined similarly based on (4).
Computing the gradient of the image and maintaining only
the areas that have high gradient values improves the results
of the specular reflection detection algorithm. For the images
in our training database of NBI endoscopic videos of the larynx (described in Section III), tG = 0.35 was selected from an
ROC curve analysis as the optimal threshold for classifying the
computed gradient as high
 
 2
2
∂I
∂I
| G |=
+
> 0.35.
(6)
∂x
∂y
The algorithm described previously defines a ROI for each
detected specular reflection area. The consecutive step is to
reconstruct the information in these areas. This process starts

B. ROI Segmentation
This section describes the methods implemented for detecting
areas potentially affected by lesions within the NBI laryngeal
images. The goal is to select regions of interest for subsequent
processing by the feature segmentation and classification algorithms, which will label each region as normal or suspected of
malignancy. Alternatively, this same algorithm can be used to
create an assistive system able to identify suspicious areas in
the endoscopic images and simply present them to physicians
as the approximate location of possible tumors.
To date only a few studies have been published related to the
segmentation of NBI images, and most of them analyze only a
specific class of abnormality in NBI colonoscopy [15], [16]. For
NBI laryngoscopy, we have decided to locate the ROI based on
the outer boundary of suspected areas.

BARBALATA AND MATTOS: LARYNGEAL TUMOR DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION IN ENDOSCOPIC VIDEO

As noted in related research, e.g., [17], anisotropic diffusion
is efficient in eliminating noise while maintaining edges, and in
some cases, it also enhances edges. This effect was especially
noted in this application. In this case, anisotropic diffusion tends
to enhance small vessels, helping to create a favorable representation for the identification of the ROI. Anisotropic diffusion
is performed after the application of the bilateral filter to reconstruct small vessels affected by the denoising process. This
allows a better segmentation of the ROI, and further, reduces
the noise level in the images, helping to minimize blood vessel
segmentation errors that can lead to wrong tissue classification.
Anisotropic diffusion is defined by the following equation:
∂I
= ∇g · ∇I + g(∇I, σ)	I
∂t

(7)

where 	 represents Laplace operator, ∇ is the gradient,
g(∇I, σ) is the diffusion coefficient chosen as a function
of the image gradient to preserve edges in the image, ∇I is
the gradient magnitude, and σ is the scale parameter. The most
significant parameters in this equation are the scale parameter
σ and the diffusion coefficient g(∇I, σ), which define the
level of discontinuities present in the image. According to [18],
a crucial step in anisotropic diffusion is to define an edge stopping function. Perona and Malik [19] proposed two different
functions for g(•)


g(∇I) =
1+

1
∇I 
h

2

	 
2 

∇I
g(∇I) = exp −
h

(8)

325

could be described by its outer boundaries, T1 tended to provide the best results (i.e., the surface of the lesion was properly
identified in that image). On the other hand, when the ROI did
not present clear margins, it was better detected in T2 . In this
latter case, it was noted that the ROI area in T2 tended to be
larger than in T1 . From these observations, a novel thresholding method based on the size of the connected components was
defined and used to select the best ROI for further processing.
This ROI was extracted as a rectangular area.
The complete ROI segmentation algorithm is summarized in
Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 ROI detection
g1 = compute discontinuity level using (8)
g2 = compute discontinuity level using (9)
AD1 = enhance image using g1 and (7)
AD2 = enhance image using g2 and (7)
T1 = edges detected on AD1 using Canny filter
and closing operation
T2 = edges detected on AD2 using Canny filter
and closing operation
area1 = area of the largest component in T1
area2 = area of the largest component in T2
tharea = experimental threshold for ROI selection
then
if (area1 > tharea )
ROI is defined by area1
else
ROI is defined by area2
end if

(9)

where h determines the edge-strength value used to define a
region boundary as valid. This parameter is chosen empirically.
A high value of h can lead to an isotropic result. The difference
between the two equations is represented by the scale space
interpretation of the images. Equation (8) offers a higher confidence to wide regions over small regions, while (9) privileges
high-contrast edges over low-contrast ones [19].
After examining the characteristics of the images in our NBI
database, a decision was made to utilize both anisotropic filters.
The filter based on (9) was used to maintain high-contrast edges,
while the one based on (8) was used to maintain large areas. The
obtained results were preserved separately, i.e., each filter generated a separate enhanced image, here designated, respectively,
as T1 and T2 .
Each enhanced image was then processed for the extraction
of regions of interest. This process involved the use of a Canny
edge detector [15] followed by a morphological closing operation to close small edge gaps, and a subsequent connected
component analysis. The extracted connected components constituted the first estimates for the regions of interest. The final
ROI was selected in a later step based on the area of the connected components extracted from both images.
During this research, an analysis of obtained connected components demonstrated that both in T1 and T2 the largest area
tended to correctly include the region of the larynx suspected
of malignancy. Furthermore, it was observed that when the ROI

C. Vessel Detection
As mentioned above, visualization of the vascular network
is enhanced in NBI, presenting features that can characterize
the presence and the type of laryngeal carcinoma. However,
automated segmentation of blood vessels in the larynx is a challenging problem since the width and length of the vessels can
vary from very small to very large, and their shapes differ from
case to case, no pattern being respected. This can be observed
in the laryngeal tissue image presented in Fig. 2.
During this research, we noticed that an MF provides effective
results when used for laryngeal blood vessel extraction. This
processing method is basically a template matching algorithm.
In our implementation, the formulation for such a filter is
described by (10). The equation defines a bidimensional filter
assuming its y-axis is aligned with the direction of the blood
vessel being processed.


x2
1
exp − 2 − m
(10)
f (x, y) = √
2σ
2πσ
L
2
where L is the length of the neighborhood along y-axis, σ
is the scale of the filter, t is a constant that describes the area
under the Gaussian curve, and m normalizes the mean value of
the filter to 0, in order to remove the background after filtering.
| x |≤ t · σ, | y |≤

326

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

One disadvantage of this segmentation method is that it tends
to generate a relatively high number of false positives as nonvessel edges are also extracted. These have to be eliminated to
improve the algorithm performance. To achieve this goal, an
extension of the MF filter based on the first-order derivative of
Gaussian (FODG) was used. In this case, the results obtained
using an MF are selected according to a threshold obtained from
the FODG. This idea was introduced by Zhang et al. [20] for the
case of retinal blood vessel segmentation. The FODG is defined
by (11), which also represents the first-order derivative of the
MF in (10).


x2
x
√
exp − 2 .
(11)
f (x, y) = −
2σ
2πσ 3
As mentioned earlier, the cross section of a blood vessel is
characterized by symmetry and can be described by a Gaussian
function. This property is most often not valid for other edges or
noise present in the image, which tend to be asymmetric. However, the MF produces strong positive response for both vessels
and nonvessels, so it is not ideal algorithm to distinguish the two
cases. Conversely, when the FODG is applied to the main orientation of a vessel cross section, the response is characterized
by positive values on one side and negative values on the other,
resulting in a low overall response. The application of FODG
on nonvessels typically results in a strong response.
Based on this latter observation, a threshold can be computed
based on the FODG response using (12). This threshold is used
on the MF image to segment the blood vessels while minimizing
false detections. In this case, a pixel is only considered as part of
a blood vessel when its value in the MF image is higher than the
value of T . This process results in a more reliable segmentation
of the laryngeal blood vessels.
T = (1 + MN ) · Tc

(12)

where Tc is the reference threshold, defined by (13) and based
on the mean value of the MF response image, μ, and on the
constant c, which was empirically set to 3. The term MN is the
normalized mean image obtained from the FODG result. This
image is obtained by first computing the mean of the FODG
image using a 9 × 9 mean filter, and then, normalizing the
result.
Tc = c · μ.

(13)

Once the aforementioned processing is done, the output image
(MFFODG) contains both large and small blood vessels. This
represents a rough approximation of the desired results, but
a final validation and refinement of the vessels structures is
still needed to improve later lesion classification results. In this
study, this is performed using a Gabor filter to validate large
vessels, as presented in [21], and the morphological Black-TopHat operation for the small blood vessels. These operations are,
respectively, defined by



x2p
yp2
+ 2
(14)
cos(2πf xp )
gφ = exp −π
σx2
σy
where
xp = x cos φ + y sin φ

yp = −x sin φ + y cos φ
and φ is the filter direction, σ is the standard deviation of
Gaussian, and f is the frequency of cosine.


H = (G • B) − G

(15)

where G is the color channel to be processed, B is the structuring element for the closing operation (•), and H is the closing
residue.
In this application, the final map of blood vessels is obtained
using only the green channel of the original image. This is
realized because this channel presents the best contrast between
blood vessels and other tissues in the larynx.
A summary of the complete blood vessel extraction algorithm
is presented in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Blood Vessel Extraction Algorithm
G = green channel from input RGB image
MF = image G processed by MF
using (10)
FODG = image G processed by First Order
Derivative of Gaussian using (11)
MN = normalized mean image of FODG
T = threshold image computed from MN using (12)
MFFODG = blood vessels from the application of
T on MF
T Hat = image G processed by Black-Top-Hat
morphological operation using (15)
Gab = image G processed by on Gabor filter using
(14)
& = logic AND operator
BV = MFFODG & THat + MFFODG & Gab

D. Classification
This part of the processing algorithm is responsible for the
identification and classification of laryngeal tumors based on
novel quantitative measurements performed on the blood vessel
networks. In this case, the width and tortuosity of the blood
vessels were found to provide significant information for proper
lesion classification. This has also been noted in the medical
literature, where correlations between the dilation of blood vessels and the occurrence of tumors have been described [1]. In
addition, high tortuosity values have been associated to lesion
development [22], [23].
It has to be highlighted that this is the first time an automatic
classification method is developed for laryngeal tumors. In this
study, the width of segmented vessels was computed at every
point of the skeleton of the blood vessels. The method implemented for this task is shown in Fig. 4(a). It is based on finding
the shortest line segment passing through each skeleton point
such that it is fully enclosed within the blood vessel image. This
process can be described as follows: For each skeleton pixel, a
line segment is initially placed horizontally at such pixel and its
intersections with the blood vessel boundaries in the BV image
are computed. The distance between these intersection points

BARBALATA AND MATTOS: LARYNGEAL TUMOR DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION IN ENDOSCOPIC VIDEO

Fig. 4. Characterization of blood vessels: (a) Width measurement (b) sum of
angles metric for tortuosity measurement.

327

the other hand, the presence of small and tortuous vessels tend
to indicate malignant cases. The blood vessel measurements
obtained from our database were, therefore, used in the LDA.
This process considered the SOAM tortuosity measurement as
the first LDA parameter, while the number of large vessels,
N , multiplied by the density of the vessels in the ROI, D,
represented the second parameter. In this case, the density was
computed based on the number of blood vessels encountered
within the ROI region. From the LDA results, the following set
of equations were defined:

X = 1.72SOAM + 0.48N D − 2.80
(16)
Y = −0.21SOAM − 0.62N D − 0.21.
As can be seen from Fig. 5, the parameters computed based
on linear discriminative analysis provide a clear separation between the two classes, by maximizing the difference between
malignant and benign tissues.
Finally, malignancy classification was achieved based on the
confidence measure given by (17). The equation returns a value
between 0 and 1, which represents the malignancy probability
of the tissue image analyzed. Values close to 1 correspond to
malignant cases, while values close to 0 correspond to benign
cases. Furthermore, the best threshold value to separate both
cases was found to be 0.5 based on an ROC curve analysis with
the training set.

Fig. 5.

LDA for the separation between malignant and benign cases.

Malignancy Probability =
provides the first blood vessel width estimate. The line segment
is, subsequently, rotated up to 180◦ in 1◦ increments. After each
rotation increment, a new width estimate is computed following
the same process. The final blood vessel width value is given by
the smallest estimate.
Based on their width, blood vessels are classified as small or
large. In this application, a vessel was considered large when its
width was larger than 6 pixels. This value was defined empirically and is consistent with other parameters used within the
blood vessel extraction algorithm. The validity of this threshold
is established in Section III.
The tortuosity measurement was based on the Sum of Angles Metric (SOAM), as presented in Fig. 4(b). In this case,
tortuosity was computed for each vessel found in the image as
follows: Every three consecutive pixels in the vessel’s skeleton
were considered at a time and used to compute the angle between the vector pairs defined by them. These angles were then
summed together and divided by the total number of points in
the skeleton, resulting in the vessel’s tortuosity value.
Once these measurements were obtained, the laryngeal tumor
classification process was ready to be started. This is also a
highly challenging task that, up to our best knowledge, has never
been the focus of an automatic diagnosis system before. In this
research, we based the classification process on the medical
expertise presented in [23]. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
was used in the training images set to define a separation between
malignant cases (X) and benign cases (Y), as presented in Fig. 5.
During this research, it was noticed that a large number of
large vessels are typically present in normal laryngeal tissue. On

exp(X)
.
exp(X) + exp(Y )

(17)

III. RESULTS
The development and tuning of the proposed algorithms were
performed using a training image database assembled from 35
different NBI laryngeal videos taken from 35 different patients,
28 of which presented laryngeal lesions. The evaluation of the
algorithms, on the other hand, was based on a separate testing
database assembled from 25 different NBI laryngeal videos from
another set of 25 different patients. Within the testing set, 15
patients presented laryngeal lesions.
The videos used in this research were provided by the San
Martino Hospital (UNIGE, Genoa, Italy) and were all acquired
using an Olympus Visera Elite S190 imaging system and an
ENF-VH rhino-laryngo videoscope. From each video, two images of vocal cords were selected to build the databases. Therefore, the training database contained 70 images and the testing
database 50 images. All videos provided were used, so the quality of the images in our databases had a large variance. Several
images showed poor contrast between vessels and surrounding
tissue and/or suffered from motion artifacts, while some others
included bleeding areas. In addition, lesions were not always
completely visible in the sampled images. These images obviously increased the challenges faced by the automatic tumor
detection and the classification system, but were nevertheless
used to make the evaluation process realistic.
In order to analyze the results of the proposed algorithm, the
database images were manually segmented for the extraction of
regions of interest and blood vessels. This process was carefully
performed using a custom ground-truth labeling software, i.e., a

328

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
QUALITY MEASURES FOR ROI SEGMENTATION
Sensitivity
67%

Specificity

Accuracy

Dice

86%

77%

69%

between the segmented scene and the ground truth. This is done
based on (18). A Dice value close to 0 means the results of the
segmentation do not match the ground truth, while values close
to 1 indicate good segmentation. This metric is useful to validate
the segmentation results because it retains sensitivity in highly
heterogeneous datasets, giving less weight to outliers, and thus,
providing a better measure of the algorithm performance [24].
D=
Fig. 6. Preprocessing results: Examples of specular reflections and residual
information removal.

custom-developed program created to allow the manual marking of blood vessels. The result was the creation of reference
images where pixels were marked with 1 if part of a vessel or
0 otherwise. However, due to the wide variability in the vessels’ morphology and to the subjectivity of the manual process,
we recognize that false labeling of vessels may have occurred.
Nevertheless, in the analysis below, these errors were assumed
negligible and the manual segmentations were considered as the
ultimate ground truth.
A. Specular Reflections Removal
This first algorithm was shown to be highly effective in the
task of removing specular reflection areas from the endoscopic
images. As Fig. 6 illustrates, it was able to successfully localize affected areas, substituting them with smooth regions.
Moreover, the algorithm was also shown to be instrumental in
solving another important problem: the removal of additional
information added to the images by the endoscope equipment.
After application of the proposed algorithm, both overlay text
and specular reflections are removed from the images due to
their similar characteristics, but lesions are maintained intact.
Such results can be seen in the Fig. 6(d).
B. ROI Segmentation
The performance of this processing stage was analyzed using
the following quality measures: sensitivity, specificity, accuracy,
and Dice coefficient. In addition, the obtained results were classified into two categories: “Successful ROI segmentation” and
“Failed ROI segmentation.”
Sensitivity is defined as the ratio between correct positive
classifications and the total number of true positives, i.e., refers
to the correct identification of diseased patients. Specificity is
defined as the ratio between correct negative classifications and
the total number of true negatives, i.e., refers to the correct identification of healthy patients. Accuracy represents the overall
results and the Dice coefficient is used to measure the similarity

2TP
(FP + TP) + (TP + FN)

(18)

where TP represents true positives, FP represents false positives, and FN represents false negatives.
These quality measurements are based on a pixel by pixel
computation according to the following reasoning: a pixel is
marked TP if it is labeled “1” both in the ground-truth image
and in the automatic segmentation image; a pixel is marked
as FP if it is labeled “1” only in the segmentation result; and a
pixel is marked as FN if it is labeled “1” only in the ground-truth
image.
A summary of the experimental results is presented in Table I, where the values represent the overall measurements for
all images in our testing database. The results demonstrate the
implemented algorithm presented a 67% sensitivity for the detection of regions of interest, with specificity reaching 86% and
overall accuracy 77%.
During this study, it was noticed that the images presenting
significant false negatives (i.e., those contributing to a decrease
in the overall system accuracy) belonged to one of the following
two cases: 1) The lesion was highly similar to the surrounding
tissue, presenting poorly visible outer boundaries due to low
contrast between the healthy and the anomalous tissue. In this
case, the region segmentation algorithm tended to select areas
that were smaller than the real lesions, thus reducing the computed accuracy rating. 2) Preprocessing did not properly remove
specular reflections or the reconstruction of the affected areas
was not satisfactory, leading to false detection of tumors.
Analyses conducted during the progress of this study have
shown that the detection of only 20% of the surface area of
a lesion (measured with respect to the ground-truth image) is
sufficient for the subsequent blood vessels analyzes and tumor
classification. Considering this observation, the values presented
in Table I indicate the ROI segmentation algorithm is fairly
reliable. Based on our database of 50 NBI images, the algorithm
provided correct and useful ROI segmentations in 78% of the
cases.
C. Vessel Detection
This part of the algorithm was evaluated through the ROC
curve presented in Fig. 7(a), which represents the overall results
obtained by varying the threshold parameter associated with

BARBALATA AND MATTOS: LARYNGEAL TUMOR DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION IN ENDOSCOPIC VIDEO

329

which a value of 6 pixels was found to be the best discriminant
width value as mentioned in Section II-D.
The overall classification accuracy obtained was 84.3%. This
result proves that the analysis of blood vessel networks can
provide reliable information about the malignancy of lesions.
Furthermore, it allows the calculation of confidence levels related to the presence of malignancy, as described in Section II
and exemplified in Fig. 8.
Fig. 7. ROC curve of: (a) feature segmentation algorithm; (b) vessel size
classification algorithm.

TABLE II
BLOOD VESSEL SEGMENTATION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS
Method

Sens.

Spec.

Acc.

Dice

Canny Edge Detector
Hirota [25]
Rossant [26]
Proposed method

26%
39%
40%
70%

87%
85%
89%
87%

56%
62%
65%
78%

36%
56%
59%
76%

the Black-Top-Hat operation described in Algorithm 3. In the
algorithm, this threshold is used to obtain the binary mask of
blood vessels. Here, the evaluation started considering a small
threshold (t = 10), which was incrementally increased until t =
240. The blood vessels segmentation result for each t value was
then compared with the ground-truth images, generating the
data presented by the ROC curve.
An analysis of Fig. 7(a) shows the best possible result is given
by the point closest to the upper left corner of the ROC space,
which represents 100% sensitivity and 100% specificity. Based
on this information and on the experimental data, the threshold
for the Black-Top-Hat operation was set to t = 80. This value
resulted in the quality measures presented in Table II, i.e., a 70%
sensitivity, 87% specificity, 78% accuracy, and Dice coefficient
equal to 76%.
The aforementioned results show the feature segmentation
algorithm can successfully differentiate between real blood vessels and other edges present in the images. In addition, the
algorithm proved to be successful in detecting fine microvessel structures. On the other hand, some false positives were
also encountered, mainly due to image noise. Noise was still
present due to the specific settings of the preprocessing algorithm. Specifically, a compromise between filtering performance
and the preservation of small blood vessels was used for choosing the value of the range parameter (σr ) of the bilateral filter,
confining the noise removal results.
D. Classification
The final processing step dedicated to establishing if the patient presents signs of malignant tumor in the larynx was evaluated based on histopathological results associated with each NBI
endoscopic video in our database. In this part, a threshold that
differentiates between small and large blood vessels was used.
The selection of this threshold was based on the ROC curve
obtained from the training dataset, as shown in Fig. 7(b), from

IV. DISCUSSION
The processing framework presented in this paper constitutes
a pioneering method for the automatic classification of laryngeal tumors based on blood vessels characteristics. The system
was created based on recent medical findings showing that tumor vascular patterns offer sufficient information for classifying
laryngeal tumors. In the process, advantage was taken from the
up-to-date development of the NBI technology, which provides
an enhanced contrast between vessels and surrounding tissue
compared to the traditional white-light imaging. Overall, the
main contributions of this paper include the use of the NBI for
automatic detection of tumors, and the development of an automatic method for laryngeal tumor classification based on recent
medical findings.
Results from detailed evaluations of each component of the
proposed framework as well as from the overall system have
been presented in the previous section. Fig. 8 presents representative examples of larynx lesions and respective results from
different steps of the proposed tumor detection and classification
algorithm. The first row of images in the figure presents the original NBI endoscopic views. These images stress the first challenge faced and overcome by our algorithm, i.e., the observed
wide range of shapes and characteristics that define regions of
interest for further analysis. The second image row in the figure
presents the outputs of the ROI segmentation algorithm. Good
results were achieved for the cases shown, with the segmented
regions covering at least 20% of the lesions. Nevertheless, experiments with our image database showed the performance of
this algorithm can be degraded if the lesion characteristics are
very similar to the surrounding tissue. In such cases, the development of an additional processing step may be needed to
improve the results.
The third image row in Fig. 8 shows results from the vessel detection step. The results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
is successful in segmenting both the very small and the large
blood vessels. However, limitations were noticed when bleeding was present in the images and for the cases of submucosal
blood vessels, which present lower contrast to the surrounding
tissue than mucosal vessels. Such effect, in fact, comes from
the characteristics of the NBI technology. Under NBI, mucosa
vessels appear brownish in color and present high contrast with
surrounding tissue. Submucosal vessels, on the other hand, appear cyan in color, thus presenting reduced contrast and making
the segmentation task more difficult.
Also for the case of blood vessels segmentation, errors causing under segmentation were identified as the result of similarities between microblood vessels and image noise. As mentioned
previously, the bilateral filter used for image preprocessing was

330

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 8. Sample results: The first row presents the original NBI images; the second row presents the ROI segmentation; the third row shows the extracted blood
vessels in the segmented ROI; the fourth row presents the probability of malignancy given by the proposed algorithm; the last row shows the reference biopsy
results for each case.

carefully tuned to remove noise while preserving small blood
vessels. However, microblood vessels were often removed as
noise, impacting the efficiency of the proposed algorithm. A
possible solution for this issue may come from multiscale image decomposition followed by the application of the vessels
segmentation algorithm at each scale. A subsequent merging
operation could then be performed to generate the final segmented image. Another possible solution could involve the use
of confidence boundaries and learning techniques to improve
blood vessels identification. These are ideas that will be evaluated in the future as this research progresses.
The fourth row in Fig. 8 shows results from the tumor classification process. Overall, the classification algorithm presented
reliable results, reaching an accuracy rating of 84.3%. This is
a motivating result, especially if one realizes the difficulties involved in defining a reliable metric able to classify blood vessel
features as belonging to healthy or diseased tissue. The main
complication here is the huge variety observed for the measured
characteristics, i.e., vessel density, vessel tortuosity, average diameter, length, and location within the larynx. Furthermore, the
establishment of relationships between such characteristics and
the malignancy of a lesion is still a fairly new research topic even
within the medical area, as can be seen from the scarce literature
related to this issue. Consequently, the methods presented herein
should be considered exploratory research and should undergo
further improvements and testing based on a much larger range
of laryngeal tumors before they can be used clinically. Future
developments to improve malignancy classification may include
the use of artificial intelligence methods, additional statistical
measurements, as well as the use of information about the patient history, such as age, sex, weight, height, and smoking and
drinking habits.
The computational time of the overall algorithm resulted to
be approximately 0.5 s/image, with slight variations caused by
the number of angular orientations used by the Gabor and MFFODG filters. The computer used in this application had an

Intel Core i73610QM processor, 6-GB RAM, and an NVIDIA
GTX660M graphics card. Further improvement by a parallel
implementation is in our plan to expand this research. Processing the endoscopic video images in real time will increase the
amount of data available for the statistical evaluation of blood
vessels characteristics, leading to an enhanced lesion classification capacity and to the creation of a more robust and reliable
computer-aided diagnosis system.
A. Comparison With Existing Methodology
The new processing framework has demonstrated to successfully cope with the many challenges posed by the application,
which was achieved thanks to the careful selection and development of state-of-the-art algorithms for each of its components.We review these choices considering existing approaches
in the following.
1) Preprocessing: The algorithms implemented for removing noise and specular reflections from the video images were
selected from the literature as described earlier. The bilateral
filter was chosen to eliminate noise because of its performance
in preserving thin blood vessels, and adaptive thresholding in
the HSV color space [14] was selected for being effective and
computationally fast.
2) ROI Segmentation: The algorithm proposed in this part
represents a novel approach of ROI segmentation due to its ability to detect the ROI based on two sets of information: the size
of potential tumor areas and the specific contrast of the edges
extracted from the images. The main advantage of using this
approach over existing methods is the capacity to define ROIs
with different characteristics. This proved to be highly important due to the large variability in shape and texture presented by
laryngeal tumors. For example, a comparison with the method
based on gradient magnitude proposed in [27] demonstrated an
increase in overall ROI segmentation accuracy from 34% to
77% when using the algorithm proposed in this paper. Furthermore, ROI segmentation results achieved with the Gabor filter

BARBALATA AND MATTOS: LARYNGEAL TUMOR DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION IN ENDOSCOPIC VIDEO

and K-means clustering (as described in [28]) demonstrated an
accuracy of only 39.6%. Both of these methods presented poor
performance on our database due to the similarities between tumors and surrounding tissue observed in the laryngeal images.
Another alternative algorithm evaluated for comparison purposes was the level set method based on active contours. This
method achieved an accuracy of 68.2%, outperforming the other
alternative algorithms but still demonstrating the superiority of
our novel method.
3) Vessel Detection: The implemented algorithm is based on
the MF technique, which has demonstrated good performance in
similar applications [29], [30]. Also in this study, the technique
proved to be efficient in extracting blood vessels, however, it
tended to generate a relatively high number of false positives
for extracting also nonvessel edges. This issue was successfully
dealt with here by enhancing the algorithm with the FODG
method, which filtered out nonvessel features based on their
cross-sectional patterns. At this time, the blood vessels segmentation algorithm was deemed reasonably efficient in its task,
allowing progress toward the evaluation of the tumor classification algorithm. This conclusion is supported by a comparison
of the obtained results with those from similar algorithms proposed for blood vessels in retina [26] and in large intestine [25],
as summarized in Table II. The table shows that even though our
method can still be improved, it already provides higher sensitivity and more reliable segmentation results than other state-ofthe-art algorithms found in the literature. Rossant’s algorithm
[26], based on morphological and topological analyses, was not
able to recognize small vessels, and thus, presented low sensitivity. The algorithm proposed by Hirota et al. [25], based on
watershed segmentation combined with a level-set method, presented limitations due to high oversegmentation. Finally, also
the results obtained with the OpenCV’s Canny edge detector
were limited due to oversegmentation issues.
4) Classification: A completely novel algorithm based on
the recent medical findings described in [23] was proposed to
classify the detected lesions. The method, which is based on the
density and shape of the segmented blood vessels, was shown
to reliably distinguish between benign and malignant lesions,
achieving an overall accuracy of 84.3% as described in the previous section. This is a remarkable result considering this is
first system ever created for the automatic detection and classification of laryngeal lesions. Furthermore, the method was
shown to be computationally fast while not relying on previous training. A comparison with existing methodologies was
attempted considering the algorithm presented in [31], which
is based on texture information and two different classifiers:
k-nearest neighbors and decision tree classifier. To evaluate the
results, the leave-one-image-out method was used. This alternative method achieved a correct classification percentage of
61.1% using the k-nearest neighbors algorithm and 63.4% using the decision tree classifier, demonstrating the superiority of
the novel method proposed in this paper.
B. Translation to Clinical Practice
The proposed processing framework represents the first attempt and the starting point for the creation of an automatic

331

system for laryngeal tumors detection and classification. It is
clear that further research and development is still needed to
achieve a system reliable enough to be used in clinical practice.
For example, accuracy metrics have to be greatly increased if
such system is to be used for diagnosis.
Ideally, medical devices for the disease classification are expected to present accuracy values close to 100%. However, if
the system is to be used in routine laryngeal inspections as an
assistive device for tumor detection, the current state of development can be considered quite advanced. Currently, no such
device exist and the acceptable practice is totally based on the
judgment of the medical specialist performing the examination, i.e., the decision to proceed with further examinations and
biopsy for diagnosis is totally dependent on the experience of
the medical doctor. Consequently, the system proposed here
has the potential to significantly improve the early detection of
tumors, especially when the routine laryngeal inspections are
performed by nonexpert personnel such as resident doctors or
nurses. In such cases, the described objective analysis of blood
vessel networks using NBI endoscopic videos may provide the
supporting data required for informed decisions toward further
examinations or surgical actions.
Apart for the need for improved accuracy, the developed system will have to face other challenges before it can be used in
clinical practice. These include: 1) the need for real-time operation, which will require algorithm optimization and the use of
parallel processing techniques; 2) the need for increased robustness against motion artifacts and image blur; and finally, 3) the
need for a seamless integrating to the NBI endoscopy equipment
to create an intuitive and user-friendly device.
Once these challenges are solved, such system for automatic
laryngeal tumor detection and classification will greatly benefit
patients with an improved detection of early cancers, and ultimately benefit the healthcare system with a reduction of cancer
treatment costs.
V. CONCLUSION
This research proposes a novel automatic system for laryngeal
tumor detection and classification using endoscopic NBI technology. The benefits of this noninvasive imaging technology,
such as the possibility to exam the larynx without the need for
anesthesia and the provided improved contrast between blood
vessels and surrounding tissue, were exploited to generate a new
type of computer-assisted diagnosis system based on the visual
characteristics of blood vessel networks. This is a relatively new
and growing approach within the medical area. However, up to
this point, it has been totally dependent on subjective analyses and on the individual experience of medical doctors. This
research changes this scenario, proposing a system able to establish malignancy based on a statistical analysis of quantitative
blood vessel measurements. In addition, to our best knowledge,
this is the first system developed for the segmentation or analysis
of laryngeal blood vessels.
The proposed algorithms were fully evaluated herein based
on a custom testing database containing 50 NBI endoscopic
images of larynxes. Such evaluations demonstrated that the new
system is capable of recognizing malignant laryngeal tumors
with high accuracy (84.3%). At the same time, the experimental

332

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

results stress the need for further research to improve the
sensitivity of the blood vessels extraction algorithm (currently
at 70%). This may be achieved by complementing the current
algorithm with other promising methods, such as the multiple
scale Hessian filter. In any case, further research, development
and testing are needed before this system can be used clinically
by medical specialists.
Even though challenges remain, the system proposed by this
research consists in the first implementation of a promising
novel method for laryngeal cancer detection and classification.
It represents an innovation in biomedical and health informatics
that is worth of further investigation and development.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank G. Peretti and L. Guastini,
from the San Martino Hospital (Genoa, Italy), for enlightening discussions about the NBI technology and for providing
the videos and associated histopathological results used in this
research.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Bullitt, S. R. Aylward, T. Van Dyke, and W. Lin, “Computer-assisted
measurement of vessel shape from 3T magnetic resonance angiography
of mouse brain.,” Methods, vol. 43, pp. 29–34, Sep. 2007.
[2] M. de Boer, J. Pruyn, B. van den Borne, P. Knegt, R. Ryckman, and
C. Verwoerd, “Rehabilitation outcomes of long-term survivors treated for
head and neck cancer.,” Head Neck, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 503–515, 1995.
[3] R. Fiorella, V. Di Nicola, and L. Resta, “Epidemiological and clinical
relief on hyperplastic lesions of the larynx,” Acta Otolaryngol. Suppl.,
vol. 527, pp. 77–81, 1997.
[4] N. Mastronikolis, T. Papadas, P. Goumas, I. Triantaphyllidou, D.
Theocharis, N. Papageorgakopoulou, and D. Vynios, “Head and neck:
Laryngeal tumors: An overview,” Atlas Genetics Cytrogenetics Oncol.
Haematol., vol. 11, pp. 888–893, 2009.
[5] J. Horne, “Cancer of the vocal cords, difficulties in diagnosis, and fallacies
in statistics,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1547–1554, 1929.
[6] W. Tarnawski, M. Fraczek, M. Jelen, T. Krcicki, and M. ZalesskaKrecicka, “The role of computer-assisted analysis in the evaluation of
nuclear characteristics for the diagnosis of precancerous and cancerous lesions by contact laryngoscopy,” Adv. Med. Sci., vol. 53, no. 2,
pp. 221–227, 2008.
[7] C. Gheorghe, “Narrow-band imaging endoscopy for diagnosis of malignant and premalignant gastrointestinal lesions,” J. Gastrointestinal Liver
Diseases, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 77–82, 2006.
[8] P. Lukes, M. Zabrodsky, J. Plzak, M. Chovanec, J. Betka, E. Foltynova, and
J. Betka, “Narrow band imaging (NBI) endoscopic method for detection
of head and neck cancer,” in Endoscopy. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2013.
[9] N. Schonfeld, C. Schwarz, J. Kollmeier, T. Blum, T. Bauer, and S. Ott,
“Narrow band imaging (NBI) during medical thoracoscopy: First impressions,” J. Occupational Med. Toxicol., vol. 4, no. 24, 2009, doi:
10.1186/1745–6673-4-24.
[10] J. Laitakari, V. Nayha, and F. Stenback, “Size, shape, structure, and direction of angiogenesis in laryngeal tumour development,” J. Clinical Pathol.,
vol. 57, pp. 394–401, 2004.
[11] S. Deepti and B. Dhandra, “Abnormality detection in endoscopic images
of throat cancer by morphological operations,” Indian Streams Res. J.,
vol. 1, no. 4, 2011, doi: 10.9780/22307850.
[12] M. Liedlgruber and A. Uhl, “A summary of research targeted at computeraided decision support in endoscopy of the gastrointestinal tract,” Dept
Comput. Sci., Univ. Salzburg, Austria, Tech. Rep. 2011-01, 2011.
[13] S. Paris, P. Kornprobst, and J. Tumblin, Bilateral Filtering: Theory and
Applications. Hanover, MA, USA: Now Publishers, vol. 4, 2009.
[14] T. M. Lehmann and C. Palm, “Color line search for illuminant estimation
in real-world scenes,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 2679–2691,
2001.
[15] S. Gross, M. Kennel, T. Stehle, J. Wulff, J. Tischendorf, C. Trautwein, and
T. Aach, “Polyp segmentation in NBI colonoscopy,” in Bildverarbeitung
für die Medizin 2009, Informatik aktuell.Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2009,
pp. 252–256.

[16] B. V. Dhandra, R. Hegadi, M. Hangarge, and V. S. Malemath, “Analysis
of abnormality in endoscopic images using combined HSI color space and
watershed segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Pattern Recog., vol. 4,
2006, pp. 695–698.
[17] M. Zeinali, S. Saryazdi, and H. Rafsanjani, “Image denoising via combination anisotropic diffusion and bilateral filtering,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput. Intell. Commun. Netw., 2011, pp. 421–425.
[18] J. Weickert, “Theoretical foundations of anisotropic diffusion in image
processing,” in Proc. 7th Theoretical Found. Comput. Vis., 1994, pp. 221–
236.
[19] P. Perona and J. Malik, “Scale-space and edge detection using anisotropic
diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 12, no. 7,
pp. 629–639, Jul. 1990.
[20] B. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and F. Karray, “Retinal vessel extraction
by matched filter with first-order derivative of Gaussian,” Comput. Biol.
Med., vol. 40, pp. 438–445, Apr. 2010.
[21] J. V. B. Soares, J. J. G. Leandro, R. M. Cesar, H. F. Jelinek, and M. J. Cree,
“Retinal vessel segmentation using the 2-D Gabor wavelet and supervised
classification.,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1214–1222,
Sep. 2006.
[22] Y. Lin, A. Watanabe, W. Chen, K. Lee, I. Lee, and W. Wang, “Narrowband
imaging for early detection of malignant tumors and radiation effect after
treatment of head and neck cancer,” Archives Otolaryngol.—Head Neck
Surg., vol. 136, pp. 234–239, 2010.
[23] X. Ni, S. He, Z. Xu, L. Gao, N. Lu, Z. Yuan, S. Lai, Y. Zhang, J. Yi, X.
Wang, L. Zhang, X. Li, and G. Wang, “Endoscopic diagnosis of laryngeal
cancer and precancerous lesions by narrow band imaging,” J. Laryngol.
Otol., vol. 125, no. 3, pp. 288–296, 2011.
[24] J. B. Grace, B. McCune, and D. L. Urban, Analysis of Ecological Communities. Gleneden Beach, OR, USA: MjM Software Design, 2002.
[25] M. Hirota, T. Tamaki, K. Kaneda, S. Yosida, and S. Tanaka, “Feature
extraction from images of endoscopic large intestine,” Inst. Electron. Eng.
Korea, Seoul, Korea, pp. 100–105, 2008.
[26] F. Rossant, M. Badellino, A. Chavillon, I. Bloch, and M. Paques, “A
morphological approach for vessel segmentation in eye fundus images,
with quantitative evaluation,” J. Med. Imag. Health Informat., vol. 1,
pp. 42–49, 2011.
[27] Y. Lee, S. Song, J. Lee, and M. Kim, “Tumor segmentation from small
animal pet using region growing based on gradient magnitude,” in Proc.
7th Int. Workshop Enterprise Netw. Comput. Healthcare Ind., Jun. 2005,
pp. 243–247.
[28] S. Hwang and M. Celebi, “Polyp detection in wireless capsule endoscopy
videos based on image segmentation and geometric feature,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoustics Speech Signal Process., Mar. 2010, pp. 678–681.
[29] S. Chaudhuri, S. Chatterjee, K. N., M. Nelson, and M. Goldbaum,
“Detection of blood vessels in retinal images using two-dimensional
matched filters,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 263–269,
Sep. 1989.
[30] M. Al-Rawi, M. Qutaishat, and M. Arrar, “An improvement matched filter
for blood vessel detection of digital retinal images,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
vol. 37, pp. 262–267, 2007.
[31] A. Oliver and J. Freixenet, “Automatic classification of breast density,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Image Process., 2005, pp. 1258–1261.
Corina Barbalata received the B.Sc. degree in 2011 from the Transilvania
University Brasov, Romania, and the VIBOT Erasmus Mundus M.Sc. degree
in 2013 from the University of Burgundy, University of Girona and HeriotWatt University. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the field
of control systems for underwater manipulator..vehicle systems at the Ocean
Systems Laboratory, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, U.K.
Her research interests include automation, control systems, computer vision
and machine learning.
Leonardo S. Mattos (M’02) received the B.Sc. degree from the University of
São Paulo (USP), São Carlos, Brazil, in 1998, the M.S. degree in 2003, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering, both from the North Carolina State
University (NCSU), Raleigh, USA.
He is a Team Leader at the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT), Genoa, Italy.
His research interests include micromanipulation, systems integration, development of user interfaces and systems for safe and efficient teleoperation, robotic
surgery, computer vision, adaptive controllers and automation. He worked as a
Research Assistant at the Center for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, NCSU,
from 2002 to 2007. He has been a Researcher at the IIT Advanced Robotics
Department, since 2007. He is the PI and Coordinator of the European project
μRALP.

