IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1253

An Ultrasonic-Adaptive Beamforming Method and
Its Application for Trans-skull Imaging of Certain
Types of Head Injuries; Part I: Transmission Mode
Kiyanoosh Shapoori∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Jeff Sadler, Adrian Wydra, Eugene V. Malyarenko,
Anthony N. Sinclair, Member, IEEE, and Roman Gr. Maev, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A new adaptive beamforming algorithm for imaging
via small-aperture 1-D ultrasonic-phased arrays through composite layered structures is reported. Such structures cause acoustic phase aberration and wave refraction at undulating interfaces
and can lead to significant distortion of an ultrasonic field pattern
produced by conventional beamforming techniques. This distortion takes the form of defocusing the ultrasonic field transmitted
through the barrier and causes loss of resolution and overall degradation of image quality. To compensate for the phase aberration
and the refractional effects, we developed and examined an adaptive beamforming algorithm for small-aperture linear-phased arrays. After accurately assessing the barrier’s local geometry and
sound speed, the method calculates a new timing scheme to refocus
the distorted beam at its original location. As a tentative application, implementation of this method for trans-skull imaging of
certain types of head injuries through human skull is discussed.
Simulation and laboratory results of applying the method on skullmimicking phantoms are presented. Correction of up to 2.5 cm
focal point displacement at up to 10 cm depth under our skull
phantom is demonstrated. Quantitative assessment of the method
in a variety of temporal focusing scenarios is also reported. Overall
temporal deviation on the order of a few nanoseconds was observed
between the simulated and experimental results. The single-point
adaptive focusing results demonstrate strong potential of our approach for diagnostic imaging through intact human skull. The
algorithms were implemented on an ultrasound advanced openplatform controlling 64 active elements on a 128-element phased
array.
Index Terms—Adaptive beamforming, focusing, phase aberration, refraction, trans-skull imaging, ultrasound advanced openplatform (ULA-OP), ultrasonic phased array.

Manuscript received December 12, 2013; revised October 9, 2014; accepted
October 15, 2014. Date of publication October 15, 2014; date of current version
April 17, 2015. This work was supported by the US Office of Naval Research
Award N0001406C0088, and the Ontario Brain Institute/Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario Award 802290-#7, and the Canadian
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ K. Shapoori is with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S, Canada, and also with Tessonics,
Inc., Windsor, ON N9A 4J4, Canada (e-mail: ks@tessonics.com).
J. Sadler is with the Department of Physics, University of Windsor
A. Wydra is with the Institute for Diagnostic Imaging Research
E. V. Malyarenko is with Tessonics Corp.
A. N. Sinclair is with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto
R. G. Maev is with the Institute for Diagnostic Imaging Research, and also
with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of
Toronto
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2371752

I. INTRODUCTION
AGGED as a “silent epidemic” nearly a decade ago, head
injuries are a leading cause of death and disability among
a predominantly young population [1]. The spectrum of these
injuries ranges from minor fragment wounds to mutilating blast
injuries. It is critical for optimal treatment to be able to identify
the internal head injuries in minutes after occurrence. Unfortunately, a noticeable number of head injuries involve foreign
objects of various sizes lodged into the brain tissue, such as
bone fragments, pieces of shrapnel, even bullets, etc. If conventional imaging techniques via phased arrays are used for
ultrasonic trans-skull imaging of such objects, strong scattering, phase aberration, and refraction by the human skull could
result in significant distortion and defocusing of the ultrasonic
field. These effects, along with human skull’s natural strong
attenuation, lead to significant degradation of the image quality, loss of spatial resolution, and possibly large displacement
or total disappearance of reflecting targets in the resulting image. Implementing accurate focusing and steering adapted to the
propagation media can help optimize image quality of the final
sonograms obtained with all existing beamforming techniques.
The human skull bone is inhomogeneous and in many regions
consists of compact (cortical) versus porous (cancellous or trabecular) bone as shown in Fig. 1. The middle porous layer is the
main contributor to the distortional effects of attenuation and
scattering of ultrasonic waves [3], [4]. The total skull thickness
in adults normally varies from 4 to 12 mm [5]–[7].
In the past years, there have been various studies to characterize distortional effects of human skull [5]–[9]. Efforts have been
made to study the feasibility of ultrasonic trans-skull focusing.
A famous phase aberration correction example is the time reversal mirror method, invented by Fink [10]–[12]. Some other
studies led to more suggestions on how to partially compensate
for human skull phase aberration in both imaging [13]–[22],
and therapeutic [23]–[28] applications. Here, the use of the
term “partially” is due to the fact that all suggested correction
techniques include some inevitable simplifications due to the
structural complexity of the human skull.
A major contribution has been made on the therapeutic side,
where large-scale ultrasound arrays have been used for deep tissue hypertherima and surgery [29]–[32]. For example, Hynynen
et al. suggested methods to focus ultrasound to generate heat
and produce coagulatory necrosis [26]–[28]. On the imaging
side, however, smaller arrays have been used for imaging purposes. There have been improvements in developing methods for

T

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1254

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Human skull profile [2].

transcranial imaging through human skull temporal windows
using small aperture ultrasound probes. Many of the current
commercially available transcranial imaging systems employ
such methods, but yet, due to strong distortional effects of human skull on ultrasound, imaging through thick human skull has
remained a highly attractive while extremely challenging field
of study.
Besides the pure ultrasonic methods, also studies have been
conducted to take advantage of high resolution skull profile
imaging techniques for phase aberration correction of ultrasonic
arrays. MRI-guided adaptive focusing [33]–[35] and CT-guided
adaptive focusing techniques [36], [37] fall in this category.
In this paper, a new phase aberration compensation method
for adaptive focusing of ultrasound through randomly shaped
scattering layers via small aperture 1-D phased arrays is
presented. The method is then optimized for the case of human
skull as the scattering layer and its application for trans-skull
imaging via adaptive beamforming is discussed. In an earlier
report, a limited version of the current study without formal
analysis of our main results or comprehensive analytical explanation of the theory and its applicability criteria was presented
[38]. We are now building on that earlier work by including a
thorough description of the method and conducting more realistic simulation and experiments.
The compensation technique to be presented here employs
quick simultaneous measurement of both thickness and sound
speed in the skull phantom, prior to the focusing process. All
the measurements and focusing processes are implemented on
the same 1-D array. We note that the use of an array with a large
number of elements in a small physical footprint is essential
for this technique; it makes accurate geometrical and acoustical
measurements of the skull segment in contact with the probe
possible.
In order to explain different aspects of the proposed method,
it is important to first take into account all of the major physical
effects of skull contributing to the sonogram quality reduction in
an ultrasonic beamforming process. In the trans-skull imaging
application discussed in this paper, major contributions come
from attenuation, scattering, strong impedance mismatch between the skull and rest of the propagation media, as well as

Fig. 2. (a) Beam steering and focusing at the transmission stage. τ i are delays that vary as a function of each element’s position. (b) Geometry used for
calculating the required delays. (Reproduced, with permission, from [39].)

complex surface topography of the skull (large variations of
thickness-to-wavelength ratio over the probe’s area). The distortional effects of scattering and absorption will be discussed
in more detail in the following sections. The main focus of
our phase aberration correction technique, however, is on compensating for the two remaining factors, i.e., for the acoustic
mismatch between the skull and the brain tissue as well as
for the skull’s thickness variation. These last two factors cause
unpredictable bending of the wave trajectories leading to the
angle-dependent displacement and blurring of the focal spot.
The proposed method automatically adapts the time delay transmission patterns of the phased array to the local geometry and
acoustical properties of the skull and cancels its refractional
distorting effects.
Section II contains theoretical aspects and methodology of the
adaptive compensation technique. The proposed method is then
verified through a numerical simulation with wave propagation
modeling, and through a series of laboratory experiments using
a skull-mimicking 1-D phantom.

II. THEORY
Phased array imaging is achieved via multiple steering and
focusing of ultrasonic waves in both transmission and reception
modes. As shown in Fig. 2(a), focusing is achieved by appropriate timing of signals for each array element. The delayed
ultrasonic fields interfere constructively with each other at the
intended focal area and destructively elsewhere. This way the
focus can be placed at any desired angle and depth within the focusing range of the transducer. This process is then repeated for
every transmission and reception shot until the whole area of
interest in front of the array is scanned and a final sonogram is
generated [39].
In a homogeneous medium, the path of a beam from each
array element to any observation point in front of the array can
be assumed to be a straight line. Focusing can be achieved by
introducing the time delays, τn , as indicated in Fig. 2(a). To be
able to make a focus at desired coordinates, (RF , φs ), the delays

SHAPOORI et al.: ULTRASONIC-ADAPTIVE BEAMFORMING METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION FOR TRANS-SKULL IMAGING

to each element can be found as

1
(N − 1)2 d2
+ (N − 1)RF d sin |φs |
RF2 +
τn =
c0
4


2
2
− RF + (nd) − 2nRF d sin φs
(1)
where the index n denotes the element number, −(N − 1)/2 ≤
n ≤ (N − 1)/2. N is the total number of elements in the array,
and c0 is the longitudinal sound speed in propagation medium.
RF and φs are the focal distance and the steering angle measured
from the center of the array, respectively, and d is the array’s
pitch [see Fig. 2(b)].
The next step is the calculation of the far-field response of
the array of point sources under pulse excitation. The complex
pressure p at a distance r from a single point source excited by
a Gaussian modulated sinusoidal waveform is given by
A j ω c (t−r /c 0 ) −σ ω2 (t−r /c 0 ) 2 /2
e
e
(2)
r
where ωc is the angular center frequency. The −6 dB bandwidth
is equal to 2.36 σω /ωc where σω defines the width of the temporal Gaussian window. The waveform at any observation point
(R, θ) can be found by summing over all N elements of the array,
i.e.
p(r : t) =

p(R, θ : t) ≈

−

A jωc t
e
R

(N −1)/2



where
rn =



2

/2

] . Ωn

It is again noted that in the development of (1)–(5), straight
paths are assumed from the array elements to desired focal coordinates or observation points. This is in fact a key assumption
in most existing conventional beamforming techniques. But,
in the presence of a barrier of nonuniform thickness, e.g., human skull, ultrasonic beams can be refracted away from their
intended targets and have their timing delayed. Under such circumstances, the use of original timing patterns (calculated based
on the straight path assumption, i.e., (1)) results in distortion and
displacement of the beam from its intended focal spot, and compromise the final image. An adaptive beamforming algorithm is
required to avoid such image degradation.
In our proposed algorithm, geometrical and acoustical properties of the skull layer and brain tissue are used to find physically possible refracted acoustic ray paths between the active
elements of the array and the desired focal point. In simulation,
the acoustical and geometrical properties of the skull layer are
input by the user. In practice, these properties will be measured
by the imaging probe, via the method we recently disclosed in
[41].
After defining the skull layer in the simulation, the proposed
method first discretizes the inner boundary of the skull profile.
The step size between the boundary points is a user-defined
value. Use of finer steps results in calculation of more accurate
refracted paths but with cost of higher processing time. The
process continues by first solving the Helmholtz equation in
each medium:
∇2 Φ + k 2 Φ = 0

n =−(N −1)/2

e−σ ω (t−r m /c 0 )
2

[e−j ω c r n /c 0

−

(3)

(R cos θ)2 + (R sin θ − nd)2

and Ωn is the spatial apodization coefficient on the nth element
and R represents the distance from the middle point (origin) of
the array to the observation point. The above Gaussian modulated waveform can be digitized and addressed as Sref (m), with
m being the sample number in the excitation signal. The total
intensity at each observation point (pixel) in front of the array
could be then calculated by a first summation over the m samples of the spatially apodized excitation signal for each element,
Sn , and a second summation over all n active elements on the
array as

2

 

Sn (RF , φs , m + ξn )
(4)
P (R, θ) =



m
n
where
Sn (RF , φs , m) = Exp(−αr)Sref (RF , φs , m + τn )Ωn
(5)
In the previous equations, ξn is the difference between the
paths from the observation point to the nth element and from
the observation point to the middle of the array in signal sample
unit [40]. Also, α is the attenuation coefficient in “Np/m,” and
x is the beam path length, in meters, from the observation point
to the nth element on the array.

1255

(6)

√
In (6), k = k/ 1 + jωκμB is a complex wave number in
−
√
which k = ω/c0 and c0 = 1/ κρ0 . κ and μB are the compressibility coefficient and bulk modulus of the propagation media,
respectively. The algorithm then searches through the boundary
points and, based on Fermat’s principle, picks the one at which
all boundary conditions are satisfied. The identified boundary
point defines the physically possible refracted path between an
active element on the array and a desired focal point. This process is then repeated for all the active elements on the array
which participate in the beamforming process. The calculated
refracted paths are then used in (1)–(5), replacing their original
straight counterparts RF , R, r, and rn , to derive a new timing
pattern and generate a corrected beam profile. The new pattern
is adapted to the geometry and acoustical properties of the skull
phantom and is designed to refocus the beam at the desired
location. By adding the effects of skull refraction to (4), the
far-field response of the array is calculated at each pixel and its
corrected beam profile is finally reconstructed. Both simulation
and experimental results will then be used to verify the accuracy
of the new adapted timing pattern.
It should be noted that due to their minimal distortional effects
on the application in hand, some approximations were made
during this study.
Consideration of nonlinearity effects of the barrier (skull)
and propagation media (skin and brain tissue) is outside the
scope of this study. This, in fact, is a valuable tradeoff for our
final imaging purposes since accounting for nonlinearity could

1256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

substantially increase the algorithm processing time. Accounting for nonlinearity delivers relatively minor sonogram corrections compared to the refraction-related algorithm presented
here.
It also should be noted that in the particular case of this
study, dispersion across the spectral bandwidth of the transmitted pulse is very minor. Based on previous studies on the human
skull bone [6], we estimate a maximum phase velocity variation of ±30 m/s over the implemented bandwidth of 1–3 MHz.
In our simulation, this variation is neglected over the average
sound speed of 2980 m/s that we use in our study for full skull
segments.
In the frequency range of our study (∼2 MHz—%100 BW),
the radii of pores in the trabecular layer in many areas of a
human skull are much smaller than the average wavelength in
skull bone. The wavelength in cortical layers is of the order of
1.5 mm at 2 MHz. In other words, we are in the Rayleigh regime
in many areas of human skull. Under this condition, scattering
patterns of pores lead to very low misdirectional effects, as
explained by Cobbold in [42], and only their attenuation effect
needs to be considered.
As the targets to be imaged via application of the method presented in this paper are highly reflective small objects lodged in
the brain tissue, the aforementioned simplifications are allowable, as opposed to the case of normal brain tissue imaging via
collection of reflected pulses from inhomogeneities. Also, shear
wave transmission inside the skull and its mode conversion at
the boundaries are not considered since this mode is mainly
appreciable at angles beyond the angle of intromission (∼20°
[43]).
The application of this technique remains limited to those
skull areas where the porous layer is not extremely thick or the
pores are not extremely large. In other areas, the attenuation
and scattering effects are predicted to dominate and cause the
transmitted signals to be buried in noise upon reception. As an
example, estimated applicable and nonapplicable areas on the
center-line of the sample skull in Fig. 3 are marked as green
versus red regions, respectively.
Such areas can be immediately recognized by looking at the
normal beam B-scan image obtained with a 1-D phased array
probe placed in contact with the head skin. If the reflection from
the back wall (inner boundary of the skull interfacing the brain
tissue) is clearly visible in the scan, then the segment in contact
with the probe falls in the green zone and vice versa. Examples
of such in vivo B-scans for green zones, taken in our laboratory through ULA-OP (an ultrasound advanced open platform,
university of Florence [44]) and our 128-element phased array
(PA230-Esaote SpA), are shown in Fig. 4. The two examples
show different behavior of skull thickness variation at different
regions.
III. SIMULATION AND DISCUSSION
The main theory of the proposed adaptive beamforming technique has been developed for the case of a 1-D phased array of
64 elements in transmission mode. The mathematical approach
has been verified through computer simulation, with the source

Fig. 3. Example of applicable and nonapplicable regions of human skull for
the reported method. The red zones refer to the skull areas possessing extreme
porosity [2].

Fig. 4. In vivo B-scans of human forehead profile imaged with ULA-OP in
our laboratory. In these images, the effect of the porous layer is not too extreme;
the reflection from the inner boundary is detectable and therefore the inspection
area is in the green zone.

codes developed in MATLAB and C++. The program receives
ultrasonic and geometrical properties of the skull and brain tissue (e.g., sound velocities, densities, geometrical profile of skull
layer, etc.) as inputs. It then defines the excitation signals for
individual array elements within predefined boundaries (e.g.,
pulse shape and duration, central frequency, bandwidth, choice
of a temporal window, etc.).
The simulation results presented here were obtained with the
following input parameters.

SHAPOORI et al.: ULTRASONIC-ADAPTIVE BEAMFORMING METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION FOR TRANS-SKULL IMAGING

Fig. 5. Original and corrected time delay patterns responsible for beamforming at focal coordinates of (5 cm, 0°), corresponding to Fig. 6(a) and (c),
respectively.

1) Propagation media—Sound velocities of 2980 and
1540 m/s and attenuation of 24 dB/cm at 2 MHz and
1.8 dB/cm at 2 MHz) for the barrier and the propagation
media (close to the average values for most areas of the
human skull and brain tissue, respectively [5]–[7]). It is
important to note that the range of measured ultrasonic
attenuation values reported in the literature is very broad
as also discussed in [41]. The difference in the measured
values can be attributed to many factors, including different porosity, different physical conditions of the skull
bone, and even different measurement techniques.
2) Transducer array—The simulation results are presented
for an array of 64 point source transducers pitched at
0.17 mm making a total aperture size of 10.71 mm. Spatial apodization of Gaussian type was used to weight the
element outputs accordingly to minimize the appearance
of side lobes in the beam profile pattern.
3) Excitation signal—A 6-μs-long Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal waveform with central frequency of 2 MHz and
100% bandwidth, digitized at the sampling frequency of
50 MHz and quantized with 16-bit resolution, was introduced to the simulated beamformer.
After calculating the corrected time delay pattern for a desired
focal point, the simulation is capable of generating an intensity
profile of the array’s ultrasonic field. As an example, Fig. 6
shows (a) simulated original transmitted beam intensity profile
without accounting for the skull layer, (b) simulated distorted
intensity profile with the skull present, but with no adaptive
beamforming, and (c) beam from Fig. 6(b) corrected by the
new beamforming technique. Each image covers an area of
6 cm × 10 cm with a pixel resolution of 0.5 mm. The white
cross shows the location of the intended focus. It can be seen
that the misdirected beam of Fig. 6(b) is redirected to a path
through the white cross in Fig. 6(c) after the compensation
algorithm is applied.
In terms of timing the simulated array elements, Fig. 5 represents time delay patterns over 64 transmitting elements used
in Fig. 6. The curve labeled as “original” shows the excitation

1257

timing sequence of the array elements when beamforming at
focal coordinates of (R = 5 cm, 0°) is intended in absence of
a simulated skull layer [see Fig. 6(a)]. The curve labeled as
“corrected,” on the other hand, represents excitation timing sequence of array elements in the same scenario, but this time
in the presence of the simulated skull layer used to generate
Fig. 6(c). The timing sequence is now adapted to the local geometry and acoustical properties of the simulated skull layer
in contact with the probe. Through application of this modified
timing pattern, the out-of-focus beam of Fig. 6(b) was brought
back to its desired direction as was shown in Fig. 6(c).
At first glance, it is notable that the original timing sequence
of the array elements in Fig. 5 is distributed symmetrically
around the center of the transmitting aperture for the example
focal coordinates of (5 cm, 0°). This is due to the symmetry
of the propagation medium in the absence of a simulated skull
layer. The corrected timing sequence, on the other hand, is not
symmetric as it was adapted to the asymmetric geometry of the
simulated skull layer.
As a simple verification of the two plots, comparison between
the original and corrected timing of single elements of the array
can be made. In the specific case of the previous simulated
system, when the simulated skull is present, the 40th element of
the array is excited with a delay of 4.86 × 10−7 s compared to its
excitation in the absence of the layer. A ray-tracing calculation
of the straight and refracted paths from this element to the focal
coordinates verifies the result.
It must be noted that in the simulation results presented in this
section, no major sources of error can be identified. All the input
parameters, e.g., sound speeds in the propagation media are userdefined and single-valued. Some very minor sources of error,
related to numerical solutions of systems of equations, can be
identified, although their effect can be kept small. Examples include errors associated with sampling of the excitation signal or
discretization of the simulated skull’s inner boundary. By use
of a very high sampling frequency (e.g., high-order multiples
of the Nyquist frequency) or very fine mesh-grid on the skull’s
inner boundary (e.g., small fraction of the wavelength), the corresponding contribution to simulation errors can be kept very
small. Comprehensive quantitative assessment and error analysis of the developed adaptive beamforming method are therefore
delayed until the end of Section IV where the new beamforming
strategy is implemented in experimental setups.

IV. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
To check the validity of the proposed theory and simulation,
a series of laboratory experiments was conducted with custom
skull phantoms fabricated in our laboratory [45]. The phantoms have their main geometrical and acoustical properties, i.e.,
sound speed, attenuation, and density, well within the ranges
reported in the literature for the human skull. The latest generation of our phantoms mimics a skull segment with two cortical
layers and a middle porous layer. The intermediate porous layer
was introduced into the phantoms to resemble the diploe layer.
The composite material, its fabrication process, and measured

1258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 6. (a) Simulated original transmitted beam profile in the absence of a simulated skull, (b) distorted beam in the presence of a simulated skull with no adaptive
beamforming, and (c) beam from Fig. 2(b) corrected by the new beamforming technique. Results for focal coordinates of (5 cm, 0°) are shown. The intended target
is designated by a white cross.

TABLE I
PROPERTIES OF HUMAN SKULL AND THE SKULL PHANTOM
Property
Density (g/cm3)
Attenuation @2 MHz (dB/cm)
Sound velocity (m/s)
Thickness (mm)

Fig. 7. (a) Skull phantom samples with various porosity levels. (b) Picture of
the phantom used in the laboratory tests.

ultrasonic properties of such phantoms are reported by our team
in [45].
As explained earlier, consideration of the acoustic nonlinearity of the human skull is outside the scope of this study and
therefore it was not a required parameter while developing the
skull phantoms. By controlling the thickness of each layer as
well as the density and the distribution of pores in the phantoms,
it is possible to control the total density, attenuation, and sound
speed of each phantom. Fig. 7(a) shows some sample pieces
with different porosity layers, while Fig. 7(b) shows the skull
phantom used in the experimental tests in this study. In this case,
to mimic the geometrical profile of real human skull segments,

Skull phantom

Human skull

2.04
24
2980
5.3–11.7

1.7–2.3
17–38
2800–3300
4–12

it is flat on one side and has an undulating structure on the other
side with a variable thickness of 5.3–11.7 mm. It should also be
noted that this phantom is suitable for testing with 1-D arrays,
while a 2-D array would need phantom with curves along both
surface axes. Avoiding the extreme thickness and heavy porosity
of those human skull areas labeled as “inapplicable” in Fig. 3,
the phantom shown in Fig. 7(b) was designed to possess the
main acoustical properties in the range of the rest of the skull
(labeled as “applicable” in Fig. 3).
Table I lists the main acoustical properties of the skull phantom shown in Fig. 7(b) as well as their corresponding average
reported ranges for nonextreme regions of human skull based
on the literature data [5]–[7].
Fig. 8 shows a schematic configuration of our experimental setup. The adaptive beamforming algorithm in transmission
mode was implemented on ULA-OP. Via its 64 independent
channels, ULA-OP simultaneously controls 64 active elements
selected out of our 128-element phased array (PA230-Esaote
SpA). This array possesses elements of 0.1 mm width, 14 mm
height, 0.5 mm depth, and 0.17 mm pitch with central frequency
of 2 MHz and bandwidth of 85% at −6 dB.
The probe was submerged in water and held in contact with the phantom. An ultrasonic hydrophone (Pinducer,
Valpey-Fisher) was attached to a 4-D scanner (XSel, IAI) to

SHAPOORI et al.: ULTRASONIC-ADAPTIVE BEAMFORMING METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION FOR TRANS-SKULL IMAGING

Fig. 8.

Schematic configuration of our experimental setup.

Fig. 9.

Typical B-scan of one of the skull phantom in Fig. 7(b).

measure the acoustic field pressure in the plane of the 1-D probe
[see xz plane in Fig. 2(b)] with a 0.5 mm step size. At each
scanning point, the hydrophone signal was amplified, digitized,
averaged, and then processed to calculate the acoustic pressure.
To obtain information about the geometry of the skull phantom prior to the beamforming process, a customized B-scan
of the skull was recorded using all 128 elements of the array.
To get a better SNR on receiving RF signals of the B-scan, we
arranged five elements at a time to focus at a 1 cm distance
from the probe’s surface. Starting from one end of the array, this
small aperture was moved in single element steps to the other
end of the 1-D probe. At each step, multiple acquisitions of the
RF signals were recorded for averaging prior to the five-element
beamforming and summation processes.
Fig. 9 shows a typical result of such scan. The skull phantom
profile extracted from the B-scan was then fed into the simulation program (described in Section III) to calculate a new
corrected delay pattern. Excitation signals with amplitude of
100 Vpp were applied to the array elements via ULA-OP according to the calculated delay time profile. After loading this
pattern to the ULA-OP and applying appropriate delay times
to the excitation pulses for all active elements, the hydrophone
starts scanning to measure the resulting beam profile.

1259

Fig. 10 shows a sample representative set of beam patterns
measured using the previous apparatus. Each image in Fig. 10 is
a result of scanning the hydrophone over an area of 5 × 5 cm2 in
front of the array and around the intended focus (white cross).
In this case, the intended focal coordinates were at RF = 5 cm
and φs = 0◦ , i.e., on the normal to the probe and 5 cm away
from its center. (Results are similar for nonzero values of φs ).
Fig. 10(a) shows the measured beam profile in water without the phantom. Fig. 10(b) shows the measured beam pattern
through the skull phantom when the conventional delay scheme
(without correction) is applied. Similar to the simulation results,
it can be seen how dramatically a beam can be deflected from its
intended focal point. Fig. 10(c) shows the measured beam profile through the skull phantom after applying the corrected delay
pattern via ULA-OP. It can be seen that the developed adaptive
beamforming algorithm in the transmission mode is capable of
bringing the misdirected beam of Fig. 10(b) back to the desired
orientation, so that the beam passes through the intended focus
[see Fig. 10(c)]. The experimental result is consistent with the
simulation results of Fig. 6.
Compared to the beam of Fig. 10(a), lower intensity levels
are observable in both Fig. 10(b) and (c); this loss of signal
strength is due to the presence of the skull phantom which
leads to attenuation and interfacial transmission losses. Based
on the HGL-0400 hydrophone’s calibrated chart provided by the
manufacturer, a pressure amplitude of 3.577 MPa was measured
at the intended focus in Fig. 10(a). On the other hand, a pressure
amplitude of only 0.233 MPa was measured for the beam profile
of Fig. 10(c) at the same intended focus.
For a better assessment, the pressure plots of the three profiles
at the intended focus and along the x-axis are shown in Fig. 11
on a log scale. On this representative example, a displacement
of 7.04 mm was observed between the intended focus and the
peak of the distorted profile, as illustrated in Fig. 10(b). The
peak of the corrected profile [see Fig. 10(c)] is only 0.013 mm
away from the intended focus.
The experimental results shown in Fig. 10 are consistent with
the simulation results of Fig. 6. As a more stringent test, another
set of experiments was designed and conducted to quantitatively
evaluate the developed adaptive focusing method. The evaluation was based on measuring the deviation between calculated
time delay patterns via developed simulation and their experimentally measured counterparts in temporal focusing scenarios.
A schematic representation of the setup used in this set of experiments is shown in Fig. 12.
For such assessment, a “single-element excitation” mode was
designed and programmed on ULA-OP. In this operating mode,
any single element of the 1-D array can be individually excited.
The array was submerged in the water tank and the HGL-0400
hydrophone was attached to the 4-D scanner for accurate positioning of the hydrophone at any desired point in front of the
probe. The experiment was controlled by ULA-OP, which triggered the excitation pulse and the oscilloscope (Tektronix TBS1000, United States) attached to the hydrophone.
The first test was conducted to measure the setup’s baseline error in a simple nonadaptive focusing scenario without
the skull phantom for future references. For this experiment, the

1260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 10. Experimental results of (a) original, (b) distorted, and (c) corrected beam profiles in the absence and presence of the skull phantom. White cross shows
the intended focus.

Fig. 12. Schematic representation of the experimental setup used to measure
the deviation between calculated and measured time delay patterns in different
temporal focusing scenarios.

Fig. 11. Pressure plots of original, distorted, and corrected beam profiles of
Fig. 10 along x-axis at the intended focus.

hydrophone was placed in the array’s imaging plane [see xz
plane in Fig. 2(b)] in front of the center of the 64-element aperture and 5 cm away from the probe’s surface. This corresponds
to focal coordinates of (RF , ϕs ) = (5 cm, 0◦ ) in Fig. 2(b). For
accurate placement of the tip of the hydrophone at these coordinates, its position was calibrated both in depth and laterally. For
depth calibration, the hydrophone was moved along the probes
center-line until time-of-flight corresponding to 5 cm was observed on the oscilloscope. For lateral calibration, first and last
elements on the probe were excited separately. The probe was
moved along the x-axis [see Fig. 2(b)] until equal time-of-flights
were measured for the two received signals.

After the hydrophone was accurately positioned at the intended focal point, the 64 central elements of the array were
excited, one by one. The signal received by the hydrophone
corresponding to each of these 64 events was digitized and
saved. The signals were then transferred to another MATLAB
script to determine the relative time delays among the signals
by calculating the peak of the envelope function of each signal.
The envelope function was calculated via the Hilbert transform
method.
The physically measured time delay pattern was processed
to yield the time delay of each element relative to the central
element. To generate a corresponding delay pattern with the
simulation code, the appropriate focusing geometry was input to
the code, together with the measured speed of 1489 m/s for water
at our laboratory conditions; the resulting time delay pattern
was then calculated. The resulting measured and simulated time
delay patterns, both expressed relative to the central element, are
compared in Fig. 13(a). The deviation between the two curves as

SHAPOORI et al.: ULTRASONIC-ADAPTIVE BEAMFORMING METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION FOR TRANS-SKULL IMAGING

1261

Fig. 14. Focal coordinates used in the temporal deviation measurement experiments via the 1-D probe.

Fig. 13. (a) Comparison of measured and calculated delay patterns in the
absence of the skull phantom. (b) Plot of deviation between the two patterns.

a percentage of the pulse period at its central frequency (T2M Hz )
is shown in Fig. 13(b).
A standard deviation of 4 × 10−9 s was observed for this
temporal deviation distribution. This standard deviation is about
0.8% of the pulse period at its central frequency (T2 M Hz ). This
small baseline deviation can be attributed to various sources of
errors during the measurements. Hydrophone positioning error
is recognized as the primary source of error. For example, a
positioning error of ∼8 μm could cause error of the same order
as the mentioned standard deviation (∼1% of the signal period at
2 MHz). Other sources include water sound speed measurement
error, and the measurement errors associated with the sampling
and envelope peak measurements of the received signals. Such
baseline error must be recognized and considered in the next
step, where temporal deviation is measured in the presence of
the skull phantom. In this step, the skull phantom of Fig. 7(b) is
added to the setup and is held in contact with the 1-D probe.
The previous procedure is then repeated to measure the timeof-flight between each array element and the tip of the hydrophone. The relative time delay pattern of the received signals
in this setup represents the time delay pattern adapted to the geometry and acoustical properties of the skull phantom segment

in contact with the probe. The final time delay pattern was again
obtained by calculating the peak of the envelope function of
each signal.
To calculate the counterpart of this measured delay pattern
through the simulation algorithm, first the extracted profile of
Fig. 9 was input to the simulation code and the adapted delay
pattern was calculated. The measured and calculated patterns
are finally compared and the temporal deviation plot is generated. The results for the representative skull phantom profile of
Fig. 9 and six focal points through this profile are reported here.
The set of six focal coordinates are listed and graphically shown
in Fig. 14. These points were chosen within the accessible inspection area of the 1-D probe, shown schematically with dotted
lines.
Final temporal deviation plots for the skull phantom profile
of Fig. 9 are presented in Fig. 15.
Overall larger deviation values were observed compared
to the previous case where the skull phantom was not introduced. This is mainly due to the errors associated with the skull
phantom profile measurement and also to the random phase
shifts induced by the diploe in the skull phantom. In each focusing scenario, the standard deviation still remained a small
fraction of the pulse period. Maximum temporal deviation of
2.34 × 10−8 s was observed. Maximum standard deviation of
8 × 10−9 s was observed. This standard deviation is about 1.6%
of the pulse period at 2 MHz.
In some temporal deviation plots, a positive or negative constant offset was observed, e.g., focal point no. 6 in Fig. 15. In
the authors’ opinion, this relates to the depth positioning error
of the hydrophone via the 4-D scanner. Such a shift can be better
understood when a simple focusing scenario, such as the case
for Fig. 13, is considered. If the hydrophone is placed closer to
the probe’s surface than the intended focus, the distribution will
have a shift below the zero line in the corresponding temporal
deviation plot. A depth positioning inaccuracy of 15 μm would
result in a shift of up to 2% in the temporal deviation plots.
The quantitative assessment of the developed adaptive focusing method showed consistency between the simulation
and experimental results. The overall order of measured and
reported deviations, as a small percentage of the signal period,

1262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 15. Temporal deviation plots when focusing on representative focal points of Fig. 14 through the skull profile in Fig. 9. The signal period at its central
frequency (2 MHz) is 0.5 μs.

would lead to an intensity error of less than 0.06% in the final
image. This small error is acceptable for the final beamforming
purposes of this study.
One of the main challenges during this study was minimization of the processing time. The most time-consuming portion
is the calculation of refracted paths instead of simple straight
paths. This might not be a serious concern for a single focal
point (see Figs. 6 and 10). But for this method to be applicable
as an imaging technique, such corrections needs to be implemented for each element and each of the focal points involved
in both transmission and reception processes. Therefore, the
simplifications addressed in previous sections could be valuable
compromises to achieve higher frame rates.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The presented adaptive beamforming algorithm has demonstrated the ability to focus ultrasound through certain types of
multilayered randomly shaped ultrasonic barriers for the case
of a 1-D array. Each layer of the barrier is assumed homogeneous in this study. This method can be introduced to any of the
currently existing conventional active beamforming processes
to effectively remove phase aberrations caused by refraction at
barrier interface. The developed theory was successfully verified

through numerical simulation as well as laboratory experiments.
Results of beam focusing and steering through simulated and
fabricated skull phantoms were presented. The ULA-OP research system used in the experiments was exploited to quickly
modify the timing sequences and to select desired signal patterns. The system was interfaced into our immersion scanner,
data acquisition system, and other ultrasonic hardware.
As an immediate future plan, this work will be continued by
applying the developed adaptive focusing method at the reception stage of the beamforming process. The dynamic focusing
nature of a conventional reception mode introduces certain programming challenges due to its much higher computational processing demands. Both the transmission- and reception-adaptive
beamforming processes will then be combined to produce a final corrected 2-D sonogram, which will be compared with the
distorted sonogram and with the actual defect map. Extension
of the method to planar arrays and 3-D adaptive beamforming
and imaging through realistic ultrasonic skull phantoms is also
part of our future plan.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express sincere gratitude to Tessonics Corp. for
the financial and technical support.

SHAPOORI et al.: ULTRASONIC-ADAPTIVE BEAMFORMING METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION FOR TRANS-SKULL IMAGING

REFERENCES
[1] National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Traumatic Brain
Injury: Hope Through Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA, NIH Pub. no. 02-158, 2007.
[2] L. D. E. Rohen and C. Yokochi, Color Atlas of Anatomy, 4th ed. Baltimore,
MD, USA: Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
[3] S. A. Gross et al., “Comprehensive compilation of empirical ultrasonic
properties of mammalian tissues,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 64, no. 2,
pp. 423–457, 1978.
[4] S. A. Gross et al., “Compilation of empirical ultrasonic properties of
mammalian tissues, II,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 93–108,
1980.
[5] F. J. Fry and J. E. Barger, “Acoustical properties of the human skull,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1576–1590, 1978.
[6] S. Pichardo et al., “Multi-frequency characterization of the speed of sound
and attenuation coefficient for longitudinal transmission of freshly excised
human skulls,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 219–250, Jan. 2011.
[7] G. Pinton et al., “Attenuation, scattering, and absorption of ultrasound in
the skull bone,” Med. Phys., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 299–307, Jan. 2012.
[8] T. Hölscher et al., “Transcranial sound field characterization,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 973–980, Jun. 2008.
[9] A. Y. Ammi et al., “Characterization of ultrasound propagation through
ex-vivo human temporal bone,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 10,
pp. 1578–1589, Oct. 2008.
[10] M. Fink, “Time reversal of ultrasonic fields. I. Basic principles,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 555–566,
Sep. 1992.
[11] F. Wu et al., “Time reversal of ultrasonic fields. II. Experimental results,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 39, no. 5,
pp. 567–578, Jan. 1992.
[12] D. Cassereau and M. Fink, “Time-reversal of ultrasonic fields. III. Theory
of the closed time-reversal cavity,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr.,
Freq. Control, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 579–592, Jan. 1992.
[13] S. W. Flax and M. O’Donnell, “Phase-aberration correction using signals from point reflectors and diffuse scatterers: Basic principles,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 758–767,
Jan. 1988.
[14] M. Hirama and T. Sato, “Imaging through an inhomogeneous layer
by least-mean-square error fitting,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 75,
pp. 1142–1147, 1984.
[15] S. Smith and G. Trahey, “Phased array ultrasound imaging through planar
tissue layers,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 229–243, 1986.
[16] L. Nock et al., “Phase aberration correction in medical ultrasound using
speckle brightness as a quality factor,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 85,
no. 5, pp. 1819–1833, May 1989.
[17] G. Trahey et al., “Experimental results with a real-time adaptive ultrasonic imaging system for viewing through distorting media,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 418–427,
Jan. 1990.
[18] D. Rachlin, “Direct estimation of aberrating delays in pulse-echo imaging
systems,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 191–198, Jul. 1990.
[19] Y. Li, “Phase aberration correction using near-field signal redundancy. I.
Principles,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 44,
no. 2, pp. 355–371, Mar. 1997.
[20] Y. Li et al., “Phase aberration correction using near-field signal redundancy. II. Experimental results,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 372–379, Mar. 1997.
[21] R. G. Maev et al., “Ultrasound imaging of brain structures and blood
vessels through thick skull bones,” Report to the ONR Stress Physiology
Program, 2008.
[22] R. G. Maev, Advances in Acoustic Microscopy and High Resolution Imaging: From Principles to Applications. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH,
2013, ch. 2.
[23] G. T. Clement and K. Hynynen, “A non-invasive method for focusing
ultrasound through the human skull,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, no. 8,
pp. 1219–1236, Apr. 2002.
[24] J.-L. Thomas and M. Fink, “Ultrasonic beam focusing through tissue
inhomogeneities with a time reversal mirror: Application to transskull
therapy,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 43,
no. 6, pp. 1122–1129, Nov. 1996.
[25] M. Tanter et al., “Focusing and steering through absorbing and aberrating
layers: Application to ultrasonic propagation through the skull,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Amer., vol. 103, pp. 2403–2410, 1998.
[26] J. Sun and K. Hynynen, “Focusing of therapeutic ultrasound through
a human skull: A numerical study,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 104,
no. 3 Pt 1, pp. 1705–1715, Sep. 1998.

1263

[27] K. Hynynen, “Trans-skull ultrasound therapy: The feasibility of using
image-derived skull thickness information to correct the phase distortion,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 752–755, May 1999.
[28] G. T. Clement et al., “A hemisphere array for non-invasive ultrasound
brain therapy and surgery,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45, pp. 3707–3719,
2000.
[29] J. Song et al., “A 1372-element large scale hemispherical ultrasound
phased array transducer for noninvasive transcranial therapy,” in Proc.
AIP Conf., vol. 377, 2009, pp. 377–381.
[30] G. T. Clement et al., “Investigation of a large-area phased array for focused
ultrasound surgery through the skull,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45, no. 4,
pp. 1071–1083, Apr. 2000.
[31] P. J. White, “Transcranial focused ultrasound surgery,” Topics Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 165–172, Jun. 2006.
[32] A. H. Aitkenhead et al., “The design and characterization of an ultrasound
phased array suitable for deep tissue hyperthermia,” Ultrasound Med..
Biol., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 1793–1807, Nov. 2008.
[33] Y. Hertzberg et al., “Ultrasound focusing using magnetic resonance acoustic radiation force imaging: Application to ultrasound transcranial therapy,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 2934–2942, 2010.
[34] K. Hynynen, “MRI-guided focused ultrasound treatments,” Ultrasonics,
vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 221–229, Feb. 2010.
[35] L. Marsac et al., “MR-guided adaptive focusing of therapeutic ultrasound beams in the human head,” Med. Phys., vol. 39, no. 2,
pp. 1141–1149, Feb. 2012.
[36] J.-F. Aubry et al., “Experimental demonstration of noninvasive transskull
adaptive focusing based on prior computed tomography scans,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Amer., vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 84–93, 2003.
[37] F. Marquet et al., “Non-invasive transcranial ultrasound therapy based on
a 3D CT scan: Protocol validation and in vitro results,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 2597–2613, May 2009.
[38] K. Shapoori et al., “Adaptive beamforming for ultrasonic phased array
focusing through layered structures,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2010,
pp. 1821–1824.
[39] R. Cobbold, Foundations of Biomedical Ultrasound. New York, NY, USA:
Oxford Univ. Press, 2006, ch. 7.
[40] A. Dhanantwari et al., “An efficient 3D beamformer implementation for
real-time 4D ultrasound systems deploying planar array probes” in Proc.
IEEE Ultrason. Symp., Montreal, Canada, Aug. 2004, pp. 1421–1424.
[41] A. Wydra et al., “Simultaneous ultrasonic measurement of the thickness
and the speed of sound in human skull bone phantom,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 58, pp. 1083–1102, 2013.
[42] R. Cobbold, Foundations of Biomedical Ultrasound. New York, NY, USA:
Oxford Univ. Press, 2006, ch. 5.
[43] P. J. White et al., “Longitudinal and shear mode ultrasound propagation in
human skull bone,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1085–1096,
Jul. 2006.
[44] P. Tortoli et al., “ULA-OP: An advanced open platform for ultrasound
research,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 56,
no. 10, pp. 2207–2216, Oct. 2009.
[45] A. Wydra and R. G. Maev, “A novel composite material specifically
developed for ultrasound bone phantoms: Cortical, trabecular and skull,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, pp. N303–N319, Nov. 2013.

Kiyanoosh Shapoori (S’13) received the B.S. degree
in solid state physics from the University of Tehran,
Tehran, Iran, in 2006, and the M.Sc. degree in medical physics from University of Windsor, Windsor,
ON, Canada, in 2008. In 2014, he received the Ph.D.
degree in biomedical engineering from Mechanical
and Industrial Engineering Department, University
of Toronto, ON, Canada.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute for Diagnostic Imaging Research, Toronto, and
a Research Scientist at Tessonics Inc., Windsor.
Jeff Sadler received the B.Sc. degree in physics from the University of Guelph,
Guelph, ON, Canada, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in physics from the
University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada.
He is currently a Research Associate at the University of Windsor.

1264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Adrian Wydra received the M.Sc. degrees in
biomedical engineering and in physics in 2009 and
2013, respectively.
He is currently a Research Assistant at the University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada, and the CTO
of True Phantom Solutions, Inc., Windsor.
Mr. Wydra is the award winner of the 2014
OBI/OCE Entrepreneurship program.

Anthony N. Sinclair (M’88) received the Bachelor’s
degree in engineering science from the University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1976, and the
Ph.D. degree in nuclear engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1980. He
is currently a Professor of mechanical and industrial
engineering at the University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada. His research interests include industrial
applications of ultrasonic nondestructive testing, with
particular emphasis on signal processing, characterization of material interfaces, wave modeling, and
design of piezoelectric sensors for harsh environments.

Eugene V. Malyarenko received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees in solid-state physics and acoustics from Kiev
Taras Shevchenko University, Kiev, Ukraine, in 1994,
and the Ph.D. degree in applied science from the College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, VA, USA,
in 2000, specializing in Lamb wave tomography.
He is currently a Senior Scientist at Tessonics
Corp., Birmingham, MI, USA, developing new industrial and biomedical applications of ultrasound.

Roman Gr. Maev (F’10) received the Master of
Science degree in theoretical nuclear physics from
Moscow Physical Engineering Institute, Moscow,
Russia, in 1969, followed by the Ph.D. degree in
the theory of semiconductors from the Physical P.N.
Lebedev Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow, in 1973. In 2002, he received the
D.Sc. degree from the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, and a Full Professor Diploma in physics
from the Government of the Russian Federation in
2005.
In 2006, he was granted the title of a University Distinguished Professor,
while also being cross appointed with the Electrical Engineering Department,
the University of Windsor. He is also the founding Director-General of the
Institute for Diagnostic Imaging Research—a multidisciplinary, collaborative
research and innovation consortium. He is a Fellow the BINDT since 2012. For
2015 to 2016, he has been appointed as the IEEE Distinguished Lecturer.

