IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

143

Component-Level Tuning of Kinematic Features
From Composite Therapist Impressions
of Movement Quality
Vinay Venkataraman, Student Member, IEEE, Pavan Turaga, Senior Member, IEEE, Michael Baran, Nicole Lehrer,
Tingfang Du, Long Cheng, Thanassis Rikakis, Member, IEEE, and Steven L. Wolf

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a general framework for
tuning component-level kinematic features using therapists’ overall impressions of movement quality, in the context of a home-based
adaptive mixed reality rehabilitation (HAMRR) system. We propose a linear combination of nonlinear kinematic features to model
wrist movement, and propose an approach to learn feature thresholds and weights using high-level labels of overall movement quality
provided by a therapist. The kinematic features are chosen such
that they correlate with the quality of wrist movements to clinical assessment scores. Further, the proposed features are designed
to be reliably extracted from an inexpensive and portable motion
capture system using a single reflective marker on the wrist. Using
a dataset collected from ten stroke survivors, we demonstrate that
the framework can be reliably used for movement quality assessment in HAMRR systems. The system is currently being deployed
for large-scale evaluations, and will represent an increasingly important application area of motion capture and activity analysis.
Index Terms—Kinematic features, movement quality assessment, stroke rehabilitation.

I. INTRODUCTION
TROKE is the most common neurological disorder worldwide [1] leaving behind a significant number of survivors
every year disabled with chronic impairments such as problems
with vision, difficulty to formulate or understand speech, or inability to move limbs. Even with persistent efforts to lower blood
pressure and reduce smoking, the incidence of stroke remain
high due to the ageing population, with nearly three-quarters of

S

Manuscript received January 23, 2014; revised September 29, 2014; accepted
November 16, 2014. Date of publication November 26, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This research was supported by NIH R24 under
Grant 5R24HD050821-10.
V. Venkataraman and P. Turaga are with the School of Electrical, Computer
and Energy Engineering and the School of Arts, Media, and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA (e-mail: vvenka18@asu.edu;
pturaga@asu.edu).
M. Baran and N. Lehrer are with the School of Arts, Media, and Engineering,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281 USA (e-mail: mlbaran@asu.edu;
nlehrer@asu.edu).
T. Du is with Lytro, Inc., Mountain View, CA 94043 USA (e-mail: tfang.du@
gmail.com).
L. Cheng is with Marvell Semiconductor, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA
(e-mail: chenglg@marvell.com).
T. Rikakis is with the School of Design, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: trikakis@andrew.cmu.edu).
S. L. Wolf is with the Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30307 USA, and also with the Center for Visual and Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, Atlanta VA Medical Center, Decatur, GA 30033 USA (e-mail:
swolf@emory.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2375206

stroke related events experienced by people over the age of 65
[2], [3]. This increasing demand for rehabilitation facilities has
been seen as a significant healthcare problem worldwide [4],
[5]. In addition, studies indicate that the increasing healthcare
costs paired with insufficient coverage by insurance for longterm therapy treatment has often left impairments untreated [6].
Hence, it is important to have well-thoughtout strategies to manage these stroke survivors by providing low-cost long-term rehabilitation therapy for their recovery.
Traditional rehabilitation therapy is usually composed of
repetitive movement tasks such as reaching and grasping an
object. A participant performs these movement tasks in a hospital under the supervision of a physical therapist, who visually
monitors the quality of movement over time to provide personalized rehabilitation therapy. This laborious and expensive
process has motivated researchers to invent novel strategies to
accelerate hospital discharge without compromising on clinical
outcomes.
A. Challenges in Developing Component-Level
Kinematic Features
Therapists are trained to assess the overall performance of a
task, which can also be achieved through existing validated clinical measures such as the Wolf motor function test (WMFT) [7]
and the Fugl-Meyer assessment (FMA) [8]. Such clinical measures do not provide enough information about the componentlevel impairments, which will be useful in providing focused
rehabilitation. The motivation of our research was to develop a
computational framework for component-level tuning of kinematic features such as trajectory error, speed profile deviation,
jerkiness, and segmentation using the composite (overall) therapist impressions of movement quality to drive the feedback
module in the home-based adaptive mixed reality rehabilitation
(HAMRR) system.
One recurring problem in the stroke rehabilitation community
is the general lack of consensus among physical therapists in
defining an ontology of component level labels for movement
quality, thereby leading to lack of training datasets to develop
algorithms for movement quality assessment. In addition, therapists only provide composite assessments indicative of quality
of overall movement without any information about components such as deviation in speed profile, leading to a challenging
problem to train the component-level kinematic features, which
are required to provide personalized rehabilitation and facilitate
active learning without therapist supervision. An illustration of
the above concept is shown in Fig. 1, where the aim is to induce

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

144

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 1. Exemplar visual feedback summaries based on low-level kinematic
analysis. (a) Represents an efficient reach, (b) represents trajectory error to the
right, (c) representation of an efficient and consistent task completion, and (d)
represents segmented movement.

active learning by providing auditory and visual feedback
implying the impairments in low-level components such as trajectory inaccuracy, tremor, and segmentation [9]. In Fig. 1(a)
and (c), it represents the visual feedback seen during an efficient reach (reach trajectory without any impairments) marked
by a straight path of rocks or a complete boat, while Fig. 1(b)
represents a reach with trajectory error on the right marked by
curved path of rocks (in red), and Fig. 1(d) represents a reach
with segmentation error marked by a broken boat.
B. Toward Home-Based Rehabilitation Systems
Clinical intervention alone is not completely effective for
restoring daily activity functionality in a stroke survivor [10]–
[13]. A comprehensive study involving 1277 stroke survivors
has reported that an early hospital discharge and home-based
rehabilitation strategy resulted in reduced length of stay by
13 days, and overall mean costs being 15% lower compared
to standard care, without any significant effect on mortality
or clinical outcomes [14]. A similar long-term study has reported significant reduction in hospital stay without any change
in health outcomes in stroke survivors who experienced homebased rehabilitation compared to traditional rehabilitation care
[15].
Interactive neurorehabilitation systems which computationally evaluate and deliver feedback based on a subject’s movement performance have been utilized to provide home-based
rehabilitation care. With advances in 3-D motion capture and
wearable sensor technology, researchers from various backgrounds have developed objective measures for movement quality assessment during and following rehabilitation [16]–[20].
Virtual and mixed reality environments have been employed in
novel stroke rehabilitation strategies [21]–[24]. In this direction,
adaptive mixed reality rehabilitation system, which integrates
rehabilitation and motor learning theories with motion capture,
activity analysis, and multimedia feedback [25], [26], has been
shown as an effective rehabilitation system in helping improve
the kinematic and functional performance of a stroke survivor’s
upper extremity in a hospital setting. Examples of visual feedback for active learning using the home system are shown in
Fig. 1. In addition, accommodating heavy marker-based systems
in a home-based setting is unrealistic, as inaccurate placement of

Fig. 2. HAMRR system designed for stroke survivors. The system uses four
OptiTrack cameras to track the wrist movements as well as a computer and
speakers to provide audio and visual feedback during therapy treatment. The
table is designed to accommodate custom touch and grasp objects for training
reaches in different orientations. In the inset, we see the placement of a wrist
marker on a participant performing reaching tasks to a cone. The system design
is discussed in detail in [9].

markers can negatively affect the movement quality assessment
framework and place a heavy burden on the stroke survivor
and/or caregiver. In recent years, the focus of rehabilitation research has been toward devising multimodal interventions and
accompanying tools to assist home-based therapy [9], [25], [27],
thereby supplementing traditional therapy received in the hospital. A solution to this was proposed in [9], where a single
reflective marker was placed on the participant’s wrist to track
the movement (see Fig. 2). A recent study has shown that a single
marker-based system (marker on the wrist) can achieve comparable performance levels of movement quality assessment to a
heavy marker-based system [17].
In this paper, our aim is to use the composite labels provided by therapists’ impressions to learn the underlying movement components. We propose several kinematic features and
learn the associated thresholds and weights using composite labels to reach data. This research facilitates better understanding
of the underlying components defining movement quality and
also the generation of a “cumulative score” for movement quality, which can aid physical therapists in visual monitoring during
supervised rehabilitation therapy.
C. Contributions
Our aim is to decompose the movement quality score (given
by therapists) into its constituent kinematic components. We

VENKATARAMAN et al.: COMPONENT-LEVEL TUNING OF KINEMATIC FEATURES FROM COMPOSITE THERAPIST IMPRESSIONS

assume a linear relation between kinematic features and composite movement quality score. This paper has two main contributions: 1) propose component-level kinematic features for
movement quality assessment of wrist movement, 2) propose a
generic framework for tuning the thresholds and weights associated with each of these kinematic features using movement
quality labels provided by therapists.

II. RELATED WORK
Quantifying movement quality is useful for physical therapists to provide improved and personalized rehabilitation
therapy. Several quantitative scales for movement quality assessment have been proposed, including the FMA [8] and the
WMFT [7]. For example, the WMFT has been used to quantify
the upper extremity motor ability through timed and functional
tasks [28]. However, these methods rely on visual monitoring
of movements by experienced and trained physical therapists.
Hence, these methods can be subjective, as a therapist will apply their individual training and impressions when evaluating a
participant’s movement quality. Developing an objective computational framework for movement quality assessment will be
beneficial, thereby minimizing the influence of a therapist.
The focus of existing approaches for movement quality assessment has been toward finding typical patterns in kinematic
attributes, which differ between healthy and impaired participants. Kinematic impairment measure proposed by Chen et al.
[16] employs 33 kinematic attributes derived from a heavy
marker-based system in a hospital setting to quantitatively evaluate the movement quality. This study showed that the weighted
average of individual kinematic attributes was strongly correlated with the WMFT scores. Similar work using kinematics to
model the smoothness of the movement have also been explored
[29], [30]. In a similar study, it was shown that features derived
from wearable sensor data can be used to estimate the FMA
score [31].
Rehabilitation robotics has gained a lot of attention in quantification of motor functionality due to its ability to offer objective and repeatable therapy treatment [32]–[38]. Linear regression model-based kinematic scales were developed using
the MIT-Manus robot to achieve highly a repeatable and highresolution framework for quantification of motor performance
[39]. Another robotics-based rehabilitation technique proposed
four measures showing correlation with clinical measures such
as FMA, MAL, action research arm test, and Jebsen–Taylor hand
function test [40]. A recent work using movement time, trajectory length, directness, smoothness, and mean and maximum
velocity claims that such kinematic features can be effectively
used to assess upper limb motor recovery and is linked to FMA
score [41].
Nonlinear dynamical analysis methods have been employed
to model the variability in repetitive movements, which are an
integral part of rehabilitation therapy [18], [42]. To address
the drawbacks of traditional nonlinear dynamical measures, a
shape theory-based dynamical analysis framework for movement quality assessment was proposed [17]. This study also
demonstrated that the information contained in a single marker
on the wrist is sufficient to achieve comparable performance

145

levels to a heavy marker-based system in movement quality
assessment.
The outline of this paper is as follows: The design of the
home-based rehabilitation system and protocol for collecting
reach data from stroke survivors are discussed in Sections III
and IV, respectively. In Section V, we propose componentlevel kinematic features and a framework to tune the associated
thresholds and weights using overall therapist impressions for
movement quality. The results of the proposed frameworks in
Section V on data collected from ten stroke survivors are discussed in Section VI.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
The HAMRR system has four natural point optitrack cameras
facing down on a table to track a single reflective marker placed
on the participant’s wrist (wrist marker). The selection of the
wrist marker was motivated by previous investigations indicating that the wrist trajectory is the most informative joint about
the reach trajectory [16], [17], [23], [43], [44]. The system also
tracks torso movement using four reflective markers attached to
a badge worn on the left side of the participant’s chest. Effective
upper extremity rehabilitation requires monitoring of such aspects of the body movement to evaluate the extent participant’s
compensation while performing a task. In this study, we focus
solely on the data collected from the wrist marker.
The table houses a contact switch rest position pad and can
accommodate a target location of the cone object based on the
participant’s reaching ability. While we only consider reaching
tasks for the cone object located on the left of a participant,
the system was designed to accommodate custom touch and
grasp objects for training reaches in different orientations. The
system is shown in Fig. 2, and detailed information of the system
design can be found in [9]. The main objective of this design
was to be able to install the system in a participant’s home for
long-term therapy treatment, which prohibits the use of a heavy
marker-based system.
IV. DATA COLLECTION
Therapists undergo training to assess both the overall performance of a task and monitor some individual coarse aspects of
movement for a set of reaches. While validated clinical measures
exist for assessing overall task performance, no such measures
currently relate these to the performance of component-level
kinematic attributes for an individual reach. Therefore, in this
study, we have collected therapist ratings for quality of wrist
trajectory for each reach in an attempt to build a computationally generated component-level assessment that correlates with
therapist impressions.
The dataset consists of reaching tasks performed by a total of
ten participants (refer to Table I for demographics) to an on-table
cone left of the participant’s rest position. Each participant performs five reaches in each of four sessions. An iPad application
was developed to assist therapists in administering the system
experience questionnaire, recording videos of reaching tasks,
and providing movement quality labels. These videos were later
segmented to contain individual reaches, which were randomized across participants and provided to two physical therapists

146

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
DEMOGRAPHICS AND FMA SCORE OF THE STROKE SURVIVORS WHO
PARTICIPATED IN OUR STUDY AND HAVE EXPERIENCED THE HAMRR SYSTEM
Name

Age

Gender

Time since
stroke*

Lesion Location

FMA
Score(/66)

S1

63

Male

14

37

S2

69

Male

44

S3
S4

65
47

Male
Male

31
26

S5

56

Male

28

S6

49

Male

18

S7
S8
S9

64
27
50

Female
Male
Male

6
12
15

S10

44

Female

13

Left posterior
frontal ischemic
Left ICH
(fronto-parietal)
AVM rupture
Left pontine
infarct
Left Internal
Capsule
Left MCA
(Middle cerebral
artery)
Unknown
Unknown
Left basal
ganglia
hemorrhage
Ischemic left
pons

50
47
47
44
37

28
26
30

29

All participants had impairment in their right hand with one stroke event. *Time
since stroke event is in months.

(each therapist would rate a reach movement which was not
repeated by the other therapist) to rate each reach in terms of
overall performance of the task. Overall reaching performance
was rated on a scale from 1 to 5 based on the therapist’s impression of the participant’s performance, where 1 denotes that the
participant could not complete the task, and 5 denotes that the
participant performed the task with the same quality of performance as the therapist if he/she was to perform it. This rating
scale was adapted from the WMFT functional assessment score
[7] by rehabilitation experts who collectively created a rubric
for the purposes of this study.
V. QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF WRIST TRAJECTORY
In this section, we introduce the framework for quantitative
assessment of quality of wrist trajectory using kinematic analysis. We learn kinematic features using composite movement
quality labels provided by therapists. The proposed kinematic
features were designed to evaluate the movement along five aspects of impairment with respect to hand trajectory performance:
Curvedness, fastness, slowness, smoothness, and segmentation
(see Fig. 3 for pictorial representation of these features). Each
of these kinematic features have a unique threshold (Ti ), which
is difficult to define, and hence, we use optimization theory to
estimate these values. We also learn the weights in our proposed
linear model using the same framework which is discussed in
Section V-G. The steps involved in feature extraction are explained below.
A. Choice of Kinematic Features
The movement during reach and grasp action is thought to be
controlled by considering the endpoint (wrist) as the guiding reference [23], [43], [44]. Hence, the endpoint acts as the interactor
between the environment and the action goal to reach the target.

Fig. 3. Proposed linear model of kinematic features extracted from the wrist
marker. The weights (W 1 , W 2 , . . . , W 5 ) and a unique threshold associated
with each kinematic feature (T 1 , T 2 , . . . , T 5 ) were estimated by minimizing
the L 1 norm between cumulative score and therapist rating (R jw ).

Further, studies indicate that the endpoint trajectory data from
multijoint movement such as reach and grasp (e.g., movements
utilizing both shoulder and elbow) consistently have nearly invariant kinematic characteristics, such as straight line trajectory
paths and bell-shaped velocity profiles [45]–[47]. The findings
from these studies have motivated our selection of kinematic
features to represent the reach and grasp action focusing significantly on the endpoint using trajectory error, velocity profile
deviation, jerkiness, and segmentation.
B. Preprocessing of Trajectories
The three-dimensional positions of the wrist marker p(t) =
[x(t), y(t), z(t)], t = 0, . . . , τ were recorded from the start of
the movement to the target grasp state. The coordinate system
was rotated such that p(0) was the origin, X-Z plane was the
horizontal plane and the straight line connecting p(0) and p(τ )
lies along the new Z-axis. This, in effect, reparameterizes (after normalization) the trajectory [x(t), y(t), z(t)], t = 0, . . . , τ
to [x (z), y (z)], z = 0, . . . , 1. This reparameterization works
without introducing significant ambiguity in our experiments
due to the strong directionality of the reach action. The Z-axis
was further quantized into N = 50 bins, thereby transforming the trajectory to [x (n), y (n)], n = 0, . . . , N − 1. We now
have a vector representation of the trajectory suitable for realtime comparisons. For every new sequence, the 3-D positions
from the start of the movement to the end were rotated from
the global coordinate to the new coordinate system. This rotated and normalized axes facilitates easier calculation of deviation of kinematic features from a reference trajectory (efficient

VENKATARAMAN et al.: COMPONENT-LEVEL TUNING OF KINEMATIC FEATURES FROM COMPOSITE THERAPIST IMPRESSIONS

reach trajectory collected from mean age matched unimpaired
participants).
C. Trajectory Error
Trajectory error is a measure of spatial deviation of the wrist
trajectory from the reference trajectory. For every point in the
reach trajectory, horizontal error (Ehor ) and vertical error (Evert )
were defined as
Ehor (i) = x(i) − xref (i),

i = 0, . . . , Ns − 1

(1a)

Evert (i) = y(i) − yref (i),

i = 0, . . . , Ns − 1

(1b)

where Ns is the number of points in the reach trajectory. A
thresholded error function was calculated as

Ehor (i), if Ehor (i) > T1
Êhor (i) =
.
(1c)
0,
otherwise

147

The confidence score for movement being too-fast was computed as C fast given by

v̂f (i)
< i>

.
(2b)
=
1
−
CTfast
2
v(i)
< i>

Similarly, the thresholded speed vector for slowness feature
is given by

v(i), if v(i) − vref (i) < T3
.
(2c)
v̂s (i) =
0,
otherwise
The confidence score for movement being too-slow was calculated as C slow given by

v̂s (i)
< i>

.
(2d)
=
1
−
CTslow
3
v(i)
< i>

E. Jerkiness

Similarly
Êvert (i) =


Evert (i),
0,

if Evert (i) > T1

.

(1d)

otherwise

Confidence values for the movement being curved were estimated as

|Êhor (i)|
< i>
curved

(1e)
=
Cx
|Ehor (i)|
< i>



< i>
Cycurved = 

|Êvert (i)|
|Evert (i)|

.

(1f)

< i>

The final confidence of curved movement was a combination
of the above two confidences

if λ1 > 2λ2
λ1 ,
curved
CT 1
=
(1g)
min(1.5λ1 , 1), otherwise
where λ1 = 1 − max(Cxcurved , Cycurved )
λ2 = 1 −

The jerkiness (or smoothness) feature is a measure of variations in the velocity profile. An “efficient” reach movement
should have a smooth velocity profile with an accelerating pattern followed by a decelerating pattern without any jerks. Jerkiness of a movement was calculated using the method described
in [16] (similar to [29]) and is given by

 t e o m  3 2  3 2  3 2
d y
d z
d x
J=
+
+
dt
(3a)
3
3
dt
dt
dt3
ts o m
where x, y, and z are 3-D coordinates of the position of participant’s wrist. tsom is the time index corresponding to the start
of the movement, and teom is the time index of the end of the
movement. The thresholded jerkiness function was calculated
as

J(i), if J(i) > T4
ˆ =
J(i)
.
(3b)
0,
otherwise
The confidence score for movement being jerky was calculated as
 ˆ
J(i)
< i>
CTjerk
=1− 
4

min(Cxcurved , Cycurved )

D. Speed Profile Deviation
It is a measure of deviation of the speed profile from the reference speed profile (speed profiles collected from ten unimpaired
participants to generate a reference). For a given reach trajectory, a point-to-point comparison of speeds with the reference
speed profile was calculated. The speed vector for the reference
and test data are denoted as vref (i) and v(i), respectively, and
was calculated as the first derivative of the position vector. The
thresholded speed vector for fastness feature was calculated as

v(i), if v(i) − vref (i) > T2
.
(2a)
v̂f (i) =
0,
otherwise

J(i)

.

(3c)

< i>

F. Segmentation
A movement is termed as “segmented ” if the elbow does
not open in synchrony with the shoulder moving forward. Instead, the forward movement of the shoulder and the opening of
the elbow happens in sequence resulting in a disjointed movement (or presence of submovements). Rohrer et al. [48] have
shown how paretic movement can be represented by submovements using MIT-MANUS and InMotion2 robots, which allows
motion within a horizontal plane. An accurate analysis of this
phenomenon (presence of submovements) requires tracking of
both shoulder and elbow in addition to the wrist. In the proposed home-based rehabilitation system, this was not possible
with the one marker sensing solution, and we wanted to learn if

148

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 4. Comparison between the predicted cumulative score and therapist rating for movement quality. Each of ten participants performed 20 reach and grasp
to cone tasks except subjects S7, S8, and S10. The demographics and FMA score for each subject is tabulated in Table I. A correlation of 0.6 exists between the
predicted cumulative score and therapist rating for movement quality.

such movements can be described computationally using only
the wrist marker.
After consultation with domain experts, it was found that
segmented movements give rise to notches (sudden change in
direction) in the wrist trajectory. These notches can be quite
subtle and often occurs toward the end of the movement. We
quantify segmented movements by calculating the following:
1) The number of times the movement changes its turning
direction.
2) The magnitude of direction change.
3) The ratio of the magnitude of direction change.
We project the 3-D trajectory onto the X-Z and Y-Z planes
to detect the direction changes (notches). In the projection onto
the X-Z plane, we first compute displacement vectors from
the spatial locations. The direction change was quantified as the
signed angle (αxz (i)) between successive displacement vectors.
The sign of the angle is positive if the displacement is clockwise
from the previous displacement vector, and negative if it is
counter-clockwise. Using this, the number of significant changes
in turning direction of the movement is calculated (NC ), and the
corresponding confidence is calculated as

b
1 − e−(a·N C ) , if NC > Nref
.
(4a)
Cseg1,xz =
0,
otherwise

computed as

The magnitude of direction change is computed as S =
< i> |αxz (i)|, and the corresponding confidence score was
given by

G. Estimation of Optimal Weights and Thresholds

Cseg2,xz = 1 − e−(a·λS )

1 − S/ref xz , if S < ref xz
b

λS =

0,

(4b)
.

(4c)

otherwise

Theratio of magnitude of direction change is defined as
(i)|
, and the corresponding confidence score was
γ = | |ααxx zz (i)|


1,

Cseg3,xz =

1.47 ∗ (1 − γ),

if γ < γref

.

(4d)

otherwise

The final confidence for segmentation of the projected movement on X-Z plane is computed as
Cxz = Cseg1,xz · Cseg2,xz · Cseg3,xz .

(4e)

Similarly, we can compute Cyz in the Y-Z plane. Let
β1 = 1 − max(Cxz , Cyz ), β2 = 1 − min(Cxz , Cyz ). The final
confidence of segmented movement is given by

if β1 /β2 > T5
β1 ,
seg
CT 5 =
.
(4f)
min(1.5β1 , 1), otherwise
The thresholds T1 , . . . , T5 were difficult to define, and hence,
optimal values for these thresholds was estimated using movement quality label provided by therapist. Thresholds such as
Nref , ref xz , and γref were determined from the data collected
from unimpaired participants. The constants a and b were selected through empirical observation. The confidence scores
range from 0 to 1, with 0 indicating maximum impairment and
1 indicating movement being similar to an unimpaired participant’s reach.

A physical therapist rating the quality of reach trajectory will
pay careful attention to many kinematic attributes, including
speed, trajectory, and jerkiness. We believe that a linear combination model of the nonlinear kinematic features will be correlated with the therapist rating. In this paper, we propose a linear
model of kinematic features for movement quality assessment
by posing an optimization problem to determine the thresholds
and weights associated with each kinematic feature in the linear
combination model. Hence, the equation for the linear model

VENKATARAMAN et al.: COMPONENT-LEVEL TUNING OF KINEMATIC FEATURES FROM COMPOSITE THERAPIST IMPRESSIONS

149

Fig. 5. Comparison of cumulative score and therapist rating before and after optimization procedure. A linear regression plot between cumulative score and
therapist rating indicates that correlation coefficient increases from 0.13 to 0.6 with a significant p-value and increased slope. (a) Before Optimization. (b) After
Optimization.

for movement quality assessment for the wrist trajectory can be
written as

w1 CTcurved
+ w2 CTfast
+ w3 CTslow
+ w4 CTjerk
+
1
2
3
4
	
w5 CTseg
≈ Rjw
(5)
5
where w1 , . . . , w5 are weights for each of the confidence scores
of kinematic attributes curvedness, fastness, slowness, jerkiness, and segmentation, respectively. Rjw is the therapist rating
for quality of wrist trajectory. The thresholds T1 , . . . , T5 bound
a region called “zero-zone” where the attribute value is termed
as “efficient” (indicating a reach movement without any impairments). For example, (2a) has a threshold T2 which represents
a “zone” of ideal speed profiles. Equation (5) is pictorially depicted in Fig. 3. The aim here is to minimize the error between
cumulative score and therapist rating in L1 sense to estimate
thresholds and weights associated with each kinematic feature.
The cost function can be written as
P 1 : {w1 , . . . , w5 , T1 , . . . , T5 }opt =
arg min

5

 

i
|
wi C(T
− Rjw |
i)

w 1 ,...,w 5 ,T 1 ,...,T 5 < j >

i=1

subject to wi ≥ 0,
0 ≤ Ti ≤ 10.

(6)

This cost function is difficult to optimize, and is nonconvex.
In order to solve this optimization problem, we use the active-set
method [49] because of its reduced complexity of the search, as
the algorithm uses a subset of inequalities while searching the
solution. We use the implementation of the active-set method
available in MATLAB.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In order to measure the efficacy of the proposed optimization
procedure, we look at the output (cumulative score) generated
by the forward model in (5). The results of our analysis using
the linear combination of kinematic features for movement
quality assessment of the wrist trajectory are shown in Fig. 4.
The information about participants who experienced our system
is tabulated in Table I. Each participant performed 20 repetitions
of reach and grasp to a cone target, except participants S7, S8,

and S10 who performed 5, 5, and 15 repetitions, respectively.
Fig. 4 shows the comparison between the movement quality
scores provided by a trained physical therapist against the cumulative score predicted by our proposed framework. If the feature
thresholds and combination weights were tuned, we expect the
cumulative predicted scores to be correlated with the therapist
ratings. The Pearson correlation coefficient between the cumulative scores and the therapist ratings was found to be 0.6 with a
significant p-value (p < 0.001). The results of our analysis using
the linear combination of kinematic features for quality assessment of wrist trajectory before and after optimization is shown
in Fig. 5. We see that before optimization, the predicted movement quality scores of all classes (therapist ratings from 1 to 5)
are overlapping [see Fig. 5(a)]. The use of optimized weights
and thresholds resulted in an increased correlation between cumulative predicted score and therapist rating from 0.13 to 0.6.
The contribution of each of the low-level kinematic features
with optimized threshold toward movement quality assessment
is shown in Fig. 6. A linear regression analysis between each
kinematic feature and therapist rating shows that curvedness,
too slow, and jerkiness show a significant positive correlation,
while too-fast and segmentation show negative and weak correlation, respectively. The weak correlation between segmentation
and therapist rating could be due to the fact that the segmentation feature needs data from elbow and shoulder joints, which is
not available in our single marker-based system. The obtained
values for thresholds and weights after solving the optimization
problem P 1 are listed in Table II. Kinematic features curvedness and too-fast have the highest weight of 2.5 in our linear
model, with jerkiness and segmentation having lowest weight.
It is evident from these results that the estimation of weights
and thresholds of linear model using the proposed framework
provides a novel methodology to combine low-level kinematic
features to generate a cumulative score for movement quality of
wrist trajectories. Furthermore, the cumulative score aligns with
the ratings given by a therapist, which makes it a suitable tool
to assist physical therapists in assessing the movement quality
during supervised rehabilitation, leading to better evaluation and
adaptation of therapy. The estimation of thresholds for low-level
kinematic features facilitates better evaluation of components
of movement (e.g., curvature, segmentation), thereby improving the efficacy of audio and visual feedback in our home-based
rehabilitation system.

150

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Linear regression plots for various low-level kinematic features used in our linear model for movement quality assessment with estimated thresholds. (a)
Curvedness, (c) Too-slow, and (d) Jerkiness show positive and significant correlation with therapist rating. (b) Too-fast shows a negative and significant correlation.
(e) Segmentation shows a weak correlation with therapist rating.

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have introduced the problem of developing
a computational framework for movement quality assessment
suitable for home-based rehabilitation systems using kinematic
analysis. We have proposed and evaluated a linear model of
component-level kinematic features for movement quality assessment of the wrist. We propose a framework to learn these
component-level kinematic features indicating impairments in
underlying movement components using composite therapist
impressions of movement quality. Our results indicate that the
proposed framework can be used to provide improved and efficient audio and visual feedback indicative of the impairments
in component-level kinematics of a participant’s reach. Further, this framework can be used to generate a cumulative score
indicative of overall reach quality, which can be used to aid therapists during supervised rehabilitation. It should be noted that
kinematic analysis of movement has an inherent requirement
of “reference” trajectory data, which is difficult to define for
complex movements (e.g., lift and transport an object) due to
variability. Since we are interested in analyzing such complex
movements of stroke survivors, our future directions will be focused toward developing suitable quantitative frameworks for
modeling such complex movements.
Monitoring body movement during upper extremity tasks is
necessary to determine the extent to which the stroke survivor
is using body compensation. Preliminary work using the data
collected from the marker plate worn by the participant (not
presented here due to scope) is promising for applying similar
methods to aspects of movement beyond wrist trajectory performance. However, the consistent marker placement on the torso
requires assistance from a caregiver, and we believe that markerless solutions for monitoring the torso movements, such as
using the Kinect, could provide a robust alternative. This points
to several interesting directions of future work. From a sensor
fusion perspective, one can explore the utility of multiple Kinect
sensors, and study the effects on obtaining high fidelity tracking
results. Such efforts are already underway with early commercial systems that are limited to a few gestures [50]. Accuracies

TABLE II
OPTIMIZED VALUES FOR THRESHOLDS AND WEIGHTS IN THE PROPOSED
LINEAR MODEL FOR MOVEMENT QUALITY ASSESSMENT
Parameter
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5

Optimized Value
0.13 m
0.2 m /s
0.1 m /s
2.5 m /s 3
0.99
2.5
2.5
1.8
0.05
0.05

of such multikinect systems and its efficacy for rehabilitation
systems are still unknown. We are currently working on pilot
experiments with kinect and monovision systems.
For the computer vision and machine learning communities,
this application area opens up several interesting questions related to the design of robust features for movement quality analysis. Significant research in computer vision has been focused on
activity and gesture recognition and not much on measures for
“quality” of the movement. While this problem is traditionally
addressed in the biomechanics community, the tools developed
there are based on precise clinical measurements of biomechanics. These tools have limited applicability in home-based deployments, where data are of significantly lower quality. Thus,
one needs to rely on larger datasets and advanced feature selection and machine learning tools to design movement quality
measures. This can form the basis of several interesting research
questions in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the physical therapists A.
Reiss and M. Bidgood at Emory University, and M. Buell at
the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago for their contributions.

VENKATARAMAN et al.: COMPONENT-LEVEL TUNING OF KINEMATIC FEATURES FROM COMPOSITE THERAPIST IMPRESSIONS

We also thank W. Z. Rymer and M. Duff of the Rehabilitation
Institute of Chicago for their contributions in the development
of the HAMRR system.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Mackay, G. A. Mensah, and K. Greenlund, The Atlas of Heart Disease
and Stroke. World Health Organization, 2004.
[2] A. Go, D. Mozaffarian, V. Roger, E. Benjamin, J. Berry, W. Borden,
D. Bravata, S. Dai, E. Ford, C. Fox et al., “Heart disease stroke statistics
2013 update: A report from the American Heart Association,” Circulation,
vol. 127, no. 1, pp. e1–e240, 2013.
[3] V. L. Roger, A. S. Go, D. M. Lloyd-Jones, E. J. Benjamin, J. D. Berry,
W. B. Borden, D. M. Bravata, S. Dai, E. S. Ford, C. S. Fox et al., “Heart
disease and stroke statistics—2012 update: A report from the american
heart association.” Circulation, vol. 125, no. 1, pp. 188–197, 2012.
[4] World Health Organization, “The world health report, 2002: Reducing the
risks, promoting healthy life,” 2002.
[5] C. J. Murray and A. D. Lopez, “Global mortality, disability, and the
contribution of risk factors: Global burden of disease study,” Lancet,
vol. 349, no. 9063, pp. 1436–1442, 1997.
[6] C. Anderson, K. Jamrozik, and E. Stewart-Wynne, “Patterns of acute
hospital care, rehabilitation, and discharge disposition after acute stroke:
The perth community stroke study 1989–1990,” Cerebrovasc. Dis.,
vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 344–353, 1994.
[7] S. L. Wolf, P. A. Catlin, M. Ellis, A. L. Archer, B. Morgan, and
A. Piacentino, “Assessing wolf motor function test as outcome measure
for research in patients after stroke,” Stroke, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1635–1639,
2001.
[8] A. Fugl-Meyer, L. Jääskö, I. Leyman, S. Olsson, and S. Steglind, “The
post-stroke hemiplegic patient. I. A method for evaluation of physical
performance.” Scandinavian J. Rehabil. Med., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 13–31,
1974.
[9] M. Baran, N. Lehrer, D. Siwiak, Y. Chen, M. Duff, T. Ingalls, and
T. Rikakis, “Design of a home-based adaptive mixed reality rehabilitation system for stroke survivors,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2011, pp. 7602–7605.
[10] G. Kwakkel, B. Kollen, and E. Lindeman, “Understanding the pattern of
functional recovery after stroke: Facts and theories,” Restorative Neurol.
Neurosci., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 281–299, 2004.
[11] E. Taub, G. Uswatte, R. Pidikiti et al., “Constraint-induced movement
therapy: a new family of techniques with broad application to physical
rehabilitation—A clinical review,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 36, no. 3,
pp. 237–251, 1999.
[12] M. de Niet, J. B. Bussmann, G. M. Ribbers, and H. J. Stam, “The stroke
upper-limb activity monitor: Its sensitivity to measure hemiplegic upperlimb activity during daily life,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 88, no. 9,
pp. 1121–1126, 2007.
[13] A. W. Dromerick, C. E. Lang, R. Birkenmeier, M. G. Hahn,
S. A. Sahrmann, and D. F. Edwards, “Relationships between upper-limb
functional limitation and self-reported disability 3 months after stroke,”
J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 401–408, 2006.
[14] C. Anderson, C. N. Mhurchu, P. M. Brown, and K. Carter, “Stroke rehabilitation services to accelerate hospital discharge and provide home-based
care,” Pharmacoeconomics, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 537–552, 2002.
[15] C. Anderson, S. Rubenach, C. N. Mhurchu, M. Clark, C. Spencer, and
A. Winsor, “Home or hospital for stroke rehabilitation? Results of a randomized controlled trial I: Health outcomes at 6 months,” Stroke, vol. 31,
no. 5, pp. 1024–1031, 2000.
[16] Y. Chen, M. Duff, N. Lehrer, H. Sundaram, J. He, S. L. Wolf, and
T. Rikakis, “A computational framework for quantitative evaluation of
movement during rehabilitation,” presented at the AIP Conf., Toyama,
Japan, 2011, vol. 1371, p. 317.
[17] V. Venkataraman, P. Turaga, N. Lehrer, M. Baran, T. Rikakis, and
S. L. Wolf, “Attractor-shape for dynamical analysis of human movement:
Applications in stroke rehabilitation and action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recogn. Workshops, 2013, pp. 514–520.
[18] N. Stergiou and L. M. Decker, “Human movement variability, nonlinear
dynamics, and pathology: Is there a connection?” Human Movement Sci.,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 869–888, 2011.
[19] M. Zhang, B. Lange, C.-Y. Chang, A. A. Sawchuk, and A. A. Rizzo,
“Beyond the standard clinical rating scales: Fine-grained assessment of
post-stroke motor functionality using wearable inertial sensors,” in Proc.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2012, pp. 6111–6115.

151

[20] C.-Y. Chang, B. Lange, M. Zhang, S. Koenig, P. Requejo, N. Somboon,
A. A. Sawchuk, and A. A. Rizzo, “Towards pervasive physical
rehabilitation using microsoft kinect,” in Proc. IEEE Pervasive Comput.
Technol. Healthcare Conf., 2012, pp. 159–162.
[21] G. Saposnik, R. Teasell, M. Mamdani, J. Hall, W. McIlroy, D. Cheung,
K. E. Thorpe, L. G. Cohen, M. Bayley et al., “Effectiveness of virtual
reality using wii gaming technology in stroke rehabilitation a pilot randomized clinical trial and proof of principle,” Stroke, vol. 41, no. 7,
pp. 1477–1484, 2010.
[22] A. Mirelman, B. L. Patritti, P. Bonato, and J. E. Deutsch, “Effects of
virtual reality training on gait biomechanics of individuals post-stroke,”
Gait Posture, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 433–437, 2010.
[23] N. Lehrer, S. Attygalle, S. L. Wolf, and T. Rikakis, “Exploring the bases
for a mixed reality stroke rehabilitation system, part I: A unified approach
for representing action, quantitative evaluation, and interactive feedback,”
J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 51–65, 2011.
[24] N. Lehrer, Y. Chen, M. Duff, S. L. Wolf, and T. Rikakis, “Exploring the
bases for a mixed reality stroke rehabilitation system, part II: Design of
interactive feedback for upper limb rehabilitation,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil.,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 54–74, 2011.
[25] Y. Chen, W. Xu, R. I. Wallis, H. Sundaram, T. Rikakis, T. Ingalls, L. Olson,
and J. He, “A real-time, multimodal biofeedback system for stroke patient
rehabilitation,” in Proc. 14th Annu. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2006,
pp. 501–502.
[26] Y. Chen, M. Duff, N. Lehrer, S.-M. Liu, P. Blake, S. L. Wolf,
H. Sundaram, and T. Rikakis, “A novel adaptive mixed reality system
for stroke rehabilitation: Principles, proof of concept, and preliminary application in 2 patients,” Topics Stroke Rehabil., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 212–230,
2011.
[27] D. Siwiak, N. Lehrer, M. Baran, Y. Chen, M. Duff, T. Ingalls, and
T. Rikakis, “A home-based adaptive mixed reality rehabilitation system,”
in Proc. 19th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2011, pp. 785–786.
[28] D. M. Morris, G. Uswatte, J. E. Crago, E. W. Cook III, and E. Taub, “The
reliability of the wolf motor function test for assessing upper extremity
function after stroke,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 82, no. 6, pp. 750–
755, 2001.
[29] T. Flash and N. Hogan, “The coordination of arm movements: An experimentally confirmed mathematical model,” J. Neurosci., vol. 5, no. 7,
pp. 1688–1703, 1985.
[30] N. Hogan and D. Sternad, “Sensitivity of smoothness measures to movement duration, amplitude, and arrests,” J. Motor Behav., vol. 41, no. 6,
pp. 529–534, 2009.
[31] S. D. Din, S. Patel, C. Cobelli, and P. Bonato, “Estimating Fugl-Meyer
clinical scores in stroke survivors using wearable sensors,” in Proc. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 5839–5842.
[32] M. P. Barnes, B. H. Dobkin, and J. Bogousslavsky, Recovery After Stroke.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.
[33] K. Tyryshkin, A. M. Coderre, J. I. Glasgow, T. M. Herter, S. D. Bagg,
S. P. Dukelow, and S. H. Scott, “A robotic object hitting task to quantify sensorimotor impairments in participants with stroke,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 47–58, 2014.
[34] S. P. Dukelow, T. M. Herter, K. D. Moore, M. J. Demers, J. I. Glasgow,
S. D. Bagg, K. E. Norman, and S. H. Scott, “Quantitative assessment
of limb position sense following stroke,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 178–187, 2010.
[35] A. M. Coderre, A. A. Zeid, S. P. Dukelow, M. J. Demmer, K. D. Moore,
M. J. Demers, H. Bretzke, T. M. Herter, J. I. Glasgow, K. E. Norman
et al., “Assessment of upper-limb sensorimotor function of subacute stroke
patients using visually guided reaching,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair,
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 528–541, 2010.
[36] D. J. Reinkensmeyer, L. E. Kahn, M. Averbuch, A. M.-Cole, B. D. Schmit,
and W. Z. Rymer, “Understanding and treating arm movement impairment
after chronic brain injury: Progress with the arm guide,” J. Rehabil. Res.
Dev., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 653–662, 2000.
[37] D. Reinkensmeyer, B. Schmit, and W. Rymer, “Mechatronic assessment
of arm impairment after chronic brain injury,” Technol. Health Care,
vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 431–435, 1999.
[38] T. Krabben, G. Prange, B. Molier, J. Rietman, and J. Buurke, “Objective
measurement of synergistic movement patterns of the upper extremity
following stroke: an explorative study,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil.
Robot., 2011, pp. 1–5.
[39] C. Bosecker, L. Dipietro, B. Volpe, and H. I. Krebs, “Kinematic robotbased evaluation scales and clinical counterparts to measure upper limb
motor performance in patients with chronic stroke,” Neurorehabil. Neural
Repair, vol. 24, pp. 62–69, 2010.
[40] O. Celik, M. K. O’Malley, C. Boake, H. S. Levin, N. Yozbatiran, and
T. A. Reistetter, “Normalized movement quality measures for therapeutic

152

[41]

[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

robots strongly correlate with clinical motor impairment measures,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 433–444, Apr. 2010.
L. van Dokkum, I. Hauret, D. Mottet, J. Froger, J. Métrot, and I. Laffont,
“The contribution of kinematics in the assessment of upper limb motor recovery early after stroke,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 28,
pp. 4–12, 2014.
M. Perc, “The dynamics of human gait,” Eur. J. Phys., vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 525–534, 2005.
W. Prinz, “Perception and action planning,” Eur. J. Cognitive Psychol.,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 129–154, 1997.
G. Wulf and C. H. Shea, “Principles derived from the study of simple
skills do not generalize to complex skill learning,” Psychonomic Bull. Rev.,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 185–211, 2002.
J. W. Krakauer, “Motor learning: Its relevance to stroke recovery and
neurorehabilitation,” Current Opinion Neurol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 84–90,
2006.
P. Morasso, “Spatial control of arm movements,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 42,
no. 2, pp. 223–227, 1981.
W. Abend, E. Bizzi, and P. Morasso, “Human arm trajectory formation.”
Brain, J. Neurol., vol. 105, no. Pt 2, pp. 331–348, 1982.
B. Rohrer, S. Fasoli, H. I. Krebs, B. Volpe, W. R. Frontera, J. Stein,
N. Hogan et al., “Submovements grow larger, fewer, and more blended
during stroke recovery,” Motor Control, vol. 8, pp. 472–483, 2004.
J. Nocedal and S. Wright, Numerical Optimization, Series in Operations
Research and Financial Engineering. New York, NY, USA: SpringerVerlag, 2006.
Finger-precise hand tracking [Online]. Available: http://threegear.com/
technology.html

Vinay Venkataraman (S’13) received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2012, where he is
currently working toward the Doctoral degree in the
Department of electrical engineering, Arizona State
University.
His research interests include nonlinear dynamical analysis, computer vision, and biomedical signal
processing.

Pavan Turaga (S’05–M’09–SM’14) received the
B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology,
Guwahati, India, in 2004, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from the University
of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, in 2008 and
2009 respectively.
He spent two years as a Research Associate at
the Center for Automation Research, University of
Maryland. He is currently an Assistant Professor in
the School of Arts, Media, Engineering, and Electrical Engineering at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. His research
interests include computer vision and machine learning with applications to
human activity analysis, video summarization, dynamic scene analysis, and statistical inference on manifolds for these applications.
Dr. Turaga received the Distinguished Dissertation Fellowship in 2009. He
was selected to participate in the Emerging Leaders in Multimedia Workshop
by IBM, New York, in 2008.

Michael Baran is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in media arts and sciences from the
School of Arts, Media and Engineering, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
His research interests include interdisciplinary
methodologies toward interactive system design and
development for ranging applications, including
stroke rehabilitation.

Nicole Lehrer is in Graduate School where she is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in media
arts and sciences at the School of Arts, Media, and
Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ,
USA.
Her research interests include developing interactive visual media for motor rehabilitation, with a focus on retraining upper extremity movement of stroke
survivors.

Tingfang Du received the M.S. degree from the
School of Arts, Media, and Engineering at Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2012.
He is a currently a Software Engineer at Lytro Incorporation, Mountain View, CA, USA. His research
interests include light field imaging, computer vision,
and the design and development of real-time motion
analysis system.

Long Cheng received the M.S. degree from the
School of Arts, Media, and Engineering at Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2012.
He is currently a Software Engineer at Marvell Semiconductor Incorporation, Santa Clara, CA,
USA.

Thanassis Rikakis (M’09) received his MA and
DMA degrees in music composition from Columbia
University respectively in 1988 and 1994. He is
the Vice-Provost for design, arts, and technology at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA. He serves as a full Professor in the
Schools of Design and Music and holds a courtesy appointment in Biomedical Engineering Department. He also oversees the university’s Entertainment Technology Center. His research and
creative interests include the areas of experiential
media, mixed reality rehabilitation, interdisciplinary education, and computer
music. As a Vice-Provost, his charge is to facilitate the growth of the many existing synergies among design, arts, and technology, each term broadly conceived
as well as to create opportunities for new ones. For the past 11 years, he had
lead an interdisciplinary team—spanning rehabilitation medicine, neuroscience,
engineering, design and the arts—that is developing mixed reality rehabilitation systems for stroke survivors. These are systems that track the movement of
stroke survivors during the performance of functional tasks in the physical realm
and enhance internal feedback with digitally generated, multimodal feedback
that facilitates motor learning and functional recovery.

Steven L. Wolf received the M.S. degree in physical therapy and anatomy, and the Ph.D. degree in
anatomy and neurophysiology.
He is a Professor of medicine and rehabilitation
medicine at the Center for Rehabilitation Medicine at
Emory University School of Medicine. His research
interests include the use of artificial physiological
feedback (via operant conditioning) to enhance the
control of aberrant movement in normal human subjects and patients with neuromuscular and musculoskeletal disorders. This work has involved shaping
muscle, force, and joint position control through presentation of audio or visual
cues.

