IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

249

Automated Localization of Multiple Pelvic
Bone Structures on MRI
Sinan Onal, Member, IEEE, Susana Lai-Yuen, Paul Bao, Senior Member, IEEE,
Alfredo Weitzenfeld, Senior Member, IEEE, and Stuart Hart

Abstract—In this paper, we present a fully automated localization method for multiple pelvic bone structures on magnetic resonance images (MRI). Pelvic bone structures are at present identified manually on MRI to locate reference points for measurement
and evaluation of pelvic organ prolapse (POP). Given that this is a
time-consuming and subjective procedure, there is a need to localize pelvic bone structures automatically. However, bone structures
are not easily differentiable from soft tissue on MRI as their pixel
intensities tend to be very similar. In this paper, we present a model
that combines support vector machines and nonlinear regression
capturing global and local information to automatically identify
the bounding boxes of bone structures on MRI. The model identifies the location of the pelvic bone structures by establishing the
association between their relative locations and using local information such as texture features. Results show that the proposed
method is able to locate the bone structures of interest accurately
(dice similarity index >0.75) in 87–91% of the images. This research aims to enable accurate, consistent, and fully automated
localization of bone structures on MRI to facilitate and improve
the diagnosis of health conditions such as female POP.
Index Terms—Localization, MRI, nonlinear regression, pelvic
organ prolapse (POP), support vector machines (SVM).

I. INTRODUCTION
ELVIC organ prolapse (POP) is a serious health condition
that affects about 30–50% of women [1]. It occurs when a
pelvic organ such as bladder, uterus, small bowel, and rectum
drops from its normal position and pushes against the vaginal
walls. Dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is currently
being used for assessing POP as it provides global assessment
of the movements and interactions of pelvic floor organs, while
avoiding the use of ionizing radiation [2]. The current practice consists of manually identifying specific reference points
on three pelvic bone structures as shown in Fig. 1: Pubic bone,
sacral promontory, and coccyx. Based on these points, reference
lines are drawn to measure and define the severity of POP. Un-

P

Manuscript received April 24, 2014; revised July 19, 2014 and September
18, 2014; accepted October 27, 2014. Date of publication November 25, 2014;
date of current version December 31, 2015.
S. Onal is with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville, Edwardsville, IL 62026 USA
(e-mail: sonal@siue.edu).
S. Lai-Yuen, is with the Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail:
laiyuen@usf.edu).
P. Bao, and A. Weitzenfeld are with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail:
pbao@usf.edu; aweitzenfeld@usf.edu).
S. Hart is with the College of Medicine Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA (e-mail: shart1@health.usf.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2366159

Fig. 1.

ROI and their corresponding reference points.

fortunately, the manual identification of these points and measurements is a time-consuming and subjective procedure. For
this reason, it is expected that a model that automatically locates the bone structures of interest and extracts image-based
predictors from patient specific MRI can facilitate and improve
the evaluation of POP. However, bone structure detection is a
challenging task on MRI since bones are not easily differentiable from the soft tissue as their pixel intensities tend to be
very similar.
Various approaches have been proposed for the automated localization of multiple organs such as heart, liver, spleen, lungs,
kidneys, and bladder on medical images using geometric methods, statistical atlas-based techniques, and supervised methods
[3]–[10]. Among supervised methods, there has been an increasing interest in regression-based approaches for anatomical
structure localization since organs and tissues in the human body
have known relative arrangement. Zheng et al. [11] proposed an
approach called marginal space learning (MSL) that uses a set
of classifiers based on probabilistic boosting tree to predict the
position, position-orientation, and full 3-D pose. In [12], the
authors further expanded this idea to nonrigid MSL using statistical shape models. Zhou et al. [13] introduced a technique
based on boosting ridge regression to detect and localize the
left ventricle in cardiac ultrasound 2-D images. Criminisi et al.
[14] proposed regression forests to predict the location of multiple anatomical structures in CT scans. Cuingnet et al. [15]
presented an improved regression forest by adding a refinement step to the detection process to find kidneys in CT scans.
These methods use the difference in mean intensities to locate
the bounding boxes of the anatomical structures on the images.
However, considering only intensity levels is not sufficient for
the localization of anatomical structures such as bones on MRI.
In this paper, we present a fully automated model that locates
the bounding boxes of multiple bone structures on MRI us-

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

250

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

ing support vector machines (SVM)-based classification and
nonlinear regression model with global and local information. The proposed method first identifies pelvic organs using
k-means clustering and morphological opening operations.
Then, it uses the spatial relationship between the organs and
bone structures to estimate the locations of the structures. The
pubic bone is located using the relative location between bones
and organs, and texture information. Then, a nonlinear regression model is used to predict the location of other bone structures
whose local information is insufficient, such as sacral promontory and coccyx. The main contribution of this method is a new
parameterization through nonlinear regression approach for the
multiple bone localization problem on MRI.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the proposed multiple bone localization model. Section III
shows the implementation results and performance evaluation
followed by the discussion and conclusions in Sections IV
and V, respectively.
II. MULTIPLE BONE LOCALIZATION FRAMEWORK
As shown in Fig. 1, three regions of interest (ROIs) need to be
located automatically that correspond to the pubic bone, sacral
promontory, and coccyx, respectively. However, bones are not
easily differentiable from soft tissues on MRI as their pixel intensities tend to be very similar. This is particularly true for bones
located on the vertebra such as sacral promontory and coccyx.
On the other hand, both the bladder and the rectum are visible as
retrograde bladder/ureteral dye is injected during image capturing to enhance visualization. Therefore, the regions for both the
bladder and the rectum have high-intensity values on the MR
images and can be used as contextual information to automatically locate the pelvic floor structures of interest. Based on these
observations, our method is designed to localize the pubic bone
first using both global and local information, and then use global
information to localize the sacral promontory and coccyx.
The proposed method consists of three main phases: Identification of bladder and rectum, identification of pubic bone
region, and identification of coccyx and sacral promontory regions (see Fig. 2). The first phase starts with noise reduction
and contrast adjustment of the images. Then, the bladder and
rectum are identified using bisecting k-means clustering using
pixel intensities and morphological opening operation. In the
second phase, the pubic bone region is localized based on “keypoints,” which are corner points on the input image that satisfy
certain intensity and location constraints. Based on the identified keypoints, candidate bounding boxes of the pubic bone can
be determined. The best bounding box that describes the pubic
area is selected using SVM with Haar-like features. In the third
phase, the coccyx and sacral promontory regions are localized
using the location of the bladder, rectum, and pubic bone via a
nonlinear regression model. The detailed description of the proposed localization method is described in the following sections.
A. Dataset Description
A representative set of 207 dynamic MRI were used in
this study. MR images were obtained from a 3-T GE system

Fig. 2.

Overview of the proposed method.

(General Electric Company, GE Healthcare, U.K.) using an
8-channel torso phased-array coil with the patient in a modified dorsal lithotomy position. Dynamic MRI of the pelvis is
performed using a T2-weighted single-shot turbo spin-echo sequence in the midsagittal plane for 23–27 s with a temporal
resolution of 2 s (FOV 300 × 300 mm2 , slice thickness 3 mm,
TR/TE 2000/75 ms, 20 image sequences, inplane resolution of
1.6 × 1.6 mm2 ). Subjects were coached, prior to imaging, on
the performance of an adequate valsalva maneuver (straining
maneuver) to observe the movement of the pelvic organs from
rest to maximum strain. The image data have been preprocessed
and deidentified.
B. Identification of Bladder and Rectum
The first phase of the proposed method is to perform noise reduction by applying a 3 × 3 Gaussian kernel (Gaussian smoothing with σ = 0.8) due to its computational efficiency. After
noise reduction, contrast adjustment is performed to improve
the contrast in the images by stretching the range of intensity
values. Minimum and maximum values used for normalization
are 0 and 255, respectively.
Given the clear visibility of the bladder and the rectum on
dynamic MRI due to ureteral dye use, these two organs can be
automatically identified to be used as contextual information
for the localization of the bone structures. We use a “bisecting k-means” algorithm to identify regions on the image and to
overcome the initialization susceptibility of the basic k-means
clustering algorithm. The idea is to obtain k clusters by first

ONAL et al.: AUTOMATED LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE PELVIC BONE STRUCTURES ON MRI

Fig. 3. Illustration of bladder and rectum localization. (a) Input image. (b)
Clustering with k = 4. (c) Identified regions for bladder and rectum using size,
homogeneity, and location constraints.

splitting the set of all points into two clusters. Then one of these
clusters is selected for splitting and the process continues until k clusters are generated. In our study, the value of k is 4
because the region of the pelvic floor is divided into four subregions representing the bone, cartilage, soft tissue and organ,
and background.
After identifying the four types of regions, the regions with
the highest intensity are selected to locate the bladder and rectum regions. However, many regions with similar intensities to
the bladder and rectum may be identified as shown in Fig. 3(b).
To separate the bladder and rectum, size, homogeneity, and
location constraints were incorporated. For size constraint, connected regions that have less than a specified number of pixels
were removed using morphological opening operations. For homogeneity, it was observed that the bladder and rectum regions
on MRI are homogeneous regions without internal holes. Therefore, the Euler number, which is a topological descriptor, was
used to determine the number of holes inside the regions and to
eliminate those regions with internal holes. Finally, as location
constraint, the location of the bladder and rectum normally appear close to the center of the image so the search of these two
organs was limited to the center of the image. The results of this
process are shown in Fig. 3(c).
The mathematical description of this filtering operation to find
the desired regions H (bladder and rectum) is shown below. Rl
corresponds to the set of regions obtained after clustering
H = {sm in < sR l < sm ax
φR l = 1
dR l < r ∀ Rl ∈ R}

(1)

where sR l denotes the size of the lth region in set R, which
was obtained through bisecting k-means clustering, sm in and
sm ax are the minimum and maximum region sizes, respectively.
φR l is the specified Euler number which is 1. dR l denotes the
distance between the centroid of the lth region and the midpoint
of the image, and r is the specified distance.
C. Identification of Pubic Bone Region
After the locations for the bladder and rectum have been
identified, the next phase is to identify the location of the pubic
bone. This is achieved through the identification of keypoints on
the image that satisfy specific location and intensity constraints.
The use of corner points was selected instead of pixels because

251

Fig. 4. Candidate region generation. (a) Keypoints used as centroids of candidate regions. (b) Candidate regions of pubic bone.

corner points can be extracted without any user input and it is
computationally efficient. Corner points are identified using the
Harris corner detector [16] with sensitivity factor of 0.04. These
corner points are determined by evaluating the autocorrelation
function of the input image, which measures the local changes
of the patches moved by a small amount in a different direction.
Corner point extraction is followed by spatial filtering to eliminate the number of corner points that are outside of the vicinity
of the bladder. The following equations provide the mathematical framework of the spatial filtering operation. Set C corresponds to the set of locations obtained after an initial selection
of corner points
C = {p(xy) ∈ P : T1 < I(xy) < T2
d1 < p(x) − c(x) < d2
c(y) < p(y) < d3 and ∀ p ∈ P }

(2)

where p(xy) denotes the interest point location, P is the set
of points obtained by the Harris corner detector, I(xy) denotes
the intensity level at p(xy), T1 is the threshold for minimum
pixel intensity, T2 is the threshold for maximum pixel intensity,
and d1 and d2 denote the minimum and maximum distances
between the keypoints and the centroid of the bladder on the
x direction, respectively. d3 is the maximum distance between
the keypoints and the centroid of the bladder on the y direction,
where c(x) and c(y) denote the centroids of the regions on the
x and y direction, respectively. These distances are determined
based on the relative positions between anatomical structures
on the body from the training image dataset. The constraints
ensure that corner points that are below and to the left of the
bladder and within a specific distance and intensity range are
retained. For instance, the mean intensity value of pixels located
on the pubic bone has been defined as 33 ± 10.4 using histogram
analysis over the training image dataset. Hence, corner points
with intensity levels between 10 and 60 can be considered as
potential keypoints corresponding to the pubic bone.
After spatial filtering, potential pubic bone regions are generated as seen in Fig. 4. These bounding boxes are centered at
the keypoints and the size is set to a value defined by analyzing
the training image dataset. Principal component analysis (PCA)
is applied to the manually segmented pubic bone regions in the
training image dataset to find the mean shape and the shape
variation models of the pubic bone. This is used to determine
the size of the bounding boxes to enclose the pubic bone. Each

252

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

of these bounding boxes represents a potential bounding box for
the pubic bone.
However, some of these bounding boxes do not completely
enclose the pubic bone as the keypoints may fall near the boundaries of the bone. For this reason, the bounding boxes that completely enclose the pubic bone need to be identified. To do this,
we propose to analyze each bounding box based on Haar-like
[17] and texture features. Haar-like features provide the average
intensity difference between two displaced boxes (horizontal,
vertical, and central differences). Texture features have shown
to enable more reliable results on MRI by providing the relative position information of any two pixels with respect to each
other [18], [19]. We used a total of 303 features: 297 generated
by Haar-like features and six texture features. The texture features used in this study are average gray level, average contrast,
smoothness, skewness, uniformity, and entropy.
The feature set representing the candidate regions are evaluated using SVM. SVM has been shown to achieve the highest
classification accuracy for medical diagnosis compared to other
classification techniques [18]–[21]. Our study consists of a twoclass problem where candidate bounding boxes are classified
into bounding boxes of pubic bone or not. The classification of
the candidate bounding boxes involves two steps: Construction
of the classifier and prediction. In the first step, a classifier structure is constructed based on the training dataset using SVM. In
this study, the radial basis function (RBF) was used as a kernel
function of SVM to provide a nonlinear decision surface. There
are two parameters in the kernel that need to be determined:
C representing the penalty parameter, and γ representing the
RBF sigma parameter. A grid search was implemented using
100 runs of tenfold cross validation to identify the best (C, γ)
so that the classifier can accurately predict the unknown data.
The search range of SVM parameters for cross validation is
C = 2−5 , 2−3 , . . . 215 and γ = 2−15 , 2−13 , . . . 23 . The best values were found to be C = 2 and γ = 0.000488.
After the bounding boxes are trained according to the features, the built SVM classifier is used to test the images. The
anticipated outcome at the end of this process is a set of two
groups of bounding boxes that are automatically classified as
enclosing or partially enclosing the pubic bone.
D. Identification of Coccyx and Sacral Promontory Regions
The locations of the bladder, rectum, and pubic bone are
strongly correlated with the locations of the sacral promontory
and coccyx. However, the relationship between these organs
is complex given the different sizes and locations of the organs. Thus, we build a nonlinear regression model to predict
the location of the coccyx and sacral promontory regions.The
proposed nonlinear model has been trained through parameterizing the location of the pelvic floor structures with respect to
the bladder, rectum, and pubic bone locations. For training, we
consider our input as (Si , Pi ), where Si is the input matrix and
Pi is the predicted matrix. Si consists of cji1 (x, y), di1 (x, y),
and di2 (x, y), where cji1 (x, y) is the location of the centroid
of structure j for the ith subject, j corresponds to the regions
(bladder, rectum, pubic bone, coccyx, and sacral promontory),

di1 (x, y) and di2 (x, y) are the relative distances between the
centroids of the bladder and rectum to the centroid of the pubic
bone, respectively. Pi consists of di3 (x, y) and di4 (x, y), where
di3 (x, y) and di4 (x, y) are the distances between the centroids
of sacral promontory and coccyx to the centroid of the pubic
bone, respectively. Pi helps in predicting the sacral promontory
and coccyx regions for the image dataset.
After parameterization, the next step was to choose the model
function to fit the model to the dataset. The selection of the
model is a critical step as the accuracy of the model depends
on this function. The dataset has been trained using different
nonlinear models and the exponential polynomial model has
been selected since it provides the minimum distance between
the model curve and data points. Another reason for the selection
of this model is that the residuals appear randomly distributed
across the zero line indicating that the model is a good fit.
The goodness of fit has also been measured using quantitative
measures such as R squared. The selected model provided the
2
highest R squared among the other models (Rsacral
prom ontory =
2
0.904, Rco ccyx = 0.887). The selected nonlinear model can be
expressed as follow:
2

3

f (P, β) = eβ 0 + β 1 c 1 + β 2 d 1 + β 3 d 2 .

(3)

Unlike in linear regression, most nonlinear regression models
require initialization of the parameters (β0 , β1 , β2 , and β3 ). In
order to find the initial values, our dataset has been transformed
and analyzed using linear regression. After selecting the initial
values, the parameters are estimated from the dataset by minimizing the distance between the model curve [f (P, β)] and the
data points (yi ) using
n


[yi − f (P, β)]2 .

(4)

n =1

Once the centroids of the sacral promontory and coccyx are
determined, the bounding boxes that enclose these regions are
determined based on PCA by generating the mean boxes and
box variations of the coccyx and sacral promontory regions.
PCA provides fixed size bounding boxes for each region. For
instance, the maximum size for the bounding box of the sacral
promontory has been defined as [60 px 60 px] based on the training dataset and PCA. For the coccyx, the maximum size for the
bounding box was determined to be [30 px 30 px]. These bounding boxes are centered at the centroids of the sacral promontory
and coccyx.
III. RESULTS
The proposed automated bone localization model was evaluated on a wide range of MR images along the midsagittal view
and at different stages of POP (from stage 0 to stage 4). The
validation was performed on a representative clinical dataset of
207 selected dynamic MRI. The proposed method was implemented using MATLAB 2012b on a workstation with 3.00-GHz
dual processors and 2-GB RAM.
The regions identified through the proposed localization
method were compared to the regions identified manually by
experts. The Euclidean distance between the centers of the

ONAL et al.: AUTOMATED LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE PELVIC BONE STRUCTURES ON MRI

253

TABLE I
AVERAGE CENTER ERROR (MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION) FOR
STRUCTURE LOCALIZATION BY THE PROPOSED LOCALIZATION
MODEL COMPARED TO OTHER LOCALIZATION MODELS
Center error (mm)

Bladder
Rectum
Pubic bone
Coccyx
Sacral promontory

Regression
forest

Multiatlas
lower bound

Multiatlas
upper bound

Proposed
model

4.1 ± 1.7
7.6 ± 3.8
5.8 ± 1.6
17.2 ± 5.4
8.6 ± 2.8

20.2 ± 2.8
46.2 ± 7.4
11.1 ± 3.9
20.3 ± 13.9
14.9 ± 6.2

81.1 ± 11.5
85.2 ± 19.6
15.6 ± 9.4
26.3 ± 24.5
17.6 ± 16.8

2.1 ± 0.4
3.2 ± 2.1
4.2 ± 1.7
15.9 ± 2.6
9.2 ± 2.7

predicted and ground truth bounding boxes was used to assess
the accuracy of the bone localization approach. In addition, we
quantified the region overlap between the predicted and ground
truth regions using the dice similarity index (DSI)


Aref ∩A 
(5)
DSI = 2 .
|Aref | + |A|
where Aref and A indicate the manual and automatic segmented
regions, respectively. Since the proposed bone localization approach depends on the identified bladder and rectum locations,
they have also been evaluated independently using center error
rate and DSI.
Tenfold cross validation experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed model and two other organ
localization models: Multiatlas-based models [22] and regression forest [14]. These validation experiments were repeated
100 times for stability. The multiatlas-based localization model
was implemented as follows: 100 runs of tenfold cross validation experiments with grid search were conducted to find the
optimum similarity index (selected similarity index is 0.0025).
Five different average shape atlases were generated using affinebased transformation, intensity-based similarity measure, and
genetic algorithm for optimization. These five atlases were generated to represent the five stages of prolapse and to eliminate
bias on selecting an atlas during the registration process. For
each image of the dataset, each atlas was registered to the image
using affine-based registration. The location error of the bounding boxes was calculated based on the ground truth bounding
boxes for each atlas. The mean error on lower and upper bounds
was computed over the dataset.
For the regression forest model, 100 runs of tenfold cross
validation experiments with grid search were conducted to find
the best parameters, number of forest size, and tree depth. The
best result was obtained with forest size of 9 and tree depth of 6.
The node optimization model described in [14] was performed
to predict the location of the bounding boxes.
Table I provides the average center error in millimeter for
the regression forest model, the multiatlas-based model, and
the proposed localization model. It can be observed that the
proposed model provides the lowest average center error in
the localization of the bladder, rectum, pubic bone, and coccyx
regions compared to the other methods. The average center error

Fig. 5. Average percentage of correctly detected cases by the proposed localization model compared to other localization models for different thresholds of
DSI: (a) 0.65, (b) 0.75, (c) 0.90.

for the sacral promontory region by the proposed model was
0.6-mm higher than the average center error by the regression
forest. For all the models and among the bone structures only,
the average center error for the pubic bone is the lowest, whereas
for the coccyx is the highest. This is due to the low variability
in location of the pubic bone compared with the coccyx.
The proposed localization model was also compared with the
other methods based on DSI. Fig. 5 provides the average percentage of correctly detected cases at different thresholds for DSI.
It can be observed that even at very high thresholds for DSI
(DSI > 0.90), the proposed method can correctly detect the
pubic bone, sacral promontory, and coccyx in 89%, 87%, and
80%, respectively. Once the overlapping percentage between
two regions is decreased to 0.75, the proposed method correctly
detected the pubic bone, sacral promontory, and coccyx in 91%,
90%, and 87%, respectively. Compared to other methods, the
proposed localization method achieved the highest average percentage of detection over all the thresholds of DSI and for all the
anatomical structures except for the sacral promontory, where
it performed very similar to the regression forest.
In terms of computational time, the proposed model provides
the regions faster than the regression forest and multiatlas-based

254

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Regions identified by the proposed localization model with their corresponding ground truth regions.

model. The proposed model identifies the location of the bone
structures in 1.3 s compared with 2.1 s by the regression forest,
and 13.2 s by the multiatlas-based model. Regarding the training time, the proposed model takes 5.6 s compared with 28.0 s
for the regression forest. The multiatlas-based model does not
require a training process but overall, the computational time is
higher and accuracy is much lower than the proposed localization model. For the regression forest, the time for model building
will increase significantly whenever new data are included into
the training dataset as it requires exhaustive search of parameters for the node optimization process to find the forest size and
tree depth.
Fig. 6 shows some sample localization results of the proposed
model compared to the ground truth regions of the pubic bone,
sacral promontory, and coccyx. The regions shown with solid
lines correspond to the regions found by the proposed method,
while regions with dashed lines indicate the ground truth
regions.

IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we presented a model that integrates local and
global information to locate the bounding boxes of bone structures on MRI using SVM and nonlinear regression. The main
contribution of this method is a new parameterization paradigm
through a nonlinear regression approach for the multiple-bone
localization problem on MRI. The location of the pubic bone
is determined based on the relative location with respect to the
pelvic organs and using a SVM-based classification with Haarlike and texture features. The coccyx and sacral promontory are
located using a nonlinear regression model. Results demonstrate
that the proposed localization method can accurately and consistently find the locations of the pubic bone, coccyx, and sacral
promontory on MRI. Moreover, it achieves higher localization
accuracy compared to other localization methods.
The average center error for the pubic bone region was found
to be lower than for the coccyx and sacral promontory. The
reason is that the local information of the pubic bone was incorporated into the localization process along with the global
information. As seen in Table I, the center error is highest for the
coccyx since currently the manual identification of the coccyx
region is difficult resulting in lower localization accuracy for
this region.

The advantages of the proposed method are that it is fully automated, more accurate, robust, and faster on training and testing processes. Furthermore, there is no need for an exhaustive
search of parameters for registration as in the multiatlas-based
localization model, or for node optimization to find the parameters for the regression forest. Since the proposed localization
method uses the relative positions of anatomical structures to
find the bone structures, images of subjects with unusual health
conditions may affect the effectiveness of the proposed method.
The proposed localization method has been integrated with the
segmentation and reference point identification techniques presented in our previous work [18], [19] to fully automate the
extraction of pelvic floor measurements for POP diagnosis.
V. CONCLUSION
A model using SVM-based classification and nonlinear regression model with global and local information is presented to
automatically localize multiple pelvic bone structures on MRI.
The main contribution of this approach is a new parameterization through nonlinear regression approach for the multiple
bone localization problem. The model uses the location of pelvic
organs to approximate the relative location of the pelvic bones.
The best pubic bone region is selected using a SVM classifier
based on texture and Haar-like features. Then, a nonlinear regression model was built to establish the association between
the locations of the bladder, rectum, and pubic bone with respect to the location of the sacral promontory and coccyx. Results demonstrate that the proposed method can accurately find
the location of the bone structures on each image consistently.
We are currently investigating the use of local information to
improve the localization of the sacral promontory and coccyx
regions. The proposed automated bone localization method will
be used to automatically identify ROI to extract image-based
predictors for pelvic floor measurements. This is expected to
improve and facilitate the diagnosis of pelvic organ prolapse.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Dallenbach, I. Kaelin-Gambirasio, S. Jacob, J. B. Dubuisson, and M.
Boulvain, “Incidence rate and risk factors for vaginal vault prolapse repair
after hysterectomy,” J. IntUrogynecol , vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1623–1629,
2008.
[2] A. Fayyad, S. Hill, V. Gurung, S. Prashar, and A. Smith, “How accurate is
symptomatic and clinical evaluation of prolapse prior to surgical repair?”
J. Int. Urogynecol, vol. 18, pp. 1179–1183, 2007.
[3] U. Kurkure, O. C. Avila-Montes, and I. A. Kakadiaris, “Automated segmentation of thoracic aorta in non-contrast CT images,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2008, pp. 29–32.
[4] B. Van Ginneken, W. Baggerman, and E. M. Van Rikxoort, “Robust segmentation and anatomical labeling of the airway tree from thoracic CT
scans,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention Conf.,
2008, pp. 2019–226.
[5] H. A. Vrooman and C. A. Cocosco, “KNN-based multi-spectral MRI
brain tissue classification: manual training versus automated atlas-based
training,” Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., vol. 6144, 2006.
[6] M. Fenchel, S. Thesen, and A. Schilling, “Automatic labeling of anatomical structures in MR fastview images using a statistical atlas,” in Proc.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention Conf., 2008, pp. 576–
584.
[7] A. Shimizu, R. Ohno, T. Ikegami, and H. Kobatake, “Multi-organ segmentation in three-dimensional abdominal CT images,” Int. J. Comput.Assisted Radiol. Surg., vol. 1, pp. 76–78, 2006.

ONAL et al.: AUTOMATED LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE PELVIC BONE STRUCTURES ON MRI

[8] X. Han, M. S. Hoogeman, P. C. Levendag, L. S. Hibbard, D. N. Teguh,
P. Voet, A. C. Cowen, and T. K. Wolf, “Atlas-based auto-segmentation
of head and neck CT images,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.Assisted Intervention Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 434–441.
[9] M. Freiman, Y. Edrei, Y. Shmidmayer, E. Gross, L. Joskowicz, and R.
Abramovitch, “Classification of liver metastases using MRI images: A machine learning approach,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted
Intervention Conf., 2008, pp. 93–100.
[10] M. Prasad and A. Sowmya, “Multi-level classification of emphysema in
HRCT lung images using delegated classifiers,” in Proc. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention Conf., 2008, pp. 59–66.
[11] Y. Zheng, A. Barbu, B. Georgescu, M. Scheuering, and D. Comaniciu,
“Four-chamber heart modeling and automatic segmentation for 3-D cardiac CT volumes using marginal space learning and steerable features,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1668–1681, Oct. 2008.
[12] Y. Zheng and D. Comaniciu, “Marginal space learning for efficient detection of 2d/3d anatomical structures in medical images,” presented at the
Proc. Information Processing Medical Imaging, Williamsburg, VA, USA,
2009.
[13] S. K. Zhou, J. Zhou, and D. Comaniciu, “A boosting regression approach
to medical anatomy detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., 2007, pp. 1–8.
[14] A. Criminisi, J. Shotton, D. Robertson, and E. Konukoglu, “Regression
forests for efficient anatomy detection and localization in CT studies,” presented at the Medical Image Computing Computer-Assisted Intervention
Conf., Beijing, China, 2010.

255

[15] R. Cuingnet, R. Prevost, D. Lesage, L. D. Cohen, B. Mory, and R. Ardon, “Automatic detection and segmentation of kidneys in 3d CT images
using random forests,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted
Intervention Conf., 2012, pp. 66–74.
[16] C. Schmid, R. Mohr, and C. Bauckhage, “Evaluation of interest point
detectors,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 151–172, 2000.
[17] P. Viola and J. J. Michael, “Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade
of simple features,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., 2001, pp. I–511–I-518.
[18] S. Onal, S. Lai-Yuen, P. Bao, A. Weitzenfeld, and S. Hart, “Image based
measurements for evaluation of pelvic organ prolapse,” J. Biomed. Sci.
Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 45–55, 2013.
[19] S. Onal, S. Lai-Yuen, P. Bao, A. Weitzenfeld, and S. Hart, “MRI based
segmentation of pubic bone for evaluation of pelvic organ prolapse,” IEEE
J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no, 4, pp. 1370–1378, Jul. 2014.
[20] K. Polat and S. Gunes, “Breast cancer diagnosis using least square support
vector machine,” Digital Signal Process., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 694–701, 2007.
[21] M. F. Akay, “Support vector machines combined with feature selection
for breast cancer,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3240–3247, 2009.
[22] T. Rohlfing, R. Brandt, R. Menzel, and C. R. Maurer Jr., “Evaluation of
atlas selection strategies for atlas-based image segmentation with application to confocal microscopy images of bee brains,” Neuroimage, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 1428–1442, 2004.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

