IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

1011

Prediction of the Biomechanical Effects
of Compression Therapy by Finite Element
Modeling and Ultrasound Elastography
Fanny Frauziols∗ , Jérôme Molimard, Laurent Navarro, Pierre Badel, Magalie Viallon, Rodolphe Testa,
and Stéphane Avril

Abstract—Goal: In the present study, the biomechanical response of soft tissues from the fascia cruris to the skin is studied in the human leg under elastic compression. Methods: The
distribution of elastic moduli in these tissues is measured for a
volunteer at inactive and active muscle states using transient ultrasound elastography (TUSE). After registering the elasticity maps
against magnetic resonance imaging scans of the same volunteer,
patient-specific finite element (FE) models are developed for the
leg cross section at inactive and active muscle states. Elastic properties obtained with TUSE are assigned at each Gauss point of the
models. The response to 20 mmHg elastic compression is eventually predicted with the models. Results: Results show significantly
higher elastic moduli in the fascia cruris tissue and also a significant increase of elastic moduli at active muscle state. Conclusion:
This seems to have a marginal impact on pressure maps in the soft
tissues of the leg predicted by the FE models. There is still an effect
on the reduction of vein diameter induced by elastic compression,
which is decreased at active muscle state. Significance: The discussion of this paper highlights the benefits of using elastography to
reconstruct patient-specific FE models of soft tissues.
Index Terms—Medical compression stocking (MCS), multimodality, soft tissues, supersonic shear imaging (SSI).

I. INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1. Anatomy of the human leg—cross section of the human right leg.
The fascia cruris makes a separation between the superficial tissues, composed
by the adipose tissue, the skin and the superficial veins, and the deep tissues,
composed by the muscular compartments and the deep veins. Adapted from [4].

population [2]. Elastic compression of the limb using medical
compression stockings (MCS) is a widely used treatment, since
it is efficient for almost all forms of CVI and can be employed
at all stages of the disease [3].

A. Medical Condition: Causes and Treatment
IFFERENT draining mechanisms prevent blood from
stagnating in the legs of healthy subjects, such as the
effect of muscular contraction, the activity of the sympathetic
nervous system or the venous valve system [1]. In case of default in one of these mechanisms, chronic venous insufficiency
(CVI) may appear. Symptoms of CVI range from the feelings
of “heavy leg” to ulcers. CVI affects about 30% of the French

D

Manuscript received September 4, 2014; revised October 31, 2014; accepted
November 30, 2014. Date of publication December 4, 2014; date of current
version March 17, 2015. This work was supported by the IFRESIS. The work of
F. Frauziols was supported by the French Scientific National Research Center
under Ph.D. Grant. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
* F. Frauziols is with the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Mines, CIS-EMSE,
CNRS:UMR5307, LGF, Saint-Etienne, France (e-mail: frauziols@emse.fr).
J. Molimard, L. Navarro, P. Badel, and S. Avril are with the Ecole Nationale
Supérieure des Mines, CIS-EMSE, CNRS:UMR5307, LGF, Saint-Etienne,
France.
M. Viallon is with the Université de Lyon, CREATIS, UMR CNRS 5220 and
INSERM U1044, Lyon, France and with the Université Jean Monnet, Service
de Radiologie Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France.
R. Testa is with the Université de Lyon, Laboratoire de Physiologie de
l’Exercice, EA4338, Saint-Etienne, France.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2378553

B. Motivations for Looking at Superficial Tissues
The benefits of MCS are not to be proven, but still, for some
patients, the therapeutic goal is not reached. It has been shown
that the ability of the treatment to achieve the desired medical
goal is closely related to the question of transmission of pressure
through the soft tissues [5], as a result of which biomechanical
models have been developed [6], [7]. These models investigated the transmission of pressure applied with compression
garments [7]–[10]. Early studies focused on finding material
properties to input in the numerical models [5], [11], [12]. The
pressure was found to be heterogeneous inside the leg and with
a great intersubject variability. This gives a first statement on the
subject-specific efficacy shown in the literature. Then, studies
started to consider the deformation of veins in these models [8],
[9], [13]. Recent studies [14] have shown that the biomechanical
action and the benefits of elastic compression are different for
deep veins and for superficial veins (see Fig. 1). Indeed, at active
muscle state, the intramuscular pressure in the tissues surrounding deep veins varies by range ten times larger than the pressure
applied by MCS. The direct impact of elastic compression on
the caliber of deep veins is then relatively limited, especially
in the standing position [14]–[16]. The situation is different for

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1012

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

superficial veins. When the transmural pressure increases in
these veins, their dilatation is only limited by their elastic properties and the elastic properties of the surrounding tissues.
C. Problem Definition
The focus should be on the superficial veins network of the
leg when looking at CVI treated by MCS. Also, to account for
the intersubject variability, the mechanical properties of each
subject should be used. To that extent, this paper answers the
two following questions:
1) How do the elastic properties of soft tissues vary from the
skin surface to muscle compartments, including the fascia
cruris (see Fig. 1)?
2) Does muscular activation have an impact on the elastic
properties of superficial soft tissues?
D. Proposed Solution by the Use of a New Technology
Elastography is a noninvasive way of measuring in vivo mechanical properties by inducing a static compression or transient
vibrations in soft tissues [17]. A new ultrasound-based technology called supersonic shear imaging (SSI) was introduced in
2004 [18] for real-time soft tissue elasticity mapping. This transient elastography technique is used here for the first time to
identify the material property distribution of the soft tissues
from the fascia cruris to the skin in the human leg. After registering the obtained elasticity maps against magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scans, patient-specific finite element (FE) models are developed for entire leg cross sections at inactive and
active muscle states. The response to 20 mmHg elastic compression is eventually predicted with these models.
E. General Outlines of This Paper
Section II of this paper gives a thorough explanation of the
methodology for registering both imaging modalities, and for
the implementation of the FE simulations. Then, in the result
section, the distributions of the elastic moduli inside the leg at
active and inactive muscle states are shown, and the responses
of the leg under 20 mmHg of elastic compression for different
states of the leg are presented. Finally, these results and the
limitations of this study are explained in the discussion section.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Acquisition and Processing
A 22-year-old healthy female volunteer underwent a MRI
scan (see Fig. 2) and SSI ultrasound elastography, following
informed consent.
Before acquiring ultrasound data, the subject was asked to
perform an isometric maximum voluntary contraction (MVC),
and the response of a torque sensor, attached to the foot, was
reported. Ten percent of this MVC was taken as baseline for
contraction to ensure good repeatability. An in-house program
coded in LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA)
was used to display the forces and give the volunteer visual

Fig. 2. MRI—Fat-saturated multiplanar of the whole legs of the subject obtained from a high resolution 3-D fast dual-echo sequence (Dixon [19], [20]).
Imaging parameters were as follows. Repetition time: 6.94, 2.45, 3.675, and
5.69 ms; echo time: 2.45/3.675 ms; flip angle: 9◦ ; FOV: 330 mm × 330
mm; acquisition matrix: 320 × 320; number of partitions: 176; bandwidths:
500/820 Hz/pixel; and parallel acquisition acceleration factor: 2 (grappa technique). The scan time per step was 3 min 24 s. Subjects were imaged in supine
feet first position with the arms along the body. Care was taken to avoid any
compression of the leg muscle on the MR table when positioning the subject.

Fig. 3. Experimental Setup—The probe is mounted on a ring, which allows
collecting images around the leg. The foot is fixed through a shoe to a torque
sensor. A feedback of the torque is given to the subject with the monitor.
Data, including B-mode scans and SWE maps are acquired with Aixplorer
(SuperSonic Imagine, Aix-en-Provence, France).

feedback to ensure that the desired force was maintained when
acquiring ultrasound data.
An ultrasound elastographic device (Aixplorer ; SuperSonic
Imagine, Aix-en-Provence, France) was used to acquire the distribution of elastic moduli in the soft tissues of the leg. In the
rest of this paper, a distinction will be made between B-mode
scans and shear wave elasticity (SWE) maps. The B-mode scans
(conventional echography) account for the anatomy of the leg,
corresponding to the echogenicity of the medium displayed in
grayscale. The SWE maps display the elastic moduli calculated
from the velocity fields of shear waves inside the medium, displayed in a false color scale.
An experimental setup was designed so as to hold the ultrasound probe at different positions all around the leg (see Fig. 3).
A special attention was paid to ensure that the plane of acquisition remains perpendicular to the tibial axis. To ensure minimal
movement of the subject, her right shoe was attached to the

FRAUZIOLS et al.: PREDICTION OF THE BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF COMPRESSION THERAPY BY FINITE ELEMENT MODELING

plate. To ensure that the probe applies minimal compression to
the tissues, a small gel bath was designed to place the probe
at approximately half a centimeter from the skin. The probe is
doing a 360◦ rotation around the leg.
At each position around the leg, SWE and B-mode scans
were simultaneously acquired using a 4–15 MHz probe with 256
piezoelectric elements (SuperLinearTM SL15-4), first at inactive
muscle state, and second at active muscle state, corresponding
to 10% MVC. This required several consecutive acquisitions at
different angular positions denoted by βi , 1 ≤ i ≤ N (N = 37).
Adjacent pairs of B-mode scans, say Ii and Ii−1 acquired at
angles βi and βi−1 , were then stitched together using an inhouse program coded in MATLAB .
After picking up a minimum of four anatomical landmarks
(veins, crossing of aponeuroses) in each pair of adjacent images, the rigid transformation Fi0 relating the coordinate systems of both adjacent images was calculated by least-squares
minimization. Then, a cross-correlation factor was estimated
across the overlapping area, and this cross-correlation factor
was optimized by updating the rigid transformation through the
Nelder–Mead algorithm [21], yielding finally the rigid transformation Fi . Repeating the procedure throughout 2 ≤ i ≤ N , all
pairs of adjacent images were consecutively stitched together.
Aligning the coordinate system of I1 with the global coordinate system, the rigid transformation Gi = F2 × · · · × Fi was
applied to each image Ii in order to align it within the global
coordinate system.
However, additional constraints had to be considered to ensure an optimal cross-correlation between I1 and GN (IN ). Indeed, because the subject could move during the test, the images
collected might have come from different transversal planes of
the leg. Also, echography has a distortion coming from the width
of the beam. Additionally, the stitching process was not fully automatic (points picked by user), thus user-dependent error could
occur. To correct these errors, several options were considered
(for details, see Appendix).
1) Option 1: Find a rigid transformation F such that by
applying F × Fi instead of Fi to each Ii , GN (IN ) = F ×
F2 × · · · × F × Fi × · · · × F × FN (IN ) maximizes the
cross-correlation between I1 and IN .
2) Option 2: Model the obtained unclosed contour of the leg
as a curved beam and deform it until closure. This yields a
set of transformations Fib for each image Ii ensuring that
F2b × F2 × · · · × Fib × Fi × · · · × FNb × FN = ι with ι
the identical transformation.
3) Option 3: Minimize a global factor
d¯ = d(I1 , GN (IN )) +

N
−1


d(Gi (Ii ), Gi + 1 (Ii + 1 ))

i=1

with d(Ia , Ib ) the objective function to be minimized
representing the distance between anatomical landmarks
supposed to be on top of each other after the transformation of successive images. Using the Nelder–Mead algorithm, d¯ was minimized by updating the parameters of
the Gi rigid transformations, for all the transformations
simultaneously.

1013

Fig. 4. FE mesh of the 2-D patient-specific geometry (a) for the bone and veins
and from the ultrasound assembly (b) for the skin (c) reconstructed from the
segmentation of the transversal cross section of the subject right leg acquired
by MRI. It consists of continuum plane strain elements, except for skin and
MCS, composed of truss elements. A relatively finer discretization is used in
the vicinity of the great saphenous and small saphenous vein walls (c).

For each angular position denoted by βi , 1 ≤ i ≤ N , (N = 37),
four SWE maps were acquired and averaged yielding an elasticity image denoted by Ji . Then, each image was aligned within
the global coordinate system by applying the rigid transformation: Gi (Ji )(G1 = ι), permitting a stitched reconstruction of
the whole distribution of the elastic moduli.
B. FE Model Implementation
The MRI leg cross section and the ultrasound reconstructions (B-mode and SWE) were registered using the bones edges
(tibia and fibula) visible in both imaging modalities. From the
skin segmentation of the B-mode reconstruction, the global geometry of the leg was defined. The contours and positions of
the bones as well as the great and small saphenous veins [22]
were added from the segmentation of the MRI leg cross section.
This geometry was used to create a 2-D FE mesh, made of fournode plane strain elements, using the meshing tools available in
Abaqus (see Fig. 4). Soft tissues were represented with a NeoHookean hyperelastic constitutive model. Their strain energy
per unit of reference volume was defined such as [23]
1
(J el − 1)2
U = C10 (I¯1 − 3) +
D1
with I¯1 the first deviatoric strain invariant and C10 and D1 the
material parameters reported in Table I. For each Gauss point
from the fascia cruris to the skin, SWE data were available,
and the following material property was assigned: C10 = E6 ,
where E was the locally measured elastic modulus using SWE.
Deeper than the fascia cruris, a value of C10 = 3 kPa was
assigned [6] for the model at inactive muscle state. Regarding
the model at 10% MVC, a parametric study was performed on
the elastic moduli input deeper than the fascia cruris to evaluate

1014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

TABLE I
MATERIAL PROPERTIES
Material

Model

Parameters

Source

Soft tissue inside
fascia cruris

Hyperelastic
Neo-Hookean

C 1 0 = 0.005 MPa
D 1 = 0.14 MPa

[6]

Soft tissue on and

Hyperelastic

C10 =

outside fascia cruris
Skin
Veins

Neo-Hookean
Hyperelastic
Neo-Hookean
Linear elastic

MCS

Linear elastic

D 1 = 0.14 MPa
C 1 0 = 0.1 MPa
D 1 = 0.14 MPa
E = 0.1 MPa
ν = 0.49
E = 0.4 MPa
ν = 0.49

E
6

MPa

SSI
elastic moduli
[25]
[7]
[6]

the influence of likely evolving material properties in contracted
muscles.
The MCS was defined as a circle of radius equal to the
radius of the sock at inactive muscle state. A class II MCS,
corresponding to 15–20 mmHg external compression was used.
Material properties are reported in Table I.
The vein wall was modeled using five elements through the
whole 1 mm thickness. The material properties were linearized
following Rohan et al. [7].
The simulation entailed two steps. At first, the radius of the
MCS was increased until the whole leg fitted in it. Then, this
kinematic condition was removed and the contact between skin
and MCS was activated. In order to match the experimental
conditions where the subject lied supine, a blood pressure of 15
mmHg was applied on the inner surface of the vein walls. Both
bones were fixed in the model.
The interaction between the skin and the sock was enforced using a Coulomb frictional behavior with a skin-totextile friction coefficient fixed at 0.3 as reported in the literature [24]. From the Abaqus library for contact algorithms, the
penalty formulation was used in the tangential and normal directions. In the latter, an exponential contact pressure/overclosure
relationship was defined. Two sets of simulations were
computed.
1) The biomechanical response of the leg to external compression at inactive and active (corresponding to 10%
MVC) muscle states.
2) A parametric study to evaluate the influence of the constitutive parameters of the deep soft tissues on the response
of superficial soft tissues to elastic compression.
III. RESULTS
A. B-Mode Assembly
A stitched reconstruction of the 37 B-mode scans without
constraining the contour to be closed is shown in Fig. 5. A
significant gap remains, which justifies the use of an additional
constraint for the stitching approach.
The results obtained with the different stitching approaches
providing a closed contour are shown in Fig. 6. The sum of the
differences of grayscale values in the overlapping areas were
derived for the three options. Their values are 30.2 for option 1,

Fig. 5. Initial assembly of B-mode scans. The reconstruction is not closed
(red circles).

29.6 for option 2, and 29.4 for option 3. Option 3 is the approach
which provides an optimal match between all pairs of images
[see Fig. 6(c)]. The rigid transformations of option 3 are the
ones used further to reconstruct the stitched elasticity maps for
the leg at inactive and active muscle states (see Fig. 7).
Stitching errors were finally quantified through a criterion
defined as the average distance between 10 anatomical landmarks in each pair of B-mode scans. Average errors for the
entire stitched reconstruction are 0.67 and 0.83 mm at inactive
and active muscle states, respectively.
The maps of elastic moduli reconstructed from SWE measurements are showed in Fig. 7 at inactive state and active muscle
state, corresponding to 10% MVC. They both are heterogeneous, with overall higher values at the surface (skin) and at the
location of fascia cruris.
Elastic moduli [see Fig. 7(b)] are globally higher at active
muscle state, corresponding to 10% MVC than at inactive muscle state [see Fig. 7(a)]. A mean value of 12.4 kPa was measured
for the elastic moduli (from skin to fascia cruris) at inactive muscle state and 17.2 kPa at active muscle state, corresponding to
10% MVC.
B. Elastic Compression of the Leg
The first studied case is for the muscles at inactive muscle state
(see Fig. 8). Hydrostatic pressure was chosen for the analysis
because it does not depend on the coordinate system and can be
used to predict local fluid flows.
The second studied case is for the muscles at 10% MVC. To
the best of our knowledge, the literature does not report global
C10 value for 10% MVC inside the leg. To analyze the impact of
the input value below the fascia cruris in our contracted model,
a parametric study increasing this value up to 20 times the value
inputted for the model at inactive muscle state was performed.
Increasing the elastic moduli of the muscular compartments
affects the hydrostatic pressure distributions derived from these
simulations by accentuating the tension and compression found

FRAUZIOLS et al.: PREDICTION OF THE BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF COMPRESSION THERAPY BY FINITE ELEMENT MODELING

1015

Fig. 7. Elastic moduli distribution in kilopascal at (a) inactive muscle state
and (b) at active muscle state, corresponding to 10% MVC (b). The position of
the fascia cruris is marked as dotted lines.

Fig. 8. Hydrostatic pressure distribution in kilopascal for the leg at inactive
muscle state, during 20 mmHg of elastic compression.

Fig. 6. Closing contour methods comparison: (a) Option 1, (b) option 2, and
(c) option 3 optimization.

between the skin and the fascia cruris, until this inner C10
overpasses a threshold value of 90 kPa. Then, the effect remains
stable (see Fig. 9).
For all cases, the obtained maps (Figs. 8 and 9) show heterogeneous distributions. The maximal pressure is located where
the curvature radius is minimal (near the tibia) and conversely,
minimal pressures are found on flat regions of the leg. An important effect of elastic compression is the impact on the area
of the superficial veins. To study this effect, the FE model incorporated two major veins of the leg. For both veins (small

and great saphenous veins), the effect of elastic compression is
a slight decrease of the vein cross-sectional area (see Tables II
and III). The decrease is significantly larger for the great saphenous vein than for the small saphenous vein due to the larger
curvature at the location of the great saphenous vein and due
to the stiffer properties around the small saphenous vein. Also,
the decrease in cross-sectional area diminishes as the elastic
modulus increases inside the fascia cruris (see Table III).
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Stitching Methodology
An important drawback of SWE, as well as conventional
echography, is the small size of the field of view (FOV). Several
stitching of B-mode scans from all around the leg were presented

1016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

TABLE II
PERCENTAGE OF CONTRACTION (I.E., DECREASE OF THE CROSS-SECTIONAL
AREA) OF THE GREAT AND SMALL SAPHENOUS VEINS UNDER AN ELASTIC
COMPRESSION OF 15–20 MMHG FOR THE MODEL AT INACTIVE MUSCLE STATE
Vein position

Contraction (%)

Great saphenous
Small saphenous

4.5
3.7

TABLE III
PARAMETRIC STUDY
Contraction (%)

Fig. 9. Parametric study results—Hydrostatic pressure distribution in kilopascal for the leg under 20 mmHg of elastic compression. 10% MVC elastic
moduli are used for the fascia cruris up to the skin. Inside the fascia cruris, the
value was increased as follows, for cases a to k (in kPa): 18 - 36 - 72 - 108 - 144
- 180 - 216 - 252 - 288 - 324 - 360.

here. The grayscale values of the overlapping area for the three
options helped us to define the best way to stitch the images.
The quantitative spatial error on the stitching gave us a first
quality criterion of this methodology. By assembling B-mode
scans around the leg, a wide FOV was explored, comparable to
the extended FOV [26] (EFOV) software, used by clinicians to
explore large areas, such as abdomen [27] or musculoskeletal
system [28]. However, to the best of our knowledge, EFOV was
never performed along with SWE.
Other imaging modalities can overcome this drawback. For
example, magnetic resonance elastography has been used to explore the elasticity of soft tissue in large anatomical areas such
as thighs [17] or livers [29] but due to a low spatial resolution, it
is not appropriate to study subcutaneous tissues. Moreover, external vibrator is needed to generate low-frequency shear waves
compared to SSI, where the ultrasonic probe remotely generates
the shear wave inside the region of interest through pressure of
radiation [18] allowing ease of use and minimal discomfort to
the subject.
To improve the SWE methodology, a different design of the
probe that follows the contour of the leg may be an alternative
in the future.

a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k

Great Saphenous Vein

Small Saphenous Vein

8.1
8.0
7.8
7.8
7.7
7.7
7.7
7.7
7.7
7.6
7.6

5.7
5.3
4.6
4.2
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.4
3.3

Percentage of contraction (i.e., decrease of the crosssectional area) of the great and small saphenous veins
under an elastic compression of 15–20 mmHg for the
model at 10% MVC.

The in vivo material properties of subcutaneous tissues have
been an intense topic of research for the past 10 years. Measurement of skin elasticity have been performed through traditional
tests such as suction [24], [32] or torsion. More recently, to
account for anisotropy, microrobot equipped with force and displacement sensors have been developed and used to demonstrate
the strongly anisotropic and viscoelastic behavior of skin [33].
However, these techniques can only give local elasticity measures. Another approach combining FE analysis, MRI, and indentation was able to define more global mechanical parameters
for the different layers of the human skin [31] and subcutaneous
tissues [30].
All these different methods developed, although promising,
cannot address the heterogeneities of mechanical properties
found in subcutaneous soft tissues, which can be obtained with
SWE.
C. Prediction of the Effects of Elastic Compression

B. Material Properties of the Subcutaneous Tissues
A mean value of 12.4 kPa was measured for the elastic moduli (from skin to fascia cruris) at inactive muscle state and
17.2 kPa at active muscle state, corresponding to 10% MVC.
These are consistent with the literature, where values range from
11 to 32 kPa for fat [6], [30], [31]. The two questions addressed
in Section I are answered here. The distribution of the elastic moduli in the superficial tissues are heterogeneous and the
muscular activation tends to increase the values of the elastic
moduli.

Rohan et al. [7] performed a computational parametric study
and they showed that the biomechanical response of superficial veins to elastic compression is subject to three mechanical
factors: The size of the cross section, the position on the leg contour (local radius of curvature of the leg), and the type of fat of
the patient. This highlighted the strong patient-specific response
of the leg to external compression. By using the elastic moduli measured by SWE, the effect of heterogeneity in material
property distribution and the change in elastic moduli of 10%
MVC on pressure maps and veins contraction was determined

FRAUZIOLS et al.: PREDICTION OF THE BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF COMPRESSION THERAPY BY FINITE ELEMENT MODELING

in this study. This effect remains marginal, though, in the range
of moduli measured for the volunteer considered here.
This shows that the distribution of perivenous tissue pressure
[34] is mostly determined by the shape and the size of each
subjects leg (local radii of curvature) for superficial veins such
as the great saphenous veins and the small saphenous veins. The
hydrostatic pressure distributions reported here confirm the idea
that MCS work toward increasing perivenous tissue pressure on
superficial veins consequently reducing the transmural pressure.
Transmural pressure is also known to be related to the tension
of the vein wall according to the Laplace law [35]. Reduction of
this tension implies lower alterations in the vein wall associated
with various pathologies.
Several research works [36]–[38] have shown that muscle activation is modified by medical devices similar to MCS. Indeed,
skin mechanoreceptors provide not only exteroceptive by also
proprioceptive effects, through Pacinian and Ruffini mechanoreceptors [39]. These are some of the receptors found in the subcutaneous tissue. They sustain essentially static pressure and
stretch [40]. In the skin and adipose tissue, inhomogeneous material properties around the locations of the mechanoreceptors
may also cause significant differences in the spatial distribution
of candidate relevant stimuli of the pressure. Therefore, the inhomogeneous material properties may have a stronger impact
on the proprioceptive effects of elastic compression.
D. Limitations and Perspectives
A question could be raised on the nature of elastic moduli
given by SWE in soft tissues. Indeed, one assumption used
to retrieve the elastic moduli from shear wave group velocity
is that the medium is isotropic and homogenous. It is a fairly
common assumption to consider adipose tissue as such [30],
[31], [41]. For skeletal muscular tissues, which are made of
fibers, it has been previously considered as transversely isotropic
[42], [43]. Here, a 2-D model in transversal plane is constructed,
so muscles can be considered as isotropic. Nevertheless, further
investigation would be needed to check the relevance of the
elastic moduli given by the Aixplorer on thin structures such
as fascia cruris and skin.
Apart from the assumptions used in SWE, a technical limitation constraining this methodology is not having a good access
to deep tissue mechanical properties. This might be overcome
by using a probe with a lower frequency that would provide
useful information to study the transmission of pressure to deep
veins.
A higher level of muscular activation should be investigated
to draw strong conclusions on the effects of muscular activation
on the transmission of pressure.

1017

skin to the fascia cruris, their impact on the hydrostatic pressure
distribution inside the leg, and the closure of the great and small
saphenous veins.
This opens the way to promising applications for predicting computationally the personalized action of biomechanical
devices on soft tissues.
APPENDIX
STITCHING ULTRASOUND IMAGES
Three options were considered to correct the problem of closure of the stitching of all the B-mode scans together.
1) Option 1: Find a rigid transformation F such that by
applying F × Fi instead of Fi to each Ii , GN (IN ) = F ×
F2 × · · · × F × Fi × · · · × F × FN (IN ) maximizes the
cross-correlation between I1 and IN .
Here, the error was considered to be systematic between
all the images. The opening angle was divided by the
number of images, and this correcting angle was used to
correct the rotational component of the rigid body transformations, then the two other components of the rigid
body transformations parameters (the two translations)
were computed by maximizing the cross-correlation between successive images. These three correcting components, the rotation and the two translations are represented
by F in the equation.
2) Option 2: Model the obtained unclosed contour of the leg
as a curved beam and deform it until closure. This yields a
set of transformations Fib for each image Ii ensuring that
F2b × F2 × · · · × Fib × Fi × · · · × FNb × FN = ι with ι
the identical transformation.
Here, the error was not considered to be systematic and
the idea was to use the FE method to compute each individual error. Along the fascia cruris, a hundred points
were manually picked on the unclosed stitching of the leg
[see Fig. 10(a)]. The first and last points were taken as
the same anatomical landmarks. Then, these points were
used to define a curved beam on Abaqus . Two boundary conditions were applied. The first boundary condition
constrained one end of the line as fixed and the second
boundary condition induced a displacement on the other
end of the line to make both ends meet. Finally, the FE
simulation provided the displacements and rotations of all
points [see Fig. 10(b)]. These displacements and rotation,
Fib , were used to update each previously found rigid body
transformations parameters to close the contour of the leg.
3) Option 3: Minimize a global factor:
d¯ = d(I1 , GN (IN )) +

N
−1


d(Gi (Ii ), Gi+1 (Ii+1 ))

i=1

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new methodology coupling MRI and TUSE
data were developed and implemented in a FE model, which is
patient-specific in terms of geometry and material properties.
This method was used to study the biomechanical response of
the leg, under 20 mmHg of elastic compression. The focus was
on the material properties of the superficial soft tissues from the

With d(Ia , Ib ) the objective function to be minimized representing the distance between the anatomical landmarks
placed in the global coordinate system which are supposed to be on top of each other. Using the Nelder-Mead
algorithm, d¯ was minimized by updating the parameters
of the Gi rigid transformations, for all the transformations
simultaneously.

1018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

tem which are supposed to be on top of each other. Using
the Nelder-Mead algorithm, d¯ was minimized by updating
the rigid body transformations parameters Gi .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. R. Le Riche for his
support in developing the stitching methodology and the IVTV
platform for its experimental support.
REFERENCES

Fig. 10. Schematic overview of the second option of the stitching method.
The contour of the aponeurosis is displayed on a stitching of B-mode scans
(a). Precomputation (green) and postcomputation (blue) of the closure of the
contour by FE modeling (b).

Fig. 11. Schematic overview of the third option of the stitching method. The
same anatomical landmarks are picked for each image of all the pairs of images.

Here, the goal was to find the rigid body transformations parameters globally instead of finding a correcting
factor for the previous unclosed stitching. To do so, ten
anatomical landmarks were picked on the image Ii and the
same ten anatomical landmarks were picked on the image
Ii+1 . This process was repeated through all the images and
circled back to the first one, meaning that ten anatomical
landmarks were picked on the image IN and the same ten
anatomical landmarks were picked on the image I1 (see
Fig. 11). Then, for each pairs of images, Ii and Ii+1 , the
rigid body transformation parameters Gi were computed
and all the points picked were placed in the same global
coordinate system. Following this initial estimate of Gi ,
¯ was defined as the distance of
an objective function, d,
each anatomical landmarks in the global coordinate sys-

[1] E. N. Marieb, Anatomie et Physiologie Humaine, ERP Paris ed. SaintLaurent, QC, Canada: Pearson, 2010.
[2] N. C. Floury, Donnes Sociales 1996: La SociT franais, (ser. Collection de
l’INSEE). Malakoff, France, INSEE, 1996
[3] H. Partsch, “Chapter 10—Mechanism and effects of compression therapy,”
The Vein Book. Burlington, MA, USA: Academic Press 2007 pp. 103–109.
[4] H. Braus and C. Elze, Anatomie Des Menschen: Ein Lehrbuch für
Studierende Und Ärzte, New York, NY, USA: Springer, vol. 1, 1921.
[5] S. Avril et al., “Mixed experimental and numerical approach for characterizing the biomechanical response of the human leg under elastic
compression,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 132, no. 3, pp. 31006–31014, Mar.
2010.
[6] L. Dubuis et al., “Identification of the material parameters of soft tissues in the compressed leg,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–11, 2012.
[7] C. P.-Y. Rohan et al., “Biomechanical response of varicose veins to
elastic compression: A numerical study,” J. Biomech., vol. 46, no. 3,
pp. 599–603, Feb. 2013.
[8] G. Dai et al., “The effects of external compression on venous blood
flow and tissue deformation in the lower leg,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 121,
no. 6, pp. 557–564, Dec. 1999.
[9] A. J. Narracott et al., “A validated model of calf compression and deep
vessel collapse during external cuff inflation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 273–280, Feb. 2009.
[10] Y. Wang et al., “Analysis of flow and wall shear stress in the peroneal
veins under external compression based on real-time MR images,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 17–27, 2012.
[11] L. Bouten, “Identification des proprits mcaniques des tissus constitutifs du
mollet pour l’tude mcanique de la contention,” Ph.D. dissertation, Ecole
Nationale Suprieure des Mines de Saint-Etienne, Saint-tienne, France,
Mar. 2009.
[12] S. Avri et al., “Patient-specific modeling of leg compression in the treatment of venous deficiency,” in Patient-Specific Modeling in Tomorrow’s
Medicine (ser. Studies in Mechanobiology Tissue Engineering and Biomaterials), A. Gefen, Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer, Jan. 2012, no. 9,
pp. 217–238.
[13] Y. Wang et al., “Finite element analysis of the deformation of deep veins
in the lower limb under external compression,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 515–523, Apr. 2013.
[14] P.-Y. Rohan et al. (2014). “Prediction of the biomechanical effects of compression therapy on deep veins using finite element modelling,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., pp. 1–11. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10439-014-1121-6
[15] B. Partsch and H. Partsch, “Calf compression pressure required to
achieve venous closure from supine to standing positions,” J. Vasc. Surg.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 734–738, Oct. 2005.
[16] H. Partsch et al., “Narrowing of leg veins under compression demonstrated
by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).” Int. Angiol., J. Int. Union Angiol.,
vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 408–410, 2010.
[17] S. F. Bensamoun et al., “Determination of thigh muscle stiffness using
magnetic resonance elastography,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 23, no. 2,
pp. 242–247, Feb. 2006.
[18] J. Bercoff et al., “Supersonic shear imaging: A new technique for soft
tissue elasticity mapping,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 396–409, Apr. 2004.
[19] W. T. Dixon, “Simple proton spectroscopic imaging,” Radiology,
vol. 153, no. 1, pp. 189–194, Oct. 1984.
[20] J. K. Lee et al., “Fatty infiltration of the liver: Demonstration by proton
spectroscopic imaging. preliminary observations,” Radiology, vol. 153,
no. 1, pp. 195–201, Oct. 1984.

FRAUZIOLS et al.: PREDICTION OF THE BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF COMPRESSION THERAPY BY FINITE ELEMENT MODELING

[21] J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, “A simplex method for function minimization,”
Comput. J., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 308–313, 1965.
[22] F. Vin, “Varices,” EMC - Cardiologie-Angiologie, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–26,
2005.
[23] K. Hibbit, ABAQUS Theory and User Manuals Version 6.9, ABAQUS
Inc., Rhode Island, USA, 2009.
[24] L. C. Gerhardt et al., “Skintextile friction and skin elasticity in young and
aged persons,” Skin Res. Technol., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 288–298, Aug. 2009.
[25] J. T. Iivarinen et al., “Experimental and computational analysis of soft
tissue stiffness in forearm using a manual indentation device,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 1245–1253, 2011.
[26] L. Weng et al., “US extended-field-of-view imaging technology,” Radiology, vol. 203, no. 3, pp. 877–880, Jun. 1997.
[27] S. H. Kim et al., “Extended field-of-view sonography advantages
in abdominal applications,” J. Ultrasound Med., vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 385–394, Apr. 2003.
[28] E. C. Lin et al., “Extended field of view sonography in musculoskeletal
imaging.,” J. Ultrasound Med., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 147–152, Feb. 1999.
[29] S. F. Bensamoun et al., “Measurement of liver stiffness with two imaging
techniques: Magnetic resonance elastography and ultrasound elastometry,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1287–1292, Nov. 2008.
[30] E. Linder-Ganz et al., “Assessment of mechanical conditions in subdermal tissues during sitting: A combined experimental-MRI and finite
element approach,” J. Biomech., vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 1443–1454, 2007.
[31] H. V. Tran et al., “In vivo characterization of the mechanical properties of human skin derived from MRI and indentation techniques,”
Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 401–407,
Dec. 2007.
[32] F. Hendriks et al., “The relative contributions of different skin layers to the
mechanical behavior of human skin in vivo using suction experiments,”
Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 259–266, 2006.
[33] C. Flynn et al., “Mechanical characterisation of in vivo human skin using
a 3d force-sensitive micro-robot and finite element analysis,” Biomech.
Modeling Mechanobiol., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 27–38, 2011.

1019

[34] C. Gardon-Mollard and A.-A. Ramelet, La Compression Mdicale. New
York NY, USA: Elsevier Masson, Jul. 2008.
[35] R. J. Gusic et al., “Mechanical properties of native and ex vivo remodeled
porcine saphenous veins,” J. Biomech., vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1770–1779,
2005.
[36] D. K. Ramsey et al., “Electromyographic and biomechanic analysis of anterior cruciate ligament deficiency and functional knee bracing,” Clinical
Biomech., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 28–34, 2003.
[37] D. Théoret and M. Lamontagne, “Study on three-dimensional kinematics and electromyography of ACL deficient knee participants wearing a
functional knee brace during running,” Knee Surg., Sports Traumatol.,
Arthroscopy, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 555–563, 2006.
[38] W. J. Kraemer et al., “Effects of a whole body compression garment on
markers of recovery after a heavy resistance workout in men and women,”
J. Strength Conditioning Res., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 804–814, 2010.
[39] R. S. Johansson and Å. B. Vallbo, “Tactile sensory coding in the glabrous
skin of the human hand,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 6, pp. 27–32, 1983.
[40] J. H. Martin and T. M. Jessell, “Modality coding in the somatic sensory
system,” Principles Neural Sci., vol. 3, pp. 341–352, 1991.
[41] F. S. Azar et al., “Methods for modeling and predicting mechanical
deformations of the breast under external perturbations,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–27, Mar. 2002.
[42] M. Van Loocke et al., “A validated model of passive muscle in compression,” J. Biomech., vol. 39, no. 16, pp. 2999–3009, 2006.
[43] J. A. Weiss, “A constitutive model and finite element representation for
transversely isotropic soft tissues,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Bioeng., Univ.
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 1994.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

