IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

1001

Human Experts’ and a Fuzzy Model’s Predictions
of Outcomes of Scoliosis Treatment:
A Comparative Analysis
Eric Chalmers∗ , Witold Pedrycz, and Edmond Lou

Abstract—Brace treatment is the most commonly used nonsurgical treatment for adolescents with idiopathic scoliosis. However,
brace treatment is not always successful and the factors influencing
its success are not completely clear. This makes treatment outcome
difficult to predict. A computer model which can accurately predict treatment outcomes could potentially provide valuable treatment recommendations. This paper describes a fuzzy system that
includes a prediction model and a decision support engine. The
model was constructed using conditional fuzzy c-means clustering to discover patterns in retrospective patient data. The model’s
ability to predict treatment outcome was compared to the ability
of eight Scoliosis experts. The model and experts each predicted
treatment outcome retrospectively for 28 braced patients, and these
predictions were compared to the actual outcomes. The model outperformed all but one expert individually and performed similarly
to the experts as a group. These results suggest that the fuzzy
model is capable of providing meaningful treatment recommendations. This study offers the first model for this application whose
performance has been shown to be at or above the human expert
level.
Index Terms—Decision support systems, fuzzy systems, medical
expert systems, orthotics, pattern analysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
DOLESCENT idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a threedimensional spinal deformity affecting about 2–3% of
adolescents [1]. It involves abnormal bending and rotation of
the spine, causing visible torso asymmetry. Its severity is measured using the Cobb angle: The angle formed by the two most
tilted vertebrae seen on a standing radiograph. If left untreated,
the deformity can progress (i.e., the Cobb angle increases) and
negatively affect patients’ physical, emotional, and social wellbeing [2].

A

Manuscript received January 14, 2014; revised June 23, 2014 and October 16,
2014; accepted November 28, 2014. Date of publication December 4, 2014; date
of current version February 16, 2015. The work was supported in part by the
Women and Children’s Health Research Institute, Alberta Innovates Technology
Futures, and TD Bank Financial Group. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ E. Chalmers is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G2V4, Canada (e-mail:
dchalmer@ualberta.ca).
W. Pedrycz is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Alberta, also with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, King Abdulaziz University, and with the Systems Research Institute,
Polish Academy of Sciences.
E. Lou is with the Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, and also
with Alberta Health Services.
This paper contains supplemental material available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 17 KB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2377594

Fig. 1. Radiograph of an adolescent with scoliosis (left) and a scoliosis brace
(right).

Patients considered to be at risk of progression are called
“progressive,” and often prescribed a brace—a hard plastic orthotic, which counteracts the spinal curve—to be worn full-time
until the patient reaches skeletal maturity [3]. Fig. 1 shows an
example of a scoliotic curve and a custom spinal brace. The goal
of brace treatment is to stop progression of the Cobb angle—
usually defined as a Cobb angle increase of more than 5° [4].
Surgical intervention to fuse the spine is often the next step if
brace treatment fails.
Although brace treatment has been proven to reduce surgical
rates, it is only about 50% successful in preventing progression
[5]. Characteristics of the patient, their particular spinal curve,
treatment parameters, and brace wear habits all affect treatment
outcome [6]–[8], but the exact nature of these relationships is
still unclear. Recent studies such as those by Katz et al. [5]
and Weinstein et al. [8] claim that patient compliance (i.e.,
faithfulness in wearing the brace as long as prescribed) is a key
factor in treatment success. But it seems clear that compliance is
not the only factor; the same studies observed treatment failures
even among highly compliant patients, and successes among
those with poor compliance. So compliance—while possibly a
major factor—is not the only factor affecting treatment outcome:
Some cases are simply more difficult to treat.

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Identifying these difficult cases is important in planning treatment, and providing patients and families with accurate information about their situation. Some methods for predicting risk
of progression have been proposed in the literature. Methods
proposed by Lonstein and Carlson [9] and Peterson et al. [10]
are perhaps the best known. Wu et al. have used fuzzy clustering
and artificial neural networks [11], and a nonuniform rational
B-spline technique [12] to predict a patient’s Cobb angle at their
fourth follow-up visit based on three previous measurements (6–
12 months apart). Wu reported good results, though the models
cannot give a progression estimate until at least 18 months into
treatment. Lee et al. used classification and regression tree analysis to develop a decision tree for classifying patients’ risk of
progression [13]. Unfortunately, a glance at the class probabilities at the tree’s leaf nodes suggests that the model may predict
progressive curves quite inaccurately. Moreover, all of these
methods consider the risk of progression when the scoliosis
is untreated, which is useful when deciding whether a patient
should be braced or not. But to set the parameters of brace treatment, we must predict risk given brace treatment. This requires
a different prediction scheme because brace treatment alters the
natural history of scoliosis.
To our best knowledge, only two methods have considered
braced patients. Ajemba et al. developed a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to predict progression using a dataset
of 44 patients, 14 of whom were braced [14]. They reported a
prediction accuracy of 79% on the 14 braced patients, though
never validated the model on separate test data. Lou et al. used
data from 20 braced patients to develop a linear model to predict
progression [15]. The data included new measurements relating
to patient compliance. An assessment of the method’s accuracy
is pending.
A model to predict progression may be most useful as a
component of a decision support system. The system could accept information about a patient, and then optimize brace treatment parameters to give the most favorable model prediction of
treatment outcome. Thus, the model would be used to generate patient-specific treatment recommendations. Chi described
this form of decision support system [16] and demonstrated
its application to choosing a hospital [17], and recommending
lifestyle changes to prevent heart disease [18]. Where some decision support systems emulate experts using a knowledge base
of existing facts represented in a machine-readable way, this
system’s knowledge base is derived fresh, directly from patient
data.
Of course, the system’s treatment recommendations are only
as good as the model used to create them. In this paper, we
consider a prediction model derived using conditional fuzzy cmeans (CFCM) clustering [19] with a custom distance measure.
Conventional fuzzy c-means (FCM) has been successfully applied to problems in the scoliosis field: Wu’s prediction model
has already been mentioned [11], and Duong et al. used it to
discover a classification system for scoliotic deformities [20].
Fuzzy systems have also been used to measure scoliosis severity [21], and make recommendations regarding surgical scoliosis
correction [22].
This paper uses the CFCM-based prediction model in a system, which both predicts treatment outcome and recommends

Pre-treatment Measurement 2

1002

Progress
Neutral
Improve

Pre-treatment Measurement 1

Fig. 2. CFCM discovers clusters of observations belonging to particular contexts. This illustration depicts clusters of patients who improve, remain neutral,
or progress during brace treatment (three unique contexts).

treatment parameters. A physician makes Scoliosis treatment
decisions using their own experience to predict risk of progression. If a computer model can improve these predictions, it will
likely improve the resulting treatment decisions. Comparing the
prediction accuracy of computer models and human experts
is a common benchmark [23]–[25], and is important to determine whether the model can enhance the experts’ predictive
performance.
The main objectives of this paper are to describe a fuzzy
model’s application in a decision support system for brace treatment of scoliosis, and to determine whether the model predicts
treatment outcome as accurately as experts. Here, we demonstrate that the fuzzy model gives improved accuracy over predictions made by most experts at our center. This suggests potential
value for the model as a decision support tool. This is the first
model for this application which has been shown to operate at
or above the human expert level.
In this paper, we use boldface fonts to denote vectors and
italics to denote scalars.
II. METHOD
A. Overview
This paper describes a previously designed model [26], which
predicts brace treatment outcome using measurements obtained
at the start of treatment: Three clinical measurements describing
the patient, and the measurement of in-brace correction (the
instantaneous Cobb angle correction applied by the brace).
The model was derived using CFCM [19]—an extension
of FCM. Three brace treatment outcomes (“contexts”) were
defined: “improvement,” “neutral,” and “progression.” CFCM
identified clusters of patients who had similar pretreatment measurements and similar outcomes (see Fig. 2). Each cluster was
represented by a prototype centroid, which can be thought of as
a “hypothetical patient” representative of a particular outcome.
New patients’ treatment outcomes can be predicted based on
their similarity to the prototypes.
We also propose a decision support engine, which generates predictions for a range of in-brace corrections. The engine
graphically displays how a particular patient’s predicted outcome changes as a function of this treatment parameter. Thus,
the system can provide patient-specific recommendations of inbrace correction, supporting a vital “what-if” analysis. This
information can help inform physicians’ treatment decisions.

CHALMERS et al.: HUMAN EXPERTS’ AND A FUZZY MODEL’S PREDICTIONS OF OUTCOMES OF SCOLIOSIS TREATMENT

Decision
Support
Engine

PredicƟon
Model

PaƟent True
Data Outcomes

Human
Experts

Pre-Treatment
Measurements

Fuzzy Sets
Progress/ Neutral / Improve

Outcome
Predictions

Outcome Predictions
Prediction
Assessment

1003

Prediction
Assessment

Fig. 3. Flow diagram of the test procedure. The model and experts each
predicted treatment outcome for 28 patients, based on those patients’ pretreatment clinical measurements. The predictions were assessed vis-à-vis the true
outcomes.

The decision support engine’s usefulness depends on the accuracy of the prediction model’s predictions. Thus, in this paper,
we compare the model’s prediction accuracy to the accuracy of
scoliosis experts’ predictions. The model and the experts were
given clinical measurements coming from 28 past patients at
the start of brace treatment. Outcomes were predicted for each
patient. Since the true outcomes were known, the accuracy of
each set of predictions could be determined. Fig. 3 illustrates
this procedure.
The model was also compared to the alternatives from the
literature: Prediction methods proposed by Lonstein and Carlson
[9] and Peterson and Nachemson [10].
B. Patient Data
Patient data used in this study was obtained retrospectively
from our local scoliosis clinic’s database, with approval from
the local ethics board. Records were extracted for patients aged
9–16 years, who had been diagnosed with idiopathic scoliosis
and had prebrace Cobb angles between 20° and 45°. All patients
had been treated in 2006 or later, and had finished brace treatment at the time of this study. One hundred two patient records
met these criteria; 12 were excluded because key radiographic
measures had not been recorded. Sixty two records were used
to develop a prediction model; 28 were used as a test set to
evaluate the model’s and scoliosis experts’ predictions. Each
record contained 14 clinical measurements taken at the start of
treatment (see [26]), and the treatment outcome—a Cobb angle
progression in degrees.
The 90 patients included 75 girls and 15 boys, aged 13.4 ±
1.7 years. Prebrace Cobb angles were 30◦ ± 7◦ . Forty one patients (46%) experienced >5° progression of their deformity
by the end of brace treatment. The overall mean Cobb angle
change was 5◦ ± 10◦ . Patients had been prescribed full-time

Fig. 4. Fuzzy sets defining the three treatment outcome contexts used in the
CFCM clustering. A measured Cobb angle progression is mapped to three
context memberships using these membership functions.

thoraco-lumbar-sacral orthoses (60 cases) or night-time only
braces (30 cases) by the attending surgeon or nurse practitioner,
according to established guidelines.
C. Prediction Model
We identify three meaningful brace treatment outcomes or
contexts: “Improvement,” “neutral,” and “progression,” and define each as a fuzzy set of Cobb angle progressions measured
post-treatment. These fuzzy sets’ membership functions are
shown in Fig. 4. Each of these fuzzy sets represents a unique
treatment outcome, and together they reflect the nature of our
modeling problem. The “neutral” context was designed to intersect the “improved” context at −0.5° progressions, and the
“progressed” context at 5.5°. This is convenient because the
Scoliosis Research Society’s standardized definition of progression is a Cobb angle increase greater than 5° [4]. The fuzzy
sets were based on Gaussian membership functions with a variance of 1°—which is in the range of estimated values for variance of the Cobb angle measurement [27]. Thus, for example,
the “progressed” fuzzy set suggests the degree to which a measured progression represents an actual progression greater than
5°. Using these fuzzy sets as contexts in the CFCM clustering
resulted in clusters of patients who tend to progress, improve,
or remain neutral after brace treatment.
The 62 patient records used to develop the model were
each assigned degrees of membership in the “progressed,” “improved,” and “neutral” contexts based on their measured progression at the end of brace treatment.
The CFCM clustering grouped the 62 patients into eight fuzzy
clusters: Two from the “neutral” context, and three from each of
the other contexts. The number of clusters (prototypes) was chosen empirically, by plotting the fuzzy clusters’ goodness of fit
as a function of the number of prototypes. Points of diminishing
returns in these plots indicated suitable numbers of prototypes.
This was done for each of the three outcomes separately (see [26]
for details). The clustering used a custom distance function instead of conventional Euclidean distance. Distance between two
points was calculated as the angle between the vectors connecting each point to the global mean X̄ of the training data. That is,
given a set of n training instances S = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }, with
xi ∈ Rd , we first calculate the mean X̄ ∈ Rd of all members of
S. The distance between any two points xa and xb is then
 

x a · x b
−1
xa − xb = cos
(1)
|x a | |x b |

1004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
FEATURE VALUES FOR EACH PROTOTYPE AND GLOBAL MEAN

where
x a = xa − X̄,

x b = xb − X̄.

(2)

Using this distance function, we compare patients on the basis
of how they differ from average. Ultimately, this means that the
prototypes reveal how patients who tend to progress or improve
differ from average. Each context’s prototypes were placed by
a downhill simplex algorithm.
Treatment outcome for new patients was predicted by first calculating the patient’s membership in every cluster using (3)—the
conventional FCM membership calculation. That is, the membership ug of a new patient (described by feature vector x) in
prototype vg ’s cluster is
ug =

C
h=1

1
 
2/(m −1)
 x−v g 

Prototype
#

Context

Scoliometer
(°)

In-Brace
Correction (%)

Cobb
Angle (°)

Age
(yrs)

Global Mean

9

66

30

13.6

1
2
3

Improve
Improve
Improve

7
5
7

61
142
87

27
25
22

10.8
12.9
14.6

4
5

Neutral
Neutral

4
16

60
60

27
41

13.6
15.4

6
7
8

Progress
Progress
Progress

10
10
14

101
20
38

26
38
31

15.3
13.6
12.3

(3)

x−v h

where C is the total number of clusters in all contexts, and m
if the fuzzification coefficient controlling the smoothness of the
transition between cluster memberships. The memberships for
all clusters in a given context were then summed to give the
membership in that context. This produced predicted memberships in the “improved,” “progressed,” and “neutral” outcome
categories.
The model provided these three membership values along
with a dichotomous progressed/nonprogressed label (as per
the Scoliosis Research Society standard for reporting brace
treatment outcome [4]). The label was “progressed” if the
“progressed” membership was larger than the “neutral” and
“improved” memberships and “nonprogressed” otherwise.
A “wrapper” feature selection procedure [28] was used to
eliminate redundant and irrelevant features from the full set
of 14, giving a more interpretable and meaningful model. The
procedure exhaustively searched through feature subsets of size
5 or less. For each feature subset, the modeling process described
above was tested in a tenfold cross validation. The feature subset
which maximized correlation between the model’s predictions
and the true outcome was selected.
The final model retained four features: Scoliometer measurement (a measurement of torso rotation), in-brace correction (a
measure of the instantaneous Cobb angle reduction achieved by
the brace, expressed as a percentage of the prebrace Cobb angle),
Cobb angle, and patient age. Thus, the feature selection process
retained two features describing the scoliosis, one describing
the patient, and one describing the treatment. The selection of
Scoliometer measurement was an interesting result, as clinicians
have not previously considered it to have much prognostic value.
The final CFCM-derived prototypes are shown in Table 1. More
complete details of the modeling strategy are found in [26].
D. Decision Support Engine
A decision support system was built around the prediction
model in the style described by Chi [16]. That is, the decision
support system uses the model to explore how different treatments affect outcome. Clinical decision support systems based
on machine learning have found many applications in the literature [29], [30].

Fig. 5. Predicted memberships in the “improve,” “neutral,” and “progress”
categories for a 13-year-old patient with 3° Scoliometer measurement and 30°
Cobb angle.

The model predicts treatment outcome based on three uncontrollable features (Scoliometer, Cobb angle, and age) and
one controllable one (in-brace correction). Thus, the decision
support engine uses the model’s predictions to recommend optimum in-brace correction given a patient’s Scoliometer, Cobb
angle, and age.
First, the model generates a complete set of predictions for every possible combination of all four features (given a specified
resolution), creating a multidimensional lookup table of “improve,” “neutral,” and “progress” membership predictions for
the range of possible cases. A user treating a particular patient
enters their Scoliometer measurement, Cobb angle, and age, and
the decision support engine retrieves the predictions for these
characteristics and the range of in-brace corrections. The results
are plotted, allowing the user to visualize their patient’s predicted memberships in the “improve,” “neutral,” and “progress”
contexts as a function of the in-brace correction applied.
Fig. 5 shows predicted memberships in each context for a
particular patient. A physician could observe that “progress” is
the dominant membership for in-brace corrections below 55%,
so correction greater than 55% is indicated for this patient. But
we also notice that the “improve” membership shows a point of
diminishing returns at about 75% correction. This is valuable
information, as applying too much correction can result in a
very uncomfortable brace and low compliance.

CHALMERS et al.: HUMAN EXPERTS’ AND A FUZZY MODEL’S PREDICTIONS OF OUTCOMES OF SCOLIOSIS TREATMENT

1005

E. Panel of Scoliosis Experts
The model’s ability to predict treatment outcome was compared to that of experts in the Scoliosis field. The panel included
eight experts:
1) Two orthopaedic surgeons, each with approximately
30 years of experience treating Adolescent Scoliosis.
2) One nurse practitioner with 3 years of experience working
with Scoliosis cases.
3) Three orthotists with approximately 10, 20, and 7 years of
experience constructing and adjusting braces for treating
AIS.
4) One research scientist with 22 years of experience in Scoliosis research, and over 40 refereed publications related
to brace treatment.
5) One clinical engineer with 25 years of experience working in Scoliosis clinics, and over 50 refereed publications
related to Scoliosis and brace treatment.
Almost all brace-treated AIS cases in our health region are
overseen by the nurse practitioner or one of the two orthopaedic
surgeons, though a small number are seen by a third surgeon
who was unable to participate in this study. All braces in the
region are designed and built by the three orthotists. The orthotists and surgeon or nurse practitioner work together to devise
a brace treatment predicted to minimize a patient’s risk of progression. Predicting the risk of progression is an inherent part of
this process. The scientist and clinical engineer research scoliosis progression and risk factors, and both have multiple publications on the topic of predicting progression. These eight experts
represent the most knowledgeable personnel on brace treatment
in our health region.
F. Comparison Methods
Perhaps the most suitable comparison methods—those proposed by Ajemba et al. [14] and Lou et al. [15]—could not
be implemented because they use unusual inputs not routinely
measured by scoliosis clinics. Instead prediction methods proposed by Lonstein et al. and Peterson et al. were implemented
for comparison with our model. These methods have seen perhaps the most clinical use; Lonstein’s was used in guidelines
published by the Society on Scoliosis Orthopaedic and Rehabilitation Treatment (SOSORT) until 2011 [31]. SOSORT’s 2011
guidelines avoided sanctioning any method, however [32]. Peterson’s method has been cited numerous times and its predictions are one of the inputs to Lou’s model [15].
Lonstein’s method uses a patient’s Cobb angle, Risser sign,
and age as inputs. Peterson’s uses Risser sign, age, imbalance
of the spine, and apical level of the curve. See [9] and [10] for
details.
G. Validation Procedure
Besides the 62 patient records used to develop the model, our
local Scoliosis clinic’s database contained an additional 28 patient records. The following measurements were obtained from
these 28 records and presented to the experts: Age, gender,
time since menarche (where applicable), type of brace used and

Fig. 6. Mathew’s correlation between predicted and actual outcomes for each
expert’s predictions, the panel of experts, and the model.

in-brace correction applied, height, weight, Cobb angle, location of scoliotic curve apex, scoliometer measurement, height
velocity, weight velocity, and observed progression prior to bracing. The treatment outcomes were also recorded (but not shown
to the experts) as a categorical progressed/nonprogressed label. Each expert was asked to predict whether each of the 28
patients would progress by the end of brace treatment. The
multirater kappa was calculated to measure agreement between
the expert’s predictions. Experts did not collaborate with each
other, as they typically make decisions on their own in clinical
settings.
The model’s predictions (the dichotomous progressed/
nonprogressed labels) for these 28 patients were also obtained,
based on their scoliometer measurements, in-brace corrections,
Cobb angles, and ages. The model’s and each expert’s predictions were evaluated for agreement with the actual treatment
outcomes using Mathew’s correlation coefficient (MCC) [33].
The MCC measures the correlation between a set of predicted
outcomes and the corresponding true outcomes, with a value
of 1 showing perfect correlation, 0 showing no correlation, and
–1 showing inverse correlation. The experts were also considered as a panel by taking their mode prediction. Sensitivity,
specificity, and positive- and negative-predictive values (PPV
and NPV) were calculated for the panel and the fuzzy model.
McNemar’s test was used to check statistical significance of the
differences between predictors.
Risser sign information did not exist for 6 of the 28 test patients (due to X-ray cropping). Thus, Lonstein’s and Peterson’s
methods were applied to the remaining 22 patients. Mathew’s
correlation between our model’s predictions and actual outcome
was calculated for these 22 patients and compared to the correlations for Lonstein’s and Peterson’s methods.
III. RESULTS
The multirater kappa measure of agreement among experts
was 0.47. The model outperformed (in terms of MCC) all but
one expert, and performed similarly to the panel of experts.
Sensitivities for the panel and model were 91% and 100%, respectively, specificities were 80% and 69%, PPVs were 77%
and 71%, and NPVs were 92% and 100%. Fig. 6 shows MCC
for each expert’s predictions, as well as for the panel and the
model. The expert’s MCC scores had mean 0.55 and standard deviation 0.08—if experts’ scores were drawn from a

1006

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 7. Mathew’s correlation between predicted and actual outcomes for Lonstein and Peterson’s prediction methods and the model.

corresponding normal distribution then the model’s improvement in MCC is statistically significant at p = 0.03.
McNemar’s test showed p-values less than 0.1 when comparing the model to experts 1, 2, 6, and 8, and when comparing
expert 1 to experts 3, 4, and 7.
Fig. 7 shows the comparison between Lonstein and Peterson’s
prediction methods and the model. Predictions generated using
Lonstein’s method showed an insignificant (negative) correlation with actual outcomes.
IV. DISCUSSION
The model’s predictions correlated more closely with actual
treatment outcome than the expert’s predictions in seven out
of eight cases. It also had the advantage of 100% sensitivity,
meaning it never mispredicted a high-risk progressive case. In
four cases (including the one case where the expert outpredicted
the model), the model operated differently than the experts to a
statistically significant degree. The model’s MCC was identical
to the experts acting as a panel but in practice, it would be
impractical to gather all the experts together to consider a singlepatient case.
Moreover, the multirater agreement among the panel of experts was not high (κ = 0.47). Some experts tended to favor
predictions of “progression,” while others favored “nonprogression.” Significant prediction differences existed between three
pairs of experts, but we noticed no particular correlation between experience and performance. These results illustrate the
difficulty of making outcome predictions.
The results suggest a model of this type that could potentially
complement the experts in a valuable way. The model could
identify braced patients who are at high risk of progression. It
may be possible to treat some of these cases more aggressively,
for example by modifying the brace to increase in-brace correction, prescribing longer wear time, installing an electronic
compliance monitor [34], or prescribing exercise therapy in
conjunction with bracing. The model may also be helpful in
providing accurate prognostic information to patients and their
families.
A decision support system built on this prediction model
could recommend in-brace corrections for a given patient. For
example, Fig. 5 suggests that a 13-year-old patient with 3°
Scoliometer measurement and 30° Cobb angle is best treated
by applying 55–75% in-brace correction. Of course, these
recommendations are not perfect—they are limited by the underlying model’s 0.7 MCC.

The existing prediction models presented by Ajemba et al.
[14] and Lou et al. [15] have merit, but this model provides
some advantages. It probably performs similarly to Ajemba’s
SVM (Ajemba does not report performance details for the 14
braced patients, but the MCC would be 0.65 at most), but our
model is more transparent: We can get a feeling for its operation by examining the prototypes it uses. Also, the SVM uses
no controllable features for prediction, meaning it cannot be
expanded to provide decision support as we have demonstrated
here. Our model would be somewhat easier to implement than
both Lou’s and Ajemba’s models because it uses features which
are already measured at most clinics, rather than novel compliance measurements. To our knowledge, neither of these models
is used clinically, possibly because both use specialized inputs
not routinely measured at scoliosis clinics.
However, after participating in this experiment, the experts
suggested that the model would be more valuable if it included
brace wear time as a predictor. This is because—despite depending on the patient—wear time is more controllable than
in-brace correction. In some situations, recommending longer
wear time is more realistic than modifying a brace for more
correction.
Though the results of this study are promising, limitations
of this study call for further testing. The size of our dataset is
reasonable for this domain [11], [12], [14], [15], but testing the
model on a larger patient dataset would allow more conclusive
evaluation of its performance. While this study focused on a single scoliosis treatment center, including patient data and experts
from other centers would be beneficial: This would provide a
larger set of expert data for comparison. Also, it would be interesting to test the effect of allowing experts to collaborate with
each other and the model while making predictions.
An important goal for future work could be an improved
treatment outcome measure. While progressed/nonprogressed
labels are the standard way of reporting treatment outcome,
they are somewhat artificial and do not take into account patient
satisfaction—arguably the most important measure of success.
Future developments should incorporate patient’s feelings to
create a model which is more human-centric from both the
patients’ and physicians’ viewpoints.
V. CONCLUSION
In predicting brace treatment outcome, our computer model
outperformed most experts individually and was comparable to
experts as a group. This provides some justification for using this
type of model in a decision support system. Such a system would
use the model’s predictions to recommend patient-specific treatment parameters.
The model could be improved by incorporating information
about brace wear. Future work will focus on collecting brace
wear information for inclusion in the model—a task which
seems feasible given our modeling technique’s apparent aptitude for this domain. This could make the model’s predictions more accurate, and increase the value of its treatment
recommendations.

CHALMERS et al.: HUMAN EXPERTS’ AND A FUZZY MODEL’S PREDICTIONS OF OUTCOMES OF SCOLIOSIS TREATMENT

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to sincerely thank the Edmonton Scoliosis Research Group for their participation.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Lou et al., “Brace treatment for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” Studies
Health Technol. Informat., vol. 135, no. 1, pp. 265–273, 2008.
[2] M. A. Asher and D. C. Burton, “Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: Natural
history and long term treatment effects,” Scoliosis, vol. 1, pp. 2–10, 2006.
[3] D. Rowe. (2003). “Idiopathic Scoliosis,” in Manual of Brace
Treatment for Idiopathic Scoliosis. [Online]. Available: http://www.
srs.org/professionals/education_materials/SRS_bracing_manual/
[4] S. Richards et al., “Standardization of criteria for adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis brace studies,” Spine, vol. 30, no. 18, pp. 2068–2075, 2005.
[5] D. Katz et al., “Brace wear control of curve progression in adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis,” J. Bone, Joint Surg., vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 1343–1352,
2010.
[6] D. Katz, “The etiology and natural history of idiopathic scoliosis,”
J. Prosthet. Orthot., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. S3–S10, Oct. 2003.
[7] S. Upadhyay et al., “New prognostic factors to predict the final outcome of brace treatment in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” Spine, vol. 20,
no. 5, pp. 537–545, 1995.
[8] S. L. Weinstein et al., “Effects of bracing in adolescents with idiopathic
scoliosis,” New Engl., J. Med., vol. 369, pp. 1512–1521, Sep. 2013.
[9] J. Lonstein and M. Carlson, “The prediction of curve progression in untreated idiopathic scoliosis during growth,” J. Bone, Joint Surg., vol. 66,
no. 7, pp. 1061–1071, Sep. 1984.
[10] L.-E. Peterson and A. Nachemson, “Prediction of progression of the curve
in girls who have adolescent idiopathic scoliosis of moderate severity,”
J. Bone, Joint Surg., vol. 77, no. 6, pp. 823–827, Jun. 1995.
[11] H. Wu et al., “Prediction of scoliosis progression in time series using a
hybrid learning technique,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. 27th Annu.
Conf., Shanghai, China, 2005, pp. 6452–6455.
[12] H. Wu et al., “Prediction of scoliosis progression with serial threedimensional spinal curves and the artificial progression surface technique,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 1065–1075, Jul. 2010.
[13] C. F. Lee et al., “A new risk classification rule for curve progression in
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” Spine J., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 989–995,
Jun. 2012.
[14] P. Ajemba et al., “A support vectors classifier approach to predicting the
risk of progression of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 276–282, Jun. 2005.
[15] E. Lou et al., “Prediction of curve progression for AIS patients treated
with a TLSO Brace,” Scoliosis, vol. 4, no. Supp. 2, pp. O38–O38, 2009.
[16] C.-L. Chi, “Medical decision support systems based on machine learning,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Health Informat., Univ. Iowa, Iowa, IA, USA,
2009.
[17] C.-L. Chi et al., “Building a hospital referral expert system with a
prediction and optimization-based decision support system algorithm,”
J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 371–386, 2008.

1007

[18] C.-L. Chi et al., “Individualized patient-centered lifestyle recommendations: An expert system for communicating patient specific cardiovascular
risk information and prioritizing lifestyle options,” J. Biomed. Informat.,
vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 1164–1174, Jul. 2012.
[19] W. Pedrycz, “Conditional fuzzy C-Means,” Pattern Recog. Lett., vol. 17,
no. 6, pp. 625–631, May 1996.
[20] L. Duong et al., “Three-dimensional classification of spinal deformities
using fuzzy clustering,” Spine, vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 923–930, Apr. 2006.
[21] F. Tang et al., “Computer-generated index for evaluation of idiopathic
scoliosis in digital chest images: A comparison with digital measurement,”
J. Digit. Imaging, vol. Supp. 1, pp. S113–S120, Nov. 2008.
[22] M.-L. Nault et al., “Fuzzy-logic–assisted surgical planning in adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis,” J. Spinal Disorders Techn., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 263–
269, Jun. 2009.
[23] P. Lisboa and A. Taktak, “The use of artificial neural networks in decision
support in cancer: A systematic review,” Neural Netw., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 408–415, May 2006.
[24] A. Rodriguez-Gonzalez et al., “Analysis of a multilevel diagnosis decision support system and its implications: A case study,” Comput. Math.
Methods Med., vol. 2012, pp. 1–9, 2012.
[25] K. J. Farion et al., “Comparing predictions made by a prediction model,
clinical score, and physicians: Pediatric asthma exacerbations in the emergency department,” Appl. Clin. Informat., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 376–391, 2013.
[26] E. Chalmers et al., “Predicting the outcome of brace treatment for scoliosis
using conditional fuzzy clustering,” in Proc. IFSA World Congr., NAFIPS
Annu. Meet., 2013, pp. 837–842.
[27] M. Gstoettner et al., “Inter- and intraobserver reliability assessment of
the Cobb angle: Manual versus digital measurement tools,” Eur. Spine J.,
vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1587–1592, 2007.
[28] R. Kohavi and G. John, “Wrappers for feature subset selection,” Artif.
Intell., vol. 97, nos. 1/2, pp. 273–324, Dec. 1997.
[29] K. P. Exarchos et al., “Multiparametric decision support system for the
prediction of oral cancer reoccurrence,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1127–1134, Nov. 2012.
[30] B. G. Nair et al., “Smart anesthesia manager (SAM)—A real-time decision
support system for anesthesia care during surgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 207–210, Jan. 2013.
[31] H.-R. Weiss et al., “Indications for conservative management of scoliosis
(guidelines),” Scoliosis, vol. 1, pp. 1–5, May 2006.
[32] S. Negrini et al., “2011 SOSORT guidelines: Orthopaedic and rehabilitation treatment of idiopathic scoliosis during growth,” Scoliosis, vol. 7,
no. 1, pp. 3–37, 2012.
[33] D. M. W. Powers, “Evaluation: From precision, recall and f-measure to
roc., informedness, markedness & correlation,” J. Mach. Learn. Technol.,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 37–63, 2011.
[34] D. Miller et al., “Electronic monitoring improves brace-wearing compliance in patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis,” Spine, vol. 37,
no. 9, pp. 717–721, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

