982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

A Miniaturized, Eye-Conformable, and Long-Term
Reliable Retinal Prosthesis Using Monolithic
Fabrication of Liquid Crystal Polymer (LCP)
Joonsoo Jeong, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, So Hyun Bae, Kyou Sik Min, Jong-Mo Seo, Hum Chung,
and Sung June Kim∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel retinal prosthetic device was developed using biocompatible liquid crystal polymer (LCP) to address the
problems associated with conventional metal- and polymer-based
devices: the hermetic metal package is bulky, heavy, and laborintensive, whereas a thin, flexible, and MEMS-compatible polymerbased system is not durable enough for chronic implantation.
Exploiting the advantageous properties of LCP such as a low moisture absorption rate, thermobonding, and thermoforming, we fabricate a small, light-weight, long-term reliable retinal prosthesis
that can be conformally attached on the eye-surface. A LCP fabrication process using monolithic integration and conformal deformation was established enabling miniaturization and a batch
manufacturing process as well as eliminating the need for feedthrough technology. The functionality of the fabricated device was
tested through wireless operation in saline solution. Its efficacy and
implantation stability were verified through in vivo animal tests by
measuring the cortical potential and monitoring implanted dummy
devices for more than a year, respectively.
Index Terms—Conformable, liquid crystal polymer (LCP),
monolithic fabrication, neural prosthesis, retinal prosthesis.

I. INTRODUCTION
ETINAL prosthetic devices for restoring partial vision in
blind patients suffering from retinal degeneration such as
age-related macular degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa have
been widely investigated by a number of groups worldwide
[1]–[8]. Those devices elicit a sense of light in a controlled
manner through electrical activation of the remaining retinal

R

Manuscript received October 20, 2014; accepted November 20, 2014. Date
of publication December 4, 2014; date of current version February 16, 2015.
This work was supported by the Public Welfare and Safety research program
(2011-0020987) and Pioneer Research Center Program (2009-0082961), both
through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of
Science, ICT and Future Planning, and by the Brain Korea 21 Plus Project, the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
in 2014 and by a project for the Global Ph.D. Fellowship which the National
Research Foundation of Korea conducts from 2011 (2011-0007411). Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
J. Jeong is with with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail: joonsoo.
jeong@gmail.com).
S. H. Bae is with the Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital.
K. S. Min was with Seoul National University. He is now with the Samsung
Advanced Institute of Technology.
J.-M. Seo is with Seoul National University, and also with Seoul National
University College of Medicine.
H. Chung is with Seoul National University College of Medicine.
∗ S. J. Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail: kimsj@snu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2377197

cells using a microelectrode array inserted into the subretinal
[1]–[3], epi-retinal [4], [8], or suprachoroidal space [6], [7]. In
clinical trials, blind patients reported consistent light perception
with spatial and temporal correlation with retinal stimulation
which enabled the performance of several basic tasks such as
reading characters, discriminating grating patterns and light localization [3], [4], [7], [8]. These efforts led to recent regulatory
approvals for the Argus II and the Alpha IMS.
Despite these remarkable progresses and promising results,
there still remain great challenges in device fabrication because
retinal implants to date are mostly based on previous technologies of metal packages with additional wire-wound coils that
have been used for a long time as conventional neural prostheses such as cochlear implants and deep brain stimulation.
While titanium-based encapsulation is impermeable to water
and well tolerated by the body, it has several limitations as follows. It needs feedthrough technology, and its incompatibility
with microfabrication not only requires time-consuming and laborious manual work for assembly but also limits the number
of channels for high-density stimulation; the metal package is
relatively bulky and heavy. These are general challenges for any
kind of implantable biomedical device but become critical requirements particularly for a retinal prosthesis which is fixed
on/in the eyeball with a high number of channels for useful
vision. The anatomically available space between the eye and
orbital rim is limited [9], and the continuous movement of the
eyeball imposes additional mechanical stress leading to a higher
risk of device failure and discomfort in patients. A thin and conformable structure that can fit the curved surface of the eyeball
is highly desired.
Polymer-based neuroprostheses have been recently investigated to substitute the metal package using biocompatible materials such as silicone elastomer, polyimide, and parylene-C,
achieving miniaturization and high flexibility as well as compatibility with the semiconductor process [7]–[9]. However, their
long-term reliability remains questionable due to high moisture
absorption of the polymer materials and the insufficient interlayer adhesion strength resulting in degradation and delamination under aqueous condition [10].
Liquid crystal polymer (LCP) has been explored as an alternative material for biomedical applications including retinal and cochlear prostheses [10], [11], neuromodulation [12],
[13], and intraocular sensor [14]. In a series of recent studies,
LCP has shown promise toward an all-polymer neural prosthesis with constitutional technologies including microfabrication

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JEONG et al.: MINIATURIZED, EYE-CONFORMABLE, AND LONG-TERM RELIABLE RETINAL PROSTHESIS

of an electrode array [15], [16], design of an efficient planar
coil [17], thermal deformation [10], [18], monolithic encapsulation [18], and magnetic resonance imaging compatibility [19].
The moisture absorption rate of LCP (<0.04%), which is much
lower than those of conventional biocompatible polymers such
as polyimide (∼2.8%) and parylene-C (0.06–0.6%), is the most
advantageous property that could significantly improve the longterm reliability if properly processed. LCP encapsulation has
been proven to provide superior long-term reliability than that
of polyimide and parylene-C through accelerated soak tests [18].
LCP is compatible with microfabrication technologies and
is thermoplastic so that multiple layers of LCP films can be
thermally bonded together without adhesives. These properties contribute to achieving a monolithic system, in which
all the components including the electrode array, coil, and circuit are integrated onto a single body of multilayered LCP films
and packaged by the same material. This monolithic fabrication allows miniaturization and a low-cost batch manufacturing
process eliminating the need for feed-through technology. Additionally, the LCP substrate can be readily deformed into a
desired nonplanar shape by thermal pressing to achieve an eyeconformable structure that can fit the curvature of an eyeball.
In this study, therefore, we demonstrate a novel LCP-based
retinal prosthesis that addresses the following problems associated with conventional metal- and polymer-based devices: the
hermetic metal package is bulky, heavy, and labor-intensive,
while a thin, flexible, and MEMS-compatible polymer-based
system is not durable enough for chronic implantation. Combining the abovementioned characteristics of LCP, the proposed
device offers several advantageous features as follows: a miniaturized and eye-conformable device, monolithic fabrication, and
long-term reliability. The novel fabrication technologies are described, and the functionality and reliability of the developed
device is evaluated in vitro as well as in vivo.
II. METHODS
A. System Overview
The overall configuration of our LCP-based retinal prosthesis
is depicted in Fig. 1. An image captured by a camera on the
glasses is processed by an external device and then transferred
into the implanted unit through an inductive link. This study focuses on a LCP-based implanted unit with the goal of achieving
suprachoroidal and subretinal stimulation.
B. Monolithic Fabrication Process
1) Multilayered Integrations: The novel monolithic fabrication process using LCP is schematically shown in Fig. 2. First,
the electrical components including the planar coil, circuit footprints, and electrodes array were independently microfabricated
on the LCP films with a high melting temperature (HT-LCP;
330 °C, ULTRALAM 3850, Rogers Corporation, USA) or a
low melting temperature (LT-LCP; 280 °C, Vecstar CTF series,
Kuraray, Japan). The details on the LCP-based retinal electrode array and the multilayered LCP coil have been previously
reported [15]–[17], whereas the electrodeposition process for

983

Fig. 1. Overall configuration of LCP-based retinal prosthesis: camera on the
glasses, external unit inductively linked to the implanted unit for power and data
transmission. Implanted unit is monolithically fabricated from LCP.

depositing iridium oxide on a LCP-based Au electrode will be
published elsewhere. After surface activation by oxygen plasma
(150 W, 100 sccm, 3 min; Plasmalab 80 plus, Oxford Instruments, U.K.) and alignment in a metal jig, those LCP layers
were thermally laminated together using a heating press (30 min,
285 °C, 4 Kgf/cm2 ; model 4330, Carver, USA) to form a multilayered system substrate by melting the LT bonding layers
between them as shown in Fig. 2(a). The actual layer configuration of the multilayered structure is shown in Fig. 3. An overall
thickness of 350 μm and the composition of the films are the
result of a compromise between long-term reliability and yield.
Higher pressure during the thermal bonding of the LCP layers
can strengthen the interlayer adhesion leading to higher longterm reliability in aqueous conditions. Although thicker layers
can allow a higher lamination pressure with less probability
of undesired contact between the metal patterns in the adjacent layers, a thick substrate is difficult to deform because the
tensile/compressive stress increases with the film thickness as
shown in Fig. 4(a). The composition of the film in Fig. 3 is the result of optimization so that it can be thermally deformed as well
as endure the lamination and packaging process at 285 °C with
4 Kgf/cm2 for 30 min, which is the condition found through
preliminary experiments that provides sufficient LCP–LCP
adhesion.
2) Thermal Deformation: The second step is thermal deformation to create an eye-conformable structure. As shown in
Fig. 2(b), the multilayered substrate was placed between a pair
of custom-made metal jigs with the desired convex and concave
profile, followed by thermal pressing. To prevent metal line
fractures as a result of the deformation, we used wavy metal
patterns to provide stretchability upon tension or compression
[20]–[23]. The geometric characteristics defining the serpentine
shape, including the width of the tracks w, minimum line distance d, tracks pitch p, opening angle θ, and radius r were varied
according the degree of deformation for five different regions
(I–V) shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c). The optimized values for the

984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 4. (a) Generation of compressive and tensile stress during deformation of
the multilayered substrate, (b) geometrical parameters defining the wavy metal
tracks for providing stretchability, (c-d) five locations of different wavy shapes
according to the degree of deformation.
TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE WAVY LINES
Electrode

Fig. 2. Monolithic fabrication process of LCP-based retinal prosthesis:
(a) independent film fabrication and thermal lamination to form a multilayered
substrate, (b) thermal deformation using a metal jig pair for eye-conformable
curvature, (c) assembly of stimulator ASIC and surrounding circuitries, (d) encapsulation of electronics by LCP powder, (e) laser-machining, and (f) surgical
implantation into an eye.

w
d
r
θ
P

Coil

I

II

III

IV

V

30
37
40
240
150

30
30
30
180
100

25
25
40
90
65

130
85
300
120
230

130
85
620
130
240

∗unit in micrometers

Fig. 3. Layer configuration for the multilayered system substrate integrated
with a coil, circuitries, and an electrode array. “HT” and “LT” indicate “highmelting temperature” and “low-melting temperature,” respectively.

five locations that could survive the stress from the deformation
with a minimum line pitch are summarized in Table I. In addition, we estimated the electrical properties of the spherically
deformed coil to verify any adverse effects from this process
on the wireless link performance. Three-dimensional finite elements models were built using FastHenry solver [24] to compare
the inductance, resistance, and quality factor of the deformed
coil with those of the planar coil.

3) Assembly: A stimulator ASIC [13] was wire-bonded in
the central area of the deformed substrate, and the surrounding
circuitries were assembled with the discrete components for an
oscillator, a rectifier, and dc-blocking-capacitors using conductive epoxy (H20E, Epotek) that can withstand the lamination
temperature as shown in Fig. 2(c). A flat central area with a
5-mm diameter was maintained during the deformation for stable bonding of the ASIC (3.3 mm × 3.3 mm).
4) Packaging and Laser-Machining: The packaging process
came next to encapsulate the electronics against body fluids
as shown in Fig. 2(d). Packaging of electronics on a curved
substrate poses several challenges in applying uniform pressure throughout the bonding surface. In addition, if an air-cavity
is left inside, expansion and contraction of the air inside the
package during thermal cycle up to 285 °C can lead to undesired deformation of the package. To address these issues, a LCP
powder-filling packaging technique was developed: the concave
volume accommodating the electronic components was filled
with house-milled LT-LCP powder and covered by a 25 μmthick precurved lid of LT-LCP. They were thermally pressed
under the same condition as the lamination using a pair of

JEONG et al.: MINIATURIZED, EYE-CONFORMABLE, AND LONG-TERM RELIABLE RETINAL PROSTHESIS

Fig. 5. (a) and (b) Schematic illustration of the LCP-packaging process filling
and melting LCP powder in the curved volume. (c) A crescent-shaped cross
section of the eye-conformable system package showing molten LCP powder
evenly filled the volume.

metal jigs leaving a void inside when combined as shown in
Fig. 5(a) and (b). The melted LCP powder can fill the internal
space to achieve a thin, eye-conformable, and monolithic system
package. This filling-and-melting method offers the additional
benefits of being mechanically robust and moisture condensing inside the package is less likely than a package with an
air-cavity.
The final steps were a series of laser-machining (355 nm UV,
Samurai system, DPSS, USA) including electrodes site opening
by laser-ablation, thinning of the retinal electrode part for higher
flexibility by applying grating laser patterns, and final outlining
described in detail in [15]. The device was completed after
plasma cleaning to remove any laser burrs [see Fig. 2(f)].
C. In Vitro Evaluation
The functionality and reliability of the fabricated device were
tested in bench. The wireless operation was verified by delivering power and data from an inductively linked primary coil into
the device soaked in PBS solution. The primary coil was driven
by a custom-built external unit on a printed circuit board that
consisted of a microcontroller to generate PWM data to control
the stimulation parameters of ASIC and a class-E amplifier for
2.54 MHz modulation.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and cyclic
voltammetry (CV) of the fabricated IrOx electrodes array were
measured with the Solatron 1260 and 1287 system (Solatron,
U.K.) in a three-electrode cell using an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a mesh-type Pt counter electrode in PBS solution (1X,
Gibco). The EIS was measured for frequencies from 10 Hz to
10 kHz by applying a sinusoidal of 10 mV amplitude without
an offset. The CV curve was recorded in the −0.8–0.6 V range
at a scan rate of 50 mV/s for which the cathodic area was integrated to calculate the charge storage capacity (CSC) using the
CorrView software.
D. In Vivo Evaluation
To demonstrate the functionality and implantation stability
of the LCP-based retinal prosthesis, in vivo animal experiments
were performed with New Zealand white rabbits. All procedures conformed to the ARVO Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research. General anesthesia
was induced by intramuscular injection of tiletamine/zolazepam

985

Fig. 6. Multilayered integration steps showing (a) a CAD drawing, (b) stacking of independently fabricated films carrying the coil, circuit footprints, electrodes array, and cover layer. (c) shows the 4-in host wafer.

(Zoletil; Carros, France) and xylazine (Rompun; Bayer AG,
Germany) in a 1:1 mixture at a dose of 0.6 mL/kg. After a superior conjunctival incision along the limbus, a subconjunctival
pocket was made for inserting the circular system package into
the superior-temporal quadrant. The electrode array was then
inserted into the suprachoroidal space under funduscopic examination through a 3-mm superior-nasal scleral incision made
parallel to the limbus. The primary coil for power and data
transfer was attached on the skin shown in Fig. 12(a).
The functionality of the device was verified by recording
electrically evoked cortical potentials (EECPs) while stimulating the rabbit retina with a biphasic current pulse generated
from the implanted device (cathodic-first, amplitude 200 μA,
pulse duration 500 μs, pulse rate 2 Hz). The EECP was measured with a Powerlabs 4/20 system (AD Instruments, USA)
with a needle-type recording electrode inserted into a fine hole
drilled in the skull to reach the visual cortex (6 mm anterior and
4 mm contralateral to the lambda). The reference electrode was
inserted into a hole located 20 mm anterior to the lambda, and
the counter electrode was inserted subdermally in the ipsilateral
ear.
To evaluate the long-term implantation stability and compatibility, dummy devices that were physically identical to the actual
device but not functionally were implanted using the same procedure as above. The devices have been implanted for more
than a year to observe any adverse events such as protrusion
of the device, inflammation, and retinal damage through fundus
examination and OCT imaging.
III. RESULTS
A. Device Fabrication
The layer stacking steps for the multilayered integration are
shown in Fig. 6, where the independently fabricated coil, circuit footprints, and electrode layers are sequentially stacked
with bonding layers, and thermally laminated together to form
a 350-μm-thick multilayered system substrate. The film microfabrication and lamination steps were processed in a 4-in host
shown in Fig. 6(c).
The results from the thermal deformation process are shown
in Fig. 7. A FEM model and the fabricated planar coil on the

986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 8. Fabricated wavy metal tracks in three different locations for providing
stretchability to survive mechanical stress during the deformation process.

Fig. 7. Spherical deformation of the LCP-based coil: (a) and (d) FEM models
to estimate the changes in electrical properties, (b) and (e) outer face showing
the coil, (c) and (f) and inner face showing the circuit footprints before and after
deformation. The coil cover layer was removed for demonstration.
TABLE II
ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF THE DEFORMED COIL
Simulated

Planar Coil
Deformed Coil
∗

Measured

R (Ω)

L (μH)

Q∗

R (Ω)

L (μH)

Q∗

D∗ ∗ (mm)

6.02
6.03

7.45
6.69

19.4
17.4

6.33
6.35

7.7
7.3

19.1
18.1

16
16

Q at 2.54 MHz.
D: maximum operating distance.

∗∗

LCP are shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively, along with
those after the deformation process in Fig. 7(d) and (e). The coil
cover layer was removed to show the deformed coil patterns.
The inner faces of the substrate are shown in Fig. 7(c) and (f),
in which an individual piece cut from its 4-in host is fixed in the
metal jig before and after deformation, respectively. The simulated and measured electrical properties of the deformed coil are
compared with the planar coil in Table II. Despite the slight difference between the simulated and measured data, likely due to
the imperfection in modeling the deformed wavy metal patterns
precisely, estimation of the decreased inductance and constant
resistance was verified by the measurements. The inductance of
the deformed coil decreased 5% from the planar coil which is
probably caused by the reduced magnetic interaction between
the adjacent tracks as they get further apart after deformation.
The quality factor decreased as well; however, the wireless operating distance of our stimulator circuit was nearly unchanged.
The fabricated wavy metal tracks used to survive the mechanical
stress from the deformation are shown in Fig. 8 at three different
locations (I–III). The wavy tracks of the coil (IV, V) are shown
in Fig. 7(e). All the wavy metal tracks remained intact after the
deformation to the curvature desired for our eye-conformable
device verified by the resistance measurements.
The stimulating circuit assembled on the deformed substrate
and its typical waveforms from the wireless operation are shown
in Fig. 9: PWM signal modulated by a 2.54-MHz carrier induced
at the receiver coil (a), after rectification (b), decoded PWM data
stream (c), regulated power (d), and the output biphasic current
pulse (e).

Fig. 9. Typical waveform from wireless operation: (a) PWM signal modulated by a 2.54-MHz carrier induced at the receiver coil (b) after rectification,
(c) decoded PWM data stream, (d) regulated power, and (e) the output biphasic
current pulse across a 1 kΩ load.

The cross section of the encapsulated electronics packaged
by filling and melting the LCP powder is shown in Fig. 5(c). The
melted powder filled the inner volume evenly without any observation of voids or defects. The multilayered substrate endured
the packaging temperature and pressure preserving its laminar
structure without collapsing or an interlayer short circuit.
B. Device Characteristics
The completed LCP-based retinal prosthetic device is shown
in Fig. 10, and its characteristics are summarized in Table III.
The device has a circular package accommodating the electronics with a 14 mm diameter and 1.3 mm maximum thickness
for its crescent-shaped cross section that can be conformally
attached on the eyeball shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b). The electrode part to be inserted into the retina has a thickness of 30 μm
after the laser-thinning process, which etched away the LCP
starting from a 350 μm thickness and is precurved to fit the
eye-curvature shown in Fig. 10(c). As compared in Fig. 10(d),
our device is geometrically comparable to the Ahmed glaucoma
valve (16 mm × 10 mm × 1 mm, 0.3 g; Model FP7, New World
Medical, Inc.) which has been clinically proven to be stably
attached on the eye surface for more than a decade. Because
the surgical procedure attaching the device in the conjunctival

JEONG et al.: MINIATURIZED, EYE-CONFORMABLE, AND LONG-TERM RELIABLE RETINAL PROSTHESIS

987

D. In Vivo Evaluation

Fig. 10. Fabricated LCP-based retinal prosthesis: (a) comparison with a dime,
(b) the device on a model eye showing conformal attachment, (c) electrode part
also precurved to fit the eye-curvature, (d) comparison with a Ahmed glaucoma
valve, (e) inner surface of the device, and (f) magnification of the retinal electrode
array coated by iridium oxide.

TABLE III
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE LCP-BASED RETINAL PROSTHESIS
Parameter
Package Size
Max. thickness
Weight
Volume

∗

Value

Parameter

Value

14 mm
1.3 mm
0.38 g
0.22 cc

Wireless Operating Distance
Number of Electrodes
Current Amplitude
Pulse Duration∗
Pulse Rate∗

16 mm
16
10 μA–10 mA
0–6 ms
2–30 Hz

adjustable by an off-chip oscillator

pocket with episcleral suturing is also similar, our device is expected to be stably attached on the temporal side of the eyeball
over an extended period of time.
This LCP-based retinal prosthesis weighs only 0.38 g, which
is less than a tenth of conventional implantable devices with
a metal package. Considering that the weight of an eyeball is
about 5 g, this weight reduction is a significant improvement in
patients’ discomfort as well as implantation stability.
C. In Vitro Evaluation
In the wireless test, the LCP-based retinal prosthesis was
operated as intended to generate stimulating current pulses up
to a gap of 16 mm in the air and 15 mm in PBS from the external
transmitter coil.
The CV and EIS measurements revealed that the iridium oxide
coated electrodes have superior electrochemical properties over
gold electrodes as shown inFig. 11. In the EIS represented by the
means and standard deviations of the magnitude (a) and phase
(b) at each frequency, the impedance measured at 1 kHz had
a mean magnitude of 1.2 ± 0.06 kΩ which is about a 27-fold
decrease for Au. Integration of the cathodic area from the cyclic
voltammogram suggests that the CSC of the IrOx electrodes is
27.8 ± 0.84 mC/cm2 , which is a 70-fold increase from Au.

Following surgical implantation into the rabbit retina, the
EECP recorded from the visual cortex confirmed the functional
efficacy of the device shown in Fig. 12(b). Wireless operation
of the implant by an external coil could elicit robust cortical
response represented by a positive peak (P1) with shorter latency
than visually evoked potential in Fig. 12(c) [25], [26].
In the in vivo stability test using dummy devices, fundus and
ocular observation along with OCT imaging were performed
for a year after the implantation. The microscopic image in
Fig. 12(d) shows the device during the surgery after the attachment of the device using two episcleral suturing holes before
recovering the conjunctiva, whereas Fig. 12(e) shows the same
device after a year of implantation. The recovered conjunctiva
was well preserved without observation of any adverse effects
such as inflammation and protrusion of the device. A fundus
image of Fig. 12(f) showed that the implanted array had not
migrated or induced vitreous inflammation. A representative
OCT image in Fig. 12(g) shows that the retinal structure containing the LCP-based electrode array was well preserved for
the postoperative one-year period without any choroidal retinal
inflammation or structural deformations.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, a novel LCP-based retinal prosthetic device that
is thin, light, and eye-conformable was fabricated, and its functionality was verified in vitro and in vivo. Our LCP monolithic
fabrication process negates the need for expensive and laborintensive feed-through technology enabling a low-cost, batch
manufacturing process. Although the device reported here is
designed as a retinal prosthesis, the concept and the fabrication methodology are not limited to retinal applications. The
advantages of this all-LCP retinal prosthesis achieved by multilayered integration for miniaturization and manufacturability
are numerous. The thermal deformation process for conformal
structure to the target tissue/organ and the long-term reliability
attained from the low moisture absorbing nature of LCP are generally highly desired characteristics for any type of implantable
biomedical devices. The design and fabrication technologies established in this study, therefore, could be used for other neural
prosthetic applications as well, for example cochlear implants,
deep brain stimulation, bioreactors, and various central and peripheral nerve stimulators.
The new retinal implant demonstrated in this study consisted
of a circular package that was 14 mm in diameter and 1.3 mm
thick and a retinal electrode array with 16 channels. The bottleneck toward further miniaturization and higher numbers of
channels is in the stimulating electronics not in the LCP fabrication process. If the oscillator and voltage regulator that are
currently built using discrete components are integrated into the
ASIC design, the system package could be minimized to less
than 10 mm in diameter and 0.5 mm thick. Because the need for
a complicated feed-through process that limits the high count
lead to channels was removed by monolithic fabrication, our
technology is easily scalable to a higher number of electrodes.
For instance, current LCP microfabrication of a feature size less

988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 11. Electrochemical characterizations of the retinal electrodes array coated with iridium oxide: EIS as represented by the means and standard deviations of
the magnitude (a) and phase (b) at each frequency; and CV curves in (c).

fabrication process using LCP as a substrate and packaging material was established including multilayered integration, thermal deformation, LCP-power packaging, and laser-machining.
The developed device with 16 channels has a circular package
14 mm in diameter with a maximum thickness of 1.3 mm and
a weight of 0.38 g and was wirelessly operated up to 16 mm in
the air. Its functionality and implantation stability was verified
through in vivo animal tests by measuring the cortical potential
and monitoring implanted dummy devices for more than a year.
REFERENCES

Fig. 12. In vivo evaluation of the LCP-based retinal prosthesis in a rabbit:
(a) schematic description of the surgical implantation of the device, (b) electrically evoked and (c) visually evoked cortical potential confirming the functionality of the device, (d) circular package attached on the sclera using two suturing
holes before recovering the conjunctiva, (e) the same device as in (d) after one
year of implantation showing well recovered ocular tissues, (f) a fundus, and
(g) OCT image after one year of implantation showing no adverse effect such
as retinal inflammation.

than 10 μm combined with multilayered routing can produce a
retinal electrode with more than 300 channels.
Although the functionality of the new device has been demonstrated acutely in this study, the long-term reliability needs to
be further investigated. At this moment, in vitro accelerated aging test and in vivo animal tests to verify the reliability and
stability of active devices for an extended period of time are
ongoing. Additionally, further study is being conducted to further improve the long-term reliability of the LCP-based package
and electrode array, for example, by constructing a special microstructure in the interface of the adhesion, and sophisticating
the lamination and packaging process to allow higher pressure
during thermal bonding.
V. CONCLUSION
A novel retinal prosthetic device which is small, thin, lightweight, and eye-conformable was developed using monolithic
fabrication and conformal deformation of LCP. A monolithic

[1] S. K. Kelly et al., “A hermetic wireless subretinal neurostimulator for
vision prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3197–
205, Nov. 2011.
[2] K. Mathieson et al., “Photovoltaic retinal prosthesis with high pixel
density,” Nat. Photon., vol. 6, pp. 391–397, May 2012.
[3] K. Stingl et al., “Artificial vision with wirelessly powered subretinal
electronic implant alpha-IMS,” Proc. Roy. Soc. B, Biol. Sci., vol. 280,
Apr. 2013, web: http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/280/1757/
20130077.
[4] M. S. Humayun et al., “Interim results from the international trial of
second sight’s visual prosthesis,” Ophthalmology, vol. 119, pp. 779–788,
Apr. 2012.
[5] J. D. Weiland et al., “Retinal prostheses: Current clinical results and future
needs,” Ophthalmology, vol. 118, pp. 2227–2237, 2011.
[6] J. A. Zhou et al., “A suprachoroidal electrical retinal stimulator design
for long-term animal experiments and in vivo assessment of its feasibility
and biocompatibility in rabbits,” J. Biomed. Biotechnol., vol. 2008, art.
no. 547428 (10 pages), 2008.
[7] T. Fujikado et al., “Testing of semichronically implanted retinal prosthesis by suprachoroidal-transretinal stimulation in patients with retinitis
pigmentosa,” Investigative Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 52, pp. 4726–4733,
2011.
[8] S. Klauke et al., “Stimulation with a wireless intraocular epiretinal implant
elicits visual percepts in blind humans,” Investigative Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci., vol. 52, pp. 449–455, Jan. 2011.
[9] A. A. Weaver et al., “CT based three-dimensional measurement of orbit
and eye Anthropometry,” Investigative Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci., vol. 51,
pp. 4892–4897, 2010.
[10] J. Jeong et al., “Liquid crystal polymer (LCP), an attractive substrate for
retinal implant,” Sens. Mater., vol. 24, pp. 189–203, 2012.
[11] K. S. Min et al., “A polymer-based multichannel cochlear electrode array,”
Otol. Neurotol., vol. 35, pp. 1179–1186, 2014.
[12] S. E. Lee et al., “A flexible depth probe using liquid crystal polymer,”
IEEE Trans. Bio. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 2085–2094, Jul. 2012.
[13] K. S. Min et al., “A liquid crystal polymer-based neuromodulation system:
An application on animal model of neuropathic pain,” Neuromodulation,
vol. 17, pp. 160–169, 2014.
[14] D. Ha et al., “Polymer-based miniature flexible capacitive pressure sensor
for intraocular pressure (IOP) monitoring inside a mouse eye,” Biomed.
Microdevices, vol. 14, pp. 207–215, 2012.

JEONG et al.: MINIATURIZED, EYE-CONFORMABLE, AND LONG-TERM RELIABLE RETINAL PROSTHESIS

[15] J. Jeong et al., “Advancements in fabrication process of microelectrode
array for a retinal prosthesis using liquid crystal polymer (LCP),” in Proc.
35th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 5295–5298.
[16] S. W. Lee et al., “Development of microelectrode arrays for artificial
retinal implants using liquid crystal polymers,” Investigative Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci., vol. 50, pp. 5859–5866, 2009.
[17] J. Jeong et al., “A novel multilayered planar coil based on biocompatible
liquid crystal polymer for chronic implantation,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys.,
vol. 197, pp. 38–46, 2013.
[18] S. W. Lee et al., “Monolithic encapsulation of implantable neuroprosthetic devices using liquid crystal polymers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2255–2263, Aug. 2011.
[19] J. H. Kim et al., “Magnetic resonance imaging compatibility of the
polymer-based cochlear implant,” Clin. Exp. Otorhinolaryngol., vol. 5,
pp. S19–S23, 2012.
[20] D. H. Kim et al., “Flexible and stretchable electronics for biointegrated
devices,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. vol. 14, pp. 113–128, 2012.
[21] D. H. Kim et al., “Optimized structural designs for stretchable silicon
integrated circuits,” Small, vol. 5, pp. 2841–2847, 2009.
[22] J. A. Rogers et al., “Materials and mechanics for stretchable electronics,”
Science, vol. 327, pp. 1603–1607, 2010.
[23] M. Schuettler et al., “Stretchable tracks for laser-machined neural electrode arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009,
pp. 1612–1615.
[24] FastHenry2. [Online]. Available: http://www.fastfieldsolvers.com
[25] E. Kim et al., “Fabrication of pillar shaped electrode arrays for artificial
retinal implants,” Sensors, vol. 8, pp. 5845–5856, 2008.
[26] K. Nakauchi et al., “Transretinal electrical stimulation by an intrascleral
multichannel electrode array in rabbit eyes,” Graefe’s Archive Clin. Exp.
Ophthalmol., vol. 243, pp. 169–174, Feb. 2005.

Joonsoo Jeong (GSM’12) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees from the School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2009 and 2011, respectively,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science.
His main research topic is development of chronic
implantable electronics using a new material of liquid crystal polymer, especially for retinal prosthesis.
His research interests include polymer-based microfabrication, long-term reliability of polymer encapsulation, and stretchable and deformable electronics.
Mr. Jeong received the Global Ph.D. Fellowship from the National Research
Foundation of Korea for 2011–2014.

So Hyun Bae received the Medical degree from
the Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea, in 2004, and completed the retinal fellowship at Seoul National University Hospital and
Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital, Seoul, Korea, in
2012. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the interdisciplinary program for biomedical
engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul.
She is currently working as a Retinal Specialist at
Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University,
Seoul. Her research interest includes biocompatibility and surgical procedures for neural prosthesis.

989

Kyou Sik Min received the B.S. degree from the
School of Physics, in 2006 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea, in 2009 and 2014, respectively. His current
research interests include front-end ASIC design for
capacitive micromachined ultrasound transducer.

Jong-Mo Seo received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea, in 1996, 2002, and 2005,
respectively.
He has been an Associate Professor at the School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Seoul National University, since 2008. His research
interest includes artificial vision and various vitreoretinal diseases.

Hum Chung received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea, in 1974, 1977, and 1982,
respectively.
He completed residency in 1979 with the Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, and has been a practicing Vitreoretinal Surgeon since 1982. He also served a fellowship in vitreoretinal diseases and surgery at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, USA,
from 1985 to 1987. He is currently the Director of
the Korean Uveitis Society and Nano Artificial Vision Research Center funded
by the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Korea. He has published more than
150 clinical and scientific papers, edited books, and book chapters. His primary
research interests include artificial vision and vitreoretinal diseases.

Sung June Kim (S’79–M’84–SM’06) received the
B.S. degree in electronics engineering from Seoul
National University (SNU), Seoul, Korea, in 1978,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, in
1981, and 1983, respectively.
From 1983 to 1989, he was a Member of Technical Staff with Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ,
USA. In 1989, he joined SNU, where he is currently
a Professor with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering. For 2000–2009, he was the
Director of the Nanobioelectronics and System Research Center, SNU, which
was an ERC funded by the Korean Science and Engineering Foundation. His
research interest includes implantable neural prostheses, and has authored or
coauthored more than 160 journal papers.

