960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Sparse Representation of Electrodermal Activity
With Knowledge-Driven Dictionaries
Theodora Chaspari∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Andreas Tsiartas, Member, IEEE, Leah I. Stein, Sharon A. Cermak,
and Shrikanth S. Narayanan, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Biometric sensors and portable devices are being increasingly embedded into our everyday life, creating the need for
robust physiological models that efficiently represent, analyze, and
interpret the acquired signals. We propose a knowledge-driven
method to represent electrodermal activity (EDA), a psychophysiological signal linked to stress, affect, and cognitive processing.
We build EDA-specific dictionaries that accurately model both the
slow varying tonic part and the signal fluctuations, called skin conductance responses (SCR), and use greedy sparse representation
techniques to decompose the signal into a small number of atoms
from the dictionary. Quantitative evaluation of our method considers signal reconstruction, compression rate, and information
retrieval measures, that capture the ability of the model to incorporate the main signal characteristics, such as SCR occurrences.
Compared to previous studies fitting a predetermined structure
to the signal, results indicate that our approach provides benefits across all aforementioned criteria. This paper demonstrates
the ability of appropriate dictionaries along with sparse decomposition methods to reliably represent EDA signals and provides a
foundation for automatic measurement of SCR characteristics and
the extraction of meaningful EDA features.
Index Terms—Dictionary design, electrodermal activity, (orthogonal) matching pursuit, skin conductance response, sparse
representation.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECENT technological achievements are enabling the increasing use of wearable devices that allows the sensing
of physiological signals for health [1], [2], medical [3], [4] and
other [5], [6] purposes. These applications stem from the need to
monitor individuals over long periods of time overcoming the
limits imposed by traditional nonambulatory technology and
providing new insights into diagnostic and therapeutic means

R

Manuscript received June 20, 2014; revised October 18, 2014; accepted
November 17, 2014. Date of publication December 4, 2014; date of current
version February 16, 2015. This work was supported by National Science Foundation, National Institute of Health; National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial
Research (1R34DE022263-01, ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02077985),
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health (T32HD064578), and a California
Foundation of Occupational Therapy Research Grant.
∗ T. Chaspari is with the Signal Analysis and Interpretation Laboratory, Ming
Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA (e-mail: chaspari@usc.edu).
S. S. Narayanan is with the Signal Analysis and Interpretation Laboratory,
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern
California.
A. Tsiartas is with the Stanford Research Institute.
L. I. Stein and S. A. Cermak are with the Division of Occupational Science
and Occupational Therapy, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of
Southern California.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2376960

[3]. They typically rely on small sensors for capturing data,
portable devices for temporal storage, and the use of wireless
networks for (periodic) data transfer to a database [7]. The large
volume of recordings from these sensors, their use in everyday life and beyond specialized places like clinics, the potential
variability in the data quality, and the limited resources of appropriately trained people for the corresponding signal analysis
underscore the need of automatic ways to process them. A central goal is to derive meaningful quantitative constructs from
the measured signal data. Robust representations of physiological signals should consider their characteristic structure, efficiently encode the underlying information, and provide reliable
interpretation.
Electrodermal activity (EDA) is one of the most widely used
psychophysiological signals. It is related to the sympathetic
nerve activity through the changes in the levels of sweat in
the ducts [8], [9], that result in the observed skin conductance
response (SCR) fluctuations. EDA has been used in a variety
of laboratory settings examining attention, memory, decision
making, emotion, as well as a predictor of normal and abnormal
behavior and other psychological constructs [8], [9].
Recently the focus has shifted to collecting EDA signals outside the laboratory “in the wild” [10], [11] with wearable devices that can measure continuously, privately logging and/or
wirelessly streaming data [12]–[14]. This unobtrusive long-term
recording of EDA results in large amounts of data that require deriving appropriate signal representation and interpretation with
two separate goals. EDA models should first target efficient signal compression yielding reduced memory allocation and fast
network transfer, accompanied with low reconstruction error.
Second, since the availability (and analysis ability) of human
experts is not always guaranteed, in the light of human–machine
applications, automated interpretation of the acquired physiological patterns is essential. The reliable detection of SCRs,
linked to various indexes of psychophysiological interest [8],
can serve as a step toward this goal. Eventually, inference of
internal states based on EDA representations could afford us
more insights by comparing the parameters of the corresponding models across various conditions of emotion, arousal, and
attention [15], [16].
Previous research has introduced parameterized [17] and
generative causal [15], [18], [19] models that consider the characteristic structure of the signal or mimic the physiological processes of the sweat ducts. These methods tend to explain the
cause and not the observed signal. They are mostly evaluated
through empirical findings about hidden variables for inferring
internal states [20], although several efforts have taken into account signal reconstruction criteria [15], [16].

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHASPARI et al.: SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY WITH KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN DICTIONARIES

Sparse representation techniques model a signal as a linear combination of a small number of atoms chosen from an
overcomplete dictionary aiming to reveal certain structures of
a signal and represent them in a compact way [21]. Since psychophysiological signals, such as EDA, show typical patterns
over time, their sparse decomposition can yield accurate representations of scientific and translational value and contribute
to scalable implementations (e.g., on mobile devices). Noting
that the desired information contained in EDA signals is low
dimensional, we introduce the use of sparsity to robustly represent them. The innovation of our approach lies in that we model
the EDA signal directly by taking into account its variability
through the use of overcomplete knowledge-driven dictionaries
and evaluate our method explicitly through both signal reconstruction and information retrieval measures.
We propose EDA-specific dictionaries that take into account
the characteristic signal structure in time. Dictionaries include
tonic and phasic atoms capturing the signal levels and SCR
fluctuations, respectively. We represent the characteristic SCR
shape with previously used sigmoid-exponential [17] and Bateman functions [15], as well as a chi-square function, introduced
in this study, and decompose EDA into a small number of tonic
and phasic atoms with matching pursuit [22] and orthogonal
matching pursuit [23]. Through postprocessing of the selected
phasic atoms, we automatically detect the SCRs occurring in
the signal. We evaluate the usefulness of our approach through
goodness of fit criteria and SCR detection measures with respect
to human annotated groundtruth. Due to potential portable device applications for signal storage and transmission, we further
analyze the compression rate of our algorithm. Our results indicate that the proposed approach provides benefits compared to
the least-squares fit method that estimates predetermined model
parameters [17], with respect to reconstruction, discrimination,
and efficiency metrics.
In the following, we briefly survey previous EDA models (see
Section II). In Section III, we present our sparse EDA representation approach with knowledge-driven dictionaries. We next
describe the data for this study (see Section IV) and the corresponding results (see Section V). Finally, we discuss our results
and conclusions in Sections VI and VII, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The EDA signal is decomposed into tonic and phasic components. The slow moving tonic part, called skin conductance level
(SCL), depicts the general trend, whereas the fast fluctuations
superimposed onto the tonic signal are the skin conductance
responses (SCR) (see Fig. 1) [8]. The shape of SCRs is characterized by a steep increase in the signal and a slow recovery [24].
Amplitude is the most commonly reported SCR measure, quantified as the amount of increase in conductance from the onset of
the response to its peak (see Fig. 1) with typical values ranging
between 0.1 and 1.0 μS [8]. SCRs are caused by the burst of
the sympathetic sudomotor nerves controlling the sweat glands
linked to emotion, arousal, and attention [8]. Previous work has
modeled explicitly the shape of the resulting signal with appropriate functions [17], [25] or implicitly the causal relation

961

Fig. 1. Example of an electrodermal activity (EDA) signal of skin conductance
responses (SCR), marked with red “o,” and an indicative notation of SCR
amplitude measure.

between the underlying activity of sudomotor nerves and the
observable SCRs [15], [18], [19]. A review on EDA models can
be found in [19].
Several studies have mathematically expressed the SCR
shape. Lim et al. [17] developed a parameterized sigmoidexponential model of EDA fitted into signal segments. Results
were found to be correlated with previously established automatic scoring methods [24]. Storm et al. [25] used a quadratic
polynomial fit to sequential groups of datapoints to detect SCRs,
whose total number was compared to manual counting.
In the context of causal EDA modeling, Alexander et al. [18]
represented the SCR shape as a biexponential function and used
deterministic inverse filtering to estimate the driver of nerve
bursts. Evaluation of the method was performed by visual inspection and by finding significant correlations of the resulting
SCR measures with variables of gender and age. Benedek et al.
[15], [26] assumed EDA to be the convolution of a driver function, reflecting the activity of sweat glands, with an impulse
response depicting the states of neuron activity. This method
was evaluated through the reconstruction error. It was also compared to standard peak detection for a set of noise burst events
and was found to give results more likely to confound with
these environmental conditions. Finally, Bach et al. [16], [19],
[27], [28] have described a dynamic causal model (DCM) using Bayesian inversion to infer the underlying activity of sweat
glands. Each sudomotor activity burst is modeled as a Gaussian
function, which serves as an input to a double convolution operation yielding the EDA signal. The correlation of the estimated
bursts with the number of SCRs from semivisual analysis was
reported. This model was found to be a good predictor of anxiety
in public speaking.
EDA decomposition was cast as a convex optimization problem in [29]. The minimization of a quadratic cost function was
used to estimate the tonic and phasic signal components, represented with a cubic spline and a biexponential Bateman function, respectively. The EDA features extracted from the model
parameters yielded statistically significant differences between
neutral and high-arousal stimuli.
Despite their encouraging results, some of these research efforts [17], [25] tend to impose restrictions on the signal structure. Also, studies modeling EDA through its relationship with
sympathetic arousal [15], [18], [19] assume a linear-time invariant system, which is not always justified by empirical evidence [20]. While several studies take into account signal reconstruction measures [15], [16], evaluation is mostly performed
by visual inspection or implicitly through expected empirical

962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
EQUATIONS AND PARAMETER VALUES OF DICTIONARY ATOMS REPRESENTING TONIC AND PHASIC EDA COMPONENTS
Atom

EDA part

Equation

Straight Line

Tonic

g β (t) = Δ 0 + Δ · t

Sigmoid-exponential

Phasic

g γ ( 1 ) (t) =

−( s t −t ) / T

ecay
e  0 d−2
2 u (t − t 0 )
s t −t 0
1+

Bateman

Phasic

Chi-Square

Phasic

Parameter Values
Δ 0 ∈ {−20, −10, 1}
Δ ∈ {−0.010, −0.009, . . . , −0.001, 0,
0.01, 0.02, . . . , 0.10}
T r i s e ∈ {0.5, 0.8, . . . , 2.9}
T d e c a y ∈ {0.3, 0.6, . . . , 3}

s ∈ {0.06, 0.07, . . . , 0.14}

a ∈ {0.2, 0.3, . . . , 2}
b ∈ {0.4, 0.6, . . . , 2}
k ∈ {2.70, 2.73, . . . , 5.37}

t 0 ∈ {0, 10, 20, . . . , 310}

T rise



g γ ( 2 ) (t) = e −a ( s t −t 0 ) − e −b ( s t −t 0 ) u (t − t 0 )
a<b
g γ ( 3 ) (t) = χ 2 (st − t 0 , k )u (t − t 0 )

u (t) = 1, t ≥ 0, and u (t) = 0 otherwise, χ 2 (t, k ): the value of k-degrees chi-square distribution at point t.

assumptions correlating the systems’ SCR measures with physical, mental, and behavioral states. The novelty of this study lies
in the fact that it directly models the EDA signal with sparsity
constraints and takes into account the SCR shape variability.
We evaluate our approach through both signal reconstruction
criteria and measures comparing automatically detected SCRs
to human-annotated SCRs.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
Many psychophysiological signals carry distinctive structures
in time making the use of sparse decomposition techniques appealing. Their small number of nonzero components contain important information about the signal characteristics, which can
potentially be related to various medical conditions and psychological constructs. For this reason, dictionaries have to be
carefully designed so that they capture the signal variability and
their underlying information. We propose the use of parameterized EDA-specific dictionaries that are able to represent the tonic
and phasic parts of the signal (see Section III-A). The benefit
of introducing these predetermined atoms is that we know their
properties in advance, such as amplitude and rise and recovery
time, which are of interest in a variety of psychophysiological
studies [30]. We further decompose EDA into a small number
of atoms (see Section III-B) which are used to retrieve information about its specific constructs, such as SCRs (see Section
III-C). We compare the proposed parametric EDA representation to the least-means-squares parametric fit proposed by Lim
et al. [17] (see Section III-D) with respect to signal reconstruction, information retrieval, and compression rate criteria (see
Section III-E).
In the following, we will use x = [x(1) . . . x(L)]T ∈ L to
denote a vector of length L, x(t), t = 1, . . . , L, its corresponding

value at the tth sample in time and xp = ( Lt=1 |x(t)|p )1/p
its p-order norm. The inner product between two vectors x1 and
x2 will be referred as x1 T x2 . A matrix with L1 raws and L2
columns will be written in bold capital letters as A ∈ L 1 ×L 2 .
A. Dictionary Design
Since our approach involves a knowledge-based representation of signals, the choice of dictionary atoms is critical. Specif-

ically for EDA, we introduce two kinds of atoms that model the
tonic and phasic components of the signal (see Table I).
The first group takes into account the tonic part, i.e., the slow
varying signal level. It is quantified with straight lines having
an offset Δ0 and a slope Δ. Tonic atoms will be referred as
gβ ∈ L , where β = (Δ0 , Δ) is an element of the set B = 2 .
Negative values of Δ indicate decreasing lines, while positive
values represent lines with increasing slope.
The second group of atoms captures the phasic component
of EDA, meaning the rapid fluctuations superimposed on the
signal, also known as SCRs. We use three types of functions
that can potentially represent the characteristic steep rise and
slow decay of SCRs: the sigmoid-exponential, the Bateman,
and the chi-square functions. The sigmoid-exponential was introduced in [17] for representing SCRs with high values of Trise
and Tdecay resulting in long rise and decay time. The Bateman
function [15], inspired by the laws of diffusion at the skin pores,
represents the shape of an impulse response, which when convolved with a driver function results in the EDA signal. Parameters a and b control the steepness of recovery and onset,
respectively; the higher they are, the less time it takes for the
SCR to transition to and from a peak. Finally, the probability
density function of the chi-squared distribution, referred here as
chi-square function, is introduced by the authors of this paper as
an alternative way to represent the SCR shape. It involves only
one parameter k, with large values resulting in wider SCRs.
Although no apparent physiological explanation could be found
for the chi-square, each dictionary atom is encoded with one
fewer parameter. Taking into account the large size of (overcomplete) dictionaries in sparse representation techniques, this
function benefits computational cost and memory allocation, an
important factor for mobile device applications.
In order to ensure large variety in the dictionary atoms, we
considered two additional parameters common for all phasic
atom types. The time scale s is responsible for the compression
and dilation of the atom in time with lower values resulting
in wider SCRs and vice-versa (see Fig. 2). Since there is no
a priori information about the location of SCRs within an analysis frame, the dictionary contains shifted versions of all atoms
over a range of time offsets t0 spanning one signal frame.
We will refer to the three types of sigmoid-exponential, Bateman, and chi-square SCR atoms as gγ ( 1 ) ∈ L , gγ ( 2 ) ∈ L ,

CHASPARI et al.: SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY WITH KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN DICTIONARIES

963

Fig. 2. Examples of normalized phasic atoms represented with sigmoid-exponential, Bateman and chi-square functions for different time scale parameters
s = 0.06, 0.1, 0.14 and time offset t0 = 20. For each time-scale value, plots were created using all combinations of corresponding atom-specific parameters.

and gγ ( 3 ) ∈ L , respectively, with corresponding parameters
γ (1) = (Trise , Tdecay , s, T0 ) ∈ Γ(1) , γ (2) = (a, b, s, T0 ) ∈ Γ(2)
4
4
and γ (3) = (k, s, T0 ) ∈ Γ(3) , where Γ(1) = + , Γ(2) = + ,
(3)
+3
and Γ =  . By combining the possible parameters, we
created all tonic and phasic atoms which are merged into
three different dictionaries D(1) = {gβ (t), gγ ( 1 ) (t)}, D(2) =
{gβ (t), gγ ( 2 ) (t)}, and D(3) = {gβ (t), gγ ( 3 ) (t)}, containing
sigmoid-exponential, Bateman, and chi-square functions, respectively. In the case of sigmoid-exponential dictionary (see
Table I), for example, there are nine possible values for scale s,
32 for time offset t0 , 9 for Trise , and 10 for Tdecay , resulting in
25 920 phasic atoms. Combining the 3 and 21 different values
for Δ0 and Δ, respectively, we get additionally 63 tonic atoms,
that result in a dictionary size of 25 983 atoms in total. Similarly, Bateman and chi-square dictionaries contain eventually
the same number of phasic and tonic atoms with the sigmoidexponential one. All dictionary atoms are normalized for unit
standard deviation. We introduced more phasic than tonic atoms
in order to capture the large variety of SCR shapes compared
to the signal level, which remains fairly constant through an
analysis frame. The parameter values (see Table I) were empirically set so that the resulting atom shapes are similar to the
observed SCRs. In the future, we plan to automatically learn the
dictionary parameters for more accurate representation.
B. Sparse Decomposition
Sparse representation of a signal f ∈ L can described by the
following equation providing a nonconvex problem [21]:
min c0 subject to f = Dc
c

(1)

where D ∈ L ×Q is an overcomplete dictionary matrix with Q
prototype signal-atoms and c ∈ Q are the atom coefficients
with N  Q nonzero elements.

One way to approach this NP-hard problem is to use greedy
strategies, that abandon exhaustive search in favor of locally optimal updates. The most well known are MP [22] and OMP [23],
[31] reaching suboptimal solutions. Another way of solving Eq.
(1) is through relaxation of the discontinuous l0 -norm leading
to basis pursuit [32] and focal underdetermined system solver
[33], [34]. Despite the fact that these relaxation approaches can
obtain global solutions, they are far more complicated and less
efficient in terms of running time [21], rendering MP algorithms
compelling because of their simplicity and low computational
cost. Theoretical guarantees of correctness [35] along with empirical experiments [36]–[38], led us to the use of MP and OMP
in this paper. (O)MP will denote cases referring to both these
algorithms.
Let D be a dictionary described in Section III-A containing
a total of Q tonic and phasic atoms from either the sigmoidexponential, Bateman, or chi-square functions, i.e., D = D1 , or
D = D2 , or D = D3 , and gζ n an atom from the dictionary, i.e.,
gζ n ∈ D: ζn ∈ B ∪ Γ(1) , or ζn ∈ B ∪ Γ(2) , or ζn ∈ B ∪ Γ(3) .
According to MP [22], the initial signal f can be written as a
linear combination of infinite atoms as follows:
∞

cn gζ n
(2)
f=
n =0

where cn are the atom coefficients. MP selects a set of atoms
from D that best matches the signal structure. If gζ 0 ∈ D is the
atom at the first iteration, the signal f can be written as follows:
f = (f T gζ 0 ) · gζ 0 + Rf

(3)

where Rf is the signal residual after approximating f in the direction gζ 0 . The selection of gζ 0 is greedily performed in order
to maximize the similarity of the atom to the original signal,
i.e., such that f T gζ 0 is maximum. Note that in the selection
criterion, we did not use the absolute value, as in the original
MP algorithm. If we allowed negative inner product values, i.e.,

964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 3. EDA representation scheme and SCR detection for an example signal frame. (a) Input and reconstructed signal with solid blue and dashed red lines. The
location of expert hand-annotated SCRs is marked (red “×”), along with the signal peaks (magenta “∗”) and the SCRs estimated based on the phasic atoms of the
sparse decomposition algorithm (green “•”). The final SCRs (black “
”) are located by combining the SCRs from the phasic atoms according to their location
and mapping them to the signal peaks. (b) The normalized dictionary atoms selected by the first four iterations of OMP. The first tonic atom (solid cyan line)
captures the signal level, the first and third phasic atoms (dashed magenta and dash-dotted green lines) the first SCR, while the second phasic atom (black dotted
line) the second SCR. (c) The normalized phasic atoms multiplied by the corresponding OMP coefficients (dashed magenta, dotted black, and dash-dotted green
lines). The energy of each atom is indicative of the order they have been selected by OMP with higher energy atoms selected first.

negative atom coefficients, the shape of the predefined atoms
would change, resulting in a totally different signal interpretation. Negative coefficients of the SCR atoms, for example,
would not have any physical meaning and would disturb the
structure of the original EDA signal.
After the first iteration, residual Rf is similarly decomposed
by selecting an atom from dictionary D that best matches
its structure. Iteratively, the residual Rn +1 f can be written as
follows:


Rn +1 f = Rn f − (Rn f )T gζ n · gζ n
(4)

We use a step of L3 samples in order to avoid discontinuities
introduced by the start and end of the signal frame. As will
be described in Section III-C, SCR detection is based on the
middle part of each signal frame for the same reason. A similar
approach has been followed with other biosignals [39].
OMP [23], [31], [35], [40] is a refinement of MP which adds
a least-squares minimization to obtain the best approximation
over the atoms that have already been chosen at each iteration.
Let DS N = [gζ 0 , . . . , gζ N −1 ] ∈ L ×N be the matrix containing
the selected atoms after N iterations. The least-squares approximation fN of signal f is

where gζ n ∈ D is selected to maximize (Rn f )T gζ n . After N
iterations, the original signal f is approximated by fN :

fN = DS N (DS N T DS N )−1 DS N T f

fN =

N
−1






(Rn f )T gζ n · gζ n

n =0

=

N




[δn · (Rn f )T gβ n · gβ n +

n =0



(1 − δn ) · (Rn f )T gγ n · gγ n ]

(5)

where δn ∈ {0, 1} selects either a tonic or a phasic atom (see
Table I), βn ∈ B and γn ∈ Γ(1) , or γn ∈ Γ(2) , or γn ∈ Γ(3) are
the parameters of the nth atom.
Since processing of long duration signals is involved, we
perform segmentation and frame-by-frame analysis. Let the superscript (k) denote the kth time frame of length L, where
k = 1, . . . , K with K being the total number of frames. Therefore, the kth frame of the original signal in terms of the atoms
selected by MP can be approximated by
(k)

fN =

N
−1

n =0



(Rn f (k) )T gζ n

	

· gζ n .

(6)

(7)

where the term in brackets corresponds to the N nonzero coefficients used to scale the selected atoms. OMP updates the
residual by projecting the original signal onto the linear subspace spanned by the selected atoms; therefore, it never selects
the same atom twice. Similar expressions hold for the signal of
the kth time frame.
A schematic representation of the way OMP sparsely decomposes a signal frame is presented in Fig. 3. The original
and reconstructed signals are shown with solid and dashed lines
[see Fig. 3(a)]. OMP first selects a straight line atom in order
to represent the signal level and then two phasic atoms centered around the 100th and 220th sample to capture the two
SCRs. The original normalized atoms as well as the resulting
phasic atoms when scaled with the coefficients computed by
OMP are shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c). We also notice that the
phasic atom centered around sample 100 has the highest energy [see Fig. 3(c)], since it represents the wider SCR of the
frame. Finally, the third selected phasic atom is centered toward
the end of the first annotated SCR around sample 140. This
happens because the first phasic atom did not capture the entire energy of the corresponding SCR; therefore, another atom

CHASPARI et al.: SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY WITH KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN DICTIONARIES

with much smaller coefficient was introduced. In Section III-C,
we will describe how we combine these two phasic atoms located at samples 100 and 140 in order to reliably represent an
SCR.
C. SCR Detection
(k )

Let {gγ m : m = 1, . . . , M } be the phasic atoms selected after
N (O)MP iterations at the kth signal frame with M < N , as at
least one tonic atom will compensate for the signal level. Since
the dictionary is predetermined, we know exactly the location
of the maximum amplitudes of the phasic atoms, denoted as
(k )
pm . As shown in Fig. 3 for atoms centered around samples
100 and 140, more than one phasic atoms might be selected
to represent a single SCR because the fit between dictionary
atoms and signal is not always perfect. Taking advantage of
their time proximity, we can group phasic atoms according to
(k )
their location with a histogram of the pm values with Nb bins.
Each nonempty histogram bin h will contain all phasic atoms
(k )
{gγ m h } capturing one SCR, which is represented by the linear
combination of the grouped phasic atoms:
(k )

SCRh (t) =



h

(k )

{g γ m
(k )

) (k )
c(k
m h gγ m (t).

h

(8)

}

The weights cm h correspond to the atom coefficients computed
by (O)MP. Because of the simple shape of the above SCR signal,
we are able to find its amplitude and time of peak by simply
locating its maximum point. SCRs with amplitude less than a
predetermined threshold athr were omitted [8], in accordance
to the manual annotation (see Section IV-B).
To estimate the final SCR locations for the whole signal, we
merged the SCRs from all analysis frames. Since the starting and
ending samples of each frame are more prone to errors due to
discontinuity issues, we only take into account SCRs located in
the middle L3 samples of each frame. The value L3 was chosen to
coincide with the length of the analysis step in order to ensure
that each SCR is taken into account once. For the first and
last frame we also consider SCRs from the first L3 and last L3
samples, respectively. A signal frame of 10 s (320 samples), for
example, will result in analysis step of approximately 3.3 s (107
samples), in which the shape of an SCR is easily identifiable, as
shown in Fig. 3.
Since our approach involves local decisions made on each
signal frame, a postprocessing step that takes into account the
global EDA shape is necessary. Simple peak detection was performed and the located SCRs were then mapped to the nearest
detected peak within a distance threshold dthr . SCRs not paired
with a neighboring peak were omitted and those matched to
the same peak were only counted once. In Fig. 3, for example,
the phasic atoms centered around samples 100 and 140 were
grouped together based on the proximity of their location and
were further mapped to the peak of sample 110 to represent
the first SCR. In order to capture the second SCR, the phasic
atom centered around sample 220 was mapped to the peak from
sample 230.

965

D. Description of the Least-Squares Fit Model for EDA
We compare our approach against the least-squares fit EDA
representation model by Lim et al. [17], since it is conceptually
the closest to our method involving a parameterization of the
signal. The authors proposed a eight-parameter model that incorporates the signal tonic level, at most two SCRs and a recovery
phase. SCL is represented by a straight line with offset c. SCRs
are captured by sigmoid-exponential functions with common
rise time tr and decay time td . They are located at time offsets
Tos 1 , Tos 2 , and have amplitudes g1 , g2 , respectively. Finally, the
recovery phase is assumed to follow the exponential decay of
SCRs with the same time constant decay td and an initial amplitude a0 . Therefore, the eight-parameter model representing
an EDA signal frame can be written as follows:
− tt

f (t) = c + a0 e

d

+ fs (t; g1 , Tos 1 ) + fs (t; g2 , Tos 2 ) (9)
−

t −T o s i

gi · e t d
fs (t; gi , Tos i ) = 

	 2 , i = 1, 2.

t−T o s i −2
1+
tr

(10)

The nonlinear least-squares fit [41] was used to estimate the
model parameters from the data. Time offset and amplitude of
SCRs were initialized from peak detection. If less than two
peaks were detected in a signal frame, only the corresponding
parameters were estimated and the remaining were set to zero.
E. Evaluation
Evaluation of the proposed model is performed with respect
to the quality of signal reconstruction, the ability to capture
EDA-specific characteristics and the compression rate.
1) Signal Reconstruction: Signal reconstruction is evaluated
with the root mean square (RMS) error, defined as follows:

K 
L
1 

1
(k )

(f (k ) (l) − fN (l))2
(11)
RMSErr =
K
L
k =1

l=1

where f (k ) (l) denotes the value of the lth sample at the kth
signal frame with k = 1, . . . , K and l = 1, . . . , L; similarly for
(k )
the reconstructed signal fN (l) with N (O)MP iterations. Low
RMS error values reflect high-quality signal representation.
2) Information Retrieval: Evaluation with RMS error provides a limited view of the representation quality, since an overly
complex model may result in perfect representation of the existing data, but might perform poorly on unseen patterns [42]. One
technique to avoid overfitting with greedy algorithms, such as
(O)MP, is early stopping, that might result in a better estimate
of the original signal without introducing too many erroneous
or noisy entries [43], [44]. Indeed, our results (see Section VA2) suggest that 4-7 (O)MP iterations provide the most reliable
EDA representation. An alternative way is the use of quantitative and qualitative criteria, depending on the application that
assess the amount of meaningful information captured by the
proposed models [45], [46]. In this study, we measure the ability
of our approach to detect SCRs, an important EDA component

966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

[8], [9]. SCR detection is assessed in two ways, each containing
complementary accuracy metrics.
We first quantify the quality of SCR representation based on
the amount of detected SCRs and their distance from the human
annotated reference ones. Let Sr = {pr i } and Sd = {pd i } be
the sets of locations of real and detected SCRs, respectively.
The absolute relative difference between the number of real and
detected SCRs captures the portion of hand annotated SCRs that
is correctly located by our system:
RDiff =

||Sr | − |Sd ||
|Sr |

(12)

where | · | denotes the cardinality of a set. In order to see how
many of the detected SCRs are correct, we compute the mean
distance of each detected SCR from the closest real one

Md 

1 
MinDist =
(13)
pd i − min |pd i − pr j | .
pr j
Md i=1
We further calculate precision and recall measures. If
Sr d = {pd i : ∃j s.t. minp r j |pd i − pr j | < dm ax } are the estimated SCRs whose distance to their closest real SCR is less
than a maximum threshold dm ax , precision equals to the portion
of detected SCRs that are close to a real one within the distance boundary dm ax : Precision = |Sr d |/|Sd |. Recall captures
the fraction of hand-annotated SCRs that are detected from our
system within the same boundary: Recall = |Sr d |/|Sr |.
F-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a single measure from these complementary ones:
Fscore = 2 ·

Precision · Recall
.
Precision + Recall

(14)

These goodness of detection measures improve as the distance
boundary dm ax increases, since evaluation becomes more forgiving to errors. Note that the distance boundary dm ax used
for evaluation of SCR detection is different from the distance
threshold dthr for mapping SCRs detected from the phasic atoms
to the signal peaks (see Section III-C).
One can observe that precision is related to the MinDist metric
quantifying how close an estimated SCR is to a real one. On the
other hand, recall is closer to RDiff that captures the algorithm’s
ability to reliably detect the hand-annotated SCRs.
SCR detection results (see Section V-A2) are reported with
a tenfold cross validation by randomly splitting the data from
the 37 subjects. At each fold, the training set was used to find
the optimal combination of dthr and Nb (see Section III-C)
from a pool of parameters dthr ∈ {32, 64, . . . 320 samples} and
N ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5 bins}, selected to maximize the Fscore of the
corresponding data, since this yields a combined measure of
the amount of missed and erroneously detected SCRs. The average value of each metric on the test set is reported based on
the optimal parameters of each fold, as found from the training
set. This reduces the risk of overfitting and is more indicative of
the performance of our algorithm on novel data.
3) Compression Rate: Compression rate is evaluated as the
number of bits used for representing the EDA signal over 1 s
with low values indicating better compression ability.

Fig. 4. Logarithmic ratio between the second-order norms of the residual
R n f and original signal f , r = 2 · log 1 0 (||R n f ||2 /||f ||2 ), computed for 1–50
orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) iterations based on a dictionary of tonic
and Bateman phasic atoms. Red-dashed line denotes a decay of approximately
constant rate between 15–30 iterations. Green dashed-dotted line denotes a
steeper constant decay between 30–50 OMP iterations.

IV. DATA DESCRIPTION
A. Data Collection
Our data contain 10-min recordings of 37 children watching a
preferred television show in order to sustain attention and keep
the subject stationary. Two silver-silver chloride electrodes were
placed on the index and middle finger of the child’s nondominant
hand. These were connected to the BIOPAC MP150 system that
recorded EDA at a sampling rate of 32 Hz. Details about the
experiment can be found in [47].
B. Preprocessing and Annotation
High-frequency noise artifacts were removed with a low-pass
Blackman filter [48] of 32 samples (1 s).
Annotation of SCRs was performed by an expert using the visualization capabilities of BIOPAC’s AcqKnowledge software.
SCR scoring involved visual inspection of the denoised EDA
signal within a 30-s time frame and detection of signal “peaks”
with the typical steep rise and slow decay. Each SCR amplitude
was visually determined (see Fig. 1) and a minimum threshold
of 0.05 μS was set for an SCR to be eligible for annotation [8].
In order to ensure reliable annotations, 25% of the data were
double coded, yielding interannotator agreement of 96%.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of our method based on the
collected and annotated data (see Section IV) and compare it
against the least-squares fit approach (see Section V-A). Results
concern the mean of each evaluation metric over all subjects.
We further discuss how the analysis frame length and the SCR
detection parameters affect our results (see Sections V-B and
V-C).
In the following experiments, the maximum number of
(O)MP iterations was determined so that the coherent signal
structures, i.e., the nonzero signal components, are likely to be
recovered. As explained in [22], this occurs when the residual
decay ratio r = 2 · log10 (||Rn f ||2 /||f ||2 ) decays at a constant
rate. Our data suggest that this occurs after 15 OMP iterations with a dictionary of Bateman phasic atoms, while after

CHASPARI et al.: SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY WITH KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN DICTIONARIES

967

Fig. 5. Signal reconstruction and SCR detection results. (a) Root mean square (RMS) error between original and reconstructed signal with respect to (w.r.t.) the
number of (orthogonal) matching pursuit ((O)MP) iterations. (b) Absolute number of relative difference between real and estimated SCRs w.r.t. the number of
(O)MP iterations. (c) Mean distance of estimated SCRs from their closest real SCR w.r.t. (O)MP iterations. (d), (e), (f) Precision, recall, and Fscore of SCR detection
with 6 (O)MP iterations w.r.t maximum distance threshold dm a x between real and detected SCRs, the latter ranging between 10–100 samples, or 0.3125–3.125 s.
Results on Fig. (b)– (f) are reported based on a tenfold cross validation, during which SCR detection on the test set is performed using the parameter combination
(dth r ,N b ) that gave the best results on the training data, where dth r is the distance threshold for mapping estimated SCRs to the nearest signal peaks and N b is
the number of histograms bins for grouping the selected phasic atoms of each analysis frame. Same legend applies to all plots.

30 iterations decay happens at an even steeper constant slope
(see Fig. 4). Similar results are obtained from other types of
dictionaries, omitted for the sake of simplicity. For this reason,
we examine 1–15 (O)MP iterations and in fact, our experimental
results indicate that even a smaller number can achieve reliable
representation (see Section V-A).
A. EDA Representation Results
For consistency with [17], in which 10-s isolated EDA segments were evaluated, results in this section are reported and
compared to [17] with the same analysis frame.
1) Signal Reconstruction: During the first iteration, MP
yields better signal reconstruction than OMP [see Fig. 5(a)].
Since MP does not reestimate the atom coefficients, it selects
more tonic atoms in order to adjust signal levels after the addition of new phasic ones. On the contrary, OMP readjusts the
levels of the already selected tonic atoms. It is also apparent
from Fig. 6 that tonic atoms are mostly selected by OMP during
the first two iterations, whereas this occurs very often in MP.
Therefore, during the first iteration, MP tends to capture part
of the signal energy that is more attributed to the signal level
and less to the signal fluctuations, resulting in lower RMS values.
As more iterations occur, OMP achieves lower RMS indicating
its ability to more reliably capture the signal variability.

Fig. 6. Percentage of selected tonic atoms with respect to the number of
iterations for (orthogonal) matching pursuit ((O)MP) and the various dictionaries
(with sigmoid-exponential, Bateman and chi-square phasic atoms).

2) Information Retrieval: Since OMP introduces more phasic atoms than MP for a given iteration, the absolute relative
difference between real and estimated SCRs RDif f is lower
and becomes optimal around 4–7 iterations [see Fig. 5(b)]. This
can be also justified by the fact that in a 10 s frame, we have
on average 1–3 tonic and 2–4 phasic atoms, the latter capturing
the 1–3 expected SCRs. To achieve similar RDif f , MP needs
more iterations due to the tonic atoms it keeps selecting.

968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 7. Compression rate of the original EDA signal and the EDA representation with the proposed sparse decomposition and the least-squares fit methods.
(Y-axis break between 100 and 900 bits/s).

Because MP selects less phasic atoms than OMP, it tends to
capture the most distinct SCRs, resulting in smaller distances
M inDist from the estimated to the real SCRs [see Fig. 5(c)]
and higher precision [see Fig. 5(d)]. For the same reason MP
shows poorer recall [see Fig. 5(e)], as it misses many SCRs.
Compared to the least-squares fit approach, Fscore is higher for
both MP and OMP [see Fig. 5(f)], indicating the ability of our
system to reliably detect SCRs.
3) Compression Rate: In a 10 s segment, we compute the
number of encoding bits for the raw signal, the least-squares
fit and the proposed models. Long integers and single-precision
binary floating-point numbers of 32 bits are assumed.
Since the original signal was recorded with 32 Hz, a 10 s
signal segment is represented with 320 samples (1280 Bytes);
therefore, its compression rate is CRraw = 1024 bits/s.
Lim et al. [17] use a 8-parameter model to represent a 10 s
signal. Assuming that the time offset parameters Tos 1 , Tos 2 are
long integers and the remaining parameters are floating points,
we need 32 Bytes, resulting in CRb = 25.6 bits/s.
In our approach, given a known dictionary, each atom is represented by its indexed location in the dictionary and the corresponding coefficient. A 16 bit integer can encode the location
of the 25 983 atoms used in our experiments. Assuming that
each atom coefficient is a single-precision floating point, N selected atoms can be encoded by (16·N + 32·N ) bits, which is
equivalent to compression rate CRp = 4.8N bits/s.
The proposed model achieves compression rate between 14.2
to 213 times upon the original signal depending on the number of (O)MP iterations (see Fig. 7). Compared to the leastsquares approach, signal decomposition with 2–5 atoms also
yields lower compression rate (see Fig. 7) and lower RMS error
[see Fig. 5(a)].
B. Effect of Analysis Frame Length
The different time scales over which tonic and phasic EDA
components coevolve, the first being much slower, create the
need of analyzing multiple window lengths. Since the tonic
component of the signal lies in the frequency range between
0–0.05 Hz [49], the upper limit corresponding to 20 s, we examined EDA representation metrics of variable frame lengths

Fig. 8. Effect of the analysis frame length L (in seconds) to signal reconstruction and SCR detection. (a) Root mean square (RMS) error between original and
reconstructed signal for 1–15 orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) iterations. (b)
and (c) Fscore of SCR detection with 4 and 10 OMP iterations. Same legend
applies to both plots.

between 5–30 s. For the sake of simplicity, our experiments
for this section are performed with OMP based on Bateman
phasic atoms, but no significant differences occur from other
combinations.
Representation results for the various analysis windows are
greatly influenced by the number of (O)MP iterations. Signal
reconstruction based on a few selected atoms is better for shorter
than longer analysis frames, while this difference converges as
the number of OMP iterations increases [see Fig. 8(a)]. Similar
patterns occur with SCR detection Fscore, although the shortterm nature of the phasic part makes short analysis frames more
compelling with respect to that [see Fig. 8(b) and (c)].
C. Effect of SCR Detection Parameters
We analyze SCR detection with respect to the distance threshold dthr used for mapping the estimated SCRs to the nearest signal peaks and with respect to the number of histograms bins Nb
for grouping the selected phasic atoms of each analysis frame.
As given in Section V-B, we report results using OMP with
Bateman atoms.
When changing dthr , the absolute relative difference RDiff
between the number of real and detected SCRs remains almost
unaltered [see Fig. 9(a)]. This is not the case for their minimum
average distance MinDist, which decreases as dthr becomes
larger [see Fig. 9(b)], suggesting that more information about
signal peaks benefits SCR detection.
The number of histogram bins Nb strongly affects the absolute
relative difference RDiff between real and estimated SCRs, since
the latter directly depends on the number of groups in which
the phasic atoms are combined. In contrast, metric MinDist is
not largely affected by this parameter.

CHASPARI et al.: SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY WITH KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN DICTIONARIES

Fig. 9. SCR detection metrics with respect to the distance threshold dth r for
mapping estimated SCRs to signal peaks and the number of histogram bins N b
for grouping the selected phasic atoms from sparse decomposition. (a) Absolute
relative difference RDiff of real and detected SCRs. (b) Mean distance MinDist
of detected SCRs to the closest real one.

VI. DISCUSSION
Our method involves the design of EDA-specific dictionaries
that take into account the tonic and phasic parts of the signal
and the use of sparse decomposition techniques to represent
the EDA. Compared to previous EDA models, our approach
incorporates the idea of sparsity and is quantitatively evaluated
directly on the signal as well as its human annotated characteristics. We examined three different types of phasic atoms of
similar nature. These provided equivalent results in terms of signal reconstruction and information retrieval metrics (see Fig. 5);
therefore, no definite conclusions can be drawn with respect to
the most suitable dictionary for representing EDA among these
variants. A larger amount of data from variable sources could
potentially address this further in the future.
Sparsity is important for representing biomedical signals, especially for efficient storage and transmission in ambulatory
(mobile device based) applications. Parameterization of EDA in
light of compression was considered by Lim et al. [17], who
used a eight-parameter sigmoid exponential model. This effort
has several constraints, as it assumes the existence of at most two
SCRs within 10 s and is tested on predefined signal segments. In
real-world applications, however, the shape of the signal is more
unpredictable and can be better captured by the variability of
the proposed EDA-specific dictionaries. Sparsity has also been
examined by the DCM approach [16], that computes the onset
and amplitude of spontaneous fluctuations every 2 s, resulting
in 10 parameters for every 10 s. In our sparse EDA model, each
atom is represented by its location in the dictionary and the coefficient to which it is multiplied. This results in 2N parameters
for a 10 s segment , where N is the number of (O)MP iterations.
Taking into account that 5 (O)MP iterations give adequately reliable results (see Fig. 5), the two algorithms are fairly equivalent
with respect to compression rate. Sparse representations can
be further used to represent other psychophysiological signals
with characteristic structure in time, such as electroencephalogram (ECG), electrocardiogram (ECG), and photoplethysmograph (PPG).
Our approach offers also advantages in terms of quantitative
evaluation criteria. Most previous studies were implicitly validated with statistical analysis of the resulting parameters. Lim

969

et al. [17] visualized an example residual error and reported
residuals below 5% of the signal amplitude, while Bach et al.
[19] plotted an original example and reconstructed signal with
no further quantitative results. Bach et al. [16] reported the negative log-likelihood of the mean sum of squares of the residual,
referred as Log Bayes Factor (LBF), with DCM reaching LBF
values around −3 × 106 . In their nonnegative deconvolution
approach, Benedek et al. [15] examined signal reconstruction
with average RMS error of 0.019 μS. In our study, OMP running for 15 iterations achieves mean RMS error of 0.015, 0.019,
0.017 μS for dictionaries containing sigmoid-exponential, Bateman, and chi-square phasic atoms, respectively. Although 15
iterations are not indicative of the representation quality of our
algorithm, a smaller number of iterations appears more suitable
for the inherent low-dimensionality of EDA (see Fig. 5), they
give the least compressed representation in our setup and are
more comparable with [15]. Despite the fact that comparisons
are performed on different data and in the context of slightly different approaches, these results indicate a promising framework
for our method. Since dictionaries were empirically designed,
our future work will examine dictionary learning techniques for
data-specific dictionaries that can improve signal reconstruction
measures.
The high correlation between SCRs and sympathetic nerve
activity bursts and their extensive use in various psychophysiological studies [8] suggest that reliable SCR detection mechanisms are necessary. It is therefore essential to validate automatic
scoring systems with human-annotated ground truth, since the
increasing use of longitudinal data renders manual annotation
techniques laborious and time consuming. To the best of our
knowledge, only Storm et al. [25] compared the number of automatically detected and manually annotated SCRs with linear
regression analysis. For 0.05 μS minimum SCR amplitude, the
magnitude of linear regression ranged between 0.75 and 0.98
depending on the model parameters and the data. Although it is
useful to compare the total number of real and estimated SCRs,
information about their relative location is also important. One
of the novelties of this paper lies in the use of SCR detection criteria assessing both the sensitivity and specificity of automatic
SCR scoring. These include two complementary pair measures:
1) the relative absolute difference between the number of real
and detected SCRs, the average distance of detected SCRs to
their closest real one and 2) the precision and recall of SCR
detection, yielding the Fscore. Fscore is 83.43% using six OMP
iterations and a tolerance threshold of 1.25 s between real and
estimated SCRs [see Fig. 5(f)]. This improves upon [17], which
achieves 75.1% Fscore for the same conditions, and suggests
that our approach appears promising for an automatic system.
Continuous advances in wearable technology suggest that
physiological models should go beyond traditional signal reconstruction and pattern detection to signal interpretation in
the context of internal human state tracking that could lead
to individualized assessment and intervention [3], [7]. Previous efforts have provided meaningful interpretations of EDA
models in terms empirical expectations (e.g., public versus nonpublic speaking [19], baseline versus anticipation [19], different noise stimuli [15], neutral, negative and positive arousing

970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

images [16]). Other studies have analyzed EDA patterns in the
context of human–computer interaction relatively to individual’s affective states [6], [50]. The parameterized nature of the
dictionary atoms in our approach can capture SCR characteristics, such as width, rise, and recovery time, which could further
lead to more intuitive interpretations of EDA signals in terms of
cognitive, social, and emotional stimuli. Data that allow these
types of comparisons, including in the context of clinical translation such as therapy for Autism [51], will be explored as part
of our future work.
A common problem when measuring changes in EDA is overlapping SCRs. It is typically agreed that when a second response
occurs before completion of the first, one would count two overlapping responses [30]. Such an example is shown in Fig. 3(a)
with two overlapping SCRs at samples 110 and 230, which we
notice that our sparse decomposition approach is capable of
discriminating. Previous studies have also assessed this by considering the underlying processes that contribute to SCRs as a
linear time invariant system and measuring the event onsets of
the system generator [27], [28].
VII. CONCLUSION
We propose a knowledge-driven EDA model that sparsely
decomposes the signal into a small number of atoms from a
dictionary. We focus on the dictionary design, which contains
tonic and phasic atoms relevant to the signal levels and SCR
fluctuations, respectively. With appropriate postprocessing, we
automatically retrieve the SCRs from the EDA. Evaluation of
our approach includes signal reconstruction, SCR detection, and
compression rate analysis. These measures are improved upon
the least-square fit model, that uses a parameterized template,
providing benefits in terms of all criteria.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Milenković et al., “Wireless sensor networks for personal health
monitoring: Issues and an implementation,” Comput. Commun., vol. 29,
no. 13, pp. 2521–2533, 2006.
[2] U. Mitra et al., “KNOWME: A case study in wireless body area sensor
network design,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 116–125, May
2012.
[3] P. Binkley, “Predicting the potential of wearable technology,” IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 23–27, May/Jun. 2003.
[4] T. Vuorela et al., “Design and implementation of a portable long-term
physiological signal recorder,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 718–725, May 2010.
[5] J. Coyne et al., “Applying real time physiological measures of cognitive
load to improve training,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Foundations Augmented
Cognition. Neuroergonomics Operational Neurosci., pp. 469–478, 2009.
[6] I. Leite et al., “Sensors in the wild: exploring electrodermal activity in
child-robot interaction,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Human-Robot Interaction, 2013, pp. 41–48.
[7] P. Bonato, “Wearable sensors/systems and their impact on biomedical
engineering: An overview from the guest editor,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Mag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 18–20, 2003.
[8] M. Dawson et al., “The electrodermal system,” in Handbook of Psychophysiology, 3rd ed., J. Cacioppo, L. Tassinary, and G. Berntson, Eds.,
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007, pp. 159–181.
[9] W. Boucsein, Electrodermal Activity. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2012.
[10] R. Picard, “Future affective technology for autism and emotion communication,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc., vol. 364, pp. 3575–3584, 2009.

[11] R. Picard, “Measuring affect in the wild,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Affective
Comput. Intelligent Interaction, 2011, p. 3.
[12] M. Poh et al., “A wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term assessment
of electrodermal activity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5,
pp. 1243–1252, May 2010.
[13] A. Burns et al., “SHIMMERT M —A wireless sensor platform for noninvasive biomedical research,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1527–1534,
Sep. 2010.
[14] Y. Lee et al., “Wearable EDA sensor gloves using conducting fabric and
embedded system,” in Proc. World Congr. Med. Phys. Biomed. Eng., 2006,
pp. 883–888.
[15] M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “Decomposition of skin conductance data
by means of nonnegative deconvolution,” Psychophysiol., vol. 47, no. 4,
pp. 647–658, 2010.
[16] D. Bach et al., “An improved algorithm for model-based analysis of evoked
skin conductance responses,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 94, no. 3, pp. 490–497,
2013.
[17] C. Lim et al., “Decomposing skin conductance into tonic and phasic
components,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 97–109, 1997.
[18] D. Alexander et al., “Separating individual skin conductance responses in
a short interstimulus-interval paradigm,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 146,
no. 1, pp. 116–123, 2005.
[19] D. Bach et al., “Dynamic causal modeling of spontaneous fluctuations in
skin conductance,” Psychophysiology, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 252–257, 2011.
[20] D. Bach and K. Friston, “Model–based analysis of skin conductance responses: Towards causal models in psychophysiology,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 15–22, 2013.
[21] M. Elad, Sparse and Redundant Representations: From Theory to Applications in Signal and Image Processing. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2010.
[22] S. Mallat and Z. Zhang, “Matching pursuits with time-frequency dictionaries,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3397–3415, Dec.
1993.
[23] Y. Pati et al., “Orthogonal matching pursuit: Recursive function approximation with applications to wavelet decomposition,” in Proc. 27th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 1993, pp. 40–44.
[24] W. Boucsein, Electrodermal Activity. New York, NY, USA: Plenum Univ.
Press, 1992.
[25] H. Storm et al., “The development of a software program for analyzing spontaneous and externally elicited skin conductance changes in infants and adults,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 111, no. 10, pp. 1889–1898,
2000.
[26] M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “A continuous measure of phasic electrodermal activity,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 190, no. 1, pp. 80–91, 2010.
[27] D. Bach et al., “Dynamic causal modelling of anticipatory skin conductance responses,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 85, pp. 163–170, 2010.
[28] D. Bach et al., “Modelling event-related skin conductance responses,” Int.
J. Psychophysiol., vol. 75, pp. 349–356, 2010.
[29] A. Greco et al., “Electrodermal activity processing: A convex optimization
approach,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Med. Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 2290–
2293.
[30] W. Boucsein et al., “Committee report: Publication recommendations for
electrodermal measurements,” Psychophysiology, vol. 49, pp. 1017–1034,
2012.
[31] G. Davis et al., “Adaptive greedy approximations,” Constructive Approximation, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 57–98, 1997.
[32] S. Chen et al., “Atomic decomposition by basis pursuit,” SIAM J. Sci.
Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 33–61, 1998.
[33] B. Rao and K. Kreutz-Delgado, “An affine scaling methodology for best
basis selection,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 187–200,
Jan. 1999.
[34] B. Rao et al., “Subset selection in noise based on diversity measure minimization,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 760–770, Mar.
2003.
[35] J. Tropp, “Greed is good: Algorithmic results for sparse approximation,”
IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2231–2242, Oct. 2004.
[36] Q. Tan et al.,“Improved simultaneous matching pursuit for multi-lead
ECG data compression,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Measuring Technol. Mechatronics Autom., 2010, vol. 2, pp. 438–441.
[37] L. Polania et al., “Compressed sensing based method for ECG compression,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2011,
pp. 761–764.
[38] L. Polania et al., “Exploiting prior knowledge in compressed sensing
wireless ECG systems,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., May 2014.
DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2325017.

CHASPARI et al.: SPARSE REPRESENTATION OF ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY WITH KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN DICTIONARIES

[39] X. Zhu et al., “Real-time signal estimation from modified short-time
Fourier transform magnitude spectra,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Language Process., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1645–1653, Jul. 2007.
[40] T. Cai and L. Wang, “Orthogonal matching pursuit for sparse signal recovery with noise,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 57, no. 7,
pp. 4680–4688, Jul. 2011.
[41] D. Marquardt, “An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear
parameters,” J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 431–441, 1963.
[42] R. Duda et al., “Multiple discriminant analysis,” in Pattern Classification,
2nd ed., New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2000.
[43] A. Fletcher and S. Rangan, “Orthogonal matching pursuit from noisy
random measurements: A new analysis,” Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., pp. 540–548, 2009.
[44] A. Fletcher, and S. Rangan, “Orthogonal matching pursuit: A Brownian
motion analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1010–
1021, Mar. 2012.
[45] M. Lustig et al., “Sparse MRI: The application of compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging,” Magnetic Resonance Med., vol. 58, no. 6,
pp. 1182–1195, 2007.
[46] R. Pichevar et al., “Auditory-inspired sparse representation of audio
signals,” Speech Commun., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 643–657, 2011.
[47] L. Stein, “Oral care and sensory sensitivities in children with autism
spectrum disorders,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA, 2013.
[48] A. Oppenheim et al., Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1999.
[49] A. Ishchenko and P. Shev’ev, “Automated complex for multiparameter
analysis of the galvanic skin response signal,” Biomed. Eng., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 113–117, 1989.
[50] R. Leijdekkers et al., “CaptureMyEmotion: A mobile app to improve
emotion learning for autistic children using sensors,” in Proc. Int. Symp.
Comput.-Based Med. Syst., 2013, pp. 381–384.
[51] T. Chaspari et al., “A non-homogeneous Poisson process model of skin
conductance responses integrated with observed regulatory behaviors for
Autism intervention,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
Process., 2014, pp. 1611–1615.

Theodora Chaspari (S’12) received the Diploma
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
the National Technical University of Athens, Athina,
Greece, in 2010 and the M.S. degree from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA, 2012, where she is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree.
Since 2010, she has been a Member of the Signal Analysis and Interpretation Laboratory. Her research interests include the area of biomedical signal
processing, speech analysis, and behavioral signal
processing.
Ms. Chaspari received the USC Annenberg Graduate Fellowship in 2010–
2012 and the IEEE Signal Processing Society Travel Grant in 2014.

Andreas Tsiartas (S’10–M’14) was born in Nicosia,
Cyprus, in 1981. He received the B.Sc. degree in electronics and computer engineering from the Technical
University of Crete, Crete, Greece, in 2006, and the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of
Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2012 and 2014,
respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Stanford Research Institute, Menlo Park, CA, USA. His
research interests include speech-to-speech translation, acoustic and language modeling for automatic speech recognition, voice
activity detection and cognitive state representation through multimodal signals.
Dr. Tsiartas received the USC Viterbi School Deans Doctoral Fellowship in
2006 and the USC Department of Electrical Engineering best teaching assistant
awards for the years 2009 and 2010.

971

Leah I. Stein received the B.S. degree in neuroscience and behavioral biology from Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2004, and the M.A. and
Ph.D. degrees in occupational science and occupational therapy from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2006 and 2013,
respectively.
She is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Mrs.
T.H. Chan Division of Occupational Science and
Occupational Therapy at the University of Southern
California. Her research interests include autism, pediatric oncology, the use of wearable sensors to collect physiological data, and
the impact of environmental modifications to reduce distress in children during
healthcare procedures.

Sharon A. Cermak received the B.S. degree in occupational therapy from Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, and the M.S. degree and Ed.D.
degrees from Boston University, Boston, MA, USA,
in occupational therapy and special education,
respectively.
She is currently a Professor of occupational
science and occupational therapy at the Mrs. TH
Chan Division of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, the University of Southern California
(USC), Los Angeles, CA, USA, and is a Professor
of Pediatrics at the Keck School of Medicine at USC. Her research focuses on
autism spectrum disorders, dyspraxia, and sensory processing. He is PI on a
grant from the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research to adapt
sensory environments in the dental clinic to enhance oral care for children with
ASD.
Dr. Cermak is a Charter Member of the AOTF Academy of Research
Academy and a Fulbright Scholar. She is an internationally renowned Scholar,
Researcher, and Clinician with more than 170 publications.

Shrikanth S. Narayanan (S’88–M’95–SM’02–
F’09) received his M.S., Engineer, and Ph.D., degrees
in electrical engineering, from UCLA in 1990, 1992,
and 1995, respectively. From 1995-2000 he was with
AT&T Labs-Research, Florham Park and AT&T Bell
Labs, Murray Hill–first as a Senior Member and later
as a Principal member of its Technical Staff. He is
currently a Professor of engineering at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
where he directs the Signal Analysis and Interpretation Laboratory. He holds appointments as a Professor of Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, Linguistics, and Psychology,
and as the Founding Director of the Ming Hsieh Institute, Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering, USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA. He has published
more than 600 papers and has been granted 16 U.S. patents. His research interests include human-centered signal and information processing and systems
modeling with an interdisciplinary emphasis on speech, audio, language, multimodal and biomedical problems, and applications with direct societal relevance.
Dr. Narayanan is a Fellow of the Acoustical Society of America and the American Association for the Advancement of Science and a member of Tau Beta Pi,
Phi Kappa Phi, and Eta Kappa Nu. He is also an Editor for the Computer Speech
and Language Journal and an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
AFFECTIVE COMPUTING, APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, and the Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. He was also
previously an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS OF SPEECH AND
AUDIO PROCESSING (2000-2004), IEEESIGNAL PROCESSING MAGAZINE (2005–
2008) and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA (2008–2011). He received
of a number of honors, including Best Transactions Paper awards from the IEEE
Signal Processing Society in 2005 (with A. Potamianos) and 2009 (with C. M.
Lee) and selection as an IEEE Signal Processing Society Distinguished Lecturer
for 2010–2011. Papers coauthored with his students have won awards at Interspeech 2014 Cognitive and Physical Load Challenge, Interspeech 2013 Social
Signal Challenge, Interspeech 2012 Speaker Trait Challenge, Interspeech 2011
Speaker State Challenge, Interspeech 2013 and 2010, Interspeech 2009 Emotion Challenge, IEEE DCOSS 2009, IEEE MMSP 2007, IEEE MMSP 2006,
ICASSP 2005, and ICSLP 2002.

