IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

153

A Novel Approach for Toe Off Estimation During
Locomotion and Transitions on Ramps
and Level Ground
Deepak Joshi, Bryson H. Nakamura, and Michael E. Hahn

Abstract—Identification of the toe off event is critical in many
gait applications. Accelerometer threshold-based algorithms lack
adaptability and have not been tested for transitions between locomotion states. We describe a new approach for toe off identification using one accelerometer in over ground and ramp walking,
including transitions. The method uses invariant foot acceleration
features in the segment of gait, where toe off is probable. Wavelet
analysis of foot acceleration is used to derive a unique feature in a
particular frequency band, yielding estimated toe off occurrence.
We tested the new method for five conditions: over ground walking
(W), ramp ascending (RA), ramp descending (RD); transitions between states (W-RA, W-RD). Mean absolute estimation error was
17.4 ± 12.5, 13.8 ± 8.5, and 22.0 ± 16.4 ms for steady states W, RA,
and RD, 20.1 ± 15.5, and 17.1 ± 13.7 ms for transitions W-RA and
W-RD, respectively. Algorithm performance was equivalent across
all pairs of transition and locomotion state except between RA
and RD (p = 0.03), demonstrating adaptability. The db1 wavelet
outperformed db2 across states and transitions (p < 0.01). The
presented algorithm is a simple, robust approach for toe off
detection.
Index Terms—Foot acceleration, over ground, ramp, toe off
(TO), wavelet decomposition.

I. INTRODUCTION
DENTIFICATION of gait events [i.e., initial contact (IC) and
toe off (TO)] is integral to calculation of spatial-temporal gait
parameters used to analyze normal and pathological gait [1]–[5].
TO is the primary event, which marks the transition between
stance and swing phase. For comparison between various gait
cycles phase wise normalization is needed, which requires TO
estimation. Ground reaction force (GRF) data [6] and kinematic
data using motion capture have been the popular choices for
detection of IC and TO during over ground [7] and treadmill
gait [8]. Such measurements are expensive, have limited capture volume, and require specific expertise. Further, they are
restricted to laboratory settings. There are numerous applications like functional electrical stimulation and monitoring of
activity of daily living, where ambulatory monitoring systems
are required. The restrictions of GRF and kinematic data using

I

motion capture in ambulatory monitoring led us to search for an
alternate method of TO detection.
Inertial sensors have been used with some success toward producing a robust gait event detection approach. Many algorithms
have been published for accurate identification of TO in normal
gait [5, 9–14], specifically over ground walking [7], [15] over
ground running [16], [17], treadmill walking [18], and treadmill
running [19]. These algorithms are based on basic thresholds of
the source signal, leading to multiple thresholds, peak detection,
acceleration, deceleration and, hence, are sensitive to walking
speed. However a recently published technique, which accounts
for speed has produced improved accuracy [2]. With recent
advancements in computational methodology, fuzzy logic [20],
multiobjective optimization techniques using genetic algorithms
[21], cross correlation [22] and machine learning [23] have also
been explored. Compared to studies of over ground and treadmill walking and running, there is relatively little reported about
TO detection in ramp locomotion [24], [25]. Furthermore, no
method has been reported for detection of TO during the transition from over ground to ramp locomotion.
As TO marks the transition from stance to swing phase, we
can expect a discontinuity at this transition in the vertical component of acceleration, which should be easily detected by wavelet
decomposition. We explored the orthogonality of acceleration
data to derive features for TO detection. In this paper, we propose a method that uses invariant signal features from foot acceleration to focus on the particular segment of a gait cycle,
where TO is likely to occur. We then perform wavelet analysis
of foot within this data segment to determine a unique feature
in a particular frequency band, yielding an estimate of TO occurrence. We assessed estimation accuracy for over ground and
ramp surface locomotion. We further assessed the adaptability
of the detection algorithm for the gait cycle corresponding to
transition from over ground to ramp locomotion.
II. METHODS
A. Instrumentation and Data Collection

Manuscript received August 12, 2014; revised October 16, 2014; accepted
November 27, 2014. Date of publication December 5, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This work was supported by the Department of
Defense under Grant W81XWH-09-2-0144.
The authors are with the Human Physiology Department, University of
Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403 USA (e-mail: djoshi@uoregon.edu; bnakamur@
uoregon.edu; mhahn@uoregon.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2377749

This study was approved by the university’s Institutional Review Board. All subjects provided written informed consent
prior to involvement in the study. Data were collected from six
subjects (five male and one female; 25.7 ± 5.0 years, 173.0 ±
10.5 cm, 73.6 ± 12.2 kg), while walking over ground (W), ascending ramp (RA), descending ramp (RD), and the transition
between locomotion states (W-RA and W-RD). The ramp was
measured as 24 feet long with inclination of 5°. Foot switches

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

154

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 1. Sensor placement and data collection overview. (a) Foot switch placement. (b) Locomotion mode and the transition cycle. (c) Accelerometer placement. (d) Global coordinate reference and local acceleration components, Az
and Ax are measured acceleration with respect to shown global anterior posterior (AP) and vertical direction. Ay (not shown) is orthogonal to Ax and Az.
Arrow shows positive direction with respect to local coordinate system and g is
the acceleration due to gravity.

were placed below the foot to provide a repeatable reference of
TO [see Fig. 1(a)] as the experiments were conducted in the field,
outside of the laboratory setting. A tri-axial accelerometer (5.7 g,
±6 g output range, ±0.67-V/g sensitivity, 5 Hz- to 1.8-kHz
bandwidth) was placed on the dorsum of the foot as shown in
the Fig. 1(c). With respect to a global coordinate reference of
anterior–posterior (X) and vertical direction (Z), placement of
the accelerometer on the foot led to primary measurement directions as Ax and Az [see Fig. 1(d)], with Ay representing the
medial-lateral direction, orthogonal to Ax and Az. As noted in
Fig. 1(d), Az and Ax were not purely aligned with the global vertical and Z, being dependent upon the orientation of the dorsum
of the foot.
The transitions W-RA and W-RD were defined as the gait
cycle when two heel strikes for over ground and ramp occurred
consecutively (see Fig. 1(b). Data were wirelessly transmitted,
using local transmitters (Noraxon, Scottsdale, AZ, USA) placed
slightly medial to the collection site, to the portable data collection unit. Footswitch and accelerometer data were sampled at a
frequency of 1500 Hz from the data collection unit.
Subjects practiced on the pathway before data were collected
to ensure that they were able to consistently walk at a selfselected speed while making the transitions between locomotion
modes. Data were then collected while each subject performed
three trials walking from over ground to each ramp surface.
B. Data Processing
Foot movement during walking is generally in a low frequency range. To reduce data redundancy, we down sampled
the original data by a factor of 5, resulting in an effective sampling frequency of 300 Hz. The data were further filtered with
a low-pass second-order Butterworth filter with 10 Hz cutoff

Fig. 2. Ax and Ay with foot switch data during ramp walking (ascending,
RA). Three separate cycles are shown from one example subject, representing
those with minimum, maximum, and median stride duration. The Y-axis unit for
acceleration and foot switch are ±g and Volt, respectively and are shown with
respect to time-normalized gait cycle. The marker C corresponds to the region
of toe off for all the three stride cycles showing that it lies between point A
and B exclusively. A similar pattern was observed in W, RD, W-RA, and W-RD
(data not shown). Note: Acceleration in Ay direction is shown with an offset of
+2 g for visualization purposes.

frequency. This cutoff frequency, compared to other options
like 20 and 40 Hz, avoided the local minima and maxima in
the acceleration data while maintaining meaningful information
of source signal to develop the algorithm. To remove the gravity component, the residual acceleration value in all directions
during a period of quiet stance, was removed from the filtered
data.

C. Data Segment Identification
For a complete trial, the gait cycles were extracted using foot
switch data. The gait cycles were labeled as W, RA, RD, WRA, and W-RD based on event markers placed in the dataset.
For every gait cycle, the true TO event was marked using the
foot switch data. From repeated observations, the TO event
was found to be always between two distinct points of the Ax
acceleration data, across the locomotion (W, RA, and RD) and
the transition (W-RA and W-RD) states, shown as point A and
point B in Fig. 2.
Points A and B were identified utilizing mutual information
in the Ax and Ay acceleration data. Specifically, point M is
the maximum Ay acceleration peak in a gait cycle, and is the
closest unique point in proximity to point A, which is the peak
Ax acceleration. Further, point C is the maximum negative Ax
peak prior to point A. We segmented Az acceleration of a gait
cycle between point A and point B to locally search for the TO.
The algorithm for determining the segment between point A
and B for Az acceleration (as just described), is presented as a
flowchart in Fig. 3.

JOSHI et al.: NOVEL APPROACH FOR TOE OFF ESTIMATION DURING LOCOMOTION AND TRANSITIONS ON RAMPS AND LEVEL GROUND

155

Fig. 5. Estimation error compared between db1 and db2 wavelet decomposition. Error values were significantly higher in RD compared to RA (p = 0.03).
∗∗ indicates significant difference between decomposition levels (p < 0.01).

observations, we could consistently estimate the TO corresponding to minimum approximation coefficient at decomposition level 2, which corresponds to frequency band of 0–2.5 Hz
(see Fig. 4).
Fig. 3. Flowchart to illustrate the complete algorithm. The acceleration in
each direction is calibrated by removing the residual gravity component during
a static standing position. Signals are filtered at 10 Hz (low pass, second-order
Butterworth) before applying this algorithm.

E. Estimation Error
Estimation error was first defined as the time difference between the TO detection by foot switch and TO detection by the
proposed algorithm. We took the absolute value of this error
value, and averaged across the subjects to report mean absolute
estimation error. Note, as the effective sampling frequency was
300 Hz, the error of a single sample of time corresponds to
3.3 ms.
III. RESULTS

Fig. 4. Wavelet decomposition (at level 2) for segmented Az signal with
respective frequency bands. The location of TO was estimated as the minimum value of approximation coefficient at decomposition level 2 (shown with
blue dot).

D. Wavelet Decomposition
The segmental Az acceleration was decomposed using
Daubechies wavelet family. We sought an invariant feature toward TO detection at the decomposed level. Increasing the
decomposition level decreases the time resolution; however,
it increases the frequency resolution. In this particular case,
as we need to estimate TO as accurately as possible in time,
we limited the decomposition level. We utilized low vanishing
moment family members, db1 and db2 of Daubechies wavelet
family, as the accelerometer data may be visualized as having limited oscillatory behavior (see Fig. 4). Over repeated

The average stride durations for steady state locomotion were
1.08 ± 0.078, 1.07 ± 0.10, and 1.06 ± 0.067 s for W, RA, and
RD, respectively, and 1.07 ± 0.081 and 1.06 ± 0.076 s for
the transition W-RA and W-RD, respectively. No significant
differences were found between any possible pairs of within
or between transition- and steady-state locomotion (paired ttest, α = 0.05). Points A, B, C, and M were detected with 100
percent accuracy utilizing the Ax and Ay acceleration data; no
trial was missed in examining TO due to misidentification of
any instance of points A, B, or C. Hence, the Az acceleration
was segmented correctly in all the trials across all subjects.
Though every event was detected with Az, there were measurable differences between the timing of those events, as assessed
by foot switch data and the proposed detection algorithm. The
mean absolute estimation error using db1 was 17.4 ± 12.5,
13.8 ± 8.5, and 22.0 ± 16.4 ms for steady states W, RA, and
RD, respectively, and 20.1 ± 15.5 and 17.1 ± 13.7 ms for the
transitions W-RA and W-RD, respectively. A matched paired
t-test showed no significant difference of algorithm performance
across any possible pair of within and between transition and
steady state locomotion except between RA and RD (p = 0.03),
shown in Fig. 5. For W-RA and RA the estimated TO was always

156

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ESTIMATION ERROR (MEAN ± STD, MS) USING THE CURRENT ALGORITHM AND OTHER REPORTED APPROACHES
Author
Jasiewicz et al. [12]
Aung et al. [24]
Aung et al. [24]
Sabatini et al. [25]
Current Method

Data

Over ground

Ramp

Transition

Algorithm type

Foot accelerometer
Foot acceleration (simulated + measured)

19 ± 34
18.3 ± 27.0

N/A
N/A

Ankle accelerometer

19.5 ± 27.1

Foot gyroscope
Foot accelerometer

35
17.4 ± 12.5

N/A
5.1 ± 12.1 (smooth)
15.2 ± 41.7 (tactile)
32.5 ± 63.0 (smooth)
21.1 ± 53.1 (tactile)
35
13.8 ± 8.5

Heuristic
Heuristic + Wavelet +
Machine learning
Heuristic + Wavelet +
Machine learning
Heuristic
Heuristic + Wavelet

delayed compared with the true TO detection. The mean absolute estimation error using db2 was 25.6 ± 18.3, 32.5 ± 15.3,
33.2 ± 21.7, 32.5 ± 19.5, and 26.8 ± 16.2 ms compared to
17.4 ± 12.5, 13.8 ± 8.5, 22.0 ± 16.4, 20.1 ± 15.5, and
17.1 ± 13.7 ms using db1 wavelet, for W, RA, RD, W-RA,
and W-RD, respectively. The db1 wavelet performed significantly better than db2 in identifying TO with high accuracy
(p < 0.01). Fig. 5 shows the summary comparison of db1
and db2 wavelet performance across locomotion modes and
transitions.

IV. DISCUSSION
The purpose of this paper was to develop and test a novel
method of TO detection, using accelerometry and wavelet
decomposition, in two different locomotion modes and transitions between modes. Using a single-three-axis accelerometer
resulted in accuracy levels superior to those previously reported
in the literature [12], [25]. For example, Jasiewicz et al. [12]
utilized a heuristic approach with foot acceleration data as input, reporting an error of 19 ± 34 ms in over ground walking
using healthy subjects. This is higher than our estimation error
of 17.4 ± 12.5 ms, with higher variation across the subjects.
However their study involved twenty six subjects (5–79 years)
and the larger variation in estimation may be accounted for in
the large range of ages within their sample. Sabatani et al. [25]
reported an average systematic error of 35 ms, averaged across
ramp and over ground walking, which is nearly two to three
times as large as our estimation errors of 17.4 and 13.8 ms
for over ground and ramp walking, respectively. In more recent work, Aung et al. [24] utilized a wavelet approach and
machine learning for automated detection of instantaneous gait
events, reporting an estimation error of 18.3 ± 27.0 ms, from
eight healthy subjects. Their source of data for TO detection
was from simulated accelerometer data derived from the positions of marker clusters attached to the foot while walking in
a motion analysis laboratory. However, they reported an outstanding reduction in estimation error to 5.1 ± 12.2 ms for ramp
walking when true accelerometer data were used. Our proposed
approach provides equivalent estimation error with less variation across six subjects, in addition to estimating the transitions
between locomotion modes. A summary comparison of our approach to the closest respective literature in terms of sensor type
and placement is presented in Table I.
Removal of the gravity component was done by removing
the residual acceleration, during standing, from the acceleration signal. This works fairly well for walking assuming the

N/A
N/A
20.1 ± 15.5

foot does not rotate by a large magnitude. However, utilizing
a more thorough method for removing the gravity component,
using goniometer to measure foot rotation or employing other
computational methods like those suggested by van Hees et al.
[26], might further enhance the estimation accuracy of this algorithm. The “gold standard” for TO detection in this study
relied on foot switch data, which itself has some inherent error,
due to variations in the size and shape of subjects’ feet. This
can lead to large variation in estimation error across subjects.
It may be necessary to determine any biasing or offset between
the estimations derived from foot switch and GRF plates. This
offset could be further added or subtracted from the estimation
of the proposed algorithm to test it against the GRF true estimation. In future work, it would be good to test this algorithm
in pathological, prosthesis and treadmill gait conditions, which
would help to determine modifications to make the algorithm
more robust in varied applications. Further, the algorithm could
be extended to heel strike detection for complete detection of
spatio-temporal gait parameters.
The nonsignificant difference between mean absolute estimate errors across all locomotion types and transitions shows
that the new approach is robust and adaptable for different terrains and transitions. The better performance of db1 over db2
wavelet decomposition is likely due to less oscillatory behavior
during the data segment where TO occurs. In some of the trials the algorithm resulted in perfectly accurate TO estimation
(estimation error = 0).
V. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the findings of this study lead us to observe
that the combination of signal processing, and a heuristic approach is better than a heuristic approach alone at identifying
TO using accelerometry data. This may be due to the fact that
heuristic approaches are generally subjective, while signal processing approaches are data driven and, hence, more adaptive
to signal source. A fusion of approaches can capture the advantages of both, leading to high accuracy, as well as reduction in
computation time. This may be effective in real-time applications, where TO has to be anticipated prior to actual TO with
high accuracy, such as the case of critical damping of powered
prostheses, which must be controlled for swing phase.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the assistance of D. Jones
and E. Deming during data collection and processing.

JOSHI et al.: NOVEL APPROACH FOR TOE OFF ESTIMATION DURING LOCOMOTION AND TRANSITIONS ON RAMPS AND LEVEL GROUND

REFERENCES
[1] A. Bregou Bourgeois, B. Mariani, K. Aminian, P. Y. Zambelli, and C. J.
Newman, “Spatio-temporal gait analysis in children with cerebral palsy
using, foot-worn inertial sensors,” Gait Posture, vol. 39, pp. 436–442,
2014.
[2] D. A. Bruening and S. T. Ridge, “Automated event detection algorithms
in pathological gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 39, pp. 472–477, 2014.
[3] E. Desailly, Y. Daniel, P. Sardain, and P. Lacouture, “Foot contact event
detection using kinematic data in cerebral palsy children and normal adults
gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 29, pp. 76–80, Jan. 2009.
[4] B. Mariani, M. C. Jimenez, F. J. Vingerhoets, and K. Aminian, “Onshoe wearable sensors for gait and turning assessment of patients
with Parkinson’s disease,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 1,
pp. 155–158, Jan. 2013.
[5] R. W. Selles, M. A. Formanoy, J. B. Bussmann, P. J. Janssens, and
H. J. Stam, “Automated estimation of initial and terminal contact timing
using accelerometers; development and validation in transtibial amputees
and controls,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 81–88, Mar. 2005.
[6] Y. H. Chang, H. W. Huang, C. M. Hamerski, and R. Kram, “The independent effects of gravity and inertia on running mechanics,” J. Exp. Biol.,
vol. 203, pp. 229–238, Jan. 2000.
[7] A. Hreljac and R. N. Marshall, “Algorithms to determine event timing during normal walking using kinematic data,” J. Biomech., vol. 33,
pp. 783–786, Jun. 2000.
[8] J. K. De Witt, “Determination of toe-off event time during treadmill locomotion using kinematic data,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, pp. 3067–3069,
Nov. 16, 2010.
[9] A. R. De Asha, M. A. Robinson, and G. J. Barton, “A marker based
kinematic method of identifying initial contact during gait suitable for
use in real-time visual feedback applications,” Gait Posture, vol. 36,
pp. 650–652, Jul. 2012.
[10] S. Ghoussayni, C. Stevens, S. Durham, and D. Ewins, “Assessment and
validation of a simple automated method for the detection of gait events
and intervals,” Gait Posture, vol. 20, pp. 266–272, Dec. 2004.
[11] B.-J. Hsue, F. Miller, F.-C. Su, J. Henley, and C. Church, “Gait timing
event determination using kinematic data for the toe walking children with
cerebral palsy,” J. Biomech., vol. 40, p. S529, 2007.
[12] J. M. Jasiewicz, J. H. Allum, J. W. Middleton, A. Barriskill, P. Condie,
B. Purcell, and R. C. T. Li, “Gait event detection using linear accelerometers or angular velocity transducers in able-bodied and spinal-cord injured
individuals,” Gait Posture, vol. 24, pp. 502–509, Dec. 2006.
[13] J.-D.-J. Salazar-Torres, “Validity of an automated gait event detection
algorithm in children with cerebral palsy and non-impaired children,”
Gait Posture, vol. 24, pp. 130–131, 2006.
[14] W. Zijlstra and A. L. Hof, “Assessment of spatio-temporal gait parameters
from trunk accelerations during human walking,” Gait Posture, vol. 18,
pp. 1–10, Oct. 2003.
[15] C. M. O’Connor, S. K. Thorpe, M. J. O’Malley, and C. L. Vaughan,
“Automatic detection of gait events using kinematic data,” Gait Posture,
vol. 25, pp. 469–474, Mar. 2007.
[16] A. Hreljac and N. Stergiou, “Phase determination during normal running
using kinematic data,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 38, pp. 503–506,
Sep. 2000.
[17] A. Maiwald, T. Sterzing, T. A. Mayer, and T. L. Milani, “Detecting
gait events in running from kinematic data,” presented at the Int. Soc.
Biomech., Cape Town, South Africa, 2009.
[18] J. A. Zeni, Jr., J. G. Richards, and J. S. Higginson, “Two simple methods
for determining gait events during treadmill and overground walking using
kinematic data,” Gait Posture, vol. 27, pp. 710–714, May 2008.
[19] J. Leitch, J. Stebbins, G. Paolini, and A. B. Zavatsky, “Identifying gait
events without a force plate during running: A comparison of methods,”
Gait Posture, vol. 33, pp. 130–132, Jan. 2011.
[20] C. M. Senanayake and S. M. Senanayake, “Computational intelligent
gait-phase detection system to identify pathological gait,” IEEE Trans Inf.
Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1173–1179, Sep. 2010.

157

[21] E. Guenterberg, A. Y. Yang, H. Ghasemzadeh, R. Jafari, R. Bajcsy, and
S. S. Sastry, “A method for extracting temporal parameters based on
hidden Markov models in body sensor networks with inertial sensors,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1019–1030,
Nov. 2009.
[22] C. C. Yang, Y. L. Hsu, K. S. Shih, and J. M. Lu, “Real-time gait cycle
parameter recognition using a wearable accelerometry system,” Sensors,
vol. 11, pp. 7314–7326, 2011.
[23] R. Williamson and B. J. Andrews, “Gait event detection for FES using
accelerometers and supervised machine learning,” IEEE Trans Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 312–319, Sep. 2000.
[24] M. S. Aung, S. B. Thies, L. P. Kenney, D. Howard, R. W. Selles,
A. H. Findlow, and J. Y. Goulermas, “Automated detection of instantaneous gait events using time frequency analysis and manifold embedding,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 908–916,
Nov. 2013.
[25] A. M. Sabatini, C. Martelloni, S. Scapellato, and F. Cavallo, “Assessment
of walking features from foot inertial sensing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 486–494, Mar. 2005.
[26] V. T. van Hees, L. Gorzelniak, E. C. D. Leon, M. Eder, M. Pias, S. Taherian,
and U. Ekelund, F. Renström, P. W. Franks, A. Horsch, and S. Brage,
“Separating movement and gravity components in an acceleration signal
and implications for the assessment of human daily physical activity,”
PLoS One, vol. 8, p. e61691, 2013.

Deepak Joshi received the B.S. degree from Garhwal
University, Srinagar, India, the M.S. degree from the
Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal, India, and the Ph.D. degree from the
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Delhi, India.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Human Physiology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.

Bryson H. Nakamura received the B.S. degree in
exercise science from the University of Puget Sound,
Tacoma, WA, USA, and the M.S. degree in human physiology from the University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Human
Physiology.

Michael E. Hahn received the B.S. degree from Colorado Mesa University, Grand Junction, CO, USA,
the M.S. degree from Iowa State University, Ames,
IA, USA, and the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the
Department of Human Physiology, University of
Oregon.

