424

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

A Predictive Model for Personalized Therapeutic
Interventions in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer
Nelofar Kureshi, Syed Sibte Raza Abidi, and Christian Blouin

Abstract—Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) constitutes the
most common type of lung cancer and is frequently diagnosed at
advanced stages. Clinical studies have shown that molecular targeted therapies increase survival and improve quality of life in
patients. Nevertheless, the realization of personalized therapies for
NSCLC faces a number of challenges including the integration of
clinical and genetic data and a lack of clinical decision support tools
to assist physicians with patient selection. To address this problem,
we used frequent pattern mining to establish the relationships of
patient characteristics and tumor response in advanced NSCLC.
Univariate analysis determined that smoking status, histology, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, and targeted
drug were significantly associated with response to targeted therapy. We applied four classifiers to predict treatment outcome from
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Overall, the highest classification
accuracy was 76.56% and the area under the curve was 0.76. The
decision tree used a combination of EGFR mutations, histology,
and smoking status to predict tumor response and the output was
both easily understandable and in keeping with current knowledge.
Our findings suggest that support vector machines and decision
trees are a promising approach for clinical decision support in the
patient selection for targeted therapy in advanced NSCLC.
Index Terms—Decision support, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), personalized
medicine.

I. INTRODUCTION
CIENTIFIC advances since the completion of the human
genome project have confirmed that the genetic composition of individual humans has a significant role to play in predisposition to common diseases and therapeutic interventions.
The traditional medicine model has relied on best practices
emerging from large population studies and dictates a one-sizefits-all approach [1]. Although synthesized evidence is essential
to demonstrate the overall safety and efficacy of medical approaches, it falls short in explaining the individual variations
that exist among patients. Recent advances in genome-wide association studies have revolutionized the practice of medicine,
causing a shift to a patient-centered model [2] and offering tailored diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. The translation of
genetic and genomic data into the knowledge of patient care for

S

Manuscript received June 27, 2014; revised October 10, 2014; accepted
November 20, 2014. Date of publication December 4, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This work was supported in part by NSERC
Discovery Grant and CIHR Catalyst Grant.
N. Kureshi is with the NICHE Research Group, Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada (e-mail: nelofar.
kureshi@dal.ca).
S. S. R Abidi is with the NICHE Research Group, Faculty of Computer
Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax NS B3H 4R2, Canada (e-mail: sraza@
cs.dal.ca)
C. Blouin is with Faculty of Computer Science and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2,
Canada (e-mail: cblouin@cs.dal.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2377517

prevention, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment has introduced
a new paradigm for healthcare: personalized medicine.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is an example of a
disease where personalized medicine has shown tremendous
progress. NSCLC comprises 80–90% of all diagnosed lung
cancers [3] and approximately two-thirds of patients are not
diagnosed until the late stages of the disease, limiting the role
of surgical resection as a treatment option. The discovery of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a key component in
the epidermal growth factor signaling pathway, advanced our
understanding of the molecular basis of lung cancer. In an attempt to target this molecule, molecules that compete with ATP
binding to the tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR were tested and
developed [4]. Currently, gefitinib (Iressa, AstraZeneca) and
erlotinib (Tarceva, Roche) are the two EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) that have been approved for use in clinical
practice [5]. Patients with somatic mutations in exons 18–21 of
the tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR show marked response to
gefitinib and erlotinib [6], [7].
Clinical practice guidelines for NSCLC recommend EGFR
mutation testing prior to treatment with EGFR-TKIs [8]. Unfortunately, most NSCLC patients are diagnosed with advanced
disease and their histologic specimens are often insufficient for
routine molecular profiling. In this patient population, clinical
predictors continue to be an important part of treatment selection
with EGFR-TKIs. As such, a comprehensive analysis of multiple risk factors is critical for personalized health planning and
predictive modeling approaches that appraise all forms of potentially meaningful information are deemed likely to produce
informed treatment decisions.
Predictive models that combine both clinical and molecular
patient information have been successfully developed in many
areas of oncology including breast cancer [9], large B-cell
lymphoma [10], and prostate cancer [11]. In lung cancer, mixed
models that combine multifactorial features have been shown to
provide superior prognostic benefit [12], [13]. A small number
of composite predictive models that combine anatomical, clinical, and molecular factors have been developed specifically for
NSCLC. Lopez et al. developed a prognostic survival model for
early stage NSCLC using a supervised learning classification
algorithm and demonstrated that the prognostic discrimination
of integrated models surpasses that of individual risk factors
[14]. Additionally, Spira et al. constructed a gene expression
biomarker model to predict lung cancer in smokers and then
tested it in combination with clinical information, suggesting
that an integrated model provided superior specificity for
diagnosis [15].
The objective of this study was to investigate the influence of a combination of factors—i.e., clinical predictors,

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KURESHI et al.: PREDICTIVE MODEL FOR PERSONALIZED THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS IN NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER

environmental risk factors, and EGFR mutation status—to predict tumor response to EGFR-TKI therapy in patients with advanced NSCLC. We developed a proof of concept data-driven
prediction model to assist in personalizing treatment and patient
selection in advanced NSCLC. In this paper, we present a datadriven prediction model, developed by applying two data mining methods—i.e., association rule mining and decision trees
to predict a patient’s response to EGFR-TKI therapy. Given the
scarcity of patient data available for such a study, we formulated a novel data curation methodology to derive data from
a multitude of secondary sources. We applied association rule
mining to validate the inherent relationships between patient
characteristics and tumor response patterns as reported in the
literature. Decision tree classifiers were then used to develop a
visually interpretable prediction model that combined clinicopathological data and EGFR mutation status to categorize patients’ responsiveness to EGFR-TKI therapy. Despite the rather
small dataset, our decision tree based prediction model is able
to produce meaningful and useful predictions with an accuracy
of 75%.
Our study presents a unique and interesting approach to develop a prediction model based on both clinical and genetic
characteristics for predicting optimal treatments for NSCLC
with EGFR-TKIs. In the context of personalized health, we have
contributed as follows: 1) despite challenges in the procurement
of patient data, we have shown the utility and application of secondary data for predictive modeling; and 2) we demonstrated
the application of a data mining decision tree algorithm to generate a prediction model that health professionals can readily
visualize, interpret, validate, and objectively apply to evaluate
EGFR-TKI response in advanced NSCLC.
II. METHODS
The availability of a rich patient data resource to conduct such
a study is always a major challenge. Therefore, in this study, we
explored and used patient data from secondary sources. Although potential databases were identified, a closer examination revealed that very few stored the attributes of interest to this
study (age, gender, histology, EGFR mutation status, EGFR TKI
therapy, and objective response) and were publically available.
Thus, we took an innovative approach of drawing upon multiple freely available data sources to construct a research dataset
containing attributes for patient demographics, smoking history, NSCLC histology, EGFR mutation, EGFR-TKI treatment,
and clinical response to targeted therapy. An evidence-based
approach was used to determine the predictors of response to
EGFR TKIs [6].
A. Data Curation
Sources for data curation included PubMed, Catalogue of
somatic mutations in cancer (COSMIC) [16], and EGFR Mutations database (SM-EGFR-DB) [17]. MeSH terms (“Carcinoma,
Non-small-Cell Lung” AND “Receptor, Epidermal Growth Factor”) were used to search for case series, case reports, and
research publications among the years 2000–2012. Only articles reporting individual-level patient data on human subjects
were selected. The bibliographies of these articles also pointed

425

TABLE I
PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
Attributes
Gender
Male
Female
Smoking status
Current
Former
Never
Histology
AD
BAC
LC
SCC
Other
EGFR status
Mutated
Wildtype
Drug
Erlotinib
Gefitinib
Either
Response
Responder
Non-responder

N

%

143
212

40.28
59.72

34
145
176

9.58
40.85
49.58

281
21
10
21
22

79.15
5.92
2.82
5.92
6.20

260
95

73.24
26.76

72
226
57

20.28
63.66
16.06

210
145

59.15
40.85

Abbreviations: AD, adenocarcinoma; BAC, bronchoalveolar carcinoma, LC, large cell
carcinoma; SCC, squamous cellcarcinoma.

to relevant literature containing patient-level data. Studies reporting acquired EGFR-TKI resistance treatment with secondgeneration EGFR-TKIs were excluded. This search resulted in
the identification of 1962 papers from PubMed, 4681 unique
mutated samples (each associated with a PubMed ID) from
the COSMIC database, and 167 articles from SM-EGFR-DB.
After screening for inclusion criteria and removal of duplicate
studies, 34 articles and 14 case reports were selected for data
extraction.
Our approach for manual curation and structuring of relevant
data from research articles and case reports was as follows: 34 research articles were selected based on the inclusion criteria. For
each research article, we reviewed the study design, methods, interventions, and outcomes. Candidate articles reported attributes
of demographics, smoking status, diagnosis, EGFR mutations,
and response to EGFR-TKI therapy for selected study subjects
in the form of tables or supplementary files. Pertinent data were
extracted from these tables and combined. Some authors reported patients and rare mutations in multiple papers and care
was taken to delete duplicate entries for individual cases.
We identified 14 case reports pertaining to NSCLC and
EGFR-TKI treatment response. These clinical narratives each
presented a detailed account of patient history, investigations,
treatment, and outcome. Through a careful examination of the
free text for each case report, we identified the key attributes of
interest that were scattered through the report. The aggregation
of attributes from individual case reports comprised a single
data record. Data extracted from article and case reports were
pooled to create the final working dataset. Overall, 355 cases
were extracted from 34 research articles and 14 case reports (see
Table I), where each case was represented by seven attributes
(age, gender, smoking status, diagnosis, drug, EGFR mutation,
and tumor response).

426

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Most studies reported treatment response as complete response (CR), partial response (PR), stable disease (SD) or progressive disease (PD) as defined by the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST) [18]. If the study did not specify
the use of RECIST and response was classified using terms
such as partial regression, complete regression, partial remission, complete remission, major response or minor response,
it was labeled miscellaneous response (MR). Subsequently, a
binary outcome using the multiclass outcome was constructed,
where the original response attributes were recoded into two
classes. The attributes were categorized such that CR, PR, and
MR acquired the label “responder,” whereas SD and PD were
labeled “nonresponder.”
The original attribute of EGFR mutation status included 70
distinct mutations, some of which are rare and, thus, occurred
infrequently in the dataset. Several authors have studied mutations and their relationship to EGFR-TKI response according
to the mutation’s physical location in the EGFR gene sequence
(exon 18–21), type of mutation (point mutation, insertion, deletion, or duplication), and complexity (single mutation, double
mutation [19], classical mutation or complex mutation [20]).
Using this domain knowledge, a new attribute was constructed
from the existing attribute of EGFR mutation [21]. This was intended to improve the representation of the problem and aimed
to facilitate the discernment of patterns that may otherwise have
been difficult to recognize.
B. Association Rule Discovery
Given that the data for this study were derived from secondary
sources, prior to developing the prediction model we needed to
objectively validate the generated study dataset. We applied association rule mining to identify inherent associations between
patient characteristics and tumor responses within the generated study dataset. Frequent associations were then compared
with previously well-understood patterns and trends in order
to validate the study dataset. Various authors [22]–[24] have
reported the success of using frequent patterns (or association
rules), expressed as IF–THEN rules, in medical databases to
confirm previous biomedical knowledge and to discover novel
associations between variables.
We applied the constrained association rule learning method,
where the consequent was limited to include only tumor response as the intent was to detect tumor response patterns. We
used the association measures of confidence and lift that indicate
the reliability and relevance of an association rule to establish
the efficacy of a “discovered” association rule.
To derive the association rules, the upper bound minimum
support was set to 100% and the lower bound to 10%. Initially,
the confidence was set to 90% and incrementally dropped by
10% until constrained rules were obtained.
C. Predictive Modeling
Predictive models to predict the tumor response to erlotinib or
gefitinib, at individual patient level, were developed using support vector machine and decision tree classifiers. Patients were
divided into responder and nonresponder groups. Student’s t-test

was used to compare ages between the two groups. Univariate
analysis comparing clinical characteristics and EGFR mutation
status was performed using Pearson’s chi-square or Fischer’s
exact test, where appropriate.
A feature vector was constructed informed by the results of
the univariate analysis, where tumor response was selected as the
outcome of interest. Data were divided into a training set with
291 instances and a test set with 64 instances. Next, attribute
selection was performed to determine the subset of features that
were highly correlated with the class while having low intercorrelation. Finally, classification algorithms were employed to
predict tumor response to targeted therapy in advanced NSCLC.
Classifier performance was evaluated using the metrics of accuracy, error, precision, recall, and the area under the curve (AUC).
Output interpretability of the decision tree was assessed as the
qualitative performance criteria.
All association-rule mining and classification algorithms
were implemented using the Waikato environment for knowledge analysis (WEKA) [25] and the R Project for Statistical
Computing (http://www.r-project.org/).
III. RESULTS
A. Description of Dataset
The study sample comprised 143 (40%) males and 212 (60%)
females with a mean age was 60 ± 12.03 years. The majority
of cases were nonsmokers; 50% patients reported never smoking, 40% were former smokers, and 10% were current smokers. Eleven histologies for NSCLC were documented; of these,
adenocarcinoma (AD) (79%), squamous cell carcinoma (SSC)
(6%), bronchoalveolar carcinoma (BAC) (6%), and large cell
carcinoma (3%) were the most common histologies recorded.
The dataset included 70 distinct EGFR mutations spanning
exons 18, 19, 20, and 21. These included point mutations, insertions, deletions, duplications, classical mutations, and complex
mutations. Eight EGFR classes were constructed from the existing EGFR mutations, in addition to wild-type status. In general,
a complex mutation represented point mutations from two different exons in a single patient. For example, exon 20/exon 21
complex mutations include “exon 20 R776G + exon 21 L858R,”
“exon 20 G779S + exon 21 L858R,” and “exon 20 R776H +
exon 21 L858R.” T790M complex mutations included the exon
20 T790M point mutation in combination with another EGFR
mutation. A classical complex mutation was defined as exon
19 deletion and exon 21 L858R point mutation coexisting. The
term double mutation denoted two different point mutations on
the same exon of EGFR. If a mutation could not be grouped into
the aforementioned classes, it was made into its own class. For
example, the commonly occurring L858R mutation, occurred
independent of any grouping.
In our study sample, 92% of patients with EGFR exon 20
insertions/deletions/duplications (n = 12) and 75% of EGFR
wild-type patients (n = 95), were nonresponders to EGFR TKIs
(see Fig. 1). Furthermore, 86% of patients harboring classical
complex mutations (n = 14) and 92% of subjects with exon
19 nonLREA deletions (n = 36) were responders to targeted
therapy with erlotinib or gefitinib. L858R was observed in 68

KURESHI et al.: PREDICTIVE MODEL FOR PERSONALIZED THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS IN NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER

427

Fig. 1. Distribution of EGFR mutation with response. Abbreviations: CCM, classical complex mutation; CM, complex mutation; E19LREA, exon 19 LREA
deletion; E19NLREA, exon 19 nonLREA deletion; E21D, exon 21 double mutation; E20IDD, exon 20 insertion/deletion/duplication; WT, wildtype; R, responder;
NR, nonresponder.
TABLE II
SELECTED ASSOCIATION RULES FROM APRIORI ALGORITHM

TABLE III
UNIVARIATE ANALYSIS

Antecedent

Consequent

Lift

Confidence

Histology=Adenocarcinoma, EGFR
mutation=Wildtype
EGFR mutation=Wildtype
EGFR mutation=Exon 19 del, E746-A750
Gender=Female, Diagnosis=
Adenocarcinoma, Drug=gefitinib
Age=>49.2, Gender=Female
Smoking=Never,
Histology=Adenocarcinoma
Age=>49.2, Gender=Female,
Smoking=Never,
Histology=Adenocarcinoma

Non-responder

1.93

0.79

Non-responder
Responder
Responder

1.84
1.33
1.06

0.75
0.79
0.63

Responder

1.05

0.62

Responder

1.01

0.60

patients; of these 74% were responders and 26% were nonresponders.
B. Association Rule Mining Results
The association rule mining algorithm discovered 30 association rules with lift values (indicating interestingness) ranging
from 0.9 to 1.93. The largest itemset contained three items.
A selection of six “interesting” rules are shown in Table II.
Twenty-seven rules reported the interaction of only clinical
attributes (age, gender, smoking status, and histology). In
general, females with never smoking status who had been
diagnosed with an AD often achieved a favorable response with
EGFR-TKIs.
Two association rules demonstrated the relationship of only
EGFR mutations with the tumor response to EGFR-TKI therapy. These rules demonstrated that the presence of sensitizing
mutations increase the efficacy of the EGFR-TKI and lead to an
improved response, whereas wildtype status leads to progressive
disease.
The highest lift value corresponded to a rule with a combination of clinical and molecular attributes, illustrating that
the integration of these characteristics is more informative of
treatment response in advanced NSCLC than clinical predictors

Attribute
Age
Gender
Male
Female
Smoking status
Never
Former
Current
Histology
AD
BAC
LCC
SCC
Other
Drug
Erlotinib
Gefitinib
Either
EGFR status
Mutated
Wildtype

Responder

Non-responder

p-value

60.18 ±11.99

60.24 ± 12.21

0.970
0.218

79 (55.24)
131(61.79)

64 (44.76)
81 (38.21)

113 (64.20)
87 (60)
10 (29.41)

63 (35.80)
58 (40)
24 (70.59)

166 (59.07)
19 (90.48)
3 (30)
6 (28.57)
35 (81.40)

115 (40.93)
2 (9.52)
7 (70)
15 (71.43)
8 (18.60)

53 (73.61)
134 (59.29)
23 (40.35)

19 (26.39
92 (40.71)
34 (59.65)

186 (71.54)
24 (25.26)

74 (28.46)
71 (74.74)

0.002

0.0002

0.0006

0.0001

Abbreviations: AD, adenocarcinoma; BAC, bronchoalveolar carcinoma, LC, large cell
carcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma.

alone [26]. The diagnosis of AD is frequently seen in patients
who achieve response to EGFR-TKI therapy. However, when
the antecedent contains the additional information of wildtype
EGFR status with AD histology, there is a drastic change in the
tumor response and the patient is labeled as a nonresponder.
C. Prediction Modeling Results
Prior to developing the prediction models, we performed univariate analysis that identified smoking status, histology, drug,
and EGFR mutation status as significant predictors of tumor
response to EGFR-TKI therapy (see Table III). Further attribute
selection reduced the predictors to smoking status, histology,
and EGFR mutation status. Results of the top four performing
classifiers, support vector machine (SMO), J48 (open source

428

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF CLASSIFIERS
Classifier
SMO
J48
RF
CART

Accuracy

Error

Precision

Recall

AUC

76.56
75.00
75.00
73.44

23.44
25.00
25.00
26.56

0.77
0.76
0.76
0.74

0.77
0.75
0.75
0.73

0.76
0.73
0.72
0.72

Abbreviations: SMO, sequential minimal optimization which is an algorithm for training a support vector classifier; J48, C4.5 classifier in WEKA; RF, random forest; CART,
classification and regression tree.

Java implementation of the C4.5 algorithm), Random Forest,
and classification and regression tree (CART), are reported here.
The classification accuracy of all algorithms was comparable
(see Table IV). SMO had the highest AUC (0.76) and all decision trees had similar AUCs (0.72–0.73). Given the comparable
results of decision trees, we decided to pursue decision trees as
our prediction model since decision trees provide an illustration
of the decision logic that is visually comprehensible. Fig. 2 illustrates a portion of the decision tree generated from the training
data, where EGFR mutation status is the root node. Accuracy
of each decision rule from root to leaf is displayed with individual leaves. Within the most commonly detected mutations
of exon 19, NSCLC histologies differed in their individual responses. AD and BAC were responsive to EGFR-TKI therapy.
However, patients with SCC were nonresponders. In the case
of wildtype status, patients were nonresponders regardless of
histology, with the exception of BAC, which led to a response
from targeted therapy.
IV. DISCUSSION
Sensitizing EGFR mutations are established independent predictors of treatment outcome from EGFR-TKIs and previous
studies have shown that AD histology is associated with higher
likelihood of response to gefitinib or erlotinib. Previous research
has also established that the combination of clinical and genetic
or genomic features has enhanced predictive ability for risk
stratification in lung cancer [27], [28]. In keeping with prior
investigations, our results demonstrate that the combination of
smoking status, tumor tissue histology, and EGFR mutation status can be used to predict treatment outcome from EGFR-TKIs
in advanced NSCLC. Our findings are also consistent with previous research that investigated the importance of combining
clinical and molecular predictors of outcome to identify costeffective patient subgroups for treatment in NSCLC. The authors
from this analysis determined that patients with AD and never
smoker status who had received one prior chemotherapy regimen had the lowest incremental cost-effectiveness ratio. This
demonstrates that the integration of molecular and clinical predictors has the capacity to determine treatment efficacy as well
as treatment cost-effectiveness [29].
We explored the use of decision trees to generate interpretable
classification rules allowing users to understand the underlying decision-making process. Our decision tree illustrates that
EGFR mutation is the most powerful variable in determining

patient response to EGFR-TKIs, with histology being the next
most important discriminating factor. Interestingly, current management guidelines for NSCLC suggest that patient selection
for EGFR mutation testing should be based on tumor histology.
Thus, decision trees were shown as a promising technique for
analyzing clinical and genetic data for patient outcome prediction. We contend that decision trees can optimize and potentially
automate medical decision making for targeted treatment selection.
The model accuracy is comparable to the response rate reported by several phase III trials, which have compared EGFRTKI therapy with chemotherapy for EGFR mutant patients. The
response rate of mutation positive patients receiving erlotinib
was 83% as reported by the OPTIMAL trial [30], whereas the
EURTAC trial showed a response rate of 58% in genotypically selected patients with NSCLC [31]. Recently, a metaanalysis of six trials involving 1021 EGFR mutation-positive
patients with clinical disease stage IIIB–IV reported an overall response rate of 66.6% of EGFR-TKIs [32]. This work is
the first attempt to apply decision tree algorithms to a dataset
that incorporates both clinical and genetic attributes to produce a clear decision tree for the treatment of NSCLC with
EGFR-TKIs.
Another line of work that was pursued in this study was the
curation of the study dataset from publically available patient
data; this involved abstracting the data and then validating the
information captured within the dataset. In this regard, we developed an approach to extract study-related information from
various sources to create a representative sample of advanced
NSCLC, complete with demographics, pathological diagnosis,
and EGFR mutation data. For this study, the data were extracted
manually from the literature and public data repositories, where
we were able to abstract elements essential to describe the characteristics of NSCLC patients: age, gender, smoking status, tumor histology, EGFR mutations, therapeutic intervention, and
tumor response to molecularly targeted therapy. For validating
the dataset, we applied a rule association method to observe the
presence of 1) well-defined patterns; 2) superfluous or irregular
patterns; and 3) new and interesting patterns. Unselected trials
for advanced NSCLC have indicated that clinical characteristics, such as female gender, a history of never smoking, and
the histology of AD were all highly correlated with a favorable
response to erlotinib or gefitinib [33]–[35]. The results of the association rule mining algorithm (a priori) consistently revealed
frequent itemsets that have been previously described from large
randomized controlled trials. Also, the association rules highlighted inherent regularities in the data and the frequency of
attributes occurring together. We noted that EGFR wildtype
status frequently leads to progressive disease after EGFR-TKI
therapy, whereas sensitizing mutations in exon 19 confer increased sensitivity [36]. High lift ratios, indicating relevance
and interestingness, were found in the association rules containing EGFR mutation characteristics or a combination of clinical
and genetic factors. We contend that this is the first attempt
to apply association-based rule learning to explore clinical and
molecular characteristics in NSCLC, and our results indicate the
aptness of frequent pattern mining methods to both identify new

KURESHI et al.: PREDICTIVE MODEL FOR PERSONALIZED THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS IN NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER

429

Fig. 2. Decision tree generated from learning data (Partial tree shown). Abbreviations: E19LREADEL, exon 19 LREA deletion AD, adenocarcinoma; BAC,
bronchoalveolar carcinoma; LC, large cell carcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; R, responder; NR, nonresponder. Number of instances reaching each leaf
with classification accuracy are noted.

associations and to validate the presence of known associations
within the study dataset.
Limitations of this study include the potential omission of rare
patterns and low discriminative capacity of the decision model.
As described previously, the current research dataset was created
from diverse sources, each with a slightly different experimental
approach, DNA sequencing methodology, and assessment of tumor response. The limited sample size (n = 355) included both
common and rare mutations. Pattern mining techniques applied
to validate the data discovered many of the well-established
clinical and molecular associations. However, traditional pattern
mining algorithms are designed to discover interesting patterns
in potentially large datasets. Rare features, including several
insertions, duplications, deletions, and point mutations, had
low-frequency counts and would not have occurred in frequent
itemsets. The highest predictive accuracy of the data-driven decision support model reached 76.56%, implying that a more
extensive training set may improve the overall performance of
this binary classification. Additional clinical features such as
performance status, ethnicity, line of treatment, and additional

genetic mutations may help further explain tumor response to
erlotinib or gefitinib.
Although there is an overwhelming amount of clinical and
genomic data being captured and collected, the data are not
being analyzed in a manner to produce actionable information
[1]. As of yet, this represents lost opportunities for making
improvements to personalized healthcare. The current research
demonstrates a data-driven decision modeling approach for predicting tumor response to targeted therapies in advanced stage
NSCLC. This proof of concept can be extended and further validated using alternative data sources. Longitudinal electronic
health records contain comprehensive patient data, through
which learning models can decipher the complex interaction between clinical and molecular characteristics that predict tumor
response. Alternatively, data warehouses that are not tied to specific institutes or organizations offer increased scope and utility
for mining healthcare data. The predictive ability and reliability
of decision models relies heavily on the quality and volume of
training data; this underlies the importance of data aggregation
initiatives from both public and private provider organizations.

430

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

V. CONCLUSION
The success of personalized medicine will depend on the accurate identification of patients who can benefit from targeted
therapies [37]. This study leverages the research on successful
predictive modeling in NSCLC that has been previously established by several researchers [14], [15], [38]. In this paper,
we demonstrate the development of a decision support model
for patient selection in NSCLC using real-world patient data.
With rapid advances in biomedicine, we expect that ongoing
research efforts will identify new genetic mutations and protein
expression signatures involved in NSCLC. Our decision tree
model provides a framework in which new forms of phenotypic
information and genomic data can be evaluated. This type of
data-driven decision support has the potential to rapidly implement research findings into clinical practice and help healthcare
providers plan and deliver individualized treatment.

REFERENCES
[1] C. C. Bennett, T. W. Doub, and R. Selove, “EHRs connect research and
practice: Where predictive modeling, artificial intelligence, and clinical
decision support intersect,” Health Policy Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 105–
114, Jun. 2012.
[2] L. Chouchane, R. Mamtani, A. Dallol, and J. I. Sheikh, “Personalized
medicine: a patient-centered paradigm,” J. Trans. Med., vol. 9, p. 206,
2011.
[3] S. Navada, P. Lai, A. G. Schwartz, and G. P. Kalemkerian, “Temporal
trends in small cell lung cancer: Analysis of the national surveillance
epidemiology and end-results (SEER) database,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 24,
no. 18, p. 7082, 2006.
[4] R. S. Herbst, M. Fukuoka, and J. Baselga, “Gefitinib—A novel targeted
approach to treating cancer,” Nature Rev. Cancer, vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 956–
965, Dec. 2004.
[5] Z. Zhang, A. L. Stiegler, T. J. Boggon, S. Kobayashi, and B. Halmos,
“EGFR-mutated lung cancer: A paradigm of molecular oncology,” Oncotarget, vol. 1, no. 7, pp. 497–514, Nov. 2010.
[6] J. G. Paez, P. A. Janne, J. C. Lee, S. Tracy, H. Greulich, S. Gabriel,
P. Herman, F. J. Kaye, N. Lindeman, T. J. Boggon, K. Naoki, H. Sasaki,
Y. Fujii, M. J., W. R. Sellers, B. E. Johnson, and M. Meyerson, “EGFR
mutations in lung cancer: Correlation with clinical response to gefitinib
therapy,” Science, vol. 304, no. 5676, pp. 1497–1500, Jun. 2004.
[7] T. J. Lynch, D. W. Bell, R. Sordella, S. Gurubhagavatula, R. A. Okimoto,
B. W. Brannigan, P. L. Harris, S. M. Haserlat, J. G. Supko, F. G. Haluska,
D. N. Louis, D. C. Christiani, J. Settleman, and D. A. Haber, “Activating
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib,” New England J. Med., vol.
350, no. 21, pp. 2129–2139, May 2004.
[8] National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). (2013, Jun. 3).
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines). Non-small cell lung cancer version 2.2013 [Online]. Available:
http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/nscl.pdf
[9] J. Pittman, E. Huang, H. Dressman, C. F. Horng, S. H. Cheng, M. H. Tsou,
C. M. Chen, A. Bild, E. S. Iversen, A. T. Huang, J. R. Nevins, and
M. West, “Integrated modeling of clinical and gene expression information
for personalized prediction of disease outcomes,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA, vol. 101, no. 22, pp. 8431–8436, Jun. 2004.
[10] L. X. Li, “Survival prediction of diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma based on
both clinical and gene expression information,” Bioinformatics, vol. 22,
no. 4, pp. 466–471, Feb. 2006.
[11] A. J. Stephenson, A. Smith, M. W. Kattan, J. Satagopan, V. E. Reuter,
P. T. Scardino, and W. L. Gerald, “Integration of gene expression profiling
and clinical variables to predict prostate carcinoma recurrence after radical
prostatectomy,” Cancer, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 290–298, Jul. 2005.
[12] S. K. Lau, P. C. Boutros, M. Pintilie, F. H. Blackhall, C. Q. Zhu,
D. Strumpf, M. R. Johnston, G. Darling, S. Keshavjee, T. K. Waddell,
N. Liu, D. Lau, L. Z. Penn, F. A. Shepherd, I. Jurisica, S. D. Der, and M.
S. Tsao, “Three-gene prognostic classifier for early-stage non-small-cell
lung cancer,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 25, no. 35, pp. 5562–5569, Dec. 2007.

[13] A. Potti, S. Mukherjee, R. Petersen, H. K. Dressman, A. Bild, J. Koontz,
R. Kratzke, M. A. Watson, M. Kelley, G. S. Ginsburg, M. West, D. H.
Harpole, and J. R. Nevins, “A genomic strategy to refine prognosis in
early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer,” New England J. Med., vol. 355,
no. 6, pp. 570–580, Aug. 2006.
[14] A. Lopez-Encuentra, F. Lopez-Rios, E. Conde, R. Garcia-Lujan,
A. Suarez-Gauthier, N. Manes, G. Renedo, J. L. Duque-Medina,
E. Garcia-Lagarto, R. Rami-Porta, G. Gonzalez-Pont, J. Astudillo-Pombo,
J. L. Mate-Sanz, J. Freixinet, T. Romero-Saavedra, M. Sanchez-Cespedes,
A. Gomez de la Camara, and P. Bronchogenic, and Bronchogenic Carcinoma Cooperative Group of the Spanish Society of Pneumology and
Thoracic Surgery (GCCB-S), “Composite anatomical-clinicalmolecular
prognostic m odel in non-small cell lung cancer,” Eur. Respir. J., vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 136–142, Jan. 2011.
[15] A. Spira, J. E. Beane, V. Shah, K. Steiling, G. Liu, F. Schembri, S. Gilman,
Y. M. Dumas, P. Calner, P. Sebastiani, S. Sridhar, J. Beamis, C. Lamb,
T. Anderson, N. Gerry, J. Keane, M. E. Lenburg, and J. S. Brody, “Airway
epithelial gene expression in the diagnostic evaluation of smokers with
suspect lung cancer,” Nat. Med., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 361–366, Mar. 2007.
[16] Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. (2013, Jun. 2). Catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer (COSMIC) [Online]. Available: http://cancer.
sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/projects/cosmic
[17] (2013, Jun. 2). Somatic mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor
DataBase (SMEGFR-DB), EGFR Mutations Database, 2008. [Online].
Available: http://somaticmutations-egfr.org
[18] E. A. Eisenhauer, P. Therasse, J. Bogaerts, L. H. Schwartz, D. Sargent,
R. Ford, J. Dancey, S. Arbuck, S. Gwyther, M. Mooney, L. Rubinstein,
L. Shankar, L. Dodd, R. Kaplan, D. Lacombe, and J. Verweij, “New
response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: Revised RECIST guideline
(version 1.1),” Eur. J. Cancer, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 228–247, Jan. 2009.
[19] I. Y. Tam, E. L. Leung, V. P. Tin, D. T. Chua, A. D. Sihoe, L. C. Cheng,
L. P. Chung, and M. P. Wong, “Double EGFR mutants containing rare
EGFR mutant types show reduced in vitro response to gefitinib compared
with common activating missense mutations,” Mol. Cancer Ther., vol. 8,
no. 8, pp. 2142–2151, Aug. 2009.
[20] S. G. Wu, Y. L. Chang, Y. C. Hsu, J. Y. Wu, C. H. Yang, C. J. Yu,
M. F. Tsai, J. Y. Shih, and P. C. Yang, “Good response to gefitinib in lung
adenocarcinoma of complex epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations with the classical mutation pattern,” Oncologist, vol. 13, no. 12,
pp. 1276–1284, Dec. 2008.
[21] L. H. Liu and H. Motoda, Feature Extraction, Construction and Selection:
A Data Mining Perspective. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1998.
[22] A. Agrawal and A. Choudhary, “Identifying HotSpots in lung cancer data
using association rule mining,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Data Mining
Workshop, 2011, pp. 995–1002.
[23] C. Ordonez, N. Ezquerra, and C. A. Santana, “Constraining and summarizing association rules in medical data,” Knowl. Inform. Syst., vol. 9,
no. 3, pp. 1–2, 2006.
[24] L. Elfangary and W. A. Atteya, “Mining medical databases using proposed
incremental association rules algorithm (PIA),” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf.
Digital Soc., Sainte Luce, QC, Canada, Feb. 10–15, 2008, pp. 88–92.
[25] I. H. Witten and E. Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools
and Techniques. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2005.
[26] M. S. Tsao, A. Sakurada, J. C. Cutz, C. Q. Zhu, S. Kamel-Reid, J. Squire,
I. Lorimer, T. Zhang, N. Liu, M. Daneshmand, P. Marrano, G. D. Santos,
A. Lagarde, F. Richardson, L. Seymour, M. Whitehead, K. Y. Ding,
J. Pater, and F. A. Shepherd, “Erlotinib in lung cancer—Molecular and
clinical predictors of outcome,” New England J. Med., vol. 353, no. 2, pp.
133–144, Jul. 14, 2005.
[27] E. S. Lee, D. S. Son, S. H. Kim, J. Lee, J. Jo, J. Han, H. Kim, H. J. Lee,
H. Y. Choi, Y. Jung, M. Park, Y. S. Lim, K. Kim, Y. M. Shim,
B. C. Kim, K. Lee, N. Huh, C. Ko, K. Park, J. W. Lee, Y. S. Choi,
and J. Kim, “Prediction of recurrence-free survival in postoperative nonsmall cell lung cancer patients by using an integrated model of clinical
information and gene expression,” Clin. Cancer Res., vol. 14, no. 22,
pp. 7397–7404, Nov. 2008.
[28] K. Shedden, J. M. G. Taylor, S. A. Enkemann, M. S. Tsao, T. J. Yeatman,
W. L. Gerald, S. Eschrich, I. Jurisica, T. J. Giordano, D. E. Misek,
A. C. Chang, C. Q. Zhu, D. Strumpf, S. Hanash, F. A. Shepherd,
K. Ding, L. Seymour, K. Naoki, N. Pennell, B. Weir, R. Verhaak,
C. Ladd-Acosta, T. Golub, M. Gruidl, A. Sharma, J. Szoke, M. Zakowski,
V. Rusch, M. Kris, A. Viale, N. Motoi, W. Travis, B. Conley, V. E. Seshan,
M. Meyerson, R. Kuick, K. K. Dobbin, T. Lively, J. W. Jacobson,
D. G. Beer, and D. S. C. C. Mo, “Gene expression-based survival prediction in lung adenocarcinoma: a multi-site, blinded validation study,”
Nature Med., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 822–827, Aug. 2008.

KURESHI et al.: PREDICTIVE MODEL FOR PERSONALIZED THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS IN NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER

[29] P. A. Bradbury, “Impact of clinical and molecular predictors of benefit from
erlotinib in advanced non-small cell lung cancer on cost-effectiveness,”
J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 26, p. 6531, 2008.
[30] C. Zhou, Y. L. Wu, G. Chen, J. Feng, X. Q. Liu, C. Wang, S. Zhang,
J. Wang, S. Zhou, S. Ren, S. Lu, L. Zhang, C. Hu, C. Hu, Y. Luo,
L. Chen, M. Ye, J. Huang, X. Zhi, Y. Zhang, Q. Xiu, J. Ma, and
C. You, “Erlotinib versus chemotherapy as first-line treatment for patients
with advanced EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (OPTIMAL, CTONG-0802): A multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3
study,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 735–742, 2011.
[31] R. Rosell, E. Carcereny, R. Gervais, A. Vergnenegre, B. Massuti, E. Felip,
R. Palmero, R. Garcia-Gomez, C. Pallares, J. M. Sanchez, R. Porta,
M. Cobo, P. Garrido, F. Longo, T. Moran, A. Insa, F. De Marinis,
R. Corre, I. Bover, A. Illiano, E. Dansin, J. de Castro, M. Milella,
N. Reguart, G. Altavilla, U. Jimenez, M. Provencio, M. A. Moreno,
J. Terrasa, J. ozMuñ-Langa, J. Valdivia, D. Isla, M. Domine, O. Molinier,
J. Mazieres, N. Baize, R. Garcia-Campelo, G. Robinet, D. RodriguezAbreu, G. Lopez-Vivanco, V. Gebbia, L. Ferrera-Delgado, P. Bombaron,
R. Bernabe, A. Bearz, A. Artal, E. Cortesi, C. Rolfo, M. Sanchez-Ronco,
A. Drozdowskyj, C. Queralt, I. de Aguirre, J. L. Ramirez, J. J. Sanchez,
M. A. Molina, M. Taron, and L. Paz-Ares, “Erlotinib versus standard
chemotherapy as first-line treatment for European patients with advanced
EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (EURTAC): A multicentre, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 13,
pp. 239–246, 2012.
[32] G. Gao, S. Ren, A. Li, J. Xu, Q. Xu, C. Su, J. Guo, Q. Deng, and C. Zhou,
“Epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy is
effective as first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
with mutated EGFR: A meta-analysis from six phase III randomized
controlled trials,” Int. J. Cancer, vol. 131, no. 5, pp. E822–E829, 2012.
[33] M. Fukuoka, S. Yano, G. Giaccone, T. Tamura, K. Nakagawa,
J. Y. Douillard, Y. Nishiwaki, J. Vansteenkiste, S. Kudoh, D. Rischin,
R. Eek, T. Horai, K. Noda, I. Takata, E. Smit, S. Averbuch, A. Macleod,
A. Feyereislova, R. P. Dong, and J. Baselga, “Multi-institutional randomized phase II trial of gefitinib for previously treated patients with advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (The IDEAL 1 Trial) [corrected],” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 2237–2246, Jun. 15, 2003.

431

[34] V. A. Miller, M. G. Kris, N. Shah, J. Patel, C. Azzoli, J. Gomez, L. M. Krug,
W. Pao, N. Rizvi, B. Pizzo, L. Tyson, E. Venkatraman, L. Ben-Porat,
N. Memoli, M. Zakowski, V. Rusch, and R. T. Heelan, “Bronchioloalveolar
pathologic subtype and smoking history predict sensitivity to gefitinib in
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 22, no. 6,
pp. 1103–1109, 2004.
[35] F. A. Shepherd, J. Rodrigues Pereira, T. Ciuleanu, E. H. Tan, V. Hirsh,
S. Thongprasert, D. Campos, S. Maoleekoonpiroj, M. Smylie, R. Martins,
M. van Kooten, M. Dediu, B. Findlay, D. Tu, D. Johnston, A. Bezjak,
G. Clark, P. Santabarbara, L. Seymour, and G. National Cancer Institute
of Canada Clinical Trials, “Erlotinib in previously treated non-small-cell
lung cancer,” New England J. Med., vol. 353, no. 2, pp. 123–132, Jul. 14,
2005.
[36] Y. L. Wu, C. Zhou, Y. Cheng, S. Lu, G. Y. Chen, C. Ang, H. H. Yan, S. Ren,
Y. Liu, and J. J. Yang, “Erlotinib as second-line treatment in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer and asymptomatic brain metastases:
A phase II study (CTONG-0803),” Ann. Oncol., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 993–
999, Apr. 2013.
[37] M. A. Hamburg and F. S. Collins, “The path to personalized medicine,”
New England J. Med., vol. 363, no. 4, pp. 301–304, 2010.
[38] J. Beane, P. Sebastiani, T. H. Whitfield, K. Steiling, Y. M. Dumas,
M. E. Lenburg, and A. Spira, “A prediction model for lung cancer diagnosis that integrates genomic and clinical features,” Cancer Prev Res
(Phila), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 56–64, Jun. 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

