IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

1195

Wavelet-Based Regularization for Robust Microwave
Imaging in Medical Applications
Rosa Scapaticci, Member, IEEE, Panagiotis Kosmas, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Lorenzo Crocco∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Microwave imaging (MWI) is an emerging tool for
medical diagnostics, potentially offering unique advantages such
as the capability of providing quantitative images of the inspected
tissues. This involves, however, solving a challenging nonlinear and
ill-posed electromagnetic inverse scattering problem. This paper
presents a robust method for quantitative MWI in medical applications where very little, if any, a priori information on the imaging
scenario is available. This is accomplished by employing a distorted
Born iterative method and a regularization by projection technique, which reconstructs the tissue parameters using a wavelet
basis expansion to represent the unknown contrast. This approach
is suited for any microwave medical imaging application where
the requirement for increased resolution dictates the use of higher
frequency data and, consequently, a robust regularization strategy. To demonstrate the robustness of the proposed approach, this
paper presents reconstructions of highly heterogeneous anatomically realistic numerical breast phantoms in a canonical 2-D
configuration.
Index Terms—Distorted Born inversion method (DBIM), electromagnetic scattering inverse problem, medical imaging, microwave imaging (MWI), wavelet transform.

I. INTRODUCTION
UANTITATIVE microwave imaging (MWI) aims at retrieving the unknown features of a target from processing
measured electromagnetic (EM) field data. MWI is relevant
to many applications, ranging from subsurface prospecting to
biomedical monitoring, and requires the solution of a nonlinear and ill-posed inverse scattering problem [1]. In medical
imaging, microwave tomography has made significant progress
toward clinical applications [2]. Initial clinical results have already been reported in the literature for microwave breast cancer
detection [3], [4], which has arguably been the driving application for the development of both radar-based and EM inverse
scattering approaches [5].

Q

Manuscript received June 13, 2014; revised October 2, 2014 and October
31, 2014; accepted December 4, 2014. Date of publication December 18, 2014;
date of current version March 17, 2015. This work was initiated during Rosa
Scapaticci’s visit at King’s College London, which was supported by the COST
action IC1102 through a Short Term Scientific Mission Grant. The work was
developed further under the framework of COST Action TD1301, MiMed.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
R. Scapaticci is with theNational Research Council of Italy—Institute for
Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment.
P. Kosmas is with theSchool of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, King’s
College London, London.
∗ L. Crocco is with theNational Research Council of Italy—Institute for Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment (CNR-IREA), 80124 Napoli, Italy
(e-mail: crocco.l@irea.cnr.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2381270

Iterative local optimization methods such as the
Gauss–Newton (GN) algorithm are widely used to tackle EM
inverse scattering problems, but their sensitivity to the adopted
“initial guess” can be critical in applications where very little
a priori information may be available, such as medical imaging [6]. In particular, an “initial guess” provides the starting
point for these convex optimization algorithms, and inaccurate
information can lead to false solutions which fit the data but are
completely different from the ground truth [7].
This paper addresses this challenge by proposing a modification of the GN optimization approach, which is implemented
via the distorted Born iterative method (DBIM) [8] and is regularized by a projection of the unknown contrast function on
a wavelet basis. The DBIM requires the computation of the
total field inside the current estimate of the profile, which is
updated at each iteration. Recent advances in highly efficient
forward solvers based on graphic processor units programming
can overcome the heavy computational burden required by this
numerical approach and allow its application to realistic 3-D
EM inverse scattering problems, such as quantitative microwave
breast imaging [9], [10].
Projecting the unknown contrast function into a representation basis is not new in EM inverse scattering; different possibilities have been suggested in biomedical applications, such as
spatial Fourier harmonics [11], Gaussian basis functions [12],
and wavelets [13], [14]. It is evident that the choice of the basis function will have an impact on both the efficiency (related
to the number of nonzero coefficients) and the accuracy of the
representation (i.e., the fidelity of the representation with respect to the actual profile). In light of this fact, the wavelet
decomposition appears to be a suitable choice to tackle the typically heterogeneous scenarios occurring in medical imaging, as
it allows us to represent a given profile with a low number of
nonzero coefficients without a significant loss of resolution (due
to its intrinsic multi-resolution abilities). Moreover, the wavelet
transform can capture information on both the spatial and the
frequency domain, allowing significant wavelet coefficients to
concentrate only in the areas of high variability where higher
resolution is required.
The use of wavelets as the representation basis in EM inverse
scattering has already led to good results in contrast source inversion formulations [13], [14], but the incorporation of this
method within the DBIM algorithm is examined in detail for
the first time. As the DBIM solves a new linear problem at each
iteration, the wavelet representation combined with the selfregularizing properties of the conjugate gradient least-squares
(CGLS) method offers a flexible regularization approach that

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

can be adjusted to take into account various parameters such
as frequency range, number of iterations, residual data errors,
etc. In addition, the proposed wavelet implementation does not
require a fixed number of steps or ad-hoc criteria for the termination of the CGLS iterative process to avoid instabilities, as in
previous implementations of the method [15], [16].
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: after
reviewing the basics of the DBIM in Section II, Section III
introduces the wavelet representation and discusses its effect
on the developed algorithm. Section IV discuss the exploitation
of frequency diversity in our inversion algorithm. Section V
presents results to illustrate the advantages of this approach over
conventional DBIM using anthropomorphic breast phantoms; in
Section VI, we report a robustness analysis of the procedure, and
Section VII offers some final conclusions and discussion.
II. DBIM SCHEME
It is well known that the inverse EM scattering problem is
nonlinear and ill posed. In a DBIM scheme, the nonlinearity of
the inverse scattering problem is tackled through a succession
of linear approximations, where the unknown is the variation
of the contrast function Δχ = ε − εb , which accounts for the
variation between the actual permittivity profile and the one
of an assumed reference “background” scenario. This latter is
iteratively updated, as well as the corresponding background
field inside the domain E b , which approximate the (unknown)
total field E [8] .
Accordingly, denoting with rT and rR the position of the
transmitters and receivers, respectively, the scattering integral
equation within the DBIM approximation is given by1

which involves the minimization of the quadratic cost functional Φ(Δχ) = Lb [Δχ] − ΔE s 2 through an inner iterative
procedure.
This process can be schematically represented with two
nested loops, as in Fig. 1: the “outer” loop implements the linearization of (1) at each DBIM iteration, while the “inner” loop
involves the inverse solution of the resulting linear system. The
stopping rule for the outer loop can be dictated by a (prefixed)
maximum number of given iterations or a stopping criterion
based on the norm of the residual ΔE s . The regularization of
the problem comes into play independently in the inner loop
only. As mentioned above, we implement the solution of the
linear system in the inner loop via a CGLS algorithm and apply
a wavelet-based regularization by projection approach described
in the next section.

A. Use of Wavelets as Basis Representation

V

= L [Δχ]

Schematic representation of the DBIM algorithm.

III. WAVELET-BASED REGULARIZATION IN THE DBIM

ΔE s (rT , rR ) = E(rT , rR ) − E b (rT , rR )

= ω2 μ
Gb (r, rR )Δχ(r)E b (r, rT )dr
b

Fig. 1.

(1)

where ΔE s (rT , rR ) is the scattered electric field due to the
contrast variation Δχ(r) in the volume V with respect to the
current background, and Gb (r, rR ) denotes the dyadic background Green’s function, which represents propagation from
the source located at r ∈ V to the point rR . The resulting linear
integral equation is solved (in the discrete domain) at each iteration of the DBIM algorithm for the contrast function Δχ(r)
and can also be represented with the use of the integral operator
Lb in (1).
The iterative update of the reference background scenario
requires updates of the field E b and the Green’s function Gb
at each iteration, which can be computed numerically from
the forward solution of the scattering equation (1). Conversely,
the inversion of the resulting linear equation represents the inverse solution and provides the estimate of the contrast function, which is used to update the background profile at the
next iteration. This can be performed via a CGLS algorithm,
1 In the following, as well as in next section, the formulation is given for
functions defined over a continuous domain and for the 3-D vectorial problem,
the reduction to the discrete 2-D scalar problem, dealt with in the numerical
examples, being straightforward.

A way to reduce the ill-posedness of an underdetermined linear problem (and possibly reduce its computational complexity)
is to represent the unknown function Δχ through its projection
onto a finite number N of orthogonal basis functions ψn :
Δχ =

N


xn ψn .

(2)

n =1

Under this transformation, the actual unknowns of the inverse
problem are the projection coefficients {xn }N
n =1 .
In this framework, the adopted basis plays a key role, as it has
to be accurate and efficient. Efficiency requires a reduced number of coefficients in the representation, while accuracy involves
a low representation error, which quantifies the mismatch between the actual function and its projection onto the considered
basis. This paper argues that the wavelet basis is a good choice
to accommodate the tradeoff between efficiency and accuracy of
the representation. Indeed, the intrinsic multiresolution feature
of the wavelet transform [17] allows an accurate representation
of the unknown function with a reduced number of coefficients.
In particular, the wavelet transform decomposes a given profile into two sets of coefficients: coarse and detail. The coarse
coefficients account for the profile’s low-frequency content acting as a low-pass filter of the original function, while detail coefficients account for high-frequency content and allow

SCAPATICCI et al.: WAVELET-BASED REGULARIZATION FOR ROBUST MICROWAVE IMAGING IN MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

representing the finer details of the function [17]. As the decomposition level increases, the number of nonzero coefficients is
reduced. These properties motivate an approach that starts from
a high level of decomposition, which is gradually reduced to
retrieve finer details in the image. In practice, this is achieved
by starting from a high-order coarse representation and progressively moving to lower order coarse images to improve
resolution.
B. Wavelet-Based CGLS
The regularization by projection on wavelets comes into play
in the inverse solution. In particular, once the Green function
Gb and the incident field E b have been updated and the current background operator Lb has been constructed (outside the
CGLS), we solve the linear problem, which minimizes the following quadratic cost functional:
Φ(Δχ) = Lb [Δχ] − ΔE s 2 .

(3)

To solve this minimization problem with respect to the
wavelet coefficients, we denote with W the operator which
transforms Δχ into wavelet coefficients and with W −1 the inverse wavelet transforms, which operates on wavelet coefficients
and returns a spatial representation. In this case, the expression
of the cost functional Φ(Δχ) can be rewritten as a function of
x = W (Δχ) as follows:
(4)
Φ(x) = δ(x)2 = δ(x), δ(x)


wherein δ(x) = {Lb W −1 (x) − ΔE s }.
In order to minimize this cost functional via a CGLS method,
one has to find a gradient of the functional and a direction of
descend. To pursue the first goal, it is sufficient to derive the
functional Φ with respect to x, that is,


∂Φ
= δ(x), Lb W −1 (Δx)  + c.c.
∂x
= W {(Lb )+ [δ(x)]}, Δx + c.c.

(5)

wherein + denotes the Hermitian and c.c. the complex conjugate. From (5), it follows that the gradient of Φ with respect to
the wavelet coefficients is
∇Φx = W {(Lb )+ [δ(x)]}.

(6)

In order to find the update direction λ, it is sufficient to calculate the functional Φ(x + λΔx) and find λ which minimizes
it, that is,
F (λ) = Φ(x + λΔx) = aλ2 + bλ + c

(7)

where
a = Lb W −1 (Δx)2


b = 2ReLb W −1 (Δx) , δ(x)
c = δ(x)2 .

1197

CGLS (W-CGLS) is determined by the slope of the residual
R(k) = δ(xk ). In particular, the CGLS loop stops as soon as
R(k − 1) − R(k) ≤ 0.01 (R(1) − R(2)).
IV. HYBRID STRATEGY TO EXPLOIT FREQUENCY DIVERSITY
The use of multifrequency data in MWI can be beneficial in
terms of both robustness and resolution. In particular, frequency
diversity enlarges the ratio of independent data to unknown parameters thereby reducing the occurrence of false solutions [7],
[18]. We hereby discuss our approach to using multifrequency
data within the proposed algorithm.
A popular method for the use of multifrequency data is based
on frequency hopping, where single-frequency (monochromatic) reconstructions are performed successively from low to
high frequencies [19]. This approach has the advantage of being very simple in handling the dispersive behavior of human
tissues. Moreover, the use of low frequencies in the initial inversion stages reduces the nonlinearity of the problem and acts
as a “regularizer” in the later stages of the frequency hopping
approach. The method, however, is computationally expensive
for a DBIM algorithm and may not take full advantage of highfrequency data, as it will be inevitably biased toward the solutions provided at the low frequencies considered initially. In
addition, it is worth recalling that frequency hopping does not
yield an actual enlargement of the data-to-unknown ratio [18].
A second obvious possibility for exploiting multifrequency
data is to simultaneously consider all the available frequencies
[15], [18], [20]–[22]. This entails the necessity of adopting a
proper dispersion model throughout the inversion process, but
also allows increasing the amount of exploited independent data
and therefore pursuing a solution for an enlarged set of unknowns. On the other hand, the presence of high-frequency data
increases the nonlinearity of the problem and thus the need of a
robust regularization method to avoid local minima.
To balance between these two strategies, this study considers
frequency diversity by means of a hybrid approach similar to
[18], in which a good initial guess is initially pursued by inverting monochromatic data followed by simultaneous processing
of multifrequency data. This strategy is perfectly suited with
our wavelet projection approach, which aims at retrieving only
a smooth version of the actual profile at its first steps requiring
the use of lower frequencies. Conversely, the use of higher frequencies is useful to reconstruct higher resolution details after
a good initial guess is obtained. At this stage, the simultaneous
use of different frequencies can take advantage of the enlargement of the essential dimension of the space wherein data are
represented with a beneficial effect on the ratio between data
and unknowns [18].
We implement the multiple-frequency DBIM similar to [12],
[15] by capturing the dependence of the dielectric properties of
human tissues on frequency by a single-pole Debye model

(8)

As can be seen from (7), the functional F (λ) is formally
the equation of a parabola with a minimum represented by its
vertex.
Wavelet coefficients for the next iteration are updates as
xi+1 = xi + λ∇Φx . The stopping rule for this wavelet-based

εr (ω) = ε∞ +

σs
Δε
+
1 + jωτ
jωε0

(9)

where ε∞ , Δε, τ , and σs are the Debye parameters that capture frequency dependence. Lazebnik et al. have shown that
the Debye model in (9) provides an accurate representation of

1198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

the frequency-dependent behavior of the dielectric properties
of breast tissues at microwave frequencies [23]. The relaxation
time τ can be considered known and constant, which allows
a linear model for the three other unknown parameters in (9).
This is a reasonable assumption since τ does not vary extensively across different biological tissues [23], [24].
The multifrequency approach involves solving (1) at multiple
discrete frequencies, say F . To this end, the system of equations at different frequencies are coupled via the Debye model
such that the contrast function Δχ represents the contrast of
the unknown parameters of the model. Since the model parameters take real values, the first step is to separate the real and
imaginary components of each set of equations. Then, the real
and imaginary parts of the contrast are expressed in terms of
the Debye parameters, obtaining the set of equations in (10) as
shown at the bottom of the page.
The vector of unknowns x is constituted by three subvectors x∞ , xΔ , and xσ , which contain the wavelet coefficients
obtained by projecting the contrast functions χ∞ , χΔ , and χσ
of corresponding Debye parameters ε∞ , Δε, and σs . The solution of (10) is formally equivalent to that described above, once
the metrics and the vector of the unknowns have been properly
redefined. In particular, we can use the symbol M to refer to
the matrix on the left-hand side of (10), X for the vector of the
unknowns, and b for the right-hand side of (10) (representing
the data of the problem), so that the equation to be inverted at
each of the DBIM iteration is in the form M W −1 (X) = b.
V. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
To assess the performance of the proposed inversion approach
in microwave medical imaging applications with little a priori
information, we have considered 2-D anthropomorphic breast
phantoms taken from the University of Wisconsin at Madison’s
numerical repository [25]. To construct 2-D phantoms, we have
extracted a slice and performed a resizing of the original grid
so that the actual cell dimension is equal to 2.0 mm. We
consider two breast phantoms belonging to different classes:
⎡
b

⎢ R{L (ω1 )}
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢ 
{Lb (ω1 )}
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢ R{Lb (ω )}
2
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢ 
{Lb (ω2 )}
⎢
⎢
⎢
.
⎢
⎢
.
⎢
⎢
.
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢ R{Lb (ωF )}
⎢
⎢
⎣

{Lb (ωF )}

R{Lb (ω1 )} + ω1 τ 
{Lb (ω1 )}
1 + (ω1 τ )2
b

{L (ω1 )} − ω1 τ R{Lb (ω1 )}
1 + (ω1 τ )2
b
R{L (ω2 )} + ω1 τ 
{Lb (ω2 )}
1 + (ω2 τ )2
b

{L (ω2 )} − ω2 τ R{Lb (ω2 )}
1 + (ω2 τ )2
.
.
.
R{Lb (ωF )} + ωF τ 
{Lb (ωF )}
1 + (ωF τ )2
b

{L (ωF )} − ω1 τ R{Lb (ωF )}
1 + (ωF τ )2

slice s1 = 112 from phantom ID 062204 representing a heterogeneously dense breast and slice s1 = 65 from phantom ID
012304 corresponding to a very dense breast. We assume that
these phantoms are immersed in a lossless coupling medium
having relative permittivity of εb = 18, as suggested in [11].
In practice, mixtures of vegetable oil and water can be used to
achieve these permittivity values with very low losses in the
considered frequency range (1–3 GHz) [26].
The adopted measurement configuration considers 16 filamentary sources surrounding the breast at positions with average distance of approximately 1 cm from the skin layer. This
number of antennas is chosen as a tradeoff between the system’s complexity and the need to gather as much independent
information as possible. According to theoretical considerations
[27], [28], this number suffices to collect all the available information at the lowest frequency of 1 GHz considered here
in a nonredundant way, but corresponds to undersampled data
at the higher frequencies. This motivates our hybrid frequency
diversity approach further, as it allows an “initial guess” reconstruction based on accurately sampled low-frequency data
(at 1 GHz).
We simulate measured data using the finite-difference timedomain method and a uniform grid cell size of 2.0 mm, which
is also used as the forward solver in the inversion process. The
Debye parameters for the various tissues are extracted from
UW-Madison’s repository data [25]. The simulated data have
been corrupted with additive Gaussian noise with SNR of 60
dB relative to the energy of total field, i.e., the field computed
in presence of the phantom. Note that the projection of the
unknown on a representation basis as well as the presence of
noise on data ensure that no “inverse crime” is committed.
In the reconstructions below, the only a priori assumption
used in the initial guess of the DBIM algorithm is the knowledge of the actual shape of the breast. This is a reasonable
assumption for many practical cases, such as in systems where
the breast is hosted into a cup (of course, the presence of such a
cup should then be taken into account in the inversion process)

ω1 ω1−1 
{Lb (ω1 )}

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
ω1 ω1−1 R{Lb (ω1 )} ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
−1
b
ω2 ω2 
{L (ω2 )} ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎡
⎥
x∞
⎥
⎢
ω2 ω2−1 R{Lb (ω2 )} ⎥
−1
⎥ W ⎢ xΔ
⎥
⎣
⎥
.
xσ
⎥
ε0 ω 1
⎥
.
⎥
⎥
.
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
−1
b
ωF ωF 
{L (ω1 )} ⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
−1
b
ωF ωF R{L (ω2 )}

⎡

R{ΔE s (ω1 )}

⎤

⎢
⎥
⎢ 
{ΔE s (ω1 )} ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
R{ΔE
(ω
)}
2
s
⎤ ⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥

{ΔE s (ω2 )} ⎥
⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥
⎥=⎢
⎥
⎦ ⎢
.
⎥
⎢
⎥
.
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
.
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ R{ΔE (ω1 )} ⎥
s
⎣
⎦

{ΔE s (ω1 )}

(10)

SCAPATICCI et al.: WAVELET-BASED REGULARIZATION FOR ROBUST MICROWAVE IMAGING IN MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

Fig. 2. Heterogeneously dense breast. (a) Real part ε and (b) imaginary part
ε of the reference permittivity profile. (c) Real part ε (d) imaginary part ε
recovered from the monochromatic processing at 1 GHz. (e) Real part ε and (f)
imaginary part ε at 3 GHz recovered at the end of the procedure.

or where complementary methods are used to estimate the breast
surface [29]. The starting guess assumes that the actual shape
is filled with homogeneous fatty tissue (ε∞ = 5.76, Δε = 5.51,
and σs = 0.0802 S/m). The Debye parameter τ is fixed for all
breast tissues equal to 17.5 ps. We note that these initial values
are considerably lower than the true average Debye parameters
for these dense breast phantoms, which were required for previous conventional DBIM-CGLS algorithms to converge [15],
[16]. Finally, the inversion scheme constrains the reconstructed
Debye parameters within a reasonable range belonging to breast
tissue suggested by the experimental observations in [23],
i.e., ε∞ ∈ [4.68 − 25], Δε ∈ [3.12 − 52], and σs ∈ [0.0697 −
0.9] S/m.
Based on our frequency diversity strategy, the first step of
the procedure has been carried out by inverting monochromatic
data at a frequency of 1 GHz. In this step, the multiresolution
feature of wavelets has been explored by changing the decomposition level of the Discrete Wavelet Transform throughout
the iterations. In particular, we performed five iterations for a
third-level decomposition, the next five iterations at the sec-

1199

Fig. 3. Very dense breast. (a) Real part ε and (b) imaginary part ε of the
reference permittivity profile. (c) Real part ε and (d) imaginary part ε recovered
from the monochromatic processing at 1 GHz. (e) Real part ε and (f) imaginary
part ε at 3 GHz recovered at the end of the procedure.

TABLE I
RECONSTRUCTION ERROR
f = 1 GHz
RMSE
Heterog. dense breast
Very dense breast

on ε
0.41
0.39

on ε 
0.45
0.38

f = 3 GHz
on ε 
0.88
0.97

on ε
0.28
0.29

on ε 
0.28
0.27

on ε 
0.53
0.50

ond decomposition level, and, finally, five iterations at the first
level of decomposition. Then, the second step has been carried
out by inverting multifrequency data at 11 frequencies evenly
spaced in the range 1–3 GHz. A first level per ten iterations and
a zeroth level (which is equivalent to considering a pixel representation) per 20 iterations have been adopted in this second
step. The mother wavelet adopted during the procedure is the
Daubechies20.
The accuracy of the obtained reconstructions is quantified by
means of the root-mean-square reconstruction error (RMSE):
RMSE =

ε − ε̃2
ε2

(11)

1200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 4. Effect of the assumed average tissue value. Reconstructions of the
permittivity profile of a very dense breast obtained starting from a homogeneous
breast having the average electric properties of fibroglandular tissue. (a) Relative
permittivity and (b) ε .

Fig. 5. Results for different strategies for the use of multifrequency data.
Heterogeneously dense breast—reconstructions of the real part ε (at 3 GHz)
obtained by means of (a) simultaneous multifrequency processing and (b) a
frequency hopping procedure.

ε and ε̃ being the reference complex permittivity and the reconstructed one, respectively.
Moreover, in order to easily connect the reconstruction error
to the “quality” of the achieved result, we also report the RMSE,
computed separately for the real and imaginary parts of the
complex permittivity (which are actually the parameters shown
in next figures).
RMSEε  =

ε − ε̃ 2
ε 2

(12a)

RMSEε  =

ε − ε̃ 2
ε 2

(12b)

ε and ε being the real part and imaginary part of the reference
complex permittivity and ε̃ , ε̃ the reconstructed ones.
The obtained reconstructions of the permittivity profile at
1 GHz (at the end of the first step of the inversion process) and
at 3 GHz (after second step) are shown in Figs. 2 and 3 for the two
phantoms, which clearly show that both the morphology and the
microwave properties of the imaged breast have been accurately
retrieved. Reconstruction errors are reported in Table I. To test
robustness, we have repeated the reconstructions for an initial
breast model filled with a homogeneous fibroglandular tissue
(ε∞ = 14.00, Δε = 30.12, and σs = 0.7 S/m). The resulting
reconstruction for the very dense breast is shown in Fig. 4,
which clearly suggests that the algorithm is robust with respect
to a priori information on the interior of the breast. The reconstruction errors in this case are RMSE= 0.28, RMSEε  = 0.29,
and RMSEε  = 0.58.
VI. ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS
A. Impact of Using Multifrequency Data
To illustrate the advantage of using the proposed hybrid approach for multifrequency data, we have tested the other two
approaches discussed in Section III-C (frequency hopping and
single-step simultaneous multifrequency reconstruction) for the
heterogeneously dense breast phantom of Fig. 2(a) and (b). Corresponding reconstructions of the relative permittivity are shown
in Fig. 5. It is evident that simultaneous multifrequency reconstructions lead to a completely unreliable result. Conversely,
the frequency hopping procedure returns a good reconstruction,

Fig. 6. Effect of the regularization by projection on wavelets. Very dense
breast—reconstructions of the complex permittivity profile without regularization recovered from the monochromatic processing at 1 GHz. (a) Real part ε
and (b) imaginary part ε .

but some finer details lost as suggested also by a slightly
higher reconstruction error (RMSE= 0.28, RMSEε  = 0.29,
RMSEε  = 1.54). The frequency hopping procedure, however,
is much more demanding from a computational point of view,
as it requires to perform F sequential DBIM reconstructions,
with F equal to the number of involved frequencies.
B. Impact of the Regularization by the Projection Approach
As mentioned previously, the proposed wavelet projection’s
regularizing properties increase the robustness of the DBIM algorithm with respect to the initial guess. Indeed, we have tested
the DBIM algorithm using a conventional CGLS implementation with an ad-hoc stopping criterion in the inner loop of Fig. 1
and verified that it does not converge to a meaningful solution
for the “fatty tissue initial guess,” which is considerably lower
than the average properties for these dense breast phantoms.
This is illustrated in Fig. 6 for the very dense breast of Fig. 3(a)
and (b). The reconstruction in this case is completely unreliable
and the procedure is trapped in a false solution even when using
low-frequency data at 1 GHz.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a novel inversion approach for quantitative microwave medical imaging, which employs the wavelet
transform as a means of regularization for the inverse EM

SCAPATICCI et al.: WAVELET-BASED REGULARIZATION FOR ROBUST MICROWAVE IMAGING IN MEDICAL APPLICATIONS

scattering problem encountered in microwave tomography. We
have argued that wavelets allow for an efficient representation
of the unknown contrast, leading to a reduced number of coefficients with minimal information loss. We have presented
an inversion process that exhibits two innovative features: first,
the adoption of a regularization by projection on wavelets in a
DBIM scheme, and second, a hybrid approach in the exploitation
of multifrequency data. We have assessed the algorithm’s performance by reconstructing dense 2-D anthropomorphic breast
phantoms characterized by different percentage of fibroglandular/adipose tissues.
Our results have demonstrated the increased robustness of
our W-CGLS method over traditional CGLS approaches. Moreover, our method does not require any explicit regularization
schemes that can be computationally demanding and compromise resolution. It also offers additional flexibility, as the number
of elements for the representation basis can be reduced for frequencies under 1 GHz and increased as we move toward higher
frequencies. However, in this study, we have considered 1 GHz
as starting point as a tradeoff between spatial resolution of the
first achieved estimate and its reliability.
The computational time needed to achieve a reconstruction
like the ones showed in this paper is about 1 h, running non
optimized codes on a standard computer, having 8-GB RAM
and two 2.17-GHz processors. We are currently extending the
proposed algorithm to a fully 3-D implementation, which will
be presented in future work, and, once optimized, it is expected
to return a reconstruction in the order of some hours, which can
be considered clinically reasonable.
Finally, similar to all other MWI techniques applied to breast
cancer, the ability of a clinical MWI system based on this approach to detect cancerous tissue will depend on the tumor size
and location. In particular, detecting very small tumors would require the use of high-frequency data and a high dynamic range
available by the MWI apparatus. In addition, while dielectric
spectroscopy data in [23] suggest that the contrast of cancerous
to fibroglandular tissue is considerably lower than that of cancerous to adipose tissue, very recent clinical studies [30] have
shown that an increase of the conductivity at lower frequency
(i.e., below 2 GHz) can be considered as a marker of tumor aggressiveness. This suggests that successful tumor detection by
microwave tomography requires accurate quantitative estimation of both the real and imaginary parts of the tissue complex
permittivity, which can be indeed achieved by our method.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Colton and R. Kress, Inverse Acoustic and Electromagnetic Scattering
Theory. 2nd ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1998.
[2] S. Semenov, “Microwave tomography: Review of the progress towards
clinical applications,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, vol. 367, pp. 3021–3042,
2009.
[3] P. M. Meaney et al., “Initial clinical experience with microwave breast
imaging in women with normal mammography,” Acad. Radiol., vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 207–218, Feb. 2007.
[4] Fear et al., “Microwave breast imaging with a monostatic radar-based
system: A study of application to patients, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2119–2128, May 2013.
[5] N. K. Nikolova, “Microwave imaging for breast cancer,” IEEE Microw.
Mag., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 78–94, Dec. 2011.

1201

[6] T. M. Grzegorczyk et al., “Fast 3-D tomographic microwave imaging
for breast cancer detection,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 8,
pp. 1584–1592, Aug. 2012.
[7] T. Isernia et al., “On the local minima in a tomographic imaging technique,” IEEE Trans Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1596–1607,
Jul. 2001.
[8] W. C. Chew and Y. M. Wang, “Reconstruction of two-dimensional permittivity distribution using the distorted Born iterative method,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 218–225, Jun. 1990.
[9] J. D. Shea et al., “Contrast enhanced microwave imaging of breast tumors:
A computational study using 3D realistic numerical phantoms,” Inv. Prob.,
vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1–22, Jun. 2010.
[10] H. Zhou et al., “A breast imaging model using microwaves and a time
domain three dimensional reconstruction method,” Progress Eletromagn.
Res., vol. 93, pp. 57–70, 2009.
[11] I. Catapano et al., “On quantitative microwave tomography of female
breast,” Progr. Electromagn. Res., vol. 97, pp. 75–93, 2009.
[12] D. W. Winters et al., “Three-dimensional microwave breast imaging: Dispersive dielectric properties estimation using patient-specific basis functions,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 969–981, Jul. 2009.
[13] R. Scapaticci et al., “Wavelet-based adaptive multiresolution inversion for
quantitative microwave imaging of breast tissues,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 3717–3726, Aug. 2012.
[14] M. Li et al., “A contrast source inversion in the wavelet domain,” Inverse
Problems, vol. 29, no. 2, p. 025015-1–025015-19, 2013.
[15] J. D. Shea et al., “Three-dimensional microwave imaging of realistic
numerical breast phantoms via a multiple-frequency inverse scattering
technique,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 4210–4226, Aug. 2010.
[16] P. Kosmas et al., “Three-dimensional microwave imaging of realistic
breast phantoms via an inexact Gauss-Newton algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Antennas Propag., Jul. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[17] S. G. Mallat, “A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: The
wavelet representation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 2,
no. 7, pp. 674–693, Jul. 1989.
[18] O. M. Bucci et al., “Inverse scattering problems with multifrequency data:
Reconstruction capabilities and solution strategies,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1749–1756, Jul. 2000.
[19] W. C. Chew and J. H. Lin, “A frequency-hopping approach for microwave
imaging of large inhomogeneous bodies,” IEEE Microw. Guided Wave
Lett., vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 439–441, Dec. 1995.
[20] P. D. Jensen et al., “Utilization of multiple frequencies in 3D nonlinear microwave imaging,” in Proc. 6th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propagation, Prague,
Czech Republic, 2012, pp. 1776–1779.
[21] K. Belkebir et al., “Microwave imaging: Location and shape reconstruction from multifrequency scattering data,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 469–476, Apr. 1997.
[22] A. Fhager et al., “Image reconstruction in microwave tomography using
a dielectric Debye model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 1,
pp. 156–166, Jan. 2012.
[23] M. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave
dielectric properties of normal, benign and malignant breast tissue obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 6093–6115,
2007.
[24] S. Gabriel et al., “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 41, pp. 2271–2293, 1996.
[25] E. Zastrow et al., “Database of 3D grid-based numerical breast phantom for
use in computational electromagnetics simulations,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2792–2800, Dec. 2008.
[26] J. Stang et al., “A preclinical system prototype for focused microwave
thermal therapy of the breast,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 9,
pp. 2431–2438, Sep. 2012.
[27] O. M. Bucci and G. Franceschetti, “On the degrees of freedom of scattered fields,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 918–926,
Jul. 1989.
[28] O. M. Bucci and T. Isernia, “Electromagnetic inverse scattering: Retrievable information and measurement strategies,” Radio Sci., vol. 32, pp.
2123–2138, 1997.
[29] T. C. Williams et al., “Laser surface estimation for microwave breast
imaging systems,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1193–
1199, May 2011.
[30] P. M. Meaney et al., “Microwave open-ended coaxial dielectric probe:
Interpretation of the sensing volume re-visited,” BMC Med. Phys.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1–11, 2014.

1202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Rosa Scapaticci (M’14) was born in Naples, Italy, in
1985. She received the Master’s degree (summa cum
laude) in biomedical engineering from the University
of Naples Federico II, Naples, in March 2010, and
the Ph.D. degree in information engineering from the
“Mediterranea” University of Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy, in May 2014.
She has been a Research Fellow at the Institute of Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment,
National Research Council of Italy (IREA-CNR),
Naples, since December 2013. Her scientific research
interests are mainly focused on the development of innovative approaches for the
solution of electromagnetic scattering problems, particularly in the framework
of biomedical microwave imaging, and therapeutic applications of electromagnetic fields.
Dr. Scapaticci was awarded by IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
Central and Southern Italy Chapter for the Best Student Member Paper in 2013.
She received the Barzilai Award from the Italian Society of Electromagnetics
in September 2014.

Panagiotis Kosmas (SM’13) received the master degree and the doctoral degree in 2002 and 2005, respectively, from the Northeastern University, Boston,
MA, USA.
He joined King’s College London (KCL), London,
U.K., as a Lecturer in 2008 and is currently a Member of KCL’s Centre for Telecommunications within
the Department of Informatics. Prior to his appointment, he held research positions at the Center for
Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems, Boston,
the University of Loughborough, U.K., and the Computational Electromagnetics Group, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.
His expertise in microwave imaging includes radar and tomographic methods,
and he has pioneered the use of time reversal for microwave breast cancer detection. He has more than 50 journal and conference publications on microwave
imaging and related areas. He is also the co-founder of Mediwise Ltd., a U.K.based SME focusing on the use of EM waves for medical applications. Beyond
microwave medical imaging, his research interests include computational electromagnetics with application to other areas of subsurface sensing, antenna
design, and inverse problems theory and techniques.

Lorenzo Crocco (SM’10) was born in Naples, Italy,
in 1971. He received the Laurea degree (summa cum
laude) in electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree in applied electromagnetics from the University
of Naples Federico II, Naples, in 1995 and 2000,
respectively.
Since 2001, he has been a Research Scientist
with the Institute for the Electromagnetic Sensing
of the Environment, National Research Council of
Italy (IREA-CNR), Naples. In 2009–2011, he was
an Adjunct Professor at the Mediterranea University
of Reggio Calabria (Italy), where he currently is a Member of the Board of
Ph.D. advisors. His scientific interests include electromagnetic scattering problems, imaging methods for noninvasive diagnostics, through the wall radar
and ground-penetrating radar, as well as microwave biomedical imaging and
therapeutic uses of electromagnetic fields. With respect to these topics, he
has published more than 60 papers in peer-reviewed international journals,
given keynote talks at international conferences, and lead or actively contributed to Italian and European research projects. Moreover, he has served
as a Guest Editor for international scientific journals. He is currently a Member
of the management committee of COST Action TD1301 on microwave medical
imaging.
Dr. Crocco is a Fellow of the Electromagnetics Academy. He received the
“Barzilai” Award for Young Scientists from the Italian Electromagnetic Society
in 2004 and Young Scientist Awardee at the XXVIII URSI General Assembly in
2005. In 2009, he was awarded as one of the top one-hundred under 40 scientists
of CNR.

