IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

119

Comparison of Three Different Types of Wrist Pulse
Signals by Their Physical Meanings
and Diagnosis Performance
Wangmeng Zuo, Member, IEEE, Peng Wang, and David Zhang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Increasing interest has been focused on computational pulse diagnosis where sensors are developed to acquire pulse
signals, and machine learning techniques are exploited to analyze
health conditions based on the acquired pulse signals. By far, a
number of sensors have been employed for pulse signal acquisition, which can be grouped into three major categories, i.e., pressure, photoelectric, and ultrasonic sensors. To guide the sensor
selection for computational pulse diagnosis, in this paper, we analyze the physical meanings and sensitivities of signals acquired by
these three types of sensors. The dependence and complementarity
of the different sensors are discussed from both the perspective
of cardiovascular fluid dynamics and comparative experiments by
evaluating disease classification performance. Experimental results
indicate that each sensor is more appropriate for the diagnosis of
some specific disease that the changes of physiological factors can
be effectively reflected by the sensor, e.g., ultrasonic sensor for
diabetes and pressure sensor for arteriosclerosis, and improved diagnosis performance can be obtained by combining three types of
signals.
Index Terms—Computational pulse diagnosis, photoelectric
sensor, pressure sensor, pulse signal acquisition, ultrasonic sensor.

I. INTRODUCTION
ULSE diagnosis has played an important role in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and traditional Ayurvedic
medicine for thousands of years [1]–[3]. Generally, the wrist
pulse signals are mainly produced by cardiac contraction and
relaxation and are also affected by the movement of blood and
changes in the vessel diameter, making them effective for analyzing both cardiac and noncardiac diseases.
However, pulse diagnosis is a subjective skill which needs
years of training and practice to master [4]. Moreover, the

P

Manuscript received June 13, 2014; revised October 8, 2014; accepted
November 4, 2014. Date of publication December 10, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This work was supported in part by the General Research Fund from the Hong Kong SAR Government, in part by the
central fund from the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 61271093, Grant 61332011, Grant
61020106004, Grant 61272292, and Grant 61271344, Shenzhen Fundamental
Research Fund (JCYJ20130401152508661), and Key Laboratory of Network
Oriented Intelligent Computation, Shenzhen, China.
W. Zuo and P. Wang are with the Computational Perception and Cognition
Centre, School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: wmzuo@hit.edu.cn; dualblacklagrange@
gmail.com).
D. Zhang is with the Computational Perception and Cognition Centre, School
of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin
150001, China, and also with the Biometrics Research Center, Department
of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong
(e-mail: csdzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2369821

diagnosis result relies on the personal experience of the practitioner. With different practitioners, the diagnosis results may
then be inconsistent. To overcome these limitations, computational pulse diagnosis has been recently studied to objectify and
quantify pulse diagnosis, and researchers have verified the connection of pulse signals with several certain diseases [5]–[12].
During the development of computational pulse diagnosis,
a number of sensors and systems have been developed for acquiring pulse signals. Sorvoja et al. [13] reported a pressure
pulse sensor based on electromechanical film. Kaniusas et al.
[14] used a magnetoelastic skin curvature sensor to design a
mechanical electrocardiography system for nondisturbing measurement of blood pressure signals. Chen et al. [15] presented
a liquid sensor system that measures pulse signals. Wu et al.
[16] proposed an air pressure system that measures pulse signals. Renevey et al. [17] proposed an infrared (IR) pulse detection system. Wang et al. [18] proposed a multichannel pressure
pulse signal acquisition system with a linear subsensor array.
Hu et al. [19] proposed a pulse measurement system based on a
polyvinylidene fluoride pressure sensor array. Zhang and Wang
[20] proposed a photoelectric system that measures pulse signals
on fingers.
Among these systems, the three major types of sensors for
pulse signal acquisition are pressure, photoelectric, and ultrasonic sensors. The pressure sensor is adopted in pulse diagnosis
to imitate the TCM procedure of pulse taking [18], the photoelectric sensor is mainly adopted because it is inexpensive
and easy to make [21], and the ultrasonic sensor is usually
adopted for its robustness to interference [6]. As for pulse diagnosis, pressure signals have been investigated for pulse waveform classification and the diagnosis of cholecystitis, nephrotic
syndrome, and diabetes [18], [22]–[24]. Lee et al. found that
the photoplethysmogram (PPG) variability is related to sympathetic vasomotor activity, and photoelectric signal (i.e., PPG)
had been combined with routine cardiovascular measurements
(i.e., heart rate and mean arterial pressure) for the diagnosis of
low systemic vascular resistance [25]. Finally, ultrasonic signals have been investigated for the diagnosis of arteriosclerosis,
pancreatitis, duodenal bulb ulcers, cholecystitis, and nephritis
[5], [9], [26].
In this paper, by conducting a comparative study, we analyze
the physical meanings, correlations, sensitivities to physiological and pathological factors, and diagnosis performance of pulse
signals acquired by these three types of sensors. With these studies, we intend to reveal the relative advantages of each type of
pulse signal, which can guide us to choose a proper sensor for

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

120

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Pulse signal acquisition framework.

Fig. 2.

Measurement mechanism of a pressure sensor.

Fig. 3.

Measurement mechanism of photoelectric sensor.

the diagnosis of specific diseases and to combine different types
of pulse signals for improved diagnosis accuracy.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
is a discussion on the acquisition method and physical meaning
of the signals sampled by the three types of sensors. Section
III provides an analysis on the relationship between different
pulse signals and sensitivities of these pulse signals with respect
to different physiological and pathological factors. Section IV
provides the experimental results that demonstrate the relative
advantages of different types of pulse signals and improved
performance by combining different sensors. Finally, Section V
gives several concluding remarks.
II. MEASUREMENT MECHANISM
In this section, we introduce the measurement mechanism of
the three major types of sensors to reveal the physical meanings
of the acquired pulse signals. As shown in Fig. 1, one typical
pulse acquisition hardware system usually involves three parts,
i.e., the sensor, amplifier, and digitizer units, and the major difference between these pulse systems is the sensor unit. Thus, by
analyzing the sensor units, we discuss the measurement mechanism of different pulse signal acquisition systems.
A. Measurement Mechanism of Pressure Sensors
As shown in Fig. 2, pressure sensor is designed to measure
the transmural pressure at certain positions of the blood vessel.
Pulse waves are generated by the expulsion of blood with heart
contraction into the aorta, resulting in the dilatation of the vessel
[27]. Blood flow takes place in a closed system of vessels, and
any generated pressure affects the entire system. The wrist radial
artery is close to the skin surface and thus changes in pressure
can be noninvasively measured.
The measured pressure pm is composed of the counterforce of
the hold down pressure pc and transmural pressure from blood
vessel p, i.e., pm = pc + p. Usually, p is smaller than its true
value due to the damping of the skin and tissue. Since the radial
artery is close to the surface of the skin, the damping usually is
slight and that is why a TCM practitioner chooses the wrist as
the position for pulse diagnosis.

B. Measurement Mechanism of Photoelectric Sensors
As shown in Fig. 3, photoelectric sensor is designed to measure the blood volume at certain area of the blood vessel. The
intensity of the reflected light is in proportion with the volume
of the vessel. When the blood volume in the vessel changes
with the heartbeat, the reflected light will change accordingly,
and thus, the volume variation can be recorded by measuring the
intensity of the reflected light from the vessel. IR light is usually
employed in photoelectric sensor because it can penetrate deeper
into the vessel than visible light while being absorbed/reflected
less by epidermal melanin [28].
The measured volume signal Vm is composed of the light reflected from tissue V0 and the reflected light from vessel Vs , i.e.,
Vm = Vs + V0 , where V0 is almost constant for the same person
and Vs is time dependent and changes with the vessel volume.
As shown in Fig. 3, for photoelectric sensor, the phototransistor
can only receive the reflected IR light from a certain area. The
measured volume is the integral of the cross-sectional area over
the length l determined by the sensor size. Since l is constant,

ZUO et al.: COMPARISON OF THREE DIFFERENT TYPES OF WRIST PULSE SIGNALS BY THEIR PHYSICAL MEANINGS

121

TABLE I
PHYSICAL MEANING OF THE MEASURED SIGNALS
Sensor

Physical meaning

Pressure
Photoelectric
Ultrasonic

p
A (or R2 )
um ax

A. Assumptions

Fig. 4.

Measurement mechanism of ultrasonic sensor.

the measured volume by photoelectric sensor would depend on
the change of cross-sectional area within the measure area.
C. Measurement Mechanism of Ultrasonic Sensors
Ultrasonic sensor is employed to measure the blood velocity at certain positions along the blood vessel. As shown in
Fig. 4, velocity information can be obtained by measuring the
frequency-shifting between the ultrasonic wave emitted by the
transmitter (T) and that returned to the receiver (R). The ultrasonic signals reflect the velocities of red blood cells in the vessel,
where the relationship of the frequency-shift and velocity can
be formulated as
u=

c(fr − f0 )
2f0 cos α

(1)

where f0 is the emitted frequency, fr is the reflected frequency,
μ is the flow velocity, and c is the speed of sound in soft tissue
(about 1540 m/s) [29]. Usually, the angle α should be between
30° and 60° [27]. In this study, we assume that the measured
speed μ is the speed of blood at the center of the vessel because
this scenario can be applicable by locating the position with
maximum blood speed um ax and this strategy is commonly
used in practice [29].
III. DEPENDENCE AND COMPLEMENTARITY
OF MEASURED SIGNALS
In this section, we first analyze the dependence between the
different types of pulse signals. The analysis and discussion
are begun with some ideal simplifying assumptions to deduce
the basic facts of the relationship between signals acquired by
different types of sensors. Then, the diagnostic factors that affect
each type of measured signal will be discussed. Finally, we will
consider their complementarities.

The arterial system is a complex nonlinear anisotropic and
viscoelastic system, which comprises tapered, curved, and
branching tubes. In order to obtain some basic facts about arterial pulse characteristics, we put forth some assumptions on
both the arterial system and the sensors to simplify the analysis.
First, we assume that the blood composition, blood density,
and the elasticity of the vessel wall are uniform and that the
flow in the sampling window is laminar as indicated by most
physiological fluid dynamic theories. We also assume that the
vessel is a straight cylindrical tube and has a circular cross section and the distortion of the vessel is minimal. Therefore, for
photoelectric signals, we have
Vm = Vs + V0 = Al + V0 = lπR2 + V0

(2)

where R is the radius of the vessel. The length is fixed and thus
photoelectric signals are in proportion with the square of the
radius under this assumption. Table I summarizes the physical
meaning of measured signals. For simplicity purposes, pc in the
measured pressure signals and V0 in the measured photoelectric
signals are not taken into consideration. Since these signals were
continuously recorded, both the values and time derivatives of
these signals can be easily obtained.
B. Relationship Among Blood Velocity, Radius, and Pressure
in Steady Laminar Flow
In this section, we analyze the relationship of the blood velocity, area (radius), and pressure in steady laminar and pulsatile
flows to reveal their relationship.
We first provide a cylindrical coordinate system (r, θ, z) which
will be used in this section. As shown in Fig. 5, the coordinate
is set along the vessel, the z-axis is in the center of the vessel
and toward the direction of the blood flow, and the r-axis is
perpendicular to the skin.
In order to determine the basic arterial pulse characteristics,
we first consider the simplest model: steady laminar flow in
which the radius R, density ρ, viscosity η, velocity u, volume
V, and pressure p are all constant. The pressure gradient is also
uniform. The general time-dependent governing equations can
be given by the continuity and the Navier–Stokes equations. For
steady laminar flow, the solution is [30], [31]
u=

R2 − r2 ∂p
.
4η ∂z

(3)

The pressure gradient along the z-axis is hard to measure with
only one sensor, considering that the pulse wave is a wave that is
traveling without distortion with velocity c. Then, the pressure

122

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

blood velocity, volume, and pressure. If we let the radius R be a
time-dependent variable, the model would be more difficult to
obtain. Moreover, for real pulse signals, the parameters ρ and
η are also time-dependent and all of these parameters would
vary with individual, health conditions, and many other factors.
Thus, although the three types of signals are closely related, it
is difficult to obtain an explicit model that uses two signals to
estimate the other while using multiple types of signals to estimate some of the circulatory parameters that are still available
which we will discuss in the next section.
C. Influence of Physiological and Pathological Factors
Fig. 5.

Cylindrical coordinates and flow in the vessel.

will have the form of [32]


z
.
p = p0 + f t −
c
By differentiating (4) with respect to t and z, we obtain

(4)

∂p
1 ∂p
=−
.
(5)
∂z
c ∂t
Therefore, a good approximation to the pressure gradient
along the z-axis is the time derivative of the measured pressure
signal.
The measured ultrasonic signals are the velocity at the center
of the vessel and thus r = 0. By inserting r = 0 and (5) into (3),
we obtain
1 ∂p 2
R .
um ax = −
(6)
4ηc ∂t
One can see that the measured velocity um ax , radius R, and
time derivative of the measured pressure p are highly correlated
with each other. Under the simplifying assumptions described
in Section III-A, if we have parameters η and c, the continuous
pressure and photoelectric signals, respectively, we can get the
velocity by using (6). If we have three types of measured signals,
we can estimate the parameter ηc.
The discussion above is based on several strong assumptions
in order to determine the basic relationship between the three
types of measured signals. If we consider more realistic conditions, the relationship will become more complicated. For
example, if we let the pressure gradient be in a pulsatile form:
∂p
= aeiω t
(7)
∂z
the velocity can be estimated by the model given by Womersley
[32],
⎛
 
⎞
ρω 32
r
i
J
iω t
0
η
ae ⎜
 
⎟
u=
(8)
⎠
⎝1 −
ρω 32
ρiω
J0 R η i
where J0 (xi3/2 ) is a Bessel function of the order zero with
a complex argument. If we insert r = 0 and (5) into (7) and
(8), we can obtain a more complicated model on the measured

Different types of sensors have different physical meanings
and thus would be influenced by different circulatory parameters. In this section, we analyze the influence of physiological
and pathological factors on the different types of pulse signals.
Pressure signals are associated with the elasticity of the vessel
wall, and the radius. From the definition of incremental elastic
modulus:

R̄∂p ∂R
σinc
(9)
=
Einc =
εinc
h∂t R̄∂t
we can get
∂p
Eh ∂R
= 2
∂t
R̄ ∂t

(10)

where Einc is the incremental elastic modulus, σinc is the incremental stress, εinc is the incremental strain, R̄ is the mean
radius of the blood vessel, and h is the thickness of the blood
wall.
From these equations, one can see that pressure signals are
sensitive to changes in the radius, the elastic property, and the
thickness of the blood vessel.
Photoelectric signals can be used to measure the volume
changes of the blood in the vessel and are primarily sensitive
to radius changes. Moreover, physically the photoelectric signals are measurements of the intensity of reflected IR light and
influenced by blood composition. The IR absorption spectra of
blood elements are also different, i.e., water, oxyhemoglobin,
and deoxyhemoglobin exhibit different absorption spectra, and
thus, the composition ratio may influence the IR absorption rate
[33]. Actually, the blood oxygen monitor is designed by using
this principle to measure blood oxygen saturation.
Ultrasonic signals represent the velocity of the blood flow.
From (6) and (8), one can see that the ultrasonic signals are associated with the pressure gradient, blood density, and viscosity.
The velocity also reflects the flow statement. For example, the
Reynolds number [30]
Re =

2uρR
η

(11)

is a measure of the tendency for turbulence to occur. The viscosity of blood is normally about 1/30 poise, and the density is
only slightly greater than 1. When the Reynolds number rises
above 200 to 400, turbulent flow will occur in some branches of
vessels; when the Reynolds number rises above approximately

ZUO et al.: COMPARISON OF THREE DIFFERENT TYPES OF WRIST PULSE SIGNALS BY THEIR PHYSICAL MEANINGS

TABLE II
INFLUENCE FROM CIRCULATORY PARAMETERS

Radius of vessel
Wall elastic property
Wall thickness
Blood composition
Blood flow status
Blood viscosity

Pressure

Photoelectric

Ultrasonic

◦
◦
◦

◦

◦

From (12) and (13), one can see that vascular compliance is
related to photoelectric and pressure signals and can be calculated by using their time derivatives.
Vascular resistance is defined as
Res =

◦

◦
◦

ΔV
Δp

1 ∂p
Δp
=
.
Q
uA ∂t

(14)

Several documented conditions are associated with low vascular resistance, such as sepsis, pancreatitis, cirrhosis, and so
on [36]. From the definitions, we can see that the resistance
parameter is related to all three types of signals.

2000, turbulence will usually occur even in straight and smooth
vessels [27].
Table II summarizes the sensitiveness of different types of
signals to changes in physiological parameters. Pressure signals
mainly represent the transmural pressure and are sensitive to the
parameter changes of the vessel wall, such as the wall elastic
modulus and its thickness. Photoelectric signals represent the
volume information of the vessel and are sensitive to the area
of the cross section. Moreover, volume information is measured
by the intensity of the reflected IR light, and thus, photoelectric signals are also sensitive to blood composition. Ultrasonic
signals represent the blood velocity and are sensitive to the
parameters associated with blood flow, such as viscosity and
blood flow state. All three signals are sensitive to the changes
of the vessel radius. As discussed above, the complex nonlinear
anisotropic and viscoelastic properties of the arterial system and
the relationship between different parameters are mostly nonlinear. Thus, the analysis results in Table II are obtained based
on some common assumptions used in most physiological fluid
dynamic theories. Except for these basic circulatory parameters,
some other important diagnosis parameters are also associated
with pressure, volume, and velocity, such as the blood flow, and
vascular compliance and resistance. The diagnostic validity of
these parameters reveals the complementarity of the different
measured signals.
Blood flow is the quantity of blood that passes through a
given point in circulation in a given period. Blood flow Q can
be calculated by Q = μA. Since photoelectric signals are in
proportion to area A, blood flow is related to both ultrasonic and
photoelectric signals.
Vascular compliance is of particular significance in cardiovascular physiology and has been reported to be sensitive to hypertension, congestive heart failure, and aging [34], [35]. Vascular
compliance is defined as
C=

123

(12)

which is a measure of the tendency of the arteries to stretch in
response to pressure. Blood vessels with a higher compliance
deform easier than those of lower compliance under the same
pressure and volume conditions. From its definition, ΔV has a
fixed length, and we can replace ΔV with ΔA and (18) becomes


ΔA
∂A ∂p
∂A ∂p
C=
=
= −c
.
(13)
Δp
∂t ∂z
∂t
∂t

D. Summary
Signals measured by three popular sensors are closely related, but have different physical meanings and are sensitive to
different circulatory parameters. By combining different types
of signals, some useful diagnostic parameters, such as blood
flow, and vascular compliance and resistance can be inferred,
which demonstrate the complementarity of different signals.
Since they have different sensitivity parameters to diseases that
may be associated with a certain parameter, the use of a sensor
which is sensitive to that certain parameter may achieve better
diagnosis performance.
From Table II, one can see that all types of signals are sensitive
to the radius of the vessel, and thus, a disease that is associated
with radius change may be detected by these sensors. As pressure signals are more sensitive to changes in the elastic property
and the thickness of the vessel wall, they should be more effective than signals from the other types of sensors in the diagnosis
of the related disease (e.g., arteriosclerosis). With a similar rationale, photoelectric sensors should be more effective than the
other sensors in the diagnosis of diseases related to the area of
the vessel cross section and blood composition, and ultrasonic
sensors should be more effective than the other sensors in the
diagnosis of the blood flow-related disease, e.g., diabetes which
has been reported to be related to viscosity. Moreover, since the
different signals are complementary, the combination of these
signals may further reveal other diagnostic parameters, like vascular compliance and resistance which are related to many kinds
of diseases. Thus, the combination of all of these signals may
further increase diagnosis performance.
IV. CASE STUDIES
In the case studies, the pulse signals are acquired by using the
pressure and photoelectric systems designed by our lab [18],
and the CBS 2000 ultrasonic system provided by EDAN Instruments, Inc. Fig. 6 shows the pulse signals sampled from
a healthy volunteer using different systems, where Fig. 6(a)
shows the pressure signals, Fig. 6(b) the photoelectric signals,
and Fig. 6(c) the ultrasonic signals. From these figures, one can
see that different types of pulse signals are similar in terms of
waveform, which demonstrated that these signals are dependent. However, their differences are also obvious because of
their different physical attributes and influential factors. Thus,
it is natural to suppose that the diagnosis of different disease

124

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Three types of pulse signals from a healthy volunteer: (a) pressure
signals, (b) photoelectric signals, and (c) ultrasonic signals.

using the three types of pulse signals may also have different
performance.
Diabetes and arteriosclerosis diagnoses are used as two examples in the experiments because diabetes is reported to be
associated with blood viscosity [37] and arteriosclerosis refers
to the thickening and hardening of the arteries [38]. Using these
two diseases, experiments were conducted to compare the diagnosis performance of the three types of pulse sensors and to
validate the effectiveness of combining three types of measured
signals.
A. Method
In this section, we introduced the preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification methods. In preprocessing, the highfrequency noise and baseline drift coupled with pulse signal
was removed. These two interferences are mainly introduced
by the power line interference and breathing, respectively. The
wavelet denoising method was adopted to remove the noise, and
the wavelet-based cascaded adaptive filter [39] was adopted to
correct the baseline drift.
In feature extraction, three kinds of features were extracted
to characterize the pulse signal. First, the time-domain fiducialpoint-based feature was extracted. Fiducial-point-based feature
describes the shape of an average pulse cycle, it includes the position of the primary peak, dicrotic notch, and secondary peak,
which is the most common feature used in pulse signal classification [7], [40]–[44]. Second, the multiscale sample entropy
of the pulse signal was calculated. Sample entropy can be used
to measure the unpredictability of pulse signal and multiscale
sample entropy can reveal unpredictability with long-range correlations on multiple spatial and temporal scales which had been
successful applied for pulse signal classification [45]–[47]. The
last feature was the TWED feature. TWED is an elastic metric
to measure the distance between time series, which is reported
effective and efficient in pulse signal classification [7], [48].

Fig. 7.

Tree that depicts groups of kernels for pulse signal classification.

In the classification, we adopted the composite kernel learning (CKL) method to combine these features since it is more
flexible than SVM in combining features from different sources
[49]. For each type of pulse signal, we extract three kinds of
features, i.e., time-domain fiducial point-based feature, multiscale sample entropy (SampEn), and TWED feature. Thus, nine
basis kernels K1,1 –K3,3 are built that correspond to three type
of signals and three kinds of features, where K1,m , K2,m , K3,m
are the basis kernels for pressure, photoelectric, and ultrasonic
signals, respectively, and Kl,1 , Kl,2 , and Kl,3 are the basis kernels for time domain fiducial point-based feature, SampEn, and
TWED feature, respectively.
To combine the basis kernels, we adopt the CKL model [7],
which defines a tree structure to guide the selection and removal
of kernels. In pulse classification, as shown in Fig. 7, the basis
kernels are structured into three groups based on the types of sensors, i.e., G1 = {K1,1 , K1,2 , K1,3 }, G2 = {K2,1 , K2,2 , K2,3 },
and G3 = {K3,1 , K3,2 , K3,3 }. In CKL [7], the combination of
the kernels is defined by


σl
σlm Klm (x, y)
(15)
K(x, y) =
l

m

where σlm and σl are the nonnegative coefficients for kernel
Klm and group Gl , respectively. For kernel selection/removal,
the following constraints are imposed on σlm and σl :

2/p
dl σl ≤ 1, σl ≥ 0
(16)
l

2/q
σlm ≤ 1, σlm ≥ 0
(17)
lm

where p and q are two hyperparameters for tuning sparsity within
or between groups, and dl is the number of
basis kernels in
q
and flm (x) = i αi Klm (xi , x);
group Gl . Let γlm = σlp σlm

ZUO et al.: COMPARISON OF THREE DIFFERENT TYPES OF WRIST PULSE SIGNALS BY THEIR PHYSICAL MEANINGS

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF DIABETES DATASETS
Age Distribution

Healthy
Diabetes

TABLE IV
DIABETICS DIAGNOSIS PERFORMANCE

Gender Distribution

1∼40

40∼50

50∼60

> 60

Male

Female

9
3

41
35

69
67

72
96

119
131

72
70

Pressure
Photoelectric
Ultrasonic
Combination of three types of signals

the CKL model [7] is formulated as
1/(p+q )
  p 
1/q
dl (
min J(γ)s.t.
γlm )q
≤ 1, γlm ≥ 0
l

γ


1
1
flm 2Hl m + C
ξi
(19)
lm γlm
i
f l m ,b,ξ 2


s.t. yi
flm (xi ) + b ≥ 1 − ξi , ξi ≥ 0.
lm

As introduced in [7], the model above can be efficiently solved
by iterating between 1) updating flm with the standard SVM
solver, and 2) updating γ with the fixed-point algorithm. In this
study, we set p = q = 0.5 and set C = 100.
The tenfold cross-validation method is used to evaluate the
classification performance. Three performance indicators, i.e.,
classification accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, are adopted
for quantitative evaluation. The accuracy is defined as the percentage of all the correctly identified samples, the sensitivity is
defined as the percentage of patients who are correctly identified
as sick, and specificity was defined as the percentage of healthy
people who are correctly identified as healthy [50].
B. Diabetes Experiment
In the diabetes experiment, we constructed a dataset of 392
volunteers, including 191 healthy and 201 diabetic volunteers
by collaborating with the Yao Chung Kit Diabetes Assessment
Centre in Hong Kong. Each volunteer provided three different
types of sample data for the dataset. To avoid the potential influence of biological factors, we also ensured that the distributions
of gender and age of volunteers with diabetes are similar to those
of the healthy volunteers. Table III lists the basic information of
the dataset.
In the experiment, we used the preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification methods described in Section IV-A. In
the classification of signals from single source, we have only
one group in CKL model and in the classification of pulse signals from multiple sources we have three groups in CKL model
as shown in Fig. 7. The classification results of the signals from
the different types of sensors are listed in Table IV. One can see
that the ultrasonic pulse signal is more effective in the diagnosis
of diabetes than the other types of pulse signals. The result is
consistent with a previous study in which diabetes is reported to
be associated with viscosity [37]. Note that the ultrasonic sensor
is more sensitive to the changes in the viscosity. The results also
show that the combination of the three types of signals can obtain improved classification accuracy, which indicates that the

Sensitivity

Specificity

84.2%
79.8%
87.0%
91.6%

86.1%
82.6%
88.6%
92.5%

82.2%
77.0%
85.3%
90.6%

Age Distribution

m

J(γ) = min

Accuracy

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF ARTERIOSCLEROSIS DATASETS

(18)
with

125

Healthy
Arteriosclerosis

Gender Distribution

1∼40

40∼50

50∼60

> 60

Male

Female

19
15

22
18

23
24

31
32

60
59

35
30

TABLE VI
ARTERIOSCLEROSIS DIAGNOSIS PERFORMANCE

Pressure
Photoelectric
Ultrasonic
Combination of three types of signals

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Specificity

86.4%
79.3%
83.7%
89.7%

87.6%
83.1%
85.4%
91.0%

85.2%
75.8%
82.1%
88.4%

three types of signals contain some complementary information
for the diagnosis of diabetes. The result of the McNemar’s test
[51] shows that in the diabetes classification, the performance
difference between ultrasonic and other types of signals is statistically significant at α = 0.05. The performance difference
between the group of combined signals and any single signal
group is also statistically significant at α = 0.05.
C. Arteriosclerosis Experiment
In the arteriosclerosis experiment, we constructed a dataset
of 184 volunteers, including 95 healthy and 89 arteriosclerosis
volunteers by collaborating with the Guangzhou Hospital of
TCM. The principle of the constructing the dataset and the
format of the samples is the same as those of the diabetes dataset.
Table V lists the basic information of the arteriosclerosis dataset.
The results are listed in Table VI. From Table VI, it can be
observed that the pressure pulse signal outperforms the other
types of pulse signal in the arteriosclerosis experiment. This
may be because it is more sensitive to the changes in vessel
hardness and thickness which are related to arteriosclerosis [38].
The ultrasonic group also obtained good performance because
the hardness of the vessel will also influence the blood speed.
Moreover, in the arteriosclerosis experiment, the classification
performance can also be improved by combining all three types
of signals. The result of the McNemar’s test [51] shows that
in the arteriosclerosis classification, the performance difference
between the pressure and photoelectric signals is statistically
significant at α = 0.1. The performance difference between the

126

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

group of combined signals and any single signal group is also
statistically significant at α = 0.1. The higher α value can be
partially explained by that the dataset size in the arteriosclerosis
experiment is lower than that in the diabetes experiments.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the dependence and complementarity
among three major types of sensors, i.e., pressure, photoelectric,
and ultrasonic sensors, for pulse signal diagnosis. Our analysis
on their physical meanings, relationships, and sensitivity factors
shows that 1) the changes in the elastic property and thickness
of the vessel wall can be more readily detected using pressure
signals; 2) the changes in the area of the cross section and blood
composition can be more readily captured using photoelectric
signals; and 3) the changes in the blood viscosity and the blood
flow state can be more effectively characterized using ultrasonic
signals. Thus, we state that each sensor is more appropriate
for the diagnosis of some specific disease that the changes of
physiological factors can be effectively reflected by the sensor,
and different types of signals are complementary.
Case studies have been conducted to validate these statements. The experimental results show that, in terms of accuracy,
sensitivity, and specificity, the ultrasonic sensor is superior to
the others for the diagnosis of diabetes, while the pressure sensor outperforms the others for the diagnosis of arteriosclerosis.
These results can be explained by that the onset of diabetes is
usually accompanied by the changes in blood flow viscosity
[37], which can be well depicted by ultrasonic signals, arteriosclerosis usually results in the changes in the hardness and
thickness of wrist radial artery [38], which can be well characterized by pressure signals. Moreover, the combination of the
three types of signals further improves the diagnosis performance, which can be explained by the complementarity among
sensors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the associate editor and the
anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Walsh and E. King, Pulse Diagnosis: A Clinical Guide. Sydney, Australia: Elsevier, 2008.
[2] V. D. Lad, Secrets of the Pulse. Albuquerque, NM, USA: The Ayurvedic
Press, 1996.
[3] E. Hsu, Pulse Diagnosis in Early Chinese Medicine. New York, NY, USA:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010.
[4] R. Amber and B. Brooke, Pulse Diagnosis: Detailed Interpretations for
Eastern & Western Holistic Treatments. Santa Fe, NM, USA: Aurora
Press, 1993.
[5] Y. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Wrist pulse signal diagnosis
using modified Gaussian models and fuzzy C-means classification,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 31, pp. 1283–1289, Dec. 2009.
[6] Y. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Computerized wrist pulse
signal diagnosis using modified auto-regressive models,” J. Med. Syst.,
vol. 35, pp. 321–328, Jun. 2011.
[7] L. Liu, W. Zuo, D. Zhang, N. Li, and H. Zhang, “Combination of heterogeneous features for wrist pulse blood flow signal diagnosis via multiple kernel learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 599–607, Jul. 2012.
[8] L. Liu, W. Zuo, D. Zhang, N. Li, and H. Zhang, “Classification of wrist
pulse blood flow signal using time warp edit distance,” Med. Biometrics,
vol. 6165, pp. 137–144, 2010.

[9] D. Y. Zhang, W. M. Zuo, D. Zhang, H. Z. Zhang, and N. M. Li, “Wrist
blood flow signal-based computerized pulse diagnosis using spatial and
spectrum features,” J. Biomed. Sci. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 361–366, 2010.
[10] Q. L. Guo, K. Q. Wang, D. Y. Zhang, and N. M. Li, “A wavelet packet
based pulse waveform analysis for cholecystitis and nephrotic syndrome
diagnosis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Wavelet Anal. Pattern Recog., Hong
Kong, 2008, pp. 513–517.
[11] S. Charbonnier, S. Galichet, G. Mauris, and J. P. Siche, “Statistical and
fuzzy models of ambulatory systolic blood pressure for hypertension diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Measur., vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 998–1003,
Oct. 2000.
[12] H.-T. Wu, C.-H. Lee, C.-K. Sun, J.-T. Hsu, R.-M. Huang, and C.-J. Tang,
“Arterial waveforms measured at the wrist as indicators of diabetic endothelial dysfunction in the elderly,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas, vol. 61,
no. 1, pp. 162–169, Jan. 2012.
[13] H. Sorvoja, V. M. Kokko, R. Myllyla, and J. Miettinen, “Use of EMFi as
a blood pressure pulse transducer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 54,
no. 6, pp. 2505–2512, Dec. 2005.
[14] E. Kaniusas, H. Pfutzner, L. Mehnen, J. Kosel, C. Tellez-Blanco,
G. Varoneckas, A. Alonderis, T. Meydan, M. Vazquez, M. Rohn, A. M.
Merlo, and B. Marquardt, “Method for continuous nondisturbing monitoring of blood pressure by magnetoelastic skin curvature sensor and ECG,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 819–828, Jun. 2006.
[15] L. Chen, H. Atsumi, M. Yagihashi, F. Mizuno, H. Narita, and
H. Fujimoto, “A preliminary research on analysis of pulse diagnosis,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Complex Med. Eng., Beijing, China, 2007,
pp. 1807–1812.
[16] H.-T. Wu, C.-H. Lee, and A.-B. Liu, “Assessment of endothelial function using arterial pressure signals,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 64,
pp. 223–232, 2011.
[17] P. Renevey, R. Vetter, J. Krauss, P. Celka, and Y. Depeursinge, “Wristlocated pulse detection using IR signals, activity and nonlinear artifact
cancellation,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2001,
vol. 3, pp. 3030–3033.
[18] P. Wang, W. Zuo, H. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Design and implementation of a multi-channel pulse signal acquisition system,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Informat., ChongQing, China, 2012,
pp. 1063–1067.
[19] C.-S. Hu, Y.-F. Chung, C.-C. Yeh, and C.-H. Luo, “Temporal and spatial
properties of arterial pulsation measurement using pressure sensor array,”
Evidence-Based Complementary Alternative Med., vol. 2012, pp. 1–9,
2012.
[20] A. Zhang and H. Wang, “Real-time detection system for photoelectric
pulse signals,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Bus. Manag. Electron. Inform.,
Guangzhou, China, 2011, pp. 498–501.
[21] N. Selvaraj, K. H. Shelley, D. G. Silverman, N. Stachenfeld, N. Galante,
J. P. Florian, Y. Mendelson, and K. H. Chon, “A novel approach using time frequency analysis of pulse-oximeter data to detect progressive
hypovolemia in spontaneously breathing healthy subjects,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2272–2279, Aug. 2011.
[22] Q. Guo, K. Wang, D. Zhang, and N. Li, “A wavelet packet based pulse
waveform analysis for cholecystitis and nephrotic syndrome diagnosis,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Wavelet Anal. Pattern Recog., Hong Kong, 2008,
pp. 513–517.
[23] I. Wakabayashi and H. Masuda, “Association of pulse pressure with fibrinolysis in patients with type 2 diabetes,” Thrombosis Res., vol. 121,
pp. 95–102, 2007.
[24] N. Arunkumar and K. M. M. Sirajudeen, “Approximate entropy
based ayurvedic pulse diagnosis for diabetics—A case study,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trendz Inf. Sci. Comp., Chennai, India, 2011,
pp. 133–135.
[25] Q. Y. Lee, G. S. H. Chan, S. J. Redmond, P. M. Middleton, E. Steel,
P. Malouf, C. Critoph, G. Flynn, E. O’Lone, and N. H. Lovell, “Classification of low systemic vascular resistance using photoplethysmogram and routine cardiovascular measurements,” in Proc. Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010,
pp. 1930–1933.
[26] R. Murata, H. Kanai, N. Chubachi, and Y. Koiwa, “Measurement of local
pulse wave velocity on aorta for noninvasive diagnosis of arteriosclerosis,”
in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Baltimore, MD, USA,
1994, vol. 1, pp. 83–84.
[27] A. C. Guyton and J. E. Hall, Textbook of Medical Physiology. Philadelphia,
PA, USA: Elsevier, 2006.
[28] ICNIRP, “ICNIRP Statement on far infrared radiation exposure,” Health
Phys., vol. 91, pp. 630–645, 2006.
[29] W. Schèaberle, Ultrasonography in Vascular Diagnosis: A Therapyoriented Textbook and Atlas. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005.

ZUO et al.: COMPARISON OF THREE DIFFERENT TYPES OF WRIST PULSE SIGNALS BY THEIR PHYSICAL MEANINGS

[30] G. E. Mase, Schaum’s Outline Of Theory and Problems of Continuum
Mechanics. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1970.
[31] M. Kutz, Biomedical Engineering and Design Handbook: Biomedical
Engineering Fundamentals. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill Professional, 2009.
[32] J. R. Womersley, “Method for the calculation of velocity, rate of flow and
viscous drag in arteries when the pressure gradient is known,” J. Physiol.,
vol. 127, pp. 553–563, 1955.
[33] L. V. Wang and H.-i. Wu, Biomedical Optics: Principles and Imaging.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2012.
[34] S. M. Finkelstein, W. Feske, J. Mock, P. Carlyle, T. Rector, S. Kubo, and
J. N. Cohn, “Vascular compliance in hypertension,” in Proc. Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., New Orleans, LA, USA, 1988, vol. 1,
pp. 241–242.
[35] S. M. Finkelstein, G. E. McVeigh, D. E. Burns, P. F. Carlyle, and J. N.
Cohn, “Arterial vascular compliance in heart failure,” in Proc. 12th Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1990, pp. 548–549.
[36] J. Melo and J. I. Peters, “Low systemic vascular resistance: Differential
diagnosis and outcome,” Critical Care, vol. 3, pp. 71–77, 1999.
[37] D. A. Fedosov, W. Pan, B. Caswell, G. Gompper, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Predicting human blood viscosity in silico,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,
vol. 108, pp. 11772–11777, 2011.
[38] W. A. N. Dorland, Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Saunders, 2011.
[39] L. Xu, D. Zhang, and K. Wang, “Wavelet-based cascaded adaptive filter
for removing baseline drift in pulse waveforms,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1973–1975, Nov. 2005.
[40] L. Xu, M. Q. H. Meng, R. Liu, and K. Wang, “Robust peak detection of
pulse waveform using height ratio,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2008, pp. 3856–3859.
[41] D. Zhang, W. Zuo, D. Zhang, H. Zhang, and N. Li, “Wrist blood flow
signal-based computerized pulse diagnosis using spatial and spectrum
features,” J. Biomed. Sci. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 361–366, 2010.
[42] C. Xia, Y. Li, J. Yan, Y. Wang, H. Yan, R. Guo, and F. Li, “Wrist pulse
waveform feature extraction and dimension reduction with feature variability analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Bioinform. Biomed. Eng., Shanghai,
China, 2008, pp. 2048–2051.
[43] L. Xu, M. Q. H. Meng, K. Wang, W. Lu, and N. Li, “Pulse images
recognition using fuzzy neural network,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36,
pp. 3805–3811, 2009.
[44] Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Liu, Y. Yi, and W. Wang, “Definition and application
of indices in Doppler ultrasound sonogram,” Shanghai J. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 18, pp. 26–29, Aug. 1997.
[45] M. Costa, A. L. Goldberger, and C. K. Peng, “Multiscale entropy analysis
of biological signals,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 71, pp. 1–18, Feb. 2005.
[46] M. Costa, A. L. Goldberger, and C. K. Peng, “Multiscale entropy analysis
of complex physiologic time series,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 89, pp. 1–4,
Aug. 5, 2002.
[47] L. Liu, N. Li, W. Zuo, D. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Multiscale sample
entropy analysis of wrist pulse blood flow signal for disease diagnosis,”
in Proc. Sino-Foreign-Interchange Workshop Intell. Sci. Intell. Data Eng.,
Nanjing, China, 2012, pp. 475–482.
[48] L. Liu, W. Zuo, D. Zhang, N. Li, and H. Zhang, “Classification of wrist
pulse blood flow signal using time warp edit distance,” Med Biometrics.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, pp. 137–144, 2010.
[49] M. Szafranski, Y. Grandvalet, and A. Rakotomamonjy, “Composite kernel
learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 79, pp. 73–103, 2010.
[50] A. G. Lalkhen and A. McCluskey, “Clinical tests: Sensitivity and specificity,” Continuing Educ. Anaesthesia, Crit. Care Pain, vol. 8, pp. 221–223,
2008.
[51] Q. McNemar, “Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages,” Psychometrika, vol. 12,
pp. 153–157, Jun. 1947.

127

Wangmeng Zuo (M’09) received the Ph.D. degree
in computer application technology from the Harbin
Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2007.
From July 2004 to December 2004, from November 2005 to August 2006, and from July 2007 to
February 2008, he was a Research Assistant at the
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong. From August 2009 to February 2010, he was a Visiting Professor in Microsoft
Research Asia. His current research interests include
discriminative learning, image modeling, low-level
vision, biometrics, medial image, and signal analysis. He has published more
than 40 papers in top tier academic journals and conferences including IEEE
T-IP, T-NNLS, T-IFS, Pattern Recognition, CVPR, ICCV, ICML, ECCV, and
NIPS.
Dr. Zuo is an Associate Editor of the IET Biometrics and the Scientific World
Journal, and the Guest Editor of Neurocomputing.

Peng Wang received the B.S. degree in information
and computing science from Harbin Normal University, Harbin, China, in 2007, and the M.S. degree in
computer science from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, in 2009, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in School of Computer
Science and Technology.
From September 2009 to December 2009, he was a
Research Assistant in the Department of Computing,
Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include computerized medical diagnosis, pattern recognition, machine learning, and biometrics.

David Zhang (F’09) received the Graduate degree
in computer science from Peking University, Beijing,
China, and the M.Sc. degree in computer science and
the Ph.D. degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China, in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and also the Ph.D. degree in electrical and
computer engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1994.
From 1986 to 1988, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
at Tsinghua University, Beijing, and then an Associate Professor at the Academia Sinica, Beijing. He
is currently a Head in the Department of Computing, and a Chair Professor at
the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, where he is the
Founding Director of the Biometrics Technology Centre (UGC/CRC) supported
by the Hong Kong SAR Government in 1998. He was also a Visiting Chair Professor in Tsinghua University, and an Adjunct Professor in Peking University,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, HIT, and the University of Waterloo. He is the
author of more than ten books and 200 journal papers. He is a Senior Research
Fellow of Croucher.
Dr. Zhang is the Founder and Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of
Image and Graphics, Book Editor of Springer International Series on Biometrics, an Organizer of the International Conference on Biometrics Authentication,
and an Associate Editor of more than ten international journals, including several IEEE Transactions and Pattern Recognition. He is a Distinguished Speaker
of the IEEE Computer Society and a Fellow of the International Association of
Pattern Recognition.

