IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

1215

Expiration-Phase Template-Based Motion Correction
of Free-Breathing Abdominal Dynamic
Contrast Enhanced MRI
Zhang Li∗ , Jeroen A. W. Tielbeek, Matthan W. A. Caan, Carl A. J. Puylaert, Manon L. W. Ziech, Chung Y. Nio,
Jaap Stoker, Lucas J. van Vliet, Member, IEEE, and Frans M. Vos

Abstract—This paper studies a novel method to compensate for
respiratory and peristaltic motions in abdominal dynamic contrast
enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. The method consists of two
steps: 1) expiration-phase “template” construction and retrospective gating of the data to the template; and 2) nonrigid registration
of the gated volumes. Landmarks annotated by three experts
were used to directly assess the registration performance. A
tri-exponential function fit to time intensity curves from regions of
interest was used to indirectly assess the performance. One of
the parameters of the tri-exponential fit was used to quantify the
contrast enhancement. Our method achieved a mean target registration error (MTRE) of 2.12, 2.27, and 2.33 mm with respect to
annotations by expert, which was close to the average interobserver variability (2.07 mm). A state-of-the-art registration method
achieved an MTRE of 2.83–3.10 mm. The correlation coefficient
of the contrast enhancement parameter to the Crohn’s disease
endoscopic index of Severity (r = 0.60, p = 0.004) was higher
than the correlation coefficient for the relative contrast enhancement measurements values of two observers (r(Observer1) =
0.29, p = 0.2; r(Observer2) = 0.45, p = 0.04). Direct and
indirect assessments show that the expiration-based gating and a
nonrigid registration approach effectively corrects for respiratory
motion and peristalsis. The method facilitates improved enhancement measurement in the bowel wall in patients with Crohn’s
disease.
Index Terms—Crohn’s disease (CD), image registration, medical
image processing, organ motion, peristalsis, susceptibility effect.

I. INTRODUCTION
NFLAMMATORY bowel diseases (IBD) are a substantial healthcare problem in the Western World. They affect
over 1 million citizens in the U.S., of which 565.000 suffer from Crohn’s disease (CD) [1]. Grading of CD severity
is important to determine treatment and to quantify drug re-

I

Manuscript received February 25, 2014; revised December 9, 2014; accepted
December 9, 2014. Date of publication December 23, 2014; date of current
version March 17, 2015. This work was supported in part by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013): the VIGOR++
Project (Grant 270379). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ Z. Li is with the Quantitative Imaging Group, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2628 CJ, The Netherlands (e-mail: z.li-1@tudelft.nl).
J. A. W. Tielbeek, M. W. A. Caan, C. A. J. Puylaert, M. L. W. Ziech, C. Y.
Nio, and J. Stoker are with the Department of Radiology, Academic Medical
Center.
L. J. van Vliet is with the Quantitative Imaging Group, Delft University of
Technology.
F. M. Vos is with the Quantitative Imaging Group, Delft University of Technology, and also with the Department of Radiology, Academic Medical Center.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2385307

sponse. Ileocolonoscopy in combination with the assessment
of biopsy samples is mostly used for diagnosis and assessment of all IBD. However, this procedure is invasive and requires extensive bowel preparation, which is considered very
burdensome by most patients. Moreover, it primarily gives information on mucosal abnormalities and only little information on the transmural and extra-enteric extent of the disease,
while only the colon and a small part of the small bowel is
examined.
Therefore, abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
now widely studied for diagnosing and grading luminal CD.
Various imaging features are used to determine the presence
and extent of disease activity, including enhancement after intravenous injection of a contrast medium [2]. In a recent study,
Rimola et al. [3] used multivariate analyses correlating radiological features to the Crohn’s Disease Endoscopic Index of
Severity (CDEIS) [4], which is often considered the reference
standard. The study reported that the radiologic features to be
evaluated include wall signal intensity and relative contrast
enhancement (RCE) after intravenous injection of a contrast
medium.
Several other previous studies indicate that the time intensity curves (TICs) obtained from dynamic contrast enhanced
MRI (DCE-MRI) contain important information on the degree
of inflammation of the bowel wall [5], [6]. The aforementioned
papers achieved a temporal resolution in the order of 5 s, making motion artefacts inevitable [5]. Advances in high temporal resolution MRI scanning protocols have opened the way to
extract TIC measurements from free-breathing DCE-MRI. Unfortunately, respiratory and peristaltic motions complicate an
easy analysis of such curves since spatial correspondence over
time is lost. Direct registration of DCE-MRI fails if the bowel
is subject to large locally discontinuous deformations caused
by organs “sliding” along each other due to breathing. This
paper presents a novel method to compensate for such motion
and facilitates quantitative analysis of TICs extracted from the
bowel wall. As such, a solution is presented for a crucial and
challenging problem: to obtain accurate quantitative features for
assessing CD severity from DCE-MRI. Actually, the method is
also applicable to other abdominal diseases, but our focus is on
CD.
A. Related Work
Much work has been done to correct for motion during image acquisition in cardiac imaging applications, particularly, by

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

means of gating techniques using various physiological signals
[7], [8]. Early work on DCE-MRI registration was related to
breast imaging [9]. It involved a nonrigid B-spline transformation and employed normalized mutual information (NMI) as
similarity metric. Unfortunately, NMI appeared not well suited
for the substantial intensity differences between pre- and postcontrast images as it led to undesirable shrinkage or expansion in certain regions [10], [11]. Therefore, volume-preserving
nonrigid registration methods were introduced [10], [11]. Later,
Song et al. [12] proposed a registration method based on a
dyadic wavelet and Fourier transforms for renal imaging, but
they only dealt with rigid motion.
An alternative way was to de-enhance the DCE images prior
to registration [13]. Thereafter, methods addressed the contrast
change by estimating the intensity enhancement during the registration procedure. This was accomplished by incorporating
the intensity enhancement in the regularization term [14]. Also,
a progressive principal component registration (PPCR) method
was proposed [15] in order to use enhancement information
from an entire dataset to drive the registration procedure (illustrated on liver images). This method relied on principal component analysis (PCA) and did not require the selection of a
reference image. The PCA aimed to separate contrast enhancement from motion before registration, assuming that the contrast enhancement appears earlier in the sorted list of principal
components than organ motion. Similar ideas based on data
decomposition were also used in other studies [16], [17]. In
[16], independent component analysis was used for separating
the various sources of data variability in free-breathing cardiac MRI. Recently, a method called robust data decomposition
registration (RDDR) [17] was proposed for registering DCEMRI images. They used robust PCA to decompose DCE-MRI
into low-rank and sparse components. The low-rank components were shown to correspond to smooth deformations and
slowly varying changes, while the sparse components represented rapid and local intensity changes. The low-rank components were insensitive to intensity changes and therefore used for
registration.
Lately, the aforementioned PPCR method was compared with
a model-based technique and a sequential elastic registration
(SER) approach on a synthetic DCE-MRI phantom and a variety
of clinical cases [18]. It was concluded that the SER method was
superior in small, but important regions of interest (ROIs) such
as the tumor core. However, a limitation of this paper is that the
comparison was done on breath-hold DCE-MRI data.
Furthermore, a number of methods incorporated a pharmacokinetic model such as the Tofts model [19] into the registration procedure for improving the registration accuracy. An
example is an iterative registration procedure that was proposed
by Buonaccorsi et al. [20], aiming to register motion deformed
liver images to synthetic images. Therefore, pharmacokinetic
models were first fit to each voxel in the deformed data. Subsequently, synthetic images were generated corresponding to the
model values for each time point in the dynamic series. The
synthetic maps were used as fixed reference volumes to drive
the registration of the raw time point images. More recently,
a Bayesian framework was introduced to jointly estimate the

Fig. 1. Illustration one of the DCE-MRI sequence: notice that the diaphragm
is outside the field of view (a); dataflow indicating sections (in the bracket) in
which data is used (b); MSR stands for Mean Square Residue.

parameters of a pharmacokinetic model and the motion of the
colon [21]. Alternatively, a combined image segmentation and
registration method was established [22].
Some prospective methods use respiratory tracking based on
navigator echos during imaging to impose a priori correspondence. A navigator echo samples a small column of tissue in
the craniocaudal direction, typically across the diaphragm. The
result is a 1-D image of the tissue boundary between the thorax and abdomen, with the temporal change in signal intensity providing a reference for the position of the diaphragm. A
limitation of the method is that it requires uniform and regular respiration cycles for optimal image correspondence [23].
Clearly, registration techniques could be used for fine tuning.
More important, however, is that the navigator approach requires that a well-defined reference area is available. This is not
the case in the lower part of the abdomen [notice that the diaphragm is outside the field of view in Fig. 1(a)]. Recently, a
generalized image reconstruction method in k-space for motion
compensation was presented [24]. Here, a linear nonrigid motion model was assumed. However, the combined respiratory
and bowel motion of our application has nonlinear characteristics, for which this technique was not designed.

LI et al.: EXPIRATION-PHASE TEMPLATE-BASED MOTION CORRECTION OF FREE-BREATHING ABDOMINAL DCE-MRI

The aforementioned studies paid specific attention to breast,
cardiac, liver, and renal DCE MR imaging. Abdominal
DCE-MRI poses additional challenges. None of the aforementioned methods address the problems induced by respiratory and
peristaltic motion combined with potential susceptibility variations that are inherently associated with DCE-MRI of the bowel.
B. Objective and Approach
State-of-the-art DCE-MRI has a high temporal resolution
(less than 1 s per volume) which facilitates data acquisition
while the subject is freely breathing. However, quantification of
contrast enhancement is hampered by a substantial spatial mismatch due to respiratory motion, potentially associated susceptibility variations, and peristaltic movement. To overcome these
problems, we present a new “template”-based registration (motion correction) scheme for compensating the aforementioned
effects, which leads to an unbiased registration result.
Volumetric images are obtained during contrast injection,
while the subject is freely breathing. Since abdominal scans
lack a well-defined reference area like the diaphragm, the conventional navigator echo gating cannot be applied. To eliminate
the dominating respiratory motion, we apply a retrospective gating scheme instead. In our earlier work [25], we first randomly
picked a reference image from the DCE-MRI data. Then, we
gated the DCE-MRI to that reference image through rigid registration. However, this random reference may not coincide with a
stable phase of the respiratory cycle [26]. Therefore, it may contain large breathing artefacts. In such a case, a poor registration
outcome was obtained.
In this paper, we avoid the randomness of the algorithm’s
performance as well as a potential bias by building an expirationphase reference instead.
After selection of the expiration-phase images, we align these
data by a B-spline transformation that maximizes the NMI. The
poor performance of NMI in previous DCE MRI applications
was caused by discontinuities in the deformation field and the
sudden appearance of structures due to the inflowing contrast
medium. In our application, the former is tackled by gating and
the latter does not occur. The bowel wall is merely enhanced as
it was already visible prior to contrast injection. We chose NMI
as our cost function for its robustness to intensity alterations.
The registration compensates for the residual mismatch due to
varying breathing depth and remaining peristalsis.
The choice for expiration-phase gating will be compared to
using other phases of the respiratory cycle such as the inspiration
phase and the arbitrary phase. Moreover, the efficiency of our
approach is studied by comparison to a state-of-the-art method
[27]. This evaluation includes an assessment by means of manually annotated landmarks. Finally, enhancement measurements
from the TICs are correlated with colonoscopic measurements
of disease activity.
II. METHODS
We will first describe the DCE-MRI data and the annotation procedure used in our work. Then, we present the two
main steps that our method comprises: 1) expiration-phase tem-

1217

plate construction and retrospective gating to the template (see
Section II-B), and 2) nonrigid registration using B-splines (see
Section II-C). Finally, validation experiments are described.
A. Data
The MRI data employed in this paper were taken from a prior
study of consecutively included patients with luminal CD [27]
that has been approved by the local Medical Ethics Committee.
All 33 patients had given informed consent to the prior study.
Furthermore, 30 out of 33 patients have given written consent
to usage of their data for future investigations. The data of the
latter 30 patients were used for this study.
Patients drank 1600 ml of a hyperosmolar fluid (Mannitol,
2.5%, Baxter, Utrecht, The Netherlands) 1 h before acquiring the MRI scans to achieve bowel distention. MR imaging
included T2-weighted single-shot fast spin echo (SSFSE) sequences and a high-resolution 3-D T1-weighted spoiled gradient
echo sequence with fat saturation, followed by a free-breathing
3D+t DCE-MRI data acquisition on a 3.0T MRI scanner (Intera,
Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) by a 3-D spoiled gradient echo sequence. Fourteen coronal slices were obtained with
a pixel size of 1.78 × 1.78 × 2.5 mm3 , TE = 1.8 ms, TR =
2.9 ms, and a flip angle of 6°. In 6.1 min, 450 3-D image
volumes were acquired at a rate of 0.8 s/volume. The patients
were instructed to breathe regularly at a low frequency. A bowel
relaxant (20 mg, Buscopan, Boehringer, Ingelheim, Germany)
was administered to the patients immediately prior to the start
of the DCE sequence to minimize bowel movement. A contrast agent (Gadovist 1.0 mmol/ml, Bayer Schering Pharma,
Berlin, Germany) was injected (0.1 ml/kg bodyweight) after the
tenth image volume was acquired. The dynamic volume was located in a visibly inflamed area of the bowel, or in the terminal
ileum when a visibly inflamed area was absent, based on the
T2-weighted SSFSE sequences. The DCE sequence was also
succeeded by a high-resolution 3-D T1-weighted spoiled gradient echo sequence with fat saturation. A routine radiological
report was made for each patient by an experienced abdominal
radiologist.
Two observers with, respectively, 17 years (1100 small bowel
MRI) and 18 years (700 small bowel MRI) experience in reading abdominal MRI evaluated the MRI scans as described in
[28]. In seven of the 30 cases, one of the scoring radiologists
had already seen the MR previously during routine patient care
(see above). However, the elapsed time between the initial evaluation and the current scoring was at least one year (ranging
from 357 to 622 days, median of 481 days). Each observer measured the RCE from the pre- and postcontrast T1-weighted MR
images. The RCE was calculated as
RCE =

100((Ip ost − Ipre )/Ipre )
std(Ip ost )/std(Ipre )

(1)

in which (Ipre ,Ip ost ) are the averaged bowel wall signal intensities measured over manually annotated ROIs in pre- and
postcontrast T1-weighted MRI; each ROI was placed at approximately the same location in the pre- and postcontrast images; {std(Ipre ), std(Ip ost )} are the standard deviations of the

1218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

noise measured in manually annotated ROIs with air outside
the body in the pre- and postcontrast MR images. The bowel
was visually classified into five different segments: rectum, left
colon (sigmoid plus colon descendens), transverse colon, right
colon (cecum plus colon ascendens), and terminal ileum. The
observers delineated per segment an ROI in the bowel wall that
was identified to contain the most disease activity [27]. If a
bowel segment did not contain disease activity, a bowel wall
region was randomly selected.
A research fellow with a background in image analysis of CD
made manual annotations in the DCE-MRI expiration-phase
template, as well as in other templates to be evaluated (see below) based on the radiological report of the patient. In each
slice, all 2-D regions signifying CD were identified by a polygon. Additionally, the bowel segment was indicated. For each
positive annotation, i.e., a single polygon, a nearby region was
annotated that was deemed healthy. Additionally, for each positive annotation, a region outside the body was annotated. All
these annotations were checked by an abdominal radiologist
with extensive experience in assessing luminal CD in MRI (i.e.,
the radiologist with 17 years of experience).
All previously mentioned observers (including the research
fellow and the abdominal radiologist) were unaware of the findings from ileocolonoscopy, but were aware of the patients’ surgical history. All patients underwent ileocolonoscopy within
one month after the MRI scan was acquired, which served as
the reference standard. During ileocolonoscopy, the CDEIS was
scored per bowel segment [27]. The endoscopist performing the
scoring was blinded with respect to the MRI results.
In 2/30 patients, no inflammation or other signs of CD were
detected. In the remaining 28 patients, 26 regions were identified
in which the terminal ileum was affected by CD, eight regions
in the colon ascendens, one suspicious region in the transverse
colon, and also one in the sigmoid (thus, there were 36 affected
regions in total). We separated the 36 bowel segments with
CD areas into two parts. Ten segments, from ten patients were
randomly chosen for training, i.e., parameter tuning: the training
set; 26 segments were left for testing to have an independent set
for evaluation: the test set. In the test set, no CDEIS could be
obtained due to strictures in 5/26 segments. Fig. 1(b) illustrates
the dataflow of our paper.

B. Unbiased Retrospective Gating to the Expiration Phase
The focus of our investigation is on the quantification of the
time-varying contrast uptake and release as reflected by the
dynamic MRI signal values. During contrast uptake/release,
there is respiratory and bowel movement. Unfortunately, simple
motion correction by means of registration of all the recorded
images cannot be applied. This is because registration without
gating needs to cope with the large discontinuous deformations
induced by breathing. Furthermore, varying susceptibility effects could affect the image intensity differently depending on
the breathing depth. Moreover, the bowel movement may also
impose a discontinuous deformation on the bowel structures, as
the injected Buscopan does not fully suppress the peristalsis.

Fig. 2. Head-to-foot displacement of each volume with respect to the
expiration-phase template as a function of time shows oscillatory behavior due
to respiration. Positive displacements indicate that the volume is shifted in foot
direction compared to the template. The black circles in the inset correspond to
the gated volumes that are in the expiration phase. Since the shifts are relative
compared to the template negative values arise as the subject exhales deeper.

We hypothesize that retrospective gating to a certain phase
of the respiratory cycle reduces the aforementioned effects to a
large extent. In earlier work [25], we incorporated information
about the respiratory cycle by computing the sum of squared
differences (SSD) for all volumes to a selected reference volume. The middle volume of a series of DCE images was taken
as reference volume. The gating was done by selecting the volumes that corresponded to the local minima of the SSD as a
function of volume number. As such, we aimed that images
acquired in the same respiration phase were selected. However, picking the middle volume as a reference image led to
large undesired fluctuations in the selected volumes, because
the selected reference could be in any phase of the respiratory
cycle. Therefore, the gated images were prone to suffer from
motion artifacts, particularly as a phase right in between the
inspiration and the expiration stages was accidentally selected.
To solve this problem, we now rigidly register all volumes to a
so-called expiration-phase template image, to avoid picking the
“wrong” volume. Based on the head-to-foot translation curve
derived from this rigid registration, we select all local minima
which represent the expiration phase (see Fig. 2). Essentially,
our gating procedure is inspired by the one described in [29].
We propose a method consisting of five steps for creating the
template image, which is adaptively formed by a weighted sum
of temporal images.
Step 1 (Selection of ten reference volumes): Divide the 450
volumes into ten consecutive subsets with an equal number of
images, i.e., 45. Randomly select one reference from each subset. The ten initial references are uniformly distributed over time
and account for variations in breathing depth during acquisition.
Step 2 (Measurement of head-to-foot displacement around the
reference volumes): For each of the initial references, we pick
the ten nearest neighbors in time and apply a rigid registration
to the reference volume based on the SSD. Since these ten volumes are scanned in 8 s and the normal breathing frequency is
about 12–20 cycles/min, this corresponds to approximately two
to three respiratory cycles. We use the SSD as similarity measure, since the contrast over ten consecutive images does not
vary much in such a short time.

LI et al.: EXPIRATION-PHASE TEMPLATE-BASED MOTION CORRECTION OF FREE-BREATHING ABDOMINAL DCE-MRI

The head-to-foot displacement is measured by the ycoordinate of the rigid registration: a smaller y-displacement
implies closer to the head.
Step 3 (Detection of the expiration-phase volumes): Select from each of the ten subsets the expiration-phase
images corresponding to the local minima of the ten head-tofoot displacement curves. This was done by picking the volumes
for which the Gaussian second derivative was higher than that of
its direct neighbors (i.e., a local minimum). The scale (standard
deviation) of the Gaussian was set to 0.8 s (1 scan interval). Typically, this would deliver two to three images per subset. Again,
notice that these images are rather evenly distributed over the total number of 450 images and may, therefore, represent varying
breathing depth.
Step 4 (Selection of the ‘best’ expiration-phase volume as the
initial template): An initial template image is obtained by
c = arg min
i

N


d(Ii0 , Ij0 )

(2)
(3)

where d(Ii0 , Ij0 ) denotes the NMI between two expiration-phase
volumes from step 3, c the index to the volume with maximal
cumulative NMI to all others, and N the number of expirationphase volumes selected in step 3. Thus, Ia0 is the image that
has maximal accumulated NMI with respect to all the other
expiration-phase images selected in step 3. We use NMI now as
the image contrast over the entire series varies significantly due
to the inflow of the contrast medium.
Step 5 (Update the template volume): Register all expirationphase volumes from step 3 to the template Iat (t = 0 is starting
point) based on a rigid transformation that maximizes the NMI.
Adaptively weighting the expiration-phase volumes yields a new
template image as follows:
N


Fig. 3. Comparison of (a) nonweighted and (b) weighted template construction. The zoomed-in images at the bottom correspond to the yellow and red
windows. The weighting process particularly yields an increased local sharpness around the bowel wall (yellow window) and at the bladder boundary (red
window).

j =1,j = i

Ia0 = Ic

Iat =

1219

Wit Iit

(4)

i=1

Wit = d(Iit−1 , Iat−1 )/

N


d(Iit−1 , Iat−1 )

(5)

i=1

in which Iit is the ith volume with weight factor Wit , Iat the
template, and t denotes the iteration. We found empirically that
we need five iterations of step 5 until convergence (defined as a
relative change in Iat of less than 0.1%).
Since the initial expiration-phase images (step 3) are obtained
around randomly picked time points in each one-tenth part of
the whole sequence, the template image emanating from step
5 reflects the temporal-intensity information via the weighting
procedure. It has an intensity that is somewhat in the middle
of the range of intensities encountered. Notice that expiration
images that were acquired when a subject did not fully exhale
(for instance, as a subject started to inhale after only reaching
mid-exhale), might yield poor correspondence. However, due
to the involved weighting, the influence of such outliers will be
minimized. As such, the template retains some local sharpness
(see Fig. 3).

Finally, all volumes (i.e., from the entire DCE series) are
rigidly registered to the template to obtain a head-to-foot displacement curve. Subsequently, the expiration-phase images
were selected by finding the local minima of this curve. Fig. 2
illustrates the outcome of this so-called retrospective gating
procedure.

C. Nonrigid Registration
After retrospective gating of the expiration-phase volumes,
there is still some remaining misalignment due to variations
between the respiratory cycles and small peristaltic movements.
A nonrigid transform is used for compensating the residual
misalignment. Therefore, a B-spline transform based on NMI
similarity is employed. A transformation based on B-splines is
widely used in nonrigid registration and is defined as
Tμ (x) = x +



k
ρk β 3 ( x−x
σ ).

(6)

x k ∈N x

This transform is governed by a set of Nx control points (xk ),
β 3 (x) represents the cubic multidimensional B-spline polynomial, ρk is the control point displacement, and σ is the grid
spacing of the B-spline [9].
We used the Elastix [30], a publically available registration platform to perform the rigid and nonrigid registrations. Both registrations were applied as part of a hierarchical
(coarse-to-fine) multiresolution procedure involving three levels
corresponding to down-sampling by a factor of 4, 2, and 1, respectively (1 refers to original resolution) [31]. The NMI was
maximized by gradient descent in 1000 iterations for each resolution level. The bending energy of the transformation field was
used to penalize sharp variations of the transformation, i.e., to
prevent folding. The weight for the bending energy in Elastix
was set to 0.01, as in [9].

1220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

D. Experimental Design
From each annotation (ROI) in the template image, we extract
a single TIC. Each TIC was normalized as follows S  (t) =
S(t)/S(0) − 1. Essentially, S(0) is taken to represent the offset
of the curve. Subsequently, a tri-exponential model S  (t), which
is a closed-form solution of Tofts’ model [19], was fit to S  (t)
to extract the global trend:
S  (t) = A1 exp(−λ1 t) + A2 exp(−λ2 t) − A3 exp(−λ3 t).
(7)
The mean square residue (MSR) of the fit served as a measure for spatial alignment of the registration process. We have
chosen to apply the tri-exponential model as it is often used in
pharmacokinetic analysis, provides a good fit to the acquired
TICs, and facilitates easy interpretation.
After an initial visual inspection of the registration results,
we performed two experiments in order to set the parameters
of our algorithm. These experiments were based on the training
set (as indicated above).
1) Number of subsets and random reference selection: Each
DCE series was partitioned into consecutive subsets to
create the expiration template and from each subset a random reference volume was selected as described above.
We varied the number of subsets from 1 to 50 to evaluate
how it influences the registration result. We also determined the variation due to the random reference selection.
Therefore, we repeated the procedure five times, while selecting different reference volumes. While doing so, we
extracted TICs from the registered data and fitted a triexponential model to the annotated regions. The MSR
after fitting was used to assess the effect of our choices.
2) B-spline node spacing: The nonrigid registration was performed with five different B-spline node spacings: 20,
16, 12, 8, and 4 voxels, respectively (they correspond to
50, 40, 30, 20, 10 mm, respectively). As in the previous
experiment, the TICs were extracted from the registered
data and we fitted a tri-exponential model to each of them.
The lowest average MSR after fitting was used to select
the B-spline node spacing. The Wilcoxon signed rank test
was used to compare the results. A p-value < 0.05 was
considered to indicate a significant difference.
Next, we assessed the performance of the algorithm by three
experiments, carried out on the test set.
1) Respiration phase selection: Our method includes retrospective gating to the expiration phase, which intuitively
seems the least susceptible to motion artifacts [32]. To
support our choice, this method was compared to gating
and registration to two other phases of the respiratory cycle: the inspiration phase and an arbitrarily selected phase.
Essentially, the inspiration-based framework works in a
similar fashion as the proposed method except for the
selection of the maxima from the displacement curves
instead of the minima. To compare with our earlier preliminary work [25], we also picked the middle volume of
the DCE series as a reference. Henceforth, we will refer to
it as the arbitrary-phase reference since the respiration
phase is essentially randomly picked. In addition to the

Fig. 4. Illustration of the registration and gating method on a representative
dataset: first volume (prior to contrast injection) of the dataset (a) and last
volume (after contrast injection) of the dataset (b); intensity as a function of
time (horizontally) along the red line in the original data (c); after registration
of all data without gating: the red arrow indicates a misregistered region (d);
after gating to the expiration phase (e); after gating to the expiration phase and
registration (f).

aforementioned choices, we also tried to register all images to the expiration-phase template, i.e., without gating. The MSR that remains after fitting the tri-exponential
model to different sections of the bowel wall was used to
assess the various strategies. Again, the Wilcoxon signed
rank test was used to compare the results.
2) Mean target registration error (MTRE): We evaluated the
accuracy of our method based on manually annotated
landmarks. Unfortunately, it is not a trivial task to identify
salient points on the bowel wall which was subject to both
intensity and spatial deformations. Therefore, five landmarks were carefully selected on organs in close proximity
to the bowel wall, including the lateral caudal tip of the
liver, the cranial apex of the bladder and the bifurcation
of the aorta into the lower extremities. We invited three
experts in abdominal image analysis to independently annotate these landmarks on ten randomly selected DCE
images from each patient. The interobserver variability
was computed by the mean distance between the annotations of the experts. Subsequently, the different gating
and registration methods were applied to the annotated
volumes after which the MTRE was calculated for each
expert. The mean MTRE was determined by averaging
the Euclidean distance between the landmarks over all
permutations of the ten registered DCE images. Similarly,

LI et al.: EXPIRATION-PHASE TEMPLATE-BASED MOTION CORRECTION OF FREE-BREATHING ABDOMINAL DCE-MRI

1221

TABLE I
AVERAGE MEAN SQUARED RESIDUE (MSR) AFTER FITTING THE
TRI-EXPONENTIAL MODEL TO TICS FROM DISEASED AND HEALTHY REGIONS
IN TEN PATIENTS FOR A VARYING NUMBER OF SUBSETS
No. of subsets
Diseased,
n = 10
Normal,
n = 10

1

2

5

10

20

50

0.0031

0.0020

0.0021

0.0021

0.0022

0.0021

0.0015

0.0011

0.0011

0.0011

0.0010

0.0011

TABLE II
AVERAGE MEAN SQUARED RESIDUE (MSR) AFTER FITTING THE
TRI-EXPONENTIAL MODEL TO TICS FROM DISEASED AND HEALTHY REGIONS
IN TEN PATIENTS FOR FIVE RANDOMLY SELECTED REFERENCE IMAGES
(NUMBER OF SUBSETS IS 10)
Reference image no.:
Diseased,
n = 10
Normal,
n = 10

1

2

3

4

5

0.0020

0.0020

0.0022

0.0023

0.0021

0.0011

0.0011

0.0011

0.0011

0.0011

Fig. 6. Comparison of TICs. (a) Representative dataset containing two annotations: a bowel segment affected by CD (red) and a region representing a healthy
area (green). The remaining images show the TICs extracted from ROIs in the
original data (b), after registering all 450 volumes to the expiration-phase template (c), after gating to an arbitrary selected respiratory phase and registration
(d), after inspiration-based gating and registration (e) and after expiration-based
gating and registration (f). The black lines in (d)–(f) result from fitting the triexponential function. The mean squared residuals (MSRs) of the red TICs from
(b) to (f) are: 0.0037, 0.0030, 0.0025, 0.0020, and 0.0020; the MSRs of the
green TICs from (b) to (f) are: 0.0155, 0.0091, 0.0031, 0.0033, and 0.0011.

Fig. 5. Average mean squared residue (MSR) after fitting the tri-exponential
model to TICs from diseased and healthy region in ten patients as a function of
the B-spline node spacing.

the MTRE was computed for a state-of-the-art method
for respiratory motion correction: the so-called RDDR
[17]. We applied the RDDR method to the original data
as was proposed in [17]. Furthermore, we applied RDDR
to the images remaining after expiration-phase gating to
examine how gating influences the result. Once more, the
Wilcoxon signed rank test was used for comparison of the
outcomes.
3) Relative contrast enhancement: It was shown that radiological features from MRI are related to CDEIS [3].
Particularly, the RCE is evaluated as it is known to have
significant correlation to CDEIS. A measure for DCE RCE
(DR) was defined via (1) using for (Ipre , Ip ost ) the signal intensity inside an ROI in the first respectively the
last registered volume and for {std(Ipre ), std(Ip ost )} the
standard deviations of the noise measured in the annotated
air region outside the body in the first respectively the

last registered volume. Subsequently, we computed the
Pearson correlation coefficient between the RCE measurements from the two observers and the CDEIS scores.
We also computed the Pearson correlation coefficient between DR and the CDEIS scores. Finally, we determined
the Pearson correlation coefficient between model fitting
parameter A1 and the CDEIS, as A1 is directly related
to the slope of the TIC curve and, therefore, to the DR
measurement. All correlations were performed on measurements from diseased areas as determined on the MRI
data. These data served as independent measures (in addition to the MSR of the fit) to assess the performance of our
method as RCE is known to correlate with CDEIS [3]. The
significance of the correlations was assessed by mapping
the correlations onto a t-statistic by a Fisher transformation (MATLAB R2010b, The Math Works Inc., Natick,
MA, USA).
III. RESULTS
A. Visual Inspection
Intensity profiles as a function of time are visualized in
Fig. 4(b)–(e). The original profiles show jagged periodic

1222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

TABLE III
MSR AFTER FITTING THE TRI-EXPONENTIAL MODEL TO THE TICS IN VARIOUS ROI’S, AVERAGED OVER ALL PATIENTS

Case
TI(diseased, n = 16)
CA(diseased, n = 8)
TC(diseased, n = 1)
SIG(diseased, n = 1)
TI(normal, n = 16)
CA(normal, n = 8)
TC(normal, n = 1)
SIG(normal, n = 1)

#1
Original data

#2
E-Phase

#3
E-Phase R-all

#4
A-Phase R

#5
I-Phase R

#6
E-Phase R

0.0047(0.0114)
0.0047(0.0194)
0.0114
0.0013
0.0116(0.0536)
0.0126(0.0177)
0.0814
0.0129

0.0039(0.0087)
0.0051(0.0111)
0.0119
0.0020
0.0047(0.0073)
0.0071(0.0113)
0.0476
0.0156

0.0021(0.0061)
0.0029(0.0047)
0.0024
0.0013
0.0023(0.0037)
0.0018(0.0047)
0.0057
0.0092

0.0024(0.0044)
0.0040(0.0069)
0.0030
0.0019
0.0030(0.0075)
0.0023(0.0041)
0.0079
0.0100

0.0021(0.0037)
0.0031(0.0059)
0.0025
0.0019
0.0020(0.0034)
0.0019(0.0025)
0.0052
0.0080

0.0019(0.0027)
0.0021(0.0031)
0.0016
0.0013
0.0013(0.0019)
0.0011(0.0028)
0.0037
0.0087

The first column indicates the bowel section in which the ROI was placed: TI = Terminal Ileum, CA = Colon Ascendens, TC = Transverse
Colon, SIG = Sigmoid colon. The first four rows are averages over diseased areas and the last four rows are over normal bowel regions. The
six labels #1 - #6 denote averaged MSR values without gating or registration (#1), after expiration-phase gating (#2), after registration of all
data to the expiration-phase template (#3), after gating and registration to an arbitrary (#4), inspiration (#5), and expiration-phase template
(#6). The numbers in bold are the lowest per row. The worst cases encountered are shown between brackets. Abbreviations E-phase, A-Phase
R, and I-Phase stand for expiration phase, arbitrary phase, and inspiration phase, respectively. The additive “-all” means registration of all
images and additive R reflects registration of those images in a particular respiration phase.

TABLE IV
MTRE OF LANDMARKS

Case

#1
Original data

#2
E-Phase

#3
E-Phase R-all

#4
A-Phase R

#5
I-Phase R

#6
E-Phase R

#7
RDDR-all

#8
RDDR-gated

OB1
OB2
OB3

5.01 (2.65)
5.62 (2.60)
6.32 (1.06)

2.22 (0.67)
3.40 (1.77)
2.48 (0.77)

4.41 (2.84)
3.71 (2.42)
5.35 (1.00)

2.66 (1.93)
2.48 (1.57)
2.34 (0.71)

2.60 (1.53)
2.53 (1.24)
2.60 (0.92)

2.12 (0.56)
2.27 (1.13)
2.33 (0.73)

4.44 (0.91)
3.32 (1.92)
5.27 (1.04)

3.08 (1.25)
2.83 (1.23)
3.10 (1.17)

The eight labels #1–#8 denote averaged MTRE values without gating or registration (#1), after expiration-phase gating (#2), after
registration of all data to the expiration-phase template (#3), after gating and registration to an arbitrary (#4), inspiration (#5), and
expiration-phase template (#6) and registration using RDDR without gating (#7) and using RDDR on expiration-phase gated data (#8).
The standard deviation of the target registration error of all landmarks are shown between brackets. The numbers in bold are the lowest
in the different categories (i.e., for our proposed methods and the RDDR-based methods). The unit for all reported values is mm.

TABLE V
PEARSON CORRELATION OF ENHANCEMENT MEASUREMENTS (DR, A1 ) TO CDEIS

Case

parameters

#1
Original
data

#2
E-Phase

#3
E-Phase
R-all

#4
A-Phase RR

#5
I-Phase R

#6
E-Phase R

DR

r
p
r
p

0.16
0.48
0.18
0.43

0.22
0.32
0.21
0.35

0.33
0.14
0.39
0.08

0.50
0.02
0.36
0.11

0.50
0.02
0.40
0.09

0.55
0.01
0.60
0.004

A1

r and p denote the correlation coefficient and p-value, respectively. DR was obtained from the first and last DCE volumes. A 1 is a
parameter from the tri-exponential model that captures the contrast enhancement. The six labels #1 - #6 denote correlation between
CDEIS and (DR, A1) parameters from the data without gating or registration (#1), after expiration-phase gating (#2), after registration
of all data to the expiration-phase template (#3), after gating and registration to an arbitrary (#4), inspiration (#5), and expiration-phase
template (#6). The numbers in bold are the best correlations per case.

fluctuations of the bowel surface [see Fig. 4(b)]. Fig. 4(c)
shows that these disturbances largely remain after registering
all data to the expiration template. (pointed to by the red arrow). Likewise, the fluctuations are not completely removed
from the gated data Fig. 4(d). After gating and nonrigid registration, the intensity profiles are smooth [see Fig. 4(e)]. It
nicely illustrates that our registration procedure could deal
with the effects of varying breathing depth and the (limited)
peristalsis movement that needed to be compensated after
gating.

B. Numbers of Subsets and Random Reference Selection
First, we investigate how the number of subsets influences
the registration result on the training set. Table I collates the
average MSR of the tri-exponential fit over the diseased respectively normal regions as a function of the number of subsets.
It demonstrates that the MSR stabilizes as the number of subsets is 2 or larger (for each such pair, p > 0.05). Therefore, it
shows that the number of subsets is not a critical parameter.
Additionally, we repeated the random reference selection five
times while employing ten subsets. The MSR results are shown

LI et al.: EXPIRATION-PHASE TEMPLATE-BASED MOTION CORRECTION OF FREE-BREATHING ABDOMINAL DCE-MRI

1223

TABLE VI
PEARSON CORRELATION OF RCE MEASUREMENTS BY OBSERVERS (OB1 AND
OB2) TO CDEIS
Parameters

OB1

OB2

DR

A1

r
p

0.29
0.2

0.45
0.04

0.55
0.01

0.60
0.004

r and p denote the correlation coefficient and
p-value, respectively. The entries related to DR
and A1 were repeated from TABLE V (column
#6). The numbers in bold denote the best correlation.

in Table II. It demonstrates that the random pick also does not
influence the average MSR value.

Fig. 7. Scatterplot of the CDEIS score versus the tri-exponential model parameter A1, which reflects the signal enhancement of the tri-exponential model.
The red line represents the linear regression (r = 0.60 and p = 0.004).

C. B-Spline Node Spacing
Fig. 5 shows the average MSR of the tri-exponential fit over
the training set as a function of the B-spline node spacing. It
involved the diseased as well as the healthy regions in each
subject. The red curve was derived from all regions containing
inflamed bowel. The green curve was extracted from the control
regions containing healthy bowel. We presume that a lower
average MSR indicates a better registration. Setting the node
spacing to eight voxels appears to be optimal for our registration
task. Although the differences are small, this setting yields a
significantly lower MSR compared to the other spacings (p <
0.05).
D. Respiration Phase Selection and Registration Performance
Fig. 6 collates the outcome of different correction schemes
on the test set. The original number of 3-D volumes per DCEMRI dataset was 450. The gated expiration-phase sets contained
70–140 volumes (in all 28 patients with regions affected by
CD). Fig. 6(a) depicts annotated ROIs: red indicates a diseased
region and green a healthy reference region. TICs of the ROIs
extracted from the original, gated, and registered data are shown
in Fig. 6(b)–(f). Notice that in Fig. 6(b), the fluctuations of
the green curve are much more severe than those of the red
curve. This is because the bowel segment in the green region is
closer to the lungs. As a consequence, it suffers more from
respiratory motion. Fig. 6(c) contains TICs that result from
registering all 450 volume to the expiration-phase template.
Clearly, the TICs after gating and registration display reduced
fluctuations [see Fig. 6(d)–(f)]. Observe especially the noise
reduction of the green curve, which is typical for the whole
dataset. Also, notice that the expiration-phase approach renders
the smoothest TIC curves [see Fig. 6(f)].
Table III gives sections of the average MSR values over
different the bowel wall in the test set. A smaller MSR indicates a better fit and corresponds to a smoother TIC. The MSR
values were calculated over ROIs separately indicated in the
expiration-phase template (for #1,#2,#3,#6), the arbitrary-phase
template (#4), and the inspiration-phase template (#5), respectively. Notice that there are 450 time points in the original data
(#1) and after registration of all data to the expiration-phase

template (#3). Gating reduces the original 450 time points to
approximately 100. The effect of having different numbers of
data points was taken into account by uniformly downsampling the TICs extracted from all 450 time points (#1 and
#3) to the number of data points after gating (#5). In former experiments [26], it was already shown that expirationphase images are more reproducible than inspiration-phase images. However, we still include inspiration-phase selection if
only to confirm the previous results and make our experiments
comprehensive.
Apparently, the MSR values in Table III for the methods
that also involve registration are always smaller than the MSR
values for the original and gated-only data. Furthermore,
Table III shows that expiration-phase-based registration gave
the best result among all the registration procedures. In fact, the
Wilcoxon signed rank test yields that the MSR in column #6
is significantly lower than all the other approaches in the cases
with more than one sample (p < 0.05).
E. Registration Accuracy Based on Landmarks and
Comparison to a State-of-the-Art Method
The interobserver variation in the annotations was calculated
to be 2.07 mm. Table IV demonstrates that gating alone reduced
the magnitude of misregistration by a factor of two (see #2
compared to #1). Furthermore, the expiration-based approach
(#6) yields a significantly smaller MTRE (p < 0.05) than the
other registration and gating approaches (#1–#5). Essentially,
this finding confirms the conclusions from Section III-D that
the expiration phase is the most stable respiratory phase for
registration. Observe that the errors of expiration-based gating
and registration (#6) approximate the interobserver variability
of the annotations. Notice also that RDDR applied to the images
after expiration-phase gating (#8) outperforms RDDR directly
applied to the original data (#7). It once more confirms that
gating is an important step to achieve high registration accuracy.
Finally, observe that our expiration-based approach (#6) yields
a significantly lower MTRE than RDDR applied to the same
data (#8) (p < 0.05).

1224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 8. Representative slice from one patient (a); detail indicating regions
affected by CD (d); color maps of contrast enhancement per voxel between the
first and last volume of the DCE-MRI prior to (b) and after respiration-phase
gating and registration (c); colormaps of the enhancement parameter of the
tri-exponential model A1 fitted to TICs prior to (e) and after respiration-phase
gating and registration (f).

F. Correlation of RCE to CDEIS
Table V shows the correlation of our measures for RCE (DR
and A1 ) with the CDEIS score. These correlations concern 21
out of 26 diseased segments, since in five segments the CDEIS
could not be scored during colonoscopy due to strictures. The
DR and A1 parameters based on expiration-phase gating and
registration yield the best correlation. Furthermore, Table VI
shows the outcome of correlating the RCE values from the two
observers based on the pre- and postcontrast MRI images to
CDEIS. The DR and A1 correlations from expiration-phase gating and registration are repeated in Table V for the sake of
completeness. Observe that the correlation based on DR improves over observers 1 and 2. Parameter A1 based on
expiration-phase gating and registration shows an even better
correlation with CDEIS (r = 0.60, p = 0.004) than DR. The
result is further illustrated in Fig. 7.
Finally, Fig. 8 contains representative colormaps of DR
and A1 illustrating the differentiating power of the proposed
methods. Notice particularly how in the diseased regions the
signal is stronger after gating and registration. Furthermore,
observe that the A1 color maps display a slightly sharper response than the manual RCE. There are some “false positive”
regions in the colormaps. These regions are outside of the radiologist’s annotations indicating diseased bowel. This only emphasizes that CD severity cannot be based on a single feature,
which is well known [3].

We developed a method for compensating the spatial mismatch due to the motion inherent to free-breathing DCE-MRI of
the abdomen. This problem is especially hard because adjacent
organs may slide along each other, causing large discontinuities
in the deformation field. Our method applies a retrospective
gating to the expiration breathing phase after which residual
misalignment is removed by a nonrigid registration. Effectively,
the gating makes that image volumes are already almost in correspondence and that the remaining deformation field is continuous. As such, the confounding effects of breathing motion and
potentially varying susceptibility are already limited.
We performed a quantitative assessment of the registration
accuracy using manually annotated landmarks made by three
image analysis experts. Our expiration-based approach showed
the lowest MTRE for each expert and the results were close
to the average interobserver variation (2.07 mm). We also
found that our method performed significantly better than
the state-of-the-art methods for registering DCE-MRI called
RDDR. We also quantitatively assessed the registration performance by an application-specific task. Therefore, we first
compared the MSR emanating from fitting a tri-exponential
model to the extracted TICs in diseased and healthy regions.
We compared retrospective gating of the expiration phase to
the inspiration phase as well as to a randomly selected phase. The
expiration-based approach proved to produce the best result. We
also quantitatively evaluated the motion correction procedure by
correlating the DCE based RCE measurement (DR) and the fit
parameter A1 with the CDEIS score. Again, the expirationbased approach gave the best result. A simpler expiration-based
approach which only choses one expiration-phase image from
all 450 images may give worse outcome (confirmed in Table I).
Essentially, it was shown that our weighted expiration template
gives the best outcome.
We also found that the DR measure derived from the
expiration-phase DCE data correlates significantly with the
CDEIS score. The result is better than the correlations between manual RCE measurements and CDEIS. Even stronger,
the model parameter A1 , which was obtained by fitting a triexponential model to the TIC, showed a better correlation than
all other RCE-based correlations. Parameter A1 represents the
amplitude of exponential signal enhancement.
A limitation of our work is that the ROIs were manually drawn
by one expert. As such, a differently drawn region could result
in a different TIC. Notice that in Table III, all six methods essentially involved the same regions albeit separately annotated in
different templates by the same expert to enable a proper comparison. Moreover, in order to reduce variability due to inclusion
of boundary regions, we instructed the expert to carefully make
the annotations.
Another limitation of our work is that retrospective gating
excludes a large part of the data. However, we hypothesize that
the loss of data due to retrospective gating hardly affects the
TICs from tissue and subsequent pharmacokinetic modeling.
Such TICs reflect the time-varying concentrations of contrast
agent in the blood pool and intercellular space. These two compartments are related by linear diffusion equations for which

LI et al.: EXPIRATION-PHASE TEMPLATE-BASED MOTION CORRECTION OF FREE-BREATHING ABDOMINAL DCE-MRI

the arterial input function acts as input. In our application, we
derive the AIF for pharmacokinetic modeling from the aorta,
prior to gating and registration. The aorta is firmly connected
to the spine, so that it is not affected by respiratory motion.
As such, the AIF is optimally sampled. The aforementioned
diffusion acts as a low-pass filter on the time-varying AIF and
yields a smoothed TIC in response to the AIF. As such, the effects of gating (subsampling) are limited. An AIF derived from
a different artery than the aorta that is suffering from respiration
movement might be affected by the loss of data. We consider
an investigation of this topic beyond the scope of this paper.
Primarily, our results demonstrated that gating is an important
step to improve the registration of free-breathing abdominal MR
images (see Section III-D–III-F). Due to the relative large discontinuous deformation caused by breathing, it is not easy to
estimate the displacement by a conventional registration technique. Essentially, the gating procedure reduces the breathing
effects to a large extent. Alternatively, we may consider using a
discrete optimization technique such as Markov random fields
to improve the registration results without using gating.
All the results demonstrate that our expiration-based retrospective gating and a nonrigid registration approach effectively
corrects for respiratory motion and remaining peristalsis. We
consider as future work combining DCE features with other
MRI features for optimal CDEIS prediction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank D. Atkinson and V. Hamy for
supplying the code of RDDR and advising us on the comparison
with their work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. D. Kappelman et al., “Recent trends in the prevalence of Crohn’s
disease and ulcerative colitis in a commercially insured US population,”
Dig. Dis. Sci., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 519–525, 2012.
[2] M. L. Ziech et al., “Grading luminal Crohn’s disease: Which MRI
features are considered as important?” Eur. J. Radiol, vol. 81, no. 4,
pp. 467–472, 2012.
[3] J. Rimola et al., “Magnetic resonance for assessment of disease activity
and severity in ileocolonic Crohn’s disease,” Gut, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 1113–
1120, 2009.
[4] J. Y. Mary and R. Modigliani, “Development and validation of an endoscopic index of the severity for Crohn’s disease: A prospective multicentre
study. Groupe d’Etudes Thérapeutiques des Affections Inflammatoires du
Tube Digestif (GETAID),” Gut, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 983–989, 1989.
[5] A. Oto et al., “Quantitative analysis of dynamic contrast enhanced MRI
for assessment of bowel inflammation in Crohn’s disease pilot study,”
Acad. Radiol., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1223–1230, 2009.
[6] K. Horsthuis et al., “Perianal Crohn disease: Evaluation of dynamic
contrast-enhanced MR imaging as an indicator of disease activity,” Radiology, vol. 251, no. 2, pp. 380–387, 2009.
[7] A. C. Larson et al., “Self-gated cardiac cine MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med.,
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 93–102, 2004.
[8] A. Brau and J. H. Brittain, “Generalized self-navigated motion detection technique: Preliminary investigation in abdominal imaging,” Magn.
Reson. Med., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 263–270, 2006.
[9] D. Rueckert et al., “Nonrigid registration using free-form deformations:
application to breast MR images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 18, no.
8, pp. 712–721, Aug. 1999.
[10] T. Rohlfing et al., “Volume-preserving nonrigid registration of MR breast
images using free-form deformation with an incompressibility constraint,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 730–741, Jun. 2003.
[11] C. Tanner et al., “Volume and shape preservation of enhancing lesions
when applying non-rigid registration to a time series of contrast enhancing

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]
[31]

[32]

1225

MR breast images,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.
Assist. Intervention, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2000, pp. 327–337.
T. Song et al., “Automatic 4-d registration in dynamic MR renography based on over-complete dyadic wavelet and Fourier transforms,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Intervention, Palm
Springs, CA, USA, 2005, pp. 205–213.
Y. Zheng et al., “De-enhancing the dynamic contrast-enhanced breast
MRI for robust registration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput.
Comput. Assist. Intervention, Brisbane, Australia, 2007, pp. 811–819.
M. Ebrahimi and A. L. Martel, “A general PDE-framework for registration
of contrast enhanced images,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput.
Comput. Assist. Intervention, London, U.K., 2009, pp. 811–819.
A. Melbourne et al., “Registration of dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI
using a progressive principal component registration (PPCR),” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 52, no. 17, pp. 5147–5156, 2007.
G. Wollny et al., “Automatic motion compensation of free breathing acquired myocardial perfusion data by using independent component analysis,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1015–1028, 2012.
V. Hamy et al., “Respiratory motion correction in dynamic MRI using
robust data decomposition registration—Application to DCE-MRI,” Med.
Image Anal., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 301–313, 2014.
S. Rajaraman et al., “Automated registration of sequential breath-hold dynamic contrast-enhanced MR images: A comparison of three techniques,”
Magn. Reson. Imaging, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 668–682, 2011.
P. S. Tofts, “Modeling tracer kinetics in dynamic Gd-DTPA MR imaging,”
J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 91–101, 1997.
G. A. Buonaccorsi et al., “Comparison of the performance of tracer
kinetic model-driven registration for dynamic contrast enhanced MRI using different models of contrast enhancement,” Acad. Radiol., vol. 13,
no. 9, pp. 1112–1123, 2006.
M. Bhushan et al., “Motion correction and parameter estimation in
dceMRI sequences: Application to colorectal cancer,” presented at the
Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Intervention, Toronto,
ON, Canada, 2011.
C. Xiaohua et al., “Simultaneous segmentation and registration of
contrast-enhanced breast MRI,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Med.
Imag., Glenwood Springs, CO, USA, 2005, pp. 126–137.
K. Sandrasegaran et al., “State-of-the-art pancreatic MRI,” Am. J.
Roentgenol., vol. 195, no. 1, pp. 42–53, 2010.
M. Filipovic et al., “Motion compensated generalized reconstruction for
free-breathing dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol.
65, no. 3, pp. 812–822, 2011.
Z. Li et al., “3D non-rigid motion correction of free-breathing abdominal
DCE-MRI data,” in Proc. MICCAI Workshop Abdominal Imag. Comput.
Clinical Appl., Toronto, ON, Canada, 2011, pp. 44–50.
J. M. Blackall et al., “MRI-based measurements of respiratory motion
variability and assessment of imaging strategies for radiotherapy planning,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, no. 17, pp. 4147–4169, 2006.
M. L. Ziech et al., “Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in patients with
luminal Crohn’s disease,” Eur. J. Radiol., vol. 81, no. 11, pp. 3019–3027,
2012.
J. A. Tielbeek et al., “Grading Crohn disease activity with MRI: Interobserver variability of MRI features, MRI scoring of severity, and correlation
with Crohn disease endoscopic index of severity,” Am. J. Roentgenol., vol.
201, no. 6, pp. 1220–1228, 2013.
M. Usman et al., “Motion corrected compressed sensing for freebreathing dynamic cardiac MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 70, no. 2,
pp. 504–516, 2013.
S. Klein et al., “elastix: A toolbox for intensity-based medical image
registration,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 196–205, Jan.
2010.
M. Staring, S. Klein, J. H. Reiber, W. J. Niessen, and B. C. Stoel, “Pulmonary image registration with elastix using a standard intensity-based
algorithm,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist.
Intervention, 2010, pp. 73–79.
A. Hertanto et al., “Reduction of irregular breathing artifacts in
respiration-correlated CT images using a respiratory motion model,” Med.
Phys., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 3070–3079, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

