100

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Unobtrusive Monitoring of Neonatal Brain
Temperature Using a Zero-Heat-Flux Sensor Matrix
Louis Atallah, Member, IEEE, Edwin Bongers, Bishal Lamichhane, and Sidarto Bambang-Oetomo

Abstract—The temperature of preterm neonates must be maintained within a narrow window to ensure their survival. Continuously measuring their core temperature provides an optimal
means of monitoring their thermoregulation and their response
to environmental changes. However, existing methods of measuring core temperature can be very obtrusive, such as rectal probes,
or inaccurate/lagging, such as skin temperature sensors and spotchecks using tympanic temperature sensors. This study investigates
an unobtrusive method of measuring brain temperature continuously using an embedded zero-heat-flux (ZHF) sensor matrix
placed under the head of the neonate. The measured temperature
profile is used to segment areas of motion and incorrect positioning, where the neonate’s head is not above the sensors. We compare
our measurements during low motion/stable periods to esophageal
temperatures for 12 preterm neonates, measured for an average of
5 h per neonate. The method we propose shows good correlation
with the reference temperature for most of the neonates. The unobtrusive embedding of the matrix in the neonate’s environment
poses no harm or disturbance to the care work-flow, while measuring core temperature. To address the effect of motion on the
ZHF measurements in the current embodiment, we recommend a
more ergonomic embedding ensuring the sensors are continuously
placed under the neonate’s head.
Index Terms—Core temperature, sensing, unobtrusive sensors,
zero-heat-flux.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE World Health Organization (WHO) stresses the importance of thermal protection of the newborn, by defining a
series of measures taken at birth and during the first days of
life to ensure that the baby maintains a normal body temperature of 36.5–37.5 ◦ C [1]. However, hypothermia continues to
remain underdocumented, underrecognized, and undermanaged
[2]. Hypothermia is categorized into three stages [2]: Cold stress
(36.0 to 36.4 ◦ C), moderate hypothermia (32.0 to 35.9 ◦ C), and
severe hypothermia (<32 ◦ C). The incidence of hypothermia for
low birth weight infants (<1500 g) can be up to 78% [3]. Moni-

T

Manuscript received March 13, 2014; revised December 9, 2014; accepted
December 18, 2014. Date of publication December 22, 2014; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This work was conducted within the E-NEMO
project supported by Agentschap NL.
L. Atallah and E. Bongers are with the Patient Care & Measurements Department, Philips Research, 5611 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
louis.atallah@philips.com; edwin.bongers@philips.com).
B. Lamichhane is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
b.lamichhane@student.tue.nl).
S. Bambang-Oetomo is with the Department of Industrial Design, Eindhoven
University of Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands, and also with
the Máxima Medical Center, 5504 DB Veldhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
S.BambangOetomo@mmc.nl).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2385103

toring the neonate’s core temperature and maintaining it within
the narrow range is essential for the prevention of hypothermia.
Core temperature is defined as the temperature of the body’s
vital organs, such as the liver, kidneys, and heart which are relatively protected from external influences [4]. Core temperature
is not uniform across the body as some organs produce heat,
such as the brain and liver while others lose it, such as the lungs
and skin. In practice, clinicians monitor a surrogate temperature that represents the core temperature as closely as possible.
A common core temperature measurement method uses rectal thermistors, which are thin probes that must be inserted to
5 cm in the baby’s rectum, running a risk of perforation as the
sigmoid colon makes a right-angle turn 3 cm from the anal
opening [5]. Therefore, many alternative locations are used as
core temperature surrogates. These include: the abdomen, the
axilla, the esophagus, and the tympanic membrane. There is an
ongoing debate in the existing literature as to how accurately
axillary and tympanic temperatures approximate core temperature [6]–[8] and findings vary widely across different studies.
Esophageal temperature, on the other hand, has been used as a
reference for core temperature [9], although it was noted that
esophageal temperatures may differ by 0.2 ◦ C in 2 cm distances
from the maximum temperature [10].
In addition to measuring the core body temperature of the
neonate, the brain temperature is of particular interest to clinicians. The brain of the newborn constitutes 12% of body mass
and produces up to 70% of body heat [11]. Heat storage in
the brain depends on metabolic heat production, cerebral circulation, and heat loss from the surface. Measuring the brain
temperature (and its relationship to esophageal temperatures)
allows the detection of pathological conditions impairing cerebral blood flow and possibly causing brain damage [12]. In
addition to that, measuring brain temperature would offer a
means of assessing the extent of cooling for babies with birth
asphyxia treated with therapeutic hypothermia [13]. Currently,
most studies on therapeutic hypothermia rely on rectal measurements only due to the lack of a noninvasive method to assess
brain temperature [14]. Recently, several possible techniques
have emerged for measuring brain temperature. These include
magnetic resonance spectroscopy [15] and multifrequency microwave radiometry [16]. The former is highly sensitive to motion, whereas the latter could have interference from other electric signals and has not yet been applied to neonates. Both techniques are still costly which could prevent their wide adoption in
neonatal intensive care units (NICU)s. Temperature monitoring
with zero-heat-flux (ZHF) on the other hand, is a cost-efficient
way to approximate brain temperature in a continuous way [17].
It is based on the creation of a well-insulated “zero-flux” area of

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ATALLAH et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE MONITORING OF NEONATAL BRAIN TEMPERATURE USING A ZERO-HEAT-FLUX SENSOR MATRIX

101

Fig. 1. (a) It shows the implementation of the ZHF principle per sensor. These sensors are then used in an 8 × 8 ZHF sensor matrix, shown in (b). The ZHF
matrix is covered in protective foam and embedded in a cover (c) that is then placed inside a neonatal positioner (d). In the incubator, the baby is positioned on the
modified positioner (e).

measurement that can reflect core temperature. ZHF has been
applied in several studies for brain temperature measurement for
adults. Examples are Harioka et al. [17] who reported a good
correlation between deep forehead temperature and blood temperature in the thoracic artery for patients undergoing surgery
and Zeiner et al. [18] who reported a good agreement between
cerebral ZHF and esophageal temperatures for patients during
mild therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest.
The use of ZHF techniques for brain temperature monitoring
in adult studies normally involves applying a sensor patch to the
forehead [19]. Given the vulnerable skin of preterm neonates
and the damaging (sometimes lifelong) scars left by adhesive
patches and electrodes, the use of an adhesive patch is not
recommended. Thus, the main motivation of this study is to
develop an unobtrusive embodiment of ZHF sensors to measure
neonatal brain temperature continuously without using adhesive
patches. We will first describe the embodiment of these sensors
in a matrix and its use in the context of the NICU, then explain the clinical setup and methodology used to compare brain
temperature data to measurements from reference esophageal
temperature probes [9]. Finally, we will present the results and
discuss limitations and possible improvements.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. ZHF Matrix Sensors
ZHF is a method to measure deep tissue temperature by creating an (almost) perfectly insulated area near the skin [19], [20].
The assumption is that if heat loss from the surface of the body
is reduced to zero, the gradient between core Tc and surface
temperature Ts will also tend toward zero. The surface temperature would then be uniform and equal to core temperature.
An implementation is shown in Fig. 1(a), where an electronic

circuit is used to maintain a zero heat flow. Normally, an amount
of heat (denoted by H) flows from the core toward the skin
H = K(Tc − Ts )

(1)

where K represents the thermal property of the tissue. Each
individual ZHF sensor is composed of a thermal resistance material with a thermistor on each side (measuring the skin temperature Ts and the external temperature Tt ) and a heater on
the side of the external thermistor. Since we cannot measure Tc
directly and derive the heat flow H, we assume that the difference Ts − Tt reflects the same heat flow. A control loop is used
to maintain this flow at zero by turning on or switching off the
heater. In other words, the sensor becomes a perfect isolator and
no heat escapes. In that case, the skin temperature Ts would
be equivalent to the core temperature Tc . The depth to which
the tissue reaches a uniform temperature depends on the size of
the area over which the surface is insulated [19].
In order to take into account neonatal motion and positioning
changes, we used a matrix of 8 × 8 ZHF sensors as shown in
Fig. 1(b) with a total size of 10 cm×10 cm. Since the neonate
can freely move or be repositioned by the carers, we chose this
matrix size to ensure that sensors are always under the head. In
designing the matrix, we aimed for a flexible design leaving a
small space between individual sensors as well as padding with
a protective foam material [see Fig. 1(c)] to ensure neonatal
comfort while using it in the incubator. The matrix was positioned inside a cotton fabric neonatal positioner (SnuggleUp,
Philips Healthcare, Andover, USA) under the baby’s head as
shown in Fig. 1(d) and (e).
Calibration of the thermistors in the matrix was done offline
in a temperature controlled and uniformly stabilized water bath
by using an external Fluke temperature sensor (Type 1524) as a
reference. The values measured at a series of temperatures were

102

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

8

37

7

37

7

6

36

5

36

6

35

5
35

4
3

4

34

3
34

2
1
8

8

6

4

2

33

2
1
8

6

4

2

Fig. 2. Instantaneous ZHF temperature profile is shown in (a) when the baby’s
head is positioned near the center of matrix and (b) when it is positioned at the
edge of the matrix.

used to fit a linear model that can map thermistor measurements
to exact temperatures. The sampling rate for the ZHF sensor
is 0.5 Hz. The thermistors are given a maximum temperature
of 42 ◦ C to minimize discomfort for the neonates and comply
with technical standards for medical electrical equipment safety
(IEC 60601). Thus, the role of the heater is to keep the temperature difference between Ts and Tt as close as possible to
zero, without any of these temperatures exceeding 42 ◦ C. We
relied on current limiters to prevent overheating in case of any
hardware or software failure. The recording consists of a series
of instantaneous temperature profiles of 8 × 8 Ts values shown
in Fig. 2. We hypothesize that the brain temperature can be estimated by the maximum value in the matrix. Due to physiological
properties of the head (skin, skull), the circuit required a stabilization time which was measured experimentally to be around
15 min at the beginning of a recording. This time ensures that
a ZHF is created and a reliable readout of core temperature is
provided.
B. Clinical and Experimental Setup
This study included 12 neonates admitted to the NICU (nine
babies) and the Neonatal Medium Care Unit (NMCU) (three
babies) at the Máxima Medisch Centrum, Veldhoven. The mean
gestational age (±SD) was 30.3 ± 2.4 weeks and mean postnatal age was 1.9 ± 1.8 weeks. The humidity inside the incubator
was set to 56.46 ± 10.95% and the temperature of the incubator
was set to 29.23 ± 1.45 ◦ C. All of the babies included in the
study were stable. Among them were two pairs of twin babies.
As a reference temperature measure, we used a dual function
catheter that embodies an esophageal temperature probe and
feeding tube (InnerSense Oesophageal Temperature Probe +
Feeding Tube, provided by Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA,
USA). Esophageal temperature has been used in several studies as a reference/gold standard [19], [21] of core temperature.
Except for the first three babies, a temperature probe was also installed inside the incubator to continuously measure the ambient
temperature.
In addition to the temperature recordings, video recordings
were obtained for all the babies except for Baby 7 and 8, where
parental consent for video recordings was not obtained. The
video recordings were used in the study for analysis and validation of different contexts and interventions. Detailed manual
annotations of interventions (such as feeding, kangaroo care,
and diaper changes) were also done during the recordings.

Fig. 3. This figure shows the temperatures recorded from the ZHF (maximum
temperature), esophageal, and ambient sensors in (a) and (b) for two different
babies (baby 6 and baby 9). Areas of kangaroo care, interventions, and feeding
are also marked.

C. Neonatal Context and Interventions
The manual annotations and video analysis showed four main
activity blocks for the neonates. These were: sleeping/light motion, motion, feeding, and kangaroo care. Feeding was performed using InnerSense, generally every 2 h. Obviously, during
feeding periods, it measures the temperature of the food passing
through the esophagus instead of the esophageal temperature.
Kangaroo care is the period when the baby is taken out of the
incubator and placed on the chest of the parent to promote skinto-skin contact. Both periods of feeding and kangaroo care were
discarded from the analysis. Fig. 3 shows an example dataset
recorded from two of the babies with the three temperature signals: ZHF, esophageal, and ambient temperatures. The periods
of kangaroo care and feeding are highlighted, showing how the
temperature sensors respond.
D. Data Segmentation
ZHF measurements from the matrix are influenced by both
motion and positioning. Therefore, in this study, we aim to
segment data into reliable periods and unreliable periods that
are affected by these two factors, or a combination of them.
As the baby moves and the head position changes, ambient

ATALLAH et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE MONITORING OF NEONATAL BRAIN TEMPERATURE USING A ZERO-HEAT-FLUX SENSOR MATRIX

103

temperatures affect the ZHF sensors that are no longer covered
(or insulated). These sensors cool down to ambient temperature
with a rate proportional to the temperature difference. The rate
of fall is higher at the instant of motion, from where it decreases
exponentially. When these sensors are covered again, a similar
line of reasoning holds with the sensors heating up to core
temperature levels.
As for positioning, an edge placement could lead to erroneous
measurements that would not reflect brain temperature. Fig. 2
shows examples of the instantaneous temperature profile from
the ZHF matrix where the baby’s head is placed in the center
in (a) and on the edge of the matrix in (b). Since the matrix
was embedded in the neonatal positioner, there was no way of
assuring that the baby’s head is appropriately placed over the
center of the matrix. To identify and discard unreliable ZHF
data periods taking both motion and positioning into consideration, we aimed to derive motion information from the temporal
evolution of the ZHF matrix’s instantaneous temperature profile
then subtracted periods where the baby’s head lies on the side
of the matrix.
1) Deriving Temperature Variation Information: We define
the temperature variation due to motion R as the sum of absolute elementwise difference between instantaneous ZHF temperatures in successive time instants
R(t + 1) =

8 
8


|(Ts (i, j, t + 1) − Ts (i, j, t))|

(2)

i=1 j =1

where t is the time instant and Ts is the temperature from one
sensor in the ZHF matrix (8 × 8 matrix).
2) Smoothing With Total Variation Denoising (TVD): After
obtaining the temperature variation measure R, we used the
TVD algorithm as a smoothing step to reduce the total variation of the input signal while preserving the sharp edges in
the data. These edges normally reflect the instant when contact breaks due to motion/interventions and preserving them
helps in determining the exact onset time of unreliable areas
for segmentation. Let Rs be the filtered output after smoothing
with TVD, the variability V of the output signal Rs is then
defined as

|Rs (t + 1) − Rs (t)|.
(3)
V =
t

The proximity of signals R and Rs can be measured as
1
C=
(R(t) − Rs (t))2 .
2 t

(4)

A small value of C indicates that the signals R and Rs are
similar. The objective function for TVD is to minimize
C +λ∗V

(5)

where λ is the regularization parameter that controls the degree
of variability (V) reduction. The majorization–minimization approach is used to solve the minimization of objective function
in TVD [22], [23]. The objective function for minimization by
TVD is
1
(||R − Rs ||2 )2 + λ ∗ ||DRs ||1
(6)
2

Fig. 4. Temperature variation parameter R and the TVD-smoothed temperature variation R s for baby 6, using a regularization parameter of λ = 0.3,
are shown in (a). Periods that are automatically detected and excluded from
the analysis are shaded in blue in (b). These include the effects of motion,
kangaroo-care, and feeding.

where D is the N−1 × N array for N-point signal Rs defined as
⎛
⎞
−1 1
⎜
⎟
−1 1
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
. .
⎜
⎟
⎝
−1 1 ⎠
−1 1
such that DRs gives the first-order difference of the signal Rs ,
||v||1 is the l1 norm, and ||v||2 is the l2 norm of the vector v.
The majorization–minimization approach works by iteratively
minimizing the related majorizer function to the given objective
function instead of directly minimizing the objective function.
We use the update (7) for a selected majorizer to the TVD cost
function as
	

−1
1
diag(|DRs |) + DDT
DR. (7)
Rs = R − D T
λ
A sparse matrix structure-based iterative solution to the update equation was used to obtain the smoothed signal Rs [22].
Fig. 4(a) shows an example of R and Rs after applying TVD
on the ZHF data for baby 6 [see Fig. 3(a)]. After obtaining a
measure Rs , we selected a threshold μ for the segmentation

104

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

of motion and nonmotion periods. The choice of λ (the regularization parameter) and μ affects the segmentation of these
periods. In the next section, we will explain how the videomarked data was used to select optimal values for these two
parameters.
After the motion periods were automatically segmented, we
used the position of the neonate and subtracted out all periods
where the neonate’s head was positioned on the edges. This was
assessed by detecting if the maximal temperature from the ZHF
was on one of the edges [as shown in Fig. 2(b) for example].
Fig. 4(b) shows the data for baby 6 where areas of motion,
kangaroo care, and feeding are marked in blue. These areas
were excluded from the analysis.
E. Choice of Parameters for Data Segmentation
The regularization parameter λ controls the smoothing of the
signal Rs when using the TVD approach. An optimal value of λ
would provide adequate smoothing to segment out temperature
variations due to motion while preserving stable temperature
areas. An optimal value of the threshold μ on the other hand
allows the segmentation of motion areas preserving areas where
the baby is not moving a lot, allowing the comparison of the
temperature modalities.
To select λ and μ, we used the video data as a gold standard for four babies to obtain well-annotated motion areas. The
datasets used for video annotation were: baby 1 (50 min), baby 4
(33 min), baby 11 (100 min), and baby 12 (50 min). To take into
account the effect of motion on temperature data, a period of
one minute after each motion interval was marked by an expert
as an area affected by motion. We felt that four representative
datasets (with different types of activities) would be enough to
capture the variations in the data and calculate threshold and
regularization parameters. A segment was specified as “motion” if the baby moves its hands, legs, or body during this segment. The difference between “low motion” and “motion” was
determined visually from the videos by an expert. To compare
motion areas from both the TVD segmentation (on temperature variation data) and the video-segmented data (reference),
we used receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis
to show sensitivity and (1-specificity) for different values of λ
and μ. The ROC is a graphical plot that allows the identification of optimal parameters that can optimize both sensitivity and
specificity [24]. Sensitivity was defined as the ratio of the length
of correctly segmented motion-affected areas (from the temperature variation data) over the total length of motion-affected
areas marked in the video data. Specificity was defined as the
ratio of correctly labeled nonmotion affected areas over the total
nonmotion areas in the reference data.
The specificity and sensitivity ROC curve for the combined
data is shown in Fig. 5, where ROC curves for values of μ are
plotted for a range of the parameter λ. The optimum value of λ
and μ were selected as λ = 0.3 and μ = 0.29 (shown with an
arrow) as the values that optimize both sensitivity and specificity.
These values were used to segment the data and select areas of
low motion and good positioning for comparing the temperature
modalities [as shown in Fig. 4(b)].

Fig. 5. ROC curves for four values of the threshold μ plotted for a range of
values of λ. The optimal values (μ and λ) maximizing sensitivity and specificity
are shown with an arrow.

F. Measuring Correlations With the Reference
As the two temperature modalities measure temperature at
different parts of the neonate’s body, their values can differ. Temperatures at the head and esophagus can vary between different
babies according to their physiology, age, and health conditions
[12]. Instead of performing a mean difference analysis using instantaneous temperatures per temperature module, a correlation
analysis was performed as it would reveal matching trends in
heating and cooling between the three modalities. For the correlation analysis, we used the stable (nonmotion affected) areas
as explained above. We also excluded feeding and kangarooing
areas. The reliable areas from the temperature profile for all
the babies were averaged over successive windows of 3 min,
and the Pearson’s Correlation coefficient between the resulting
average profile of the ZHF and esophageal temperature was calculated. The 3 min averaging window size was selected after
consultation with clinicians on current clinical needs for continuous temperature monitoring.
III. RESULTS
Table I shows the correlation coefficient (and p-values) between the ZHF and the esophageal temperatures in addition to
the total period of recording in minutes per baby. The values
show a good correlation between the two modalities (r > 0.5, p
< 0.001) for nine of the 12 datasets. An example of a dataset
with a high correlation (r = 0.97, p < 0.001) is that of baby 9
[see Fig. 3(b)].This figure shows how the temperature measured
by ZHF efficiently follows the changes over time, as captured by
the esophageal temperature. Increases in temperature are well
captured throughout the recording. This is also evident for baby
6 [see Fig. 3(a)], especially after minute 200 where the baby
was likely placed in a more suitable position over the sensor
matrix.
The plotted 3 min temperature values of the esophageal temperature versus ZHF are shown in Fig. 6(b). For baby 6, although
the ZHF measure follows the trends in the esophageal data,
the overall correlation (r = 0.39, p < 0.001) is relatively low.

ATALLAH et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE MONITORING OF NEONATAL BRAIN TEMPERATURE USING A ZERO-HEAT-FLUX SENSOR MATRIX

105

38

38.5

37.8
37.6
ZHF

ZHF

38

37.5

37.4
37.2
37

37

36.8
36.5
36

36.2 36.4 36.6 36.8 37 37.2 37.4 37.6 37.8
Oesophageal

38

(a)
Fig. 6.

36.6
36.6 36.7 36.8 36.9

37 37.1 37.2 37.3 37.4 37.5 37.6
Oesophageal

(b)

Scatter plot of averaged values over 3 min for the ZHF versus esophageal probe temperatures. (a) Baby 6 (b) Baby 9.

TABLE I
CORRELATION COEFFICIENT (AND P-VALUE) BETWEEN THE ESOPHAGEAL
AND ZHF TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS
Baby number

Esophageal/ZHF

1 (254 min)
2 (96 min)
3 (332 min)
4 (387 min)
5 (318 min)
6 (413 min)
7 (315 min)
8 (335 min)
9 (313 min)
10 (396 min)
11 (330 min)
12 (310 min)

0.42(p = 0.01)
0.70( p < 0.001)
0.75(p < 0.001)
0.2(p = 0.07)
0.7(p < 0.001)
0.39(p < 0.001)
0.76(p < 0.001)
0.92(p < 0.001)
0.97(p < 0.001)
0.65(p < 0.001)
0.86(p < 0.001)
0.81(p < 0.001)

The length of each recording period (in minutes) is
also shown.

Looking at the plot in Fig. 6(a), we realize that there are two
clusters there and the best fit for linear correlation is actually
somewhere in between. The raw data [see Fig. 3(a)] shows in
fact that the ZHF sensors measure different amplitudes at these
two phases. Looking at the video data further, we realized that
the neonate’s head was placed differently before and after the
intermediate period of kangaroo care (then feeding). This probably led to the ZHF sensors measuring a different temperature
for these two positions.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study investigated an unobtrusive method for the continuous measurement of neonatal brain temperature without the
use of probes or sticky electrodes. The method consists of a
matrix of ZHF sensors embedded in the support system of the
neonate. We used the temporal profile of the temperature matrix to provide an objective measure of motion periods. These
periods were combined with bad positioning periods, where the
neonate’s head was on the edge on the matrix, for example,
to segment unreliable periods. For all others periods, i.e., periods with low motion and well-aligned positioning, we used
linear correlation as a method of comparing the temperature

modalities. The correlation between the ZHF measured temperatures and those of the esophageal temperature were high
(r > 0.5, p < 0.001) for most babies. However, for some babies
the change in head position over time led to a different placement on the matrix causing the amplitude of the temperature
to vary. Although these local areas show very good correlation,
combining them, as done in Fig. 6(a) caused a lower overall
correlation. This indicates the importance of the head position
with respect to the measurement matrix. In future study, we
recommend the use of a visual indication, such as a pattern, to
help nurses position the baby’s head over the sensors, and avoid
errors due to bad placement.
The TVD algorithm was used in this study to identify periods
of unreliable data due to neonatal motion from the ZHF matrix.
We implemented TVD following the approach described in [23]
as an iterative method. However, if a real-time implementation
of motion segmentation is required, TVD can be extended to
an online method, as it was recently described in [25]. In fact,
other sensing modalities can also be used to identify motion
periods such as cameras [26] or accelerometers embedded in
the neonate’s surrounding [27].
The ZHF matrix requires approximately 15 min at the start
of the recording to heat up and reach equilibrium. However, if
the baby is moved (or moves) slightly, the time is much less
as the matrix would not need to heat up starting from room (or
incubator) temperature. This can be seen after intervention periods in Fig. 3(a) and (b). For babies with increasing temperatures
[such as baby 6- Fig. 3(a)], it is almost impossible to tell by only
looking at the ZHF matrix if the initial increase at the start of
the recording is due to the heat-up time of the matrix or a natural
increase in core temperature, due to fever for example. After this
period, we can definitely observe that the baby’s temperature is
increasing.
Although there is a good match with esophageal temperature, a question arises on the depth of measurement for the ZHF
matrix. Since we are not aware of existing work for neonatal
brain temperature measurement at different depths, we refer to
previous studies who have looked into this for adults. In [28], a
sensor for muscle temperature was used to measure temperature
up to 2 cm below the depth of the surface, whereas in [19],
a sensor was used on the forehead and estimated temperatures

106

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

just below the skull. Given that the neonatal skull is much thinner than an adult skull, we assume that our sensors measure
temperatures that are deeper than the skull and therefore can
approximate neonatal brain temperature. The depth of measurement, however, depends on sensor size and insulation. A larger
sensor is more likely to measure deeper temperatures, due to
better insulation (especially on central areas). In a recent study
by Iwata et al. [29], a ZHF sensor was also used to approximate
brain temperatures for infants. They refer to an earlier study by
Yamakage and Namiki [30] who claim that the diameter of the
probe used theoretically corresponds to the depth of the tissue,
which the temperature reading reflects. However, in addition to
sensor size, other factors that can affect depth of measurement
include heating power, insulation, and contact to skin. Since the
neonates in this study were allowed to move and change position, the area of contact between the head and the sensor matrix
varied over time, which also probably influenced the depth of
the measurement. Moreover, the sensor was completely embedded and not applied to the baby’s skin as in previous studies so
a direct comparison of exact recording depth would be difficult.
There are many factors contributing to the overall thermoregulatory state of the neonate. These include physiological conditions, age, and ambient temperatures. Although we included an
ambient temperature probe in our study, it was difficult to isolate
the effect of increasing incubator temperatures from the natural increase in a baby’s temperature, due to fever for example.
In Fig. 3(b), for example, the temperature of the incubator increases after an intervention period during which it is left open.
We then see the baby’s temperature increasing after it is returned
to the heated incubator. Isolating the effect of the heated incubator from the baby’s natural increase in temperature is difficult in
this case. Although it was addressed to a certain extent in some
studies [31], the effect of ambient temperature on neonatal core
temperature poses an important research question that needs to
be understood. The direct effect of ambient temperatures on
ZHF-measured temperatures was observed in [30] as very minimal. Although we did not analyze the relationship between
ambient temperatures and measured temperatures in this study,
the methods proposed for measuring brain and esophageal temperatures can be utilized in future studies to study physiological
changes corresponding to ambient temperature variations.
This study addressed core temperature measurement, while
the neonate was placed in an incubator. However, it is important
to provide such measurements throughout the neonate’s stay in
the NICU where many interventions, such as Kangaroo care
[32] and imaging take place.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the parents of the neonates
who participated in this study. They would also like to thank A.
Osagiator and the nursing staff at the Maxima Medisch Centre
as well as our colleagues B. Lindauer-Smith and D. Heckendorn
from Philips Healthcare who helped with this study. They also
thank Nicole Hijnen for proof-reading. They would also like to
thank all the partners in the E-NEMO project who contributed
to this study including AME and Royal Health Foam.

REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, Thermal Control of the Newborn: A Practical
Guide. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 1993.
[2] V. Kumar, J. C. Shearer, A. Kumar, and D. GL, “Neonatal hypothermia in
low resource settings: A review,” J. Perinatol., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 401–412,
2009.
[3] D. Bhatt, R. White, G. Martin, L. V. Marter, N. Finer, J. Goldsmith,
C. Ramos, S. Kukreja, and R. Ramanathan. (2007). Transitional hypothermia in preterm newborns. J. Perinatol. [Online]. 27, pp. S45–S47. Available: http://www.nature.com/jp/journal/v27/n2s/full/7211842a.html
[4] G. Merenstein and S. Gardner, Handbook of Neonatal Intensive Care. St.
Louis, MO, USA: Mosby, 2002.
[5] Q. Mok, C. A. Bass, D. A. Ducker, and N. McIntosh, “Temperature instability during nursing procedures in preterm neonates,” Arch. Dis. Childhood, vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 783–786, 1991.
[6] V. Jirapaet and K. Jirapaet, “Comparisons of tympanic membrane, abdominal skin, axillary, and rectal temperature measurements in term and
preterm neonates,” Nursing Health Sci., vol. 2, pp. 1–8, 2000.
[7] P. H. Muller, L. van Berkel, and A. de Beaufort, “Axillary and rectal temperature measurements poorly agree in newborn infants,” Neonatology,
vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 31–34, 2008.
[8] S. R. Mayfield, J. Bhatia, K. Nakamura, G. Rios, and E. Bell, “Temperature measurement in term and preterm neonates,” J. Pediatrics, vol. 104,
no. 2, pp. 271–275, 1984.
[9] S. Sarkar, S. M. Donn, I. Bhagat, R. E. Dechert, and J. D. Barks,
“Esophageal and rectal temperatures as estimates of core temperature
during therapeutic whole-body hypothermia,” J. Pediatrics, vol. 162,
no. 1, pp. 208–210, 2013.
[10] G. Simbruner, Thermodynamic Models for Diagnostic Purposes in the
Newborn and Foetus. Wien, Austria: Facultas-Verlag, 1983.
[11] K. Cross and D. Stratton, “Aural temperature of the newborn infant,” The
Lancet, vol. 304, no. 7890, pp. 1179–1180, 1974.
[12] G. Simbruner, S. Nanz, E. Fleischhacker, and M. Derganc, “Brain temperature discriminates between neonates with damaged, hypoperfused,
and normal brains,” Amer. J. Perinatol., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 137–43,
1994.
[13] J. W. Hand, G. M. J. V. Leeuwen, S. Mizushina, J. B. V. de Kamer,
K. Maruyama, T. Sugiura, D. V. Azzopardi, and A. D. Edwards, “Monitoring of deep brain temperature in infants using multi-frequency microwave
radiometry and thermal modelling,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 46, no. 7,
p. 1885–1903, 2001.
[14] N. Hoque, E. Chakkarapani, X. Liu, and M. Thoresen, “ A comparison of
cooling methods used in therapeutic hypothermia for perinatal asphyxia,”
Pediatrics, vol. 126, no. 1, pp. e124–e130, 2010.
[15] E. Cady, J. Penrice, and N. Robertson, “ Improved reproducibility of MRS
regional brain thermometry by ‘amplitude-weighted combination’,” NMR
Biomed., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 865–872, 2010.
[16] T. Sugiura, H. Hirata, J. W. Hand, J. M. J. Van Leeuwen, and S. Mizushina,
“Five-band microwave radiometer system for noninvasive brain temperature measurement in newborn babies: Phantom experiment and confidence
interval,” Radio Sci., vol. 46, no. 5, 2011.
[17] T. Harioka, T. Matsukawa, M. Ozaki, K. Nomura, T. Sone, M. Kakuyama,
and H. Toda, “Deep-forehead temperature correlates well with blood temperature,” Can. J. Anesthesiol., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 980–983, 2000.
[18] A. Zeiner, J. Klewer, F. Sterz, M. Haugk, D. Krizanac, C. Testori,
H. Losert, S. Ayati, and M. Holzer, “Non-invasive continuous cerebral
temperature monitoring in patients treated with mild therapeutic hypothermia: An observational pilot study,” Resuscitation, vol. 81, pp. 861–866,
2010.
[19] L. P. J. Teunissen, J. Klewer, A. de Haan, J. J. de Koning, and
H. A. M. Daanen, “Non-invasive continuous core temperature measurement by zero heat flux,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 32, pp. 559–570, 2011.
[20] M. Yamakage and A. Namiki, “Deep temperature monitoring using a
zero-heat-flow method,” J. Anesthesia, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 108–115,
2003.
[21] T. Togawa, T. Nemoto, T. Tsuji, and K. Suma, “Deep temperature monitoring in intensive care,” Resuscitation, vol. 7, pp. 53–57, 1979.
[22] I. W. Selesnick and P.-Y. Chen, “Total variation denoising with overlapping
group sparsity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
2013, pp. 5696–5700.
[23] M. A. T. Figueiredo, J. B. Dias, J. P. Oliveira, and R. Nowak, “On total
variation denoising: A new majorization-minimization algorithm and an
experimental comparison with wavelet denoising,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Image Process., 2006, pp. 2633–2636.

ATALLAH et al.: UNOBTRUSIVE MONITORING OF NEONATAL BRAIN TEMPERATURE USING A ZERO-HEAT-FLUX SENSOR MATRIX

[24] J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil, “The meaning and use of the area under
a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve,” Radiology, vol. 143,
no. 1, pp. 29–36, 1982.
[25] L. Condat, “A direct algorithm for 1-D total variation denoising,” IEEE
Signal Process. Lett., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1054–1057, Nov. 2013.
[26] N. Karayiannis, S. Srinivasan, R. Bhattacharya, M. Wise, J. Frost, and
E. Mizrahi, “Extraction of motion strength and motor activity signals
from video recordings of neonatal seizures,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 965–980, Sep. 2001.
[27] S. Sunderam, N. Chernyy, N. Peixoto, J. P. Mason, S. L. Weinstein,
S. J. Schiff, and B. J. Gluckman, “Improved sleep-wake and behavior discrimination using MEMS accelerometers,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 163, no. 2, pp. 373–383, 2007.
[28] D. Brajkovic and M. Ducharme, “Confounding factors in the use of
the zero-heat-flow method for non-invasive muscle temperature measurement,” Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 94, no. 4, pp. 386–391, 2005.
[29] S. Iwata, I. Tachtsidis, S. Takashima, T. Matsuishi, N. J. Robertson,
and O. Iwata. (2014). Dual role of cerebral blood flow in regional
brain temperature control in the healthy newborn infant. Int. J. Develop.
Neurosci. [Online]. 37, pp. 1–7. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S073657481400080X
[30] M. Yamakage and A. Namiki. (2003). Deep temperature monitoring using
a zero-heat-flow method. J. Anesthesia. [Online]. 17(2), pp. 108–115.
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s005400300026
[31] G. Simbruner, E. Ruttner, A. Schulze, and K. Perzlmaier, “Premature
infants are less capable of maintaining thermal balance of head and
body with increases of thermal environment than with decreases.,” Amer.
J. Perinatol., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 25–33, 2005.
[32] A. Conde-Agudelo, J. Diaz-Rossello, and J. Belizan, “Kangaroo mother
care to reduce morbidity and mortality in low birthweight infants,”
Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., vol. 2, pp. 1–112, 2003.

Louis Atallah (S’00–M’04) received the Diplome D’Ingenieur degree from the
Faculty of Engineering, Lebanese University, Broummana, Lebanon, in 2000,
and the D.Phil. degree in engineering science from Oxford University, Oxford,
U.K., in 2004.
He then joined the Department of Computing, Imperial College, London,
as a Research Fellow. He is currently a Senior Scientist at the Patient Care &
Measurements Department, Philips Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. His
research interests include machine learning, data mining, and pervasive sensing,
as well as their application to neonatal and in-hospital care.

107

Edwin Bongers received the B.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from the
Fontys University of Applied Sciences, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2005,
and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Eindhoven University
of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2011.
Since 2005, he has been a Research Scientist with the Patient Care & Measurements Department, Philips Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. His research interests include biomedical measurements and clinical applications.

Bishal Lamichhane received the B.Tech. degree from the Sardar Vallabhbhai
National Institute of Technology, Surat, India, in 2012. He is currently working
toward the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Technical University of
Eindhoven, Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
He is broadly interested in signal processing and its application in areas like
medical signal processing and image processing.

Sidarto Bambang-Oetomo received the medical doctor degree from the Faculty of Medicine, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands, in 1979,
and specialized in pediatrics and the Ph.D. degree from the same institute in
1988.
He was a Research Fellow at the Perinatal Research Laboratory, Harbor
UCLA, Torrance, CA, USA, from 1988 to 1989. In 1996, he was appointed as
a Professor of Pediatrics and Neonatology at the University of Groningen. In
2003, he accepted the position of Consultant in Neonatology at the Máxima
Medical Center, Veldhoven, The Netherlands. He was appointed as a Professor
at the Faculty of Industrial Design, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands, in 2007. His main research interest include the field of
ambient intelligence and monitoring of vital functions of newborn infants using
nonobtrusive technologies.
Dr. Bambang-Oetomo is a Member of the Dutch Pediatric Society, the European Society for Pediatric Research, and the American Society of Pediatric
Research.

