IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1293

Microbubbles and Blood–Brain Barrier Opening:
A Numerical Study on Acoustic Emissions
and Wall Stress Predictions
Nazanin Hosseinkhah∗ , David E. Goertz, and Kullervo Hynynen

Abstract—Focused ultrasound with microbubbles is an emerging technique for blood–brain barrier opening. Here, a comprehensive theoretical model of a bubble-fluid-vessel system has been
developed which accounts for the bubble’s nonspherical oscillations
inside a microvessel, and its resulting acoustic emissions. Numerical simulations of unbound and confined encapsulated bubbles
were performed to evaluate the effect of the vessel wall on acoustic emissions and vessel wall stresses. Using a Marmottant shell
model, the normalized second harmonic to fundamental emissions
first decreased as a function of pressure (>50 kPa) until reaching
a minima (“transition point”) at which point they increased. The
transition point of unbound compared to confined bubble populations occurred at different pressures and was associated with an
accompanying increase in shear and circumferential wall stresses.
As the wall stresses depend on the bubble to vessel wall distance,
the stresses were evaluated for bubbles with their wall at a constant
distance to a flat wall. As a result, the wall stresses were bubble
size and frequency dependent and the peak stress values induced by
bubbles larger than resonance remained constant versus frequency
at a constant mechanical index.
Index Terms—Acoustic emissions, blood–brain barrier (BBB),
finite-element analysis, focused ultrasound, microbubbles, vessel
wall stresses.

I. INTRODUCTION
OCUSED ultrasound exposure with microbubbles is an
emerging technique to open the blood–brain barrier (BBB)
for targeted drug delivery [1]. Its advantages over other techniques are that it is noninvasive, transient, image-guided, and
localized. The BBB is a selective barrier separating the blood
from the parenchyma of the central nervous system [2]. The
BBB restricts more than 98% of the therapeutic agents from
traveling into the brain tissue [3]. Many successful experiments
using low power ultrasound and microbubbles to mediate BBB
opening have been reported. Comprehensive reviews on this
field are given in [4]–[6]. A bubble model confined within the

F

Manuscript received August 29, 2014; revised November 19, 2014; accepted
December 13, 2014. Date of publication December 13, 2014; date of current
version April 17, 2015. This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health under Grant EB003268, and the Canada Research Chair Program.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ N. Hosseinkhah is with the Sunnybrook Research Institute and Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M4N3M5,
Canada (e-mail: nazanin@sri.utoronto.ca).
D. E. Goertz and K. Hynynen are with the Sunnybrook Research Institute
and Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2385651

vasculature could provide useful information to guide BBB
opening experiments.
Previously, acoustic emissions from bubbles were shown to
be correlated with BBB opening. During BBB opening, a significant increase in second and third harmonics of the ultrasound
transmit frequency (2f0 and 3f0 ) due to Optison microbubbles
were observed [7]. In that study, BBB opening occurred without observation of erythrocyte extravasations or wideband emissions, which are indicators of inertial cavitation. Arvanitis et al.
[8] recently demonstrated the use of harmonic emissions from
Definity microbubbles to direct BBB opening without broadband emissions. From their BBB opening experiments, Tung
et al. [9] proposed the fourth and fifth harmonics, which in
their BBB opening experiments only appeared in the presence
of microbubbles, could be used as indicators of BBB opening.
The objective of this study is to assess the harmonic emissions
from various bubbles in microvessels, using a confined bubble
model.
We have hypothesized that the mechanical stresses generated
by microbubbles could play an important role in the BBB opening. Therefore, this study investigates the mechanical stresses
generated by oscillating bubbles in order to shed light on the
relationship between the induced mechanical stresses and BBB
opening. McDannold et al. [10] reported that the BBB opening
threshold was constant when described by the mechanical index
(MI, ratio of acoustic pressure in megapascal to square room
of acoustic frequency in megahertz). The stresses generated by
various bubble sizes at a flat wall were calculated as a function
of frequency, for a constant MI as well.
The overall purpose of this study is to utilize a numerical
model of a fully coupled bubble-fluid-vessel system to examine
the effect of the vessel wall on acoustic emissions and vessel
wall stresses, in order to guide future experiments for treatment
monitoring and control.

II. METHODS
In this study, unbound bubbles (situated unconfined within
fluid) and bubbles confined within microvasculature were simulated. The coupled bubble-fluid-vessel system was solved
numerically. The numerical part was solved using the finiteelement method (FEM) in Comsol Multiphysics 4.2 (COMSOL
AB. Burlington, MA, USA). The acoustic frequency was set to
0.551 MHz based on its use in prior experimental studies [11]
and its suitability for transmission through human skull [12].
This frequency was used throughout this study unless otherwise

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

TABLE I
NOTATIONS

TABLE II
PARAMETERS AND VALUES

Symbol

Definition of symbol

Parameters

r
z
vf
ρL
μ
P
Pa c
Psu m
P f −b
Pg
Pg 0
P0
Ps
R0
R
κ
γ (A)
Pγ
k
Pi
Pμ
Ps v
P (t)
Po u t
ri
ro
χ
κs
γw a t e r
A
Ab u ck lin g
R b r e a k −u p
A b r e a k −u p
Req
a0
σi j
εi j
δi j
E
ν
wi
τr z
n

Radial direction in cylindrical coordinate system (m)
Axial direction in cylindrical coordinate system (m)
Fluid velocity (m/s)
Fluid density (kg/m3 )
Dynamic viscosity of the fluid (Pa.s)
Pressure in the fluid (Pa)
Acoustic pressure wave (Pa)
Acoustic pressure from a bubble distribution (Pa)
The pressure applied on the fluid-bubble interface (Pa)
Gas pressure (Pa)
Gas pressure at resting state (Pa)
Ambient pressure in microvessels (Pa)
Scattered pressure from bubbles (Pa)
Initial bubble radius (m)
Bubble radius (m)
Total curvature (m−1 )
Surface tension as a function of bubble area (N/m)
Laplace pressure (Pa)
Polytropic index
Intravascular pressure (Pa)
Fluid viscosity pressure term (Pa)
Shell viscosity pressure term (Pa)
Ultrasound pressure pulse at the bubble wall (Pa)
Pressure on the outer diameter of vessel wall (Pa)
Inner vessel diameter (m)
Outer vessel diameter (m)
Shell elastic modulus (N/m)
Shell viscosity (kg/s)
Surface tension of water (N/m)
Bubble area (m2 )
Bubble area at shell buckling regime (m2 )
Bubble radius at break-up regime (m)
Bubble area at break-up regime (m2 )
Spherical bubble’s equivalent radius (m)
Bubble wall acceleration (m/s2 )
The ijth components of the stress tensors
The ijth components of the strain tensors
Kronecker delta
Young’s modulus (Pa)
Poisson’s ratio
Weighting factor
Shear Stress (Pa)
The outward unit normal

Polytropic index, k
Shell viscosity, κ s

mentioned. The acoustic pressure amplitude was varied from 50
to 275 kPa in increments of 25 kPa. Notations for all variables
used are shown in Table I.
The shell properties used for Definity microbubbles (Lantheus
Medical Imaging, North Billerica, MA, USA) are indicated in
Table II, and were within the range that has been previously
reported [13], [14]. Definity bubbles are polydisperse [15] and
were simulated for various radii. In this paper, bubbles were
either in an infinite fluid, or confined within vessels of various
size (radius ranging from 3 to 10 μm).
A. FEM Simulations
A fully coupled model of a confined bubble within a microvessel was developed and previously validated [16]. This
model accounts for nonspherical bubble oscillations as well as
the effects of confinement.

Value
1.07
1.2 × 10−8 kg·s−1

Reference

Tu et al. [13], Helfield and
Goertz [14]

Fluid viscosity, μ
Shell elasticity, χ

0.002 Pa·s
0.7 N·m−1

Surface tension of
water,γ w a t e r
Vessel elastic
modulus, E v
Tissue elastic
modulus, E t
Ambient capillary
pressure, P0
Poisson’s ratio, ν

0.072 N/m

Tu et al. [13], Helfield and
Goertz [14]
Gilányi et al. [18]

1 MPa

Duck [19], Smaje et al. [20]

0.5 MPa

Duck [19]

104.6 kPa

Burton [21]

0.49

Melbin and Noordergraaf
[22]

A shell model proposed by Marmottant et al. [17] was adopted
and the bubble surface tension γ(A) was defined as follows:
⎧
0,
⎪
⎪
 A ≤ Abuckling ≈ A0
⎨ 
A
− 1 , Abuckling ≤ A ≤ Abreak−up
γ(A) = χ
⎪
Abuckling
⎪
⎩
γwater ,
A > Abreak−up .
(1)
The three conditions above represent buckling, elastic, and
ruptured states of the encapsulating shell. It was assumed that
2
Abreak−up = 4πRbreak−up
and Rbreak−up , the radius at which

the bubble shell breaks, was set to Rbuckling γwater /χ + 1,
according to Marmottant et al. [17]. The bubble’s initial surface
tension γ(A0 ) was assumed to be 0, meaning that it was at the
buckling point.
At the bubble-fluid interface, the normal stresses should satisfy the following equation:
Pg − P = Pγ + Pμ + Psv

(2)

where P ,Pg , Pγ , Pμ , and Psv are the pressure in the fluid, gas
pressure, Laplace pressure, fluid viscosity, and shell viscosity
pressure terms, respectively. As for the fluid-bubble boundary
condition, the following normal pressure was applied to the
bubble wall:
Pf −b = Pg − Psv − Pμ − P (t)

(3)

where Pf −b is the pressure on the fluid just outside the bubble wall minus the Laplace pressure. This pressure accounts for
fluid and shell viscosities, and assumes that a uniform acoustic
pressure is acting on the bubble wall. The Laplace pressure was
Pγ = κγ(A) (where γ(A)is the surface tension described above
and κ is the total curvature). Pγ was evaluated using a weak
form of the fluid-bubble boundary condition and it accounts for
nonspherical bubble oscillations (for more information on the
details of the FEM modeling, refer to [16]). Pg in (3) is the gas
	 
k
where
pressure. From the polytropic gas law Pg = Pg 0 VV0
V is the bubble volume, Pg 0 is the gas pressure at the resting
state (note that Pg 0 = P0 + 2γ(A0 )/R0 reduces to the ambient
pressureP0 as the initial surface tension was assumed to be zero

HOSSEINKHAH et al.: MICROBUBBLES AND BLOOD–BRAIN BARRIER OPENING: A NUMERICAL STUDY ON ACOUSTIC EMISSIONS

1295

γ(A0 ) = 0), and V0 is the initial bubble volume. The bubble
volume was calculated at each time step and was then updated
in (3). The fluid viscosity and shell viscosity pressures in (3)
4μ Ṙ
4κ Ṙ
were defined as Pμ = R e qe q and Psv = Rs 2 e q , respectively,
eq
and Req is the bubble equivalent radius. These viscous terms
were derived for spherical bubbles. Here, they were assumed
to be uniform on the bubble wall and independent of the bubble wall curvature. Req was calculated by equating the bubble
surface area with the surface area of a sphere of radius Req .
The elastic vasculature and the fluid were coupled in a two
way manner with a boundary condition of equal fluid-structure
velocities at the wall. The Navier–Stokes equations for a viscid
incompressible Newtonian liquid and equations for an elastic
vessel were solved simultaneously
ρL

∂v f
+ ρL (v f .∇)v f = ∇.[−P I + μ(∇v f + (∇v f )T )]
∂t
= ∇.σ
(4)

where σ was the stress tensor. The linear elastic constitutive
equation is given as


E
ν
σij =
εk k δij
(5)
εij +
1+ν
1 − 2ν
where δij is the Kronecker delta (if i = j, δij = 1, and if i = j,
δij = 0) and σij and εij are the ijth components of the stress
and strain tensors, respectively. The vessel wall was chosen to
be 1 μm in thickness. The microvessel was surrounded with a
114-μm layer of tissue structure. Fig. 1 presents the schematic
illustration of the simulated domain. Fig. 1(a)–(c) represents
the simulations performed on confined bubbles in the middle
of microvessels, unbound bubbles, and bubbles at a flat vessel
wall, respectively. The parameters and values used in this paper
are presented in Table II.
The ultrasound waveform was tapered at the start of the
burst to avoid any subtle numerical instabilities and represent
a realistic burst from an ultrasound transducer. An example of
corresponding ultrasound waveforms, nonspherical bubble oscillations, and wall shear stress is shown in Fig. 2 for a bubble with 2-μm radius within a 5-μm radius vessel sonicated at
0.551 MHz and 75, 100, and 125 kPa. The changes in the bubble oscillation between the compression dominated oscillations
[at 75 kPa, Fig. 2(b)] to near expansion dominated oscillations
[at 125 kPa, Fig. 2(h)] related to the transition from buckling
to elastic and rupture states in the shell model, respectively. In
Fig. 2(i), it is apparent that the transition to greater expansions is
directly linked to greater shear stresses. Most of the results in the
following section were generated from confined bubbles within
5-μm vessels. This vessel size was chosen because the BBB
opening experiments with two-photon microscopy revealed that
smallest vessels (2.5–12.5 μm in radius) are most susceptible to
permeabilization [23], [24].
At certain threshold pressures bubbles in these vessels underwent collapse along the z-axis. Here, the collapse is defined
when opposing bubble wall sides along the vessel axis rapidly
came into contact. The simulations stopped following this point.
Fig. 3(a) presents an example of bubble collapse from a 4-μm

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the FEM domain. Bubble, fluid, vessel and flat
wall are labeled as B, F, V, and W (a) A confined bubble in the middle of the
vessel. (b) An unbound bubble inside free fluid, and (c) A microbubble placed
close to a flat vessel wall.

bubble at 125 kPa within a 5-μm vessel during its contraction
phase. At the final stage, the two axial bubble walls came into
contact.
At lower pressures, Fig. 3(b) shows the stable oscillation of
the same bubble at 100 kPa during one cycle. The periodicity
of nonspherical bubble oscillation is at the transmit frequency
0.551 MHz. Fig. 4 depicts the pressure threshold at which bubbles within 5-μm vessels underwent collapse. The results in the
following sections are necessarily generated for pressures that
were below the collapse threshold.

1296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 2. 2-μm radius bubble within a 5-μm radius vessel with the corresponding applied ultrasound pulse (top), bubble wall radial (black solid line) and axial
(red dashed line) oscillation (middle), and shear stress (bottom). (a)–(c) at 75 kPa, (d)–(f) at 100 kPa, and (g)–(i) at 125 kPa. At 75 kPa bubble is within the elastic
regime of Marmottant shell model and exhibits compression dominated oscillation (b), At 100 kPa bubble enters the rupture state (e), and at 125 kPa bubble shows
expansion dominated as it is mainly in rupture state (h).

B. Acoustic Emissions
The acoustic emissions radiated from a spherical oscillating
bubble at a distance r can be calculated using the following
equation [25]:
Ps = ρL

R
(2Ṙ2 + RR̈)
r

(6)

where r is the radial distance to the bubble in spherical coordinates. However, since a confined bubble within a vessel is
oscillating nonspherically, the assumptions leading to (6) do not
hold. Therefore, in this study the Helmholtz equation was solved
to calculate the scattered acoustic emissions from confined
bubbles:


1 ∂ 2 Pac
1
+ ∇. − (∇Pac ) = 0
ρL c2 ∂t2
ρL

(7)

where Pac is the acoustic pressure wave. The acoustic waves
propagated in a 30 × 30 μm domain. Fig. 1(a) and (b) shows a
schematic of this model. The nonspherical bubble wall acceleration was coupled to the acoustic model and acted as a source of
wave generation. The acoustic emissions from the bubble were
calculated at a fixed point [i.e., at point P on Fig. 1(a) and (b)].
A normal acceleration boundary condition was applied on the
bubble wall with the following equation:


1
(∇Pac ) = −n.a0
(8)
− n. −
ρL
where a0 is the bubble wall acceleration which was taken from
the solution in the previous section. It is important to note that
point P on Fig. 1(a) and (b) might have been angel dependent;
however, it was not the focus here and this fixed point was used
for all of the simulations. At the edge of the numerical domain,
a spherical wave radiation boundary condition was used where

HOSSEINKHAH et al.: MICROBUBBLES AND BLOOD–BRAIN BARRIER OPENING: A NUMERICAL STUDY ON ACOUSTIC EMISSIONS

1297

Fig. 5. Effects of acoustic pressure on acoustic emission from a 2 μm within
5 μm vessels at 0.551 MHz.

C. Bubble Population

Fig. 3. Examples of bubble collapse and noncollapse during the bubble contraction phase, (a) 4-μm bubble within a 5-μm vessel at 125 kPa with collapse,
(b) 4-μm bubble within a 5-μm vessel at 100 kPa without collapse which continuous with a stable oscillation shown at one cycle. The periodicity of nonspherical
bubble oscillation is at the transmit frequency (e.g., 0.551 MHz).

As Definity bubbles are polydisperse, acoustic emissions
from a bubble population was also calculated Psum . A Definity bubble distribution in number density was taken from the
measurement performed on fresh bubble population by Faez
et al. [15]. Psum was calculated using a summation of scattered
pressures
from different bubbles, weighted to their distribution,
Psum = Pac i wi . Bubbles with radii ranging from 0.5 to 3 μm
i

were used here, in increments of 0.5 μm.

D. Signal Processing

Fig. 4. Bubble collapse threshold of different size bubbles driven at 0.551 MHz
within 5-μm vessels.

an outgoing wave leaves the modeling domain with minimal
reflections




Pac
1
1 1 ∂Pac
+
− n. − (∇Pac ) +
=0
(9)
ρL
ρL c ∂t
r
where r is the radial axis in the spherical coordinate. Acoustic
emissions were assessed for 1.1–3-μm bubbles within 3–10-μm
vessels.

The acoustic pressure emitted from a nonspherical bubble
was calculated at point P during [see Fig. 1(a) and (b)]. The
time domain signal was 40-μs long (about 22 cycles of oscillation at 0.551 MHz). Frequency spectra of the calculated pressure
waveforms were produced using a Fourier transform of the unmodified time domain signal. This Fourier transform was done
on Pac from a single bubble and Psum from bubble populations.
The area under the peaks at the fundamental, second, third,
fourth, and fifth harmonics ±27 kHz (approximately ±3 dB)
were calculated. Acoustic emissions plots represent the area under the curve for each acoustic signal. This method was in line
with the signal processing performed by McDannold et al. [7].
The acoustic emissions assessment in this study was performed
at pressures below the bubble collapse. In Fig. 5, the acoustic
emissions versus acoustic pressure for a 2-μm bubble within a
5-μm vessel is shown (corresponding to the example given in
Fig. 2).

E. Stress Calculation
On the vessel wall, circumferential stress (along the vessel circumference), shear stress (along the vessel axis), and transmural
pressure (pressure in the radial direction) induced by bubbles
within 5-μm vessels were calculated. The circumferential stress
for a thick wall cylinder was calculated using the following

1298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 6. ODE and FEM comparison for an unbound bubble (black) and a bubble
within a rigid vessel (red). ODE solution for unbound and confined bubbles
are shown in bold dashed line and dotted line, respectively. FEM solution for
unbound and confined bubbles are in solid line and bold line, respectively. The
bubble radius, acoustic frequency and pressure were 1.1 μm, 0.551 MHz, and
250 kPa, respectively.

further validated against ordinary differential equation (ODE)
bubble models of two extreme scenarios: 1) when the bubble
was within an unbound fluid and 2) when the bubble was within
a completely rigid vessel. The ODE of a modified Rayleigh–
Plesset equation for an unbound 1.1-μm bubble was solved
using MATLAB (version 7.11, The MathWorks, Natick, MA).
Leighton [27] derived an ODE equation of motion for a bubble
wall within a finite rigid tube, while accounting for the fluid
inertia ([27, eq. (12)]). The rigid tube ODE of a 1.1-μm bubble
inside a 4-μm rigid tube was solved with the addition of Marmottant shell terms using MATLAB. Both ODE solutions of bubble
wall as a function of time are plotted in Fig. 6. FEM simulations were performed for the same parameters, while adopting
unbound bubble and rigid vessel cases [similar to Fig. 1(b) and
(a), respectively]. For the unbound bubble, the plots from the
ODE and FEM were identical. In the rigid vessel case, the FEM
bubble expansion was 5% lower than the ODE solution.
III. RESULTS
A. Acoustic Emissions

equation [26]:
σθ θ =

Pi ri2 − Pout ro2
r2 r2
+ i 2o
2
2
ro − ri
r



Pi − Pout
ro2 − ri2


.

The vessel wall shear stress was calculated as below


∂u ∂w
+
τr z = μ
∂z
∂r

(10)

(11)

where u and w are fluid velocity components in the r and z
directions, respectively. Transmural pressure was calculated as
the difference between the inside and outside pressures on the
vessel wall. The maximum values of the above stresses are
reported in Section III.
In a realistic situation, bubbles of different radii are located
within different vessel sizes. Wall stresses depend on the bubble wall to the vessel wall distance, which requires a range
of simulations comprised of different bubble and vessel size
combinations. In order to reduce computational time to feasible levels, and decouple the bubble-vessel distance dependency,
bubbles ranging from 1.1 to 9 μm in radius were placed in proximity to a flat wall [see Fig. 1(c)]. Transmural pressure and shear
stresses were calculated for bubbles at a flat elastic wall with the
same elastic properties used in the previous sections. All bubbles were initially placed at a distance of 2 μm from the wall.
Note that the effect of acoustic radiation force was not taken
into account here. Bubbles during their oscillations translated
toward the vessel wall and simulations were terminated when
bubbles reached a distance of 1 μm away from the wall. At a
constant MI, three frequencies of 0.551, 1, and 1.5 MHz were
used. The corresponding acoustic pressures were 100, 134, and
164 kPa (constant MI = 0.134).
F. Model Validation
The finite-element model (FEM) has been previously validated against experimental observations [16]. The FEM was

1) Effects of Vessel Radius: Fig. 7 illustrates the acoustic
emissions from confined bubbles within 3-, 5-, and 10-μm vessels, as well as unbound bubbles. Fig. 7(a) and (b) represents a
1.1-μm bubble at 250 kPa and a 2-μm bubble at 150 kPa, respectively. These acoustic pressures were below the bubble collapse
threshold (see Fig. 4). Fundamental, second, third, fourth, and
fifth harmonics are plotted for comparison. Bubble oscillations
and consequently acoustic emissions were mitigated when bubbles were confined compared to the unbound case.
2) Effects of Acoustic Pressure: In this section, the acoustic emissions were assessed for bubble radii of 1.1, 1.5, 2, 2.5,
and 3 μm within 5-μm capillaries. In order to enhance the effects of acoustic emissions, the results of harmonic emissions
are normalized to the fundamental at each corresponding pressure. Normalized harmonic emissions are plotted in Fig. 8 for
unbound and confined bubbles. The normalized second harmonic had a consistent trend in all bubbles, where it reached a
minima (“transition point”) followed by an increase. This transition point was associated with the transition from “compression
dominated” oscillations in the shell buckling regime (Marmottant et al.) occurring at lower pressures, to the “rupture state”
for higher amplitude oscillations. An example of this behavior is
shown in Fig. 2. For larger bubbles, their normalized second harmonic had its minima at lower pressures. This transition point
occurred at 175, 125, 100, 100, and 75 kPa for 1.1-, 1.5-, 2-,
2.5-, and 3-μm bubbles, respectively. For larger bubbles, where
the bubble to vessel radius ratio is closer to 1, the differences in
the normalized emissions of confined and unbound bubbles are
more evident.
For a more clinically relevant case, the acoustic emissions
from populations of confined and unbound bubbles were calculated. The normalized harmonics are shown in Fig. 9. Here, the
transition point for the normalized second harmonic occurred
at 100 kPa for the unbound case and 125 kPa for the confined
case. The acoustic emissions for some harmonics in confined
bubbles were larger than those in the unbound case. The second

HOSSEINKHAH et al.: MICROBUBBLES AND BLOOD–BRAIN BARRIER OPENING: A NUMERICAL STUDY ON ACOUSTIC EMISSIONS

1299

Fig. 7. Effect of vessel radius on acoustic emissions from a (a) 1.1-μm radius
bubble at 250 kPa, and (b) 2-μm radius bubble at 150 kPa.

harmonics of the confined bubble population within 5-μm vessels at 100 kPa was 60% larger than that of unbound bubbles
(the normalized second harmonics was 73% larger). Also, at
125 kPa the fourth harmonics was 80% larger than the unbound
case (the normalized fourth harmonics was 105% larger).
B. Vessel Wall Stresses
Fig. 10 presents stresses induced by confined bubbles within
a 5-μm vessel, according to the geometry in Fig. 1(a). The shear
stress, circumferential stress, and transmural pressure versus
acoustic pressure induced by 1.1-, 1.5-, 2-, 2.5-, and 3-μm bubbles are plotted. Above the transition point, the stresses increase
with a steeper slope.
Fig. 11 shows the stress values induced by bubbles on a
flat wall, according to the geometry in Fig. 1(c). While varying bubble size and acoustic frequency, the maximum shear
stress and transmural pressure are shown for a MI of 0.134.
The stresses in Fig. 11 reach a peak at bubble sizes of 3, 4, and
7 μm which are larger than the resonance size at each frequency.

Fig. 8. Acoustic emissions normalized to fundamental versus the incident
acoustic pressure for (a) and (b) 1.1-μm, (c) and (d) 1.5-μm, (e) and (f) 2-μm,
(g) and (h) 2.5-μm, (i) and (j) 3-μm bubbles within 5-μm vessels (a), (c), (e),
(g), and (i) or unbound bubbles (b), (d), (f), (h), and (j) at 0.551 MHz.

1300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 9. Acoustic emissions normalized to the fundamental from a bubble
population versus the incident acoustic pressure for (a) bubbles within 5-μm
vessels, and (b) unbound bubbles.

Among the three frequencies chosen here, the shear stress, and
the transmural pressure peaks reached about 12 and 400 kPa,
respectively.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Acoustic Emissions
A bubble oscillating within a compliant small elastic vessel
will experience increased damping and a resonant frequency
shift upward. For the majority of conditions examined here the
bubbles are well below the resonant size (6 μm in the unbound
case; 6.5 within a 10-μm vessel) at 0.551 MHz. As such the
effects of damping and resonant frequency shift will act to reduce the oscillation amplitudes and, therefore, acoustic emission
levels [Fig. 7].
A shift in the harmonic energy was observed and normalized second harmonics had a “transition point,” which was bubble size dependent [see Fig. 8]. Simulations of unencapsulated
bubbles did not exhibit the transition point (data not shown),
meaning that the appearance of this feature is attributed to the
bubble shell. As shown in Fig. 2, this appears to be associated with a transition from compression dominated oscillations,

Fig. 10. (a) Shear stress, (b) Circumferential stress and (c) Transmural pressure exerted by 1.1-, 1.5-, 2-, 2.5-, and 3-μm bubbles on 5-μm vessels at different
acoustic pressures. Filled squares indicate the pressure at which the transition
point occurs.

which occur within a regime where shell buckling dominates to
expansion dominated oscillations. The second harmonics in our
simulations had a dramatic rise with pressure above the transition point (the absolute values of acoustic emissions presented
a dramatic rise as well as shown in Fig. 5). This was generally
in line with the observations by McDannold et al. [7], where
the second harmonic had a dramatic rise at pressure amplitudes
that correlated with BBB opening. The transition point could

HOSSEINKHAH et al.: MICROBUBBLES AND BLOOD–BRAIN BARRIER OPENING: A NUMERICAL STUDY ON ACOUSTIC EMISSIONS

1301

B. Vessel Wall Stresses

Fig. 11. Stresses induced by different bubbles at a flat wall, sonicated at
0.551 MHz (Dash-dotted line with inverted triangles), 1 MHz (Dashed line with
diamonds) and 1.5 MHz (Solid line with circles) at a constant MI = 0.134, (a)
Shear stress, and (b) Transmural pressure.

potentially serve as an in vivo pressure calibration and should
be experimentally tested for its value to guide and control BBB
opening.
The emissions from a bubble population were investigated,
taking into account the expected bubble size distribution. The
transition point for confined bubbles within 5-μm vessels occurred at a higher pressure in comparison to that of unbound
bubbles (see Fig. 10). This was due to larger damping of the
vasculature and an upward shift in the resonant frequency. Furthermore, the second and fourth harmonics of confined bubble
population (at 100 and 125 kPa, respectively) were larger than
that of unbound bubbles. In the future, the transition point pressures and acoustic emissions (particularly second and fourth
harmonics) from a confined versus an unbound bubble population should be tested experimentally. This would provide a mean
for the confined versus unbound bubble separation.
Although the transition point for confined and unbound bubble populations were different, the pressure dependency of transition point can be more distinct when monodisperse bubble
distributions are used. Thus, using monodisperse bubbles in the
future (such as those developed in [28] for therapeutic purposes)
could provide a more accurate mean to monitor and control the
BBB opening experiments.

In Fig. 10, a steeper slope in the stresses above the transition
point is observed. From a physical perspective, this transition is
associated with entry into a regime, where the expansion phase
of the bubble oscillations is more prominent which is in term associated with inducing a proportionally higher level of fluid flow
(and, therefore, shear stress) at the vessel wall. At 0.551 MHz,
the experimental threshold for BBB opening occurred from 0.18
MPa (with a mean at 0.28 MPa) [11]. The wall stresses at
pressures above the transition point could be correlated with
pressures that cause BBB opening. It is important to note that
the shear stress, circumferential stress, and transmural pressure
have similar trends with the acoustic pressure. Therefore, at
the current stage, it is not clear that which one is responsible for
the BBB opening. The experimental measurements revealed a
safe BBB opening at the pressure levels used here, and only a
few cases of red blood cell extravasations were observed [11].
The stresses reported here were from numerical calculations.
To the best of our knowledge, currently there are no experimental
techniques to measure the vessel wall stresses directly at a few
micrometer scale and megahertz frequencies. The shear stress
is typically calculated using the microparticle image velocimetry or temperature anemometer; however, these techniques are
limited to larger bubbles (a few hundred microns) [29], [30].
Previously circumferential stress was measured by varying the
intravascular pressures of frog microvascular endothelium [31].
In their study, exceeding the vascular strength of 0.8 MPa caused
vascular ruptures leading to red blood cell extravasations. However, this experiment was performed in static conditions without
bubbles. The stresses calculated from other numerical simulations [32] are in the same order of magnitude as those reported
in this study. Furthermore, our bubble model was validated previously with experimental data, in which vessel wall movements
were measured and resultant vascular wall stresses were calculated [16].
The results in Fig. 11 show that wall stresses are bubble size
and frequency dependent. If large bubbles are considered to be
present (specially at 0.551 MHz), then the stress peaks induced
from bubbles above resonance (i.e., 3-, 4-, and 7-μm bubbles)
are approximately constant at each frequency. McDannold et al.
[10] found that BBB opening was constant at a constant MI.
This could indicate that bubble-induced stresses are related to
the BBB opening.
It was previously shown that the extent of BBB opening
varied with the bubble size [33]. They reported thresholds for
BBB opening of 0.30–0.46 MPa when 1–2 μm in diameter
was used at 1.525 MHz transmit frequency. This threshold was
0.15–0.30 in case of 4–5-μm bubbles in diameter. In Fig. 10,
the stress calculations from larger bubbles inside 5-μm vessels
was higher. In addition, our results in Fig. 11 shows that at
1.5 MHz, 4–5-μm bubbles in diameter exert larger wall stresses
compared to 1–2-μm bubbles in diameter. In the future, BBB
opening experiments with high-resolution imaging techniques
(e.g., two-photon fluorescence microscopy), preferentially using
monodisperse bubbles, together with simulations are needed to
bring further insights into the stress values related to the BBB
opening and vessel wall damage.

1302

C. General Discussion and Model Limitations
In this study, some of the acoustic pressures used in the simulations might be smaller than the required pressure for BBB
opening. First, the maximum pressures that are reported correspond to the point at which a collapse occurs, with collapse
defined as being when the two opposite side of the bubble come
into contact. After that point, the simulations cannot continue,
but it is reasonable to expect that in reality bubbles may continue to oscillate after this point and this is simply a limitation
of our simulations. Second, it is notable that the maximum pressures employed decrease with bubble size, in other words the
collapse threshold increases with decreasing bubble size. For
a 1.1-micron bubble, this occurs at 330 kPa and, therefore, we
are able to examine stresses for this bubble size up until 300
kPa. For this size, a transition point occurred in the vicinity of
175 kPa and stresses increase rapidly until 300 kPa. This is close
to the experimentally measured threshold of 280 kPa reported
in [11], which itself was subject to uncertainty related to path
length attenuation. Given that 93.5% of Definity bubbles measured experimentally have a radii smaller than 1.1 μm [15], it is
not unreasonable to suggest that these values are within a range
that is consistent with previous experiments. It should also be
noted that in vitro measurements of bubble sizes may differ from
in vivo sizes due to changes while circulating.
In experiments performed by O’Reilly and Hynynen [11],
ultraharmonics (harmonics of the subharmonic, i.e., 3/2 or 5/2
of the transmit frequency of 0.551 MHz) were detected and
used as a control parameter for the BBB opening. In their experiments, ultraharmonics appeared in the second half of the
10-ms pulse. However, our numerical simulations were limited
to 40 μs, and subharmonics or ultraharmonics were not detected. It should also be noted that modeling of the subharmonic
oscillations for the purposes of quantitative interpretation is a
challenge (arguable much more so than for harmonics) in that
the results are highly sensitive to the form and initial state of the
elasticity and viscosity values as a function of radial strain. In
addition, lipid-encapsulated microbubbles with a size between
the resonance and twice the resonance have lowest thresholds
for subharmonic emissions (e.g., Katiyar and Sarkar [34]). At
0.551 MHz, an unbound 6-μm bubble in radius is at resonance.
Therefore, subharmonic emissions are expected to arise from
6-μm bubbles or larger, and most of the bubble sizes in our
simulations were below 6 μm.
The presence of such large bubbles in the microvasculature
is debatable as majority of Definity bubbles are below 3 μm
in radius [15]. However, the long acoustic bursts, which are
used for therapeutic ultrasound could cause microbubbles to
coalesce [35]–[37] or undergo rectified diffusion [38], leading
to the formation of larger bubbles. In our numerical model,
coalescence or rectified diffusion were not taken into account.
The model used here was 2-D and axis-symmetric, and bubbles were assumed to be in the middle of the vessel to reduce
computational complexity. In reality, bubbles may be pushed
toward one side of the microvessel wall due to the primary radiation force. However, our simulations still accounts for the
general effects of confinement on the bubble oscillation.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

As shown in Figs. 2 and 3, bubbles underwent nonspherical oscillations. Note the periodicity of these oscillations, under
conditions that produce stable oscillations, is at the transmit frequency. This differs from surface mode oscillations, which have
oscillation periods that are twice that of the insonation frequencies. Surface modes were also observed in the simulations (data
not shown), but for higher transmit frequencies as the surface
mode resonant frequencies are for bubble sizes that are larger
than the microvessel sizes examined in this study (e.g., Versluis
et al. [39]).
It was also observed that bubbles collapsed within 5-μm vessels (see Fig. 4), where the collapse pressure threshold was lower
for larger bubbles. The same unbound bubbles at the corresponding threshold pressures did not collapse, but rather underwent
stable oscillations. This implies that confined bubbles are more
likely to undergo inertial cavitation. Fragmentation, shell rupture, and shedding, and gas release could be the potential mechanisms following the bubble collapse. However, our numerical
model is limited in that it does not take these mechanisms into
account. In previous studies, the appearance of inertial cavitation was associated with the bubble fragmentation [40], [41].
Postema et al. [42] reported that in most of the fragmentation
cases other bubbles were present near the fragmenting bubble,
which may induce surface instabilities. The same analogy can
be used where the presence of an elastic nearby vessel wall
could have the same effect on oscillating bubbles and thus lowering the inertial cavitation threshold. However, the focus of this
study was rather on acoustic emissions and vessel wall stresses
evaluated at pressures below the collapse threshold.
The results reported here were necessarily constrained to specific parameters for the vessel properties and microbubble shell
properties. The selected values were within a reasonable range
of what is expected to be realistic, but the results are influenced by these values. For example, bubble oscillations would
be more damped within more rigid vasculature, which may
represent a tumorous tissue with high-interstitial fluid pressure
levels. Definity bubbles are widely approved and used clinically
for diagnostic purposes and has been widely investigated in preclinical BBB opening experiments. In this study, the properties
of Definity bubbles were chosen to correlate with the former experimental study [11]. It is speculated that the bubble behavior
observed here could be extended to other phospholipid agents
(e.g., SonoVue) as well. In order to investigate the sensitivity
of the results to the shell elasticity and viscosity parameters, a
test simulation was performed on an unbound 1.1-μm bubble at
150 kPa using the Marmottant model (at 0.551 MHz). SonoVue
bubbles (another agent used for the BBB opening experiments)
were chosen that have lower shell elasticity and viscosity values
than Definity [43]. When the shell viscosity was reduced sixfold (from 1.2 × 10−8 kg·s−1 to 2 × 10−9 kg·s−1 ), the maximum
bubble expansion increased by 3% at 150 kPa. A decrease in
the shell elasticity by 50% (from 0.7 to 0.35 N/m) resulted in a
3% (for both 150 kPa) increase in the maximum bubble expansion. Therefore, the results were not sensitive to changes in the
shell elasticity and shell viscosity at 150 kPa. In this study, we
used the Marmottant shell model which is a widely employed
model that accounts for strain-dependent shell elasticity based

HOSSEINKHAH et al.: MICROBUBBLES AND BLOOD–BRAIN BARRIER OPENING: A NUMERICAL STUDY ON ACOUSTIC EMISSIONS

on heuristic assumptions (i.e., the presence of buckling, elastic,
and rupture regimes). It was assumed that the bubble is initially
at the bucking state (γ(A0 ) = 0), while in reality initial effective
surface tension γ(A0 ) is an unknown parameter and there can be
variation in this value in practice. In order to investigate the influence of the initial surface tension on the transition point, a test
simulation on a 1.1-μm bubble close to the buckling state in an
unbound fluid was performed. The initial surface tension was set
to γ(A0 ) = 0.005 and Pg 0 = P0 + 2γ(A0 )/R0 was replaced
with Pg 0 = P0 in (3). This was performed at 0.551 MHz and
at 100–200 kPa. As the result, for γ(A0 ) = 0.005 the pressure
corresponding to the transition point was unchanged compared
to the case of zero initial surface tension. Future experimental
interrogations on individual phospholipid bubbles, as well as
bubble populations could validate the occurrence of transition
point and calibrate the pressures at which it happens.
V. CONCLUSION
A comprehensive model of a coupled bubble-fluid-vessel system has been developed and numerical simulations were performed. In the context of blood–brain barrier opening, this study
aims to assess the effects of the vessel wall on acoustic emissions and vessel wall stresses. Bubbles confined within small
vessels presented with nonspherical oscillations. The acoustic
emissions from bubbles excited at pressures below the collapse
threshold were assessed. At 0.551 MHz, a bubble oscillating
within a small vessel experienced increased damping and a resonant frequency shift upward. This led to lower acoustic emissions in confined bubbles. The normalized second harmonic
to the fundamental increased with acoustic pressure followed
by a minima, called a transition point, which was bubble size
dependent. This harmonic could potentially be used in treatment monitoring. The transition point of an unbound compared
to confined bubble populations occurred at different pressures
providing a means for confined and unbound bubbles separation. The stresses induced by different bubbles on 5-μm vessels
were calculated. Following the transition point, these stresses
rose with a steeper slope, which could be correlated with BBB
opening. Bubbles of different sizes were placed close to an elastic wall and driven at various acoustic frequencies (constant MI)
to assess the mechanical stresses. The wall stresses were bubble
size and frequency dependent. The stress peaks induced by bubbles above the resonance (i.e., 3-, 4-, and 7-μm bubbles at 1.5, 1,
and 0.551 MHz, respectively) were constant at each frequency.
Numerical simulations of a coupled bubble-fluid-vessel system
could provide insight into BBB opening for control, pressure
calibration, and bubble manufacturing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. P. Burns, Dr. D. Steinman,
and Dr. M. O’Reilly for helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Hynynen et al., “Noninvasive MR imaging-guided focal opening of the
blood-brain barrier in rabbits,” Radiology, vol. 220, no. 3, pp. 640–646,
2001.

1303

[2] N. J. Abbott and I. A. Romero, “Transporting therapeutics across the
blood-brain barrier,” Mol. Med. Today, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 106–113, 1996.
[3] W. M. Pardridge, “The blood-brain barrier: Bottleneck in brain drug development,” NeuroRx, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 3–14, 2005.
[4] M. A. O’Reilly and K. Hynynen, “Ultrasound enhanced drug delivery
to the brain and central nervous system,” Int. J. Hyperthermia, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 386–396, 2012.
[5] M. Aryal et al., “Ultrasound-mediated blood-brain barrier disruption for
targeted drug delivery in the central nervous system,” Adv. Drug Del. Rev.,
vol. 72, pp. 94–109, 2014.
[6] N. Vykhodtseva et al., “Progress and problems in the application of focused ultrasound for blood-brain barrier disruption,” Ultrasonics, vol. 48,
no. 4, pp. 279–296, 2008.
[7] N. McDannold et al., “Targeted disruption of the blood-brain barrier with
focused ultrasound: Association with cavitation activity,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 793–807, 2006.
[8] C. D. Arvanitis et al., “Controlled ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier disruption using passive acoustic emissions monitoring,” PLoS One,
vol. 7, no. 9, p. e45783, 2012.
[9] Y. S. Tung et al., “In vivo transcranial cavitation threshold detection during
ultrasound-induced blood-brain barrier opening in mice,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 55, no. 20, pp. 6141–6155, 2010.
[10] N. McDannold et al., “Blood-brain barrier disruption induced by focused
ultrasound and circulating preformed microbubbles appears to be characterized by the mechanical index,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 834–840, 2008.
[11] M. A. O’Reilly and K. Hynynen, “Blood-brain barrier: Real-time
feedback-controlled focused ultrasound disruption by using an acoustic
emissions-based controller,” Radiology, vol. 263, no. 1, pp. 96–106, 2012.
[12] G. T. Clement and K. Hynynen, “A non-invasive method for focusing
ultrasound through the human skull,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, no. 8,
pp. 1219–1236, 2002.
[13] J. Tu et al., “Microbubble sizing and shell characterization using flow
cytometry,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 58,
no. 5, pp. 955–963, May 2011.
[14] B. L. Helfield and D. E. Goertz, “Nonlinear resonance behavior and linear
shell estimates for DefinityTM and MicroMarkerTM assessed with acoustic
microbubble spectroscopy,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 133, no. 2, pp.
1158–1168, 2013.
[15] T. Faez et al., “Characterization of DefinityTM ultrasound contrast agent
at frequency range of 5–15 MHz,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 338–342, 2011.
[16] N. Hosseinkhah et al., “Mechanisms of microbubble-vessel interactions
and induced stresses: A numerical study,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 134,
no. 3, pp. 1875–1885, 2013.
[17] P. Marmottant et al., “A model for large amplitude oscillations of coated
bubbles accounting for buckling and rupture,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer.,
vol. 118, no. 6, pp. 3499–3505, 2005.
[18] T. Gilányi et al., “Adsorption of poly(ethylene oxide) at the air/water
interface: A dynamic and static surface tension study,” J. Colloid Interface
Sci., vol. 301, no. 2, pp. 428–435, 2006.
[19] F. A. Duck, Physical Properties of Tissue: A Comprehensive Reference
Book. London, U.K: Academic, 1990, pp. 1–336.
[20] L. H. Smaje et al., “The distensibility of single capillaries and venules in
the cat mesentery,” Microvascular Res., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 358–370, 1980.
[21] A. C. Burton, “Role of geometry, of size and shape, in the microcirculation,” Fed. Proc., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1753–1760, 1965.
[22] J. Melbin and A. Noordergraaf, “Elastic deformation in orthotropic vessels: Theoretical and experimental results,” Circ. Res., vol. 28, no. 6,
pp. 680–692, 1971.
[23] T. Nhan et al., “Drug delivery to the brain by focused ultrasound induced blood-brain barrier disruption: Quantitative evaluation of enhanced
permeability of cerebral vasculature using two-photon microscopy,”
J. Controlled Release, vol. 172, no. 1, pp. 274–280, 2013.
[24] A. Burgess et al., “Analysis of focused ultrasound-induced blood-brain
barrier permeability in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease using twophoton microscopy,” J. Controlled Release, vol. 192C, pp. 243–248, 2014.
[25] S. Hilgenfeldt et al., “Response of bubbles to diagnostic ultrasound: A
unifying theoretical approach,” Eur. Phys. J. B, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 247–255,
1998.
[26] A. K. Srivastava and P. C. Gope, Strength of Materials. New Delhi, India:
Prentice-Hall, 2007, pp. 127–148.
[27] T. G. Leighton, “The inertial terms in equations of motion for bubbles in
tubular vessels or between plates,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 130, no. 5,
pp. 3333–3338, 2011.

1304

[28] E. Castro-Hernández et al., “Microbubble generation in a co-flow device
operated in a new regime,” Lab Chip, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2023–2029,
2011.
[29] J. Collis et al., “Cavitation microstreaming and stress fields created by
microbubbles,” Ultrasonics, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 273–279, 2010.
[30] R. Dijkink et al., “Measurement of cavitation induced wall shear stress,”
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 93, no. 25, pp. 254107–254107-3, 2008.
[31] C. R. Neal and C. C. Michel, “Openings in frog microvascular endothelium
induced by high intravascular pressures,” J. Physiol., vol. 492, no. 1,
pp. 39–52, 1996.
[32] W. Wiedemair et al., “On ultrasound-induced microbubble oscillation in
a capillary blood vessel and its implications for the blood-brain barrier,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1019–1045, 2012.
[33] J. J. Choi et al., “Microbubble-size dependence of focused ultrasoundinduced blood-brain barrier opening in mice in vivo,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 145–154, Jan. 2010.
[34] A. Katiyar and K. Sarkar, “Excitation threshold for subharmonic generation from contrast microbubbles,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 130, no. 5,
pp. 3137–3147, 2011.
[35] M. Postema et al., “Ultrasound-induced coalescence of free gas microbubbles,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 1–4.
[36] M. Postema et al., “Ultrasound-induced gas release from contrast agent
microbubbles,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 52,
no. 6, pp. 1035–1041, Jun. 2005.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

[37] H. Chen et al., “Preliminary observations on the spatial correlation between short-burst microbubble oscillations and vascular bioeffects,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 2151–2162, 2012.
[38] H. G. Flynn, “A mechanism for the generation of cavitation maxima by
pulsed ultrasound,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 505–512,
1984.
[39] M. Versluis et al., “Microbubble shape oscillations excited through ultrasonic parametric driving,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 82, no. 2, p. 026321, 2010.
[40] J. E. Chomas et al., “Threshold of fragmentation for ultrasonic contrast
agents,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 141–150, 2001.
[41] A. Y. Ammi et al., “Ultrasonic contrast agent shell rupture detected by
inertial cavitation and rebound signals,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelect.
Freq. Control. vol., vol. 53, pp. 126–136, Jan. 2006.
[42] M. Postema et al., “Shell rupture threshold, fragmentation threshold, blake
threshold,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., pp. 1708–1711, vol. 3, no. 1,
2005.
[43] J. Tu et al., “Estimating the shell parameters of SonoVue microbubbles
using light scattering,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 126, no. 6, pp. 2954–
2962, 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

