2114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Magneto-Acousto-Electrical Tomography With
Magnetic Induction for Conductivity Reconstruction
Liang Guo, Guoqiang Liu∗ , Member, IEEE, and Hui Xia

Abstract—Magneto-acousto-electrical tomography (MAET) is
an imaging modality proposed to conduct noninvasive electrical
conductivity imaging of biological tissue with high spatial resolution. In this study, we present a method of MAET in coil detection
mode, which is named as magneto-acousto-electrical tomography
with magnetic induction (MAET-MI). Based on the analysis of the
mechanism of MAET-MI, we derive a reciprocal theorem and give
an integral equation for computing the induced voltage of the coil.
The forward problem of MAET-MI can be solved by this integral
equation. In the inverse problem of MAET-MI, two steps are taken
to reconstruct the conductivity. The first step is to reconstruct the
curl of the eddy current density in the reciprocal process by the
compression sensing method. And then the conductivity is recovered by the iterative methods such as the Levenberg–Marquardt
algorithm. Both the mechanism of MAET-MI and the reconstruction of conductivity are verified by computer simulations. We have
also conducted the phantom experiments. The reconstructed images are approximately consistent with the phantom’s conductivity. The imaging results prove the ability and the reliability of our
proposed methods. It is shown that the relative conductivity distribution can be reconstructed with our proposed reciprocal theorem
in MAET-MI modality. Comparing with the traditional MAET,
The MAET-MI modality would benefit from the noncontact measurement and be convenient for clinical application.
Index Terms—Compression sensing (CS) method, conductivity
reconstructing, magneto-acousto-electrical tomography (MAET),
magnetic induction, reciprocal theorem.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONDUCTIVITY imaging of biological tissue is usually
carried out using electrical impedance tomography (EIT)
[1], [2], magnetic induction tomography [3], and magnetic resonance EIT [4]. Recently, many researchers have been interested
in improving the spatial resolution by the interaction of the ultrasound and electromagnetic fields. Magnetoacoustic tomography
with magnetic induction (MAT-MI) [5] and magneto-acoustoelectrical tomography (MAET) [6] are two typical approaches.

C

Manuscript received August 31, 2014; revised November 12, 2014 and December 11, 2014; accepted December 11, 2014. Date of publication December
18, 2014; date of current version August 18, 2015. This work was supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61401514,
Grant 61271424, and Grant 51137004. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
L. Guo is with the Institution of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences/University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, and also with the College
of Control Theory and Engineering, China University of Petroleum.
∗ G. Liu is with the Institution of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy
of Science, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: gqliu@mail.iee.ac.cn).
H. Xia is with the Institution of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2382562

In MAT-MI, the biological tissue in static magnetic field is
stimulated by the current in a coil. The induced current in the
tissue experiences the Lorenz force and generates a vibration.
This vibration spreads out in all directions in the form of ultrasonic waves, which are detected as ultrasonic pressures by
probes surrounding the biological tissue. The ultrasonic source
can be recovered and its conductivity can be reconstructed by
these ultrasonic signals. If the induced current is excited by
a coil, it is called MAT-MI [7]. And if the current is injected
by electrodes, then magneto-acoustic tomography with applied
current is proposed [8].
Presently, the MAT-MI is well developed to image phantoms
[9] and in vitro tissues [10]. A passive B-mode ultrasound is
developed to detect the MAT-MI signals by Mariappan et al.
[11]. And even in acoustically inhomogeneous tissue, the conductivity imaging can be realized with the prior information of
the acoustic speed [12].
MAET originates from the Hall effect imaging [6], [13]. It is
a reciprocal approach of MAT-MI and has similar advantages
with its high spatial resolution and contrast.
In MAET, the ultrasound wave stimulated by the ultrasonic
transducer is applied to the biological tissue under the static
magnetic field, which will generate the vibrations of the particles. The motion of the particles leads to the separation of
charges due to the Lorenz force and produces the source current dispersed in the area. The voltage signal stimulated by the
source current can be detected by the electrodes or the coils
arbitrarily arranged out of the tissue.
The forward and inverse problems of the MAET were studied
substantially by Haider et al. [6]. They obtained the MAET signals of a slab by electrodes or coils and imaged the conductivity
by the ultrasonic scan on a plane. They considered that the signals detected by electrodes and coils were similar. The MAET at
differential frequencies was introduced in difference frequency
MAET by Renzhiglova et al. [14]. Kunyansky [15] proposed
a set of methods for MAET in electrode detection mode. The
point-like ultrasonic source was introduced in his paper. He reconstructed the curl of the current density, current density, and
conductivities by several steps using numerical simulations.
Until now, there is no explicit formula to calculate the MAET
signals detected by the coils and also no typical experiment to
obtain the MAET signals by transmitting the ultrasound from
around the phantom to image the deeper conductivity. Furthermore, the formulization of the MAET in the 2-D conductivity
model with a 3-D ultrasound field generated by the point-like
ultrasonic source is a big problem.
On the other hand, the reconstruction from the curl of the current density to the conductivity in MAET-MI is similar to the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GUO et al.: MAGNETO-ACOUSTO-ELECTRICAL TOMOGRAPHY WITH MAGNETIC INDUCTION FOR CONDUCTIVITY RECONSTRUCTION

conductivity reconstruction in MAT-MI. Bioimpedance reconstruction through vector source imaging has been developed by
Mariappan et al. [9] in MAT-MI. And also the multiexcitation
coils have been used by Li and He [16] for accurate reconstruction. Kunyansky [15] has also reconstructed the conductivity
from the curl of the current density by rotating the static magnetic field three times in the 3-D simulation model.
In our study, we focused on the MAET in coil detection
mode, which is also called magneto-acousto-electrical tomography with magnetic induction (MAET-MI) in this paper. We
propose a set of methods to solve the forward and inverse problem in the MAET-MI. First, an explicit relationship between
the spatial component of the curl of the eddy current density
in reciprocal process (CECD-RP) and the MAET-MI induced
voltage is formulated. Second, the induced eddy current problem of the MAET-MI is detailed in the forms of the spatial
component of the field variables. And then, the compression
sensing (CS) method is introduced to reconstruct the CECD-RP.
We also gave a modified form of Levenberg–Marquardt (LM)
method in reconstructing conductivity from the CECD-RP. The
proposed algorithms are applied to the numerical simulations
and phantom experiments sequentially. The computed MAETMI-induced voltage and the reconstructed images of the target
conductivities are shown to support our proposed methods.
II. FORWARD PROBLEM OF MAET-MI
A. Reciprocal Theorem of MAET-MI
In order to explain the model of the MAET-MI, both the
actual physical process and the reciprocal process should be
introduced. The actual physical process of MAET-MI can be
described as a partial differential equation (PDE) of electromagnetic fields excited by the ultrasound waves. The coupling
of the ultrasound and electromagnetic field is formulated as
follows [17]:
J e1 = σV 1 × B 0

(1)

where J e1 denotes the source current density stimulated by
ultrasound waves with the vibration velocity V 1 . B 0 is the
uniform static magnetic field, and σ is the conductivity of the
medium. By the stimulation of the source current density J e1 ,
the corresponding electric field E 1 is generated in the whole
domain including the target area and the coil. By ignoring the
displacement current, the magnetic field H1 that is stimulated
by the total current density can be represented as follows:
∇ × H 1 = J e1 + σE 1 .

(2)

At the same time, according to the Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction, the magnetic field and electrical field also
satisfy the following equation:
∇ × E 1 = −μ

∂H 1
∂t

(3)

where μ is the permeability of the medium. Because the electrical field E1 is rotational, an induced voltage can then be detected
by a coil. The induced voltage of the coil can be described as a

2115

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of MAET-MI model comparing actual physical
process and reciprocal process. The whole domain Ω is included in the ultrasound scan line.

line integral of the induced electric field along the coil:

u(t) =
E 1 (t) · dlcir

(4)

r∈lci r

where dlcir represents the tiny line element along the coil of
wire.
In the reciprocal process, we take the assumption of applying
an external current in the same coil as used in the actual physical process. The external current density Je 2 in the reciprocal
process is represented as follows:
J e2 (r, t) = δ(r − rcir )s(t)ee2 (r)

(5)

where r denotes an arbitrary field point of the medium, rcir denotes the field point of the coil, δ(·) represents the Dirac function
in three dimension region, and s(t) is the time component of Je 2 .
The unit vector of Je 2 (r,t) is represented by ee2 (r). According
to the selectivity of Dirac function, the δ(r − rcir ) in (5) shows
that the external current density Je 2 is only applied to the coil
and does not exist in other locations.
According to the Ampere’s law and the Faraday’s law of
electromagnetic induction, the electrical field and magnetic field
induced by the external current in reciprocal process can be
described as follows:
∇ × H 2 = J e2 + σE 2
∇ × E 2 = −μ

∂H 2
∂t

(6)
(7)

where E2 and H2 are the eddy electrical field and magnetic field
of the reciprocal process, respectively. The displacement current
is also ignored in (6). The subscript 2 denotes the variable in the
reciprocal process and the subscript 1 denotes the variable in the
actual physical process. A schematic diagram of the theoretical
model is shown in Fig. 1.
Considering the reciprocal theorem, the induced voltage in
the coil can be represented as the following integral equation:

1
B 0 · ∇ × J o2 (r)ϕ̃(r, t)dΩ.
(8)
u(t) =
ρ
r ∈Ω

2116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

where u(t) is the induced voltage of the coil, ϕ(r, t) is the
vibration velocity potential function that satisfies ∇ϕ(r, t) =
ρV 1 (r, t), ρ denotes the mass density, ϕ(r, t) represents the
derivative of ϕ(r, t)with respect to time t, and J o2 (r) represents
the spatial component of J 2 (r, t). The detailed proof of (8) can
be seen in the Appendix.

Because the magnetic vector potential stimulated by the induced current in low conductive medium is ignored, Ao2 (r) is
only considered as the spatial component of the magnetic vector
potential in the vacuum under the stimulation of the coil. It can
be calculated by the following equation:

B. Eddy Current Problem in Low Conductive Medium

Thus, we can obtain the spatial component of the eddy current
density J o2 (r) by (13)–(15).

The forward problem of MAET-MI in time domain mainly
lies in the calculation of (8). We will show that the ∇ × J o2 (r)
in (8) can be obtained by computing the eddy current field in a
low conductive medium.
Considering that the magnetic field stimulated by the induced
current in the weak conductive medium is far less than the
magnetic field stimulated by the external current of the coil in
vacuum, (7) can be rewritten as follows:
∂H 2
∂t

(9)

where H 12 represents the induced magnetic field that is stimulated by the external current of the coil in vacuum. H 12 is usually
called the first-order magnetic field satisfying:
∇ × H 12 = J e2 .

(10)

Let us focus on the time component of these field variables.
Because Je 2 satisfies (5) with the time component of s(t), the
magnetic vector potential A2 (r, t) that satisfies μH 12 = ∇ ×
A2 can be rewritten as a product of a spatial component and the
time component as shown in (12a) later. According to the current
continuity theorem, the following equation can be established:
∇ · [−σ∇u2 (r, t) − σ∂A2 (r, t)/∂t] = 0.

(11)

The time component of the scalar potential u2 (r, t) is the
derivative of the time component of A2 (r, t)with respect to time.
And the electric field E 2 = −∇u2 (r, t) − ∂A2 (r, t)/∂t also
has the same time component as u2 (r, t). The three equations in
(12) demonstrate the relationships between the time components
and the spatial components of these variables:
A2 (r, t) = Ao2 (r)s(t)

(12a)

u2 (r, t) = uo2 (r)s (t)

(12b)

J 2 (r, t) = J o2 (r)s (t)

(12c)

where Ao2 (r), uo2 (r), and J o2 (r) are the spatial components of
A2 (r, t), u2 (r, t), and J 2 (r, t), respectively. s(t) denotes the
derivative of s(t) with respect to time.
Substituting (12a) and (12b) into (11) and eliminating the
time components on both sides of (11), we obtain the Poisson
equation of the spatial variables as follows:
∇ · [σ∇uo2 (r)] = −∇ · [σAo2 (r)].

C. Forward Problem of Acoustic Field
If the ultrasound is transmitted from a transient point source
in the acoustically homogenous medium, the vibration velocity
potential function also satisfies the wave equation as follows
[19]:
1 ∂2 ϕ
= Aϕ δ(r − rd )δ(t)
(16)
c2 ∂t2
where rd represents the location of the ultrasound transducer,
and Aϕ represents the constant amplitude coefficient of the vibration velocity potential of the source.
In consideration of the flat transducer, the far field of the
acoustic vibration velocity potential can be approximately regarded as the corresponding field that is stimulated by a point
source [20]. The Green’s function of a transient point source
can be used to represent the vibration velocity potential:
ϕ(r, t) = Aϕ

δ(t − |r − rd |/c)
.
4π|r − rd |

(17)

It is also called point spread function (PSF) as mentioned in
[9], [16].
Substituting (17) into (8), we obtain

∂  (t − |r − rd |/c)
Aϕ
dΩ.
u(t) =
B 0 · ∇ × J 02 (r)
ρ
4π|r − rd |
r ∈Ω
(18)
On the other hand, (18) can be regarded as the solution to the
following equation:
1 ∂ 2 û
= D(r)δ  (t)
c2 ∂t2
D(r) = Aϕ B 0 · ∇ × J o2 (r)/ρ

∇2 û −

(19a)
(19b)

where D(r) represents the distributed source function of the
wave (19a), and û represents a virtual field variable whose values on the location of rd can be regarded as u(t). That is, u(t)
computed by (18) is equal to the value of the field variable û(r, t)
that is computed at the location of the transducer rd [16]. Thus,
we convert the integral equation of (18) into the wave equation
of the distributed source. Both the integral equation of (18) and
the wave equation of distributed source of (19a) can be used to
calculate the forward problem of MAET-MI [21].

(13)

And the spatial component of the eddy current density J˜2o (r)
can be computed by the following equation [18]:
J o2 (r) = −σ∇uo2 (r) − σAo2 (r).

(15)

∇2 ϕ −

1

∇ × E 2 ≈ −μ

∇2 Ao2 (r) = −μδ(r − rcir )ee2 (r).

(14)

III. INVERSE PROBLEM OF MAET-MI
The inverse problem of MAET-MI can be stated in two steps.
The first step is to acquire the spatial component of CECD-RP,
which is equivalent to reconstructing D(r) from u(t) by (18)

GUO et al.: MAGNETO-ACOUSTO-ELECTRICAL TOMOGRAPHY WITH MAGNETIC INDUCTION FOR CONDUCTIVITY RECONSTRUCTION

2117

or (19). And the second step is to reconstruct conductivity from
D(r).

to the l1 problem for most ΦΨ:

A. CS Method in MAET-MI

It can be realized by the match pursuit-type algorithms. Approximately, the l1 norm minimization of (24) is also equivalent
to the l1 norm minimization as follows [25], [26]:

The problem of reconstructing D(r) from u(t) is equivalent
to that of reconstructing the initial value D(r) from (19). The
latter has been studied extensively in the content of photoacoustic tomography [22], [23]. If the vibration velocity potential
function is determined by the point-like source in homogenous
acoustic medium, the time reversal method can be used for reconstructing the source D(r) as follows [22]:


∂u(t) 
1
t
d
.
(20)
D(r) = −


2π rd ∈
∂t |r−rd |=ct
rd denotes the location of the acoustic point source on a
closed sphere surface ࢣ that encloses the reconstructed area Ω.
That is, the source D(r) of (19) can only be reconstructed by all
the data of u(t) that is obtained in the process of transmitting
ultrasound from all the points of ࢣ. Practically, transmitting
ultrasound from all point of ࢣ is hard to be realized, which
causes the inaccuracy of the algorithm. In order to reconstruct
D(r) with less data, under the hypothesis that the image can be
compressed in some basis, the CS method is proved to be highly
efficient for reconstruction.
If the whole region is discretized into M × N small square
regions and the conductivity in each small region j ∈ [1 : M ×
N ] keeps constant, the forward problem of (8) can be rewritten
as a matrix equation:
U = ΦD

(21)

where D is the column vector of the distributed source D(r j ) =
Aϕ B 0 · ∇ × J o2 (rj )/ρ with j ∈ [1 : M × N ]. U is a column
vector of the MAET-MI signal ui . If we take the hypothesis
that the ultrasound is transmitted totally K times at the steps
of circling around the tissue with a constant step angle and
the sampling length of each transmission is L, the scope of the
subscript i can be indicated as i ∈ [1 : K × L]. The Φ in (21) is
the known forward operator that we discretize:
Φi,j = ϕ (ti , rj ).

(22)

Thus, reconstructing D(r) from (19) is converted into solving
out D from (21).
Mathematically, the vector D contains M × N pixel, which
is usually sparse in some functional basis Ψ. Vector D can be
represented in this basis as: D = Ψθ, where θ is a column vector
satisfying θl 0 < M × N . The operator ·l 0 denotes the l0
norm that is simply the number of the nonzero coefficients.
According to the CS theory, if D is sparse in the basis of Ψ, θ is
the solution to the l0 norm minimization [24]:
min θl 0 s.t. U = ΦΨθ

(23)

with the overwhelming probability if ΦΨ is a CS-matrix.
Generally speaking, minimizing the l0 norm is a combinatorial problem. It is time consuming and inapplicable for imaging
with a large number of pixels. To overcome this issue, Donoho
[25] has shown that the l0 minimization problem is equivalent

min θl 1 s.t. U = ΦΨθ.

min θl 1 s.t. U − ΦΨθl 2 < ε.

(24)

(25)

In order to satisfy the CS matrix condition, ΦΨ should be
particularly designed according to the CS theory. In previous
work of Candès et al. [27], if Ψ is the Fourier basis and Φ is
a random matrix satisfying the Gaussian distribution, the ΦΨ
can be regarded as a CS matrix. In the previous work of Provost
and Lesage [26], the kernel of Radon transform sampling the
Fourier domain is used in the PAT. In MAET-MI, if the velocity
potential function can be regarded as a linear independent function, the matrix that is composed of the product between the
forward operator in the Fourier domain and the derivative of the
velocity potential will be a CS matrix. We need to transmit the
ultrasound from the point-like sources in some certain quantitative degrees to satisfy this condition. Even if Φ is not regarded
as the Green’s function generated by a point-like source in homogenous medium, the ΦΨ can also be a CS matrix only if
the combinations of small groups of columns in ΦΨ looks like
random noise [24]. Provost and Lesage [26] also point out that
if Ψ is defined in Fourier space, four kinds of PSFs for Φ can be
chosen: curvelets, wavelets, numerical derivative, and Fourier.
In practice, the vibration velocity potential function ϕ(r, t)
generated by the point-like source varies with the characters of
the source. Nevertheless, if the ultrasound field generated by
some other transducers satisfies the CS-matrix condition, the
CS method can also be adopted. In order to solve (24), the
orthogonal matching pursuit algorithm [28] is employed in our
work of study.
B. Reconstructing Conductivity From D(r)
Under the assumption that the mass density ρ and the
static magnetic field B0 are uniform and B0 is along z-axis,
the z-component of ∇ × J o2 (r) can be reconstructed by the
method mentioned above. We might as well assume that the
z-component of ∇ × J o2 (r) has been recovered as P, which
satisfies

(26)
∇ × J o2 (r)z = P.
Substituting J o2 = −σ∇uo2 − σAo2 into (26), in consideration
of
B o2 = ∇ × Ao2
the following equation is obtained:

(∇σ × Ao2 )z + ( ∇σ × ∇uo2 )|z + σB2oz = −P

(27)

(28)

where B2oz is the z-component of the spatial component of the
magnetic flux density B o2 .
o
are all field variables stimulated in vacIn (28), Ao2 and B2z
uum by the external current of the coil and have nothing to do

2118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

with the conductivity of the medium. Both of them can be calculated through (15) and (27). uo2 is the spatial component of
the scalar potential of the Coulomb field that is caused by the
charge accumulation at the point of ∇σ = 0. Therefore, uo2 can
be regarded as a function with respect to σ.
Transform (28) into a PDE form:
∂σ ∂uo2
∂σ o
∂σ o
∂σ ∂uo2
o
A2 y −
A2 x +
−
+ σB2z
= −P
∂x
∂y
∂x ∂y
∂y ∂x
(29)
where Ao2 x and Ao2 y are the x- and y-components of Ao2 , respectively.
Noticing that the (29) contains the partial differential only
with respect to x and y, it can be discretized by the finite difference method (FDM) in lots of square slices perpendicular to
z-axis [29]. Therefore, the conductivity reconstruction can be
achieved by the profile of two dimensions. Under the hypothesis that the conductivity on the boundary is zero, (29) can be
discretized as follows [30]:
Cσ = −P

(30)

where σ is a column vector of M × N rows, C is a matrix of
K × L rows and M × N columns, P is also a vector of K × L
rows. As uo2 is the function with respect to σ, the coefficients
matrix C also varies with σ. Therefore, reconstructing σ from
(30) is a typical nonlinear optimization problem.
In our study, the L-M method is used for solving (30). The
objective function is established as follows:
1
(P + Cσ)T (P + Cσ).
(31)
2
The first- and second-order derivative matrix of f to σ can be
written as follows, respectively:
f=

J = QT R
T

H= Q Q

(32)

∂C j
σj
∂σj

R = Cσ + P

Schematic diagram of MAET-MI setup used in this study.

the Green’s function with the first-order Born approximation is
detailed in [18] and [30].
According to the L-M method, the correction of the conductivity in each iteration step can be represented as follows:
δσ = H −1 J .

(36)

Generally speaking, the second-order derivative matrix is perhaps ill-posed and cannot be inversed directly. By introducing
the damp factor μ, the approximate form of (36) can be achieved:
δσ = (H + μI)−1 J .

(37)

Given an initial uniform distribution of the conductivity, we
can compute the derivative matrix by (32)–(35). And then, the
correction of the conductivity can be computed by (37). When
we refresh the conductivity by adding the correction to the
conductivity obtained in the last iteration, the distribution of
the conductivity will approach the real one. The next iteration step can be initiated with assembling matrix C by the new
conductivity.

(33)

where J is the first-order derivative matrix with M × N rows
and one column, H is the second-order derivative matrix with
M × N rows and M × N columns, R is the residual column
vector of K × L rows, and Q is the derivative matrix of C(σ)σ
with respect to σ. The matrix Q is made up of K × L rows and
M × N columns. More specifically, the component at ith row in
J is ∂f /∂σi , and the component at ith row and jth column in H
is ∂ 2 f /(∂σi ∂σj ). The Q and R can be computed by following
equations:
Qj = C j +

Fig. 2.

IV. METHODS
We have verified the proposed method for the MAET-MI with
computer simulation and experiment studies. For simplicity,
the conductivity of the object is assumed to be homogenous
in the z-direction. Thus, the MAET-MI forward and inverse
problem can be solved approximately in a 2-D model [9]. All the
reconstructed conductivity is normalized with a scaling factor
to account for the various gains in the system.
A. Computer Simulation Method

(34)
(35)

where Qj and Cj are the jth column vector of the matrix Q and
C, respectively. ∂C j /∂σj denotes the jth column vector that
is composed of the derivative of each component in Cj with
respect to σj .
Here, ∂C j /∂σj is mainly contributed by∂uo2 /∂σj , because
∂Ao2 /∂σj and ∂Bzo /∂σj are equal to zero. The matrix of
∂C j /∂σj can be assembled by the same FDM as that is used
in assembling C in (30). The method to compute ∂uo2 /∂σj by

The schematic diagram of the MAET-MI imaging setup is
shown in Fig. 2. The ultrasound wave is transmitted from a
wideband transducer with the center frequency of 500 kHz and
the bandwidth of 300 kHz. In the numerical simulation, we
use the Gaussian pulse with finite bandwidth as the vibration
velocity potential function:
ϕ(r, t) = Aϕ exp[−(t − τ − |r − rd |/c)2 /2v 2 ]/|r − rd |
where τ is the period of the pulse, ν is the covariance of the
Gaussian pulse, c is the ultrasound velocity in the medium,
r denotes an arbitrary point in the field, and rd denotes the

GUO et al.: MAGNETO-ACOUSTO-ELECTRICAL TOMOGRAPHY WITH MAGNETIC INDUCTION FOR CONDUCTIVITY RECONSTRUCTION

location of the ultrasound transducer. A pair of coils with 150
turns winded tightly is arranged with a separation of 6 cm in
the z-direction to detect the induced voltage. The short distance
of the two coils can increase the eddy current density in the
reciprocal process [31]. The average radii of the two coils are
both 3 cm. The static magnetic field is assumed to be uniform
in the imaging area and pointing to the z-direction with the flux
density set to 0.3 T.
The object space is set to be a cube with side length of 4 cm
and height of 1 cm in the simulation. The height of the cube
is low enough to ensure that the vibration velocity field along
the z-direction is uniform. Both the object and the coils setup
are centered at the origin. The conductivity distribution of the
object along the z-direction is uniform. The FEM simulation
can then be implemented at the object slice with a thickness of
1 mm at z = 0.
The forward problem is computed by the COMSOL FEM
simulation in two ways. On the one hand, the problem of the
coupling between the vibration and the magnetoelectrical field
as described in (1)–(4) is solved through FEM simulations using
COMSOL. On the other hand, the spatial component of the eddy
current density field is first computed by the COMSOL FEM
simulation, and then, the integral equation as described in (8)
is solved through the MATLAB. The first approach lies in the
actual physical process of computing the electromagnetic field
caused by the vibration velocity potential function. This process
is implemented by the scan of moving the transducer along a
circle centered at the origin with radius of 10 cm. The step angle
of the scan is 2.5°. At every step, the ultrasound waves are transmitted to the objective area to stimulate the induced voltage. The
other reciprocal approach is first to compute the eddy current
density field through COMSOL and then to interpolate the current density to a square area of 4 × 4 cm with square meshes
of 0.3125 mm to compute the CECD-RP. Finally, the integral
equation as described in (8) is computed with the process of the
same scan mentioned above.
In the inverse problem, the signal mentioned above is used
as the original data to reconstruct. First, D(r) is reconstructed
using the CS method with Fourier basis. And then, the L-M
method with 50 times iteration is used to reconstruct the conductivity from D(r). In order to perform the inverse problem of
reconstructing conductivity from the spatial component of the
CECD-RP, the form of ∂uo2 /∂σj in ∂C j /∂σj is also computed
with COMSOL FEM simulation using (13) at every step of the
iteration. The value of ∂uo2 /∂σj is then interpolated into the
same square meshes as mentioned above to assemble matrix Q.
A computer with 12 cores CPU, 3-GHz frequency, and 24-GB
RAM is employed for the computation. Using the algorithms
described in Section III, the time that is consumed by each
reconstruction from the raw data to the image is about 15 min.
B. Experimental Method
We have designed the experiment to verify our proposed
method for the conductivity reconstruction. The configuration
and the size of the experimental system shown in Fig. 3 are similar to the schematic setup shown in Fig. 2. The corresponding
photograph of the experiment platform can be seen in Fig. 4(a),

Fig. 3.

Schematic diagram of the MAET-MI experimental system.

Fig. 4.

Photograph of the experimental system.

2119

and the detailed arrangement in the tank is shown in Fig. 4(b).
Almost all the parts of the experimental system are shielded in
an aluminum tank filled with the nonconductive oil. The static
magnetic field is produced by two permanent magnets to obtain
an approximate uniform static magnetic field of 0.3 T (Model
1600 Guass/Tesla meter, CH-Hall). The two permanent magnets are applied to the top and bottom within the shielded oil
tank. The two same coils of 150 turns, as mentioned in computer simulation, are arranged near the two permanent magnets
and connected in series to detect the induced voltage. We have
also developed a low noise amplifier (LNA) using AD8099 to
amplify the MAET-MI signals. Both the coils and the LNA are
mounted within the oil tank to decrease the noise figure. The amplified signal is delivered out through an SMA connector fixed
on the oil tank. Because the frequency spectrum of the MAETMI signal is concerned with the distribution of the conductivity
[32], the designed amplifier is adapted to the wide frequency
band ranging from 50 kHz to 3 MHz with approximate gain of
92 dB. In order to seal the whole oil tank, instead of rotating the
ultrasonic transducer in MAT-MI [33], we choose to rotate the
object by a gear system aside the central axis. Furthermore, we
have also developed an ultrasonic driver based on a fast-speed
MOSFET switch to drive the transducer. The voltage applied to
the transducer is a pulse of 80-ns period, 2-kHz repeat frequency,
and 1200-V amplitude.
During the experiments, both the sample and the transducer
are submerged in the oil for acoustic coupling. A 500-kHz flat
transducer with 15-mm diameter and around 60% bandwidth
is employed in our study. The transducer is fixed on the oil
tank and the sample is placed on a plastic plate, which has a
gear engagement to a manual handle out of the shield. The gear
system can make the sample rotate over a 360° view angle and
2.5 scanning step manually. The scanning radius is about 10 cm.
While the sample rotates, the transducer, the coils, and the static

2120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. (a) Given conductivity distribution in simulation. (b) MAET-MI signal
computed by transmitting ultrasound from the left side of the area comparing
the FEM method and reciprocal theorem method.

Fig. 7. (a)–(c) Reconstructed curl image with SNR of 100, 20, and 2, respectively. The distributed source D(r) is represented by the (19), which is mainly
about the spatial term of the curl of the current density in the reciprocal process.

Fig. 6. (a) Target conductivity image. (b) Spatial component of CECD-RP.
(c) MAET-MI signal image in different time and angles with the horizontal axis
of time versus the vertical axis of angle.

magnetic field are fixed to acquire the MAET-MI measurements
reliably. The induced voltage collection is synchronized with the
ultrasound excitation. Signal averaging of 1024 times is used to
increase signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) with respect to the white
noise.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Computer Simulation Result
We conducted computer simulation to verify the proposed
method. In the forward problem, the MAET-MI signal is obtained with two different methods: one using the FEM method
in solving the coupling field and the other using the integral
method of reciprocal process as described in the theory section.
Fig. 5(a) shows the original conductivity. Fig. 5(b) shows the
signal obtained in transmitting the ultrasound waves from the
point (−0.04, 0). On comparing the two methods mentioned
above, we obtained a near equal approximation for the two.
Fig. 6(a) shows the original piecewise uniform conductivity distribution and Fig. 6(b) shows its spatial component of
CECD-RP. Fig. 6(c) shows the MAET-MI signal in 2-D image,
whose horizontal axis represents the time and the vertical axis
represents the scan angles.
The distributed source D(r) in reciprocal process reconstructed by the CS method is seen in Fig. 7 for various noise
levels. Fig. 7(a)–(c) shows the result of the reconstruction for
SNR of 100, 20, and 2, respectively. We can see from Fig. 7(a)
that there are distortions on the edge of the conductivity. This
is precisely because of the singularity of the conductivity gradient. Namely, the distortions arise from the uncertainty of the
conductivity’s gradient, because the scale of the grid in our al-

Fig. 8. (a)–(c) Reconstructed conductivity image with the original data of
Fig. 6(a)–(c), respectively. (d) Conductivity profile at y = –1 cm with free
noises comparing the reconstructed conductivity with the target conductivity in
simulation.

gorithm is much larger than the spatial span of the edge of the
piecewise uniform conductivity [32].
The reconstructed conductivity computed by the L-M method
is shown in Fig. 8(a)–(c). The conductivity is reconstructed
by the original data shown in Fig. 7(a)–(c). Fig. 8(d) shows
the comparison of one conductivity profile at y = 1 cm. The
correlated coefficient between the target conductivity image and
the reconstructed conductivity image is 91.2% and the relative
error (RE) is 9.7%. Here, the RE is defined as follows:

 N

2

 n =1 (σ0n − σ0n )

(38)
RE = 
N


2
σ0n
n =1

where σ0n is the normalized target conductivity value of the
nth pixel and σn is the corresponding normalized reconstructed
conductivity value. N is the total number of pixels in the range
of imaging.
We can see from the result that the reconstruction of conductivity in Fig. 8 is less sensitive to the SNR than the reconstruction
in Fig. 7. The probable reason is that the L-M method, an approximate algorithm with a regularization factor, has the ability
to resist noises. The bigger the regularization factor is, the more
noises would be filtered out by this method.

GUO et al.: MAGNETO-ACOUSTO-ELECTRICAL TOMOGRAPHY WITH MAGNETIC INDUCTION FOR CONDUCTIVITY RECONSTRUCTION

Fig. 10.
tivity.

Fig. 9. (a) Photograph of the gel phantom tested. (b) Reconstructed conductivity. (c) MAET-MI signal acquired by transmitting ultrasound from left side of
the phantom. (d) Conductivity profile at y = 0.5 cm comparing the reconstructed
conductivity with the target conductivity from the photograph.

We can also see from the results that the reconstructed conductivity has gradual edges which are different from the target
one. That is caused by the filtering effect of the Fourier basis
in the CS method. Furthermore, the singularity of conductivity gradient at the edge of the piecewise uniform conductivity
produces the distortion at these locations. The two steps reconstruction with two approximate L-M and CS methods will
result in some errors. Although the proposed algorithms have
some distortions, the relative accurate result is also obtained as
shown in Fig. 8(d).
B. Experimental Result
The proposed method is also evaluated in phantom experiments. The phantom in Fig. 9(a) is made of 10% salinity gel in
the background with a diameter of about 3 cm. A cylindrical column with 1.5-cm diameter is embedded in the gel. This region
is filled with 30% salinity gel after the background gel is set. In
order to study the results of different samples in shape, scale,
and conductivity, the phantom in Fig. 10(a) is made of nonconductive gel in the background with a diameter about 7 cm. A
triangular prism with 2-cm side length is embedded in this gel,
which is filled with 18% salinity gel after the background gel is
set.
In order to improve the SNR and distinguish the different conductivities in photograph, 5% graphite powder of 8000 meshes
is added in the two parts, which are embedded in the phantoms.
This is an alternative approach for improving SNR in our study.
Using superconductive magnets to increase the static magnetic
field should be more practical to obtain high SNR. The mean
estimated conductivity of the embedded part is 47.7 and 29.6
S/m, respectively. The background conductivity of the sample
in Fig. 9(a) is about 16.1 S/m (Estimated by DDS-307, Shanghai

2121

(a) Photograph of the gel phantom tested. (b) Reconstructed conduc-

Jingke, Inc.). The conductivity of the phantom is much higher
than the conductivity of the tissue just to obtain a high SNR.
The MAET-MI signal averaged by the oscilloscope (MSO
7104A, Agilent) is shown in Fig. 9(c). The signal is stimulated
by transmitting ultrasound from the left side of the sample to
the right at y = 0. The four locations of the large signals are
corresponding to the four edges of the sample, which are denoted
by red arrows in Fig. 9(a).
The reconstructed conductivity is seen in Fig. 9(b) and
the compared conductivity profile at y = 0.5 cm is shown in
Fig. 9(d). The red line in Fig. 9(d) represents the target conductivity profile that is obtained by the measured size and the
normalized mean estimated conductivities of the sample. The
reconstructed conductivity is approximately equal to the target one. The reconstructed conductivity of the sample shown
in Fig. 10(a) is seen in Fig. 10(b). We can see from Fig. 10,
compared with Fig. 9, that if the sample is enlarged and the
conductivity is decreased, the image quality will be reduced
because of the low-SNR signals.
In the inverse problem of MAET-MI, the CS method for reconstructing the distributed source D(r) is verified by computer
simulation with Fourier basis. The L-M method is also implemented to reconstruct conductivity from the curl. If the static
magnetic field is not rotated, we can only reconstruct the spatial
component of CECD-RP in the z-direction, which is only concerned with the eddy current density in the x- and y-directions.
Hence, the conductivity can be reconstructed on a profile in 2-D
models. Even if the L-M method is based on the hypothesis that
the conductivity is continuous in the whole domain, the results
of the simulations and the experiments also reveal that the reconstructed conductivity is approximately equal to the real one
apart from the edge of the piecewise uniform conductivity.
In order to obtain a reliable reconstruction of the conductivity,
a suitable measuring system should be designed. In the experimental study, we employ two coils of 150 turns to increase
the amplitude of the induced voltage, design the wideband filter
to acquire the MAET-MI signal with useful frequency spectrum, develop the dedicated LNA to increase the SNR, and
shield the electromagnetic interference with the aluminum tank.
Still, the unexpected signal that is produced by the coil vibration is hard to avoid in the experiment. These signals can be

2122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

regarded as a kind of background noises. Therefore, the preprocessing of the original data is essential to the later reconstruction, such as subtracting the background noise or digital
filtering.
Compared with MAT-MI, the result of the phantom experiment is less satisfactory going by the weak signal and the high
noise level. There are many reasons accounting for this phenomenon.
First, in consideration of the safety of the human body, the
stimulation of the current in the coil can be improved upon
by a customized coil driver in the MAT-MI. While in MAETMI, subject to the conditions of the experimental system, the
stimulation of the ultrasound is usually limited by the practical
transducer.
Second, in the experiment, parts of the ultrasound waves can
penetrate the plastic gear plate and transmit to the location of
the coils. The vibration of the coils stimulated by the ultrasound
would also lead to an unexpected induced voltage signal in
the static magnetic field. Because the sample’s conductivity
is much smaller than the coil’s conductivity, the vibration of
the more conductive coil will produce more interference and
reduce the SNR, even if the ultrasound in the coil is decreased
to some extent by some acoustical shielding methods. By further
shielding method to prevent the ultrasound from traveling into
the coils, such as using acoustic absorption material around, the
SNR should be further improved.
Furthermore, in order to acquire the tiny useful signals, the
coil and the magnet should be as close as possible to the phantom. While, in fact, the eddy current that is induced in the
conductive magnet would decrease the induced electric field in
the phantom, it will also reduce the amplitude of the MAETMI signal. Thus, the distance paradox between the coil and the
magnet also leads to the low SNR.
Compared with the 3-D reconstruction method in MAT-MI
[34], further research could be implemented on 3-D models with
focused transducer in scan mode.

VI. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have carried out the study on the mechanism of the MAET in coil detection mode and have derived
the equations of the reciprocal theorem in MAET-MI. The relationship between the spatial component of the CECD-RP and
the MAET-MI signal is established. Because the field variables
in the reciprocal process are the functions of time, their spatial components can be extracted in a low conductive medium.
The forward and inverse problems are all based on these spatial
variables. We have also introduced the CS method and L-M iterative method into the conductivity reconstruction. Computer
simulations and phantom experiments have been conducted to
demonstrate the validity and the reliability of the proposed algorithms in conductivity reconstruction. Through our researches,
the MAET-MI, a noninvasive conductivity imaging modality
with high resolution, has the prospect of clinical applications
because of its advantages in noncontact measurement.

APPENDIX
By taking inner product between the terms on both sides of
(2) and E2 , we obtain
	∇ × H 1 , E 2 
 = 	J e1 , E 2 
 + 	σE 1 , E 2 

(A1)
		
where the 	A, B
 represents
r ∈Ω A(r) · B(r)dΩ. It is the
inner product in spatial domain. Ω represents the whole computational region.
According to the vector identity and the Gauss theorem, if E2
or H1 vanishes on the boundary of the domain, the left side of
(A1) can be rewritten as
 
	∇ × H 1 , E 2 
 =	∇ × E 2 , H 1 
−
∇·(E 2 × H 1 )dΩ

= 	∇ × E 2 , H 1 
−


=

∂H 2
, H1
−μ
∂t



r ∈Ω

r ∈Ω

(E 2 × H 1 ) · ndΩ,
(A2)

where n denotes the normal unit vector of the boundary ࢚Ω. It is
necessary to point out that the boundary integral of (E 2 × H 1 ) ·
n will be zero if the area is large enough. That is because the E2
usually equals zero at the points of the boundary with infinite
boundary condition. Thus, the following equation is established:



∂H 2
, H 1 = 	J e1 , E 2 
 + 	σE 1 , E 2 
 .
−μ
(A3)
∂t
If we take the inner product between the terms on both sides of
(6) and E1 , using the same method of derivation, the following
equation can also be obtained:



∂H 1
, H 2 = 	J e2 , E 1 
 + 	σE 2 , E 1 
 .
−μ
(A4)
∂t
Equations (A3) and (A4) can be rewritten in the frequency
domain as

 
 

−jωμH̃ 2 , H̃ 1 = J̃ e1 , Ẽ 2 + σ Ẽ 1 , Ẽ 2
(A5)

 
 

−jωμH̃ 1 , H̃ 2 = J̃ e2 , Ẽ 1 + σ Ẽ 2 , Ẽ 1
(A6)
where ω is the angular frequency and j is the imaginary unit.
The wavy line on variable represents the corresponding variable
in the frequency domain.

 

Considering
−jωμH̃ 2 , H̃ 1 = −jωμH̃ 1 , H̃ 2
and

 

σ Ẽ 1 , Ẽ 2 = σ Ẽ 2 , Ẽ 1 , the following equation can be obtained by subtracting (A6) from (A5):

 

(A7)
J̃ e1 , Ẽ 2 = J̃ e2 , Ẽ 1 .
Because all the variables in (A7) are the functions of the
spatial point r and frequency ω, (A7) can be rewritten in detail
as follows:

J̃ e1 (r, ω) · Ẽ 2 (r, ω)dΩ
r ∈Ω


=

r ∈Ω

J̃ e2 (r, ω) · Ẽ 1 (r, ω)dΩ

(A8)

GUO et al.: MAGNETO-ACOUSTO-ELECTRICAL TOMOGRAPHY WITH MAGNETIC INDUCTION FOR CONDUCTIVITY RECONSTRUCTION

Substituting the frequency term of (1) and (3) into the left
side of (A8) and considering J̃ 2 = σ Ẽ 2 , we obtain

J̃ e1 (r, ω) · Ẽ 2 (r, ω)dΩ
r ∈Ω


=

r ∈Ω

J̃ 2 (r, ω) · [Ṽ (r, ω) × B 0 ]dΩ

(A9)

Substituting the frequency form of (4) and (5) into the right
side of (A8), we obtain

J̃ e2 (r, ω) · Ẽ 1 (r, ω)dΩ
r ∈Ω


=


r ∈Ω

=
r ∈l c i r

Ẽ 1 (r, ω) · ee2 (r)δ(r − r cir )S̃(ω)dΩ

S̃(ω)Ẽ 1 (r, ω) · dlcir

= ũ(ω)S̃(ω)

(A10)

where S̃(ω)and ũ(ω)are the Fourier transform of the s(t) and
u(t), respectively. As shown in (A10), the Dirac function transforms the volume integral into a line integral along the coil of
wire. According to (A8)–(A10), the induced voltage detected by
the coil can be calculated by the following integral equations:

ũ(ω)S̃(ω) =
J̃ 2 (r, ω) · [Ṽ (r, ω) × B 0 ]dΩ.
r ∈Ω

(A11)
Except the multiplication of S̃(ω) and ũ(ω)on the left side,
(A11) is similar to the result that is derived by Haider et al. [6]
and Kunyansky [15]. All the field variables except B0 are functions of the angular frequency ω. If we introduce the vibration
velocity potential function ϕ(r, ω) that satisfies the following
equation:
Ṽ (r, ω) =
(A11) can be written as

ũ(ω)S̃(ω) =
r ∈Ω


−

1
∇ϕ̃(r, ω)
ρ

(A12)

B0
· ∇ × J̃ 2 (r, ω)ϕ̃(r, ω)dΩ
ρ

r ∈Ω

J̃ 2 (r, ω)×

B0
ϕ̃(r, ω)d∂Ω (A13)
ρ

where ϕ̃(r, ω) denotes the Fourier transform of ϕ(r, t) and ρ
denotes the mass density of the medium.
Obviously, (A11) is divided into a volume integral and a
boundary integral as shown in (A13). For simplicity, if we submerge the tissue in nonconductive medium like oil or distilled
water, the current density J̃ 2 (r, ω) will be zero at the point of the
boundary. Thus, the boundary integral on the right side of (A13)
is zero. Considering the mass density in the area is uniform,
(A13) is simplified as

1
B 0 · ∇ × J̃ 2 (r, ω)ϕ̃(r, ω)dΩ
ũ(ω)S̃(ω) =
ρ
r ∈Ω
(A14)
According to the reciprocal theorem mentioned above, the
forward problem of MAET-MI in reciprocal process is similar

2123

to the forward problem of MAT-MI. They are both concerned
with computing the eddy current field and the integral equation
like (A14). Generally, we formulize the external current density
in the coil as in (5). Due to the low electrical conductivity of
biological tissue, the induced eddy current densityJ̃ 2 (r, ω)can
be written as the product of a spatial component and a frequency
component [7]:
J̃ 2 (r, ω) = J o2 (r)F̃ (ω)

(A15)

where J o2 (r) and F̃ (ω) represent the spatial component and the
frequency component of J̃ 2 (r, ω), respectively. According to
(7), the time component of the induced eddy electrical field E2
is the derivative of the time component of the magnetic field
H2 . Thus, the frequency component of the induced eddy current density F̃ (ω) and the frequency component of the external
current density S̃(ω) satisfy the following equation:
F̃ (ω) = jω S̃(ω).

(A16)

Substituting (A15) and (A16) into (A14), we obtain

1
ũ(ω)S̃(ω) = S̃(ω)
B 0 · ∇ × J o2 (r)jω ϕ̃(r, ω)dΩ.
ρ
r ∈Ω
(A17)
If we consider S̃(ω)as constant one, that is, s(t) equals δ(t),
(A17) can be rewritten as

1
ũ(ω) =
B 0 · ∇ × J o2 (r)jω ϕ̃(r, ω)dΩ. (A18)
ρ
r ∈Ω
Generally speaking, as long as S̃(ω) has no zero value in the
range of the spectrum of ũ(ω), S̃(ω) can be removed from the
both sides of (A16). In MAT-MI, s(t) is decided by the actual
physical process. Xu and He take the hypothesis that s(t) is a
step function [7]. It is equivalent to take the assumption that
S̃(ω)is equal to πδ(ω) + 1/jω. While in MAET-MI, only if the
S̃(ω) has no zero value in the range of the spectrum of ũ(ω),
can we take S̃(ω) as the excitation in the reciprocal process. In
this paper, we choose s(t) = δ(t) with S̃(ω) = 1 for simplicity.
Equation (A18) also shows that the MAET-MI-induced voltage is concerned with the spatial component of the CECD-RP
and the ultrasonic vibration velocity potential ϕ̃(r, ω). Taking
inverse Fourier transform of the terms on both sides of (A18),
we obtain (8).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
L. Guo would like to thank J. Chen and Z. W. Xia for useful
discussions about the computer simulation and experimental
study.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Cheney et al., “Electrical impedance tomography,” SIAM Rev., vol.
41, no. 1, pp. 85–101, 1999.
[2] J. L Mueller et al., “A reconstruction algorithm for electrical impedance
tomography data collected on rectangular electrode arrays,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 1379–1386, Nov. 1999.
[3] H. Griffiths, “Magnetic induction tomography,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol.
12, pp. 1126–1131, 2001.
[4] S. Lee et al., “Conductivity image reconstruction from defective data in
MREIT: Numerical simulation and animal experiment,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 168–176, Feb. 2006.

2124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

[5] X. Li et al., “Magnetoacoustic tomography with magnetic induction for
imaging electrical impedance of biological tissue,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 99,
p. 066112, 2006.
[6] S Haider et al., “Magneto-acousto-electrical tomography: A potential
method for imaging current density and electrical impedance,” Phys.
Meas., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. S41–S50, 2008.
[7] Y. Xu and B. He, “Magnetoacoustic tomography with magnetic induction
(MAT-MI),” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 50, no. 21, pp. 5175–5187, 2005.
[8] G. Liu et al., “Magnetoacoustic tomography with applied current,” Chin.
Sci. Bull., vol. 58, no. 30, pp. 3600–3606, 2013.
[9] L. Mariappan and B. He, “Magnetoacoustic tomography with magnetic
induction: Bioimepedance reconstruction through vector source imaging,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 619–627, Mar. 2013.
[10] G. Hu et al., “Magnetoacoustic imaging of human liver tumor with
magnetic induction,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 98, no. 2, p. 023703, 2011.
[11] L. Mariappan et al., “B-scan based acoustic source reconstruction for
magnetoacoustic tomography with magnetic induction (MAT-MI),” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 713–720, Mar. 2011.
[12] L. Zhou et al., “A reconstruction algorithm of magnetoacoustic tomography with magnetic induction for an acoustically inhomogeneous tissue,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1739–1746, Jun. 2014.
[13] H. Wen et al., “Hall effect imaging,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 119–124, Jan. 1998.
[14] E. Renzhiglova et al., “Difference frequency magneto-acousto-electrical
tomography (DF-MAET): Application of ultrasound-induced radiation
force to imaging electrical current density,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 2391–2402, Nov. 2010.
[15] L. Kunyansky, “A mathematical model and inversion procedure for
magneto-acousto-electric tomography,” Inverse Prob., vol. 28, no. 3, p.
35002, 2012.
[16] X. Li and B. He, “Multi-excitation magnetoacoustic tomography with
magnetic induction for bioimpedance imaging,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1759–1767, Oct. 2010.
[17] X. Zeng, “Research for magneto-acousto-electrical tomography,” Master’s
thesis, Inst. Elect. Eng., Chinese Acad. Sci., Beijing, China, 2011.
[18] G. Q. Liu, Medical Electromagnetic Imaging, 1st ed. Beijing, China:
Science Press, 2006, pp. 66–87.
[19] J. Shen, Application of Acoustic Foundation, 1st ed., Tianjin, China: Tianjin Univ. Press, 2004, pp. 16–28.
[20] H. Zhang, Theoretical Acoustics, 1st ed. Beijing, China: Higher Education
Press, 2007, p. 107.
[21] L. Guo. et al., “Forward procedure of magneto-acousto-electric signal in
radial stratified medium of conductivity for logging models,” Chin. Phys.
Lett., vol. 30, no. 12, p. 124303, 2013.
[22] M. Xu and L. V. Wang, “Universal back-projection algorithm for photoacoustic computed tomography,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 71, no. 1, p. 016706,
2005.
[23] P. Kuchment and L. Kunyansky, “Mathematics of thermo-acoustic and
photo-acoustic tomography,” in Handbook of Mathematical Methods in
Imaging, New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2011, pp. 817–865.
[24] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[25] D. L. Donoho, “For most large underdetermined systems of equations, the
minimal l(1)-norm near-solution approximates the sparsest nearsolution,”
Commun. Pure Appl. Math., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 907–934, 2006.
[26] J. Provost and F. Lesage, “The application of compressed sensing for
photo-acoustic tomography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 4, pp.
585–94, Apr. 2009.
[27] E. J. Candès et al., “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.
[28] G. Davis et al., “Adaptive greedy approximations,” Constructive Approx.,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 57–98, 1997.

[29] “Algebraic, reconstruction for 3D magnetic resonance electrical
impedance tomography (MR-EIT) using one component of flux density,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 281–294, 2004.
[30] R. H. Li, Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equation, 1st ed.
Beijing, China: Higher Education Press, 2005.
[31] X. Feng et al., “Magnetically mediated thermoacoustic imaging toward
deeper penetration,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 103, no. 8, p. 083704, 2013.
[32] L. Guo et al. “Conductivity reconstruction algorithms and numerical
simulations for magneto-acousto-electrical tomography with piston transducer in scan mode,” Chin. Phys. B, vol. 23, no. 10, p. 104303, 2014.
[33] X. Huang et al., “Study of pulsed magnetic field used in magnetioacoustic
tomography with magnetic induction,” Trans. China Electrotech. Soc., vol.
28, no. 2, pp. 67–72, 2013.
[34] R. Xia et al., “Magnetoacoustic tomographic imaging of electrical
impedance with magnetic induction,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 91, no. 8,
p. 083903, 2007.

Liang Guo received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in
electronic engineering, and control theory and engineering from the China University of Petroleum,
Shandong, China, in 2002 and 2005, respectively. He
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the
Institute of Electrical and Electricity, China Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China.
From 2005 to 2012, he was a Lecturer at the
China University of Petroleum. His research interests include the computation of coupled field, medical
imaging, process tomography, weak signal detection,
and circuit design.

Guoqiang Liu (M’06) received the Ph.D. degree in
geophysics from the China University of Petroleum,
Beijing, China, in 1999.
He is currently a Professor at the Institute of
Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His research interests include
biomedical imaging, logging imaging, and new imaging methods.

Hui Xia was born in China in 1981. She received
the B.S. degree from Qufu Normal University, Qufu,
China, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
the Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, China, in 2008.
She has been an Associate Researcher at the Institute of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China, since 2008. Her research
interests include magnatoacoustic tomography with
magnetic induction, magneto-acousto-electrical tomography, and related detecting methodology.

