IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

1203

Topological Modeling and Classification of
Mammographic Microcalcification Clusters
Zhili Chen∗ , Harry Strange, Arnau Oliver, Erika R. E. Denton, Caroline Boggis, and Reyer Zwiggelaar

Abstract— Goal: The presence of microcalcification clusters is
a primary sign of breast cancer; however, it is difficult and time
consuming for radiologists to classify microcalcifications as malignant or benign. In this paper, a novel method for the classification
of microcalcification clusters in mammograms is proposed. Methods: The topology/connectivity of individual microcalcifications is
analyzed within a cluster using multiscale morphology. This is distinct from existing approaches that tend to concentrate on the
morphology of individual microcalcifications and/or global (statistical) cluster features. A set of microcalcification graphs are generated to represent the topological structure of microcalcification
clusters at different scales. Subsequently, graph theoretical features are extracted, which constitute the topological feature space
for modeling and classifying microcalcification clusters. k-nearestneighbors-based classifiers are employed for classifying microcalcification clusters. Results: The validity of the proposed method
is evaluated using two well-known digitized datasets (MIAS and
DDSM) and a full-field digital dataset. High classification accuracies (up to 96%) and good ROC results (area under the ROC curve
up to 0.96) are achieved. A full comparison with related publications is provided, which includes a direct comparison. Conclusion:
The results indicate that the proposed approach is able to outperform the current state-of-the-art methods. Significance: This study
shows that topology modeling is an important tool for microcalcification analysis not only because of the improved classification
accuracy but also because the topological measures can be linked
to clinical understanding.
Index Terms—Classification, graphs, mammography, microcalcifications, topology.

I. INTRODUCTION
REAST cancer is currently the most common cancer affecting women worldwide [1]. In European women, it is
the leading cause of cancer death, causing one in six of all deaths
from cancers [2]. In the U.S., a woman has a 12.15% (about one
in eight) risk of developing breast cancer during her lifetime [3].

B

Manuscript received October 13, 2014; revised December 5, 2014; accepted
December 14, 2014. Date of publication December 22, 2014; date of current
version March 17, 2015. This work was supported in part by the NISCHR
Biomedical Research Unit for Advanced Medical Imaging and Visualization.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
* Z. Chen is with the Faculty of Information and Control Engineering, Shenyang Jianzhu University, Shenyang, 110168 China (e-mail: zzc@
sjzu.edu.cn).
H. Strange and R. Zwiggelaar are with the Department of Computer Science,
Aberystwyth University.
A. Oliver is with the Department of Computer Architecture and Technology,
University of Giron.
E. R. E. Denton is with the Department of Radiology, Norfolk and Norwich
University Hospital.
C. Boggis is with the School of Medicine, The University of Manchester.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2385102

Mammography is one of the most reliable and effective methods
for detecting breast cancer at its early stages [4]. In developed
countries, population-based mammography screening programs
have been implemented [1]. Women are encouraged to participate in regular breast examinations through mammography. In
the U.S., annual mammographic screening is recommended for
women at normal risk, beginning at age 40 [5]. In the U.K.,
women aged between 50 and 70 years are invited for breast
screening every three years [6].
Microcalcifications are small deposits of calcium salts within
breast tissue that appear as small bright spots in mammograms
[7]–[10]. The presence of microcalcification clusters is a primary sign of breast cancer. The radiological definition of a
microcalcification cluster is an area of 1 cm2 that contains, in
general, no fewer than three microcalcifications [10], [11]. The
spatial resolution of mammography is very high (normally in
the range of 40–100 μm per pixel), and therefore, mammography enables the detection of microcalcifications at an early
stage. However, not all microcalcification clusters necessarily
indicate the presence of cancer, only certain kinds of microcalcifications are associated with a high probability of malignancy
[12], [13]. The first column of Fig. 1 shows two mammographic
image patches taken from the Mammographic Image Analysis Society (MIAS) database [14], containing a malignant microcalcification cluster and a benign microcalcification cluster,
respectively. In clinical practice, it is difficult and time consuming for radiologists to distinguish malignant from benign
microcalcifications. This results in a high rate of unnecessary
biopsy examinations [9], [11]. In order to improve the diagnostic accuracy of radiologists interpreting microcalcifications in
mammograms, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems have
been applied to reduce the false positive rate (FPR) while maintaining sensitivity [9], [15].
Many methods for CAD of microcalcifications in mammograms have been proposed [9], [17]. A variety of features have
been studied in the literature to characterize microcalcifications
and classify these abnormalities into malignant and benign, such
as shape, morphological, cluster, intensity-based, and texture
features [9], [17]. Early research showed how the morphological characteristics of microcalcifications could be used to differentiate between malignant and benign cases [18]. The shape
and morphological features are mainly extracted from individual
microcalcifications and describe the morphological characteristics of individual microcalcifications, such as roughness, size,
and shape [7], [10], [19]–[21]. Complementary to the shape
and morphological features, cluster features concentrate on the
global properties of microcalcification clusters [8], [15], [20],
[22]–[25]. Some were used to describe the morphology of microcalcification clusters, such as cluster area, cluster perimeter,

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 1. Example microcalcification clusters: malignant (top row) and benign (bottom row). First column: mammographic image patches; second column: manual
annotations; third column: automatic detections [16]; fourth column: dilated microcalcifications using a disk-shaped structuring element (radius equal to 6 pixels).

cluster diameter, cluster circularity, cluster eccentricity, and
cluster elongation. Others were intended to capture the spatial
distribution of individual microcalcifications within a cluster,
such as average and standard deviation of distances between microcalcifications. In addition, a novel model-based method was
presented to reconstruct and analyze microcalcification clusters
in 3-D from two mammographic views [26].
Although a broad variety of techniques for CAD of breast
cancer have been developed in the past two decades, some of
which have achieved a high sensitivity and specificity for specific abnormalities, the automatic and accurate classification of
microcalcification abnormalities as malignant or benign remains
a challenge due to their inherent nature; furthermore, most of
the existing approaches have their own specific disadvantages.
First, for the approaches based on the shape/morphology of individual microcalcifications [7], [10], informative features cannot
be attained when microcalcifications are very small (occupying
only a few pixels) so that it seems meaningless to analyze the
shape/morphological properties of such small objects. Second,
microcalcifications may have very low contrast with respect
to the surrounding tissue especially when microcalcifications
form within dense tissue which has high and homogeneous intensity. As such, the lack of useful texture information within
the background region affects the capability of the approaches
based on the intensity variations and texture features [8], [27].
In addition, for the approaches describing the spatial distribution of microcalcifications within a cluster, the global cluster features were computed based on a fixed resolution, and
the distance-based features rely on the original spatial resolution of mammography. This results in a lack of robustness and
adaptiveness to different spatial resolutions of mammograms
in particular screen-film mammograms acquired by different
digitizers.
According to some studies on the evaluation of breast microcalcifications, malignant microcalcifications tend to be small,
numerous (> 5 per focus within 1 cm2 ) and densely distributed

because they lie within the milk ducts and associated structures
in the breast and follow the ductal anatomy [12], [13], [28]. However, benign microcalcifications are generally larger, smaller in
number (< 4 − 5 per 1 cm2 ) and more diffusely distributed as
these microcalcifications arise within the breast stroma, benign
cysts or benign masses [12], [13], [28]. These differences result
in variations in the distribution and closeness of microcalcifications within the clusters and provide radiologists with information which enables decisions regarding the need for further
assessment and possible breast biopsy. Hence, we propose a
novel method for modeling and classifying microcalcification
clusters in mammograms based on their topological properties.
The topology of microcalcification clusters is analyzed at multiple scales using a graph-based representation of their topological
structure. This method is distinct from existing approaches that
mainly concentrate on the morphology of individual microcalcifications and only compute the distance-based cluster features at
a fixed scale. In this method, a set of topological features are extracted from microcalcification graphs at multiple scales, and a
multiscale topological feature vector is subsequently generated
to discriminate between malignant and benign cases.
A preliminary version of this study has been reported in [29],
where the idea of analyzing microcalcification clusters using
their topological structure is initially investigated based on a
small number of cases. In this paper, the evaluation has been
extended by including additional data (from several databases).
We have also investigated the effect of variation in microcalcification segmentation, the dataset size, the individual significance
of eight graph metrics for malignancy diagnosis, and a direct
comparison with state-of-the art methods.
II. DATA
The data used in the experiments consist of three datasets,
which are composed of image patches of different cases (taken
from different mammograms). The first dataset was taken from

CHEN et al.: TOPOLOGICAL MODELING AND CLASSIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHIC MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS

1205

Fig. 2. Methodology framework for topology-based modeling and classifying malignant and benign microcalcification clusters in mammograms. The scales
shown are s = 1, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64 displayed left-to-right and top-to-bottom.

the MIAS database [14], containing 20 image patches with the
same size of 512 × 512 pixels. The mammograms were digitized to 50 μm per pixel with a linear optical density in the
range 0–3.2. The second dataset was extracted from the digital
database for screening mammography (DDSM) database [30],
containing 300 image patches with varied sizes (the average
size of these image patches is 482 × 450 pixels). The mammograms in the DDSM database were digitized by one of four
different scanners: DBA M2100 ImageClear (42 μm per pixel,
16 bits), Howtek 960 (43.5 μm per pixel, 12 bits), Lumisys
200 Laser (50 μm per pixel, 12 bits), and Howtek MultiRad850
(43.5 μm per pixel, 12 bits). In contrast to the first two datasets,
the third dataset contains 25 full-field digital image patches extracted from a nonpublic mammographic database. These mammograms were acquired using a Hologic Selenia mammography
unit, with a resolution of 70 μm per pixel and a depth of 12 bits.
The size of these image patches also varies and the average size
is 352 × 301 pixels. In this study, all microcalcifications in each
image patch are considered to be part of a single microcalcification cluster. The diagnostic gold standard (benign or malignant)
of all microcalcification clusters in this study has been provided
by biopsy: there are nine malignant and 11 benign clusters in
the MIAS dataset, 141 malignant and 159 benign clusters in the
DDSM dataset, and 14 malignant and 11 benign clusters in the
Digital dataset, respectively.
The proposed method works on binary images where 0s stand
for “normal” tissue and 1s represent microcalcifications that can
be automatically detected by an automatic detection approach
or manually annotated by experts. The approach developed by
Oliver et al. [16] for automatic detection of microcalcifications
is applied to the three datasets (the original work by Oliver et al.
[16] showed better results for digital data when compared to
digitized data). For the MIAS dataset, in addition to automatic
detection, the exact location of individual microcalcifications
was manually annotated by an expert (each microcalcification
in every image patch was labeled and segmented from the surrounding tissue). The manual annotations and the automatic
detection results of the example microcalcification clusters are

shown in the second and third columns of Fig. 1, respectively.
It appears that the automatic detection approach tends to undersegment individual microcalcifications, such that the pixels
close to the boundaries of individual microcalcifications are lost.
III. METHODOLOGY
We propose to investigate the potential correlation between
the topology of microcalcification clusters and their pathological type. We construct a series of microcalcification graphs
to describe the topological structure of microcalcification clusters at different scales. A set of graph theoretical features are
extracted from these graphs for modeling and classifying microcalcification clusters. The proposed methodology consists of
four main phases: estimating the connectivity between microcalcifications within a cluster using morphological dilation at
multiple scales; generating a microcalcification graph at each
scale based on the spatial connectivity relationship between
microcalcifications; extracting multiscale topological features
from these microcalcification graphs; and using the extracted
features to build classifier models of malignant and benign microcalcification clusters. The framework of our methodology is
summarized in Fig. 2. All image analysis development work
was done within MATLAB 7.8.0.
A. Connectivity Estimation Using Morphological Dilation
Morphological dilation [31] is performed on each individual microcalcification using a disk-shaped structuring element
at multiple scales. Here, the scale corresponds to the radius of
the structuring element measured in pixels. The effect of multiscale morphological dilation on a microcalcification cluster is
shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that the multiscale morphological
dilation continuously absorbs neighboring pixels into individual microcalcifications resulting in a change in the connectivity between microcalcifications within the cluster. To illustrate
the connectivity of microcalcification clusters with respect to
malignant and benign cases, the morphological dilation results
of the two example microcalcification clusters are shown in the

1206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 3. Microcalcification graphs of the example malignant cluster (top row) and benign cluster (bottom row) in Fig. 1 generated at three scales based on the
connectivity of the dilated cluster at these scales. The node colors and sequences are consistent with the corresponding microcalcifications in Fig. 1.

fourth column of Fig. 1, where the radius of the structuring element is equal to 6 pixels (i.e., scale = 6). The boundaries of
dilated microcalcifications are displayed using different colors
and each individual microcalcification is labeled with a sequential number which is ordered according to the spatial location
of the corresponding microcalcification in the image patch. As
indicated in Section I, the malignant cluster contains a larger
number of microcalcifications that are located more closely together within the cluster, while the benign cluster contains fewer
microcalcifications that are more diffusely distributed within the
cluster.
B. Microcalcification Graph Generation
We propose to represent the topology of microcalcification
clusters in graph form. A microcalcification graph is generated
based on the spatial connectivity relationship between microcalcifications within a cluster. In a microcalcification graph, each
node represents an individual microcalcification, and an edge
between two nodes is created if the two corresponding microcalcifications are connected or overlap in the 2-D image plane. The
resulting microcalcification graphs corresponding to the two example microcalcification clusters in Fig. 1 are shown in Fig. 3.
The node locations in these two graphs are in accordance with
the original spatial distribution of microcalcifications within the
two clusters, and the node sequences are consistent with those in
Fig. 1, which are sorted in a left-to-right and bottom-to-top direction (but alternative directions provide the same performance
for the subsequent processing). As shown in Fig. 3, the connectivity of the microcalcification cluster increases from small to
large scales and the corresponding microcalcification graph be-

comes denser and denser (more and more edges are created in
the graph).
C. Multiscale Topological Feature Extraction
After generating microcalcification graphs over a range of
scales, a set of graph theoretical features can be extracted to
capture the topological properties of microcalcification clusters. These features will constitute the feature space for the
classification of malignant and benign clusters. Before extracting the topological features of microcalcification clusters, we
first provide the following definitions for general graphs. Further definitions for graphs can be found in [32]. Here, we use
G(V, E) to represent a graph, where V is the vertex set and
E is the edge set, and use |V | (the cardinality of V ) and
|E| (the cardinality of E) to denote the number of vertices
and the number of edges in G, respectively. Gconn denotes
the subgraph of G that corresponds to the largest connected
component.
Definition 1: The adjacency matrix A(i, j) of a graph
G(V, E) is a |V | × |V | matrix, defined as
A(i, j) =


1,
0,

if (i, j) ∈ E
otherwise.

(1)

where (i, j) ∈ E indicates (i, j) is an edge, i.e., there is an edge
between vertex i and vertex j in G.
Definition 2: The degree matrix D(i, j) of a graph G(V, E)
is a |V | × |V | diagonal matrix containing the degree of vertex i

CHEN et al.: TOPOLOGICAL MODELING AND CLASSIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHIC MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS

1207

TABLE I
GRAPH METRICS INVESTIGATED FOR MALIGNANCY ANALYSIS OF MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS ALONG WITH THEIR DEFINITIONS
AND CLINICAL INTERPRETATIONS

No.
1

Metric

Definition

Clinical Interpretation

Number of Subgraphs

k (See Definition 4)

Malignant clusters tend to have a higher number of microcalcifications and therefore their corresponding graphs
contain a higher number of subgraphs at smaller scales
Malignant microcalcifications appear to be more densely distributed within a cluster and therefore malignant
clusters generally have a larger average vertex degree
Malignant microcalcifications appear to be more connected in a cluster and therefore malignant clusters tend to
have a larger maximum vertex degree
Malignant clusters tend to have a linear distribution and therefore have larger eccentricity values
Malignant clusters tend to have a linear topology and therefore have longer diameters
Malignant microcalcifications tend to be more connected in a cluster and therefore malignant clusters have a
higher average clustering coefficient
Malignant microcalcifications tend to be more closely grouped and therefore malignant clusters have a higher
giant connected component ratio
Malignant microcalcifications tend to be more densely distributed and therefore malignant clusters tend to have
a smaller percentage of isolated points

2

Average Vertex Degree

3

Maximum Vertex Degree


i ∈V

d(i)/|V |

m ax i ∈V d(i)


i ∈V e(i)/|V |
m ax i ∈V e(i)

i ∈V c(i)/|V |

4
5
6

Average Vertex Eccentricity
Diameter
Average Clustering Coefficient

7

Giant Connected Component Ratio

|V ∈ G c o n n |
|V ∈ G |

8

Percentage of Isolated Points

|X |/|V |

at entry (i, i), defined as
D(i, j) =



d(i),

if i = j

0,

otherwise.

(2)


where d(i)
= j ∈V aij is the number of edges incident to vertex i and i∈V d(i) = 2|E|.
Definition 3: The Laplacian matrix of a graph G(V, E), denoted by L(i, j), is defined as the difference between the degree
matrix and the adjacency matrix, given by
⎧
d(i), if i = j
⎪
⎪
⎨
if (i, j) ∈ E
(3)
L(i, j) = D − A = −1,
⎪
⎪
⎩
0,
otherwise.
Definition 4: The normalized Laplacian matrix of a graph
G(V, E), denoted by L(i, j), is defined as the normalized version of the Laplacian matrix of G, given by
⎧
1,
if i = j and d(i) = 0
⎪
⎪
⎨
1
, if (i, j) ∈ E
L(i, j) = − √
(4)
d(i)d(j )
⎪
⎪
⎩
0,
otherwise.
According to the above definitions, the normalized Laplacian
matrix of G can also be given by
L(i, j) = D−1/2 LD−1/2
= D−1/2 (D − A)D−1/2
= I − D−1/2 AD−1/2
−1

(5)

with the convention that D (i, i) = 0 if d(i) = 0 (i.e.,
D(i, i) = 0), where I is the |V | × |V | identity matrix. It should
be noted that L is a symmetric positive semidefinite matrix and
all eigenvalues of L are real and nonnegative. In addition, it can
be seen from (5) that the eigenvalues of L are all between 0
and 2, which are closely related to many structural properties
for general graphs and play an important role in spectral graph
theory [33]. The multiplicity of the eigenvalue 0, denoted for
ease of notation as k, corresponds to the number of connected
components in the graph, and the multiplicity of the eigenvalue

2 coincides with the number of bipartite connected components
in the graph.
Definition 5: The distance between two vertices i and j in a
graph G(V, E), denoted by dist(i, j), is defined as the length of
the shortest path between i and j, equal to the minimum number
of edges between them.
Definition 6: The eccentricity of a vertex i in a graph
G(V, E), denoted by e(i), is defined as the maximum distance from itself to any of the reachable vetices in G, given
by e(i) = maxj ∈V dist(i, j).
Definition 7: The clustering coefficient of a vertex i in a
graph G(V, E), denoted by c(i), is the ratio of the number of
actually existing edges between i’s neighbors (vertices adjacent
to i) and the number of all possible edges between i’s neighbors,
given by c(i) = E(i)/Ck2 = 2E(i)/(k(k − 1)), where E(i) is
the number of actually existing edges between i’s neighbors,
and k is the number of i’s neighbors.
Definition 8: A vertex is considered isolated if it has degree equal to 0. The set X denotes the setof vertices within
agraph G(V, E) that are isolated, that is, i∈X d(i) = 0 and
i∈(G \X ) d(i) > 0. Therefore, |X| is equal to the total number
of isolated vertices within G.
Following these definitions, we explain a set of graph metrics
in Table I that will be extracted from the generated microcalcification graphs and concatenated into the feature set for the
subsequent classification process.
We construct a set of microcalcification graphs based on the
spatial connectivity relationship between microcalcifications after performing morphological dilation at multiple scales, denoted by G = G0 , G1 , . . . , GS −1 , where S is the number of
scales, and Gs (s = 0, 1, . . . , S − 1) denotes the microcalcification graph generated at the sth scale (the 0th scale corresponds
to the initial microcalcification cluster without morphological
dilation). We extract the eight graph metrics from each graph in
G, which produces eight graph feature sets covering S scales.
We then concatenate the eight feature sets to create a feature
vector, termed the multiscale topological feature vector in this
paper, representing the topological characteristics of microcalcification clusters over multiple scales.

1208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 4. Resulting eight graph feature sets extracted from the example malignant and benign microcalcification clusters in Fig. 1. (a) Number of subgraphs.
(b) Average vertex degree. (c) Maximum vertex degree. (d) Average vertex eccentricity. (e) Diameter. (f) Average clustering coefficient. (g) Giant connected
component ratio. (h) Percentage of isolated points.

The resulting eight graph feature sets for the example malignant and benign microcalcification clusters in Fig. 1 are
shown in Fig. 4, where the graph metrics are extracted from
the microcalcification graphs generated at 65 scales, i.e., G =
G0 , G1 , . . . , G64 (S = 65). It can be seen from Fig. 4(a) that
the number of subgraphs corresponding to the malignant cluster
is larger than the benign cluster at the first few scales, while it
decreases more drastically as the scale increases due to the fact
that malignant microcalcifications are more densely distributed.
When the scale increases to a certain value, the number of subgraphs remains stable and further decreases to 1 when all microcalcifications in the cluster get connected after morphological
dilation. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the average vertex degree goes
up continuously as the scale increases. The maximum average

vertex degree is achieved when a complete microcalcification
graph is formed, in which case all microcalcifications within
the cluster are connected with each other. Moreover, it is shown
in Fig. 4(b) that the average vertex degree values of the malignant cluster are larger than those of the benign cluster over
the entire range of scales, which indicates that the malignant
microcalcification cluster is more connected. Fig. 4(c) shows a
set of values of the maximum vertex degree against scale which
also have an increasing trend from small to large scales and tend
toward stability when reaching the maximum value. Similarly,
as indicated by the average vertex degree, the maximum vertex degree values for the malignant cluster are also larger than
those of the benign cluster. The resulting values of the average
vertex eccentricity against scale are plotted in Fig. 4(d). At the
first few scales, most microcalcifications are isolated from others in the cluster, which results in small average eccentricity
values (the eccentricity of isolated vertices is set to 0). When
the scale increases to a specific value, the maximum average
eccentricity is obtained, in which case the previously isolated
microcalcifications are absorbed into a connected component
with a relatively large diameter. After that, as the scale further
increases, more and more microcalcifications get connected and
the average vertex eccentricity starts to decrease. When all microcalcifications in the cluster are connected with each other,
the average eccentricity is reduced to 1. Fig. 4(e) shows how the
diameter (the maximum vertex eccentricity) of the malignant
and benign clusters changes against scale, which is similar to
that of the average vertex eccentricity in Fig. 4(d). In the beginning, the diameter value increases with the scale until it reaches
the maximum value. After that, the diameter value gradually
goes down toward the minimum value of 1 when all microcalcifications are connected. Note that the maximum diameter of
the malignant cluster is larger than that of the benign cluster.
As indicated above, microcalcifications in the malignant cluster
tend to present a linear topology and as such form a connected
component having a longer diameter. For the resulting average
clustering coefficients of the two clusters, as shown in Fig. 4(f),
the malignant cluster obtains larger values at all scales than the
benign cluster. Fig. 4(g) presents how the giant connected component ratio varies with scale. As the scale increases, more and
more microcalcifications in the cluster are absorbed into the giant connected component until all of them are included. Thus,
the resulting giant connected component ratio continuously increases until it goes up to the maximum value of 1. Note that
the giant connected component ratio of the malignant cluster
reaches its maximum at a much smaller scale than the benign
cluster. The eighth feature set composed of the percentage of
isolated points is provided in Fig. 4(h). In contrast to the giant
connected component ratio, the percentage of isolated points
decreases as the scale increases, which is reduced to 0 when
all microcalcifications are linked together. The values for the
malignant cluster are smaller than those of the benign cluster,
and moreover, the malignant cluster achieves 0% at a much
smaller scale than the benign cluster. These all indicate that
the malignant cluster is more densely distributed and, therefore,
generates a more connected microcalcification graph than the
benign cluster at a specific scale.

CHEN et al.: TOPOLOGICAL MODELING AND CLASSIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHIC MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS

D. Classification of Microcalcification Clusters
Four k-nearest neighbors (kNN)-based classifiers are used
for classifying microcalcification clusters into malignant and
benign. The classical kNN classifier [34] is a popular and conceptually intuitive instance-based learning approach. A number
of alternatives are employed which attempt to address some inherent shortcomings of the classical kNN. Fuzzy nearest neighbors (FNN) [35] extends the classical kNN by fuzzifying the
memberships for test and training objects. Fuzzy rough nearest neighbors (FRNN) [36], [37] models two different types of
uncertainty: fuzziness and indiscernibility. Vaguely quantified
nearest neighbors (VQNN) [38] incorporates the uncertainty
modeling of FRNN and also employs vague quantifiers which
limit the influence that noisy data might have on the classification outcomes. These approaches offer further flexibility, improved generalization, and retain human interpretability when
compared to techniques such as ANN and SVM. In addition,
it should be noted that the classical kNN is employed for the
classification task such that the proposed method can be easily
compared with existing work in the literature.
The kNN classification is based on a simple majority vote,
unless equal class probability is indicated, in which case a Euclidean weighted approach is used. The default fuzzifier value
of m = 3.0 is used for FNN. FRNN is stable with respect to the
value of k and returns similar results but slightly different models. VQNN on the other hand results in different models when
the value of k is altered. A range of values for k are employed
when generating the experimental results which are documented
in the following section.

1209

classification and evaluation aspects were completed using the
WEKA data mining suite [42].
Moreover, to provide a comparison between the classification
results based on manually and automatically segmented microcalcifications (and also to investigate the robustness of the proposed method to microcalcification segmentation variations), it
was tested using both manual annotations and automatic detection results for the MIAS dataset.
In addition, to evaluate the stability of the proposed approach
with respect to the size of the dataset, a number of subsets
were randomly selected from each dataset for cross-validation.
Specifically, for the MIAS dataset, two groups of random subsets
were selected, consisting of ten (five malignant and five benign)
and 15 (seven malignant and eight benign) cases, respectively.
For the Digital dataset, three groups of random subsets were
selected, consisting of ten (five malignant and five benign),
15 (seven malignant and eight benign) and 20 (nine malignant
and 11 benign) cases, respectively. For the DDSM dataset, six
groups of random subsets were selected, consisting of ten (five
malignant and five benign), 15 (seven malignant and eight benign), 20 (nine malignant and 11 benign), 40 (18 malignant and
22 benign), 80 (36 malignant and 44 benign), and 160 (72 malignant and 88 benign) cases, respectively. Each random selection
was repeated 100 times, which produced 100 random subsets of
each size for each dataset. The means, standard deviations, and
maximum and minimum values of CA and Az were statistically
analyzed over each group of 100 random subsets, which are
provided in the following section.
B. Experimental Results

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
To evaluate the performance of the classifier models built
using the multiscale topological feature vectors, a leaveone-out cross-validation (LOOCV) scheme was employed
for all datasets, and an additional stratified ten runs tenfold cross-validation (10-FCV) scheme was employed for
the DDSM dataset to investigate how significantly these two
cross-validation schemes may affect the performance. Two evaluation metrics were used for this work. The first was overall
classification accuracy (CA), which is defined as the percentage of microcalcification clusters correctly classified, providing
a summary of the performance for balanced datasets (such as
the datasets used here). ROC analysis was used as the second
evaluation approach. An ROC curve is a plot of the true positive
rate (TPR) against the FPR, which describes the whole range of
possible operating characteristics for a binary classifier model.
Here, TPR is defined as the number of correctly classified malignant cases divided by the total number of malignant cases, and
FPR is defined as the number of benign cases incorrectly classified as malignant divided by the total number of benign cases.
ROC analysis can be employed in order to assess the predictive
ability of a classifier by using the area under the ROC curve
denoted by Az [39]. Az is a statistically consistent measure and
is equivalent to the Wilcoxon signed-ranks test, which is a nonparametric alternative to the paired t-test [40], [41]. All of the

We have used two digitized and one full-field digital datasets
(see Section II for details) for evaluating the performance of the
proposed approach in discriminating between malignant and benign microcalcification clusters. We have investigated a range of
values for S, which determines the dimensionality of the feature
space. As described in Section III-C, the multiscale topological
feature vectors are extracted from a set of microcalcification
graphs generated at scales s = 0, 1, . . . , S − 1, which are composed of eight graph feature sets. Thus, the dimensionality of
the multiscale topological feature space is equal to 8 × S. The
largest scale used in the experiments was set to 65, and therefore, the dimensionality of the feature space was up to 520. In
addition, we have used a range of values for k, which determines the number of the nearest neighbors used to build the
classifier models. Fig. 5 shows the results for a range of scales
(S) defining the feature space for the DDSM dataset. As can
be seen, the results are stable over a range of different scales.
Az results as a function of the k value show a similar stability
over a range of k = [1 . . . 10] for the MIAS and Digital datasets,
and k = [12 . . . 30] for the DDSM dataset. For brevity, detailed
results of this are left out of the paper. Table II shows the best
classification results achieved by the four classifiers over 65
scales, including CA [see Table II(a)] and Az [see Table II(b)].
The CA is given at the scale maximum scoring Az value.
For the MIAS dataset, when using the manual annotations,
the best CA was 95% with one benign case misclassified and the
largest Az was 0.96, produced by all the four classifiers; when

1210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

TABLE II
BEST CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OVER 65 SCALES

Test Data
MIAS (manual)
MIAS (automatic)
Digital
DDSM (LOOCV)
DDSM (10-FCV)
Test Data
MIAS (manual)
MIAS (automatic)
Digital
DDSM (LOOCV)
DDSM (10-FCV)

k NN
95 (S = 10)
95 (S = 5)
96 (S = 10)
86.0 (S = 40)
85.2 ± 5.7 (S = 41)
k NN
0.96 (S = 10)
0.96 (S = 5)
0.96 (S = 10)
0.90 (S = 40)
0.91 ± 0.05 (S = 41)

(a) CA%
FNN
95 (S = 10)
95 (S = 5)
96 (S = 10)
85.7 (S = 40)
85.1 ± 6.5 (S = 41)

FRNN

VQNN

95 (S = 14)
95 (S = 8)
88 (S = 24)
78.0 (S = 12)
77.8 ± 6.8 (S = 12)

95 (S = 26)
95 (S = 8)
88 (S = 15)
84.0 (S = 44)
83.8 ± 6.1 (S = 50)

(b) A z
FNN
0.96 (S = 10)
0.96 (S = 5)
0.96 (S = 10)
0.85 (S = 40)
0.85 ± 0.07 (S = 41)

FRNN

VQNN

0.96 (S = 14)
0.96 (S = 8)
0.90 (S = 24)
0.84 (S = 12)
0.84 ± 0.07 (S = 12)

0.96 (S = 26)
0.96 (S = 8)
0.92 (S = 15)
0.89 (S = 44)
0.89 ± 0.06 (S = 50)

For 10-FCV, the results contain means and standard deviations resulting from 100 classifier models (10 folds × 10 runs)

TABLE III
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF CA AND A z OVER 100 RANDOM SUBSETS OF
DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF CASES SELECTED FROM THE MIAS, DIGITAL, AND
DDSM DATASETS
(a) CA%
MIAS

Fig. 5. A z values produced by the four classifiers for the DDSM dataset using
leave-one-out (a) and ten-fold cross-validation (b). (a) A z for DDSM (LOOCV).
(b) A z for DDSM (10-FCV).

Mean
Std.
Max.
Min.

Digital

DDSM

10

15

10

15

20

10

15

20

40

80

160

93.0
6.5
100
80.0

95.1
4.1
100
86.7

93.1
7.2
100
80.0

94.3
4.6
100
86.7

96.1
3.7
100
90.0

88.3
9.2
100
70.0

90.1
7.9
100
70.0

89.1
7.0
100
75.0

88.1
4.6
97.5
75.0

87.2
3.4
95
78.8

86.5
2.0
91.3
82.5

(b) A z

using the automatic detection results, the best CA was also 95%
with the same benign case misclassified, and the largest Az of
0.96 was also obtained by all the four classifiers. For the Digital
dataset, the best CA of 96% with one malignant case misclassified and the best Az of 0.96 were achieved by kNN and FNN.
For the DDSM dataset, when using LOOCV, kNN obtained the
best CA of 86% and the largest Az of 0.90; for ten-fold crossvalidation, kNN also indicated the best performance, and the CA
and Az were 85.2 ± 5.7% and 0.91 ± 0.05, respectively [standard deviations were calculated across 100 classifier models (10
folds × 10 runs)].
As described in Section IV-A, to evaluate the stability of the
proposed approach with respect to the size of the dataset, a set of
subsets consisting of 10, 15, 20, 40, 80, 160 cases were randomly
sampled from the MIAS, DDSM, and Digital datasets. Hundred
random subsets were generated for each number of cases. The
means, standard deviations, and maximum and minimum values
of CA and Az calculated over each group of 100 random subsets
are provided in Table III, where the results were generated using
kNN and LOOCV. As shown in Table III, with regard to each
dataset, the random subsets containing a small number of cases
produced slightly worse results with a larger standard deviation;
however, the standard deviations of CA and Az were reduced as
the number of cases in the subsets was increased. Note that the
random subsets containing the largest number of cases selected
from the three datasets (15, 20, and 160) achieved very similar
results to those based on the whole datasets.

MIAS

Mean
Std.
Max.
Min.

Digital

DDSM

10

15

10

15

20

10

15

20

40

80

160

0.93
0.07
1.00
0.74

0.95
0.04
1.00
0.88

0.93
0.08
1.00
0.76

0.95
0.04
1.00
0.87

0.96
0.04
1.00
0.90

0.88
0.11
1.00
0.62

0.92
0.08
1.00
0.67

0.91
0.07
1.00
0.70

0.91
0.05
1.00
0.73

0.90
0.03
0.96
0.80

0.90
0.02
0.95
0.86

In addition, we investigated redundancy among the defined
topological feature set and explored the graph metrics which
contributed most to malignancy analysis of microcalcification
clusters. We performed feature selection by employing the CfsSubsetEval attribute evaluator and the GreedyStepwise search
method in WEKA. The CfsSubsetEval attribute evaluator evaluates the importance of a subset of features by estimating the
individual predictive ability of each feature as well as the extent of redundancy between them, and as such features that are
highly correlated with the class while have low intercorrelation
are more likely to be selected (see [43] for more information).
The GreedyStepwise search method performs a greedy forward
or backward search through the feature space, which starts with
no or all features and terminates when any addition or reduction
of the currently selected feature subset results in a decrease in
evaluation [44]. We used LOOCV for MIAS and Digital, while
for DDSM, we used ten runs stratified ten-fold cross-validation.
It should be noted that the feature selection is only performed
on the training data, and therefore, it cannot overfit since there
is no bias. If we did not use cross-validation, then we could run

CHEN et al.: TOPOLOGICAL MODELING AND CLASSIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHIC MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS

Fig. 6. Overview of the selection times of the eight graph metrics for the
three datasets. The graph metrics from No. 1 to 8 correspond to (1) number of
subgraphs, (2) average vertex degree, (3) maximum vertex degree, (4) average
vertex eccentricity, (5) diameter, (6) average clustering coefficient, (7) giant
connected component ratio, and (8) percentage of isolated points (see Table I).
(a) MIAS (manual annotation) S = 10. (b) MIAS (automatic detection) S = 5.
(c) Digital S = 10. (d) DDSM S = 40.
TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS FOR THE THREE DATASETS AFTER
FEATURE SELECTION
Test Data
MIAS (manual)
MIAS (automatic)
Digital
DDSM

Cross-Validation

CA

Az

leave-one-out
leave-one-out
leave-one-out
10-fold

90%
90%
96%
83.9 ± 6.3%

0.91
0.93
0.94
0.90 ± 0.05

into the risk of overtraining, but even with LOOCV, the test set
remains uncorrelated with the training data. The number of the
resulting feature subsets was 20, 25, and 100 for MIAS, Digital,
and DDSM, respectively. Fig. 6 illustrates how many times each
of the eight graph metrics were taken after feature selection. As
can be seen from Fig. 6, graph metrics No. 1 and 7, i.e., number
of subgraphs and giant connected component ratio, seemed to
be the two most important graph metrics among the eight, which
were most frequently selected from the multiscale topological
feature set. As indicated in Table I, these two graph metrics are
mainly related to the number/distribution of microcalcifications
within a cluster. Their precise clinical significance for the diagnosis of malignant and benign microcalcification clusters could
be further investigated.
The classification results for the three datasets after feature
selection are provided in Table IV. Here, the results were generated by the kNN classifier using the resulting feature subsets,
which were slightly lower when compared to those results obtained before feature selection (see Table II).
V. DISCUSSION
As described above, good classification results have been obtained for all the three datasets. The Digital dataset provided the

1211

best results, which might be due to the more accurate detection
of microcalcifications using digital mammography. As stated
in [16], the detection approach indicated the best performance
when using the Digital dataset, and therefore, more realistic
detection results of microcalcifications can be provided for the
classification task. The MIAS dataset produced the second best
classification results, and moreover, using manual annotations
and automatic detections achieved the same performance. This
indicates that the proposed method seems to be robust with
respect to variations between manual and automatic segmentations of microcalcifications. For the DDSM dataset, very similar
results were shown when using the leave-one-out and ten-fold
cross-validation methods, showing a decreased performance in
the results when compared to the other datasets. It might be partially explained by the fact that the detection approach performs
worst for the DDSM database among the three datasets [16].
Moreover, the DDSM dataset used in our experiments contains
300 cases, which is expected to give a larger variability than the
small datasets (especially as the DDSM dataset was generated
using different digitizers). However, the obtained classification
results are still comparable or even better than the related work
reviewed by Cheng et al. [9] or Table V, where most publications
used smaller databases than ours.
We compared the proposed method with related publications
in the literature. Table V shows a summary of the comparison.
Note that the various approaches use different images taken from
different databases, and therefore, this is a qualitative comparison. In [7], the 100% CA was obtained by classifying 143 individual microcalcifications from 18 biopsy proven cases based
on a leave-one-microcalcification-out approach, which is different from the goal of our classification of microcalcification
clusters. In [10], the classification of microcalcification clusters was based on the maximum feature value obtained by a
selected single microcalcification rather than the whole cluster (and therefore some manual aspects were involved in the
extraction process). In [46], the high classification performance
was obtained by introducing an optimized decision making step,
which was performed afterward through statistical analysis of
the classifier outputs to achieve the minimum cost of error classification. As shown in Table V, the obtained classification results
are comparable to the various approaches.
In addition, in order to enable a direct comparison, we extracted the features used in previously published works that
showed the most promising performance [7], [10], [46], [47]
and performed malignancy analysis of microcalcification clusters on our datasets. Table VI shows a summary of the best
CA and Az values achieved using our proposed topology-based
feature set and the other three feature sets [7], [10], [46], [47],
where the results were all produced using kNN and LOOCV.
As shown in Table VI, our proposed approach performed best
among the four approaches and achieved the best CA and Az
results for all the three datasets. In addition, our proposed approach provided a significant improvement over the existing
methods, and when the results from Table VI were compared
using an unpaired t-test, a p value of p < 0.01 was obtained in
all cases.
One inherent limitation of the developed method is that it cannot provide a reliable classification for the case where the cluster

1212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

TABLE V
QUALITATIVE COMPARISON OF OUR RESULTS WITH THOSE ACHIEVED BY RELATED WORK
Method
Shen et al. [7]
Ma et al. [10]
Chan et al. (1998) [21]
Dhawan et al. [8]
Papadopoulos et al. [15]
Chan et al. (1997) [27]
Soltanian-Zadeh et al. [11]
Betal et al. [20]
Rana et al. [23]
Wei et al. [45]
Shao et al. [25]
Ren et al. (2011) [46]
Ren (2012) [47]
Strange et al. [24]
Strange et al. [24]
Ours
Ours
Ours
Ours
Ours

Database

Cases

Feature

Classifier

Result

unknown
DDSM
unknown
unknown
MIAS
unknown
Nijmegen
Liverpool
University of Chicago Hospitals
University of Chicago
Sun Yat-sen University
DDSM
DDSM
DDSM
MIAS
MIAS I (manual annotation)
MIAS I (automatic detection)
Digital
DDSM (leave-one-out CV)
DDSM (10-fold CV)

18
183
145
191
25
54
103
38
49
104
109
150
150
150
20
20
20
25
300
300

shape
shape
morphology
texture&cluster
cluster
texture
multiwavelet
shape/cluster
morphology
cluster&morphology
pattern factor
varied features
varied features
cluster
cluster
topology
topology
topology
topology
topology

kNN
thresholding
LDC
ANN
SVM
ANN
kNN
kNN
ANN
Ada-/Cas-SVM
quantizing
ANN
ANN/SVM
barcodes
barcodes
k NN/FNN/FRNN/VQNN
k NN/FNN/FRNN/VQNN
k NN/FNN
k NN
k NN

CA = 100%
A z = 0.96
A z = 0.79
A z = 0.86
A z = 0.81
A z = 0.88
A z = 0.89
A z = 0.79, A z = 0.84
A z = 0.80
A z = 0.81, A z = 0.82
A z = 0.74
A z = 0.98
A z = 0.93, A z = 0.94
A z = 0.82
A z = 0.80
CA = 95% , A z = 0.96
CA = 95% , A z = 0.96
CA = 96% , A z = 0.96
CA = 86.0% , A z = 0.90
CA = 85.2 ± 5.7% , A z = 0.91 ± 0.05

TABLE VI
DIRECT COMPARISON OF THE RESULTING CA AND A z VALUES OF OUR APPROACH AND SHEN et al. [7], MA et al. [10], AND REN et al. [46], [47]
Test Data
MIAS (manual annotation)
Digital
DDSM

Ours

Shen et al. [7]

Ma et al. [10]

Ren et al. [46], [47]

CA = 95% , A z = 0.96
CA = 96% , A z = 0.96
CA = 86% , A z = 0.90

CA = 70% , A z = 0.68
CA = 84% , A z = 0.71
CA = 73% , A z = 0.69

CA = 80% , A z = 0.76
CA = 72% , A z = 0.68
CA = 62% , A z = 0.56

CA = 85% , A z = 0.91
CA = 85% , A z = 0.91
CA = 82% , A z = 0.86

is structureless or few microcalcifications are segmented within
the cluster. An extreme is when only a single microcalcification
is detected from the cluster by the automatic detection approach,
it will fail to discriminate malignant from benign based on the
topology. Another concern of the proposed method is that its
performance might depend on the performance of the microcalcification detection approach. False negatives or false positives
may affect the global topology/connectivity of microcalcification clusters. However, the experimental results demonstrate
the robustness and effectiveness of the developed method when
combined with automatic microcalcification detection.
In the experiments, the clusters with fewer microcalcifications
being segmented by the automatic detection approach tend to
be classified as benign since their graph metrics are more in line
with those of a benign cluster. Thus, the underdetected malignant
cases where the microcalcifications indicate a sparse distribution could be misclassified into benign. On the other hand, the
benign cases with relatively a larger number of microcalcifications (including the false positives) being segmented from the
clusters could indicate a malignant-like distribution and as such
could be misclassified into malignant. Fig. 7 shows the CA as
a function of the number of microcalcifications for the DDSM
dataset using leave-one-out and ten-fold cross-validation. The
results were obtained using the kNN classifier with S = 40 for
LOOCV and S = 41 for ten-fold cross-validation since they
correspond to the best performing scale for this classifier as
displayed in Table II. For display purposes, the results shown

Fig. 7. Graph showing the CA as a function of the number of microcalcifications. The results are reported for the DDSM dataset using (a) LOOCV and
(b) ten-fold cross-validation with the kNN classifier and S = 40 for LOOCV
and S = 41 for ten-fold cross-validation. (a) DDSM (LOOCV). (b) DDSM
(10-FCV).

in Fig. 7 were averaged such that each bar represents the mean
CA over five sizes of microcalcification clusters. The results
show that there is a slight dip in CA when the number of microcalcifications falls in the 11–15 range. This experiment was
not replicated with the MIAS and Digital dataset due to their
small sample size and good CA. Due to the fact that only a
few samples are misclassified, the sample size would not be
big enough to show any relationship between the number of
microcalcifications and the CA.
As discussed above, some highlights of this study should be
noted. For the MIAS dataset, the same methodology was applied
based on both manually annotated and automatically detected
microcalcifications, and the same classification performance

CHEN et al.: TOPOLOGICAL MODELING AND CLASSIFICATION OF MAMMOGRAPHIC MICROCALCIFICATION CLUSTERS

was obtained. This indicates the robustness of the proposed
method to detection errors. For the DDSM dataset, we used a
larger set of cases than related publications and achieved good
results. In addition to these two well-known digitized databases,
we evaluated our method using a full-field digital database and
obtained improved classification results. This demonstrates the
capability of our method in dealing with two categories of mammograms, which allows it to be applied in both film and digital
mammography. We also investigated the stability of the proposed method against the size of the evaluation dataset. For
each dataset, no significant difference in the classification performance was shown among the subsets of varied numbers of
cases. Furthermore, we investigated the most significant microcalcification graph metrics for malignancy analysis by performing feature selection. The most frequently selected graph metrics
are worth further investigation from a clinical point of view. In
addition to a qualitative comparison with related publications,
we implemented a direct comparison between the proposed approach and three state-of-the-art approaches, and our method
demonstrated the best performance for all the three datasets used
in this study. In addition, we used the CAD detection results directly instead of manual segmentation results for all the three
datasets. High classification accuracies and good ROC analysis
results were obtained when compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. This indicates its potential application in conjunction
with automatic detection approaches in CAD systems.
As future work, other features such as shape and texture of
individual microcalcifications and the whole cluster could be
incorporated to build a complete framework for malignancy
analysis of microcalcification clusters. A similarity measure between microcalcification graphs can be investigated in order to
discriminate between malignant and benign clusters using the
graph-based representation directly without generating graph
feature vectors. On the other hand, alternative classifiers (e.g.,
random forests, ANN, and SVM) could also be investigated. In
addition, we will extend the evaluation using a larger collection
of digital mammograms.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented a method for classifying microcalcification clusters in mammograms based on morphological topology
analysis. This is a novel approach to analyze microcalcifications in terms of the connectivity and topology for discriminating malignant from benign clusters. Unlike most features
(e.g., shape/morphological features) in previous publications
extracted at a single scale, a representation of microcalcification
clusters covering the multiscale characteristics was developed
in this paper. The topology/connectivity of microcalcification
clusters was analyzed using multiscale morphology. A set of
microcalcification graphs were constructed to describe the topological structure of microcalcification clusters at multiple scales.
When analyzing the topology of microcalcification clusters, we
extracted eight graph metrics from microcalcification graphs
generated at multiple scales, which are number of subgraphs,
average vertex degree, maximum vertex degree, average vertex
eccentricity, diameter, average clustering coefficient, giant connected component ratio, and percentage of isolated points. The

1213

resulting eight graph feature sets were aggregated and constituted the multiscale topological feature vector, which has been
used to classify microcalcification clusters into malignant and
benign.
The proposed method has been evaluated using three datasets:
MIAS, DDSM, and Digital. Four k-nearest-neighbors-based algorithms (kNN, FNN, FRNN, and VQNN) have been used for
the classification task. Good classification results have been
obtained for all the datasets. By investigating a set of S values for the number of scales and using a range of k values
for the classifier, the obtained best CA was 95% for MIAS
with manual annotations, 95% for MIAS with automatic detections, 96% for Digital, 86% for DDSM using LOOCV, and
85.2 ± 5.7% for DDSM based on ten-fold cross-validation, and
the largest area under the ROC curve was 0.96, 0.96, 0.96, 0.90,
and 0.91 ± 0.05, respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their comments and insight which helped to shape the final
version of this paper. They would also like to thank Dr. N. Mac
Parthaláin for his insight and discussions on cross-validation
and feature selection.
REFERENCES
[1] American Cancer Society, Global Cancer Facts & Figures, 2nd ed. Atlanta, GA, USA: Amer. Cancer Soc., 2011, pp. 11–12.
[2] Eurostat, Health Statistics Atlas on Mortality in the European Union.
Office for Official Publications of the European Union, 2009, pp. 91–93.
[3] American Cancer Society, Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2011– 2012.
Atlanta, GA, USA: Amer. Cancer Soc., 2011, pp. 11–15.
[4] L. Tabár et al., “Mammography service screening and mortality in breast
cancer patients: 20-year follow-up before and after introduction of screening,” The Lancet, vol. 361, no. 9367, pp. 1405–1410, 2003.
[5] National Comprehensive Cancer Network, NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology: Breast Cancer Screening and DiagnosisNCCN
Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Breast Cancer Screening and
Diagnosis, 2012.
[6] Cancer Research U.K. (2012, Aug.) “Who is screened for breast
cancer?” [Online]. Available: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancerhelp/type/breast-cancer/about/screening/who-is-screened-for-breastcancer
[7] L. Shen et al., “Application of shape analysis to mammographic calcifications,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 263–274, Jun.
1994.
[8] A. P. Dhawan et al., “Analysis of mammographic microcalcifications
using gray-level image structure features,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol.
15, no. 3, pp. 246–259, Jun. 1996.
[9] H. D. Cheng et al., “Computer-aided detection and classification of microcalcifications in mammograms: A survey,” Pattern Recog., vol. 36, no.
12, pp. 2967–2991, 2003.
[10] Y. Ma et al., “A novel shape feature to classify microcalcifications,” in
Proc. 17th IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., 2010, pp. 2265–2268.
[11] H. Soltanian-Zadeh et al., “Comparison of multiwavelet, wavelet, haralick, and shape features for microcalcification classification in mammograms,” Pattern Recog., vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 1973–1986, 2004.
[12] E. A. Sickles, “Breast calcifications: Mammographic evaluation,” Radiology, vol. 160, no. 2, pp. 289–293, 1986.
[13] W. Dähnert, Radiology Review Manual, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Williams & Wilkins, 2011, pp. 557–558.
[14] J. Suckling et al., “The mammographic image analysis society digital
mammogram database,” in Proc. Excerpta Med. Int. Congr. Ser., 1994,
pp. 375–378.
[15] A. Papadopoulos et al., “Characterization of clustered microcalcifications in digitized mammograms using neural networks and support vector
machines,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 141–150, 2005.

1214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

[16] A. Oliver et al., “Automatic microcalcification and cluster detection for
digital and digitised mammograms,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 28, pp. 68–
75, 2012.
[17] M. Elter and A. Horsch, “CADx of mammographic masses and clustered
microcalcifications: A review,” Med. Phys., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 2052–2068,
2009.
[18] M. Lanyi, “Morphologic analysis of microcalcifications,” in Early Breast
Cancer, J. Zander and J. Baltzer, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1985,
pp. 113–135.
[19] J. Dengler et al., “Segmentation of microcalcifications in mammograms,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 634–642, Dec. 1993.
[20] D. Betal et al., “Segmentation and numerical analysis of microcalcifications on mammograms using mathematical morphology,” Brit. J. Radiol.,
vol. 70, no. 837, pp. 903–917, 1997.
[21] H. P. Chan et al., “Computerized analysis of mammographic microcalcifications in morphological and texture feature spaces,” Med. Phys., vol.
25, no. 10, pp. 2007–2019, 1998.
[22] Y. Jiang et al., “Computerized classification of malignant and benign
clustered microcalcifications in mammograms,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1997, pp. 521–523.
[23] R. S. Rana et al., “Independent evaluation of computer classification of
malignant and benign calcifications in full-field digital mammograms1,”
Acad. Radiol., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 363–370, 2007.
[24] H. Strange et al., “Modelling mammographic microcalcification clusters
using persistent mereotopology,” Pattern Recog. Lett., vol. 47, pp. 157–
163, 2014.
[25] Y. Z. Shao et al., “Characterizing the clustered microcalcifications on
mammograms to predict the pathological classification and grading: A
mathematical modeling approach,” J. Dig. Imag., vol. 24, pp. 764–771,
2011.
[26] M. Yam et al., “Three-dimensional reconstruction of microcalcification
clusters from two mammographic views,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol.
20, no. 6, pp. 479–489, 2001.
[27] H. P. Chan et al., “Computerized classification of malignant and benign
microcalcifications on mammograms: Texture analysis using an artificial
neural network,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 42, pp. 549–567, 1997.
[28] S. A. Feig et al., “Evaluation of breast microcalcifications by means of
optically magnified tissue specimen radiographs,” Recent Results Cancer
Res., vol. 105, pp. 111–123, 1987.
[29] Z. Chen et al., “Analysis of mammographic microcalcification clusters
using topological features,” in Breast Imaging (ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 8539, H. Fujita, T. Hara, and C. Muramatsu, Eds. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2014, pp. 620–627.
[30] M. Heath et al., “The digital database for screening mammography,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Dig. Mammography, 2000, pp. 212–218.
[31] P. Soille, Morphological Image Analysis: Principles and Applications,
2nd ed. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2003, pp. 63–103.
[32] R. Diestel, Graph Theory, 4th ed. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
2010, pp. 1–28.
[33] F. R. K. Chung, Spectral Graph Theory, Number 92 of CBMS Regional
Conference Series in Mathematics. Providence, RI, USA: Amer. Math.
Soc., 1997, ch. 1, pp. 1–21.
[34] R. O. Duda et al., Pattern Classification, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA:
Wiley, 2000, pp. 174–188.
[35] J. M. Keller et al., “A fuzzy k-nearest neighbor algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. SMC-15, no. 4, pp. 580–585, Jul./Aug. 1985.
[36] R. Jensen and C. Cornelis, “Fuzzy rough nearest neighbour classification
and prediction,” Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 412, no. 42, pp. 5871–5884,
2011.
[37] N. Mac Parthaláin et al., “Fuzzy-rough approaches for mammographic
risk analysis, ” Intell. Data Anal., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 225–244, 2010.
[38] C. Cornelis et al., “Vaguely quantified rough sets,” Lecture Notes Artif.
Intell., vol. 4482, pp. 87–94, 2007.
[39] J. R. Beck and E. K. Schultz, “The use of relative operating characteristic
(ROC) curves in test performance evaluation,” Archives Pathol. Lab. Med.,
vol. 110, pp. 13–20, 1986.
[40] J. Huang and C. Ling, “Using AUC and accuracy in evaluating learning
algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 299–310,
Mar. 2005.
[41] S. J. Mason and N. E. Graham, “Areas beneath the relative operating characteristics (ROC) and relative operating levels (ROL) curves: Statistical
significance and interpretation,” Quart. J. Royal Meteorolog. Soc., vol.
128, pp. 2145–2166, 2002.
[42] M. Hall et al., “The WEKA data mining software: An update,” SIGKDD
Explorations, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10–18, 2009.

[43] M. A. Hall, “Correlation-based feature selection for machine learning,”
Ph.D. dissertation, The Univ. Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999.
[44] R. Caruana and D. Freitag, “Greedy attribute selection,” in Proc. 11th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 1994, pp. 28–36.
[45] L. Wei et al., “Microcalcification classification assisted by content-based
image retrieval for breast cancer diagnosis,” Pattern Recog., vol. 42, no.
6, pp. 1126–1132, 2009.
[46] J. Ren et al., “Effective recognition of MCCS in mammograms using an
improved neural classifier,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 24, pp. 638–645,
2011.
[47] J. Ren, “ANN versus SVM: Which one performs better in classification of
MCCs in mammogram imaging,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 26, pp. 144–
153, 2012.
Zhili Chen received the M.Eng. degree in communication and information systems from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, U.K.,
in 2013.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the Faculty of Information and
Control Engineering, Shenyang Jianzhu University, Shenyang, China. Her current research interests include computer vision and image processing, focusing
on mammographic image analysis especially on mammographic risk assessment and microcalcification classification.
Harry Strange received the B.Eng. degree in software engineering in 2008 and
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, U.K., in 2011.
He is currently a Research Fellow in medical image analysis at the Department of Computer Science, Aberystwyth University. His research interests
include mammographic image analysis, pathology informatics, manifold learning, and texture-based segmentation.
Arnau Oliver received the M.Sc. degree in physics from Universitat Autonoma
de Barcelona, Spain, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in information technology
from Universitat de Girona, Spain, in 2007.
He is currently a Lecturer with the Computer Vision and Robotics Group
at the University of Girona, Girona, Spain. His research is mainly focused on
pattern recognition and the development of automatic tools for breast cancer
detection.
Erika R. E. Denton received the M.B.B.S. degree from St. Thomas’ Hospital
Medical School, London, U.K., in 1989. She was trained in radiology at Guys
and St. Thomas’ Hospital, receiving M.R.C.P. and F.R.C.R. degrees in 1992 and
1994, respectively.
Since 2005, she has been National Clinical Lead, and subsequently the
National Clinical Director, for Imaging at the Department of Health. She has
been the Chairman of the Royal College of Radiologist Breast Group and
the Vice-President and subsequently the President of the U.K. Radiological
Congress. Prior to her national role, she was Divisional Clinical Director for
support services in Norwich, the Head of the Norwich Radiology Academy, and
the Head of training in Norwich.
Caroline Boggis received the Graduate degree from St. George’s Hospital Medical School, University of London, London, U.K., in 1978. She undertook formal
postgraduate training in radiology in Manchester becoming a Fellow of the RCR
in 1985.
In 2004, she moved to the Manchester Medical School as an Associate Director for the Curriculum and for Student Support. After a period as a Program
Director for the MBChB, she is currently the School’s Lead for Quality Assurance. Her work in education has been recognized by the RCP with the award
of an honorary MRCP as a Physician Educator and by Manchester University
with an Honorary Chair in Medical Education.
Reyer Zwiggelaar received the Ir. degree in applied physics from the State
University Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, in 1989, and the Ph.D. degree in electronic and electrical engineering from University College London,
London, U.K., in 1993.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of Computer Science, Aberystwyth University, U.K. He is the author or coauthor of more than 150 conference
and journal papers. He is an Associate Editor of the Journal of Biomedical
and Health Informatics (formerly IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE). His current research interests include medical image understanding, especially focusing on mammographic and
prostate data, pattern recognition, statistical methods, texture-based segmentation, and feature-detection techniques.

