1316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

An Inductive Sensor for Real-Time Measurement of
Plantar Normal and Shear Forces Distribution
Li Du, Xiaoliang Zhu, and Jiang Zhe∗

Abstract—Goal: The objective of this paper is to demonstrate a
multiplexed inductive force sensor for simultaneously measuring
normal force and shear forces on a foot. Methods: The sensor measures the normal force and shear forces by monitoring the inductance changes of three planar sensing coils. Resonance frequency
division multiplexing was applied to signals from the multiple sensing coils, making it feasible to simultaneously measure the three
forces (normal force, shear forces in x- and y-axis) on a foot using
only one set of measurement electronics with high sensitivity and
resolution. Results: The testing results of the prototype sensor have
shown that the sensor is capable of measuring normal force ranging from 0 to 800 N and shear forces ranging from 0 to 130 N in
real time. Conclusion: With its high resolution, high sensitivity, and
the capability of monitoring forces at different positions of a foot
simultaneously, this sensor can be potentially used for real-time
measurement of plantar normal force and shear forces distribution on diabetes patient’s foot. Significance: Real-time monitoring
of the normal force and shear forces on diabetes patient’s foot can
provide useful information for physicians and diabetes patients to
take actions in preventing foot ulceration.
Index Terms—Foot ulcer monitoring, inductive sensor, plantar
normal force, plantar shear forces.

I. INTRODUCTION
VER 8% of adults population in the world is suffering
from diabetes as of 2013, and this number could reach
11% by 2035 [1]. Up to 20% of diabetes patients will develop foot ulcerations and 85% of foot amputations are related
to diabetes caused foot ulcerations [2]. Although the causing
of the foot ulceration is not fully understood, recent studies
show that excessive normal force and shear forces generated
on the plantar surface significantly contribute to foot ulceration
[2]–[4]. Therefore, monitoring the normal force and shear forces
on diabetes patient’s feet in real time can provide useful information for physicians and diabetes patients to take actions to
prevent the foot ulceration [5]–[8]. For instance, this information can help the physicians to prescribe a preventive course of
actions or advise the patients to correct their walking habits.
A variety of measurement systems were developed to detect forces on patients’ foot. Load sensors and pressure sensors
have been used for foot stress measurement due to its simple

O

Manuscript received August 14, 2014; revised December 15, 2014; accepted
December 19, 2014. Date of publication December 19, 2014; date of current
version April 17, 2015. This work was supported by the University of Akron,
Akron, OH, USA. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
L. Du and X. Zhu are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University of Akron.
* J. Zhe is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Akron, Akron, OH 44325 USA (e-mail: jzhe@uakron.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2386136

structure and low cost [9]–[12]. For instance, to measure the
plantar pressure distribution, F-Scan and Pedar systems were
developed using a pressure sensor array. Although these measurement systems are sensitive to normal force, they cannot
measure shear forces. To overcome this problem, shear sensors
were integrated with F-Scan pressure distribution sensor sheet
into an insole [13]. However, the use of the high-cost F-Scan
makes it unaffordable for many diabetes patients [13]. To reduce
the cost, Perry et al. reported the use of strain gauges array to
accurately detect normal force and shear forces at the same time
[14]. Because of the bulky size, a patient has to stand on the
sensor array to measure the forces on the plantar surface; it is,
therefore, unsuitable for real-time monitoring of foot forces and
ulceration.
A miniature sensor based on loop antenna was reported in
[15], the resonant frequency of the loop antenna shifted as the
foot forces are applied. Normal force and shear forces can be
obtained by the natural frequency shifts with high resolution.
However, the sensor is based upon capacitance change measurement, which is sensitive to environmental changes, such as
changes in temperature or humidity. Additionally, the sensor
was operated at around 5 GHz, and thus required complicated
measurement electronics and data acquisition system for realtime applications. The sensor presented in [16] consists of one
excitation coil and three sensing coils embedded in a rubber
element. Normal force and shear forces can be calculated from
the voltage induced in the three sensing coils. The drawback of
this sensor is that each sensing coil is sensitive to both normal
force and shear forces, which makes it difficult to deduce the
individual force components from three induced voltages. In addition, there was no dynamic testing reported in both references.
A detailed review of plantar force measurement systems can be
found in [17].
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, in this article
we report a low-cost high-sensitivity inductive force sensor for
real-time measurement of normal force and shear force on a foot.
The presented foot force sensor consists of multiple mini-sized
spiral planar coils as sensing elements; resonance-frequency
division signal multiplexing was applied to the sensing coils,
enabling simultaneous measurements of normal force and twoaxis shear forces using only one set of measurement electronics,
with high sensitivity. The sensor, with further reduced size, can
be potentially embedded in the shoe of a diabetes patient for
real-time plantar force monitoring.
II. DEVICE DESIGN AND SENSING MECHANISM
Fig. 1 illustrates the design concept of a multiplexed inductive
force sensor, consisting of three mini-sized spiral coils mounted

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DU et al.: INDUCTIVE SENSOR FOR REAL-TIME MEASUREMENT OF PLANTAR NORMAL AND SHEAR FORCES DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 3.

Fig. 1.
toring.

Schematic of a three-coil inductive force sensor for foot ulcer moni-

Fig. 2.

Sensing mechanism of the three-coil inductive force sensor.

on a square substrate, four Neoprene rubber blocks fixed at
the four corners of the substrate, and a stainless steel plate
mounted on the top of the rubber blocks. Coil 1 is attached
at the center of the substrate. Coil 2 and coil 3 are positioned
at the centers of two adjacent edges of the substrate separately.
The small-size force sensor is to be embedded in the shoe of a
diabetes patient for real-time force measurement.
The working mechanism of the inductive force sensor
is shown in Fig. 2. An ac excitation is applied to each
sensing coil to generate a magnetic field (red line with up arrows
in Fig. 2); an eddy current is induced inside the stainless steel
plate, which generates an opposite magnetic field (light blue line
with down arrows in Fig. 2) and causes a decrease in the coil’s
inductance Ls . The decrease of Ls is a function of the following
two factors: 1) the vertical distance Zd between the coil plane
and the stainless steel plate; the smaller the Zd , the larger the
eddy current and, therefore, the larger the drop in the inductance Ls ; and 2) the volume of the stainless steel plate within
the magnetic field generated by a coil; the larger the volume of
stainless plate within the magnetic field, the larger the decrease
in Ls of this coil. When a normal force is applied on the top
plate, the rubber blocks are compressed and Zd decreases, leading to a decrease on Ls1 . Shear forces in x and y direction, on
the other hand, cause displacement of the stainless plate along x
and y direction (Zx and Zy ), and affect the inductance of coil 2
and 3 respectively. However, Ls1 is not affected by shear forces
because the displacement would not affect the eddy current
generated by coil 1. Therefore, the normal force on the foot can

1317

Equivalent measurement circuit for a three-coil foot force sensor.

be obtained by solely monitoring the inductance change of coil
1 (ΔLs1 ). The inductance change of coil 2 (ΔLs2 ) is a function
of both normal force and x-axis shear force. Once normal force
is obtained from ΔLs1 , x-axis shear force can be recovered from
ΔLs2 . Similarly, the inductance change of coil 3 (ΔLs3 ) is a
function of both normal force and y-axis shear force; the y-axis
force can be recovered from ΔLs3 .
To accurately acquire the peak forces at critical positions
including toes, metatarsal heads (MTH) and heel, the optimal sensing area of the sensor was found to be around
25.4 mm × 25.4 mm [3]. Hence, we determined the length and
width of the stainless steel plate to be 25.4 mm. For a person
with ordinary weight, the normal force and shear forces generated during walking could reach 800 and 130 N, respectively
[3]. To withstand the high normal force, a stainless steel plate
with 1-mm thickness was selected to build the prototype sensor.
Four rubber blocks [10 mm (length) × 10 mm (width) × 10 mm
(height)] with durometer hardness 40 A were used to obtain
linear deformation by forces ranging from 0 to 800 N. Each
planar coil was designed to be 10 mm in outer diameter and
0.8 mm in inner diameter. Such a design ensures the coil is
sensitive to the Zd up to 10 mm [18]. We tested magnet wires
with different diameters and found that a wire with 0.2 mm in
diameter generated the highest sensitivity. After the three 22turn sensing coils were built, the series resistance Rs and series
inductance Ls were measured to be around 1.53 Ω and 2.70 μH
by a high-precision LCR meter. With an excitation frequency
of 2 MHz, the Q factor of the sensing coil was calculated to
be around 16.2. The coupling coefficient k between three coils
was ranged from 0.001 to 0.007 at 2 MHz, which indicates the
mutual interference between three sensing coils is negligible.
Fig. 3 shows the measurement circuit for the inductive force
sensor with three sensing coils. Lsi and Rsi (i = 1, 2, 3) represent the series inductance and resistance for each sensing coil.
Each sensing coil is electrically connected in parallel with an
external capacitor Cpi (i = 1, 2, 3) to form a parallel LC resonant circuit that has a unique resonant frequency. A combined
excitation signal (V0 ) consisting of three sine waves whose frequencies are close to the resonant frequencies of the three LC
resonant circuits is applied. Only one combined response Vout is
measured. Because signals from each sensing coil exhibit a peak
amplitude at its resonant frequency, the signals for each individual channel can be recovered from the combined response by
taking the spectrum components at each resonant frequency.
Inductance change for each sensing coil can, therefore, be

1318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 4. Schematic of a modified prototype foot force sensor for calibration
and testing.
Fig. 5.

calculated from individual signals. More details about resonant frequency division multiplexing techniques can be found
in [19] and [20]. From the measured inductance changes, foot
forces can be back calculated from calibration curves. Excitation frequencies for the three sensing coils were experimentally
determined to be 1.51, 1.76, and 1.95 MHz. More detailed procedures of measurement parameter determination for applying
resonant frequency division multiplexing can be found in reference [19].
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Calibration
To acquire accurate relationship between applied force and
inductance changes of sensing coils, calibrations for the three
sensing coils were conducted at different normal forces and
shear forces. Note that the dimension of the designed sensor
shown in Fig. 1 is 25.4 mm (length) × 25.4 mm (width) × 16 mm
(height). The small size makes it difficult to apply known normal and shear forces by the hydraulic cylinders to evaluate
the sensor’s response and to conduct the dynamic testing. To
facilitate the calibration and dynamic testing, we fabricated a
modified prototype sensor (see Fig. 4) with a larger substrate
plate (76.2 mm × 76.2 mm area with a thickness of 3 mm) made
of PMMA; the dimensions of the sensing coils, stainless steel
plate and rubber block all remained the same. The responses of
the 25.4 mm × 25.4 mm and 76.2 mm × 76.2 mm sensor should
be exactly the same. Four rubber blocks were fixed at the four
corners of the substrate by applying a small amount of super
glue. The 25.4 mm × 25.4 mm stainless steel plate was attached
to center of a cover plate with the same size of the substrate
plate (76.2 mm × 76.2 mm); next, the cover plate was fixed on
top of the rubber blocks to finish the fabrication of the prototype
sensor.
Fig. 5 illustrates the calibration setup for the prototype sensor.
The calibration system consists of two hydraulic cylinders, two
nitrogen cylinders, a ball bearing linear translation stage, a function generator and a high-speed DAQ system. First, a mounting
block (black component in Fig. 5) was installed on the damped
optical table (RS2000TM, Newport). Next, the substrate plate
of the modified prototype sensor shown in Fig. 4 was attached
to the PMMA mounting plate using mounting tape. Then, the
cover plate of the prototype sensor was attached to a ball bearing
linear translation stage (Oriel 16021 ball bearing linear stage,
HOFSTRA group, the purple component in Fig. 5) to ensure

Experimental setup for the prototype foot force sensor calibration.

the direction of the applied shear force is perpendicular to the
direction of normal force. The other side of the linear translation stage was connected to hydraulic cylinder #1 via thread
end of the piston. Hydraulic cylinder #1 (NCDGBN32-0400 Air
Cylinder, SMC PNEUMATICS) was used to simulate normal
force along z direction, hydraulic cylinder #2 was used to apply
shear forces along the x-direction (or y-direction). The generated
force can be calculated by F = P × A, in which P is the pressure readout from the pressure gauge and A is the bore area of
the hydraulic cylinder. The bore size of the hydraulic cylinder is
32 mm. Forces applied by hydraulic cylinders can be controlled
by regulating the output of two nitrogen cylinders. For instance,
the applied force generated by a 6.90 kPa pressure is 55.45 N.
The actual normal force and shear forces applied by the two
cylinders were measured and calibrated by a precision digital
scale with a resolution of 1 N. Note that the normal force applied
by cylinder 1 may result in resistance for shear movement along
x-axis and y-axis. However, the linear translation stage utilized
in the tests was well lubricated to minimize the movement resistance. The resistance caused by the linear translation stage was
negligible compared to the applied shear forces. The responses
of three sensing coils were measured using the DAQ system.
The calibration was conducted as follows. First, the base
inductance of sensing coil, Ls1 , Ls2 and Ls3 was measured at
1.51, 1.76, and 1.95 MHz, respectively. Next, we regulated the
normal force Fz at z direction by increasing the pressure of
hydraulic cylinder #1 from 0 to 110.4 kPa with a 6.90 kPa step
size. At each normal force, the shear force Fx applied along the
x-direction was swept from 0 to 20.7 kPa with a 6.90 kPa step
size. According to calibration, the applied normal force ranged
from 0 to 800 N and shear force (Fx ) ranged from 0 to 130 N.
The inductance change of each sensing coil was measured at
each step at its specific excitation frequency mentioned above.
The changes in inductance (ΔLs /Ls ) as a function of Fz and Fx
are plotted in Fig. 6. After that, shear force along the y-direction
Fy was applied by rotating the prototype sensor clockwise by
90°. Then, inductance change caused by Fz and Fy are also
plotted in Fig. 6. Each calibration curve was obtained by five
repetitive measurements, the average relative inductive change
for each data point was used to plot the calibration curves in
Fig. 6. Error bars were not plotted because they were too small
to be seen.
Fig. 6(a) illustrates the response of the central coil (Coil 1, to
monitor normal force Fz ). It is obvious the three curves under

DU et al.: INDUCTIVE SENSOR FOR REAL-TIME MEASUREMENT OF PLANTAR NORMAL AND SHEAR FORCES DISTRIBUTION

1319

Fig. 7. Pictures of (a) the modified prototype sensor and (b) a shoe with the
modified prototype sensor attached at forefoot position.

y-axis shear force Fy [see red curve with circles in Fig. 6(b)].
To determine shear force Fx , normal force should be determined first from coil 1’s response; then, Fx can be determined
from calibration curves in Fig. 6(b). Similarly, shear force Fy
can be obtained from inductance change of Ls3 [red curve in
Fig. 6(c)] after the normal force is determined. Although the
shear force results in a small change in Zd , this deformation is
much smaller than that caused by the normal force; therefore,
shear forces applied on the sensor cause negligible change in
the inductance change of coil 1 as shown in Fig. 6(a). Hence,
the error in normal force measurement caused by the applied
shear force is negligible.
B. Dynamic Testing
Fig. 6. Calibration curves for three sensing coils under various normal forces
and shear forces: (a) coil 1, (b) coil 2, and (c) coil 3.

different shear forces are nearly identical. The applied normal
force, Fz , caused a significant decrease in Ls1 while shear force
Fx and Fy up to 130 N had negligible effect on Ls1 . This is
because coil 1 was located at the center area; Ls1 was only
sensitive to the change in Zd . Hence, the Fz can be determined
from Fig. 6(a) regardless of shear forces in x- and y-directions.
For sensing coil 2 (located at the edge to monitor x-axis
shear force Fx ), Fig. 6(b) shows Ls2 is dependent on both
normal force Fz and x-axis shear force Fx , but insensitive to

To validate the sensor’s capability of measuring dynamic normal force and shear forces in real time, the modified prototype
sensor shown in Fig. 7(a) was tested during normal gait. The
modified prototype sensor was attached at the forefoot and heel
position of a right shoe separately via mounting tapes. Fig. 7(b)
shows the shoe with the modified prototype sensor attached at
forefoot position; a supporting structure with same size of the
prototype sensor was attached at the heel position to keep balance during walking. Four male volunteers were recruited to test
the sensor. Informed consents were obtained prior to all experiments. First, a male subject with a weight of 716 N volunteered
to test the prototype sensor. Male subject was asked to wear the
modified shoe and walk normally to test the prototype sensor

1320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 9. Typical normal force and shear forces during one gait cycle for the
716 N male subject calculated from sensor responses. (a) Forefoot position.
(b) Heel position.

Fig. 8. Measured relative inductance changes of the three sensing coils during
normal walking of a 716 N male subject. (a) Forefoot position. (b) Heel position.

for 50 s. The first 10 s and the last 10 s were excluded to obtain
stable gait patterns.
To obtain the responses from the three sensing coils simultaneously with a single measurement, resonant frequency division multiplexing was applied to the signals from the three
coils inductive sensor. A combination sinusoidal wave (10 Vpp ,
consisting of 1.51, 1.76, and 1.95 MHz excitation signals) generated by an Agilent 33220A function generator was used to
excite the three-coil inductive foot force sensor. A Gage Razor
CompuScope 14-bit multichannel digitizer was used to measure
and record the voltage output (Vout ) at a 100-MHz sampling
rate in all experiments. Once the voltage output was recorded,
the data was then processed in MATLAB to calculate the inductive changes for each sensing coil. The detailed signal processing
procedures can be found in [19] and [20]. Finally, the inductance
changes for three sensing coils were calculated and plotted in
Fig. 8.
The modified prototype sensor was tested in forefoot position
and heel position separately. Fig. 8(a) illustrates the sensor’s typical response at forefoot position. Seventeen negative inductive

pulses were observed for each sensing coil. The time interval between adjacent negative inductive pulses represents one whole
gait cycle, initiated with a landing phase, followed by a contacting phase and ended with a lifting phase. The average gait
cycle is 1.67 s. The duration of each pulse was in the range of
0.74–0.85 s. Fig. 8(b) shows the sensor’s typical response at heel
position measured in a separate experiment. Eighteen negative
inductive pulses were observed for each sensing coil. The time
interval between adjacent negative inductive pulses represents
one whole gait cycle, initiated with a heel strike, followed by a
mid-stance, push off and ended with a toe off. The average gait
cycle is 1.58 s. The duration of each pulse was in the range of
0.71–0.84 s.
Next, the exact normal force and two-axis shear forces were
calculated by the following procedures: 1) normal force Fz was
determined by the inductance change of coil 1 using the calibration curve shown in Fig. 6(a); 2) with the determined normal
force, shear forces Fx and Fy were determined from the responses of coil 2 and coil 3 using calibration curves in Fig. 6(b)
and (c). Fig. 9(a) illustrates the recovered typical normal force
and shear forces at forefoot position during one gait cycle. As
shown in Fig. 9(a), the duration of a typical gait cycle was approximately 0.79 s. A typical normal force generated in the gait
cycle [see red solid curve in Fig. 9(a)] reached 712 N by the
716 N male subject, which matched the subject’s body weight
well. Black curve and blue curve in Fig. 9 indicate the generated

DU et al.: INDUCTIVE SENSOR FOR REAL-TIME MEASUREMENT OF PLANTAR NORMAL AND SHEAR FORCES DISTRIBUTION

1321

Fig. 10. Calculated peak force for four male subjects (580, 623, 667, and
716 N). (a) Normal force. (b) AP shear force.
Fig. 11. Calculated normal force for three different gait patterns of a 716 N
male subject. (a) Normal force. (b) AP shear force.

x-axis [anteroposterior (AP)] shear force and y-axis [mediolateral (ML)] shear force, respectively. Negative AP shear force
(posterior direction) was observed for heel [see black dash curve
in Fig. 9(b)] and positive AP shear force (anterior direction) was
observed for forefoot [black dash curve in Fig. 9(a)]. During the
gait cycle, only negative ML shear force was observed, indicating the ML shear force was always along medial direction [blue
dot curve in Fig. 9(a) and (b)]. The measured waveforms and
magnitudes of normal force, AP shear force and ML shear force
shown in Fig. 9 are in good agreements with other studies on
foot force measurements [13], [21].
Studies show most of the foot ulceration are developed at forefoot position [3]. This is because in a gait cycle the peak normal
force and shear force both occur at forefoot position. Hence,
accurate detection of the peak value of normal and shear forces
are critical for preventing foot ulceration. To further demonstrate
the sensor’s capability of detecting peak forces, we conducted
experiments for four male subjects with different weights (580,
623, 667, and 716 N). For each subject, 30 s data during gait was
collected and processed to obtain peak forces at the forefoot position. The calculated peak normal forces and peak shear forces
are plotted in Fig. 10(a) and (b), respectively. It is obvious the
peak normal force for each subject is approximately equal to
the subject’s weight; and the peak shear force in the x-direction
is about 15% of the subject’s weight; the peak shear force in

the y-direction is approximately half of the shear force in the
x-direction. These measurements results agree well with prior
results for normal walking reported by Mori and Marasovic [13],
[22]. The tests proved that present sensor provides repeatable
measurements of normal forces and shear forces on a foot.
In addition, the prototype sensor was tested for three different gait patterns of a 716 N male subject, i.e., normal walking, walking with right foot shuffling and walking with crutches
(three-point sequence, no-weight-bearing at left foot). Fig. 11(a)
and (b) shows the typical normal forces and AP shear forces for
the three different gait patterns, respectively. In all experiments,
the prototype sensor was installed at the forefoot position of the
subject’s right foot. Results clearly show the normal walking
generated the largest peak of normal force and shear force (red
solid curve in Fig. 11). This is because during normal walking
the peak forces occurred at the push off phase and the whole
weight of the subject was applied on forefoot at push off phase.
While for shuffle walking (blue dot curve in Fig. 11) and walking with crutches (green dash curve in Fig. 11), the whole weight
of the subject was supported by both the forefoot and the heel
when the right foot was pushed off the ground; hence, the normal
forces and shears forces measured at the forefoot position were
reduced for both the two gait patterns. When the subject walked

1322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

with right foot shuffling, a small positive normal force was observed during the shuffling phase (before the push off phase)
because the right foot was still in contact with the ground. In
addition, negative AP shear force was generated when the subject shuffled the right foot ahead and positive AP shear force was
observed during the push off phase. In comparison, for normal
walking and walking with crutches, normal and AP shear forces
were zero when the right foot had no contact with the ground
(swing phase), and were only generated at stance phase, i.e.,
from heel strike to toe off. The measurement results with the
three different gait patterns agree very well with similar studies
reported in [13] and [23]. This test shows the prototype senor
can measure the differences in forces caused by gait patterns.
Note that although the prototype inductive foot force sensor is capable of accurately detecting the overall normal force
and shear forces in real time, the spatial resolution of the
measurement is low because of the large sensing area. This
drawback can be overcome by decreasing the sensor size [3],
[24]. With its simple structure, the sensor can be made much
smaller (in millimeter level) and with lower cost using microfabrication techniques. Although we only tested a 76.2 mm ×
76.2 mm × 16 mm prototype sensor at forefoot and heel position in our experiments for concept-demonstration purpose,
more sensors with reduced sizes can be added for force measuring at various critical positions such as toes and five metatarsal
heads (MTH) for force distribution measurement with high spatial resolution. With the use of resonance frequency division
signal multiplexing/demultiplexing [19], multiple miniature
sensors/sensing coils can be embedded in the shoe of a diabetes
patient for force monitoring at multiple positions with only one
set of measurement, making the sensor suitable for force related
foot ulceration monitoring with high spatial resolution.
IV. CONCLUSION
We demonstrated a multiplexed inductive sensor for ulcerrelated foot force monitoring. The sensor consists of three minisized planar coils. The normal forces and shear forces on a
foot during walking were simultaneously measured by monitoring inductance changes of the three sensing coils. By applying
the resonant frequency division multiplexing techniques, only
one set of measurement circuit is required to measure normal
force, AP, and ML shear forces simultaneously. The use of
resonant frequency division signal multiplexing enables high
sensitivity and high resolution. Testing results demonstrated the
simultaneous measurement of normal force ranging from 0 to
800 N and shear forces ranging from 0 to 130 N has been
achieved. The signal multiplexing concept can be extended to
multiple foot force sensors installed at multiple positions to provide a complete dynamic force measurement of the entire foot.
With the extended capability, light weight and low cost, this
sensor has a potential to be used for real-time monitoring of the
plantar forces to prevent foot ulceration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Y. Han at the University of
Akron for his assistance in conducting experiments.

REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization. (2009, Jun). Global health risks:
Mortality and burden of disease attributable to selected major
risks. Geneva, Switzerland. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.
int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/GlobalHealthRisks_report_full.pdf
[2] J. E. Perry et al., “Simultaneous measurement of plantar pressure and shear
forces in diabetic individuals,” Gait Posture, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 101–107,
Feb. 2002.
[3] S. Ostadabbas et al., “A knowledge based modeling for plantar pressure image reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 10,
pp. 2538–2549, May 2014.
[4] M. Yavuz et al., “Plantar shear stress distributions: Comparing actual
and predicted frictional forces at the foot–ground interface,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 40, no. 13, pp. 3045–3049, Apr. 2007.
[5] M. Yavuz et al., “Temporal characteristics of plantar shear distribution:
Relevance to diabetic patients,” J. Biomech., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 556–559,
Dec. 2007.
[6] N. Singh et al., “Preventing foot ulcers in patients with diabetes,” J. Amer.
Med. Assoc., vol. 293, no. 2, pp. 217–228, Jan. 2005.
[7] L. A. Lavery et al., “Preventing diabetic foot ulcer recurrence in highrisk patients: Use of temperature monitoring as a self-assessment tool,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 14–20, Jan. 2007.
[8] B. Belmont et al., “An apparatus to quantify anteroposterior and mediolateral shear reduction in shoe insoles,” J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 410–419, Mar. 2013.
[9] I. Mohammad and H. Huang. (2012, Jun). Plantar pressure sensing using loop antenna sensors. presented at the PETRA. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2413107
[10] I. Mohammad and H. Huang, “Shear sensing based on a microstrip
patch antenna,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 23, no. 10, p. 105705, Oct.
2012.
[11] A. A. Kalamdani, “Development and characterization of a high-spatialtemporal-resolution foot-sole-pressure measurement system,” Ph.D. dissertation, Robotics. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
2006.
[12] T. Bernard et al. (2009, Apr). An early detection system for foot
ulceration in diabetic patients. presented at the IEEE 35th Annu.
Northeast Conf., [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/
abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4967797&tag=1
[13] T. Mori et al., “Insole-type simultaneous measurement system of plantar pressure and shear force during gait for diabetic patients,” J. Robot.
Mechatron., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 766–772, Jun. 2012.
[14] B. L. Davis et al., “A device for simultaneous measurement of pressure
and shear force distribution on the plantar surface of the foot,” J. Appl.
Biomech., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 93–104, Feb. 1998.
[15] I. Mohammad and H. Huang. (2012, Mar.). Pressure and shear sensing based on microstrip antennas. presented at the Sens.Smart Struct.
Technol. Civil, Mech. Aerosp. Syst. Conf. [Online]. Available: http://
proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=1314025
[16] M. J. Warren-Forward et al., “Three-dimensional displacement and force
transducer,” IEE. Proc.-A., vol. 139, no. 1, pp. 21–29, Jan. 1992.
[17] S. Rajala and J. Lekkala, “Plantar shear stress measurements—A review,”
Clinical Biomech., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 475–483, May 2014.
[18] L. Du et al., “A high sensitivity inductive sensor for blade tip clearance measurement,” Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 23, no. 6, p. 065018, Jun.
2014.
[19] L. Du et al., “High throughput wear debris detection in lubricants using
a resonance frequency division multiplexed sensor,” Tribol. Lett., vol. 51,
no. 3, pp. 453–460, Jul. 2013.
[20] L. Du et al., “Improving sensitivity of an inductive pulse sensor for
detection of metallic wear debris in lubricants using parallel LC resonance method,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 24, no. 7, p. 075106, Jul.
2013.
[21] W. M. Chen et al., “A novel gait platform to measure isolated plantar
metatarsal forces during walking,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 43, no. 10,
pp. 2017–2021, May 2010.
[22] T. Marasovic et al., “Analysis and interpretation of ground reaction forces
in normal gait,” WSEAS Trans. Syst., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1105–1114, Sep.
2009.
[23] S. Li et al., “Three-point gait crutch walking: Variability in ground reaction
force during weight bearing,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 86, no. 1,
pp. 86–92, Jan. 2001.
[24] S. Urry, “Plantar pressure-measurement sensors,” Meas. Sci.Technol.,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. R16–R32, Jan. 1999.

DU et al.: INDUCTIVE SENSOR FOR REAL-TIME MEASUREMENT OF PLANTAR NORMAL AND SHEAR FORCES DISTRIBUTION

Li Du received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the Beijing University of Technology,
Beijing, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Akron,
Akron, OH, USA, in 2012.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University of Akron. His current research interests
include microfluidic devices and MEMS sensors for
health monitoring.

Xiaoliang Zhu received the M.S. degree in electrical
engineering from the Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2012. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering
at the University of Akron, Akron, OH, USA.
His research interests include design and fabricate
MEMS devices for health monitoring.

1323

Jiang Zhe received the Ph.D. degree in mechanical
engineering from Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA, in 2002.
He is currently a Professor in the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University of Akron,
Akron, OH, USA. His current research interests include microfluidic devices, lab-on-a-chip, and sensors for biomedical applications.

