IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

501

A Statistical Characterization of the Finger Tapping
Test: Modeling, Estimation, and Applications
Daniel Austin, Member, IEEE, James McNames, Senior Member, IEEE, Krystal Klein,
Holly Jimison, Member, IEEE, and Misha Pavel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Sensory-motor performance is indicative of both cognitive and physical function. The Halstead–Reitan finger tapping
test is a measure of sensory-motor speed commonly used to assess function as part of a neuropsychological evaluation. Despite
the widespread use of this test, the underlying motor and cognitive processes driving tapping behavior during the test are not
well characterized or understood. This lack of understanding may
make clinical inferences from test results about health or disease
state less accurate because important aspects of the task such as
variability or fatigue are unmeasured. To overcome these limitations, we enhanced the tapper with a sensor that enables us to more
fully characterize all the aspects of tapping. This modification enabled us to decompose the tapping performance into six component
phases and represent each phase with a set of parameters having
clear functional interpretation. This results in a set of 29 total parameters for each trial, including change in tapping over time, and
trial-to-trial and tap-to-tap variability. These parameters can be
used to more precisely link different aspects of cognition or motor
function to tapping behavior. We demonstrate the benefits of this
new instrument with a simple hypothesis-driven trial comparing
single and dual-task tapping.
Index Terms—Finger tapping, mixed effects modeling, neuropsychological testing.

I. INTRODUCTION
ENSORY-MOTOR function is an important predictor of
cognitive and physical function, both of which are key indicators of an individual’s current and future health status. For
example, motor slowing in elderly patients has been shown to
precede cognitive impairment [1]–[3] and is a risk factor for
future hospitalization [4], [5]. Motor speed has also been linked
to cognitive function [6], [7] and risk of future disability [8], [9].
Measured levels of motor dysfunction have been used to differentiate between normal aging and different levels of dementia
[10], [11]. Excessive motor speed asymmetry has been seen in
patients diagnosed with probable Alzheimer’s disease [12]. We
note that although the literature faults motor function, the observed functionality depends on sensory and possibly cognitive
functions [13]–[15].

S

Manuscript received October 10, 2014; revised December 9, 2014; accepted
December 18, 2014. Date of publication December 22, 2014; date of current
version March 2, 2015.
D. Austin is with the Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239 USA (e-mail: austidan@ohsu.edu).
J. McNames is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97207 USA (e-mail: mcnames@
pdx.edu).
K. Klein is with the Department of Medical Informatics, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR 97239 USA (e-mail: kleinkr@ohsu.edu).
H. Jimison and M. Pavel are with the College of Computer & Information
Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail: h.jimison@
neu.edu; m.pavel@neu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2014.2384911

One specific task often used to assess motor function in the
clinical setting is finger tapping. Various finger tapping tasks
are routinely used in Parkinson’s disease research [16]–[19],
dementia research [20]–[22], and for aging and dual-task experimentation [23]–[25]. The most commonly administered tapping
task for neuropsychological evaluations and diagnoses [26], [27]
is the Halstead–Reitan finger tapping test (FTT) [28], which is
widely used to detect both motor and cognitive impairments
[29]. This test is also frequently used to detect and localize
cerebral lesions, and assess cerebral lateralization [29] by comparing the performance of each hand. The test is scored as the
average number of times a patient depresses a key with his or
her index finger during five 10-s trials on a manual finger tapper,
which is treated as a measure of motor speed. Each hand is tested
separately. The test nominally consists of five tapping trials, but
will continue until either the counts on five trials are within five
of each other or ten trials are administered [29]. Variants on the
basic instructions have been reported.
Despite the widespread use of the FTT, it suffers from two
main drawbacks. First, the reported outcome is a single number
for each trial, which is then averaged across trials. No information about tap-to-tap variability, trial-to-trial variability, or
slowing during a trial is measured. However, recent research
suggests that measures unrelated to tapping speed, such as variability and accuracy, are related to cognitive ability [20], [30],
[31] and may be more sensitive to cognitive change than absolute speed. Short-term fatigue may further confound the effects
of a single score, especially over multiple trials [32]. Second,
the underlying phenomenon of tapping is not well understood.
In particular, results linking finger tapping to sensory, cognitive,
or physical function have been correlational, linking some measure of finger tapping performance, such as absolute speed [2],
[10], [11], [16], [21], [33], to function or a disease state with no
specific link elucidated between finger tapping and the specific
cognitive and motor components underlying it. Understanding
how performance on the tapping task is related to motor and cognitive abilities combined with more comprehensive assessment
could improve diagnostic inferences from the task.
Several studies have proposed methods to address shortcomings such as these [18], [19], [34], [35] in other areas of research,
primarily by utilizing novel tests or measurement apparatuses
to measure motor function more accurately or comprehensively.
For example, a MIDI keyboard has been used to assess several
characteristics of tapping, such as velocity and dwell time on the
tapping key, during an alternating finger tapping task in Parkinson’s disease patients [36], [37]. While these approaches provide
a more comprehensive characterization of motor function, they
do not elucidate the underlying phenomenon of tapping. These

2168-2194 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

502

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

Fig. 1. Instrumented Halstead–Reitan manual finger tapper. The cover has
been removed to show the internal electronics.

approaches also introduce new protocols that lack historical publications and familiarity. For these reasons, new tests are often
slow to be adopted clinically and it often requires many years
before sufficient validation, understanding, and familiarity lead
to widespread adoption.
To explore the phenomenology underlying tapping, we instrumented the widely used neuropsychological FTT with a
potentiometer to measure the angle of the finger tapping lever,
which is proportional to lever position [27]. We then model
and characterize tapping based on a decomposition of the
recorded tapping movement into six different phases that may be
related to cognition, perception, and motor ability. This permits
researchers to continue using an established test and the normed
results, while benefitting from a more complete characterization
of the subjects’ performance.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Instrumentation
The finger tapper was constructed as an exact replica
of the Reitan Neuropsychology Laboratory manual tapper
(www.reitanlabs.com). A potentiometer was installed on the
shaft of a Veeder-Root brand counter (model 0727235-002).
The wiper arm of the potentiometer was connected to a USB1208FS DAQ (Measurement Computing, Norton, MA, USA)
to sample the voltage at a (user programmable) sampling frequency of 512 Hz. MATLAB R2012a was used to record from
the device and perform subsequent analyses described later. The
voltage measured at the potentiometer is proportional to the angular position of the finger tapping lever, and is converted to
degrees to represent the deflection of the lever from the resting position (the top position of the lever). The length of the
lever is 1 in from the shaft to the tip, and has a maximum arc
length of 45°. A minimum arc length of 40° is required to add
one count to the mechanical counter. The hardware is shown in
Fig. 1. Further details can be found in [38]. We note that the
apparatus itself has no mechanism for stabilizing the palm and
wrist to isolate individual finger motion from other hand or arm

Fig. 2. Finger tapping data (gray line) with the start of each of the phases:
reaction time (IRT; circle), down transition (DT; upside down triangle), down
dwell (DD; triangle), up transition (UT; square), and up dwell (UD; diamond).
Incomplete tap (IT) is not depicted.

motion. Instead, test takers are asked to place their palm flat
against the tapper board and only tap with their finger. They
are further given practice trials in which to demonstrate understanding of the task. Further, the test administrator is trained to
monitor participants during the test and to correct them if they
tap incorrectly [29].
B. Model
Our statistical characterization of tapping is based on decomposing the tapping task into a set of nonoverlapping component
phases of tapping. The model of tapping performance is based
on these phases occurring in a specific order with (idealized)
instantaneous switching times between phases. We then characterize each phase with a set of parameters that represent metrics
of performance (e.g., time intervals) as parametric model of
tapping. The six phases of tapping are as follows.
1) Initial Reaction time (IRT), the time from when the tapping task begins to when tapping starts.
2) Down transition (DT), the time during which the finger
drives the lever from the top to the bottom position.
3) Down dwell (DD), the time during which the lever is fully
depressed.
4) Up transition (UT), the time during which the finger releases the lever and returns to the top position.
5) Up dwell (UD), the time during which the lever has been
fully released.
6) Incomplete tap (IT), the time during which the lever is
either not fully depressed or not fully released.
The normal flow of tapping consists of the following phase transitions: IRT→DT→DD→UT→UD . . . , with
DT→DD→UT→UD→ repeating until the task stops. There
is only one reaction time phase for each trial. Taps are considered incomplete when either the DD or UP phases are skipped,
indicating the task was not performed correctly. Fig. 2 shows a

AUSTIN et al.: STATISTICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE FINGER TAPPING TEST: MODELING, ESTIMATION, AND APPLICATIONS

segment of raw tapping data and the start of different phases (the
phase is considered to last until the beginning of the next phase)
for a participant who performed a 10-s tapping trial. As can be
seen from Fig. 2, partitioning the signal into phases allows determination of the time spent in each phase over the course of a trial.
To characterize the individual component phases of tapping,
we model each by a random variable representing time spent in
that phase of tapping, except for IT. IT is characterized by the
number of occurrences and is treated differently for two reasons.
First, time spent in the IT phase can vary depending on how
many taps in a row are performed incorrectly. Second, this phase
does not always occur in a tapping trial. We also explicitly model
the tapping cycle, TC (a sequence of DT→DD→UT→UD), as
a random variable representing the sum of the durations of time
spent in each of the sequentially performed component phases.
C. Algorithms—Tapping Segmentation
Prior to the statistical characterization, the tapping signal from
each trial must be segmented into the different phases. To do
so, we estimate the start and end of each phase for each tapping
trial, and then, estimate the durations as the time between the
estimated start and end points. This consists of several steps
described in the following.
The segmentation algorithm has several steps. The angular
position signal is represented as sk , with k the sample index.
The algorithm first estimates the upper and lower thresholds
of the device, θU and θL , respectively, from sk . This is done
by finding the most frequently occurring signal value in the
top half (upper threshold) and bottom half (lower threshold)
of the signal range. The analog to digital converter discretizes
sk , so the largest number of samples of the same value occurs
when the tapping lever is at the device top and bottom of the
lever position as shown in Fig. 2. To estimate these points,
a histogram is constructed with number of bins equal to the
number of samples in a finger tapping trial, and identifying the
histogram bin centers corresponding to the largest peak in the
upper half and lower half of the signal range, respectively (using
fewer bins would make it difficult to precisely estimate these two
points with the bin centers). In addition to the upper and lower
thresholds, a noise tolerance θN is calculated as
θN = max (0.018◦ , min(max(sk ) − θU, θL − min(sk ))) (1)
where 0.018° is an empirically chosen level for the minimum
noise threshold (based on tests on two instrumented devices with
two participants performing ten tapping trials). After estimating
the thresholds, each sk potentially belonging to the UD and DD
phases are identified as

UD if sk > θU − θN
sk ∈
(2)
DD if sk < θL + θN .
Any unclassified samples falling between two UD samples
with no DD samples in between that are also separated by less
than 19.5 ms, are classified as UD. An analogous step is performed to search for unclassified DD samples. This smoothing
mitigates classification errors from (2) due to noise, where the
19.5-ms sample was determined empirically from early pilot

503

data from two instrumented tappers (based on tests on two instrumented devices with two participants performing ten tapping
trials). Finally, the start point of each set of points labeled UD
is removed from the set if the tapping signal derivative, s’k > 0
and sk < θU , as this set of conditions corresponds to detecting
the start of the UD phase too early. An analogous set of checks
is used to refine the end points of all UD phases, and start and
end points of the DD phases, ending the labeling step for UD
and DD phases.
To label the remaining phases, we iterate sequentially through
the signal and apply the following rules (ignoring unlabeled
points): 1) if UD is followed by DD, the unlabeled time from
the end of the UD phase to the start of the DD phase is labeled
as DT, 2) if DD is followed by UD, the unlabeled time from the
end of the DD phase to the start of the UD phase is labeled as
UT, 3) the time from the first sample to the first DT phase is
labeled as IRT if no other phase has been labeled in between,
and 4) everything else is labeled as IT. Fig. 2 shows an example
of applying this algorithm to the first second of tapping data from
one trial of tapping. Once the data are partitioned into phases,
the durations of each phase are calculated as the difference in
end time and start times.

D. Algorithms—Session Analysis
Our statistical analysis is based on two additional assumptions. First, we model any changes that occur over the duration
of the trial as linear. This assumption is appropriate because
any changes in duration that occur during a 10-s trial are gradual relative to the variability from tap-to-tap; nonlinear trends
are not apparent and difficult to estimate. Second, we assume
the durations are Gaussian random variables with a potentially
small amount of impulsive noise contamination. The impulsive noise part of the second assumption models incorrectly
segmented phases and phenomena such as attentional lapses,
which occur infrequently and result in isolated instances of uncharacteristically slow or fast phase durations. These outlier
data are identified and removed via an iteratively reweighted
least-squares approach: each set of phase-trial data is robustly
regressed onto time, and data points whose residual from the
regression is greater than 1.5 times the interquartile range of
the residual distribution, are removed. The Normality assumption is partially justified by the prototypical residual plots in
Fig. 3. The time course of durations in each phase and across
trials is modeled using a mixed effects model [39], comprising
a combination of fixed average population effects and random
trial-specific effects
yij = (b + bi ) + t(m + mi ) + εij

(3)

where yij is the jth duration of a phase for the ith tapping
trial, t is time during the trial, and b (offset) and m (slope)
are the fixed effects representing the average tapping behavior
independent of trial number. Each phase is modeled and fit
separately. The trial-specific offset and slope, bi and mi , are
random effects representing trial-specific effects, and are drawn

504

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

TABLE I
LIST OF ALL 29 FINGER TAPPING TEST PARAMETERS (SD
IS STANDARD DEVIATION)
Phase
Tapping
Cycle

Fig. 3. Prototypical residuals from one trial of one subject for phase DT. Histogram of residuals with super imposed Gaussian distribution (left) and normal
Q–Q plot (right) supporting the validity of assuming a Gaussian distribution for
the errors.

Parameters

Description

bt c , m t c , σ μ , t c , σ m , t c ,
σε ,tc ,

Initial duration, slope, SD of
average across trials, SD of slope
across trials, SD of residuals.
Initial duration, slope, SD of
average across trials, SD of slope
across trials, SD of residuals.
Initial duration, slope, SD of
average across trials, SD of slope
across trials, SD of residuals.
Initial duration, slope, SD of
average across trials, SD of slope
across trials, SD of residuals.
Initial duration, slope, SD of
average across trials, SD of slope
across trials, SD of residual.
Mean, SD across trials.
Mean, SD across trials.

DT

bD T , m D T , σμ , D T ,
σm , D T , σε , D T

DD

bD D , m D D , σμ , D D ,
σm , D D , σε , D D

UT

bU T , m U T , σμ , U T ,
σm , U T , σε , U T

UD

bU D , m U D , σμ , U D ,
σm , U D , σε , U D

IRT
IT

μIRT , σIRT
μIT , σIT

and σε . Each has an intuitive physical interpretation: b represents the average phase duration at the beginning of a trial, m
represents change in phase duration over the period of a single
trial, σb represents trial-to-trial variability in starting duration,
σm represents trial-to-trial variability in change over the period
of a single trial, and σε represents tap-to-tap variability (as each
phase happens once per tap). In addition, we also calculate the
average and standard deviation of the IRT phase, μIRT and σIRT ,
which serves as a measure of central processing speed and the
average and standard deviation of the number of incomplete
taps, μIT and σIT , which serves to measure adherence to the
task. Altogether, a total of 29 parameters characterize a set of
tapping trials for a subject and are summarized in Table I.
III. EXAMPLE

Fig. 4. Raw data (circles) and best fit lines (solid traces) for tapping cycle
duration over four finger tapping trials (trial number represented by shades of
gray) as well as the population line (“fixed effect line;” thick black).

from a Gaussian distribution

   2

0
σb
bi
∼N
,
0
mi
σm b

σbm
2
σm


.

(4)

The noise component
εij ∼ N (0, σε2 )

(5)

is also drawn from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution. The statistical model described by (3) can then be estimated via maximum
likelihood or other methods [39]. An example of raw tapping cycle data and the linear fits described by (3) from one participant
is shown in Fig. 4.
The parameters estimated from the model that characterizes
each phase of tapping and the tapping cycle are b, m, σb , σm ,

One practical application of the proposed characterization is
that it allows for substantially more precise inferences about
tapping than can be made using the average number of taps,
which is the current clinical standard. To demonstrate this, we
performed a small pilot study to investigate fatigue during tapping and the effects of an increased cognitive load on tapping.
Specifically, we hypothesized that 1) participants fatigue during
tapping, 2) increasing cognitive demands by a dual task results
in slower tapping and slower task initiation, and 3) an increased
cognitive load impacts the dwell phases of tapping and not the
transition phases. This last hypothesis is driven by a face-validity
argument. In particular, both dwell durations (DD and UD) appear to be where cognition would play the largest role during
the tapping cycle because the dwell time consists of sensing
the top/bottom of the tapping lever and initiating a motor command to move the finger in the opposite direction. Conversely,
the transition phases (UT and DT) appear to be mostly simple
motor functions: driving/releasing the lever is done via a simple
flexion/extension of the finger. We discuss specific statistical
tests below that test each of these research hypotheses.
Eleven students and staff were recruited from the Oregon
Health & Science University (Portland, OR, USA) to perform

AUSTIN et al.: STATISTICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE FINGER TAPPING TEST: MODELING, ESTIMATION, AND APPLICATIONS

a series of eight tapping trials. The mean subject age was
32.2 years (SD = 6.5 years), five were female, and nine were
right handed. This study was approved by the OHSU institutional review board (IRB#8814). Four of eight trials required
subjects to tap and the other four required the subjects to perform a dual task. During dual task, the subjects were asked
to simultaneously count backwards by seven from a number
randomly selected between 100 and 110 while tapping. The
backwards counting is a variant of the commonly used “serialsevens” task, which is considered to be a measure of attention
[40]. In the dual-task condition, we seek to reduce the cognitive
resources available for the tapping task, which may simulate
deficits present in patient populations. Subjects performed the
tasks in alternating order with 75 s of rest between each trial
to mitigate across-trial fatigue. Subjects were instructed to tap
as quickly as possible when tapping and to count backwards as
quickly and accurately as possible during dual-task trials. The
entire experiment took approximately 10 min per subject.
We also recorded the number of taps completed in each trial
as is done during clinical administration of this test, but did not
record the counting performance during dual task. Data from one
subject were completely excluded for not following instructions
to tap as fast as possible. Two subjects had their fourth trial of
each condition excluded for late starts. This left 38 trials each of
tapping only and dual task across ten subjects. On average, 2.9
outliers were removed per phase and per trial out of an average
of 39 phase durations per trial.
We then characterized tapping for each trial as described
earlier. For the three research hypotheses, we used count data
recorded from the manual tapper and various parameters from
the statistical characterization of tapping as discussed below.
The statistical tests used to test our research hypotheses are ttests if the data are approximately normally distributed (assessed
via Lilliefors’ test for normality and inspection of histograms),
and Wilcoxon signed rank tests [41] otherwise. Both these tests
assess whether there is a difference in central tendency between groups or when compared to 0. Statistical significance
is assessed at the 5% level. We did not apply a correction for
multiple comparisons as this is a pilot experiment with a limited
number of subjects. We have reported p-values for all tests in
Table II, which the reader may compare against the Bonferroni
corrected value (5% level) for nine tests of 0.0056, if desired.
We first tested the hypothesis that subjects slow during tapping trials, which cannot be determined by clinical test scoring.
We tested our hypothesis by determining whether the mean
slope of the fixed effects for tapping, mtc , across subjects was
greater than 0 using a one-sided t-test. We tested tapping only
and dual-task conditions separately, and found that in both cases
the slope was positive and significantly different than 0, indicating slowing. We also found a more robust slowing during dual
task, as shown in Table II (tests 1 and 2).
Next, we tested the hypothesis that increased cognitive load
modulates tapping by slowing both reaction time and tapping
speed. We first tested whether the clinical score was lower (indicating slower tapping) under dual-task condition than during
tapping only. We used a one-sided paired t-test, and found that
the average number of taps recorded was 3.6 fewer during the

505

TABLE II
RESULTS OF HYPOTHESIS TESTING: TESTS 1–5 ARE PAIRED t-TESTS; 6–9 ARE
PAIRED SIGNED RANK TESTS
Hypothesis

1) Subjects fatigue
within tapping trials.
2) Subjects fatigue
within dual task
trials.
3) FTT score is lower
in dual task.
4) Tapping cycle is
slower in dual task.
5) IRT is slower in
dual task.
6) DD is slower in
dual task.
7) UD is slower in
dual task.
8) DT is slower in
dual task
9) UT is slower in
dual task

Effect
size

Standard
error

Degrees
of
freedom

Test
Stat

p value

2.2 ms/s

0.68

9

3.25

0.00500

3.0 ms/s

0.45

9

6.7

0.00004

−3.6

0.86

9

−4.14

0.00130

10.6 ms

5.04

9

2.09

0.03300

302 ms

79.48

9

3.8

0.00200

7.49 ms

-

-

15

0.11621

7.74 ms

-

-

15

0.11621

−0.55 ms

-

-

27

0.50000

0.42 ms

-

-

24

0.38477

dual-task condition. This difference could have been caused by
slower reaction time, slower tapping speed, or both. To test
our research hypothesis, we tested (statistically) both the difference in initial reaction time, μIRT , and the difference in average tapping cycle speed, defined as the best-fit line midpoint of
btc + 5mtc , between task conditions. Both tests were conducted
using one-sided, paired t-tests. We found both components of
tapping were significantly slower during dual task, which indicates that the slowing is due to both slower task initiation and
slower average tapping as hypothesized.
The last research hypothesis we made regarding the effect
of increased cognitive load on tapping was that this would differentially effect some of the phases of tapping. To test this
“dwell-duration” hypothesis, we tested (statistically) whether
the initial values of the dwell phases, bDD and bUD , were slower
in dual task compared to tapping only. We completed analogous
tests for bDT and bUT . All four tests were done using a paired
one-sided signed rank test. We found that, while not reaching
significance (p = 0.116 for both), the dwell durations showed
a trend toward slowing, while the transition times appeared not
to change, as shown in Table II (tests 6–9). The lack of significance for dwell durations was likely due to the small number of
subjects used in this pilot study and the loss of statistical power
by using a nonparametric test.
IV. DISCUSSION
The tapping characterization consists of 29 parameters, which
is large compared to the single count outcome currently used
clinically from the same test. However, each of the parameters
has a clear physical interpretation covering a different aspect
of the tapping process, making each parameter potentially useful in clinical diagnosis or research investigations. Further, not
all parameters need to be used or even estimated in every investigation. For example, studies of fatigue may only require

506

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH 2015

estimation of the slopes. The variety of parameters that can be
used to characterize the tapping is precisely the advantage of
the proposed approach over a single clinical score. There are
several outcomes that have been linked to lower tapping scores
spanning the range from cognitive deficits to adverse health
outcomes [1]–[9]. However, it is unclear what aspect of tapping is causing the lower scores in each case, or which is/are
most sensitive to cognitive decline or poor health outcomes. Our
characterization of tapping overcomes this by explicitly allowing investigators to study different aspects of tapping that are
specific to patient populations or interventions while mitigating
confounds such as fatigue [32]. Further, our characterization of
tapping includes parameters describing trial-to-trial and tap-totap variability, which may be more sensitive to detecting cognitive change [30], [31] than absolute measures, such as average
number of taps.
The model described by (3) is very general and can be changed
to account for phenomena not included here that may be important in certain cases. For example, our experimental paradigm
gives fixed and lengthy rest periods between tapping trials in a
cohort of healthy adults. As a result, there is no reason to expect
slowing over consecutive trials. However, in certain populations, this may be an important aspect of the model, especially
in populations who may fatigue and not fully recover before
consecutive tapping trials. This systematic effect of trial order
can be added to the model by adding additional terms, such
as slopes and/or offsets, to account for this ordering. In a test
scheme with little to no rest between trials, we may propose that
the model should be
yij = (b + bi + ic) + t(m + mi + id) + εij

(6)

where the parameter c represents an offset that is trial dependent and d represents a slope that is trial dependent. Other
phenomena not considered here may also be included by adding
parameters to (3) or deriving additional measurements from the
raw tapping data.
In addition to the advantages of the proposed tapping characterization, there are also some shortcomings. First, the proposed
methodology is more expensive due to the additional instrumentation and computer that are required to collect the data. Second,
the distributional assumptions for the mixed effects model must
be satisfied for the model to give meaningful estimates of the
29 parameters. Third, special software is required to analyze the
data. Fourth, only healthy subjects were used in the pilot study
and the pilot study used data from only ten participants. Fifth,
the pilot study only tested a few key hypotheses using a subset
of the proposed parameters.
In general, future studies are needed to identify which parameters may be of the most use clinically and for research
purposes, including studies in patient populations and controls,
and reliability studies that further elucidate the repeatability and
precision of each of the parameters. Indeed, it may turn out that
only some of the 29 parameters are useful clinically, or that several of the parameters may be correlated to the total score or each
other, thus reducing the clinical usefulness of some parameters.
We suggest two main directions for future studies that will help
characterize the value of the proposed methodology. First, we

propose replicating the pilot study in a larger cohort to determine
whether the trend toward slowing in the dwell phases of tapping
during the pilot study becomes significant with a larger sample size. This would help determine whether the dwell phases
of tapping are truly where the most cognitive resources are recruited during tapping. A similar experiment testing whether
the transition phases are perturbed by a secondary motor task
would help validate the conjecture that the transition phases
of tapping appear to be mostly motoric. Combined, these proposed studies may show that the decomposition of tapping as
described induces a partition of the underlying cognitive and
motor resources as the face validity argument (made in the first
paragraph of Section III, previously) suggests.
The second proposed line of research would determine
whether certain phases of tapping may be more sensitive
to disease states than the overall score. In particular, using
different groups of patients with distinct deficits known to
have reduced performance on the FTT (e.g., some with known
cognitive and some with known motor decline) and controls
in a single study that compares classification into the healthy
or disease groups would help understand whether and to
what extent the additional parameters proposed here provide
increased diagnostic sensitivity. Additionally, this type of study
would allow identification of which of the parameters may be
the most useful for clinical diagnosis.
V. SUMMARY
In this paper, we present a novel adaptation of the Halstead–
Reitan FTT. This approach is based on decomposing a tapping
signal recorded from an instrumented manual tapper into different, nonoverlapping phases that may be related to different
aspects of cognitive and motor function. We further outlined the
benefits and shortcomings of the proposed approach with specific emphasis on the ways in which the approach can be used
to make inferences that cannot be made by the current clinical
testing methodology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Hunt for the design and
fabrication of the manual tapper, and the students and staff at
the Oregon Health & Science University who participated in the
experiment.
REFERENCES
[1] O. Beauchet, G. Allali, G. Berrut, C. Hommet, V. Dubost, and F. Assal,
“Gait analysis in demented subjects: Interests and perspectives,” Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat, vol. 4, pp. 155–160, 2008.
[2] R. Camicioli, D. Howieson, B. Oken, G. Sexton, and J. Kaye, “Motor
slowing precedes cognitive impairment in the oldest old,” Neurology,
vol. 50, pp. 1496–1498, 1998.
[3] R. Camicioli, Y. Wang, C. Powell, A. Mitnitski, and K. Rockwood, “Gait
and posture impairment, parkinsonism and cognitive decline in older people,” J. Neural Transm., vol. 114, pp. 1355–1361, 2007.
[4] R. Shigematsu, T. Rantanen, P. Saari, R. Sakari-Rantala, M. Kauppinen,
S. Sipila, and E. Heikkinen, “Motor speed and lower extremity strength
as predictors of fall-related bone fractures in elderly individuals,” Aging
Clin. Exp. Res., vol. 18, pp. 320–324, 2006.

AUSTIN et al.: STATISTICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE FINGER TAPPING TEST: MODELING, ESTIMATION, AND APPLICATIONS

[5] S. Studenski, S. Perera, D. Wallace, J. M. Chandler, P. W. Duncan,
E. Rooney, M. Fox, and J. M. Guralnik, “Physical performance measures in the clinical setting,” J. Amer. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 51, pp. 314–22,
2003.
[6] A. L. Fitzpatrick, C. K. Buchanan, R. L. Nahin, S. T. Dekosky,
H. H. Atkinson, M. C. Carlson, and J. D. Williamson, “Associations of
gait speed and other measures of physical function with cognition in a
healthy cohort of elderly persons,” J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci.,
vol. 62, pp. 1244–51, 2007.
[7] R. Holtzer, J. Verghese, X. Xue, and R. B. Lipton, “Cognitive processes
related to gait velocity: Results from the Einstein aging study,” Neuropsychology, vol. 20, pp. 215–223, 2006.
[8] J. M. Guralnik, L. Ferrucci, C. F. Pieper, S. G. Leveille, K. S. Markides,
G. V. Ostir, S. Studenski, L. F. Berkman, and R. B. Wallace, “Lower
extremity function and subsequent disability: Consistency across studies,
predictive models, and value of gait speed alone compared with the short
physical performance battery,” J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci., vol. 55,
pp. M221–M231, 2000.
[9] J. M. Guralnik, L. Ferrucci, E. M. Simonsick, M. E. Salive, and
R. B. Wallace, “Lower-extremity function in persons over the age of
70 years as a predictor of subsequent disability,” N Engl. J. Med., vol. 332,
pp. 556–561, 1995.
[10] A. Kluger, J. G. Gianutsos, J. Golomb, S. H. Ferris, A. E. George,
E. Franssen, and B. Reisberg, “Patterns of motor impairement in normal
aging, mild cognitive decline, and early Alzheimer’s disease,” J. Gerontol.
B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci., vol. 52, pp. P28–P39, 1997.
[11] A. Kluger, J. G. Gianutsos, J. Golomb, S. H. Ferris, and B. Reisberg, “Motor/psychomotor dysfunction in normal aging, mild cognitive decline, and
early Alzheimer’s disease: Diagnostic and differential diagnostic features,”
Int. Psychogeriatr., vol. 9, pp. 307–316, 1997.
[12] P. J. Massman, and R. S. Doody, “Hemispheric asymmetry in Alzheimer’s
disease is apparent in motor functioning,” J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol.,
vol. 18, pp. 110–121, 1996.
[13] M. Montero-Odasso, H. Bergman, N. A. Phillips, C. H. Wong,
N. Sourial, and H. Chertkow, “Dual-tasking and gait in people with mild cognitive impairment. The effect of working memory,” BMC Geriatr., vol. 9, p. 41, (2009). [Online]. Available:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcgeriatr/about
[14] M. Montero-Odasso, A. Casas, K. T. Hansen, P. Bilski, I. Gutmanis,
J. L. Wells, and M. J. Borrie, “Quantitative gait analysis under dualtask in older people with mild cognitive impairment: A reliability
study,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 6, p. 35, (2009). [Online]. Available:
http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/about
[15] J. Verrel, M. Lovden, M. Schellenbach, S. Schaefer, and U. Lindenberger,
“Interacting effects of cognitive load and adult age on the regularity of
whole-body motion during treadmill walking,” Psychol. Aging, vol. 24,
pp. 75–81, 2009.
[16] S. R. Muir, R. D. Jones, J. H. Andreae, and I. M. Donaldson, “Measurement and analysis of single and multiple finger tapping in normal and
Parkinsonian subjects,” Parkinsonism Relat. Disord., vol. 1, pp. 89–96,
1995.
[17] D. J. O’Boyle, J. S. Freeman, and F. W. Cody, “The accuracy and precision
of timing of self-paced, repetitive movements in subjects with Parkinson’s
disease,” Brain, vol. 119, pp. 51–70, 1996.
[18] M. Yokoe, R. Okuno, T. Hamasaki, Y. Kurachi, K. Akazawa, and
S. Sakoda, “Opening velocity, a novel parameter, for finger tapping test in
patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Parkinsonism. Relat. Disord., vol. 15,
pp. 440–444, 2009.
[19] A. Jobbagy, P. Harcos, R. Karoly, and G. Fazekas, “Analysis of fingertapping movement,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 141, pp. 29–39, 2005.
[20] G. Muller, S. Weisbrod, and F. Klingberg, “Finger tapping frequency and
accuracy are decreased in early stage primary degenerative dementia,”
Dementia, vol. 2, pp. 169–172, 1991.
[21] B. R. Ott, S. A. Ellias, and M. C. Lannon, “Quantitative assessment of
movement in Alzheimer’s disease,” J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol., vol. 8,
pp. 71–75, 1995.
[22] J. S. Wefel, B. D. Hoyt, and P. J. Massma, “Neuropsychological functioning in depressed versus nondepressed participants with Alzheimer’s
disease,” Clin. Neuropsychol., vol. 13, pp. 249–257, 1999.

507

[23] S. Kemper, R. E. Herman, and C. H. Lian, “The costs of doing two things
at once for young and older adults: Talking while walking, finger tapping,
and ignoring speech or noise,” Psychol. Aging, vol. 18, pp. 181–192,
2003.
[24] M. Crossley and M. Hiscock, “Age-related differences in concurrenttask performance of normal adults: Evidence for a decline in processing
resources,” Psychol. Aging, vol. 7, pp. 499–506, 1992.
[25] M. Crossley, M. Hiscock, and J. B. Foreman, “Dual-task performance
in early stage dementia: Differential effects for automatized and effortful
processing,” J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol., vol. 26, pp. 332–46, 2004.
[26] T. Horowitz, P. Schatz, and D. Chute, “Trends in neuropsychological test
usage,” Archives Clin. Neuropsychol., vol. 12, pp. 338–339, 1997.
[27] W. Camara, J. Nathan, and A. Puente, “Psychological test usage: Implications in professional psychology,” Prof. Psychol., Res. Practice, vol. 31,
pp. 141–154, 2000.
[28] R. M. Reitan, Manual for Administration of Neuropsychological Test Batteries for Adults and Children. Tucson, AZ, USA: Reitan Neuropsychology Lab., 1979.
[29] E. Strauss, E. M. S. Sherman, and O. Spreen, A Compendium of Neuropsychological Tests: Administration, Norms, and Commentary, 3rd ed.
London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2006.
[30] A. A. Bielak, D. F. Hultsch, E. Strauss, S. W. Macdonald, and M. A. Hunter,
“Intraindividual variability in reaction time predicts cognitive outcomes
5 years later,” Neuropsychology, vol. 24, pp. 731–741, 2010.
[31] A. A. Bielak, D. F. Hultsch, E. Strauss, S. W. MacDonald, and
M. A. Hunter, “Intraindividual variability is related to cognitive change
in older adults: Evidence for within-person coupling,” Psychol. Aging,
vol. 25, pp. 575–86, 2010.
[32] D. Austin, H. Jimison, T. Hayes, N. Mattek, J. Kaye, and M. Pavel,
“Measuring motor speed through typing: A surrogate for the finger tapping
test,” Behav. Res. Methods, vol. 43, pp. 903–909, 2011.
[33] J. Kaye, B. S. Oken, D. B. Howieson, J. Howieson, L. A. Holm, and
K. Dennison, “Neurologic evaluation of the optimally healthy oldest old,”
Arch. Neurol., vol. 51, pp. 1205–11, 1994.
[34] G. P. Prigatano, and S. R. Borgaro, “Qualitative features of finger movement during the Halstead finger oscillation test following traumatic brain
injury,” J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc., vol. 9, pp. 128–133, 2003.
[35] I. Shimoyama, T. Ninchoji, and K. Uemura, “The finger-tapping test. A
quantitative analysis,” Arch. Neurol., vol. 47, pp. 681–684, 1990.
[36] H. M. Bronte-Stewart, L. Ding, C. Alexander, Y. Zhou, and G. P. Moore,
“Quantitative digitography (QDG): A sensitive measure of digital motor control in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease,” Mov. Disord., vol. 15,
pp. 36–47, 2000.
[37] A. L. Taylor Tavares, G. S. Jefferis, M. Koop, B. C. Hill, T. Hastie, G.
Heit, and H. M. Bronte-Stewart, “Quantitative measurements of alternating finger tapping in Parkinson’s disease correlate with UPDRS motor
disability and reveal the improvement in fine motor control from medication and deep brain stimulation,” Mov. Disord., vol. 20, pp. 1286–1298,
2005.
[38] D. Austin, J. Petersen, H. Jimison, and M. Pavel, “A state-space model
for finger tapping with applications to cognitive inference,” in Proc. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2012, pp. 21–24.
[39] J. Singer and J. Willet, Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis: Modeling Change and Event Occurrence. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press,
2003.
[40] J. H. Banos, and L. M. Franklin, “Factor structure of the mini-mental state
examination in adult psychiatric inpatients,” Psychol. Assess., vol. 14,
pp. 397–400, 2002.
[41] M. Hollander and D. Wolfe, Nonparametric Statistical Methods, 2 ed.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1999.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

