76

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Spatial Coherence Profiles of Ictal High-Frequency
Oscillations Correspond to Those of Interictal
Low-Frequency Oscillations in the ECoG
of Epileptic Patients
Marija Cotic∗ , Yotin Chinvarun, Martin del Campo, Peter L. Carlen, and Berj L. Bardakjian, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: We have previously demonstrated that the coherence of high-frequency oscillations (HFOs; 80–300 Hz) increased during extratemporal lobe seizures in a consistent and
spatially focused electrode cluster. In this study, we have investigated the relationship between cohered HFO intracranial EEG
(iEEG) activity with that of slower low-frequency oscillations
(LFOs; <80 Hz). Methods: We applied wavelet phase coherence
analysis to the iEEGs of patients with intractable extratemporal
lobe epilepsy (ETLE). Results: It was observed that areas on the implanted patient subdural grids, which exhibited strong ictal HFO
coherence were similar to tissue regions displaying strong interictal LFO coherence in the 5–12 Hz frequency range, relative to
all other electrodes. A positive surgical outcome was correlated
with having the clinically marked seizure onset zone(s) in close
proximity to HFO/LFO coherence highlighted regions of interest
(ROIs). Conclusion: Recent studies have suggested that LFOs (in
the 8–12 Hz frequency range) play an important role in controlling cortical excitability, by exerting an inhibitory effect on cortical
processing, and that the presence of strong theta activity (4–8 Hz)
in awake adults is suggestive of abnormal and/or pathological activity. We speculate that the overlapping spatial regions exhibiting
increased coherence in both ictal HFOs and interictal LFOs identified local abnormalities that underlie epileptogenic networks. Significance: Whereas it is worthwhile to note that the small patient
group (n = 7) studied here, somewhat limits the clinical significance of our study, the results presented here suggest targeting
HFO activity in the 80–300 Hz frequency range and/or interictal LFO activity in the 5–12 Hz frequency range, when defining
seizure-related ROIs in the iEEGs of patients with ETLE.
Index Terms—Epilepsy, high-frequency oscillations (HFOs),
low-frequency oscillations (LFOs), phase coherence.

Manuscript received May 1, 2014; revised December 16, 2014; accepted
December 19, 2014. Date of publication December 19, 2014; date of current
version December 17, 2015. This work was supported by the Canadian Institute
of Health Research, and by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Cotic is with the Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 2C5, Canada (e-mail: marija.cotic@mail.utoronto.ca).
Y. Chinvarun is with the Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Phramongkutklao
Hospital.
M. del Campo is with the Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Toronto Western
Hospital.
P. L. Carlen is with the Toronto Western Research Institute.
B. L. Bardakjian is with the Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2386791

I. INTRODUCTION
N clinical settings, electroencephalograms (EEGs) are typically acquired at low-sampling frequencies (as low as
200 Hz), which is not conducive to the analysis of fast EEG
signal components. Consequently, a large amount of the literature, with regards to the interactions of neuronal electrical
oscillations, has focused on slower rhythms (i.e., <100 Hz).
Coordinated neuronal activity has been observed within and
across brain areas, during both physiological and pathological
processes [1]–[4]. Physiologically entrained oscillations have
been proposed to be involved, during both sleep and wakefulness, in memory, perception and attention processes, as well as
during the communication between brain regions [5]–[8]. In addition, correlations between neuronal synchrony and pathological brain states have been observed in individuals with impaired
cognition in several neurological disorders, including epilepsy
[1], [4], [9].
Several studies have investigated the coherence of slower
rhythms (<100 Hz) during seizures in epileptic patients, demonstrating a correlation between enhanced coherence and the ictal
state [1], [10]–[12]. A subset of coherence studies have also analyzed low-frequency activity during the interictal EEG, demonstrating both elevated [11], [13], [14], and reduced [15] coherence, in select frequency bands, during activity separate from
epileptiform disturbances.
Whereas numerous groups have explored the coherence
of low-frequency activity, in relation to epilepsy, little is
known about the relationship between low-frequency oscillations (LFOs; <80 Hz) and high-frequency oscillations (HFOs;
80–500 Hz). HFOs have only recently been recorded in the
intracranial EEG (iEEG) of epilepsy patients [16], [17] and several groups have proposed high-frequency activity to be a probable biomarker of epileptogenicity [18], [19]. New studies have
also suggested that atypical LFO-HFO interactions characterize
epileptic tissue [20]–[24].
Given that several studies have thoroughly explored coherence in the epileptic brain, in relation to slow [1], [10]–[15]
rhythms, and only recently in faster rhythms [25], [26], the focus of this study is the investigation of the relationship between
the spatiotemporal coherence patterns of LFOs and HFOs during interictal and ictal activity and their correlation with the
epileptogenic zone. In this study, we applied a wavelet phase coherence (WPC) analysis to examine the coordinated interactions

I

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

COTIC et al.: SPATIAL COHERENCE PROFILES OF ICTAL HIGH-FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS

77

TABLE I
PATIENT CLINICAL INFORMATION
Patient

Age/Sex

Epilepsy
Duration
(years)

MRI Findings

Electrode Location

Type of Surgery

Pathology

Engel Outcome

1

36/F

20

Abnormal intensity
lesion, perisylvian

Left: FT

–

No resection

2
3

16/M
30/M

4
16

Right: DF
Right: NT, F

Normal
Atypical neuron with
reactive gliosis

Class IV
Class II

4

28/M

16

Cortical dysplasia
Hippocampal
atrophy; dilated
perisylvian
Nonlesional

No resection (proximity
to functional cortex;
motor)
R F lesionectomy
R NT-F corticectomy

Cortical
micro-dysgenesis

Class III

5

56/F

8

Nonlesional

Left: P

L F-T corticectomy
(incomplete
resection-proximity to
functional cortex; motor)
L P corticectomy

Class II

6

36/F

18

Nonlesional

Left: O, P, T

P O corticectomy

7

21/M

10

Nonlesional

Left: F

Anterior frontal
lobectomy

Cortical
micro-dysgenesis
Cortical
microdysgenesis,
atypical neuron with
reactive gliosis
Cortical dysplasia
type IA

Left: FT

Class I

Class I

L: left, R: right, DF: dorsolateral frontal, F: frontal, FT: frontotemporal, NT: neocortical temporal, O: occipital, P: parietal, T: temporal

TABLE II
SUPRATHRESHOLD INTERICTAL ELECTRODES FOR ALL
PATIENTS THRESHOLD = μ + 5σ

of LFOs and HFOs during seizure and nonseizure activity in the
iEEG of patients with extratemporal lobe epilepsy (ETLE).
II. PATIENT SELECTION AND DATA ACQUISITION
We recently reported our findings regarding the increase of
ictal HFO coherence in spatially focused electrode clusters in
patients with ETLE [25], [26]. We selected the same group of
patients for this study (with the addition of two new patients),
to extend our investigation into the coherence profiles of slower
rhythms during ictal and interictal activity. We retrospectively
analyzed the iEEG data of patients who underwent intracranial
epilepsy monitoring conducted by the Thailand Comprehensive
Epilepsy Program, at the Phramongkutklao Hospital (Bangkok,
Thailand). iEEG data were collected from seven patients with
intractable ETLE. All patients underwent surgery for the placement of intracranial subdural grids (electrocorticogram; ECoG)
to map their respective seizure foci. Subdural electrodes grids
were configured from 8 × 8 electrodes for a total of 64 contacts (PMT, Chanhassen, MN, USA.), and placed directly on
the surface of the cortex. Electrode contacts possessed a diameter of 3 mm and an interelectrode distance of 10 mm (center to
center). Patient clinical information is summarized in Table I.
The institutional review board of the Phramongkutklao Hospital approved the study protocol and all patients gave informed
consent.
Digitized iEEG signals were sampled at 200 and 2000 Hz
(Stellate Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada). All recordings were
referenced to electrodes located behind the ears (i.e., linked
mastoids), and a ground electrode placed on the forehead. The
64-contact iEEG recordings studied here were reformatted offline in a bipolar arrangement in order to diminish the noise and
artifacts. The bipolar reformatting consisted of taking the difference between pairs of neighboring electrodes; thereby, reducing
the number of channels for analysis to 32. Electrodes possessing
persistent artifacts were excluded from study. Electrical noise,

Patient

Segment 1

Segment 2

Segment 3

Segment 4

1

1, 6, 9, 10,
13
20, 24, 28,
32
26, 28, 30,
32
11, 15

6, 10

–

–

20, 24, 28,
32
26, 28, 30,
32
11, 15

20, 24, 28,
32
–

–

11, 15

–

–

11, 12, 15,
16
–

11, 13, 14,
15, 26, 27,
30, 31
13, 17

16, 20, 27,
31

2
3
4
5

6

7

7, 11, 12,
15, 19, 23,
27, 31
3, 7, 11, 13,
14, 15, 18,
22, 26, 30
13, 15, 17,
19

–

–

13, 17

mains interference, and harmonics, were removed using finite
impulse response notch filtering.
iEEGs were recorded continuously, for long periods, during
the presurgical planning period. The iEEG data were reviewed
and segmented offline by the treating neurologist. Analyzed
iEEG data consisted of selected segments of seizure and nonseizure recordings from each patient. Seizure segments were
comprised of a seizure episode, as well as (on average) 1 min
of iEEG leading up to and following the seizure, to allow for
the study of iEEG activity immediately preceding and following
seizures. Interictal activity was recorded during periods when
patients 1) did not experience clinical seizures and 2) they were
at rest and/or undergoing minimal movement during the analyzed interictal iEEG activity. All iEEG data (for all patients)
were sampled at 2000 Hz except for interictal segments 2 and 3
from patient 2 and segments 1 and 2 from patient 3 (Table II),

78

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE III
SEIZURES ONSET ZONES

over the range [−π, π] as
φ(t) = arctan

Patient
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

SOZs Neurologist A

SOZs Neurologist B

22, 23, 30, 31
17–19, 34, 35,41, 42
46–48
34–37, 43, 50, 52–54, 57–59
15, 16, 23, 24
1–4, 49–51, 57, 58
19, 26–32, 33–40, 42–45

1, 2
32, 55–56, 62–64
40, 47–48, 54–55
35–36, 40, 43–44, 58
undefined
1–4, 49–51, 57, 58
19, 20, 30, 31, 39, 40

which were sampled at 200 Hz. These iEEG data, sampled
at 200 Hz, were included for patients 2 and 3 so as to allow for additional interictal epochs for low-frequency WPC
analysis.
III. CLASSIFICATION OF SOZS AND SURGICAL OUTCOME
The recorded iEEG data were independently reviewed offline
by two neurologists (neurologists A and B, Table III, Fig. 6)
to clinically delineate the SOZs for all patients. SOZ identification (performed by both neurologists) was completed separately from the algorithms used in this study. iEEG seizure
onset zone(s) were defined as the contact(s) presenting with the
earliest ictal discharges defined by sustained rhythmic and/or
sharp activities accompanied by stereotypical clinical seizures.
In addition, neurologist B was blinded to all clinical information
available from the presurgical planning phase.
Six of the seven patients studied undertook epilepsy surgery.
Brain tissue resection was limited to the areas subjacent to electrodes located in the electrographically defined SOZs (according
to the SOZs defined by neurologist A). The algorithms applied
in this study were not used for surgical planning. Patient 1 did
not undergo surgery due to the close proximity of the SOZ to
eloquent cortex. Patient 4 underwent a limited resection as a
portion of the SOZ was also in close proximity to eloquent
cortex (see Table I). Each patient’s surgical outcome was categorized according to Engel’s classification [27] as described
in Table I: 1) class 1: free, 2) class 2: rare disabling seizures,
3) class 3: worthwhile improvement, and 4) class 4: no worthwhile improvement.
IV. ALGORITHMS
A. Wavelet Phase Coherence
Phase coherence allows for the separation of phase components from amplitude for a given frequency or frequency
range, when measuring the relations between two signals. The
method for obtaining a phase coherence measure involves the
estimation of the instantaneous phases of electrical brain signals
followed by a statistical method for quantifying the degree of
phase locking [11], [28]. The original real-valued signals may
be transformed into complex-valued signals by convolution with
a complex wavelet [29]. For an arbitrary complex-valued signal
x(t) = y(t) + iỹ(t), the instantaneous phase angle is computed

ỹ(t)
y(t)

(1)

and the relative phase difference between two signals over the
same range is expressed by the relationship [11], [30]
Δφ(t) = arctan

ỹ1 (t)y2 (t) − y1 (t)ỹ2 (t)
.
y1 (t)y2 (t) + ỹ1 (t)ỹ2 (t)

(2)

Therefore, the relative phase difference between the complex
wavelet coefficients of two signals W1 (s, τ ) and W2 (s, τ ), for
different scales s and time shifts τ can be written as follows for
s = sm :
Δφ(sm , τ ) =
arctan

w̃1 (sm , τ )w2 (sm , τ ) − w1 (sm , τ )w̃2 (sm , τ )
. (3)
w1 (sm , τ )w2 (sm , τ ) − w̃1 (sm , τ )w̃2 (sm , τ )

As the wavelet transform provides a measure of the correlation between the original signal and the wavelet functions, over
time and frequency, the phase relationship between the wavelet
coefficients of two separate signals, for a given scale, corresponds to the phase relationship between the two signals for
the frequency represented by that given scale. Accordingly, the
relative WPC between two signals for a given scale (frequency)
s and time segment centered at time t = tk , and for sampling
period Δt, is obtained as follows:
ρ(sm , Δτn ) = |exp (iΔφ (sm , Δτn ))|




k +N /2



1
= 
exp(iΔφ(sm , jΔt)) . (4)
 (N + 1)

j =k −N /2

The relative phase coherence varies between 0 (independent
signals) and 1 (constant phase lag between two signals). WPC
was calculated for frequencies between 1–400 Hz at a resolution
of 1 Hz, using the complex Morlet wavelet. A moving window
of (1/f)∗ 10 s duration was applied to each iEEG segment, where
f is equal to the current frequency of interest. The window size
was chosen large enough to contain several signal oscillations,
yet brief enough to reduce smoothing. All possible electrode
pairings were applied, resulting in a WPC matrix representing
coherence, as a frequency–time distribution, for each electrode
pairing.
B. Surrogate Test Estimation
When analyzing neurophysiological data, a statistical analysis can be performed to infer the significance level or confidence
limits of the analysis, so as to distinguish physiological interactions from random coincidence. A common approach involves
the generation of a chance distribution, derived from surrogate time series sharing the statistical properties of the original
data under examination. In order to evaluate the significance of
the WPC profiles generated, particularly for higher frequencies,
we performed surrogate data tests. Phase-randomized surrogate
signals were generated using the iterated amplitude adjusted
Fourier transform method [31]. The results presented in Fig. 1

COTIC et al.: SPATIAL COHERENCE PROFILES OF ICTAL HIGH-FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS

Fig. 1. Evaluation of WPC with surrogate test estimation. For a given pairing
of two iEEG signals Ea and Eb, we generated 200 new surrogate signals for
Eb. For each surrogate signal, Ebi (i = 1:200), we measured the WPC between
Ea and Ebi for several time windows and across frequency scales. These 200
WPC profiles were used to estimate the significance of the WPC between the
original signals Ea and Eb, by calculating the proportion of surrogate WPC
values higher than the original WPC values between Ea and Eb (across time and
frequency). If the percentage of surrogate WPC values higher than the original
WPC (between Ea and Eb) was less than 5% (i.e., 10/200), these WPC value was
deemed significant. Only the phase coherence values that satisfied the indicated
significance level were plotted. One pairing from four patients are shown. All
four pairings demonstrated significant coherence at fast frequencies during the
seizure episode. (a) Patient 1, (b) patient 2, (c) patient 3, and (d) patient 4.

demonstrated significant coherence at fast frequencies during
the seizure episode (for four different patients), indicating that
WPC is a reliable measure for identifying physiological interactions.
V. RESULTS
Ictal and interictal segments were analyzed for all patients
(n = 7). Eighteen seizures in total were analyzed (at least two
seizures were included for each patient). Each iEEG seizure
segment consisted of a single seizure episode, and at least 1 min
of data preceding and following the seizure. Interictal segments
were obtained from iEEG data recorded in between seizure
episodes.
WPC was calculated for interictal and ictal iEEG segments,
for all possible electrode combinations. WPC profiles for one
electrode pairing from patient 1 are shown in Fig. 2 during interictal and ictal activity. In examining the coherence of LFOs and
HFOs, during seizures and in between seizures, two consistent
coherence patterns were observed. Elevated LFO coherence was
observed during interictal activity, whereas raised HFO coherence emerged during seizures, in select electrode clusters (see
Fig. 2(C1) and (G1)].
Average HFO and LFO WPC were computed to qualitatively
characterize the spatiotemporal coherence patterns of HFO/LFO
activity. WPC values, in the indicated LFO and HFO frequency
bands were averaged in space (across all possible electrode
pairs), and in time (within 1- and 2-s windows), yielding a

79

global WPC mean value for each electrode. These average WPC
values were arranged in the same spatial layout as the subdural grid electrodes. Average WPC values for electrode contacts
from patient 1 are shown in Fig. 2(D) and (H). Consecutive
time windows of spatially averaged HFO/LFO coherence are
shown for various segments of the plotted iEEG activity (i.e.,
seizure and nonseizure activity). Whereas it was observed that
the mean LFO coherence varied in time and space, the strongest
mean LFO coherence persisted in a given cluster of electrodes.
Furthermore, HFO coherence increased and remained highest
in a similar area of the patient grid during seizure activity.
As previously reported [25], [26], the WPC profiles of HFO
activity showed minimal variations over time and space during
interictal activity, in all patients. HFO (80–300 Hz) coherence
was consistently transient and of weak to moderate strength
during nonseizure activity, for all electrode pairs [Fig. 2(B)].
In contrast, high-HFO WPC values were observed in select
electrode clusters, during seizures, for 6/7 patients. Ictal WPC
profiles are shown in Fig. 3, for all patients. Each plot represents
one of the most strongly cohered electrode pairings from each
patient during a seizure episode. Note, electrode pairings from
patient 5 did not exhibit strongly cohered HFO pairings.
Strong LFO WPC values were observed during ictal and interictal activity in all 7 patients; however, in studying the nonseizure and seizure segments from all patients, it was observed
that elevated LFO coherence did not show a spatial selectivity
during seizures. High-LFO WPC values were only observed in
select electrode clusters, during interictal activity, for all patients. Interictal WPC profiles are shown in Fig. 3, for all seven
patients. Each plot represents one of the most strongly cohered
electrode pairings from each patient during nonseizure activity.
Electrodes possessing strong HFO ictal coherence were characterized and identified as described in [26]. Briefly, the HFO
bandwidth was bounded at frequency values located at 0.37
WPCm ax , where WPCm ax was the peak WPC value calculated
for each electrode pairing. Whereas frequency bandwidths and
peak frequencies varied in space and time, and across seizures
and patients, the defined HFO bandwidth for each patient was
based upon the widest frequency range of HFO activity identified across all electrodes in the implanted grids and across all
recorded time intervals. WPC values were averaged across frequency and time to generate a matrix consisting of average WPC
strength for each electrode pairing. To isolate HFO activity,
the averaging was completed using the defined HFO-frequency
bands for each patient (as described above). A comprehensive
exploration of all electrode pairings on the implanted subdural grids, during seizure activity, yielded the spatial locations
of strongly cohered electrode clusters, HFO regions of interest
(ROIs), in 6/7 patients (see Fig. 4).
Electrodes possessing strong LFO interictal coherence (i.e.,
electrode pairings with mean LFO-WPC values greater than the
indicated thresholds in Table II) were further explored to elucidate the frequency spread of cohered LFO activity. Whereas the
bandwidths of low-frequency activity varied in space and time,
the defined LFO bandwidth for each patient were based upon
the widest frequency range of LFO activity identified across all
electrode clusters possessing strong LFO coherence. In Fig. 3,

80

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. (A) iEEG recorded from electrode 10 during interictal activity of patient 1. (B) WPC profile for electrode pairing 9, 10 (E9, E10). (C1) WPC from B
magnified for the 1–30 Hz frequency range. Strong WPC in the lower frequency range was visible for this pairing during interictal activity. (C2) WPC profile for
E23, E24. There was minimal coherence between this pairing during interictal activity. (C3) Average WPC for the electrode pairings from (C1) and (C2) over the
120 s of interictal activity. Strong coherence was only visible in the low frequencies for E9, E10 (black dashed). (D) Average WPC for 2-s windows during interictal
activity for the 8–11-Hz frequency band [dashed black box from (A)]. Averaged grids were computed for each electrode by averaging over all possible pairings in
the indicated time windows and frequency range. Averaged grids correspond spatially to the implanted grid shown at right. (E) iEEG recorded from electrode 10
during seizure activity of patient 1. (F) WPC profile for electrode pairing 9, 10 (E9, E10). (G1) WPC from F magnified for the 120–130 s region. Strong WPC in
the higher frequency range was visible for this pairing during seizure activity. (G2) WPC profile for E23, E24. There was minimal coherence between this pairing
during seizure activity. (G3) Average WPC for the electrode pairings from G1 and G2 over the 10 s of seizure activity from (G1), (G2). Strong coherence was
visible in the 100–250-Hz frequency band for E9, E10 (black dashed). (E) Average WPC for 1-s windows during seizure activity for the 100–250-Hz frequency
band [marked by horizontal dashed lines in (A)]. Averaged grids were computed for each electrode by averaging over all possible pairings in the indicated time
windows and frequency range. Averaged grids correspond spatially to the implanted grid shown at right.

mean LFO bandwidths are plotted for all patients, for the indicated electrode pairings. WPC was averaged in time, over the
entire duration of the plotted interictal activity. A low-frequency
bandwidth of 5–12 Hz (red outline) was chosen to capture LFOWPC changes across all patients, except patient 7, where elevated WPC appeared in activity <5 Hz.

A comprehensive study of all electrode pairings on the implanted subdural grids, during interictal activity, yielded the spatial locations of strongly cohered LFO electrode clusters for all
patients. WPC values were averaged across frequency and time
to generate a matrix consisting of an average WPC estimate, for
each electrode pairing. To isolate LFO activity, the averaging

COTIC et al.: SPATIAL COHERENCE PROFILES OF ICTAL HIGH-FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS

81

Fig. 3. Coherence profiles of ictal HFOs and interictal LFOs. One electrode pairing, exhibiting elevated HFO coherence during seizures and elevated LFO
coherence during nonseizure activity, is shown for each patient. Average WPC (over the entire plotted time segment) is displayed to the right of each WPC plot.
Box: Mean LFO WPC (1–30 Hz) during interictal activity. Elevated WPC, in the 5–12-Hz frequency band, was observed across all patients, except patient 7,
where elevated WPC appeared in activity <5 Hz.

Fig. 4. Spatial locations of cohered suprathreshold electrodes during seizure and nonseizure activity. Electrodes on the patient grids possessing elevated HFO
coherence during seizures generally showed a topographical overlap with areas possessing elevated LFO coherence during interictal activity. Note: the implanted
electrodes for patient 6 have been rearranged to coincide with their position on the cortex.

was completed using only the low-frequency bands (5–12 Hz)
of each patient (and the 1–5 Hz band for patient 7). A matrix,
for one interictal segment from patient 1, is shown in Fig. 5
(top). (Note, as the matrix is symmetric, only half of the matrix

is displayed for clarity). The mean seizure LFO-WPC values
(from the matrix at top) are plotted as a histogram (see Fig. 5,
bottom). Electrode pairings with LFO coherence values greater
than the indicated thresholds are highlighted at right (black

82

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 5. Mean interictal LFO (5–12 Hz) WPC matrix and histogram for
patient 1. Mean interictal LFO WPC values were calculated for all possible
electrode pairings (top). Matrix values were also plotted as histograms (bottom), to identify strongly cohered electrode pairings. Suprathreshold electrodes
(i.e., electrodes involved in pairings exhibiting coherence interactions greater
than the indicated threshold) are highlighted on the grid at right.

circles). For all interictal segments and patients, a threshold of
μ + 5 σ (where μ is the mean and σ the standard deviation of the
mean LFO-WPC values for each interictal segment) highlighted
clusters of electrodes with strongly cohered low-frequency (5–
12 Hz) activity. The suprathreshold electrodes (for thresholds =
μ + 5 σ) for all interictal segments and all patients are listed in
Table II.
Strongly cohered HFO and LFO electrode pairings (i.e.,
suprathreshold electrodes) were marked on the patient grids
in Fig. 4. Electrode clusters possessing strong HFO WPC during seizures, and strong LFO WPC during interictal activity
highlighted similar electrodes on the patient grids. Elevated
ictal HFO spectral power (purple) was plotted for patient 5,
as elevated ictal HFO coherence was not observed. We have
previously demonstrated a positive spatial correlation between
elevated ictal HFO WPC and spectral power [26].
In general, the SOZs defined by both neurologists did not
always match. Neurologists A and B marked similar SOZs for
patients 3, 4, and 6, yet their SOZs noticeably differed for patients 1, 2, and 7. Furthermore, neurologist B determined that the
brain region responsible for seizure onset was not discernible in
the iEEG of patient 5, and concluded that the SOZ originated in
an area not covered by the implanted grid. As a result, no SOZs
are defined for patient 5 (see Table III) for neurologist B. It was
observed that the LFO-/HFO-defined ROIs were typically in
close proximity or overlapping with the clinically marked SOZs
of at least one neurologist.
Whereas comparisons to SOZs may provide support for given
biomarkers, the golden standard lies in examining a potential
marker with patient outcomes, as the epileptogenic zone can
only be confirmed postoperatively. The spatial location of elec-

trodes exhibiting strong LFO interictal coherence and strong
ictal HFO coherence (from Fig. 4) are mapped as HFO-/LFOdefined ROIs in Fig. 6. The LFO- and HFO-defined ROIs are
mapped over the surgically excised electrodes. The resected
electrodes corresponded to the SOZs identified by neurologist A,
and generally covered additional electrode contacts, unless the
SOZ was found to be in proximity to functional/eloquent cortex. In Fig. 6, postsurgical patient outcomes were ordered from
the worst to the best, in terms of surgical scores (left to right),
and ranged from the left side with patient 2 who possessed
an Engel class 4 outcome (no worthwhile improvement) to the
right end with patients 6 and 7 who both had Engel class 1
outcomes (seizure free). For patients with Engel class I and II
outcomes, several LFO- and or HFO-defined electrodes were
found to lie within and/or proximal to excised tissue, whereas
the electrodes of patients with Engel class III or IV outcomes
were observed to lie farther from LFO/HFO-defined electrodes.
The electrodes displaying high-ictal HFO WPC and highinterictal LFO WPC from Fig. 6 were used to quantify the completeness of resection of these ROIs by the following metrics.
Number (No.) of LFO-ROI electrodes within resection zone:
Number of electrodes identified in LFO ROIs within the resection margin.
Number (No.) of LFO-ROI electrodes within resection zone
+ border: Number of electrodes indentified in LFO ROIs within
the resection margin and a one-electrode border around the resection margin.
% of LFO-ROI electrodes within resection zone + border:
Number of electrodes indentified in LFO ROIs within the resection margin and a one-electrode border around the resection
margin/number of LFO-defined electrodes ×100 (%).
The same metrics were applied to HFO electrodes. Note, that
we have quantified the number of HFO-LFO defined electrodes
within the resection margin, as well as within a one-electrode
border surrounding the resection margin, as neighbouring cortex may have been partially resected and/or affected by the
removal of tissue within the resection margin. We observed that
patients with positive clinical outcomes had a larger percentage
of LFO/HFO electrodes excised during surgery (see Table IV).
VI. DISCUSSION
In this study, we applied a WPC analysis to investigate
whether electrode clusters demonstrating strong LFO coherence, relative to all other electrodes on the implanted patient
grids, resided in tissue areas—previously identified in [25]—
which exhibited increased ictal HFO coherence. We observed
clusters of electrodes possessing strongly cohered LFOs during
interictal activity. In comparing these more active interictal LFO
associated regions of the cortex with the ictal HFO ROIs defined in [25], it was observed that electrodes on the patient grids
possessing elevated HFO coherence were similar to those possessing elevated LFO coherence during interictal activity (see
Fig. 4). Only patient 7 showed no overlap between LFO/HFO
identified regions; however, LFO ROIs were found to reside
within the resection margin, whereas HFO ROIs were in the
boundary of the resected area.

COTIC et al.: SPATIAL COHERENCE PROFILES OF ICTAL HIGH-FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS

83

Fig. 6. Mapping of tissue resections areas with LFO-/HFO-defined ROIs. The resected electrodes corresponded to the SOZs identified by neurologist A (see
Table III) and covered additional electrode contacts, unless the SOZ was found to be in proximity to functional/eloquent cortex. The best surgical outcome was
observed when the resected areas and LFO- and/or HFO-defined ROIs were in close proximity. For patients with Engel class I and II outcomes, several LFO- and/or
HFO-defined electrodes were found to lie within and/or proximal to excised tissue, whereas the electrodes of patients with Engel class III or IV outcomes were
observed to lie farther from LFO/HFO-defined electrodes. We suggest that epileptogenic regions may be mapped by iEEG interictal LFO (5–12 Hz) coherence
and/or by HFO (80–300 Hz) ictal coherence.

TABLE IV
LFO-/HFO-DEFINED ROIS AND TISSUE RESECTION REGIONS
Patient

1N R
24
32
43
52
61
71

No. of LFO-ROI
electrodes

No. of LFO-ROI
electrodes within
resection zone

No. of LFO-ROI
electrodes within
resection zone +
border

% of LFO-ROI
electrodes within
resection zone +
border

No. of HFO-ROI
electrodes

No. of HFO-ROI
electrodes within
resection zone

No. of HFO-ROI
electrodes within
resection zone +
border

% of HFO-ROI
electrodes within
resection zone +
border

10
8
8
8
16
16
4

N/A
0/7
2/6
0/6
6/10
2/10
4/21

N/A
0/23
4/16
2/24
12/25
4/22
4/33

N/A
0%
50%
25%
75%
25%
100%

8
6
8
8
6∗
16
8

N/A
0/7
0/6
0/6
4/10∗
7/10
0/21

N/A
0/23
0/16
2/24
6/25∗
13/22
4/33

N/A
0%
0%
25%
100%∗
81.3%
50%

Subscripts beside patient number indicate Engle class outcome following surgery (classes range from 1 to 4; NR indicates no resection).
∗
Indicates number of channels with high-HFO spectral power.

When qualitatively examining the more active LFO- and
HFO-associated regions of the cortex with the clinical data, a
good surgical outcome generally resulted for patients in whom
the resected tissue was in closer proximity to HFO- and/or LFOdefined ROI (i.e., patients 3 and 5–7 in Fig. 6). We also investigated the spatial relationship between the HFO-/LFO-defined
ROIs and the resection zone, through our defined metrics (see
Table IV). We found that the resection of cortical regions containing a larger percentage of LFO-/HFO-defined ROIs showed
a trend toward better seizure outcome. Thus, in this study, it was
observed that for cases where the clinical outcome saw improvement (i.e., Engel class 1 and 2), either HFO or LFO alone, or
HFO and LFO ROIs (both) were contained within the resected
cortex. Traditionally, oscillations in the 10 Hz frequency range
were considered an idling rhythm, as they decreased with movement or cognitive changes [32]. However, recent studies have
suggested that alpha rhythms (8–12 Hz) play an important role
in controlling cortical excitability by exerting an inhibitory ef-

fect on cortical processing [33]. In the epileptic brain, increases
in the (4–9 Hz) frequency band have been reported in the EEG
of epilepsy patients, relative to normal controls [34]. Furthermore, Le Van Quyen et al. [13] concluded that the synchrony
of electrode pairings near the primary epileptogenic zone, in
the (4–15) Hz frequency range, increased and decreased before
seizure onset. Along the same lines, the presence of high-theta
activity (i.e., 4–8 Hz) in awake adults is suggestive of abnormal
and/or pathological activity [35]. As HFOs have been shown
to highly localize to SOZs [36], [37], and several studies have
concluded that enhanced local phase synchrony is an important
correlate of seizure activity [11], [14], [38], [39], we speculate
that the overlapping spatial regions observed here, which exhibited both increased coherence in ictal HFOs and interictal LFOs
in the (5–12 Hz) frequency band, identified local abnormalities
that underlie epileptogenic networks.
Whereas numerous groups have explored WPC (<100 Hz)
in relation to interictal and ictal activity, the relationship be-

84

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

tween slow and fast oscillations in iEEG signals recorded from
the epileptic brain have yet to be fully explored. Recent studies
have proposed the idea that epileptic tissue may be characterized by atypical cross-frequency interactions [20]–[24]. A new
study by Ibrahim et al. [20] demonstrated that high-frequency
amplitudes (40–300 Hz) were modulated by the phase of slower
rhythms (6–14 Hz) in patient SOZs during the ictal period.
Nariai et al. [21] concluded that interictal HFOs at the seizure
onset zones were tightly coupled with slow-wave phases in the
(3–10 Hz) frequency range in children with epileptic spasms,
whereas Nagasawa et al. [40] demonstrated that interictal HFOs
were locked to the phase of slow oscillations at (1–3 Hz) in patients with extra-occipital lobe epilepsy.
In general, extratemporal lobe seizures are associated with
poorer surgical outcomes compared to temporal lobe resections
[41]. ETLEs are more difficult to localize, in comparison to
temporal lobe epilepsies, as extratemporal seizures can begin in
any of the other three lobes of the brain, which cover a large
cortical area. As a result, the accurate localization of seizure
onset can become more difficult. The variable patient surgical
results presented here agreed with this observation. A similar
variability was also inherent in the neurologist defined SOZs,
which were not always in agreement (see Table III). It may be
concluded that the visually determined SOZs (used for resection) were imprecise, and may only have been areas of spread
and/or represent only a limited representation of the abnormal
neural networks. As such, the HFO and LFO guided coherence
techniques presented here show promise as potential epilepsy
biomarkers, to complement those already available in the literature and can potentially be used to support the pre-surgical
planning phase, when determining SOZs. In this study, it was
observed that for cases where the clinical outcome saw improvement (i.e., Engel class 1 and 2), HFO and/or LFO ROIs were
contained within or along the resected cortex.
The aims of this study were twofold: First to examine the
spatiotemporal coherence patterns of HFOs and LFOs, so as to
characterize the spatial relationship of LFO and HFO interactions in the epileptic brain, and second to study the correlation
between HFO- and LFO-defined ROIs and the epileptogenic
zone. The positive correlation observed here between HFO/LFO-defined ROIs and patient surgical outcomes suggests the
ability of both interictal and ictal recordings to contribute to
the identification of seizure onset zones in extratemporal lobe
seizures. Whereas HFOs present as a new and relatively unexplored epilepsy biomarker, the slower interictal rhythms observed here also offer a practical avenue for further exploration.
First, as large numbers of recording electrodes are generally required for the identification of patient SOZs, slower rhythms satisfy present clinical acquisition settings. Second, slower rhythms
are more easily accessible in the scalp EEG, providing a less
invasive option for the identification of patient SOZs during
the pre-surgical planning phase. Third, as patients may be removed from medications and/or monitored until ictal activity
can be recorded, targeting interictal oscillations would remove
the necessity of potentially harmful ictal recordings during the
pre-surgical planning phase.

Whereas this study hints at a potential clinical value of the
discussed iEEG features in relation to epilepsy, it is important to
note that the number of patients included in this study was small
and, therefore, the clinical significance of our results are limited
in this regard. As the patient sample size is low, the consistency
of the findings and clinical usefulness is not yet known. Establishing the full potential of both the low- and high-frequency
coherence features studied here to act as markers of epileptogenic cortex will involve a more detailed study with both larger
iEEG data sizes and patient numbers than those presented here.
More specifically, continuous and prolonged iEEG recordings
are necessary, in a larger number of patients. Continuous iEEG
recordings are essential, as several studies have suggested that
seizure susceptibility fluctuates at long timescales, on the order
of hours or days [42]. Thus, a more thorough investigation of
the spatial and temporal changes in the coherence and intensity measures presented here may reinforce the ability of lowand high-frequency coherence features to detect and delineate
seizure-related ROIs. Along similar lines, the analysis of the
iEEG of other epilepsies (e.g., generalized, pediatric) may indicate the universal applicability of these features to all other
epilepsies.
VII. CONCLUSION
From the initial results presented here, we propose the idea
that the proximity of LFO-/HFO-defined regions to excised tissue possibly predicts a positive postsurgical outcome. Similarly, we speculate that the removal of all areas identified by
HFO/LFO coherence might have resulted in better outcomes. As
such, we suggest that epileptogenic regions may be mapped by
iEEG interictal LFO (5–12 Hz) coherence and/or by HFO (80–
300 Hz) ictal coherence and propose these rhythms as potential epilepsy biomarkers for extratemporal lobe seizures. Along
the same lines, the low- and high-frequency coherence patterns observed here may have broad clinical applications, they
may possibly extrapolate to noninvasive scalp EEG, be relevant
as iEEG features for early warning systems for epilepsy patients, or aid in interventions for seizure abortion (e.g., electrical
stimulation).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Dr. O. Zalay for providing
MATLAB code for the WPC algorithm, along with insightful
feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] P. J. Uhlhaas and W. Singer, “Neural synchrony in brain disorders: Relevance for cognitive dysfunctions and pathophysiology,” Neuron, vol. 52,
no. 1, pp. 155–68, Oct. 2006.
[2] P. J. Uhlhaas et al., “Neural synchrony in cortical networks: History,
concept and current status,” Front. Integr. Neurosci, vol. 3, pp. 1–19,
2009.
[3] O. J. Ahmed and S. S. Cash, “Finding synchrony in the desynchronized
EEG: The history and interpretation of gamma rhythms,” Front. Integr.
Neurosci., vol. 7, pp. 1–7, 2013.

COTIC et al.: SPATIAL COHERENCE PROFILES OF ICTAL HIGH-FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS

[4] A. Schnitzler and J. Gross, “Normal and pathological oscillatory communication in the brain,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 285–96,
Apr. 2005.
[5] M. Steriade et al., “Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and
aroused brain,” Science, vol. 262, no. 5134, pp. 679–685, Oct. 1993.
[6] S. M. Montgomery et al., “Theta and gamma coordination of hippocampal
networks during waking and rapid eye movement sleep,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 28, no. 26, pp. 6731–6741, Jun. 2008.
[7] J. Fell and N. Axmacher, “The role of phase synchronization in memory
processes,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 105–118, Feb. 2011.
[8] E. K. Miller, “The ‘working’ of working memory,” Dialogues Clin. Neurosci., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 411–418, Dec. 2013.
[9] E. Niedermeyer and F. H. Lopes da Silva, Electroencephalography: Basic
Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields, 5th ed. Philadelphia,
PA, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
[10] R. B. Duckrow and S. S. Spencer, “Regional coherence and the transfer of ictal activity during seizure onset in the medial temporal lobe,”
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 82, no. 6, pp. 415–422,
Jun. 1992.
[11] F. Mormann et al., “Mean phase coherence as a measure for phase synchronization and its application to the EEG of epilepsy patients,” Phys. D,
vol. 144, pp. 358–369, 2000.
[12] M. Le Van Quyen et al., “Comparison of Hilbert transform and wavelet
methods for the analysis of neuronal synchrony,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 83–98, Oct. 30, 2001.
[13] M. Le Van Quyen et al., “Preictal state identification by synchronization
changes in long-term intracranial EEG recordings,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 116, pp. 559–568, 2005.
[14] C. A. Schevon et al., “Cortical abnormalities in epilepsy revealed by local
EEG synchrony,” Neuroimage, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 140–148, Mar. 2007.
[15] M. Chavez et al., “Spatio-temporal dynamics prior to neocortical seizures:
amplitude versus phase couplings,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 5, pp. 571–583, May 2003.
[16] A. Bragin et al., “High-frequency oscillations in human brain,” Hippocampus, vol. 9, pp. 137–42, 1999.
[17] J. D. Jirsch et al., “High-frequency oscillations during human focal
seizures,” Brain, J. Neurol., vol. 129, no. Pt 6, pp. 1593–1608, Jun. 2006.
[18] J. Jacobs et al., “High-frequency oscillations (HFOs) in clinical epilepsy,”
Prog. Neurobiol., vol. 98, no. 3, pp. 302–315, Sep. 2012.
[19] G. Worrell and J. Gotman, “High-frequency oscillations and other electrophysiological biomarkers of epilepsy: Clinical studies,” Biomarkers Med.,
vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 557–566, Oct. 2011.
[20] G. M. Ibrahim et al., “Dynamic modulation of epileptic high frequency oscillations by the phase of slower cortical rhythms,” Exp. Neurol.,
vol. 251, pp. 30–38, Jan. 2014.
[21] H. Nariai et al., “Ictal high-frequency oscillations at 80–200 Hz coupled with delta phase in epileptic spasms,” Epilepsia, vol. 52, no. 10,
pp. e130–e134, Oct. 2011.
[22] M. Cotic et al., “Frequency interactions in human epileptic brain,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, vol. 2011, pp. 2057–2060.
[23] C. Alvarado-Rojas et al., “Probing cortical excitability using crossfrequency coupling in intracranial EEG recordings: a new method for
seizure prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
vol. 2011, pp. 1632–1635.
[24] M. Guirgis et al., “The role of delta-modulated high frequency oscillations
in seizure state classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2013, vol. 2013, pp. 6595–6598.

85

[25] M. Cotic et al., “Synchrony of high frequency oscillations in the human epileptic brain,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
vol. 2013, pp. 5582–5585.
[26] M. Cotic et al., “Mapping the coherence of ictal high frequency oscillations in human extratemporal lobe epilepsy,” Epilepsia, to be published,
Dec. 2014.
[27] J. Engel and T. Rasmussen, “Outcome with respect to seizures,” in Surgical
Treatment of the Epilepsies, J. Engel, Ed. New York, NY, USA: Raven
Press, 1993.
[28] X. Li et al., “Interaction dynamics of neuronal oscillations analysed using
wavelet transforms,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 178–185,
Feb. 2007.
[29] O. C. Zalay, “Cognitive rhythm generators for modelling and modulation
of neuronal electrical activity,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Biomed. Eng.,
Inst. Biomater. Biomed. Eng., Univ. Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 2012.
[30] M. G. Rosenblum and J. Kurths, “Analysing synchronization phenomena
from bivariate data by means of the Hilbert transform,” in Nonlinear
Analysis of Physiological Data, H. Kantz, J. Kurths and G. Mayer-Kress,
Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1998, pp. 91–99.
[31] T. Schreiber and A. Schmitz, “Improved surrogate data for nonlinearity
tests,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 77, no. 4, pp. 635–638, Jul. 22, 1996.
[32] R. Hebert et al., “Enhanced EEG alpha time-domain phase synchrony during transcendental meditation: implications for cortical integration theory,”
Signal Process., vol. 85, no. 11, pp. 2213–2232, 2005.
[33] S. Sadaghiani et al., “Alpha-band phase synchrony is related to activity
in the fronto-parietal adaptive control network,” J. Neurosci., vol. 32,
no. 41, pp. 14305–14310, Oct. 10, 2012.
[34] L. Zhao et al., “Changes in EEG measurements in intractable epilepsy
patients with neurofeedback training,” Prog. Natural Sci., vol. 19, no. 11,
pp. 1509–1514, Nov. 2009.
[35] H. Adeli et al., “Analysis of EEG records in an epileptic patient using
wavelet transform,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 123, no. 1, pp. 69–87,
Feb. 15, 2003.
[36] B. Crepon et al., “Mapping interictal oscillations greater than 200 Hz
recorded with intracranial macroelectrodes in human epilepsy,” Brain,
J. Neurol., vol. 133, no. Pt 1, pp. 33–45, Jan. 2010.
[37] J. Jacobs et al., “Interictal high-frequency oscillations (80–500 Hz) are
an indicator of seizure onset areas independent of spikes in the human
epileptic brain,” Epilepsia, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 1893–1907, Nov. 2008.
[38] M. J. A. M. Van Putten, “Nearest neighbor phase synchronization as a
measure to detect seizure activity from scalp EEG recordings,” J. Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 320–325, 2003.
[39] C. P. Warren et al., “Synchrony in normal and focal epileptic brain:
The seizure onset zone is functionally disconnected,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 104, no. 6, pp. 3530–3539, Dec. 2010.
[40] T. Nagasawa et al., “Spontaneous and visually driven high-frequency
oscillations in the occipital cortex: intracranial recording in epileptic patients,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 569–583, Mar. 2012.
[41] S. Spencer and L. Huh, “Outcomes of epilepsy surgery in adults and
children,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 525–537, Jun. 2008.
[42] M. P. Richardson, “New observations may inform seizure models: Very
fast and very slow oscillations,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 105,
nos. 1/2, pp. 5–13, Mar. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

