IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1305

Extracting a Cardiac Signal From the Extracorporeal
Pressure Sensors of a Hemodialysis Machine
Mattias Holmer∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Frida Sandberg, Kristian Solem, Eglė Grigonytė, Bo Olde,
and Leif Sörnmo, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Although patients undergoing hemodialysis treatment often suffer from cardiovascular disease, monitoring of cardiac rhythm is not performed on a routine basis. Without requiring
any extra sensor, this study proposes a method for extracting a cardiac signal from the built-in extracorporeal venous pressure sensor
of the hemodialysis machine. The extraction is challenged by the
fact that the cardiac component is much weaker than the pressure
component caused by the peristaltic blood pump. To further complicate the extraction problem, the cardiac component is difficult
to separate when the pump and heart rates coincide. The proposed
method estimates a cardiac signal by subtracting an iteratively refined blood pump model signal from the signal measured at the
extracorporeal venous pressure sensor. The method was developed
based on simulated pressure signals, and evaluated on clinical pressure signals acquired during hemodialysis treatment. The heart
rate estimated from the clinical pressure signal was compared to
that derived from a photoplethysmographic reference signal, resulting in a difference of 0.07 ± 0.84 beats/min. The accuracy of
the heartbeat occurrence times was studied for different strengths
of the cardiac component, using both clinical and simulated signals. The results suggest that the accuracy is sufficient for analysis
of heart rate and certain arrhythmias.
Index Terms—Blood access pressure simulator, cardiac pressure signal, extracorporeal pressure sensors, fistula, heart rate,
hemodialysis.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONTINUOUS monitoring of vital physiological information such as heart rate and blood pressure can improve
the outcome of hemodialysis treatment. However, monitoring
requires the use of additional sensors that increases both patient
discomfort and clinical staff workload. As a result, physiological parameters are not monitored on a routine basis during
hemodialysis. It is, therefore, highly desirable to develop novel
techniques that take advantage of the built-in extracorporeal
pressure sensors so that a cardiac signal can be extracted.
Cardiac monitoring is of special significance since cardiovascular diseases cause about 50% of all deaths in renal patients

C

Manuscript received August 25, 2014; revised November 21, 2014; accepted
December 19, 2014. Date of publication December 19, 2014; date of current
version April 17, 2015. This work was supported by the Swedish Research
Council and the Swedish Institute (00923/2011). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Holmer is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center of
Integrative Electrocardiology (CIEL), and also with Gambro Lundia AB, Lund
SE-221 00, Sweden (email: mattias.holmer@bme.lth.se).
F. Sandberg, E. Grigonytė, and L. Sörnmo are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Center of Integrative Electrocardiology (CIEL), Lund
University.
K. Solem and B. Olde are with the Gambro Lundia AB.
This paper has supplemental material available online at http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org (File size: 1 MB).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2385964

Fig. 1. Extracorporeal blood circuit of a hemodialysis machine with venous
and arterial pressure sensors and a peristaltic blood pump.

[1]—a much higher percentage than in the general population.
Sudden cardiac death, ischemic heart disease, and heart failure
are the most common causes of mortality. It has been established
that ectopic beats and certain arrhythmias are more common
during hemodialysis treatment than after, especially during the
last hour of the treatment [2]. Monitoring of such intradialytic
cardiac events is essential for improving patient management
and may be used for modifying the treatment to reduce risk
and consequences of the cardiac diseases [3], [4]. Although the
electrocardiogram (ECG) is sometimes recorded for research
purposes during hemodialysis, it has not become part of clinical
routine due to the inconvenience of attaching and wearing electrodes. As a result, information on heart rate is not continuously
presented to the clinical staff.
The pressure wave initiated by a heartbeat propagates through
the vascular system of the body and enters the extracorporeal
blood circuit of the hemodialysis machine, where it may be measured by pressure sensors connected to the arterial line (where
blood leaves the patient) and the venous line (where blood enters
the patient). A peristaltic blood pump, located between the pressure sensors, generates the desired blood flow rate, see Fig. 1.
The pump occludes the blood line that effectively breaks the
propagation of all pressure waves between the arterial and venous sides of the extracorporeal blood circuit. The pump may,
thus, serve as a definition of the border between the two sides.
The blood pump is associated with strong periodic pressure
waves in the blood circuit, whose amplitude is considerably
larger than that of the waves caused by the heart. The amplitude
of the pump pressure waves, being around 30-mmHg peak-topeak, can be up to 100 times larger than the amplitude of the

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1306

Fig. 2. Venous blood pressure signal acquired during hemodialysis treatment
when the blood pump has been temporarily stopped at time 50 s (upper panel).
Prior to stopping, the pump component dominates since the cardiac component
has a much lower amplitude (lower left panel). After stopping, the cardiac
component is clearly visible (lower right panel).

cardiac waves, see Fig. 2; in fact, the amplitude of the harmonics
of the blood pump rate may even exceed the amplitude of the
cardiac component.
A major complication when analyzing the pressure signal is
that the hemodialysis machine may employ a blood pump rate
that coincides with the prevailing heart rate. The rotor of the
peristaltic pump contains two rollers and, accordingly, one revolution of the rotor gives rise to two pressure waves, with a
fundamental rate which is twice the rotational speed. Due to
rotor asymmetry, the resulting two waves are not identical in
morphology and, consequently, half the fundamental frequency
is also present in the blood pump component. A typical blood
pump setting is 400 ml/min, which corresponds to a rate of
89 beats per minute (bpm)—a pump rate that evidently can coincide with the prevailing heart rate, thus creating a challenging
signal separation problem.
The Cardiac signal extracted from the pressure sensors is
well suited for determining heart rate, but it could also be useful
for basic arrhythmia analysis including detection of premature
ventricular beats (PVBs) and atrial fibrillation [5]–[7]. When the
aim is to perform more advanced arrhythmia analysis requiring
morphologic information on atrial and ventricular waveforms,
the pressure signal is no longer well suited as a surrogate signal
for the ECG.
To date, the problem of extracting cardiac signal from
the extracorporeal pressure sensors has received very little
attention in the scientific literature. In two conference papers,
Moissl et al. proposed different approaches to the estimation
of heart rate from the arterial pressure sensor [8], [9]. The heart
rate was determined from the location of a spectral peak, but
the actual heartbeat occurrence times were not determined.
After abandoning linear filtering as a means for removing the
influence of the dominant blood pump signal, Moissl et al.
explored a technique in which the signal for removal was
modeled by a truncated Fourier series. None of the two studies
offer much detail on methodology, and performance is evaluated
through examples only. The problem of extracting a cardiac
signal was first addressed within the realm of patents [10], [11]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 3. Flowchart of the proposed method involving iterative estimation of the
blood pump signal and the cardiac signal. Please see the text for definition of
notations.

and indirectly when addressing the problem of venous needle
dislodgement [12], [13]; however, no performance evaluation
was part of the patents.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for the extraction
of the cardiac component through subtraction of an iteratively
refined blood pump signal from the extracorporeal pressure signal (see Section II). The venous pressure is analyzed since the
venous sensor is the most commonly used in the clinic (the
arterial sensor is not always connected), but also since the extraction of a cardiac signal has the potential to improve the
monitoring of venous needle dislodgement. The performance
of the method is studied for both clinical data recorded during
hemodialysis treatment (see Section III) and simulated signals
(see Section IV). Estimation of heart rate is the primary application of interest, the accuracy evaluated by comparing the
pressure-based estimate to that obtained from the photoplethysmographic (PPG) signal (see Section V). The accuracy of the
estimated heartbeat occurrence times is also studied, with special emphasis placed on the following two aspects: coinciding
pump and heart rates, and low-amplitude ratio of the cardiac to
blood pump components (see Section VI).
II. ALTERNATING, ITERATIVE ESTIMATION
OF CARDIAC RHYTHM
The main idea behind the method is to estimate the cardiac
signal by subtracting an iteratively refined blood pump signal
from the signal measured at the extracorporeal venous pressure
sensor, i.e., the observed signal y(t), see Fig. 3. In each iteration, the heartbeat occurrence times are estimated, using a least
squares error (LSE) criterion, so that the interbeat intervals
(“RR intervals”) can be determined. The procedure alternates
between estimation of the pump component and estimation of
the cardiac component until the difference in the occurrence
time estimates from one iteration to next is sufficiently small.
The pump profile p̄(t) and the cardiac profile c̄(t) are
important concepts of the method: p̄(t) characterizes the

HOLMER∗ et al.: EXTRACTING A CARDIAC SIGNAL FROM THE EXTRACORPOREAL PRESSURE SENSORS OF A HEMODIALYSIS MACHINE

pump-induced pressure wave during one complete revolution,
i.e., 360◦ , of the blood pump, whereas c̄(t) characterizes the
heart-induced pressure wave during one cardiac cycle. The two
profiles result from ensemble averaging of successive cycles
once subjected to normalization in time with respect to their
respective lengths. For both the heart and the blood pump, the
model signals c̃(t) and p̃(t) are created by concatenating suitably
time-scaled profiles; the model signals have the same length as
the observed signal. The resulting model signals are then subtracted from the observed signal to produce signal estimates of
the cardiac and the blood pump components, denoted ĉ(t) and
p̂(t), respectively. Thus, each iteration results in updates of the
two profiles, the two model signals, and the two signal estimates.

1307

ensemble averaging,
(0)

(0)

c̄

(t) =

1

N̂
−1
c

(0)
N̂c

k =0



(0)
(0)
ĉ(0) âc,k t + t̂c,k ,

0 ≤ t < T̄c(0) (5)

where the mean cardiac cycle length is given by
t̂

T̄c(0)

=

(0)

(0)

− t̂c,0

(0)

c, N̂ c

(0)

.

(6)

N̂c

The series of interbeat intervals is given by the difference of
successive estimates of the occurrence times,
(0)

(0)

(0)

T̂c,k = t̂c,k +1 − t̂c,k .

(7)

The scale factor is estimated by

A. Initialization

(0)

(0)
t̂p,k

= kTp ,

k = 0, . . . , Np

(1)

where the superscript denotes iteration index and Np the number of pump revolutions in a data segment. For simplicity, the
(0)
first revolution is assumed to occur at t̂p,0 = 0. The number of
pump revolutions is determined from the zero crossings of the
observed signal y(t).
The initial pump profile p̄(0) (t) is obtained by averaging all
Np revolutions,
p̄(0) (t) =

N p −1
1 
y(t + kTp ),
Np

0 ≤ t < Tp .

(2)

for k = 0, . . . , N̂c

The iterative estimation procedure, initiated by setting the
iteration index j to 0, scales the cardiac profile c̄(j ) (t) in time
so that it best fits, in the LSE sense, each of the cycles in a
low-pass filtered version of the cardiac signal ĉ(j ) (t) (cutoff
frequency FL P ). The scaling variable of the k:th cardiac cycle
(j +1)
is denoted Tc,k , and represents cycle length. In mathematical
terms, the optimization is defined by


(j +1)
(j +1)
T̂c,k
(9)
= arg
min
Ec Tc,k

(0)

where
Ec



(j +1)
Tc,k



(4)

The number of cardiac cycles Nc and the corresponding oc(0)
(0)
currence times tc,k , k = 0, . . . , Nc , are estimated from the
zero crossings of a low-pass filtered version of ĉ(0) (t) (cutoff frequency FL P ); filtering is introduced since it reduces the
influence of pump-related residuals. It should be noted that it
is much more challenging to estimate Nc than Np from the
zero crossings, not only because the cardiac component is much
smaller in amplitude, but also because pump-related residuals
are present in ĉ(0) (t). It should be noted that Np is held fixed
once estimated during initialization, whereas Nc is subject to
iterative estimation.
The initial cardiac profile c̄(0) (t) is obtained by normaliz(0)
ing the cardiac cycle length with the scale factor ac,k prior to



1

=

(j +1)

Tc,k

(3)

The initial estimate of the cardiac signal ĉ(0) (t) is obtained
by subtracting the pump model signal p̃(0) (t), obtained in (3),
from y(t),
ĉ(0) (t) = y(t) − p̃(0) (t).

− 1.

(j )
(j + 1)
(j )
η c , 0 T¯c < T c , k
< η c , 1 T¯c

The period length Tp in (1) is determined by fitting, in the
LSE sense, the pump model signal p̃(0) (t) to y(t) with all Np
revolutions included in the minimization; p̃(0) (t) results from
periodic extension of the pump profile p̄(0) (t), i.e.,
0 ≤ t < Tp .

(8)

B. Iterative Cardiac Signal Estimation

k =0

p̃(0) (t + kTp ) = p̄(0) (t),

(0)
Tˆc , k
(0)
¯
Tc

(0)

âc,k =

Initially, the pump period length Tp is assumed to be fixed,
and thus the occurrence time of the k:th revolution is given by

0



− c̄(j )

(j + 1)

Tc , k


 (j ) 
(j +1)
ĉ
t + t̂c,k


(j )

T̄c

(j +1)
Tc,k

·t

	2

dt

(10)

and is performed sequentially by incrementing k, i.e., for successive cardiac cycles. The lower and upper search limits ηc,0 and
ηc,1 in (9) may be chosen such that both normal sinus beats and
(j +1)
PVBs can be detected. The occurrence time t̂c,k of the k:th
cardiac cycle in ĉ(j ) (t) in (10) equals the sum of all preceding
cycle lengths,
(j +1)

t̂c,k

=

k −1


(j +1)

T̂c,l

(j +1)

+ tc,0

,

k = 1, . . . , N̂c(j +1) − 1.

l=0

(11)
Updated versions of the cardiac profile c̄(j +1) (t) and the mean
(j +1)
cardiac cycle length T̄c
are computed analogously to (5) and
(j +1)
(6), respectively. From knowledge of c̄(j +1) (t) and t̂c,k , the
(j +1)
cardiac model signal c̃
(t) is produced by concatenation
until the entire observation interval has been covered,


(j +1)
(j +1)
= c̄(j +1) (t), 0 ≤ t < T̄c (12)
c̃(j +1) âc,k t + t̂c,k

1308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

TABLE I
FREQUENT NOTATIONS IN THE PRESENT METHOD

(j +1)

for k = 0, . . . , N̂c
− 1. The number of cardiac cycles
(j +1)
Nc
is updated by determining the maximum number of
complete cardiac cycles that fits within the observation interval.
An iteration of the cardiac signal estimation finishes by subtracting the cardiac model signal from the observed signal,
p̂(j +1) (t) = y(t) − c̃(j +1) (t)

(13)

so that a new estimate of the pump signal is obtained.
C. Iterative Pump Signal Estimation
The initial assumption of a fixed period length Tp , cf. (1),
is relaxed so that each pump revolution has its own individual
period length Tp,k , thereby accounting for the fact that the pump
speed varies from one revolution to the next. The optimization
in (9), producing an estimate of Tc,k , is also employed for estimating Tp,k , except that the search interval is instead defined
by T̄p and the width parameter ηp , i.e.,


(j +1)
(j +1)
.
T̂p,k = arg
min
Ep Tp,k
(j )
(j + 1)
(j )
(1−η p ) T¯p < T p , k < (1+η p ) T¯p

(14)
The error Ep is defined analogously to the error Ec in (10), except that the integrand is replaced by its second derivative for
the purpose of de-emphasizing rapid changes in the cardiac signal estimate. Another difference is that the error is successively
minimized for half revolutions, i.e., 180◦ , instead of full revolutions, so that a better fit to the observed signal can be achieved.
These two differences were found to decrease the number of
iterations needed as well as to reduce the transient pump signal
residuals in the cardiac signal estimate.
In analogy with (5), the pump profile is updated by scaling
(j +1)
each pump revolution in time using ap,k , defined analogously
to (8), so that its length is normalized prior to averaging. In
this case, averaging is performed on the observed signal y(t) to
ensure stability,
N p −1

1   (j +1)
(j +1)
, 0 ≤ t < T̂p
p̄(j +1) (t) =
y âp,k t + t̂p,k
Np
k =0

(15)
thereby avoiding that residuals of the cardiac component are
gradually intruding into the pump model signal as the iterative
procedure progresses. In analogy with (12), the pump model
signal p̃(j +1) (t) is produced by concatenation until the entire
observation interval is covered,


(j +1)
(j +1)
p̃(j +1) âp,k t + t̂p,k
= p̄(j +1) (t), 0 ≤ t < T̂p (16)
for k = 0, . . . , N̂p − 1. Next, the cardiac signal estimate is updated by
ĉ(j +1) (t) = y(t) − p̃(j +1) (t)

(17)

which, in turn, is used to update the cardiac profile as previously
described.

Variable name

Description

c̄ ( j ) (t)
c̃ ( j ) (t)
ĉ ( j ) (t)
FL P
j
k
(j )
N̂ c
Np
p̄ ( j ) (t)
p̃ ( j ) (t)
p̂ ( j ) (t)
t̂ c , k
t̂ p , k
Tˆc , k
Tˆp , k

Cardiac profile
Cardiac model signal
Cardiac signal estimate
Lowpass cutoff frequency
Iteration index
Cardiac/pump cycle index
Estimated No. cardiac cycles in signal segment
No. pump revolutions in signal segment
Pump profile
Pump model signal
Pump signal estimate
Cardiac cycle occurrence time
Pump cycle occurrence time
Cardiac cycle duration
Pump cycle duration
Observed signal segment

y (t)

The alternating, iterative estimation procedure is considered
to have converged when the following criterion is fulfilled:
(j +1)

max |t̂p,k
k

(j )

− t̂p,k | < δ

(18)

where δ denotes convergence tolerance. As long as (18) remains
unfulfilled, the iteration index j is incremented and the procedure performs the processing steps described in Section II-B,
and so on. However, if convergence is not reached within L
iterations, the procedure is terminated and the estimates of the
L:th iteration are used. It should be noted that convergence is
tested on t̂p,k , rather than on t̂c,k , since the pump signal is much
more dominant.
The computational demands of the alternating, iterative estimation procedure are relatively modest, making it possible to
implement the method for operation in real-time.
D. Low-Pass Filter Cutoff Frequency Adaptation
The selection of cutoff frequency FLP for the low-pass filter,
introduced to remove high-frequency pump residuals in ĉ(t),
was found to be important for reducing the error in heart rate
estimation. Preliminary results from simulated data showed that
a heart rate-dependent FLP leads to fewer missed and falsely
detected beats, and therefore, a simple dependence was introduced in which FLP depends linearly on the heart rate of the
preceding 1-min segment.
E. Final Estimation of Heartbeat Occurrence Times
(J +1)

Following convergence, the accuracy of t̂c,k is improved by
replacing it with the time instant of the mid-amplitude in each
heartbeat of the low-pass filtered cardiac signal ĉ(J ) (t). This
definition is identical to the one used in the analysis of PPG
signals [14]. The resulting series of occurrence times serves as
the basis for the heart rate computation and certain types of
rhythm analysis.
The notations used in the method are summarized in Table I.

HOLMER∗ et al.: EXTRACTING A CARDIAC SIGNAL FROM THE EXTRACORPOREAL PRESSURE SENSORS OF A HEMODIALYSIS MACHINE

1309

III. CLINICAL DATA
Clinical data were acquired at Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden, in a study approved by the local ethical review
board. The data were analyzed for the purpose of comparing
the performance of the proposed method to PPG-derived information. The PPG signal is known to be proportional to blood
volume changes that result from pressure waves originating from
the heart [15]—a property that makes the PPG signal well suited
as a reference when the estimated cardiac pressure signal is assessed.
A. Study Setup

Fig. 4. Illustration of the alternating, iterative procedure for estimating the
heartbeat occurrence times, using clinical data. (a) Venous pressure signal y(t),
(b) initial pump model signal p̃ (0 ) (t), (c) initial estimate of the cardiac signal
ĉ(0 ) (t), (d) initial cardiac model signal c̃(0 ) (t), (e) final estimate of the cardiac
signal ĉ(2 ) (t) with dots indicating the estimated occurrence times, (f) final
cardiac model signal c̃(2 ) (t), (g) estimated occurrence times (black line) and
the reference occurrence times (gray line), and (h) PPG signal with the reference
occurrence times marked with dots. Note that the vertical scales in (a)–(f) all
have mmHg as unit.

F. Illustration of Method
A clinical venous pressure signal illustrates the alternating
iterative estimation procedure in Fig. 4. The observed signal
y(t) in Fig. 4(a) contains pressure waves from both the pump
and the heart. Fig. 4(b) and (c) displays the initial pump model
signal p̃(0) (t) and the initial estimate of the cardiac signal ĉ(0) (t),
respectively, and (d) the initial cardiac model signal c̃(0) (t).
Fig. 4(e) and (f) displays the signals when the alternating procedure has converged; in this example, convergence is reached
after two iterations. It is noted that ĉ(2) (t) is smoother than
ĉ(0) (t) thanks to the use of the second derivative for LSE mini(2)
mization. The estimated occurrence times t̂c,k are displayed in
Fig. 4(g) together with the reference occurrence times determined from the PPG signal in Fig. 4(h). A good agreement between the two series of occurrence times is observed. The PVB
occurring at about 8 s from the onset of the signal, which can
be identified in the cardiac signal estimate ĉ(2) (t), cf. Fig. 4(e),
is accurately detected.

Eight patients were included in the study, all suffering from
chronic renal failure (two of these patients were previously analyzed in [16] using a preliminary version of the present method).
Each patient contributed with one hemodialysis treatment, except one patient who contributed with two, and thus a total of
nine treatments were included. The patients were treated with
hemodialysis at least thrice a week, and at least for three months
before the study started. Treatment duration, ranging from 4 to
5 h, complied with the prescriptions given by the responsible
physician and followed clinical routine. Patients treated with
hemodiafiltration were excluded, as were patients participating
in other, interfering studies. Four patients had a history of one
or more heart complications. An arteriovenous fistula was used
as vascular access in all patients, except in one who had a graft.
All patients agreed to participate in the study by signing an
informed consent.
The blood pump was stopped for a 1-min period at treatment
onset so that the cardiac signal amplitude could be determined,
cf. Fig. 2.
B. Equipment
All patients were treated with a Gambro AK 200 hemodialysis machine. In order to ensure full compliance with existing
safety regulations, as well as to avoid the time-consuming work
associated with a software update and accompanying verification and validation, the built-in pressure sensors were not used.
Instead, an external device was used with dedicated pressure
sensors, which were identical to the built-in ones. Hence, the
results presented later can still be viewed as deriving from data
acquired from the built-in sensors.
Custom-made tubes were used for the external device to access the pressure inside the blood line at the venous side. A
transducer protector was connected between the new tube and
the venous drip chamber to protect the patient by securing the
sterility of the blood line. During treatment the disposable blood
circuit was mainly filled with blood, however, certain parts, like
the venous drip chamber, contain air. Since the total air volume
affects the damping of the pressure signal, it was kept low by
increasing the blood level in the drip chamber, clamping off unused gas tubes, and by selecting small dimensions of the custom
made tubes.
A sensor clip of a pulse oximeter (LifeSense) was attached to
a finger of the patient for PPG measurements. Both the resulting

1310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

TABLE II
SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS
Treatment
No.

Heart rate
bpm

Pump rate
bpm

Blood flow
ml/min

Amplitude ratio
Heart/Pump, %

1
2
3
4
5
6
(7
(8
9

62.8
75.9
51.3
73.8
76.8
59.6
67.3
100.3
60.2

44.6
89.1
41.8
71.3
89.1
44.6
84.6
78.0
55.7

400
400
370
320
400
400
380
350
500

41.3
6.1
3.6
20.0
8.8
24.7
0.8)
1.2)
2.1

Average

69.8

–

400*

12.1

The two treatments in brackets were excluded due to poor signal-to-noise
ratio. The asterisk signifies that the median was computed.

PPG signal and the pressure signal were processed at a sampling
rate of 100 Hz. The reference occurrence times are given by the
time instant for the mid-amplitude point of each heartbeat [14],
cf. Section II-E.

medium in the laboratory setting in order to create conditions of
the fluid media similar to the ones during patient treatment, e.g.,
with respect to viscosity. At a blood flow rate of 400 ml/min,
the pump profile p̄s (t) was estimated by averaging all periods
during the analyzed interval.
Next, modeling of amplitude variability and noise is considered. A pump model signal p̃s (t) was produced by concatenating
p̄s (t) once its period length had been scaled so that the occurrence times of ps,0 (t) also applied to p̃s (t), cf. (16). System
identification was performed using an autoregressive moving
average model with exogenous input, i.e., ARMAX(da , db , dc ),
with ps,0 (t) as model input and p̃s (t) as exogenous input [17].
The model order parameters da , db , and dc were selected to
account for typical pressure variations.
Finally, a signal was produced by concatenating p̄s (t) using
random period lengths for time scaling. The lengths were defined by uncorrelated, Gaussian variables whose mean and standard deviation were determined from the lab measurements. The
resulting signal was then filtered with the identified ARMAX
model to produce the simulated pressure signal ps (t).

C. Dataset

B. Cardiac Pressure Signal

Twenty consecutive 1-min segments from each treatment
were selected for performance evaluation. The segments were
located halfway into the treatment at a time when the blood flow
rate remained constant during the entire 20-min interval.
Table II presents heart rate, pump rate, and blood flow computed as averages over the 20-min interval. The pump rate was
given by the harmonic closest to the heart rate, where the harmonic was determined from the pump model signal using the
aforementioned method. Table II also presents the ratio between
the peak-to-peak amplitudes of the cardiac and pump signals.
The cardiac signal amplitude was determined when the pump
was stopped, whereas the pump signal amplitude was determined during the 20-min interval from the pump model signal
p̃(t). Two treatments (#7 and 8) were excluded from further
analysis since the cardiac amplitude was judged as too weak
relative the pump amplitude, falling below a ratio of 2%.

The cardiac signal was simulated by employing a model that
involves frequency modulation with the fundamental frequency
F0 , corresponding to heart rate, and L − 1 harmonics,
cs (t) =

L







αl cos 2πlF0 t + 2πlFΔ

l=1



t

m(τ )dτ + φl
0

Simulated data are useful when studying performance since
blood flow rate and heart rate can be exactly controlled, as can
the amplitude ratio between the pump and cardiac components.
In the present study, simulated signals were used for developing
the method, whereas clinical and simulated data were used for
performance evaluation.

(19)
where αl denotes the weight of each sinusoid, FΔ the frequency
deviation given by the ratio F0 /mm ax , m(t) a function that
models heart rate variability, and mm ax the maximum value of
the integral of m(t). The phase φl defines, together with αl , the
shape of cs (t). The model in (19) is inspired by the well-known
integral pulse frequency modulation (IPFM) event series model
[18]; however, the output signal cs (t) is instead a sinusoid with
harmonics that models the cardiac component of the pressure
signal.
The function m(t) was modeled by colored Gaussian noise
produced by an autoregressive model, whose parameters were
originally determined from a subject at rest and used for the
IPFM model [19]. Thus, the power spectrum of heart rate variability in the cardiac pressure signal cs (t) resembles that produced by the IPFM model.
The observed signal y(t) is obtained by adding the cardiac
signal cs (t) and the pressure signal ps (t).

A. Blood Pump Pressure Signal and Noise

C. Illustration of the Method

The starting point for producing the simulated blood pump
pressure signal is a pump profile determined from data acquired
in a laboratory setting. Acquisition was accomplished with the
aforementioned equipment, cf. Section III-B, but without any
patient involved, and thus, no pressure caused by the heart or
any other physiological activity is present; the resulting signal
is denoted ps,0 (t). Heparinized bovine blood was used as fluid

The performance is illustrated on simulated data in Fig. 5,
containing a rather drastic increase in heart rate. In contrast
to Fig. 4, where the PPG served as reference, the simulated
(true) cardiac signal here serves as reference. From Fig. 5(c),
it is evident that ĉ(0) (t) contains pump-related residuals that
obscure the cardiac activity; however, after five iterations, the
agreement between c(t) and ĉ(5) (t) is much better. It is noted

IV. SIMULATION OF PRESSURE SIGNALS

HOLMER∗ et al.: EXTRACTING A CARDIAC SIGNAL FROM THE EXTRACORPOREAL PRESSURE SENSORS OF A HEMODIALYSIS MACHINE

1311

Fig. 6. Plot of the difference in heart rate obtained from the PPG signal and
the venous pressure signal.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the alternating, iterative procedure for estimating the
heartbeat occurrence times on simulated data. (a) Venous pressure signal y(t)
containing a cardiac component, which is 12% of the amplitude of the pump
component, (b) initial pump model signal p̃ (0 ) (t), (c) initial estimate of the
cardiac signal ĉ(0 ) (t), (d) initial cardiac model signal c̃(0 ) (t), (e) final estimate
of the cardiac signal ĉ(5 ) (t) with dots indicating the estimated occurrence times,
(f) final cardiac model signal c̃(5 ) (t), (g) estimated occurrence times (black
lines) and the simulated (true) occurrence times (gray line), and (h) simulated
(true) cardiac signal with the reference occurrence times marked with dots. Note
that the vertical scale in (a)–(f) and (h) has mmHg as unit.

that the model signal c̃(5) (t) does not account for the amplitude
variation visible in c(t) and ĉ(5) (t).
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The standard deviation σ	 of the error between estimated and
reference occurrence times, i.e.,
(J +1)

	c,k = t̂c,k

Fig. 7. Occurrence time estimation error σ 	 as a function of relative cardiac
signal amplitude. The average of σ 	 , computed in 1-min segments, is determined
for clinical data, as well as for simulated data. For the latter type of data, the
relative cardiac signal amplitude is varied for two different heart rates.

used to process both clinical and simulated data: ηc,0 = 0.5,
ηc,1 = 1.5, ηp = 0.05, δ = 0.25 ms, L = 50.
VI. RESULTS

− tc,k

(20)

is employed as performance measure. Depending on context, the
term “reference” refers either to the occurrence times derived
from the PPG or from the simulated data. For the latter type
of data, the number of missed beats and the number of falsely
detected beats are also considered as performance measures.
The following parameter values are used to produce the simulated signals: da = 10, db = 9, dc = 10, L = 2, φ1 = 0, φ2 =
0.01, α1 = 1, α2 = 0.25. The following parameter values are

A. Clinical Signals
Fig. 6 presents the difference between heart rate estimated
from the venous pressure signal and from the PPG signal, computed in 1-min segments. The mean difference is 0.07 bpm,
with a standard deviation of 0.84 bpm; the clinical significance
of this result is further considered in the Discussion. For each
of the seven treatments, the standard deviation σ	 is plotted versus the cardiac signal amplitude determined from the interval
when the pump was stopped, see Fig. 7.

1312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 8. Occurrence time estimation error σ 	 as a function of heart rate. The
relative cardiac signal amplitude is set to 12%. The peaks at 89 and 134 bpm
are caused by a coinciding pump rate.

Fig. 9. Average number of iterations J required to reach convergence, displayed as a function of relative cardiac signal amplitude. The heart rate is set to
60 bpm.

B. Simulated Signals
In addition to the results based on clinical data, Fig. 7 also
presents σ	 as a function of cardiac signal amplitude when the
data are simulated. Two different heart rates are studied (50 and
100 bpm). The results show that a higher heart rate is associated
with a lower estimation error σ	 .
Fig. 8 presents σ	 as a function of heart rate, where the studied
heart rates are those typically found in hemodialysis patients.
The relative cardiac amplitude is set to 12%, corresponding to
the average cardiac amplitude of all treatments given in Table II.
The simulated blood flow was set to 400 ml/min, see Table II,
which corresponds to a pump rate at 44 bpm, a second harmonic
at 89 bpm, and a third harmonic at 134 bpm. It is evident from
Fig. 8 that performance deteriorates drastically when the heart
rate is very close to any of the harmonics of the pump rate;
the method is then unable to separate the cardiac and pump
components. The better performance observed at higher heart
rates is due to that the spectrum of the identified ARMAX model
is increasingly attenuated at higher heart rates.
The number of iterations J required for convergence are presented as a function of relative cardiac signal amplitude, see
Fig. 9. For small amplitudes, the number of iterations increases
slightly due to that noise is more influential on the initial cardiac
signal estimate. The required number of iterations is nonetheless
low, and most improvement occurs during the first iteration.
The number of missed beats NM and the number of falsely
detected beats NF are presented as a function of low-pass cutoff
frequency, see Fig. 10. The graphs represent the average number
of missed and falsely detected beats in 100 1-min intervals. For
a heart rate of 80 bpm, the cutoff frequency associated with the
lowest number of false and missed beats is about 2 Hz.
VII. DISCUSSION
A. Clinical Relevance
Implementation of cardiac monitoring in a hemodialysis machine may lead to increased patient safety and survival. With
the present method, continuous monitoring of cardiac rhythm
can be performed during treatment without extra sensors. The

Fig. 10. Number of missed beats N M and falsely detected beats N F as a
function of low-pass cutoff frequency FL P . The heart rate is set to 80 bpm and
the relative cardiac signal amplitude to 12%.

primary output of the method is information on heart rate and
irregularities in rhythm. The method has also the potential to
alarm when the cardiac signal vanishes, probably a sign of cardiac arrest or venous needle dislodgement—this is a topic for
future research. When such life-threatening events occur, early
detection is crucial so that the clinical staff can make prompt
actions to save a patient’s life.
The results obtained from clinical data (see Fig. 6) show that
the heart rate, estimated from the pressure signal in 1-min segments, is close to the heart rate derived from the PPG signal, the
difference being 0.07 ± 0.84 bpm. These performance figures
suggest that the method is suitable for use in clinical routine.
Table II demonstrates that there is considerable patient-topatient variation in the relative cardiac signal amplitudes, caused
by variation in size, shape, and position of the vascular access.
We have shown that the amplitude ratio between heart and pump
components influences performance, see Fig. 7. All outliers
observed in Fig. 6 are from patients with low relative cardiac
signal amplitude. In general, the cardiac component amplitude
decreases slowly during treatment, due to, e.g., blood pressure,

HOLMER∗ et al.: EXTRACTING A CARDIAC SIGNAL FROM THE EXTRACORPOREAL PRESSURE SENSORS OF A HEMODIALYSIS MACHINE

blood viscosity, or sympathetic activity, and thus performance is
expected to be slowly reduced during treatment. For the present
dataset, the amplitude ratio was essentially constant during the
analyzed 20-min segment selected from the second half of the
treatments.
When evaluating performance in more precise temporal
terms, the occurrence time estimation error σ	 was found to
be 35 ms at a relative cardiac signal amplitude of 10% and a
heart rate of 50 bpm (see Fig. 7)—an error that becomes increasingly smaller as heart rate increases. For relative cardiac signal
amplitudes exceeding 10%, the magnitude of the estimation error suggests that arrhythmia analysis involving the detection
of PVBs and atrial fibrillation can be accurately performed,
whereas the error is too high to allow spectral analysis of heart
rate variability [20]. These results are unfortunately overshadowed by the situation when heart rate is less than ±2 bpm from
pump rate: a drastic increase in σ	 is then observed (see Fig. 8).
To some extent, the situation with similar heart and pump rates
can explain the variation in clinical results observed in Fig. 7:
since heart rate changes during treatment, it may occasionally
coincide with pump rate, with increased σ	 as a result.
A practical solution to the problem of coinciding pump and
heart rates is to automatically adjust the blood flow so that it is
as close as possible to the desired flow rate, but outside a certain
margin relative the prevailing heart rate. The rate should also be
kept below the access flow rate to avoid recirculation in the blood
access, but high enough to ensure that the prescribed dialysis
dose can be achieved. The idea to make blood flow dependent
on heart rate should be clinically feasible as long as the cardiac
signal is strong enough and the selected blood flow does not
imply a significant treatment prolongation. If the cardiac signal
is lost, the flow rate can be changed or the blood pump can even
be stopped temporarily to regain cardiac monitoring.
B. Methodological Aspects
The proposed method bears some resemblance to the wellknown Woody method [21], [22], originally developed for
latency correction of an ensemble of event-related brain
potentials—both methods employ an iterative procedure for parameter estimation. However, to the best of our knowledge, the
idea to iteratively estimate time-scale parameters from an ensemble of waveforms is novel. Similar to the results reported
on the Woody method [18], convergence is typically reached
within a few iterations for the pressure signals (see Fig. 9).
The assumption of a time-varying pump rate, cf. Section II-C,
was founded on data acquired in the laboratory setting, without
patient involvement. The data showed that the period length
of the pump had a standard deviation of 4.7 ms at a blood
flow rate of 400 ml/min. Hence, it was decided that the period
length should be subject to estimation as it represents a key
factor to achieve good performance. This assumption differs
from previous work, where the period length was fixed [8],
[9]. Indeed, even tiny variations in pump rate can give rise
to residuals that worsens the accuracy of heartbeat occurrence
times. This property is illustrated by the initial cardiac signal
estimate ĉ(0) (t) that rests on the assumption of a fixed period

1313

length: it is obvious from Figs. 4(c) and 5(c) that ĉ(0) (t) contains
pump-related residuals, which are manifested as sharp peaks and
edges. These residuals are substantially reduced by the iterative
procedure thanks to the estimation of individual period lengths.
Given that PVBs are frequent in hemodialysis patients [23],
[24], and occur much more frequently during treatment than
after [2], monitoring of PVB rate can have clinical significance
[4]. In the present method, PVB detection has not been treated
separately, but it is performed in the same way as the detection
of any beat, i.e., a beat is detected as long as it is found within
the tolerance interval [ηc,0 , ηc,1 ] centered around the expected
occurrence times. However, PVB detection probably calls for
additional algorithmic structure that builds on the observation
that the cardiac profile c̄(j ) (t), likely to reflect the pressure
associated with normal sinus beats, fits less well to a PVB. Con(j +1)
sequently, the LSE Ec (T̂c,k ) will be considerably larger for
PVBs than for sinus beats, suggesting that another tolerance interval should be used or additional cardiac profiles introduced.
The value of additional algorithmic structure remains to be investigated.
The amplitude variation of the blood pump signal was intentionally not taken into account when defining the pump model
signal p̃(j ) (t). The use of a constant amplitude reduces the risk
of a vanishing cardiac component.
C. Simulation of Pressure Signals
The error σ	 was generally lower for simulated data than
for clinical data. This finding may be explained by a varying
pressure propagation time, either inside the human body or the
extracorporeal blood circuit. Since the simulation model was developed for the purpose of testing signal processing algorithms,
this property was not taken into account.
Pressure disturbances originating from the fluid side of the
hemodialysis machine can occur in the venous pressure measurements. Such disturbances, caused by, e.g., changes in valve
positions or the control of the hemodialysis fluid pumps, are
transferred from the fluid side to the blood side via the dialyzer.
The disturbances have a lower amplitude than the ones originating from the blood pump, and are accounted for by the ARMAX
model in the simulator.
D. Reference Signal
It is well known that heartbeat occurrence times determined
from the ECG have better accuracy than those from the PPG,
thus making ECG a better choice as reference signal. However,
the ECG is less practical for clinical use because of the need
to attach many electrodes and the inconvenience with cables
that have to be connected throughout treatment. In the present
study, the PPG was preferred as reference since just a simple
finger clip pulse oximeter is needed, which is considered more
comfortable to wear. The PPG is known to be proportional
to blood volume changes, which result from pressure waves
originating from the heart [15]. It has a pulse propagation time
through the vascular system, which is similar to the pressure
wave. This property makes the PPG suitable as a reference
when assessing the estimated cardiac pressure signal.

1314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Other reasons for using the PPG is that information on blood
oxygenation and respiratory rate can be derived, and offers the
potential to predict intradialytic hypotension [25]. In some of the
studied hemodialysis patients, the finger was less well perfused
which resulted in a weaker PPG signal which, in turn, translated
into less accurate heartbeat occurrence times. Hence, the clinical
results of the present study are in a few cases influenced by a
low signal-to-noise ratio of the reference signal.
E. Limitations
The small size of the clinical dataset is a limitation of the
present study. To fully validate the performance of the proposed
method, a larger clinical dataset should be acquired that contains
various types of arrhythmia. Performance was studied for only
one blood flow rate (400 ml/min); however, other rates should
also be studied since the shape of the pump signal is rate dependent. The assumption that at least one heartbeat is present in the
analyzed interval is not always realistic, and therefore additional
criteria need to be developed for proper handling of noncardiac
components. The threshold for excluding signals with relative
cardiac amplitude below 2% needs to be further investigated.
VIII. CONCLUSION
A novel iterative method has been presented for extraction of
the cardiac component from the built-in extracorporeal pressure
sensors of the hemodialysis machine. The method is suitable for
continuous online monitoring of cardiac rhythm, and does not
require any external sensor. For both clinical and simulated data,
the results show that good agreement can be achieved between
heart rates estimated from the pressure signal and from the
PPG signal. This study may be viewed as a proof-of-concept
for cardiac monitoring during hemodialysis, however, further
studies are required before the method can be used in clinical
routine.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank M. Segelmark, L. Mattsson, and S. Said at “Filialen,” Skåne University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden, and P. Hansson at Gambro Lundia AB, Sweden, for
carrying out the clinical investigation. They would also like to
thank J. Lien for performing laboratory measurements, and J.
Sternby for fruitful discussions, both at Gambro Lundia AB,
Lund.

[6] S. Dash et al., “Automatic real time detection of atrial fibrillation,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, pp. 1701–1709, 2009.
[7] C. Huang et al., “A novel method for detection of the transition between
atrial fibrillation and sinus rhythm,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 4, pp. 1113–1119, Apr. 2011.
[8] U. Moissl et al., “Continuous observation and analysis of heart rate during hemodialysis treatment,” in Proc. Eur. Med. Biol. Eng. Conf., 1999,
vol. 37, pp. S558–S559.
[9] U. Moissl et al.,“Heart rate monitoring during hemodialysis treatment,”
in Proc. Eur. Med. Biol. Eng. Conf., 2002, vol. 3, pp. 584–585.
[10] H.-D. Polaschegg, “Method for measuring and indicating in liquid systems
of medical devices, and device for carrying out this method,” Eur. Patent
0 330 761, Sep. 8, 1993.
[11] T. Hertz et al., “Method and arrangement for detecting the condition of a
blood vessel access,” U.S. Patent 6 090 048, Jul. 18, 2000.
[12] H. D. Polaschegg, “Venous needle dislodgement: The pitfalls of venous
pressure measurement and possible alternatives, a review,” J. Ren. Care,
vol. 36, pp. 41–48, 2010.
[13] M. Segelmark et al., “Successful detection of venous needle dislodgement
using extracted heart pulses obtained from venous pressure monitoring,”
Proc. Amer. Soc. Nephrol. Kidney, vol. 21, p. 241A, 2010.
[14] J. Lázaro, “Pulse rate variability analysis for discrimination of sleepapnea-related decreases in the amplitude fluctuations of pulse photoplethysmographic signal in children,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 240–246, Jan. 2014.
[15] J. Allen, “Photoplethysmography and its application in clinical physiological measurement,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, pp. R1–R39, 2007.
[16] M. Holmer et al., “Determining heart activity present in the pressure
sensors of a dialysis machine,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 40, pp. 217–220,
2013.
[17] H. Madsen, Time Series Analysis. London, U.K.: Chapman & Hall/CRC,
2008.
[18] L. Sörnmo and P. Laguna, Bioelectrical Signal Processing in Cardiac and
Neurological Applications. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2005.
[19] J. Mateo and P. Laguna, “Improved heart rate variability signal analysis
from the beat occurrence times according to the IPFM model,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 997–1009, Aug. 2000.
[20] M. Merri et al., “Sampling frequency of the electrocardiogram for spectral
analysis of the heart rate variability,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 99–106, Jan. 1990.
[21] C. D. Woody, “Characterization of an adaptive filter for the analysis of
variable latency neuroelectric signals,” Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 5, pp. 539–
553, 1967.
[22] A. Cabasson, and O. Meste, “Time delay estimation: A new insight into the
Woody’s method,” IEEE Signal Proc. Lett., vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 573–576,
Dec. 01, 2008.
[23] S. Abe et al., “Electrocardiographic abnormalities in patients receiving
hemodialysis,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 131, pp. 1137–1144, 1996.
[24] A. Santoro et al., “Electrophysiological response to dialysis: the role of
dialysate potassium content and profiling,” Contrib. Nephrol., vol. 149,
pp. 295–305, 2005.
[25] K. Solem et al., “Prediction of intradialytic hypotension using photoplethysmography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1611–
1619, Jul. 2010.

REFERENCES
[1] US Renal Data System, “Patient mortality and survival,” Amer. J. Kidney
Dis., vol. 28, pp. 79–92, 1996.
[2] J. O. Burton et al., “Hemodialysis-induced left ventricular dysfunction
is associated with an increase in ventricular arrhythmia,” Renal Failure,
vol. 30, pp. 701–709, 2008.
[3] N. M. Selby and C. W. McIntyre, “The acute cardiac effects of dialysis,”
Semin. Dial., vol. 20, pp. 220–228, 2007.
[4] L. Sörnmo et al., “Noninvasive techniques for prevention of intradialytic
hypotension,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 45–59, Jul. 2012.
[5] K. Tateno and L. Glass, “Automatic detection of atrial fibrillation using
the coefficient of variation and density histograms of RR and deltaRR
intervals,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 39, pp. 664–671, 2001.

Mattias Holmer (S’13) received the M.Sc. degree
in engineering physics from Lund University, Lund,
Sweden, in 2000. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree at Biomedical Signal Processing Group
at the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund
University.
Since 2000, he has been with Gambro Lundia
AB, Lund, a medical technology company focused on
dialysis products. He is currently with the Research
Department at Gambro. His main research topic is
extraction of physiological signals from the pressure
signals in dialysis machines.

HOLMER∗ et al.: EXTRACTING A CARDIAC SIGNAL FROM THE EXTRACORPOREAL PRESSURE SENSORS OF A HEMODIALYSIS MACHINE

Frida Sandberg received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and the Ph.D. degree in signal processing from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in 2003
and 2010, respectively.
She is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Signal Processing Group, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University. Her research interests
include statistical signal processing, time-frequency
analysis, and modeling of biomedical signals, with
particular interest in signals of cardiovascular origin.

Kristian Solem received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical
signal processing from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in 2003 and 2008, respectively.
He is currently with the Research Department,
Gambro Lundia AB, Lund. His research interest is
multimodal signal processing in hemodialysis including statistical signal processing, modeling of
biomedical signals, time-frequency analysis, filtering, and signal decomposition. Particular interests include ECG, photoplethysmographic, blood pressure,
dialysis pressure, and conductivity signals and their significance in various
hemodialysis applications.

Eglė Grigonytė received the B.Sc. degree in biophysics from Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
and the M.Sc. degree in biophysics, biomedical engineering from Kaunas University of Technology, Kaunas, Lithuania, in 2009 and 2011, respectively. She
was involved in clinical research dealing with neurophysiological intraoperative monitoring using evoked
potentials and prediction of epileptic seizure from
EEG.
She is currently with Lund University, and her
research interests include cardiovascular monitoring
during hemodialysis and intradialytic risk evaluation techniques.

1315

Bo Olde received the M.Sc. degree in engineering
of applied physics and the Ph.D. degree in applied
electronics from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in
1982 and 1991, respectively.
He is currently a Principal Scientist at the Research Department, Gambro Lundia AB, Lund. His
research interests include clinical research in the field
of hemodialysis.

Leif Sörnmo (S’80–M’85–SM’02) received the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, in 1978
and 1984, respectively. He received the degree of
Doctor Honoris Causa from Zaragoza University,
Zaragoza, Spain, in 2014.
From 1983 to 1995, he was a Research Fellow at
the Department of Clinical Physiology, Lund University, where he was involved with research on ECG
signal processing. Since 1990, he has been with the
Signal Processing Group, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Lund University, where he is currently a Professor of biomedical signal processing and responsible for the BME program. He is the author
of Bioelectrical Signal Processing in Cardiac and Neurological Applications
(Elsevier, 2005). His research interests include statistical signal processing,
modeling of biomedical signals, methods for analysis of atrial fibrillation, multimodal signal processing in hemodialysis, and power-efficient signal processing
in implantable devices.
Dr. Sörnmo is an elected Fellow of International Academy of Medical and
Biological Engineering. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, Journal of Electrocardiology, and Medical and Biological Engineering & Computing; he is on the editorial board of Journal of
Biomedical Engineering. He was an Associate Editor of Computers in Biomedical Research (1997–2000).

