1324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

A Platform for Gastric Cancer Screening
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Robert Caprara, Student Member, IEEE, Keith L. Obstein, Gabriel Scozzarro,
Christian Di Natali, Student Member, IEEE, Marco Beccani, Student Member, IEEE, Douglas R. Morgan,
and Pietro Valdastri∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer
death worldwide and screening programs have had a significant
impact on reducing mortality. The majority of cases occur in lowand middle-income countries (LMIC), where endoscopy resources
are traditionally limited. In this paper, we introduce a platform
designed to enable inexpensive gastric screening to take place in
remote areas of LMIC. The system consists of a swallowable endoscopic capsule connected to an external water distribution system
by a multichannel soft tether. Pressurized water is ejected from the
capsule to orient the view of the endoscopic camera. After completion of a cancer screening procedure, the outer shell of the capsule
and the soft tether can be disposed, while the endoscopic camera is
reclaimed without needing further reprocessing. The capsule, measuring 12 mm in diameter and 28 mm in length, is able to visualize
the inside of the gastric cavity by combining waterjet actuation
and the adjustment of the tether length. Experimental assessment
was accomplished through a set of bench trials, ex vivo analysis,
and in vivo feasibility validation. During the ex vivo trials, the platform was able to visualize the main landmarks that are typically
observed during a gastric cancer screening procedure in less than
8 min. Given the compact footprint, the minimal cost of the disposable parts, and the possibility of running on relatively available
and inexpensive resources, the proposed platform can potentially
widen gastric cancer screening programs in LMIC.
Index Terms—Capsule endoscopy, gastric cancer screening,
global health, robotic endoscopy, waterjet actuation.

I. INTRODUCTION
ORLDWIDE, gastric and esophageal cancers account
for over 10% of incident diagnoses, totaling 1.4 million
cases annually [1]. In addition, gastric cancer and esophageal
cancer have the second (10%) and sixth (5.4%) highest global
mortality rates, respectively [1]. While both types of cancer
are global phenomena, nearly 70% of cases are concentrated in
low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) [2], [3]. Screening

W

Manuscript received August 29, 2014; revised November 16, 2014 and December 15, 2014; accepted December 20, 2014. Date of publication December
20, 2015; date of current version April 17, 2015. This work was supported in part
by the Vanderbilt Initiative in Surgery and Engineering, the National Institute
of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health
under Award R01EB018992, and the National Science Foundation under Grant
CNS-1239355. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
R. Caprara, G. Scozzarro, C. Di Natali, and M. Beccani are with the STORM
Lab at Vanderbilt University.
K. L. Obstein and D. R. Morgan are with the Vanderbilt University Medical
Center.
∗ P. Valdastri is with the STORM Lab, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235 USA (email: p.valdastri@
vanderbilt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2014.2386309

programs have been shown to be effective in reducing the mortality rate through early detection [4]–[7].
Typically, screening for gastric and esophageal cancer is
completed using a flexible endoscope. While flexible endoscopes are used reliably in modern medical settings, many issues
hinder their usage in LMIC. First among these issues is a lack of
ability to reliably reprocess the endoscopes after each procedure
[8]. Improper (or lack of) reprocessing of endoscopic equipment
can lead to further spread of harmful bacteria and diseases in
areas already plagued by illness.
Capsule endoscopes could provide a sanitary method for
upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract cancer screening due to their
disposability [9]. Where issues arise for the use of capsule
endoscopes in upper GI procedures, is their lack of dynamic
controllability [10] and their cost per individual procedure [11].
With the stomach having such a large workspace, direct control
of the capsule’s movement is required to accomplish a complete examination. In 2010, Olympus Medical Systems Corp
and Siemens Healthcare jointly started development of a wireless, magnetically guided endoscopic capsule (MGEC) for upper
GI endoscopy [12]. This platform operates using the magnetic
interaction between a small permanent magnet embedded in
the capsule and a large magnetic guidance system (footprint of
1 m × 2 m) to control the capsule with 5 DOF [12]. To reduce
friction from the mucosa and to expand the stomach for easier
viewing, the patient is asked to drink water prior to the procedure. Each MGEC is designed to be single-use and is disposed
of after examination. While use of this platform is promising
in modern medical settings, the costs associated with both the
external driving unit and each individual capsule would prohibit
its adoption in low-resource settings. In addition, any screening
program’s ability to reach remote areas would be hindered by
the limited portability of the magnetic guidance system due to
its large footprint.
Capsule robots have been proposed for inspection of fluidfilled stomachs using a combination of external magnetic guidance and a soft capsule body in [13]–[15], or through usage of a
number of propellers as in a miniature submarine in [16], [17].
Again, the limited portability of the guidance system [13] and
the cost of the disposable on-board electronics [13], [17] make
these solutions not suitable for LMIC.
Any endoscopic platform designed for an upper GI cancer
screening program in resource-limited and/or remote areas of
LMIC would ideally need to be easily controllable within both
the esophagus and stomach, be portable to easily move from
each remote location to the next, be mechanically reliable, be
disposable for sanitation purposes, and be able to operate at

0018-9294 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CAPRARA et al.: PLATFORM FOR GASTRIC CANCER SCREENING IN LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

Fig. 1. (a) Hydrojet capsule inside a human stomach with gastric landmarks.
(b) Labeled rendering of the hydrojet capsule.

minimal cost per procedure (i.e., 2–5 USD). With procedural
costs in mind, any on-board system electronics, such as cameras, would need to be reclaimable and not require any further
reprocessing.
Proposed for the first time in this paper is a disposable, softtethered, swallowable endoscopic capsule, referred to as the
hydrojet capsule (see Fig. 1), which has the potential to enable
inexpensive gastric cancer screenings to take place in remote
areas of LMIC. If patients in a remote area are found to have any
suspicious lesions or any other noticeable physical discrepancies
after a hydrojet procedure, the physician would then be able to
more reliably refer them to a less remote healthcare setting for
a traditional gastroscopy. Water—a resource relatively available
and inexpensive in most remote settings—is pressurized and
ejected from the capsule to orient the view of the endoscopic
camera. After completion of a cancer screening procedure, the
hydrojet outer shell and tether is disposed of and the capsule’s
camera is reclaimed without needing further reprocessing. This
capsule configuration has the potential to minimize procedural
cost and reduce the risk of spreading disease through improper
reprocessing of endoscopic tools. Additionally, since the setup
needs to be easily transported from one location to the next, the
entire system has been designed with portability in mind.
II. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION
The proposed platform consists of a swallowable capsule
connected to external water distribution and vision acquisition
systems by a disposable, multichannel, soft tether. As represented in Figs. 1(b) and 2, the capsule is first comprised of a
disposable outer shell with two fluid suction ports and four fluid
exhaust ports. The exhaust ports, placed in 90◦ intervals around
the capsule’s cylindrical body and oriented at 90◦ relative to the
capsule’s axial direction, allow the hydrojet to achieve 2-DOF
motion when pressurized water is expelled from them. Through
selective activation of the exhaust ports at varying water pressures, the hydrojet is able to operate in a quasi-hemispherical
region. A third DOF can be introduced to the system through
the feeding and retraction of the attached multichannel tether.
Suction ports allow the operator to control the amount of fluid
within the subject’s stomach during a procedure. On the front
side of the hydrojet’s outer shell is a viewing window for the

1325

Fig. 2. (a) Exploded view of the hydrojet capsule. (b) Orientation of exhaust
and suction ports. (c) Hydrojet capsule using water jet actuation in air.

Fig. 3.

Block diagram of the hydrojet system.

internal camera. Connection points for the multichannel tether
are housed in the rear of the capsule. As illustrated in Fig. 2(a),
the hydrojet’s inner core module contains the endoscopic camera and LEDs. A four-pole female connector is located on the
backside of the inner core. This module rests within a waterproof cavity inside the hydrojet’s outer shell. The inner core
module is easily inserted or removed from the hydrojet’s outer
shell prior to and following a procedure, respectively, allowing
the on-board electronics to be reclaimed and reused. The multichannel tether is composed of six independent flexible tubes.
Four of these tubes supply pressurized water to their respective
hydrojet exhaust ports. A fifth tube is used for liquid removal
and attached to the suction line on the capsule. The final sixth
tube holds the electrical wiring for the vision unit and is plugged
into the connector located on the backside of the inner core.
To provide pressurized water for capsule maneuverability, an
external water distribution system consisting of a network of
pumps, valves, flowmeters, and junction manifolds is proposed.
Referring to the block diagram in Fig. 3, water is transferred
by a pump from a reservoir tank into the first of two system
manifolds. From the first manifold, water either exits through
the mainline to be distributed further downstream into the system
or is returned back into the initial holding reservoir. The amount

1326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND FABRICATION
A. Medical Considerations and Technical Requirements

Fig. 4. Hydrojet next to a standard gastroscope (Olympus Corp., Model:
GIF180).

of water allowed to return to the reservoir tank determines the
water pressure level downstream in the system. To vary this
amount and, thus, alter the exit pressure of the water through the
hydrojet’s exhaust ports, multiple secondary water lines exit the
first manifold. Each line has its own independent solenoid valve
which is directly connected to the hydrojet’s control system. In
the current implementation of the platform, we have two exit
lines that allow the main pressure to be reduced either by a factor
of two or ten in case one or both lines are open, respectively.
Additional exit lines can be introduced to achieve a finer control
in water pressure.
Water that exits the first manifold through the mainline then
enters into a flowmeter (propulsion flowmeter in Fig. 3). This
flowmeter allows for tracking of the amount of water exhausted
by the capsule and to monitor how much fluid has been introduced into the patient’s stomach. Exiting the flowmeter, pressurized water then travels into the directional manifold that
distributes it to four lines on the multichannel tether. Activation
and deactivation of these lines via dedicated solenoid valves
dictates the motion of the hydrojet by controlling which exhaust
port on the capsule receives pressurized water. Fluid removal
from the patient is accomplished through a completely isolated
line within the multichannel tether and is operated by user activation of a suction pump. A dedicated flowmeter allows the
operator to monitor the amount of fluid removed and, in conjunction with the first flowmeter, the net amount of fluid expended
during operation.
An external joystick, in conjunction with vision relayed by
the hydrojet, allows for open-loop control of water distribution,
and therefore capsule movement, by the operator. To control the
exit pressure of the water, a button on the joystick cycles through
valve settings. The suction line pump is controlled using a foot
pedal. A graphical user interface (GUI) on the personal computer
allows the operator to see the current operating direction and exit
pressure. The GUI also shows the exhaust line flow rate, suction
line flow rate, and net liquid used within the patient. Using data
provided by both the suction and propulsion flowmeters, the
GUI will also alert the operator when the net fluid introduced
into the stomach exceeds safety thresholds. The operator then
will know to cease propulsion and to activate the suction line
until once again under the safety threshold. A second, dedicated
monitor provides the view from the capsule’s on-board camera.

In designing the hydrojet platform, the following medical
considerations have been taken into account:
1) Device Introduction: Capsule delivery is accomplished
through oral insertion. Therefore, the hydrojet must be
able to pass through the esophagus. This passage in a fully
grown adult, as measured from the esophogeal sphincter,
is approximately 18–26 cm in length and 2–3 cm in diameter [18]. This is a limiting factor in the allowable diameter
of the device. Standard gastroscopes are up to 1.1 m in
length and 12.8 mm in diameter [19].
2) Internal Workspace: A typical nondistended human stomach has an average volumetric capacity of approximately
1000 cm3 [20]. On an average, the stomach has a maximum width of 10 cm and a length of 34 cm at the greater
curvature [21]. To operate within the workspace, flexible
endoscopes use Bowden wires to mechanically move the
distal camera with two angular DOFs. To look backward to
the cardia and the fundus, flexible endoscopes are capable
of retroflexion, a process where the tip of the endoscope
is deflected 180◦ by the user.
3) Fluid Control: The Siemens/Olympus MGEC system uses
a protocol where the patient drinks a total of 1.3 L of
water prior to the procedure [12] to expand the stomach.
This volume can be assumed as a safety threshold not to
be exceeded during operation of the hydrojet platform.
To achieve this goal, fluid levels must be monitored and
controlled in real time.
4) Duration of Procedure: A standard upper GI endoscopy
takes from 5 to 15 min [22]. Therefore, the hydrojet
must allow the operator to visualize the main anatomical landmarks in a comparable amount of time. In terms
of maximum duration of a single procedure, the hydrojet must guarantee uninterrupted operation for at least
75 min (i.e., safety factor of 5 applied to the 15 min
duration).
5) Disposability and Cost: As the target application is upper GI screening in LMIC, the costs related to a single
procedure must be minimized (i.e., 2–5 USD). This can
be achieved by disposing plastic parts of the instrument,
while retaining electronic components without the need
for reprocessing them.
6) Portability: To enable upper GI screening programs to
reach remote areas and operators to move from one village
to the next, the system must be easily portable and should
run on available and inexpensive resources.
7) Safety: To prevent tissue damage, the exhaust pressure
at each nozzle must remain below 3 bar [23]. Regarding
temperature of operation, the capsule must remain below 34 ◦ C [24] to ensure no tissue damage occurs in the
esophagus or stomach during introduction or examination, respectively. In the case of all tether lines detaching
from the main body, the capsule must be designed with
size constraints in mind to pass through the lower GI
tract using peristalsis (i.e., a maximum size of 13 mm in

CAPRARA et al.: PLATFORM FOR GASTRIC CANCER SCREENING IN LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

diameter and 31.5 mm in length, as commercial capsule
endoscopes [25]).
B. Waterjet Actuation System—Design and Fabrication
1) Hydrojet Capsule: Made from a durable plastic (Objet
Verowhite Plus) via 3-D printing (Objet Geometries Ltd.,
Model: OBJET 30), the outer shell has a diameter of
12 mm, length of 28 mm, and weight of 2.7 g. The current
material is not biocompatible as only the feasibility of the
present device is being assessed at this stage. Nevertheless, the design is compatible with injection molding of
biocompatible plastic materials. On the aft of the hydrojet,
five tether connections ports were created (diameter
3.4 mm) to allow insertion of the propulsion and suction
tubes. In the center of the hydrojet’s aft, another port was
created (diameter 2 mm) for insertion of the sixth central
line to power the on-board electronics. On the outer shell
external surface, 16 mm from the front face of the capsule, four exhaust ports (diameter 2 mm) were placed in
90◦ intervals around the capsule’s longitudinal axis. The
point of placement of these ports corresponds to the hydrojet’s theoretical center of mass when loaded with the
inner core module. Two additional ports (diameter 2 mm)
were placed with 180◦ spacing around the outer shell surface at 12 mm from the front face of the hydrojet for the
suction line. The symmetrical placement of suction ports
allows the overall disturbance created by liquid suction to
be a negligible factor when operating the hydrojet. The
port placement is represented in Fig. 2(b). On the front
side of the capsule, a recess (diameter 7 mm, depth 0.8
mm) was created to place a plexiglass cover to shield the
inner core from the external environment.
The inner core module, also fabricated by rapid prototyping, has a diameter of 5.4 mm and a length of 17 mm,
and contains the on-board camera, LEDs, and a four-pole
female connector on the backside. The dimensions of the
inner core allow it to be inserted and removed from a recess within the outer shell without it ever contacting the
external environment. The entire capsule with both inner core and outer shell is designed to be waterproof and
neutrally buoyant when in water.
2) Multichannel Tether: To connect the capsule to the water
distribution and visual acquisition systems, six independent tubes, each measuring 1.1 m in length, were used.
Five of these tubes [Tygon polyvinyl-chloride (PVC) Tubing, 3.18 mm outer diameter (OD), 1.59 mm inner diameter (ID)] are used by the water distribution system. The
sixth tube (Miniature Clear EVA Tubing, 1.78 mm OD,
1.02 mm ID) nests in the center of the five larger tubes
and provides the wired connections to the capsule’s electronics for power and video transmission. A constructed
Hydrojet capsule with multichannel tether is shown in
Fig. 4, alongside a standard gastroscope.
3) Water Distribution System: To provide pressurized water to the system, a positive displacement three-chamber
diaphragm pump (ShurFlo, Model: 8030-863-239) was
used to take in water from a reservoir upstream. Im-

1327

mediately downstream from the pump, pressurized water was fed into the system’s first brass manifold which
has two side outlets. These side outlets are connected by
PVC tubing (6.35 mm OD, 3.18 mm ID) to their own respective stainless steel solenoid valves (McMaster-Carr,
Model: 5077T144). Downstream from the first manifold,
an ultrasonic flow meter was attached to the system (Titan, Model: Atrato 740-V20-A) and connected directly
to the system’s data acquisition (DAQ) board (National
Instruments, Model: NI-USB-6221) for monitoring the
total amount of fluid expelled from the capsule. Further
downstream is the system’s second brass manifold with
four side outlets. The same model of valves (McMasterCarr, Model: 5077T144) and PVC tubing (6.35 mm OD,
3.18 mm ID) were used to provide directional control to
the hydrojet. To activate both the pressure control and
the directional control valves, power was regulated via
a valve control box, which was comprised of multiple
NPN transistor gates driven by the DAQ board. The valves
were regulated via ON/OFF signals due to their relatively
slow commutation time (i.e., 20 ms). Finer control of capsule motion may be achieved via independent pulse width
modulation (PWM) of the pressure at exhaust ports, as
suggested in [26]. While this can be obtained by using
faster and more expensive valves, we hypothesized that
three different levels of pressure, combined with the field
of view of the camera and the adjustment of tether length,
were sufficient to inspect the surface of the stomach, while
minimizing the overall cost of the platform. The validity of this assumption was assessed in both ex vivo and
in vivo trials described in Section IV. Larger diameter PVC
tubing (12.7-mm OD, 9.58-mm ID) was used between the
reservoir, pump, flowmeter, and manifolds so as not to
inhibit the max allowable flow rate to the hydrojet.
To operate the suction line, another positive displacement
pump (ShurFlo, Model: 8000-912-288) was used. A Pelton wheel flowmeter (Cole-Parmer, Model: W-32709-80)
was attached upstream from the displacement pump and
connected to the DAQ board to monitor the outflow of
fluid from the patient during procedure.
All parts of the water distribution system were chosen
with portability and cost in mind. In particular, the total
cost of the listed components is under 6000 USD.
4) Static Analysis: Prior to bench testing the system, the force
needed at the exhaust ports to achieve a particular angular orientation of the camera at various tether lengths was
estimated via static analysis. Tether length is originally
measured from the cardia as it is considered the point of
origin within the stomach and acts as an anchor point for
the tether. The possible orientation angles of the capsule
were deemed to be of significance since, to successfully
visualize gastric landmarks, the capsule needs to be able to
use the mucosa as a deflection wall. Approaching the mucosa at approximately a 90◦ angle allows for the capsule
to pivot off the mucosal wall with minimal interaction.
As represented in Fig. 5 for the transition from configuration 1 to 2, introduction of additional tether length as the

1328

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Hydrojet estimated range of motion.

the interstitial space of the five outer tubes. By using this
model, we obtained an equivalent single tube OD of 8.59
mm, while an equivalent single tube ID of 7.25 mm was
derived from the previously found equivalent area moment
of inertia.
It is worth mentioning that, in the current implementation, the single tubes can slide one against the other and
reconfigure during bending. For this reason, they offer a
lower bending stiffness. Therefore, the modeling we propose here provides a worst-case estimation of the force
required to achieve a certain orientation angle.
The system was modeled as a flexible cantilever beam with
a point load, representative of the waterjet actuation, on
its end. Gravity was ignored as an external force since the
capsule has neutral buoyancy when in water. The distance
from the cardia to the greater curvature was assumed to be
around 15 cm, therefore the model was used to investigate
beam (tether) lengths L ranging from 3 to 15 cm in steps
of 3 cm. The values of the complete elliptic integral of
the first kind F  (θ) and incomplete elliptic integral of the
first kind F  (θ) can be found via elliptic integral tables
and used to derive the modular angle α. Then, the required
force P for a given set of bending parameters can be found
with
EIα2
(2)
L2
where E is the Young’s Modulus of the tube (4.5 MPa),
I is the equivalent area moment of inertia of the single
tube, and L is the tether length. The required forces to
achieve particular angles on 3, 9, and 15 cm tethers are
shown in Fig. 6. The vertical dashed lines on the plot
represent the maximum forces at the exhaust port of the
capsule for the three different levels of pressure available
in the current implementation of the platform. In case
of combined motions involving water ejection from two
exhaust ports, these forces must be scaled down by a factor
of two (i.e., the number of active directional valves). The
estimations in Fig. 6 show that, with the design choices
that have been made, we can expect to reach any desired
orientation angle from 0◦ to 90◦ by adjusting the tether
length and the water pressure level.
P =

Fig. 6. Estimated angular orientation of the hydrojet capsule as a function of
tip actuation force at varying tether length, L. The vertical dashed lines represent
the maximum tip actuation forces available in the current platform.

capsule is perpendicular to the gastric surface creates a
physical pivot point where the tether contacts the mucosal
wall. After this contact occurs, it is assumed the capsule is
now operating on a newly created tether length. For example, this assumption means that the capsule will behave in
a similar manner whether the tether is 6 cm past the cardia
or if 6 cm away from a pivot point on the mucosal wall.
To calculate capsule angular orientation θ, defined as the
displacement from the vertical alignments as in the inset in Fig. 6, the method of elliptic integrals was used
[27], [28]. To simplify the model, the multichannel tether
was considered to act as a single line. This simplification
was calculated using an equivalent area moment of inertia
method by first finding the area moment of inertia for each
of the six independent tubes of the tether. Through usage
of the parallel axis theorem around the centroidal axis of
the central tube, the single area moments of inertia were
summed to form one governing area moment of inertia.
An equivalent dimensioned single tube was found by using the following circle packing equation for five circles
within a circle [29]:

1
(1)
Do = d3o + d3o 2(1 + √ )
5
where d3o is the diameter of the outer multichannel tubes
(i.e., 3.18 mm). A packing of only five circles was used
since the smaller central tube was capable of fitting within

C. Other Components
An ultra-mini color camera (Misumi Electronics Corp,
Model: MO-B0804-62) was chosen to be used inside the capsule for its size (4.8 mm diameter, 18.8 mm length), cost (128
USD) and video quality (656 × 496 resolution, 30 ft/s, 64◦
field of view, 1-mm minimum working distance). The camera’s
video signal is acquired by a frame grabber (Forward Video Co.
Ltd., Model: ezcap116) and displayed on a secondary monitor.
Four warm white LEDs (Nichia Corp, Model: NS2L157ARTH3) driven via PWM provide illumination for the camera during
the procedure.
A thumb-controlled joystick with a center select button
(Adafruit, Model: 512) was adopted to maneuver the hydrojet
during the procedure, while National Instrument’s LabVIEW
was used to create the control program and the system’s GUI.

CAPRARA et al.: PLATFORM FOR GASTRIC CANCER SCREENING IN LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

1329

IV. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
A. Bench Testing
1) Force Testing: Quantification of the forces exerted by the
expulsion of water was accomplished using a load cell
(ATI Industrial Automation, Model: NANO17, resolution
1/160 N). The capsule was connected to the load cell
using a 3D printed adapter and a 130 mm steel rod of
4 mm diameter. Multiple tests were completed with the
pressure set at low, medium and high settings, operating each single exhaust port one at the time. The average
forces exerted by the waterjets were 0.0105 ± 0.0013 N,
0.0295 ± 0.0012 N and 0.103 ± 0.0024 N on low, medium
and high settings, respectively. These values are reported
as vertical dashed lines in the plot in Fig. 6. The exhaust
pressures were calculated to be 0.0334 ± 0.0041 bar,
0.0939 ± 0.0038 bar and 0.328 ± 0.0076 bar for low,
medium and high settings. These values are well below
the aforementioned safety threshold of 3 bar. We also
confirmed experimentally that, when two exhaust ports
are activated at the same time, the force drops by a factor of two. The average thrust force from each waterjet
when two exhaust ports are simultaneously activated were
found to be 0.0048 ± 0.0008 N, 0.0138 ± 0.0013 N and
0.0496 ± 0.0015 N for low, medium and high, respectively.
2) Fluid Flow Rate: Using the system flowmeters, the volumetric flow rate of the hydrojet exhaust ports was found
to be 0.328, 0.576 and 1.07 L/min, respectively, for
low, medium and high pressures. Using Bernoulli’s equation, exhaust velocities were found to be 2.43, 3.86 and
5.54 m/s, respectively. With the suction line having a fluid
removal rate of approximately 0.5 L/min, extensive use of
high pressure would require resting periods solely for suction. Using the real-time data acquired by both flowmeters
on the suction and propulsion lines, the operator would be
alerted when period of resting suction would be required.
3) Range of Motion: Before getting into the details of this
experiment, it is worth denoting the difference between
the capsule’s range of motion (see Fig. 5) versus the capsule’s range of vision. The capsule’s range of motion is
defined as the reachable locations of the capsule’s center
of mass during operation. The capsule’s range of vision
is defined as the workspace that can be visualized by the
operator through the camera mounted in the hydrojet capsule. Therefore, the range of vision is a larger region than
the range of motion and is determined by the capsule’s
range of motion, the capsule’s possible angular orientation at a given location and the field of view of the onboard
camera.
The capsule’s range of motion and angular orientation
were quantified using a 5-DOF magnetic tracking module
(Northern Digital Inc., Model: Aurora Tabletop Transmitter, 1.2-mm positional nominal root mean square error
(RMSE), 0.5◦ rotational nominal RMSE, 40-Hz update
rate) inserted into the capsule at the center of mass and
orientated along its longitudinal axis. Rotation about this

Fig. 7.

Experimental range of motion: (a) top view; (b) side view.

axis is the only DOF not recorded during the trials. Using a gastric overtube (Guardus, Model: PN00711149) to
simulate an esophagus, the capsule with tracker was inserted into a tank of water until a tether length of 3 cm
was measured exiting from the overtube and into the tank.
The capsule was then propelled in all possible directions
on low, medium, and high water pressure settings. After
capturing a full range of motion for a 3 cm tether, the
capsule was further introduced into the tank in steps of
3 cm-additional tether lengths up to 15 cm and the test
was repeated each time. Overall displacement of the capsule center of mass under a medium exhaust setting is
reported in Fig. 7. While the capsule was propelled in all
possible directions, initial prebending in the tether either
aided or hindered capsule motion depending on whether
the capsule was moving with or against the moment created by prebending. When operating the capsule on high
pressure, the motion became unstable past a 9-cm tether
length.
From the data acquired by the 5-DOF magnetic tracker,
the capsule’s angular orientation θ as defined in Fig. 6 at
maximum bending was extracted and then compared to
the values estimated by the previously calculated singletether model. The comparison of these values is shown
in Table I. As anticipated, the single tether assumption
led to an underestimation of maximum bending angles
with an average absolute error of 5.59 ◦ ± 6.46 ◦ , which
constitutes a percentage error of 13.5% ± 19.7% across
all tether lengths and pressure settings. The large error
at the 3 cm tether length is most likely due to the limited resolution of the magnetic tracker. If the 3 cm tether
length is disregarded, the average absolute error becomes
3.76◦ ± 2.96◦ with a percentage error of 6.25% ± 6.75%.

1330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

TABLE I
CAPSULE ORIENTATION: MAXIMUM-MEASURED ORIENTATION ANGLES
AND ABSOLUTE ERRORS
Actuation Force (N)
Tether
Length
3 cm
6 cm
9 cm
12 cm
15 cm

0.0105
Measure
◦

17.2
36.9◦
55.4◦
65.6◦
75.5◦

0.0295
Error
◦

9.8
8.2◦
5.5◦
0.3◦
0.1◦

Measure
◦

44.4
61.9◦
78.1◦
86.3◦
87.2◦

0.103
Error
◦

24.3
6.3◦
3.0◦
2.6◦
0.0◦

Measure
◦

50.6
87.8◦
94.3◦
Unstable
Unstable

Error
1.0◦
5.7◦
5.9◦
N/A
N/A

4) Long-Term Reliability: To determine the hydrojet’s ability
to operate for extended periods of time without structural
failure, the capsule was subjected to a reliability test. In
this examination, the capsule was submerged in a tank
of water and operated at random by software with both
camera and LEDs turned on. The hydrojet system was
monitored approximately every 30 min. After 6 h of continuous operation, the capsule was removed from the test
bench and examined, showing no signs of water leakage
into the inner core and no degradation of either the onboard camera or LEDs.
5) Thermal Analysis: Thermistors (Digikey Corp, NTC 50
kΩ 1%, Model: 317-1378-ND) connected to a DAQ board
were used to determine the hydrojet’s operating temperatures. Two points on the capsule were measured during a
total of 3 h of operation. One sampling point was next to
the vision module, while the other was at the connection
with the multichannel tether. The capsule was submerged
in 22 ◦ C water at the beginning of the trial and remained
submerged for the entire process. After approximately 79
min the capsule reached a steady-state temperature of 34
◦
C at the front and 33 ◦ C at the aft. This temperature
profile meets the 34 ◦ C limit previously mentioned as
temperature safety threshold.
6) Portability: Once assembled, the entire system weighed
17.58 kg and required a footprint area of 0.3136 m2 .
B. Ex Vivo Analysis
Ex vivo testing of the hydrojet was performed in an excised
porcine stomach aiming at visualizing the cardia, the fundus, the
greater curvature, the lesser curvature, and the pylorus. These
landmarks are typically observed during gastric cancer screening procedures [30]. To ensure the capsule properly identifies
the points from within the stomach, a series of external laser
beams were projected at these particular points. The beams
were visible both externally by the operator and internally by
the hydrojet, as represented in Fig. 8. For each trial, the operator
was timed as he used the hydrojet to identify the five anatomical
landmarks. Identification of a point of interest was confirmed
when the operator saw its respective laser point using the onboard camera. Unlike the suturing of markers or the injection
of ink into the stomach wall, use of laser beams allowed for

Fig. 8. (a) External view of ex vivo setup with the laser source. (b) Internal
view of laser beam from the hydrojet camera.

Fig. 9. In vivo trials: (a)–(c) Three consecutive frames acquired by the
retroflexed endoscope showing the hydrojet in motion.

a qualitative assessment of landmark location by the operator
without physically compromising the integrity of the porcine
stomach. Prior to the ex vivo trial, the placement of landmark
points was confirmed by an experienced gastroenterologist.
A single operator controlled the hydrojet for a total of six
complete trials. The operator was allowed to experiment with
capsule movement for 20 min prior to the trial. A trial was
deemed completed once all five points of interest were identified.
The average time of trial completion was 6 m 15 s ± 1 m
41 s. In every trial, all the five landmarks were identified by
the operator. These results fall within typical time ranges of
a completed gastroscopy procedure. During each trial, it was
also recorded that an average of 1.35 L ± 0.4 L of water was
introduced into the porcine stomach by the capsule. During the
procedure fluid was capable of being suctioned at a rate of
0.5 L/min ± 0.02 L/min. This rate allowed for the platform to
operate without exceeding our 1.3 L safety threshold. No trauma
to the excised porcine stomach was found after conclusion of
the trials. It is worth mentioning that the operator often used the
mucosa as a deflection wall to visualize certain landmarks such
as the pylorus, the fundus, and the cardia, thus confirming the
feasibility of the inspection strategy described in Fig. 5.
C. In Vivo Analysis
After ex vivo validation, an in vivo qualitative feasibility trial
on a porcine model (55 kg female Yorkshire swine) was conducted at Vanderbilt University in accordance with all ethical
considerations and the regulations related to animal experiments

CAPRARA et al.: PLATFORM FOR GASTRIC CANCER SCREENING IN LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

(IACUC protocol M/14/014). The aims of this study were to
show capability of capsule introduction into a living subject’s
stomach and to qualitatively observe device maneuverability
once within the gastric cavity. An attending physician at Vanderbilt (more than 1000 lifetime flexible endoscopies) was involved
in this trial to provide a feedback on usability. To ease device
introduction since the animal was under intravenous sedation—
thus with reduced esophageal peristalsis—a gastroesophageal
overtube was used during the entire procedure (Guardus, Model:
PN00711149). Along with the hydrojet, a gastroscope (Olympus Corp., Model: GIF180) was inserted through the overtube to
visualize capsule operation. Capsule and gastroscope operation
were accomplished by two different users.
The capsule was successfully introduced through the esophagus into the subject’s stomach using the gastroesophageal overtube. Once within the stomach, the capsule was able to maneuver and relay images using the on-board camera. The mobility
achieved by varying the water pressure level at the nozzles and
by adjusting the tether length was deemed qualitative comparable to a standard gastroscope. Three consecutive frames representing the hydrojet motion as observed by the retroflexed
gastroscope are shown in Fig. 9. It is worth mentioning that the
flow caused inside the stomach by the lateral waterjets, which
can be observed in Fig. 9, did not hamper the visualization of
the mucosa by the hydrojet capsule. After the conclusion of
the in vivo analysis, the subject was sacrificed and the stomach excised for further analysis. No evidence of significant
trauma to the swine was observed either during or after the
experiment.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STUDY
This paper introduces a low-cost capsule endoscopy platform
capable of allowing an operator to conduct a visual assessment
of the upper GI tract. The ease of disposability of the capsule
and multichannel tether, along with the reusability of the hydrojet’s internal camera without needing further reprocessing,
would allow it to be used inexpensively in LMIC. Pressurized
water flowing through a controlled distribution system was used
to propel the hydrojet in the desired direction of viewing. A
model to predict capsule orientation at differing exhaust forces
and tether lengths was derived by simplifying the multichannel tether to an equivalent single tube tether and using elliptic
integrals functions. Bench trials were performed to determine
the force of water expelled from the capsule at various pressure
settings, the capsule’s range of motion, the long term reliability
of the capsule in operation underwater, and the capsule’s temperature over extended periods of operation. Ex vivo assessment
of the hydrojet platform was performed using a porcine stomach
to quantify the total time needed to visualize anatomical landmarks typically adopted in gastric cancer screening procedures.
An in vivo qualitative validation of the hydrojet confirmed the
feasibility of introducing the capsule into a living subject and
maneuvering it once in the stomach. The overall cost of the
platform is estimated to be below 6000 USD, with a projected
cost per procedure related to the disposable part of the hydrojet
of 2-5 USD. With the entire platform occupying a footprint of

1331

0.157 m2 and weighing 17.58 kg, we can envisage integration
into a couple of carry-on sized luggage containers, thus allowing
portability in remote regions of LMIC.
Future work first includes refinement of the hydrojet’s pressure control system. Additional pressure control valves with
differing diameters of exhaust tubing would allow for more sensitive control of the hydrojet. An alternative would be to use
faster valves and control the flow via PWM, as long as this does
not prohibitively increase the price of the platform.
Occlusion of the suction line did not occur during in vivo operation, however, occlusions due to debris particles within the
stomach or due to aspiration of mucosal tissue are a possibility.
This is also typical for gastroscopy administered with current
flexible endoscopes. The solution we envision in case of occlusion is the same one adopted in current practice, i.e., reversing
the pressure of the suction line by flushing saline solution with
a syringe.
Another future step is to reduce capsule size from the current 12 mm diameter. This could be accomplished in conjunction with the introduction of a smaller endoscopic camera, such
as the micro Scoutcam 1.2 mm diameter camera by Medigus.
An improved mathematical model of the hydrojet’s range of
motion should be further investigated to aid in the refinement
process.
Use of a gastric overtube allowed the hydrojet capsule to
be introduced into the porcine stomach without any signs of
buckling in the multichannel tether. However, this may become an issue during clinical use, should esophageal peristalsis be insufficient to propel the capsule down to the stomach. In this case, the incorporation of a single, multichannel
tether with progressive stiffness may prevent buckling during
insertion.
Additional in vivo trials are planned to confirm the safety of
the hydrojet via post mortem histological analysis of the gastric
mucosa. Future validation will also aim at quantitatively comparing the hydrojet with a standard gastroscope in visualizing
the key landmarks within the stomach in a porcine model. With
success in these additional endeavors, we plan to eventually begin clinical trials in LMIC. It is our hope that this platform will
provide gastric cancer screening to people that would otherwise
not have access to such medical care.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank P. Williams and the staff at
the Vanderbilt S.R. Light Surgical Facilities for Animal Trials
for their time and assistance during the in vivo experiment.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Ferlay et al., “Globocan 2012, cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: IARC CancerBase,” (2013) [Online]. . Available: globocan.iarc.fr
[2] American Cancer Society, “Cancer facts and figures 2005.”
2005. [Online]. Available: www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactsstatistics/
allcancerfactsfigures/
[3] F. Bray et al., “Global cancer transitions according to the human development index: A population-based study,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 13,
pp. 790–801, 2012.

1332

[4] H.-O. Adami et al., “Primary and secondary prevention in the reduction of
cancer morbidity and mortality,” Eur. J. Cancer, vol. 37, pp. S118–S127,
2001.
[5] K.-J. Lee et al., “Gastric cancer screening and subsequent risk of gastric cancer: A large-scale population-based cohort study, with a 13-year
follow-up in Japan,” Int. J. Cancer, vol. 118, no. 9, pp. 2315–2321, May
2006.
[6] H. Makuuchi et al., “Endoscopic screening for esophageal cancer in 788
patients with head and neck cancers,” Tokai J. Exp. Clinical Med., vol. 21,
pp. 139–145, 1996.
[7] A. Oshima et al., “Evaluation of a mass screening program for stomach
cancer with a case-control study design,” Int. J. Cancer, vol. 38, no. 6,
pp. 829–33, Dec. 1986.
[8] T. J. Wilhelm et al., “Gastrointestinal endoscopy in a low budget context:
Delegating EGD to non-physician clinicians in Malawi can be feasible
and safe,” Endoscopy, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 174–176, Feb. 2012.
[9] A. Koulaouzidis and S. Douglas, “Capsule endoscopy in clinical practice: Concise up-to-date overview,” Clinical Exp. Gastroenterol., vol. 2,
pp. 111–116, Jan. 2009.
[10] J. F. Rey et al., “Feasibility of stomach exploration with a guided capsule
endoscope,” Endoscopy, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 541–545, Jul. 2010.
[11] D. S. Mishkin et al., “ASGE technology status evaluation report: Wireless
capsule endoscopy,” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 539–
545, Apr. 2006.
[12] H. Keller et al., “Method for navigation and control of a magnetically
guided capsule endoscope in the human stomach,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatron., 2012, pp. 859–865.
[13] S. Yim and M. Sitti, “Design and analysis of a magnetically actuated
and compliant capsule endoscopic robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., May. 2011, pp. 4810–4815.
[14] S. Yim et al., “Magnetically actuated soft capsule with the multimodal
drug release function,” IEEE Trans. Mechatron., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1413–
1418, Aug. 2013.
[15] S. Yim et al., “Biopsy using a magnetic capsule endoscope carrying,
releasing, and retrieving untethered microgrippers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 513–21, Feb. 2014.
[16] G. Tortora et al., “Propeller-based wireless device for active capsular endoscopy in the gastric district,” Minimally Invasive Therapy Allied Technol., vol. 18, pp. 280–290, 2009.
[17] I. De Falco et al., “An integrated system for wireless capsule endoscopy
in a liquid-distended stomach,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 3,
pp. 794–804, Mar. 2013.
[18] R. Shaker et al. Principles of Deglutition. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2012.
[19] S. Varadarajulu et al., “GI endoscopes,” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy,
vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 1–6.e6, Jul. 2011.
[20] J. E. Hall, Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology. New York,
NY, USA: Elsevier, 2010.
[21] R. K. Clark, Anatomy and Physiology: Understanding the Human Body.
Sudbury, MA, USA: Jones & Bartlett, 2005.
[22] Mayo clinic health system, EGD. (2013). [Online]. Available:
http://mayoclinichealthsystem.org/locations/eau-claire/medical-services
/gastroenterology-and-hepatology/egd
[23] M. Moshkowitz et al., “A novel device for rapid cleaning of poorly prepared colons,” Endoscopy, vol. 42, pp. 834–836, 2010.
[24] S. M. Rappaport, “Threshold limit values, permissible exposure limits,
and feasibility: The bases for exposure limits in the United States,” Amer.
J. Ind. Med., vol. 23, pp. 683–694, 1996.
[25] P. Valdastri et al., “Advanced technologies for gastrointestinal endoscopy,”
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 14, pp. 397–429, 2012.
[26] L. Ascari et al., “A new active microendoscope for exploring the subarachnoid space in the spinal cord,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., 2003, pp. 2657–2667.
[27] L. L. Howell, Compliant Mechanisms. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
2001.
[28] K. Xu and N. Simaan, “Analytic formulation for kinematics, statics, and
shape restoration of multibackbone continuum robots via elliptic integrals,” J. Mechanisms Robot., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 011006-1–011006-13,
2010.
[29] S. Kravitz, “Packing cylinders into cylindrical containers,” Math. Mag.,
vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 65–71, 1967.
[30] A. Ferro et al., “Worldwide trends in gastric cancer mortality (1980–
2011), with predictions to 2015, and incidence by subtype,” Eur. J. Cancer,
vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 1330–1344, May. 2014.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Robert Caprara (S’14) received the B.S. (cum laude) and M.Eng. (summa
cum laude) degrees in mechanical engineering from the University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, USA, in 2010 and 2011, respectively. In 2012, he started working
toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA.
Since 2013, he has been a Member of the Science and Technology Of Robotics
in Medicine Laboratory, Vanderbilt University, where he has been primarily
involved with the development of robotic capsule endoscopy platforms.
Mr. Caprara was awarded the Vanderbilt Initiative in Surgery and Engineering
Fellowship in the Fall of 2014.
Keith L. Obstein received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering in material science concentration from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
USA, in 2000, the M.D. degree from Northwestern University Medical School,
Evanston, IL, USA, in 2004, and the M.P.H. degree from Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA, in 2010.
He completed the residency in internal medicine from the Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, and fellowship in gastroenterology from the Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA. He is currently
an Assistant Professor of medicine, an Assistant Professor of mechanical engineering, the Clinical Director of the STORM Lab, and the Associate Program
Director of the Gastroenterology Fellowship Program at Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA. His research interests include the areas of robotic endoscopy, new technologies, device development, endoscopic training, capsule
endoscopy, and healthcare quality improvement.
Gabriel Scozzarro is working toward the M.S. degree in medical engineering
at the University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
He spent two years collaborating with the University of Rome Tor Vergata
Medical Center as a Research Intern. Since 2011, he has been a Visiting Student
with the STORM Lab, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. He is actively
involved in the design of capsule robots for hydro-colonoscopy and research in
magnetic coupling actuation.
Christian Di Natali (S’10) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees (Hons.) in
biomedical engineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2008 and
2010. In the fall of 2011, he started working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
In 2011, he joined the Institute of BioRobotics of Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Livorno, Italy, as a Research Assistant working on magnetic coupling and teleoperated magnetic navigation. He is a Member of the STORM
Lab, Vanderbilt University, and he is actively involved in the design of advanced
magnetic coupling for surgery and endoscopy.
Marco Beccani (S’11) received the Master’s degree in electronic engineering
from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2010. Since 2011, he is working
toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA.
After spending one year as Research Assistant at the Institute of BioRobotics
of Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, he is a Member of the STORM Lab, Vanderbilt
University, and his field of research includes miniaturized real-time-embedded
system design for wireless robotic capsular endoscopy and robotic surgery.
Douglas R. Morgan received the Engineering degree from Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, USA, the Medical degree from Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA, and the M.P.H. degree in epidemiology from the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
He completed the internal medicine residency and gastroenterology fellowship from the University of California, San Francisco, CA. He is currently
an Associate Professor of medicine at Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA. His research and clinical interests include gastric cancer
epidemiology, prevention, and clinical translational initiatives in Central America and in U.S. Hispanic populations.
Pietro Valdastri (M’05–SM’13) received the Master’s (Hons.) degree in electronic engineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 2002, and the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna
(SSSA), Pisa.
After spending three years as an Assistant Professor at the Institute of
BioRobotics of SSSA, since 2011 he is Assistant Professor at the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA, where
he founded the STORM Lab. He is actively involved in robotic endoscopy and
robotic surgery, design of magnetic mechanisms, and design of capsule robots
for medical applications.

