IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

435

Beat-by-Beat Quantification of Cardiac Cycle Events
Detected From Three-Dimensional Precordial
Acceleration Signals
Mikko Paukkunen, Petteri Parkkila, Tero Hurnanen, Mikko Pänkäälä, Tero Koivisto, Tuomo Nieminen,
Raimo Kettunen, and Raimo Sepponen

Abstract—The vibrations produced by the cardiovascular system that are coupled to the precordium can be noninvasively detected using accelerometers. This technique is called seismocardiography. Although clinical applications have been proposed for
seismocardiography, the physiology underlying the signal is still
not clear. The relationship of seismocardiograms of on the backto-front axis and cardiac events is fairly well known. However,
the 3-D seismocardiograms detectable with modern accelerometers have not been quantified in terms of cardiac cycle events. A
major reason for this might be the degree of intersubject variability observed in 3-D seismocardiograms. We present a method to
quantify 3-D seismocardiography in terms of cardiac cycle events.
First, cardiac cycle events are identified from the seismocardiograms, and then, assigned a number based on the location in which
the corresponding event was found. 396 cardiac cycle events from 9
healthy subjects and 120 cardiac cycle events from patients suffering from atrial flutter were analyzed. Despite the weak intersubject correlation of the waveforms (0.05, 0.27, and 0.15 for the x-,
y-, and z-axes, respectively), the present method managed to find
latent similarities in the seismocardiograms of healthy subjects.
We observed that in healthy subjects the distribution of cardiac
cycle event coordinates was centered on specific locations. These
locations were different in patients with atrial flutter. The results
suggest that spatial distribution of seismocardiographic cardiac
cycle events might be used to discriminate healthy individuals and
those with a failing heart.
Index Terms—Accelerometer, atrial flutter, ballistocardiography, biomedical signal processing, seismocardiography (SCG).

I. INTRODUCTION
HE cardiovascular system produces vibrations that are
coupled to the precordium. These vibrations can be detected either by using palpation or auscultation, or by using

T

Manuscript received August 22, 2014; revised November 18, 2014 and January 5, 2015; accepted January 12, 2015. Date of current version March 3, 2016.
This work was supported in part by the Finnish Cultural Foundation and The
Finnish Society of Electronics Engineers.
M. Paukkunen, P. Parkkila, and R. Sepponen are with the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering, 02150 Espoo, Finland (e-mail: mikko.paukkunen@aalto.fi;
petteri.parkkila@aalto.fi; raimo.sepponen@aalto.fi).
T. Hurnanen, M. Pänkäälä, and T. Koivisto are with the Technology Research Center, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland (e-mail: tero.
hurnanen@utu.fi; mtpank@utu.fi; tejuko@utu.fi).
T. Nieminen is with the University of Helsinki, 00100 Helsinki, Finland and
also with the South Karelia Central Hospital, 53130 Lappeenranta, Finland
(e-mail: tuomo.nieminen@iki.fi).
R. Kettunen is with the University of Eastern Finland School of Medicine,
70211 Kuopio, Finland (e-mail: raimo.kettunen@fimnet.fi).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2391437

electronic sensors. The recording of precordial vibrations using
accelerometers is often called seismocardiography (SCG) [1].
The research of Baevsky and Bozhenko [2], [3] are regarded
as pioneering works in the field of SCG, whereas the work of
Zanetti and Salerno [1] may be viewed as the revival of the
field. SCG has multiple proposed clinical applications, such as
ischemic heart disease detection and gating of cardiac imaging and therapy modalities [4]–[7]. The recent advances in accelerometer technology have brought upon a new generation of
SCG measurement systems that measure the SCG signal in
three dimensions. The 3-D SCG measurements can be implemented using individual orthogonally mounted high-sensitivity
accelerometers [8] or smaller but less sensitive accelerometers
that use only one integrated circuit to implement the 3-D measurement [9]–[11].
The relationship of cardiac-induced vibrations and cardiac
events are fairly well known in terms of 1-D SCG [12], [13].
However, this is not the case in 3-D seismocardiograms. Although the general importance of 3-D measurements in cardiac
vibration studies is widely acknowledged [10], [14]–[16], very
few reports have focused on quantifying the physiological events
that are manifested in 3-D seismocardiograms. The main reason
for this might be that the intersubject variability of 3-D seismocardiograms is so significant. To advance SCG from a research
tool to an actual clinical tool, it was necessary to be able to
quantify the SCG waveforms.
This study aims to quantify 3-D SCG in terms of spatial
distribution of physiological events. To study the feasibility of
the proposed quantification method, ten healthy volunteers are
measured and their 3-D seismocardiograms are analyzed.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Equipment
The 3-D SCG signals were measured with three orthogonally
mounted accelerometers (SCA610-C21H1 A, Murata Electronics, Finland). The accelerometers and associated electronics are
both described in detail in the authors’ previous work [8]. The
acceleration sensors had a sensitivity of 2 V/g, true dc response
and rated output noise of approximately 60 μgrms in the frequency band of 1–50 Hz. The accelerometers were measured at
VTI’s (now Murata Electronics) laboratories where they were
shown to have their –3 dB points at 47 Hz. The antialiasing of the
acceleration signals was done with eighth-order Bessel lowpass
filters with a rated cut-off frequency of 100 Hz and attenuation

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

436

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

of at least 96 dB at 800 Hz. The Sallen-Key coupled filters were
implemented using quad operational amplifiers (AD8630, Analog Devices, USA). Changes in this particular study compared
to the preceding implementation [8] were bypassing the gain
stage and mounting the individual accelerometers to a smaller
package than before while using eyesight to orient the sensors.
The amplification setup resulted in a dc response and a gain
of 0 dB for the acceleration measurement. Three individual
accelerometers were used because, to the best of the authors’
knowledge, no integrated options with similar characteristics
(high sensitivity, low noise, dc response) were available during
the time of implementation. Recently, integrated 3-D accelerometers with similar noise and sensitivity performance to SCG but
with no dc response have been applied [17]. A dc response facilitates measuring the instantaneous inclination of the sternum
which would be important in other SCG applications.
Due to the mounting process, the orthogonality of the acceleration sensors could not be guaranteed. The largest error due
to mounting was measured between the xy plane and the z-axis
(5°). Thus, in the worst case, any single axis of acceleration
measurement will include an error of 9%.
Electrocardiography (ECG) and respiration efforts were
recorded as reference signals. The ECG lead II was measured
using a commercial wireless dual-lead ECG system (BC-ECG2,
BIOPAC Systems Inc., Goleta, CA, USA). Respiratory efforts
were recorded using a commercial wireless respiration detection
system based on a respiration band (BN-RESP-XDCR, BIOPAC
Systems Inc.). All data were captured using the MP150 data acquisition system (BIOPAC Systems Inc.) using a sampling rate
of 1000 samples/second. The acceleration signals were coupled
to the MP150 through a Universal Interface Module (UIM100
C, BIOPAC Systems Inc.). Preprocessing of the signals was
done in the Acknowledgment environment (BIOPAC Systems
Inc.). All postprocessing of the data was done in the MATALB
environment (MATLAB R2013b, Mathworks, USA).
1) In vivo Measurements:
a) Human subject protocol: Ten male volunteers with an
average weight of 79.5 kg (standard deviation (SD) 14.9 kg),
an average height of 175.2 cm (SD 7.1 cm), and an average age
of 33 years (SD 8.5 years) were measured. The measurements
were performed while the test subjects were in resting supine
position. During the measurement, the subjects were asked to
perform voluntary apnoea in order to decrease the effect of
respiratory efforts on the SCG signals.
The accelerometer package was mounted on the lower part
of the sternum about 1 cm above the xiphoid process using the
double-sided adhesive tape. The orientation of the package was
so that one accelerometer measured the acceleration in the backto-front (z-axis), one in the right-to-left (x-axis), and one in the
foot-to-head direction (y-axis).
All measurements of healthy individuals were performed at
the Aalto University School of Electrical Engineering, Espoo,
Finland, in the spirit of Helsinki declaration. A written consent
was received from each subject. The contents of the test procedure and the course of its events were explained individually
to the subjects before the study. The study did not contain any
such intervention in the physical integrity of the test subjects,

Fig. 1.

Cardiac cycle events identified from the z-axis SCG signal.

or any other features needing an ethical review as considered by
the National Advisory Board on Research Ethics in Finland.
2) Signal Processing: All signals were band-pass filtered to
the range of 0.5 Hz to 40 Hz. The annotation of the 3-D seismocardiograms was based on the annotation scheme proposed
by Crow et al. (1994). All cardiac cycle events were detected
manually from the z-axis seismocardiograms. The heartbeats
were detected from the SCG signal using the peak of ECG R
wave as a timing reference. The peaks of the ECG R waves were
detected using the Pan-Tompkins algorithm [18] and the SCG
events in the vicinity of the R peaks were investigated. Using the
convention proposed by Crow et al. [12] as a general guideline,
the local maximum before the beginning of the sharp downslope
on the z-axis seismocardiogram following the ECG R peak was
identified as mitral valve closure (MC), the positive peak after
the MC point as aortic valve opening (AO), the local maximum
before sharp down going slope change near the end of the ECG
T wave as aortic valve closure (AC), and the second nadir after the AC point as mitral valve opening (MO). 11 consecutive
heartbeats recorded during voluntary apnoea performed following inhalation were studied from each subject. Fig. 1 illustrates
the cardiac cycle events identified from the z axis SCG signal
using 11 consecutive heartbeats of a single subject. Fig. 2 shows
the 3-D vector trajectory of a single heartbeat recorded from a
healthy person.
B. Comparison Dataset
To investigate how disease manifests in the quantifications of
cardiac cycle events, three patients (two males and one female)
suffering from atrial flutter (AFl) were measured at Turku University Central Hospital. The measurements were done with an
ethical permission from the ethical advisory board of The Hospital District of Southwest Finland. The weights, heights, and ages
of the subjects were 108 kg, 98 kg, and 76 kg; 183 cm, 180 cm,
and 170 cm; and 51 years, 57 years, and 76 years, respectively.
From these subjects, ten consecutive heartbeats were recorded
under resting conditions with no breathing instructions. The
digital accelerometer (MMA8451Q, Freescale Semiconductor,
Austin, TX, USA) used in these recordings only recorded the zand y-axes. The signals were sampled at a rate of 800 samples/s.
Digital filtering with a passband of 1–40 Hz was used.

PAUKKUNEN et al.: BEAT-BY-BEAT QUANTIFICATION OF CARDIAC CYCLE EVENTS DETECTED FROM THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRECORDIAL

437

Fig. 2. 3-D vector trajectory of a single cardiac cycle. The black line depicts
the time interval beginning from mitral valve closure (MC) to aortic valve
opening (AO), the red line the time interval from AO to aortic valve closure
(AC), and the blue line the time interval from AC to mitral valve opening (MO).

C. Quantification of Cardiac Cycle Events
To quantify the spatial distribution of cardiac cycle events, the
3-D space was divided in eight rectangular octants (see Fig. 2),
and each cardiac cycle event was assigned a value representing
the octant in which the event was found in using the following
equation:
⎧
I,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
II,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
III,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ IV,
Octant (x, y, z) =
⎪
V,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
VI,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
VII,
⎪
⎪
⎩
VIII,

Fig. 3. All detected cardiac cycle events of all subjects. The mitral valve
opening (MC) events are plotted in black, the aortic valve opening (AO) events
in blue, the aortic valve closure (AC) events in red, and the mitral valve opening
(MO) events in green.
TABLE I
DISTRIBUTION OF ALL SUBJECTS’ CARDIAC EVENTS ACROSS OCTANTS
Octant

MC (%)
Healthy/AFl

AO (%)
Healthy/AFl

AC(%)
Healthy/AFl

MO (%)
Healthy/AFl

I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
I/IV
II/III
V/VIII
VI/VII

26/9/24/30/2/1/1/6/56/57
33/37
8/0
2/7

5/47/27/20/0/0/0/0/25/53
74/33
0/7
0/7

41/11/8/38/0/1/0/0/79/57
19/17
0/23
1/3

1/0/0/0/55/13/9/21/56/33
0/10
76/33
22/23

x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0, z ≥ 0
x > 0, y < 0, z > 0
x < 0, y < 0, z > 0
x < 0, y > 0, z > 0
x > 0, y > 0, z < 0

(1)

x ≥ 0, y < 0, z < 0
x < 0, y < 0, z < 0
x < 0, y > 0, z < 0.

To quantify the variability in the morphology of the 3-D SCG
waveforms squared Pearson correlation coefficients (R2 ) were
computed using a window beginning from the MC point and
ending at the MO point. Using this window, the intersubject
correlation between waveforms was computed by correlating
every obtained heartbeat with one another. The intrasubject correlation was computed similarly as the intersubject correlation
but using only subject-specific heartbeats.
III. RESULTS
A. Healthy Subjects
Subject 4 was excluded from the analysis due to poor signal
quality that prevented detecting the cardiac cycle events reliably.
Thus, the total number of analysed cardiac cycles was 99 and the
total number of analyzed cardiac cycle events was 396. Fig. 3
shows the location of all detected cardiac cycle events of all
subjects in 3-D space.

Table I shows the distribution of all identified cardiac cycle
events of each analysed subject between the spatial octants.
Of all identified cardiac events, 18.4%, 16.9%, 14.9%, 22.2%,
14.4%, 3.8%, 2.5%, and 6.8% were found in the octant I, II, III,
IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII, respectively. On average, 25% of the
cardiac cycle events detected from the 11 consecutive heartbeats
of each single subject were located in a single octant, 64% in
two or less octants, 94% in three or less octants, and 6% in four
or more octants.
The distance of each identified cardiac cycle event from
the subject-specific average spatial coordinates of the corresponding cardiac event was on average 2.5 ± 1.1 mg, 3.6 ±
1.9 mg, 2.3 ± 1.0, and 2.9 ± 1.4 mg, for the MC, AO, AC, and
MO points, respectively. The mean distance of each identified
cardiac event from the nearest interface of two octants was 1.1 ±
0.7 mg, 2.4 ± 1 mg, 1.5 ± 0.8 mg, and 1.5 ± 0.8, for the MC,
AO, AC, and MO points, respectively.

438

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

The mean intrasubject correlation (R2 ) between waveforms of
all heartbeats was 0.66, 0.79, and 0.81 for the x-, y-, and z-axes,
respectively. The mean intersubject correlation (R2 ) between
waveforms was 0.05, 0.27, and 0.15 for the x-, -y, and z-axes,
respectively.
B. Patients Suffering From Atrial Flutter
Altogether 30 heartbeats were analyzed from the patients
suffering from AFl. The distribution of the AFl patients’ cardiac
events can be found in Table I.
IV. DISCUSSION
The intrasubject correlation of seismocardiograms was found
to be reasonably strong (mean of 0.75 across all axes), which
was significantly higher than in some of the previous research assessing only the z-axis [19]. This difference is probably mainly
caused by differences between the test setups. However, the
observed strong intrasubject correlation reasserts our earlier
finding that our SCG measurement system produces consistent results [8]. Despite the strong intrasubject correlation, the
3-D seismocardiograms featured very weak intersubject correlation (mean of 0.16 across all axes). These observations imply
that the 3-D SCG waveforms are so dissimilar between subjects
that robust quantification relying only on the raw signals may
not be feasible. Thus, exploring more general quantification approaches is justified. Analysis of the intrasubject distribution
of cardiac event locations revealed a significant degree of clustering, which is supported by the observation that 94% of the
cardiac cycle events detected from the 11 consecutive heartbeats
of each individual subject were located in three or less octants.
For example, all of subject 6’s MC points were found in two
quadrants and all of subject 6’s AO, AC, and MO points were
each found in a single octant. These results suggest that although
the intersubject variability of 3-D seismocardiograms was weak,
the 3-D seismocardiograms might still feature consistent characteristics that are similar between subjects but more advanced
techniques than direct comparison of waveform morphology is
needed to reveal them.
We observed that the distribution of cardiac cycle event coordinates was centred on specific octants. 73% of all cardiac
events were found in octants I–IV, which is expected as all cardiac cycle events except for the MO were detected using the
positive peaks in the z-axis acceleration signal. 96% of MC,
AO, and AC points were found in octants I–V. We observed
that these were distributed so that 25%, 23%, 21%, and 31%
of the events were located in the octants I, II, III, and IV, respectively. This indicates that while the z-axis consistently divided
the cardiac cycle events in two halves of the 3-D space, the
y-and z-axes were not as consistent, and provided less discriminatory power. Our finding seems to in part replicate the findings
in [20], where Migeotte et al. observed that the x-axis did not
reflect any physiological events. However, we found that using
the present approach, the y-axis did not provide discriminatory
power either. The lack of consistency in the x- and y-axes signals may be explained by insufficient mechanical coupling of
cardiac vibrations to the sternum, variation in anatomy of the

cardiovascular system (orientation of the heart and the aortic
arc), and the method used in this study to detect cardiac cycle
events. The relatively strong intrasubject correlation of x- and
y-axes suggests that at least part of the cardiac vibrations in
these directions are coupled to the sternum. The variation in
the anatomy of the cardiovascular system might explain part
of the observed intersubject variation but it should not affect
the intrasubject variability of waveforms. The detection of cardiac cycle events was done using the methodology described by
Crow et al. [12] as a guideline. Since the heart and blood move
in three dimensions, the timing of the detected events might not
be reliable using only one axis of measurement. Thus, in future research, the cardiac events should be detected with a more
reliable method, such as 3-D echocardiography.
In Fig. 3, it can be seen that for some subjects, even if the
location of identified cardiac cycle events is consistent, the location might be near the interface of octants. For all detected
cardiac cycle events, the mean distance of each identified cardiac event from the nearest interface of two octants was smaller
than the mean distance of each identified cardiac event from the
subject-specific average spatial coordinates of the corresponding cardiac event. This observation strongly suggests that a more
sophisticated division of the 3-D space might be more reliable
in quantifying cardiac cycle events than simple division to rectangular octants. Such a division could be based on, for example,
the observed spatial distribution of cardiac cycle events.
The mounting method of the acceleration sensors might have
yielded estimation errors in the acceleration vector position. The
severity of these errors may be negligible but the possibility of
significant error must be accounted for in future research. Some
portion of the orientation error might be compensated by measuring the orientation of the accelerometers and transforming
the results to an orthogonal coordinate system. We suggest that
in future work the accelerometers should be mounted using a
repeatable process that will guarantee the orthogonality of the
accelerometers.
In vectorcardiography, the changes in spatial characteristics
of vectorcardiograms can be used to detect certain cardiac conditions [21], [22]. Based on the present results, a similar approach
might be feasible in 3-D SCG also. Since many cardiac conditions, such as myocardial infarction or heart failure, cause
changes also in the mechanical function of the heart, the observed locations of the cardiac cycle events in 3-D seismocardiograms might be a feasible method to discriminate normally
functioning hearts from diseased hearts. To reassert this hypothesis, we pursued preliminary investigation of how disease
manifests in the present quantifications. Table I suggests that
there the coordinates of the AO, AC, and MO points were more
evenly distributed within space in the sick patients, which is
in line with the assumption that AFl introduces instability to
cardiac function. To further assess the feasibility of the present
method to discriminate diseased and healthy hearts, a 3-D analysis with larger sample size must be done.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Kuutti, L. Sc., for help in
data collection and study design.

PAUKKUNEN et al.: BEAT-BY-BEAT QUANTIFICATION OF CARDIAC CYCLE EVENTS DETECTED FROM THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRECORDIAL

REFERENCES
[1] D. Salerno and J. Zanetti, “Seismocardiography: A new technique for
recording cardiac vibrations. Concept, method, and initial observations,”
J. Cardiovasc. Technol., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 111–118, 1990.
[2] B. S. Bozhenko, “Seismocardiography—A new method in the study of
functional conditions of the heart,” Ter. Arkh., vol. 33, pp. 55–64, Sep.
1961.
[3] R. Baevsky, A. Egorov, and L. Kazarian, “Metodika seismokardiografii,”
Kardiologiia, vol. 18, pp. 87—89, 1964.
[4] I. Korzeniowska-Kubacka, M. Bilińska, and R. Piotrowicz, “Usefulness of
seismocardiography for the diagnosis of ischemia in patients with coronary
artery disease,” Ann. Noninvasive Electrocardiol., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 281–
287, 2005.
[5] C. Wick, J. Su, J. McClellan, O. Brand, P. Bhatti, A. Buice, A. Stillman,
X. Tang, and S. Tridandapani, “A system for seismocardiography-based
identification of quiescent heart phases: Implications for cardiac imaging,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 869–877, Sep. 2012.
[6] K. Tavakolian, F. Khosrow-Khavar, B. Kajbafzadeh, M. Marzencki,
A. Blaber, B. Kaminska, and C. Menon, “Precordial acceleration signals improve the performance of diastolic timed vibrations,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1133–1140, 2013.
[7] M. Becker, A. Roehl, U. Siekmann, A. Koch, M. de la Fuente, R. Roissant,
K. Radermacher, N. Marx, and M. Hein. (2013, Jun.). Simplified detection
of myocardial ischemia by seismocardiography. Herz [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00059–013–3851-x
[8] M. Paukkunen, M. Linnavuo, H. Haukilehto, and R. Sepponen, “A system
for detection of three-dimensional precordial vibrations,” Int. J. Meas.
Technol. Instrum. Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 52–66, 2012.
[9] K. Pandia, O. T. Inan, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi, “Extracting
respiratory information from seismocardiogram signals acquired on the
chest using a miniature accelerometer,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 33, no. 10,
pp. 1643–1660, 2012
[10] P. Castiglioni, A. Faini, G. Parati, and M. Di Rienzo, “Wearable seismocardiography, Wearable Seismocardiography,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Lyon, France, 2007, pp. 3954–3957.
[11] M. Di Rienzo, P. Meriggi, F. Rizzo, E. Vaini, A. Faini, G. Merati,
G. Parati, and P. Castiglioni, “A wearable system for the seismocardiogram assessment in daily life conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 4263–4266.
[12] R. S. Crow, P. Hannan, D. Jacobs, L. Hedquist, and D. M. Salerno, “Relationship between seismocardiogram and echocardiogram for events in the
cardiac cycle,” Amer. J. Noninvas. Card., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 39–46, 1994.

439

[13] V. Gurev, K. Tavakolian, J. Constantino, B. Kaminska, A. P. Blaber,
and N. A. Trayanova, “Mechanisms underlying the isovolumic and ejection peaks in seismocardiogram morphology,” J. Med. Biol. Eng.,vol. 32,
no. 2, pp. 103–110, 2012.
[14] W. P. S. McKay, P. H. Gregson, B. W. S McKay, and J. Militzer, “Sternal
acceleration ballistocardiography and arterial pressure wave analysis to
determine stroke volume,” Clin. Invest. Med., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 4–14,
1999.
[15] P. Migeotte, S. De Ridder, J. Tank, N. Pattyn, I. Funtova, R. Baevsky,
X. Neyt, and G. K. Prisk, “Three dimensional ballisto-and seismocardiography, HIJ wave amplitudes are poorly correlated to maximal
systolic force vector,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., San Diego, CA, USA, pp. 5046–5049.
[16] S. De Ridder, P. F. Migeotte, X. Neyt, N. Pattyn, and G. Prisk, “Threedimensional ballistocardiography in microgravity: A review of past research,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Boston,
MA, USA, 2011, pp. 4267–4270.
[17] A. Wiens, M. Etemadi, S. Roy, L. Klein, and O. Inan, “Towards continuous, non-invasive assessment of ventricular function and hemodynamics:
Wearable ballistocardiography,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. PP,
no. 99, pp. 1, 2014.
[18] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Bio.Med. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[19] K. Tavakolian, A. Vaseghi, and B. Kaminska, “Improvement of ballistocardiogram processing by inclusion of respiration information,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 771–781, 2008.
[20] P. F. Migeotte, J. Tank, N. Pattyn, I. Funtova, R. Baevsky, X. Neyt, and
G. K. Prisk, “Three dimensional ballistocardiography: Methodology and
results from microgravity and dry immersion,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Boston, MA, USA, 2011, pp. 4271–4274.
[21] M. Sederholm, “The origin of monitoring of acute myocardial infarction
with continuous vectorcardiography,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 47, no. 4,
pp. 418–424, 2014.
[22] A. Rubulis, L. Bergfeldt, R. Rydén, and J. Jensen, “Prediction of cardiovascular death and myocardial infarction by the QRS-T angle and T vector
loop morphology after angioplasty in stable angina pectoris: An 8-year
follow-up,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 310–317, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

