1416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

An Integrated Widefield Imaging and Spectroscopy
System for Contrast-Enhanced, Image-Guided
Resection of Tumors
Aaron M. Mohs∗ , Member, IEEE, Michael C. Mancini, James M. Provenzale, Corey F. Saba, Karen K. Cornell,
Elizabeth W. Howerth, and Shuming Nie∗

Abstract—Tumor recurrence following surgery is a common and
unresolved medical problem of great importance since surgery is
the most widely used treatment for solid-mass tumors worldwide.
A contributing factor to tumor recurrence is the presence of residual tumor remaining at or near the surgical site following surgery.
Goal: The primary objective of this study was to develop and evaluate an image-guided surgery system based on a near-infrared,
handheld excitation source and spectrograph in combination with
a widefield video imaging system. Methods: This system was designed to detect the fluorescence of near-infrared contrast agents
and, in particular, indocyanine green (ICG). The imaging system
was evaluated for its optical performance and ability to detect the
presence of ICG in tumors in an ectopic murine tumor model as
well as in spontaneous tumors arising in canines. Results: In both
settings, an intravenous ICG infusion provided tumor contrast.
In both the murine models and surgical specimens from canines,
ICG preferentially accumulated in tumor tissue compared to surrounding normal tissue. The resulting contrast was sufficient to
distinguish neoplasia from normal tissue; in the canine surgical specimens, the contrast was sufficient to permit identification
of neoplasia on the marginal surface of the specimen. Conclusion: These results demonstrate a unique concept in image-guided
surgery by combining local excitation and spectroscopy with widefield imaging. Significance: The ability to readily detect ICG in
canines with spontaneous tumors in a clinical setting exemplifies
the potential for further clinical translation; the promising results

Manuscript received June 12, 2014; revised November 6, 2014; accepted
January 5, 2015. Date of publication January 5, 2015; date of current version
April 17, 2015. This work was supported in part by grants from the Centers
of Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence (CCNE) Program (U54 CA119338) and
the U.S. National Institutes of Health Grand Opportunity (GO) grant (RC2
CA148265) to S. Nie and an NCI Alliance in Nanotechnology for a Pathway
to Independence Award (R00 CA153916) to A. Mohs. A. M. Mohs, M. C.
Mancini, and S. Nie are inventors of instrumentation related to this manuscript,
which have been licensed to Spectropath, Inc. and may be subject to royalties
and shares associated with the technology. S. Nie is an unpaid consultant to
Spectropath, Inc. Asterisk indicates corresponding authors.
∗ A. M. Mohs is with the Wake Forest–Virginia Tech, School of Biomedical
Engineering and Sciences, Department of Cancer Biology, and the Wake Forest
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Wake Forest University Health Sciences,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157 USA (e-mail: amohs@wakehealth.edu).
M. C. Mancini was with the Emory University and Georgia Tech. He is now
with Spectropath, Inc.
J. M. Provenzale is with the Department of Radiology, Duke University
Medical Center.
C. F. Saba and K. K. Cornell are with the Department of Small Animal
Medicine and Surgery, University of Georgia.
E. W. Howerth is with the Department of Pathology, University of Georgia.
∗ S. Nie is with the Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Chemistry, Emory University and Georgia Institute of Technology (e-mail: snie@
emory.edu).
This paper contains supplementary material available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 18 MB).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2389626

of detecting neoplasia on the marginal specimen surface underscore the clinical utility.
Index Terms—Image-guided surgery, indocyanine green (ICG),
optical imaging, optical spectroscopy, surgical oncology, tumors.

I. INTRODUCTION
OMPLETE surgical removal of a tumor is one of the
most critical predictors of a favorable outcome for an oncology patient [1]. To accomplish complete tumor resection,
a surgeon must accurately determine the tumor boundary before and during surgery [2]. Presently, surgeons primarily rely
on preoperative imaging and unaided intraoperative techniques
(e.g., tactile and visual distinction of tumor from nontumor tissue) to determine tumor boundary. One limitation of using only
preoperative imaging is that tissue morphology can dramatically change intraoperatively. For instance, during brain tumor
surgery, tumor shape and location can substantially change after
removal of a portion of the cranium due to the mass effect of
the tumor [3]. Preoperative imaging offers limited guidance in
such circumstances. Reliance on tactile and visual qualities of
the tumor is also of limited utility because small foci of tumor
tissue frequently remain undetected, allowing residual tumor to
remain in the operative bed (the so-called dirty margins) [4].
Local tumor recurrence is one of the major causes of recurrent
disease and tumor-related death [5]–[8]. Alternatively, the tactile and visual properties of normal tissue can simulate those of
tumor tissue, leading to unnecessary resection of normal tissue.
Improved identification of tumor margins in the surgical cavity, such that these lesions could be removed at the time of the
surgical procedure, would likely improve patient outcome by
reducing the rate of recurrence.
An improvement in intraoperative distinction of tumor from
nontumor tissue is an active area of interest by many investigators. Both intraoperative imaging through sonography [9]
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [10] have been used for
intraoperative guidance. Sonography has many advantages: relatively low cost, compact nature of the equipment, portability
of the imaging device, video-rate imaging, lack of need for
exogenous contrast agents, and ability for imaging probe placement within the surgical cavity. Furthermore, deformation of
tumor shape has little impact because the sonography probe can
be easily redirected. A significant disadvantage that ultimately
limits intraoperative sonography use is that the contrast between
tumor and normal tissue is low. Intraoperative MRI, on the other

C

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MOHS et al.: WIDEFIELD IMAGING AND SPECTROSCOPY SYSTEM FOR CONTRAST-ENHANCED, IMAGE-GUIDED RESECTION OF TUMORS

hand, uses a scanner placed adjacent to the surgical table and
the patient is intermittently moved into the MR scanner. This
technique allows identification of changes in tumor morphology and position. Unfortunately, use of such scanners is cumbersome because the patient is connected to a wide variety of
monitoring and life-support equipment, which must be moved
along with the patient. Furthermore, because the surgical procedure must be interrupted to allow for imaging, operative time
and the time during which the patient is under general anesthesia are prolonged, which incurs increased risk to the patient and
additional financial cost [11]. Intraoperative MR equipment also
has substantial capital costs, e.g., cost of purchase and upkeep of
equipment and cost of specialized room design and construction
materials to maintain a safe imaging environment.
Intraoperative guidance to better define sites of tumor without prolonging surgery is an unmet clinical need. The ideal intraoperative guidance system would: 1) find tumor boundaries
with high sensitivity; 2) have minimal impact on operative time
and surgical technique; 3) present findings in an intuitive manner; and 4) avoid the use of ionizing radiation or a specialized
imaging environment (such as MR imaging). Additional considerations in the design of an intraoperative imaging system
would optimally include a compact, low-cost, portable system
that was durable. Neither intraoperative sonography nor intraoperative MRI completely meets these design requirements.
Devices based on optical methods can meet the full range
of the aforementioned design requirements. The near-infrared
(NIR) light range, between 700 and 1000 nm, is of greatest use
for this application: NIR light undergoes less scatter than visible
light in biological tissue and there is minimal biological background autofluorescence [12]. Silicon CCD and CMOS sensors
have appropriate sensitivity for NIR detection. Likewise, fiber
optic components and optical elements that are optimized for
the NIR range are readily available at low costs. In combination with a NIR fluorescent imaging agent that can localize
in tumor, these intraoperative imaging system design requirements are met. Here, we report the design and initial preclinical
testing of an intraoperative imaging system that uses a handheld probe for simultaneous excitation and spectroscopic detection of NIR fluorescent contrast agents in combination with a
widefield video-rate camera system for intuitive visualization.
Optical imaging systems based on detecting contrast-enhanced
fluorescence emission have been developed, including point
imaging and widefield imaging systems [13]–[18]; we present
an improvement over the current state of the art by incorporating aspects of both systems for optimized intraoperative tumor
detection.
II. METHODS
A. Integrated Optical Imaging System
1) Handheld Spectrograph Probe: The NIR spectrograph
with a remote handheld probe that we used in this study has been
previously described and characterized [13]. In brief, a coaxial
fiber-coupled Raman spectrometer remote head (RamanProbe,
InPhotonics, Norwood, MA) was coupled to a bench-top spectrograph (Advantage 785, DeltaNu, Laramie, WY). The exci-

1417

tation fiber of the remote probe was directly coupled to the
laser diode module of the spectrograph (785 nm, 100 mW). The
collection fiber of the remote probe (200 μm in diameter) was
placed at the entrance to the spectrograph. The spectrograph was
supplied with software to control excitation and data collection.
2) Widefield Video Camera: The widefield camera design
targets were as follows: 45 cm working distance from target
to lens, 5 cm object height, a 1/2 inch diagonal camera sensor
at the imaging plane, and a collimated light path for filtering.
Overall system design placed the highest priority on NIR light
sensitivity to detect NIR fluorescent contrast agents at medically relevant concentrations and at a video-rate (30 frames/s)
acquisition speed.
The cameras (Guppy F-038B series, Allied Vision Technologies, Exton, PA) we employed used 1/2 inch uncooled and interlaced silicon CCD sensors with 47% quantum efficiency in
the NIR range (as reported by the manufacturer). Cameras were
connected to the computer by a Firewire 400 interface, which
provided camera power and control. Sensor resolution was 768
× 492, with a pixel size of 8.4 μm × 9.8 μm. The sensors used
for each channel are the same; however, the anatomic camera
includes a Bayer mosaic filter to provide color imaging and
the NIR and laser channel cameras delete an NIR light filter
(resulting in greater NIR light sensitivity).
The overall optical system design was a relay lens system
that served as a link between a common objective lens and the
camera sensor. We designed a collimated light path between the
objective lens and camera sensors for placement of plate dichroic
filters. Each channel of the system (e.g., anatomic, laser, probe)
imaged a different, increasingly longer wavelength light range.
Thus, the net track length per channel was not identical. An
ideal optical design was first constructed under the assistance
of an optical layout package (OSLO Version 6, Sinclair Optics,
Pittsford, NY). Readily available commercial parts approximating the components of the ideal design were then substituted,
evaluated, and optimized using the optical layout package. The
design process proceeded iteratively until the final design was
reached, which we report in order of element encountered from
object to image plane.
A C-mount lens, designed for broadband imaging between
400 and 1000 nm with a 35 mm focal length and f/1.9 maximum
aperture (Xenoplan f1.9/35 mm, Schneider Optics, Hauppauge,
NY), served as the common objective lens. This commercial
objective was modeled as a perfect lens during system design
because a lens prescription was unavailable. The field lens, designed to extend the objective lens focal length, consisted of
a convex lens with focal length of 60 mm, a positive meniscus lens with focal length 100 mm, and a biconcave lens with
focal length of –50 mm; this field lens group was then collimated with an achromatic doublet with focal length of 45 mm.
An adjustable iris was located between the biconcave lens and
achromatic doublet to improve image quality by rejecting rays
that are far outside the paraxial region. The field lens group and
collimating lens were coated with a magnesium fluoride (MgF2 )
antireflection layer optimized for 700–1000 nm. The common
objective, field lenses, and collimating lens were mounted in
a single lens tube and secured with screw-in retaining rings,

1418

in that order. Two dichroic mirrors were mounted sequentially
in the collimated light path using kinetic mirror mounts. The
first mirror was a short-pass dichroic mirror with a center wavelength cut-on of 800 nm, designed to direct light from detected
contrast agent to the probe channel camera and allow laser
excitation light or visible light to pass. A second short-pass
dichroic mirror followed the first, with a center wavelength of
700 nm; the second dichroic mirror divided the remaining collimated light toward the laser channel camera or anatomic (i.e.,
visible light) channel camera. Beyond the dichroic filter system,
the collimated light passed through a channel-specific series
of filters before being focused onto the camera sensor with an
achromatic doublet having a focal length of 45 mm.
For the probe channel, the collimated light was then filtered through a rugate notch filter centered at 785 nm to reject
Rayleigh scattered laser light, using a rejection of optical density of at least 6. A bandpass filter with center wavelength of
820 nm and a 25 nm bandwidth was employed to reject all light
except that from the contrast agent and provide supplemental
blocking of Rayleigh-scattered laser light. For the laser channel,
the reflected light was filtered through an absorptive neutral density filter having an optical density of 2 that was coated with an
MgF2 antireflection layer optimized for 700–1000 nm. The final
component, the anatomical reference channel that allowed visible light, required no additional filtering beyond that provided
by the dichroic mirror system.
All components, i.e., camera, focusing lens, and supplemental filters, were mounted in lens tubes, each of which was secured to a breadboard using lens tube slip rings and standard
optomechanical hardware. The slip ring mount permitted simpler focusing of each individual channel. The system was made
compact by incorporating a silver mirror between the objective
lens tube and dichroic mirrors. The source of all lenses and optomechanical components was Thorlabs (Newark, NJ), except
for the dichroic mirror mounts, which were obtained from New
Focus (Newport, Santa Clara, CA) and the dichroic mirrors,
which were obtained from CVI-Melles Griot (Rochester, NY).
Two consumer-grade “white” 40 W LED lamps were used to
illuminate the surgical field.
3) Widefield Imaging Software: The widefield imaging software was written for the Microsoft .NET platform using the
C# programming language and Visual Studio Express development environment (2008 edition, Microsoft, Redmond, WA). An
application programming interface provided by the camera vendor (ActiveFirePackage, Allied Vision Technology) was used
for camera control and data acquisition. This program uses an
event-driven architecture by which each camera acquires frames
in a detached execution thread and applies image filters after
each frame is acquired. The contrast agent channel filter thresholds the image at a user-specified level to create a binary mask of
contrast agent signal. The laser tracking channel filter thresholds the image at a user-specified level to create a binary mask
of the laser position. The anatomical image channel filter combines the results of the contrast agent and laser tracking channel
filters to produce a composite view presented to the user. This
composite view displays the location of contrast agent signal
as a cyan color (which was selected to be orthogonal to the col-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

ors of the surgical cavity) and displays the approximate position
and size of the laser spot as a red circle outline. The software
is able to record still frame images or live video (with MPEG-4
compression) for documentation, as well as metadata about the
experiment (e.g., mouse tumor model used, contrast agent dose
and type) in a plain text file. Parameters and specifications for
the imaging system are listed in Table I.
B. In Vivo Murine Tumor Model Imaging
All in vivo murine studies were performed under a protocol
approved by the Emory University Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee. Mice were age-matched athymic nude females (Harlan Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN). Tumor models
were created with the 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma cell line
(ATCC, Manassas, VA); cells were maintained as per ATCC recommendations. Prior to injection into mouse subjects (N = 6),
the 4T1 tumor cells were washed (2×) with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) before collecting and diluting to a final concentration of 2 × 107 cells/mL. Cells were injected into the flank, using approximately 2 × 106 cells per animal and allowed to grow
subcutaneously for 28 days. At a time point 18–24 h prior to
the imaging procedure, the NIR fluorophore indocyanine green
(ICG, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was infused within 10 s
into the tail vein of mice bearing 4T1 tumors at a concentration
of 357 μg/kg (approx. 10 nmol per mouse). Immediately prior
to imaging, animals were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. The animals were then scanned
with the spectroscopic pen at regular intervals, with the spectroscopic pen held a constant distance, 1 cm away, from the
tissue by clamping the probe to a fixed stand and adjusting the
position of the probe until a 1 cm distance was achieved as measured by calipers. NIR fluorescence spectra were collected and
integrated using the trapezoid method. Simultaneously, video
from the contrast agent, laser tracking, and anatomical channels was recorded using the widefield system. The threshold
for the widefield imaging system was selected from mice that
had been administered ICG. Mice were euthanized at 24 h and
normal muscle, e.g., a contralateral flank or limb muscle, was
placed under the image-guided surgery system. The NIR channel of the widefield was adjusted to a point which no NIR signal
could be observed in normal muscle with laser excitation and
then the threshold was set at four times that unit. The threshold
setting obtained from the murine study was used in the canine
study described later. NIR signal in normal muscle has a relatively small coefficient of variance (26.8%, see Supplementary
Fig. 1). Surgical resection was then performed using standard
techniques to remove the tumor mass using solely the unaided
eye and palpation. Excised tissues, including tumor, tissue adjacent to tumor, and other areas of interest, were fixed in fresh
3.7% formaldehyde in PBS and submitted to the Winship Cancer Institute Pathology Core Laboratory for paraffin-embedding
and processing using H&E stain or immunohistochemistry.
C. Canine Spontaneous Tumor Imaging
Companion dogs with a clinically diagnosed tumor were enrolled in a Clinical Research Committee-approved protocol at

MOHS et al.: WIDEFIELD IMAGING AND SPECTROSCOPY SYSTEM FOR CONTRAST-ENHANCED, IMAGE-GUIDED RESECTION OF TUMORS

1419

TABLE I
INTRAOPERATIVE IMAGING SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS

Widefield Detection

Spectrographic system

Parameter

Specification

Number of imaging channels
Imaging wavelengths
Camera resolution
Camera maximum frame rate
Camera sensor size
Camera cell sensor size
Camera NIR QE
System resolution limit
Intended working distance
Field of view (at working distance
Pixel spatial resolution (at working distance)
System aperture
ICG detection limit
Excitation source wavelength
Excitation source max irradiance
Excitation source min spot size
Spectrograph resolution
Spectrograph range
ICG detection limit
Dynamic range

3
400–700, 700–800, 800–900 nm
768–492
60 fields/s (interlaced)
½ in
8.4 μm × 9.8 μm
700 nm: 80%, 800 nm: 47%, 900 nm: 23%
4 lp/mm (horizontal), 2.8 lp/mm (vertical)
60 cm
11 cm × 7 cm
145 μm
f/4
150–500 pM
785 nm
1.3 kW/cm2
100 μm
8 cm−1 (0.6 nm)
200–2000 cm−1
50 pM
40–50 fold

ing disease or a known allergy to contrast agents were excluded
from enrollment in the study. Canine patients received standard
of care treatment with addition of an intravenous ICG infusion
18–24 h before surgery followed by monitoring for postinfusion
anaphylactic reactions.
D. Ex Vivo ICG Accumulation in Companion Canine tumors
and Pathologic Correlation

Fig. 1. Operational scheme of widefield imaging with directed point excitation and spectroscopy. The widefield imaging head (center-right) is positioned
over the surgical area. Directed point excitation is provided in this case by the
handheld probe (S). The widefield imaging system uses three cameras to image
the anatomical view (A), the laser position within the anatomical view (L), and
any NIR light emitted within the anatomical view (N). The area is imaged by a
common objective lens (O) and the collected light is folded by mirrors (M) and
filtered by dichroic mirrors (D). Complex optics within the widefield imaging
head (e.g., collimation lenses, bandpass filters, etc.) are not depicted. The three
video channels recorded by the cameras (top-right) and spectral information
collected by the handheld probe (bottom-center) are processed by a computer
system to synthesize a composite display (bottom-left) to show anatomical
landmarks with the laser position and any detected NIR signal.

the University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine. A
veterinary oncologist (CFS) recruited the dogs and obtained
informed consent from dog owners, to whom a small financial
incentive was offered for participating in the trial. To participate
in the trial, canine subjects were required to have cytologically
or histologically confirmed malignant solid-mass tumors
amenable to surgical resection. Canines with severe underly-

After en bloc removal of the tumor, the participating surgeon
(KKC) obtained measurements of the surgical cavity using the
spectroscopic pen placed in a sterile sleeve. Following surgery,
tissue specimens resected from the patient, including biopsies
of the tumor bed, were probed with the spectroscopic system
in the presence of the attending pathologist (EWH), keeping
a 1 cm distance between probe and tissue as described in the
murine studies. Locations of spectral readings were recorded
on a photograph of the tissue sample for later correlation to
the histologic preparations, or when available, recorded by the
integrated imaging system. The pathologist was blinded to the
results of the spectral readings.
III. RESULTS
A. Conceptual Overview of Intraoperative Imaging Platform
The intraoperative imaging platform is presented conceptually in Fig. 1 and consists of two instruments capable of detecting
NIR fluorescent contrast agents. The first instrument is a point
excitation source that is interactively positioned by the surgeon
to direct excitation light in any area of interest. This source may
be a broadband light source, such as provided by a xenon or
LED lamp, or a monochromatic light source, such as a laser. In
the case of an LED or laser, the source can be a self-contained
handheld unit (like a laser pointer) or remotely fiber-coupled to
the handheld unit. When fiber coupled, the device can incorporate a spectrograph in order to provide detailed spectrographic

1420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 2. Photographs of current device implementation. (A) Widefield imaging
head. The objective and collimation optics (orange box) are housed in a lens
tube mounted 90° from the rest of the components: a 45° protected-silver mirror
folds the light to the rest of the system. The dichroics (magenta box) are used
for separating the collected light into the NIR (blue box), laser (red box),
and anatomic (green box) channels, in that order. Each channel has additional
filters and focusing optics mounted in lens tubes and then directly coupled to
the camera. (B) Handheld probe held in typical use pattern alongside several
common surgical implements. (C) Spatial relationship between the handheld
and widefield units. In the operating room, a member of the surgical team held
the pen.

information of the point being interrogated, as described in detail later. The second instrument is a widefield imaging system
that sits the surgical field. The widefield imaging instrument has
multiple area imaging sensors joined through a common lens.
Each camera images a distinct spectral window provided by a
system of optical elements. In the system that we describe here,
we include one camera for color imaging of the surgical cavity
(i.e., the anatomic view), one camera to track the point excitation source, and one camera for depicting the fluorescence of
the contrast agent.
B. Current Implementation of Imaging Prototype
The current implementation of the imaging platform technology is pictured in Fig. 2. The point spectroscopy and excitation
source consists of a commercially available Raman spectrograph
fiber coupled to a commercially available coaxial remote probe,
described in further detail elsewhere [13]. The ICG detection
lower limit of the spectroscopic unit is approximately 50 pM
[13]. The widefield imaging system uses CCD cameras with
high NIR sensitivity to depict the anatomical view, excitation
source position, and to detect NIR light emitted by the contrast agent. The widefield imaging system is currently mounted
on a flexible, articulating mount. The cameras are connected by
FireWire to a computer running software developed in-house for
image processing and display to the system operator. Similarly,
the spectrometer is connected to the same computer for spectrograph acquisition using commercial or in-house software for
processing and display. The display software overlays all areas
of the contrast agent above a set threshold onto the anatomic
image, the centroid of the point excitation and displays this lo-

Fig. 3. General workflow for resection of tumors by interactive intraoperative
guidance. The images on the left and right of each panel show the same mouse
with the handheld probe in two positions at each stage of tumor removal. Initially,
the suspect tumor area is scanned to find the borders of the tumor (A). The tumor
is then removed by a standard surgical technique. Following resection, the
surgical bed is rescanned to find residual ICG signal (B). The resection is
revised until no ICG signal is detected in the surgical bed (C). Finally, the
resected surgical specimen is scanned to confirm ICG accumulation and areas
of pathologic interest for histologic analysis (D). Areas of ICG accumulation are
false-colored cyan, and the area the point excitation source is being directed is
shown by the dashed red circle. Supplementary Fig. 2 shows the spectral signal
in representative area of these images.

cation as an empty circle on the anatomic image, and depicts the
spectroscopic readings of the point of interest recorded from the
handheld probe. The camera system channels are aligned using
an ISO 12233 test target.
C. Workflow of the Imaging System for Surgical Guidance
in Mouse Models
The designed workflow of the integrated imaging system in
cancer surgery in a typical subject is shown in Fig. 3. For initial proof-of-concept studies, we used the 4T1 murine breast
cancer cell line injected into the flank of athymic nude mice
to produce an ectopic tumor. As prepared, the mice develop a
visible and fibrous-encapsulated tumor within days. In a typical experiment such as this example, 357 μg/kg of ICG was
infused into the mouse via the tail vein for imaging after 18 h.
At the beginning of surgery, the tumor area is scanned with the
handheld probe to determine the tumor boundaries. Tumors had

MOHS et al.: WIDEFIELD IMAGING AND SPECTROSCOPY SYSTEM FOR CONTRAST-ENHANCED, IMAGE-GUIDED RESECTION OF TUMORS

6.8-fold stronger ICG signal compared to muscle (p = 0.0118);
see Supplementary Fig. 1. The tumor is then resected with standard surgical technique.
Following resection, the surgical bed is rescanned with
the handheld probe to assess for residual disease. If residual
disease was found, the lesions detected by the imaging system
are visually marked by pin placement, and then resected. The
process is repeated until residual disease is no longer detected.
The surgical specimens are then probed intraoperatively with
the system to identify areas of particular interest for postoperative pathology. The guidance provided by the imaging system
is unobtrusive: available when the surgeon needs to locate tumor boundaries and residual disease, and out of the surgical
field while removing tissue or performing other surgical duties.
In one example, the 4T1 tumor grew in an ectopic fashion with
the mouse skin. Thus, when the skin flap was retracted from the
surgical cavity, the primary tumor remained engrafted with the
skin, as shown in Fig. 4. Consistent with the subject shown in
Fig. 3, ICG preferentially accumulated into the primary tumor
as shown in Fig. 4(B). Following the surgical workflow, reexamination of the surgical area indicated an unexpected, a “hot spot”
of high ICG accumulation in an area distant from the fibrous
tumor capsule. On visual and tactile inspection, this tissue appeared to be connective tissue. The specimen was removed and
submitted for pathology: histological examination confirmed
that this “hot spot” was in fact a lymph node with metastatic
tumor cells as determined by CK-18 staining. Supplementary
Fig. 3 shows that the widefield imaging system can detect high
contrast-enhancing regions and low contrast-enhancing regions
as the handheld pen is moved across these regions.
D. Image-Guidance in Spontaneous Canine Tumors
Murine tumor models have a distinct fibrous capsule and frequently an exceedingly leaky vasculature; consequently, they
do not fully replicate the human tumor microenvironment morphologically or physiologically. To demonstrate the utility of
ICG for contrast-enhanced tumor imaging with the current intraoperative imaging prototype in a more realistic biologic and
clinical setting, we tested the system by imaging companion
dogs with spontaneously occurring solid tumors. Canine patients
were systemically administered 220 μg/kg ICG 24 h before
surgery. Tissues removed from the patients were analyzed by the
intraoperative imaging system in a room adjacent to the surgical
suite. An example of results obtained from a canine procedure is
shown in Fig. 5. Tumor to muscle contrast enhancement was 7.3,
which was larger than expected and likely due to the size of this
individual tumor. Additionally, ICG was detected in an area that
appeared to be normal muscle but was determined by pathology
to be inflammation-associated edema. A distinct boundary of
ICG accumulation could be observed between tumor tissue (as
determined by visual and tactile inspection) and normal tissue
bordering the specimen.
IV. DISCUSSION
Surgery remains a widely used and effective treatment of
solid tumors. Despite numerous advancements in diagnostic

1421

Fig. 4. Systemically injected ICG preferentially deposits in tumors but not
normal tissue. A nude athymic mouse bearing a subcutaneous 4T1 xenograft
mammary tumor was injected by tail vein with 357 μg/kg ICG 24 h before
dissection and imaging. (A) When the handheld probe is directed away from
the tumor, no ICG emission is detected by the widefield imaging system or
spectrometer and (a) histology is consistent with skeletal muscle. (B) When
the handheld probe is directed onto the tumor, the widefield imaging system
is able to detect ICG emission (cyan false-color) and the spectrometer is able
to resolve ICG emission, while (b) H&E histology of the enhancing region is
characteristic of tumor. (C) The widefield imaging system also detects ICG
emission when the handheld probe is directed onto an abnormal lymph node,
which was confirmed by spectroscopy. (c) Histology of the lymph node with CK18 immunohistochemistry is positive for metastatic tumor cells (yellow arrows).
Scale bar = 200 μ. Supplementary Fig. 3 shows the wide-field channel as the
handheld pen system is moved on and off tumor and lymph node.

imaging, few technological innovations have been directed
toward intraoperative guidance of tumor resection. Diagnostic imaging techniques like CT, MRI, and PET/SPECT provide
preoperative information as to the location and distribution of
solid-tumor masses, but once surgery begins, changes in the
surgical field (such as shift in organ location and change in
tumor morphology following partial removal of tissue) limit
the utility of preoperative imaging in guiding a surgical procedure. In particular, preoperative imaging cannot inform on
the status of a surgical margin (i.e., has a tumor mass been
completely removed). Attempts to develop MRI as an intraoperative modality are hampered by numerous limitations in use:
restrictions on ferrous tools, moving the patient to permit imaging, bulky MR imaging scanners, and the prohibitive expense of
intraoperative MR imaging equipment. Pathology techniques
such as touch-prep and frozen section histology are greatly

1422

Fig. 5. Postoperative analysis of a surgical specimen from a canine with
spontaneous fibrosarcoma. A 13-year old mixed-breed canine was infused with
220 μg/kg ICG 24 h before surgery to amputate the left hind leg that had an
8.5 cm in diameter mass. (A) Leg was dissected postoperatively for analysis
of normal and neoplastic tissue as determined by visual and tactile inspection.
ICG was found to accumulate and deposit in the tumor (C, cyan false-colored
region) but not fatty connective tissue (E) or normal muscle (B). (F) Areas rich
in ICG deposits (tumor) show a unique spectral signature that is distinct from the
broad, featureless spectrum of normal tissue (muscle, fat). (D) Slight increase in
ICG signal was observed in inflamed tissue associated with the tumor, consistent
with reports of ICG presence in inflammation-associated edema. Supplementary
Fig. 4 shows the widefield channel as the handheld pen system is moved through
the field.

limited in throughput and can solely examine surgical specimens after removal, rather than the surgical bed [19], [20]. The
frozen section process takes on the order of 20 min, thereby
causing delay in completion of surgery and prolonged intraoperative times. Furthermore, the delay to obtain final histological
diagnosis is much longer, i.e., on the order of 48 h, well after
the completion of the surgical procedure. The ability to provide
a definitive intraoperative diagnosis would not solely decrease
the time for decision making. It would, most importantly, provide information that would allow a surgeon to incorporate results while still in the operative suite and thus, make a decision
whether to resect additional tissue.
We have developed an optical intraoperative imaging system
that relies on systemically injected contrast agents to provide
intraoperative guidance during surgery. Imaging with optical
contrast material has no ionizing radiation concerns (as with
CT/PET/SPECT), does not place restrictions on tools that can
be used in the operating theater (as with MRI), and the instrumentation can be made compact, portable, and durable at a lower
cost than CT, MRI, or PET/SPECT. Recently, optical intraoperative imaging systems have been developed which use area excitation with widefield imaging [15], [21], [22]. In contrast, we
use point excitation with widefield imaging. This scheme allows
for spectroscopy to be obtained in real-time and for an intuitive
widefield imaging display to offer surgical guidance. Spectroscopic capabilities are useful with fluorescent contrast agents
to distinguish fluorescence emission of the contrast agent from
endogenous fluorophores or external stray light. In the future,
intraoperative spectroscopy can be used with surface-enhanced
Raman scattering (SERS)-based contrast agents to provide both
higher sensitivity and multiplexed imaging [13], [23].
Due to a lack of suitable commercial instrumentation, we
developed a prototype to perform our study, with a goal of clinical translation of both the instrumentation and the protocols
for use. The overall system consists of three parts: an exogenous contrast agent, a point excitation source, and a widefield
imaging system. The intraoperative imaging platform requires

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

a contrast agent to be infused into the patient prior to imaging.
This contrast agent can be an organic fluorophore (e.g., ICG),
a fluorescent nanoparticle (e.g., a semiconductor quantum dot),
or a Raman-active agent (e.g., an SERS gold nanoparticle). For
initial studies, we selected ICG as the contrast agent. ICG is
well suited for these preclinical studies for several reasons: it is
FDA approved for blood pool monitoring, it has a good safety
profile with well-defined counter indications [24], and it has absorbance and emission in the “NIR window” where endogenous
chromophores have low absorption and there is low autofluorescence. Recent publications have featured ICG used for sentinel
lymph node mapping with intraoperative imaging instrumentation [25], [26]; however, there are few reports of the use of ICG
as a contrast agent for determining tumor boundaries intraoperatively [14], [27]–[29]. Since ICG is known to correlate well
with the blood pool, and tumors are known to have a “leaky”
vasculature [30]–[32], it is reasonable to expect that ICG will
accumulate within tumors and could be used to delineate the
tumor boundary.
Experiments in murine tumor models show that ICG deposits
in higher amounts in the tumor relative to surrounding tissues,
which can be delineated by the image-guided surgery system as
shown in Figs. 3 and 4. In the ectopic mouse tumor model, ICG
was shown to provide sufficient tumor contrast to be identifiable
on out system, as well as in one case, allowing for identification
of a lymph node with metastatic disease that would have been
unnoticed without this intraoperative imaging system. While the
small animal model demonstrates that the concept of ICG as a
tumor contrast agent has merit, it introduces many difficulties
in conducting a full correlative study of ICG accumulation in
tumors to determine if ICG can truly be used as a tumor boundary contrast agent. The difficulties are largely those of scale, but
there are also the additional questions posed in using a tumor
model to test an imaging agent that relies on enhanced permeability and retention effect for “targeting” since mouse tumor
models are well known to have leaky vasculature that is not
representative of naturally occurring human tumors. To overcome these difficulties, we started a clinical trial in companion
canines with spontaneous tumors. Canine tumors are known to
be similar to human tumors in architecture, and canines get the
same types of tumors as humans (although in different occurrence rates) [33]. Another advantage of using canines patients
is that ICG has a history of use in canines and is both known
to be safe and to behave similarly as it does in humans [34],
[35]. Surprisingly, we found that intravenous infusion of ICG
in canines accumulates in spontaneous tumors as it does in the
mouse tumor models. An import implication is that this suggests
that ICG is likely to provide contrast for human tumors as well.
The widefield imaging technique and local spectroscopy technique each have individual advantages. Local excitation and
spectroscopic detection yields wavelength-resolved information
that allows one to distinguish endogenous versus injected fluorophores. The handheld fiber-coupled laser and spectrometer
used here can acquire NIR spectra in 0.1 s [13] in the areas
of interest in the surgical field. Spectroscopic information via a
widefield imaging system would require tunable filters (which
are inefficient and costly), which would not be conducive to

MOHS et al.: WIDEFIELD IMAGING AND SPECTROSCOPY SYSTEM FOR CONTRAST-ENHANCED, IMAGE-GUIDED RESECTION OF TUMORS

video-rate imaging. Furthermore, the directed laser allows the
operator to unobtrusively collect light over a large solid angle.
Because the surgeon can direct the laser to the point of interest,
numerous computer video processing schemes can be used to
assist in imaging, e.g., delineating the tumor boundary on the
widefield imaging screen by tracking the handheld probe position, or zooming the widefield imaging system display on the
handheld probe position. Another advantage of this scheme is
that any fluorescent dye outside the inspected area is not at risk
of photobleaching. Finally, the local excitation source is a practical way to use a relatively high power (but permissible under
ANSI criteria) laser for illumination in the operating room to
achieve high excitation fluence. Using a laser excitation source
is desirable both to achieve high fluence rates (both high relative intensity and a source that can be focused into a small
area) and to provide a monochromatic light source that can be
rejected in the widefield imaging system fluorescence channel
with notch filters. Using area illumination for the same purpose
would require high power LED or laser diodes that would color
the surgical field and introduce electrical and optical safety issues. Alternative light sources for fluorescence excitation, such
as Halogen or xenon, are broadband and require extensive optical filtering to prevent bleed-through into the emission channels
on widefield imaging. The relatively high fluence inherent in the
point excitation source allows for the widefield imaging system
to have a straightforward design if the optical layout and component selection are biased in favor of NIR sensitivity. In the
instrumentation presented in this paper, we were able to use
uncooled CCD sensors and catalog optical parts, which would
not be possible with an area illumination scheme with an inherently lower fluence rate. To that end widefield imaging is
essential for intuitive surgical guidance. It provides real-time
spatial guidance for NIR contrast-enhancing areas. We are currently developing a second-generation system with a smaller
widefield imaging head unit, less intrusive mounting, and improved monitor position.
V. CONCLUSION
The utility of ICG for imaging tumors with low-cost instrumentation amenable to intraoperative use has been demonstrated. Our technology addresses the issue of minimization of
the likelihood of postoperative residual tumor, which is a major
cause of tumor recurrence. The resultant better delineation of
tumor boundaries during surgery, such that the tumor can be
removed in toto, is expected to greatly increase the cure rate of
surgical resection. Future studies will be needed to more rigorously establish the correlation between ICG fluorescence and
the histologically defined tumor boundary in order to support
human clinical trials. Additionally, studies will need to be conducted that focus on the development of higher performance
fluorescent dyes and SERS nanoparticles, which can be targeted
to specific tumor markers.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Gebitekin et al., “Fate of patients with residual tumour at the
bronchial resection margin,” Eur. J. Cardio-Thoracic Surg., vol. 8, no. 7,
pp. 339–342, Jul. 1994.

1423

[2] S. Singhal et al., “Nanotechnology applications in surgical oncology,”
Annu. Rev. Med., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 359–373, 2010.
[3] M. H. Reinges et al., “Course of brain shift during microsurgical resection
of supratentorial cerebral lesions: Limits of conventional neuronavigation,” Acta Neurochir., vol. 146, no. 4, pp. 369–377, Apr. 2004.
[4] L. E. McCahill et al., “Variability in reexcision following breast conservation surgery,” J. Amer. Med. Assoc., vol. 307, no. 5, pp. 467–475, Feb.
2012.
[5] N. Houssami et al., “Meta-analysis of the impact of surgical margins
on local recurrence in women with early-stage invasive breast cancer
treated with breast-conserving therapy,” Eur. J. Cancer, vol. 46, no. 18,
pp. 3219–3232, Dec. 2010.
[6] E. D. Kurniawan et al., “Predictors of surgical margin status in breastconserving surgery within a breast screening program,” Ann. Surg. Oncol.,
vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 2542–2549, Jul. 2008.
[7] P. Karakiewicz et al., “Prognostic impact of positive surgical margins in
surgically treated prostate cancer: Multi-institutional assessment of 5831
patients,” Urology, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 1245–1250, Dec. 2005.
[8] M. Rouanne et al., “Long-term impact of positive surgical margins on
biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy: Ten years of followup,” Scand. J. Urol., vol. 48, pp. 131–137, Dec. 2014.
[9] N. M. A. Krekel et al., “Intraoperative ultrasound guidance for palpable breast cancer excision (COBALT trial): A multicentre, randomised controlled trial,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 48–54,
Feb. 2013.
[10] P. L. Kubben et al., “Intraoperative MRI-guided resection of glioblastoma multiforme: A systematic review,” Lancet Oncol., vol. 12, no. 11,
pp. 1062–1070, Oct. 2011.
[11] R. Ramina et al., “Optimizing costs of intraoperative magnetic resonance
imaging. A series of 29 glioma cases,” Acta Neurochir., vol. 152, no. 1,
pp. 27–33, Feb. 2010.
[12] R. Weissleder, “A clearer vision for in vivo imaging,” Nature Biotechnol.,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 316–317, May 2001.
[13] A. M. Mohs et al., “Hand-held spectroscopic device for in vivo and intraoperative tumor detection: Contrast enhancement, detection sensitivity,
and tissue penetration.,” Anal. Chem., vol. 82, no. 21, pp. 9058–9065, Oct.
2010.
[14] Y. Morita et al., “Detection of hepatocellular carcinomas with nearinfrared fluorescence imaging using indocyanine green: Its usefulness
and limitation,” Int. J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 232–241, Dec.
2011.
[15] S. Troyan et al., “The FLARE(TM) intraoperative near-infrared fluorescence imaging system: A first-in-human clinical trial in breast cancer sentinel lymph node mapping,” Ann. Surg. Oncol., vol. 16, no. 10,
pp. 2943–2952, Jul. 2009.
[16] J. R. van der Vorst et al., “Near-infrared fluorescence-guided resection
of colorectal liver metastases,” Cancer, vol. 119, no. 18, pp. 3411–3418,
Sep. 2013.
[17] Q. T. Nguyen et al., “Surgery with molecular fluorescence imaging
using activatable cell-penetrating peptides decreases residual cancer
and improves survival,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 107, no. 9,
pp. 4317–4322, Apr. 2010.
[18] O. T. Okusanya et al., “Small portable interchangeable imager of fluorescence for fluorescence guided surgery and research,” Technol. Cancer
Res. Treatment, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 411–420, Dec. 2013.
[19] J. Ferreiro et al., “Accuracy of frozen-section diagnosis of mammographically directed breast biopsies. Results of 1,490 consecutive cases,” Amer.
J. Surg. Pathol., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1267–1271, Nov. 1995.
[20] V. Klimberg et al., “Assessing margin status,” Surg. Oncol., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 77–84, Aug. 1999.
[21] N. Furukawa et al., “The usefulness of photodynamic eye for sentinel
lymph node identification in patients with cervical cancer,” Tumori,
vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 936–940, Nov./Dec. 2010.
[22] V. Ntziachristos et al., “Current concepts and future perspectives on
surgical optical imaging in cancer,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 15, no. 6,
pp. 066024-1–066025-12, Oct. 2010.
[23] X. Qian et al., “In vivo tumor targeting and spectroscopic detection with
surface-enhanced Raman nanoparticle tags,” Nature Biotechnol., vol. 26,
no. 1, pp. 83–90, Feb. 2008.
[24] M. V. Marshall et al., “Near-infrared fluorescence imaging in humans with
indocyanine green: A review and update,” Open Surg. Oncol. J., vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 12–25, May 2010.
[25] E. M. Sevick-Muraca et al., “Imaging of lymph flow in breast cancer
patients after microdose administration of a near-infrared fluorophore:
Feasibility study,” Radiology, vol. 246, no. 3, pp. 734–741, Apr. 2008.

1424

[26] J. R. van der Vorst et al., “Optimization of near-infrared fluorescent sentinel lymph node mapping in cervical cancer patients,” Int. J. Gynecol.
Cancer, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 1472–1478, Nov. 2011.
[27] K. Gotoh et al., “A novel image-guided surgery of hepatocellular carcinoma by indocyanine green fluorescence imaging navigation,” J. Surg.
Oncol., vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 75–79, Jul. 2009.
[28] T. Ishizawa et al., “Real-time identification of liver cancers by using indocyanine green fluorescent imaging,” Cancer, vol. 115, no. 11,
pp. 2491–2504, Jul. 2009.
[29] Y. Kawaguchi et al., “Hepatobiliary surgery guided by a novel fluorescent imaging technique for visualizing hepatic arteries, bile ducts, and
liver cancers on color images,” J. Amer. Coll. Surg., vol. 212, no. 6,
pp. e33–e39, Jul. 2011.
[30] H. F. Dvorak, “Vascular permeability to plasma, plasma proteins, and
cells: An update,” Curr. Opin. Hematol., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 225–229, Jun.
2010.
[31] H. Maeda et al., “The EPR effect for macromolecular drug delivery to
solid tumors: Improvement of tumor uptake, lowering of systemic toxicity,
and distinct tumor imaging in vivo,” Adv. Drug Del. Rev., vol. 65, no. 1,
pp. 71–79, Feb. 2013.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

[32] P. Ott, “Hepatic elimination of indocyanine green with special reference
to distribution kinetics and the influence of plasma protein binding,” Pharmacol. Toxicol., vol. 83, no. Suppl. 2, pp. 1–48, Feb. 1998.
[33] M. Paoloni and C. Khanna, “Translation of new cancer treatments from
pet dogs to humans,” Nature Rev. Cancer, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 147–156, Mar.
2008.
[34] R. Mayer et al., “Measurement of the fluorescence lifetime in scattering media by frequency-domain photon migration,” Appl. Opt., vol. 38,
no. 22, pp. 4930–4938, Aug. 1999.
[35] J. Reynolds et al., “Imaging of spontaneous canine mammary tumors
using fluorescent contrast agents,” Photochem. Photobiol., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 87–94, Jul. 1999.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

