1404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Modeling and Estimation of Tip Contact Force
for Steerable Ablation Catheters
Mahta Khoshnam∗ , Member, IEEE, Allan C. Skanes, and Rajni V. Patel, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Objective: The efficacy of catheter-based cardiac ablation procedures can be significantly improved if real-time information is available concerning contact forces between the catheter
tip and cardiac tissue. However, the widely used ablation catheters
are not equipped for force sensing. This paper proposes a technique
for estimating the contact forces without direct force measurements
by studying the changes in the shape of the deflectable distal section
of a conventional 7-Fr catheter (henceforth called the “deflectable
distal shaft,” the “deflectable shaft,” or the “shaft” of the catheter)
in different loading situations. Method: First, the shaft curvature
when the tip is moving in free space is studied and based on that, a
kinematic model for the deflectable shaft in free space is proposed.
In the next step, the shaft shape is analyzed in the case where the tip
is in contact with the environment, and it is shown that the curvature of the deflectable shaft provides useful information about the
loading status of the catheter and can be used to define an index
for determining the range of contact forces exerted by the ablation tip. Results: Experiments with two different steerable ablation
catheters show that the defined index can detect the range of applied contact forces correctly in more than 80% of the cases. Based
on the proposed technique, a framework for obtaining contact force
information by using the shaft curvature at a limited number of
points along the deflectable shaft is constructed. Conclusion: The
proposed kinematic model and the force estimation technique can
be implemented together to describe the catheter’s behavior before contact, detect tip/tissue contact, and determine the range of
contact forces. Significance: This study proves that the flexibility of
the catheter’s distal shaft provides a means of estimating the force
exerted on tissue by the ablation tip.
Index Terms—Ablation catheter, contact force, kinematics,
modeling.

I. INTRODUCTION

A

RRHYTHMIA or the abnormal heart rhythm is the result of a problem within the heart’s electrical system.

Manuscript received December 24, 2013; revised June 15, 2014 and November 26, 2014; accepted December 27, 2014. Date of publication December 27,
2014; date of current version April 17, 2015. This work was supported in part
by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under
Discovery Grant RGPIN1345 and CREATE Program Grant 371322-2009 and
by infrastructure grants from the Canada Foundation for Innovation and the
Ontario Research Fund awarded to the London Health Sciences Centre (Canadian Surgical Technologies & Advanced Robotics) and to Western University.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ M. Khoshnam is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Western University, London, ON N6A3K7, Canada, and Canadian Surgical
Technologies and Advanced Robotics, London, ON N6A5A5, Canada (e-mail:
mkhoshna@uwo.ca).
A. C. Skanes is with the Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, and also the Director of the Electrophysiology Laboratory at
University Hospital, London Health Sciences Centre.
R. V. Patel is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and the Department of Surgery, Western University, and also with Canadian
Surgical Technologies and Advanced Robotics.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2389615

When medications prove insufficient in restoring the normal
heart rhythm, the next widely accepted remedy is a minimally
invasive procedure, namely cardiac ablation, which is realized
using long flexible catheters. During the ablation procedure, a
steerable ablation catheter is steered through blood vessels into
the heart chambers and then the catheter tip is used to deliver
some type of energy (most commonly radio frequency (RF)) to
the heart tissue and ablate those parts that are considered to be
the source of arrhythmia. During this procedure, the vasculature
and the catheter are usually visualized via X-ray fluoroscopy,
but a good visualization of the heart is not available due to low
visibility of soft tissue in X-ray images. The efficacy of ablation treatment clearly depends on successfully detecting and
ablating the parts of cardiac tissue that interfere with normal
heart electrical signal activity. Among factors that affect the lesion formation (e.g., the ablation duration, the ablation power,
the angle between the catheter tip and the tissue, and the tissue
thickness), one important factor is the quality of contact between
the catheter tip and tissue, i.e., the force that the catheter tip applies on the tissue [1]–[3]. Recently, RF ablation catheters with
force sensors integrated within their tip have been introduced.
The Thermocool SMARTTOUCH Catheter (Biosense Webster,
Diamond Bar, CA) [4] and the Tacticath irrigated ablation
catheter (St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, MN) [5] report and
visualize the magnitude and direction of the tip/tissue contact
force [1], [3]. The axial force at the tip of Artisan Extend Control
Catheter (Hansen Medical, Mountain View, CA) [6] is measured
by a sensor placed in its steerable sheath and is reported to the
surgeon by visual as well as haptic feedback. Although these
catheters use different methods to measure and report the contact force, they have one common feature: In order to operate,
these catheters must be integrated with their custom navigation systems and interfaces. Therefore, there is a noticeable cost
currently associated with these ablation systems in addition to
the significantly higher cost of the sensorized catheters (such as
those described in [4] and [5] which, like all ablation catheters,
are single-use). This is a major constraint for the wider use of
these new technologies in clinical procedures.
In order to propose an implementable technique for estimating
the contact force at the tip of conventional steerable catheters, in
this paper, we investigate how the shape of the deflectable distal
shaft (henceforth called the “deflectable shaft” or the “shaft”)
changes as the tip exerts a force on the environment and, we show
that the flexibility of the shaft provides a means to estimate the
contact force. The basic idea is close to the idea of “intrinsic
force sensing” in the context of continuum robots [7], [8], where
a measure of contact force is provided using a kinematic model
of the robot and information on actuation force at its joint.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KHOSHNAM et al.: MODELING AND ESTIMATION OF TIP CONTACT FORCE FOR STEERABLE ABLATION CATHETERS

Several research groups have studied the kinematic modeling
of steerable ablation catheters. A kinematic model was proposed for a tendon-driven catheter by Camarillo et al. [9]. The
parameters of this model were determined using either the information from the actuation system or a vision-based shape sensing technique and the model predicted how tendon actuation
would affect the catheter shape [9], [10]. In another approach,
the kinematic model developed primarily for continuum robots
[11] was applied to model a commercially available pull-wire
ablation catheter [12]. However, the basic assumption in developing these models is that the catheter bends with constant
curvature along its length when the driving tendons/pull wires
are actuated. This assumption was shown to be invalid when the
effect of nonlinear internal friction is considered [13]. Moreover,
these models deal with the problem of modeling the catheter’s
deflectable distal shaft in free space, i.e., how the distal shaft
deflects in response to actuating the driving tendons/pull wires
when the tip is not in contact with the environment. Thus, the
effect of contact force on the shaft shape has not been addressed.
Although steerable catheters share several features with continuum robots [14], the fact that detailed information about pullwire tensions and internal friction is not generally available hinders the application of the existing methods in the context of
continuum robots to the case of conventional steerable ablation catheters. Moreover, mounting sensors on the flexing shaft
not only changes the bending characteristics of the shaft, but
also introduces new difficulties with placing the required cables
and wires inside the catheter sheath that must be solved before
the catheter can be tested in a clinical setting. It is expected
that a thorough understanding of the behavior of conventional
catheters would be very helpful in designing strategies to manipulate the catheter inside the complex anatomy, while guaranteeing a safe contact force at the catheter tip at all times during
the ablation procedure.
The ablation procedure is performed using visual feedback
from a medical imaging modality. It would be very desirable if
the acquired images could be analyzed to obtain some information about the tip contact force as well. The work presented in
this paper shows that: 1) It is feasible to determine the range
of contact forces from imaging data; and 2) a certain section
on the catheter’s deflectable distal shaft is more susceptible to
the contact forces and it is possible to obtain the force range
information by monitoring this section. In our previous work,
we showed that it is possible to control the contact force at
the catheter tip without mounting force sensors on the catheter.
This result was achieved through using the tip angle data from
a custom-designed optical strain sensor and a previously developed model of the catheter’s distal shaft that translates the
tip angle into its corresponding contact force value [15], [16],
[18]. However, the designed optical strain sensor worked for a
limited range of external loads, suggesting that either the sensor
should be relocated on the shaft or multiple sensors should be
used. In this paper, by understanding the necessity of studying
the catheter behavior and estimating the contact force with minimal alterations to the structure of a conventional catheter, we
develop a custom algorithm to accurately extract the shaft shape
from acquired images, and then use imaging data to study the

1405

effect of the actuation force as well as the in-plane external force
on the catheter shape. Studying the effect of the actuation force
on the shape of the deflectable shaft in cases where the ablation
tip is not in contact with the environment, leads to developing a
kinematic model for catheter deflection in free space. The performance of the proposed kinematic model in determining the
position and orientation of the tip is then compared to that of
the models available in the literature. In the next step, we analyze the shaft shape in contact with the environment and define
an index to identify the range of forces exerted by the catheter
tip. Studying the force data reported during ablation procedures
[3], we determine the range of tip/tissue contact forces that are
required for an effective ablation treatment. Experimental results on different catheters prove that the defined force index
can correctly detect the range of applied external forces in a
majority of cases. Moreover, this study suggests a framework
for obtaining contact force information in cases where limited
information about the catheter shape is available. This study is
performed under the assumption that the applied forces act in
the plane of the bent catheter. This is a valid assumption considering how the catheter tip is positioned with respect to the heart
tissue for ablating a target point. To the best of our knowledge,
the results presented in this paper are the first to demonstrate
the feasibility of obtaining some information about the catheter
tip/environment contact force by analyzing the changes in the
shape of the catheter’s deflectable distal shaft.
The organization of the rest of this paper is as follows: The
experimental setup used for data collection and evaluation is
described in Section II. In Section III, the catheter behavior in
free space is analyzed and a kinematic model is proposed and
evaluated. The effect of contact force on the catheter shape is
analyzed and a force index is defined in Section IV. Experimental results for evaluating the proposed technique are presented
and discussed in Section V. Section VI concludes this paper
with suggestions for future work.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this paper, rather than making assumptions on the behavior
of the catheter under applied loads (e.g., bending with constant
curvature in free space), we start with a careful observation and
analysis of the changes in the catheter shape under different
loading scenarios. In this section, the experimental setup used
for collecting shape and force information and our method for
extracting the catheter shape from the acquired images are explained. In the following sections, these data are studied and the
results are reported.
A. Experimental Setup
The experimental setup used for data collection is shown
schematically in Fig. 1. The catheter is a 7-Fr long-reach unidirectional steerable ablation catheter (D7TFL252RT, Biosense
Webster, Diamond Bar, CA). A DC servo motor (Maxon Precision Motors, Inc., Fall River, MA, USA) and a small adapter
are arranged in a 1-DOF actuation mechanism to actuate the
catheter by moving the prismatic knob on the proximal handle
[see Fig. 3(a)]. The catheter is passed through a sheath and is free

1406

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Schematic of the experimental setup.
Fig. 2. View of the catheter’s deflectable shaft, camera, and force sensor in
the experimental setup.

to slide back and forth in it. The distal shaft is the last 8 cm of the
catheter, from which the distal 1 cm is reserved for the ablation
tip and electrodes and the remaining 7 cm bends into an arc when
the proximal handle is actuated [see Fig. 3(b)]. In this paper, the
term “deflectable shaft” or the “shaft” refers to this bending
section; “base point” is the starting point of the bending section,
and “end point” is the last point of the bending section, and
marks where the nonflexing ablation tip begins [see Fig. 3(b)].
A force sensor (Nano17, ATI Industrial Automation, Apex, NC,
USA) is used as the environment with which the catheter interacts. This arrangement eliminates the need to mount a sensor
on the catheter tip for measuring the contact force. According
to the manufacturer, the force resolution of Nano17 is 1.27 gf
along each of the three orthogonal axes. Force measurements
are acquired using a data acquisition device (NI-PCIe-6320,
National Instruments, Austin, TX) with a 16-bit resolution. To
apply forces with different magnitudes and directions, the force
sensor is attached to a small adapter mounted on a motorized
linear stage (Zaber Technologies Inc., Vancouver, BC). A closer
view of the adapter is given in Fig. 4(a). The adapter consists of
two parts: A back plate which is attached to the linear stage, and
a platform on which the force sensor is mounted. Using the set
of holes provided on both parts, the two parts can be manually
positioned and fixed with screws in three different configurations. With this setting, the sensor platform can be positioned
such that the sensor surface makes angles of 0◦ , 30◦ , or 50◦ with
respect to the X-direction [see Fig. 4(b)–(d)].
A camera (Dragonfly, Point Grey Research Inc., Richmond,
BC) is positioned to show a planar view of the catheter’s
deflectable shaft and provides images with a resolution of
640 × 480 pixels from the catheter shape without affecting
the normal behavior of the flexing catheter. The pixel size is
0.167 mm and is obtained from the images acquired from a
chessboard pattern, which was placed in the plane of the deflected distal shaft.
Data samples are collected by following these steps:
1) The actuation mechanism is commanded to move the prismatic knob on the proximal handle by Δ and hold it in
this position. For the chosen catheter, Δ can vary between
0 and 15 mm: for Δ = 0, the distal shaft is completely
straight, and for Δ = 15 mm, the shaft reaches its ultimate flexed configuration.

Fig. 3. Close view of the proximal handle and deflectable distal shaft of a
steerable ablation catheter. (a) Proximal handle. (b) Deflectable shaft.

2) The camera captures the shape of the distal shaft in free
space.
3) The force sensor adapter is positioned as shown in
Fig. 4(b).
4) The motorized linear stage is moved up to bring the force
sensor in contact with the ablation tip; the force and
shape data are recorded. The linear stage is commanded to
move the force sensor about 2 mm upwards before the next
sample is collected. This procedure is continued until the
ablation tip comes to the same height as that of the sheath
support (see Fig. 2). If the catheter tip is pushed beyond
this point, the applied force deforms the shaft’s shape permanently. The motorized linear stage is then commanded
to return to its starting position.
5) The adapter is adjusted to the position shown in Fig. 4(c).
Step 4 is repeated.
6) Step 4 is repeated once more while positioning the adapter
as shown in Fig. 4(d).
7) The catheter actuation mechanism is commanded to move
the prismatic knob by 0.5 mm. Steps 2–6 are repeated until
the prismatic knob reaches its limit.
This experimental procedure is inspired by the normal sequence of actions of clinicians during ablation procedures: The
clinician flexes the distal shaft and places the ablation tip in the
proximity of the myocardium. The heartbeat results in a varying
contact force between the ablation tip and cardiac tissue, and
the clinician tries to place the catheter such that the maximum
contact force does not exceed 20–30 gf. The desired contact is

KHOSHNAM et al.: MODELING AND ESTIMATION OF TIP CONTACT FORCE FOR STEERABLE ABLATION CATHETERS

Fig. 4. Designed adapter for attaching the force sensor to the linear stage:
(a) Close view of the adapter, (b)–(d) different configurations of the sensor
platform.

achieved by: 1) inserting/withdrawing/rotating the whole body
of the catheter, and 2) flexing of the distal shaft. For the purpose of this study, we assume that the catheter body is fixed in
its place. The distal shaft is flexed using the proximal handle
before it contacts the environment. To apply different forces
on the catheter, the force sensor is moved up and down—a
reflection of what happens during each heartbeat. Replacing
cardiac tissue with the force sensor allows for measuring contact forces at the catheter tip without changing the characteristics
of the deflectable shaft.
For each data sample, the shape and force values are recorded
before proceeding to the next sample, so the time interval between each two consecutive data samples is about 1–2 s. All
data points are saved to be processed later.
B. Extracting the Shaft Shape From Images
A method for obtaining the shape of continuum robots using images was proposed by Hannan and Walker [17]. In this
method, it is assumed that each section of the manipulator bends
with constant curvature and as a result, identifying three points
on each section is sufficient for reconstructing its shape. However, since we are analyzing the actual behavior of the catheter,
we develop a custom algorithm to accurately extract the catheter
shape from acquired images. An image captured by the camera is shown in Fig. 5(a). This image is fed into a chain of
processing algorithms where the unwanted objects are removed
and a threshold is set to obtain the black and white image [see
Fig. 5(b)]. In the next step, a mask of 5-pixel width is moved
along the catheter to determine the centroid point of the corresponding catheter section [see Fig. 5(c)]. A spline curve is then
fitted to the centroid data points to give the final line representing the shaft shape. The extracted curve is then overlaid with

1407

Algorithm 1 Extract the curve representing the shape of the
catheter’s distal shaft in the image
Require: Images of the catheter’s deflectable shaft
captured
by the camera
for i=1:number of images do
I ← image(i)
if base point is marked with color then
f ilteredI ← colorf ilter(I)
BP ← centroid(f ilteredI)
else
Prompt user to click on the base point
BP ← Point of click
end if
ROI ← mask(I) // Removing unwanted objects
BW ROI ← binary(ROI)
vM ask ← Define a 5-pixel width vertical mask
cP ts(1) ← BP
cntr ← 1
F lag ← vertical
while cP ts(cntr) exists do
if F lag = vertical then
M ROI ← overlay(BW ROI, vM ask)
cP ts(cntr + 1) ← centroid(M ROI)
vM ask ← Shift vM ask horizontally by 5-pixels
end if
if distance(cP ts(cntr + 1),cP ts(cntr))>10 pixels ||
F lag = horizontal then
hM ask ← Replace the vertical mask with a 5-pixel
width horizontal mask
M ROI ← overlay(BW ROI, hM ask)
cP ts(cntr + 1) ← centroid(M ROI)
hM ask ← Shift hM ask vertically by 5-pixels
F lag ← horizontal
end if
cntr + +
end while
f P oints ← smooth(cP ts)
f curve(i) ← curvef it(f P oints)
end for
return f curve

each captured image and is checked manually to ensure that it is
an accurate representation of the shaft shape and preserves the
changes in its slope and curvature [see Fig. 5(d)]. The details of
this algorithm are given in Algorithm 1.
III. ANALYSIS OF THE SHAFT CURVATURE IN FREE SPACE
Observing the image data acquired with the technique explained in Section II suggests that the loads applied at the tip
cause a change in shaft curvature. In this section, the effect of
actuating the proximal handle on the shaft curvature is studied, a kinematic model for the flexing shaft is proposed, and
the reachable workspace and singular configurations are briefly
discussed.

1408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 7. Kinematic model for the deflectable shaft and the assigned D-H coordinate frames.

Fig. 5. Catheter shape estimation. Step-by-step (a) Sample original image.
(b) Masked black and white image. (c) Centroid points. (d) Comparing the
calculated curve to the catheter shape.

from the base point to 6 cm from it. The curvature then decreases
linearly and again becomes almost zero at the section containing
the ablation tip and electrodes. To ensure that the hysteresis,
which is inherent in the catheter structure, does not affect the
observed behavior, the experiment was repeated several times
and it was concluded that although there is a small difference in
the values of the obtained curvature for each run, the resulting
behavior is the same: The curvature is zero at the base point
and the ablation tip and has a constant value in the midsection
of the shaft. This behavior suggests that the dominant load in
this midsection has the effect of a pure moment load, however
a dominant shear force in other sections results in a varying
curvature in these sections. A more detailed discussion involves
examining the internal structure of the catheter and considering
the effect of the actuating force and moments as well as that of
the internal frictions, but this is beyond the scope of this paper.
A. Kinematic Model

Fig. 6. Shaft curvature when the proximal handle is actuated (Δ: handle
displacement).

The curvature of a smooth curve is defined as:
dφ
(1)
κ=
ds
where φ is the tangential angle and s is the arc length. To obtain
the curvature value along the catheter shaft, the tangential angle
is calculated at equispaced points located at 0.5 mm from one
another along the fitted spline curve and then (1) is applied. Possible inflection points are those at which the obtained curvature
changes sign.
The catheter’s distal shaft bends in response to the proximal
handle actuation. Although the prismatic knob on this handle has
a range between 0 and 15 mm, noticeable changes in the tip angle
occur for displacements of more than 7 mm [18]. Steering the
knob from 7 to 15 mm, the resulting curvature is demonstrated
in Fig. 6 for a number of handle displacements. It is observed
that the curvature is almost zero before the base point, but then
increases linearly with the distance from the base point, until it
becomes almost constant in the section located between 2 cm

Fig. 6 shows that only the midsection of the flexing shaft
bends with constant curvature. Based on this observation, additional joints and links are added to the kinematic model for
a continuum robot [11] to develop a kinematic model for the
catheter shaft. In deriving this model, it is assumed that the
catheter bends with zero torsion. This assumption was validated
experimentally: The deflected catheter lies in a plane.
The proposed kinematic model is demonstrated in Fig. 7. This
model is characterized by three sections (Pi = (xi , yi ), i =
1, . . . , 7 is the origin of the coordinate frames i).
1) P0 P1 P2 : The section with the constant curvature does not
start immediately from the base point, P0 . Section P0 P1 P2
represents this variable offset by two perpendicular prismatic joints d1 and d2 . The reason for choosing P0 as
the base point (see Figs. 3(b) and 7) becomes clear: The
curvature before this point is zero and the flexing shaft is
aligned with the catheter body at the base point. P0 can
act as the virtual basis of the shaft in this model.
2) P3 P4 : This section consists of one rotation θ1 , one translation d3 , and another rotation θ2 to model the planar
constant-curvature arc in accordance with [11].
3) P5 P6 P7 : In this section, two perpendicular prismatic
joints, d4 and d5 replace the variable offset between the
last point on the constant-curvature arc and the last point

KHOSHNAM et al.: MODELING AND ESTIMATION OF TIP CONTACT FORCE FOR STEERABLE ABLATION CATHETERS

1409

TABLE I
LINK PARAMETERS OF THE PROPOSED KINEMATIC MODEL FOR THE
DISTAL SHAFT
i

α i −1

a i −1

di

θi

Joint Variable Limits

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0
−π /2
π /2
−π /2
π /2
π /2
π /2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

d1
d2
0
d3
0
d4
d5

0
−π /2
−(π /2 − θ 1 )
0
θ2
π /2
0

19.3 mm < d 1 < 20 mm
0 mm < d 2 < 4 mm
0 < θ 1 < π /2.15
33.2 mm < d 3 < 40 mm
π /2 < θ 2 < π /1.03
0 mm < d 4 < 2.04 mm
9.64 mm < d 5 < 10 mm

of the flexing shaft, i.e., end point [see Fig. 3(b)]. The
ablation tip is then reached by a linear extension from this
point and is not shown in the figure.
The assigned Denavit–Hartenberg (D-H) frames are also
shown in Fig. 7 and D-H parameters are given in Table I. It
should be noted that although the proposed model is planar, to
comply with D-H convention [19], all three axes are considered.
The coordinate frame {0} is the virtual base for the model and a
rotation about Y0 -axis relates this frame to the base frame {b}.
The limits of the joint variables are obtained experimentally:
When the shaft is completely straight, d1 , d3 , and d5 have their
maximum values while d2 , d4 , θ1 , and θ2 have their minimum
values. The minimum of d1 , d3 , and d5 , and the maximum of
d2 , d4 , θ1 , and θ2 occur when the shaft is in its ultimate flexed
configuration. It should also be noted that the flexing of the shaft
is a result of actuating the catheter handle, so the joint variables
change according to the handle displacement and cannot take
independent values in their corresponding range.
The homogeneous transformation matrix that relates frame
{7} to frame {0} is obtained as shown in (2) at the bottom of
the page.
The workspace of the deflectable shaft is realized by varying
joint variables in their corresponding range. The model is also
rotated about axis Y0 by angle θr ∈ [0, 2π] to yield the 3-D
workspace shown in Fig. 8. For the sake of clarity, the shaft
is also shown for a number of cases. The workspace can be
translated in space by inserting/retracting the catheter from the
proximal end.
The Jacobian matrix [see (3) at the bottom of the page] is
a 2 × 7 matrix with respect to the base frame {b}. The determinant of b Jv b JvT never becomes zero showing that there are
no singularities in the workspace of the developed model. Considering the structure of a catheter, the shaft bends when the
⎡

−1

⎢
⎢0
⎢
0
7T = ⎢
⎢0
⎣

b

Jv =

0

0

0

−sθ1 θ2

−cθ1 θ2

−cθ1 θ2

sθ1 θ2

0

0

Fig. 8. Catheter tip workspace in 3-D with respect to frame {b}. The joint
variables are changing in their experimentally obtained range and θr is varied
between 0 and 2π. The thick gray lines represent the shaft shape.

proximal handle is actuated and in the base frame {b}, x7 , y7 ,
and Φ cannot be defined independently. This means that each
point in the workspace can be reached only from one orientation
and that the catheter tip has one degree of freedom. This degree
of freedom is never lost in the physical workspace, matching
with the result obtained from the model that the determinant of
b
Jv b JvT never becomes zero.
Recalling that the section located between 2 and 6 cm from
the base point is a circular arc, i.e., its curvature is constant, the
relationship between the model parameters and the shaft shape
is derived:
1) d1 and d2 are the horizontal and vertical distances from
the starting point of the curvature, P2 , to the base point,
P0 , respectively.
2) θ1 is the slope of the line connecting P3 to P4 .
3) θ2 , d4 , and d5 are obtained taking into account that the
position and orientation of the manipulator end-effector
should be the same as those of the end point. Fig. 9 shows
how the model links are arranged with respect to the distal
shaft. From this figure, it can be seen that the following
equations hold:
π
(4)
θ2 = + Φ − θ1
2
|mx5 − y5 − mx7 + y7 |
√
d4 =
, m = tan Φ
(5)
1 + m2
d5 = ||P6 − P7 ||
0

⎤

⎥
d2 + d3 sθ1 − d4 sθ1 θ2 − d5 cθ1 θ2 ⎥
⎥
⎥
d1 + d3 cθ1 − d4 cθ1 θ2 + d5 sθ1 θ2 ⎥
⎦
1

(2)

1 0 d5 cθ1 θ2 + d4 sθ1 θ2 − d3 sθ1

cθ1

d5 cθ1 θ2 + d4 sθ1 θ2

−cθ1 θ2

sθ1 θ2

d5 sθ1 θ2 − d4 cθ1 θ2 + d3 cθ1

sθ1

d5 sθ1 θ2 − d4 cθ1 θ2

−sθ1 θ2

−cθ1 θ2

0 1

(6)

	
(3)

1410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 9. (a) Close view of the model end-effector. (b) Section of the shaft with
constant curvature.

where xi and yi correspond to the coordinates of point
Pi , i = 1, . . . , 7 (see Fig. 7).
If the catheter shaft shape is completely known, the model
variables are known and the modeling error will be zero as expected. However, in real applications, detailed information about
the shaft shape is not available. To propose a practical method
for obtaining the model parameters, for each handle displacement, the model parameters are derived from experimental data
and then for each parameter of the model, a mapping is found
to relate it to the handle displacement. Using these mappings,
the model performance in estimating the shaft shape is evaluated. Table II provides statistical measures that show the model
performance, where MAE and RMSE denote the mean absolute
error and the root-mean-squared error, respectively. The results
show an error in estimating the position of the end-effector. A
closer look reveals that the accuracy of the model is highly dependent on the value of θ1 and, thus, having a good estimate of
θ1 is necessary. There are a few methods to obtain this angle:
1) θ1 is the angle of the line connecting P3 to P4 . If the
position of these two points is known, e.g., by using electromagnetic sensors, obtaining θ1 is straightforward.
2) The constancy of the shaft curvature between P3 and P4
means that β1 = β2 shown in Fig. 9. Consequently
θ1 =

φ3 + φ4
2

(7)

where φ3 and φ4 are tangential angles at P3 and P4 , respectively.
3) A mapping can be defined to express θ1 in terms of the
curvature values at P3 and P4 .
θ1 may be estimated with either of these methods. The results
presented in Table II are obtained using the third method and
show a clear improvement over the last case where θ1 was
directly mapped to the handle displacement. It is worth noting
that the mapping that describes θ1 in terms of the curvature
values at P3 and P4 is found by using the curve fitting toolbox
in MATLAB. This finds the best curve among many possible
forms that describes θ1 in terms of these curvature values.
B. Model Performance
The performance of the proposed kinematic model in estimating the position of the end point [see Fig. 3(b)] and the tip

angle in free space is now compared to that of two other models, namely, the kinematic model that is derived based on the
assumption of curvature constancy for the catheter’s deflectable
shaft [11], [12] and the pseudo-rigid-body PRB 3R model proposed in [16].
Assuming a constant curvature for the shaft implies modeling
the shaft with a circular arc that passes through the base point
with a slope equal to zero. A circular arc which satisfies these
rules is fitted to the shaft shape and the results are given in
Table II.
The optimal link parameters and spring stiffness values for
the PRB 3R model are obtained by recording the displacements
that different values of contact force impose on the end point
and using the same algorithm proposed in [16]
γ0 = 0.2 ,

γ1 = 0.4 ,

kθ 1 = 2.8,

kθ 2 = 5,

γ2 = 0.25 ,

γ3 = 0.15
(8)

kθ 3 = 2.1

where γi , i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are the normalized link lengths and
kθ i , i = 1, 2, 3 are the normalized spring stiffness values. The
results of estimating the position and orientation of the end point
with this model are also given in Table II.
Fig. 10 shows how the model links are arranged with respect to
the actual catheter shape when the proximal handle is moved by
13 mm. Observing this figure and the statistical results presented
in Table II, the kinematic model presented in this paper is more
accurate in estimating the position of the end point and the
tip angle. Assuming constant curvature for the shaft produces a
noticeable estimation error. In summary, the proposed kinematic
model outperforms previously developed models and is a useful
tool for analyzing the behavior of the catheter’s distal shaft in
free space and studying its workspace and singularities. This
model can also be used to reconstruct the shaft shape: The
model parameters are obtained based on handle displacement
as mentioned in Section III-A. The reconstruction of the shape of
the distal shaft is then straightforward using Fig. 7 and Table I.
The performance of the PRB 3R model is slightly inferior in
determining the position of the tip. Furthermore, it is not possible
to obtain the shape of the entire distal shaft from PRB 3R model
parameters. In other words, the PRB 3R model is only able to
estimate the position and orientation of the distal end, but the
configuration of the links in the model does not relate well to
the actual shape of the entire shaft (see Fig. 10 and Table II). In
contrast, the proposed kinematic model estimates the position
and orientation of the distal end as well as the shape of the entire
shaft.
When there is contact between the tip and tissue, the PRB
3R model can estimate the contact force if both the tip angle
and the line of action of the contact force are known. However,
in clinical settings, obtaining the direction of contact forces
from X-ray images can be challenging, partly due to the low
visibility of soft tissue in these images. Therefore, it is important
to develop a technique for estimating contact forces, which does
not require this information. To achieve this, in the next section,
we analyze the shape of the deflectable shaft when the ablation
tip is in contact with the environment.

KHOSHNAM et al.: MODELING AND ESTIMATION OF TIP CONTACT FORCE FOR STEERABLE ABLATION CATHETERS

1411

TABLE II
STATISTICAL MEASURES SHOWING THE PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED KINEMATIC MODEL, THE KINEMATIC MODEL OBTAINED ASSUMING CONSTANT
CURVATURE FOR THE FLEXING SHAFT AND THE PSEUDO-RIGID-BODY PRB 3R MODEL, WHEN THE PROXIMAL HANDLE IS MOVED FROM 7 TO 15 MM

Proposed kinematic model (θ 1 obtained from mapping)
Proposed kinematic model (θ 1 obtained from curvature values)
Constant-curvature kinematic model
PRB 3R model

MAE( x̂)

RMSE( x̂)

MAE( ŷ )

RMSE( ŷ )

MAE( Φ̂)

RMSE( Φ̂)

1.88 mm
0.41 mm
1.68 mm
0.42 mm

2.38 mm
0.45 mm
2.21 mm
0.59 mm

1.92 mm
0.61 mm
2.05 mm
0.79 mm

2.98 mm
0.72 mm
3.35 mm
1.02 mm

4.57◦
1.91◦
11◦
2.21◦

5.77◦
2.49◦
12.67◦
2.39◦

x̂, ŷ , and Φ̂ are the estimated values for x 7 , y 7 , and Φ using each model.

Fig. 10. Configuration of links in the proposed kinematic model, the kinematic model obtained assuming constant curvature for the flexing shaft, and the
pseudo-rigid-body PRB 3R model versus the actual shape of the shaft.
Fig. 12. Shaft curvature versus force magnitude for different handle displacements at a number of points along the catheter (Δ: handle displacement). (a) Δ
= 8 mm. (b) Δ = 9 mm. (c) Δ = 10 mm. (d) Δ = 11 mm.

Fig. 11. Tip curvature when forces are applied at the tip (α is the angle shown
in Fig. 4).

IV. EFFECT OF CONTACT FORCE ON THE SHAPE OF THE SHAFT
To study how the shaft shape changes when the catheter
comes in contact with the environment, force and shape data
are collected following the experimental procedure described
in Section II. Fig. 11 shows the shaft curvature obtained from
the acquired images for several data samples. The same trend
holds for other collected samples as well: There are consider-

able variations in the curvature values along the shaft length
and a section with constant curvature is not observed anymore.
Different force magnitudes result in different curvature profiles
even when the Δ and α values do not change. These observations suggest that for finding a relationship between the contact
force and the shaft shape, a more in-depth study is required. In
this regard, 12 equispaced points are chosen along the shaft, the
first of which is located at the base point. Fig. 12 shows the extent of curvature variations caused by the contact force at each
selected point for several handle displacements. The impact of
the contact force on the shaft curvature is best seen at the points
closer to the end point. Moreover, at each handle displacement,
if the magnitude of the contact force is in a certain range, the
resulting curvature at points between 3.5 and 5 cm will be in a
certain range as well. It should be noted that the last data point
at L = 6 cm was removed from Fig. 12 for the sake of clarity
and better readability in the region of interest (3.5 to 5 cm).
A. Force Index
Di Biase et al. [3] studied how the ablation power and amount
of tip/tissue contact force affect lesion formation inside the heart
when the ablation duration is constant. We define three ranges
for the contact force based on their findings presented in [3]:

1412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 13.

Values of the defined force index for different contact forces.

Fig. 14. CDF of fitted Gaussian distribution to the force index corresponding
to each force range.

1) Safe contact is when the contact force is between 15 and
35 gf.
2) Excessive force is when contact force has a magnitude
greater than 35 gf. Cardiac perforation is one of the risks
of applying excessive force on heart tissue.
3) Insufficient force is contact force with a magnitude less
than 15 gf. Incomplete ablation is the result of insufficient
contact between the catheter tip and heart tissue.
These regions are denoted by S, E, and I, respectively.
We define the dimensionless force index, λF , by observing
the relation between the contact force and changes in the shaft
curvature
5



λF =

κc (L, Δ)
E {κc (L, Δ)}|L =3.5−5
= L =3.5
5


E {κf s (L, Δ)}|L =3.5−5
κf s (L, Δ)

px (x) =

N

k=1



ωk
(x − μk )2
√ exp −
,
2σk2
σk 2π



ωk = 1

k

(11)
where μk and σk are the mean and variance of each Gaussian
component and ωk is their weighting factor. Without any prior
information about the force range, the a priori probabilities of
being in each force range are equal, i.e., PI = PS = PE . Therefore, ωk = 13 , k = 1, 2, 3. More details on GMM clustering
methods can be found in [20].

(9)

L =3.5

where E{.} represents the averaging operator, κc is the curvature obtained for each sample, L is the distance from the base
point in centimeter, Δ is the handle displacement in millimeter, and κf s is the shaft curvature in free space, which can be
estimated from Fig. 6
κf s (L, Δ) = −0.05 Δ + 0.29,

The probability distribution function (PDF) of a GMM is a
weighted sum of several normal PDF

2.5 cm < L < 6 cm. (10)

Although the mapping from λF to contact force is not a oneto-one function, the defined force index can detect the range of
applied forces exerted by the catheter (see Fig. 13).
Remark: As can be seen in Fig. 12, some overlap exists between the force ranges even in the section between 3.5 and
5 cm. Minimizing this overlap is the main reason for selecting
this section. It should be noted that since all the data in that
section are considered in the final decision simultaneously [see
(9)], the error in one sample does not necessarily propagate to
the final result.
In the next step, each force range is modeled with Gaussian
distribution, and a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) with three
components is used to cluster the obtained force index. The
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the fitted distributions
is shown in Fig. 14.

V. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
The performance of the proposed technique was evaluated
through two sets of experiments with two different catheters.
For the first set, the adopted catheter was an irrigated tip catheter
used for studying and modeling the relation between shape and
applied force. The second catheter was a 7-French unidirectional
nonirrigated tip steerable ablation catheter (Biosense Webster,
Diamond Bar, CA). Both of these catheters are widely used in
cardiac ablation procedures.
In each set of experiments, the catheter tip was pushed against
the force sensor. The contact force was measured and reported
by the force sensor. The shaft shape was captured by the camera and then analyzed to obtain λF and determine the force
range. The probabilities of estimating each force range given
the actual force range are listed in Table III. In this table, Pk̂ |k ,
k = I, S, E represents the probability of correctly estimating
the insufficient, safe, and excessive force, respectively. Similarly, Pk̂ |l , k = l represents erroneous detections. From this table, the force range is correctly decided in more than 81% of
the samples. While there are some instances of detecting safe
contact as insufficient force and excessive force as safe contact, there is no incidence of reporting insufficient contact as
too much force or vice versa. Further analysis reveals that in
almost all of the latter cases, the force magnitude is very close
to the defined threshold for excessive force. The experiments

KHOSHNAM et al.: MODELING AND ESTIMATION OF TIP CONTACT FORCE FOR STEERABLE ABLATION CATHETERS

1413

TABLE III
CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY OF ESTIMATING FORCE RANGES FOR TEST DATA
(a)

(b)

k→

I

S

E

k→

I

S

E

P Î|k
P Ŝ|k
P Ê|k

0.96
0.11
0

0.04
0.89
0.13

0
0
0.87

P Î|k
P Ŝ|k
P Ê|k

0.94
0.05
0

0.06
0.92
0.19

0
0.03
0.81

(a) Irrigated tip catheter, (b) nonirrigated tip catheter.

Fig. 15. Probability of correctly estimating the force ranges: (a) With one
curvature value and (b) with the curvature value known at two points located at
L = 3.5 cm and L = 5 cm.

with the second catheter prove the applicability of the proposed
technique and most importantly suggest that a calibration step
is not essential for applying the defined load index to different
ablation catheters.
A. Obtaining the Force Index From Limited Information
Experimental results prove the usefulness of the defined force
index in estimating the range of contact forces. This force index
is defined using the mean curvature value over a section of the
catheter’s deflectable distal shaft [see (9)]. In practical situations,
the whole shape of this section may not be available, thus it is
important to determine the force range using limited information
about the shape of the distal shaft. The technique proposed in
Section IV can be used to construct a framework to achieve this
goal: One curvature sampling point is moved along the catheter’s
deflectable shaft between L = 2.0 and 5.5 cm and the force
index is obtained for each point based on (9). The probability of
correctly estimating the force ranges is, then, calculated at each
point [see Fig. 15(a)]. The results show that by only knowing
the curvature at the point located at 4.5 cm from the base point,
we can successfully detect the range of tip/tissue contact force
in more than 80% of the cases.
The proposed technique can be extended to cases where the
curvature information is available at multiple points. For instance, consider that the curvature value is known for two points
along the distal shaft: one at L = 3.5 cm and the other at L =
5 cm. The force index is obtained for each of these points and
the probability of correct estimation is calculated. To determine
the range of the contact forces, we should decide how to jointly
apply this information. Let us define


⎧


⎪
+ (1 − α) PÎ|I 
⎪ PÎ|I = α PÎ|I 
⎪
⎪
L
=
3.5

L = 5
⎨


PŜ|S = α PŜ|S 
+ (1 − α) PŜ|S 
(12)
⎪
L
=
3.5

L=5
⎪
⎪


⎪
⎩
PÊ|E = α PÊ|E 
+ (1 − α) PÊ|E 
L = 3.5

L=5

where α ∈ [0, 1] is the mixing weight factor. Fig. 15(b) shows
that when α = 0.57, the force range is estimated correctly in
92% of the cases.
The analysis presented in Section III shows that when the
distal shaft is moving in free space, the curvature values at these
two points (L = 3.5 cm and L = 5 cm) are similar (see Fig. 6).
A study of curvature values shows that for contact forces that
are less than 3 gf, the difference between the curvature values

at these two points does not exceed 0.05◦ /mm, i.e.,




deg
 κ|

|F | < 3 gf.
 L = 3.5 − κ|L = 5 < 0.05 mm ,

(13)

This observation is useful in determining when the contact between the catheter tip and cardiac tissue is established, since due
to the low visibility of soft tissue in medical imaging modalities such as X-ray fluoroscopy, the tip/tissue contact may not be
immediately noticeable. Using the framework presented here,
even in cases where the entire shape of the distal shaft is not
available, the full shape can be reconstructed in free space, the
contact can be detected, and the range of contact force can be
determined by knowing the curvature values only at two points.
The analysis presented in this section can be repeated for
different configurations of points to find the optimum number
of curvature sampling points and their locations for a desired
performance.
B. Discussion
Remark 1: The main assumption in developing the proposed
technique is that the contact force is applied in the plane of the
bent catheter. This is a valid assumption in the case of unidirectional catheters, since these catheters can apply greater inplane contact forces. During the experiments, it was found that
the unidirectional catheters cannot apply sufficient out-of-plane
contact forces, mainly due to their flexibility. During clinical
procedures, other forces may be exerted on the catheter’s distal shaft and cause out-of-plane deformations. Nevertheless, the
contact force between the catheter tip and tissue should be the
dominant force, otherwise the catheter tip would slip away from
the target tissue. A detailed study is required to identify the
forces that may cause the catheter to have out-of-plane deformations and investigate their effect on the shaft curvature when
the tip is in contact with tissue.
Remark 2: The effect of friction between the catheter body
and the environment is important when navigating the catheter
inside the vasculature. However, when ablation is in progress,
the catheter’s distal shaft operates inside a blood-filled cavity.
Hence, it is not very likely that there is much friction between
the shaft and the cardiac walls.
Remark 3: The angle at which the catheter interacts with tissue affects the lesion formation and, hence, the ablation outcome
(e.g., see [21], [22]). In this paper, the working angle between

1414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

the catheter tip and tissue is not included in the model because
the exact angle of force is not available during the procedure.
Within the experimental setting, the angle between the catheter
and the environment was varied between 10◦ and 90◦ to enable
us to study the behavior in a broader range of contact angles.
Remark 4: The proposed technique was obtained based on
experiments with unidirectional ablation catheters. We believe
that the technique is also applicable to other types of ablation
catheters, e.g., bidirectional catheters. Analyzing the curvature
of an arbitrary type of ablation catheter reveals the section to
be most susceptible to contact forces. It is expected that the
results would then be valid for catheters with a similar design
and construction and the same actuation mechanism. However,
further study is required to compare the results for different
types of ablation catheters from several manufacturers.
Remark 5: X-ray fluoroscopy is the imaging modality commonly used during the ablation procedure. The proposed technique was applied to a series of X-ray images. The preliminary
results show that these images have sufficient resolution and the
catheter shape can be extracted from these images sufficiently
accurately for the algorithm to perform satisfactorily. Nevertheless, our study is ongoing, and we are investigating various
issues involved in using X-ray fluoroscopy for collecting shape
data.
Remark 6: Throughout this study, the camera provides a direct planar view of the catheter for estimating in-plane contact
forces. However, in a clinical setting, the imaging plane is not
necessarily the same as that of the flexed distal shaft. Therefore,
appropriate techniques for extracting the shape of the catheter
from alternative imaging planes should be developed.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the behavior of the deflectable distal
shaft of an ablation catheter in free space and in contact with
the environment. The techniques presented herein describe the
distal shaft’s behavior in free space, detect when the tip/tissue
contact is established, and determine the range of contact forces.
Instead of making assumptions on the catheter characteristics,
we started with a careful observation of how actuating the proximal handle affects the shaft shape. An algorithm was developed to accurately extract the shaft shape from acquired images
and the curvature was calculated at different points along the
deflectable shaft. Analyzing the shaft curvature in free space resulted in developing a kinematic model for the deflectable shaft.
This model is a useful tool for analyzing the behavior of the
shaft in free space. The performance of the proposed model was
then evaluated experimentally and the model was shown to be
more accurate than two previously developed models. Bringing
the ablation tip in contact with the environment, the shaft curvature was analyzed, the section which is most susceptible to
contact force was determined and a force index was defined. Experiments with two conventional but different ablation catheters
show that the defined force index can successfully identify the
range of contact forces in more than 80% of the cases. The
proposed technique was then used to determine what would be
the effect of having curvature information at a limited number

of points along the shaft on the accuracy of detecting the force
range. The presented framework gives the necessary tools to decide what points along the deflectable shaft should be monitored
during the ablation procedure for obtaining force information.
Providing contact force information to the clinician has the additional benefit of reducing the overall procedure time as well
as fluoroscopy exposure time [23].
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to investigate the effect of contact force on the shape of the catheter’s
deflectable distal shaft. The study presented here provides the
basis for identifying catheter behavior and designing modelbased robotic cardiac ablation systems. Ongoing work includes
developing a real-time algorithm for extracting the shaft shape
from medical imaging modalities, studying the effect of contact
forces that change frequently, and evaluating the proposed techniques via in vivo experiments. This forms a part of a project on
robot-assisted control of the contact force at the catheter tip.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the team in the Electrophysiology Lab, University Hospital, London Health Sciences
Center, London, ON, Canada, for providing the catheters used
in the experiments. The authors would also like to thank A.
Yurkewich for his help in designing the catheter actuator, and
M. Mirahmadi for his valuable comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Yokoyama et al., “Novel contact force sensor incorporated in irrigated radio frequency ablation catheter predicts lesion size and incidence
of steam pop and thrombus,” Circulation, Arrhythmia Electrophysiol.,
vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 354–362, 2008.
[2] G. Ndrepepa and H. Estner, “Ablation of cardiac arrhythmias energy
sources and mechanisms of lesion formation,” in Catheter Ablation of
Cardiac Arrhythmias. Dresden, Germany: Steinkopff, 2006, pp. 35–53.
[3] L. Di Biase et al., “Relationship between catheter forces, lesion characteristics, popping, and char formation: Experience with robotic navigation
system,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 436–440, Apr.
2009.
[4] Biosense Webster THERMOCOOL Irrigated Tip Catheter.
[Online]. Available: http://www.biosensewebster.com/co-smarttouch.php.
Retrieved: Jan 2015.
[5] TactiCath Quartz Contact Force Ablation Catheter [Online]. Available:
http://professional-intl.sjm.com/therapies/tacticath-quartz/home.
Retrieved: Jan 2015.
[6] Hansen Medical Artisan Extend Control Catheter. [Online].
Available:hansenmedical.com/us/en/cardiac-arrhythmia/artisan-extendcatheter/product-overview. Retrieved: Jan 2015
[7] K. Xu and N. Simaan, “An investigation of the intrinsic force sensing
capabilities of continuum robots,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 576–587, Jun. 2008.
[8] K. Xu and N. Simaan, “Intrinsic wrench estimation and its performance
index for multisegment continuum robots,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 26,
no. 3, pp. 555–561, Jun. 2010.
[9] D. B. Camarillo et al., “Mechanics modeling of tendon-driven continuum
manipulators,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1262–1273, Dec.
2008.
[10] D. B. Camarillo et al., “Vision based 3-D shape sensing of flexible
manipulators,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2008, pp. 2940–
2947.
[11] B. Jones and I. Walker, “Kinematics for multisection continuum robots,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 43–55, Feb. 2006.
[12] Y. Ganji and F. Janabi-Sharifi, “Catheter kinematics for intracardiac navigation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 621–632, Mar.
2009.

KHOSHNAM et al.: MODELING AND ESTIMATION OF TIP CONTACT FORCE FOR STEERABLE ABLATION CATHETERS

[13] J. Jung et al., “A modeling approach for continuum robotic manipulators:
Effects of nonlinear internal device friction,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., 2011, pp. 5139–5146.
[14] R. J. Webster and B. A. Jones, “Design and kinematic modeling of constant
curvature continuum robots: A review,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 13,
pp. 1661–1683, 2010.
[15] M. Khoshnam et al., “Modeling of a steerable catheter based on beam
theory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2012, pp. 4681–4686.
[16] M. Khoshnam and R.V. Patel, “A pseudo-rigid-body 3r model for a steerable ablation catheter,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013,
pp. 4412–4417.
[17] M. Hannan and I. Walker, “Vision based shape estimation for continuum
robots,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2003, vol. 3, pp. 3449–
3454.
[18] M. Khoshnam et al., “Model-based force control of a steerable ablation
catheter with a custom-designed strain sensor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., 2013, pp. 4464–4469.
[19] J. Craig, Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and Control (ser. AddisonWesley series in electrical and computer engineering: Control engineering). Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Pearson Edu., 2005.
[20] C. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2006.
[21] Z. Issa et al., Clinical Arrhythmology and Electrophysiology: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier
Health Sci., 2012, ch. 7.
[22] T. Jest et al., “Simulation of cardiac radio frequency catheter ablation—
The importance of working angle,” Biomed. Eng., 2013.
[23] E. Marijon et al., “Real-time contact force sensing for pulmonary vein
isolation in the setting of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: Procedural and 1year results,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 130–137,
2014.

Mahta Khoshnam (S’10–M’15) received the B.Sc.
degree in electrical engineering from Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2005, the
M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2008, and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
Western University, London, ON, Canada, in 2014.
She is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at Western
University and Canadian Surgical Technologies and
Advanced Robotics. Her current research interests include minimally invasive medical interventions, focusing on developing robotics-assisted catheter manipulation systems for cardiac ablation procedures.

1415

Allan C. Skanes received the medical degree from
the University of Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1990,
where he also completed his Internal Medicine training. He completed his cardiology and electrophysiology training from the University of Ottawa Heart Institute before a research fellowship in Syracuse New
York investigating the underlying mechanisms of arrhythmia, especially atrial fibrillation.
He is currently the Director of the Electrophysiology Laboratory at London Health Sciences Centre,
University Hospital in London, ON, Canada, and a
Professor of Medicine at Western University. Most recently, he cochaired the
2010 Canadian Cardiovascular Society management guidelines for atrial fibrillation. He is actively researching novel nonfluoroscopic catheter navigation
technologies in animal models as well as human studies. His research contributes clinical relevance and applicability to development of navigation and
guiding technologies. It also provides unique experience and skill set as well as
an environment for further translational development to human studies. He has
published 227 peer-reviewed papers and 25 book chapters.

Rajni V. Patel (M’76–SM’80–F’92) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Cambridge, England, in 1973.
He currently holds the position of Distinguished
University Professor and Tier-1 Canada Research
Chair in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering with a cross appointment in the Department of Surgery, Schulich School Medicine and
Dentistry, Western University, ON, Canada. He also
serves as the Director of Engineering for Canadian
Surgical Technologies and Advanced Robotics. Dr.
Patel is a Fellow of the ASME, the Royal Society of Canada and the Canadian
Academy of Engineering. He has served on the editorial boards of the IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, the IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, the
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, and Automatica, and is currently on
the Editorial Board of the International Journal of Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted Surgery.

