IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

201

Design and Evaluation of an Interactive Exercise
Coaching System for Older Adults: Lessons Learned
Ferda Ofli, Member, IEEE, Gregorij Kurillo, Štěpán Obdržálek, Ruzena Bajcsy, Life Fellow, IEEE,
Holly Brugge Jimison, Member, IEEE, and Misha Pavel, Life Member, IEEE

Abstract—Although the positive effects of exercise on the wellbeing and quality of independent living for older adults are well
accepted, many elderly individuals lack access to exercise facilities,
or the skills and motivation to perform exercise at home. To provide
a more engaging environment that promotes physical activity, various fitness applications have been proposed. Many of the available
products, however, are geared toward a younger population and
are not appropriate or engaging for an older population. To address these issues, we developed an automated interactive exercise
coaching system using the Microsoft Kinect. The coaching system
guides users through a series of video exercises, tracks and measures their movements, provides real-time feedback, and records
their performance over time. Our system consists of exercises to
improve balance, flexibility, strength, and endurance, with the aim
of reducing fall risk and improving performance of daily activities.
In this paper, we report on the development of the exercise system,
discuss the results of our recent field pilot study with six independently living elderly individuals, and highlight the lessons learned
relating to the in-home system setup, user tracking, feedback, and
exercise performance evaluation.
Index Terms—Fitness application, gerontechnology, interactive
exercise, Kinect, older adults, online coaching.

I. INTRODUCTION
ROVIDING care for populations at risk such as older adults
and those with neurodegenerative diseases is a major societal challenge. This challenge can be partially mitigated by improving the health-related behaviors of older adults. In addition
to nutrition and socialization, physical and cognitive exercises
are among the most effective preventive approaches that improve outcomes as well as quality of life [1]. Despite these benefits, many older adults continue to face difficulty in engaging
in exercise activity due to various social and economic reasons,
including motivation, confidence, and skills. One approach that

P

Manuscript received August 8, 2014; revised November 17, 2014; accepted
December 19, 2014. Date of publication January 13, 2015; date of current
version December 31, 2015. This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant 1111965.
F. Ofli, G. Kurillo, and R. Bajcsy are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720 USA (e-mail: fofli@eecs.berkeley.edu; gregorij@eecs.berkeley.edu;
bajcsy@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Š. Obdržálek was with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA, at the time
of this study. He is currently with the Department of Cybernetics, Faculty
of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University, 16636 Prague, Czech
(e-mail: stepan.obdrzalek@gmail.com;).
H. B. Jimison and M. Pavel are with the College of Computer and Information Science at Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115 USA (e-mail:
h.jimison@neu.edu; m.pavel@neu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2391671

can be used to address these barriers is using coaching in conjunction with a variety of health behavior change techniques,
including motivational interviewing [2]. Unfortunately, a personal coach is typically not economically feasible, and access
to exercise classes in community centers is not an option for
many older adults.
One promising approach that mitigates these problems is the
use of a semiautomated coaching [3], [4] in conjunction with
automatic exercise monitoring and health coaching system. In
our prior work, we developed a prototype of such a semiautomated coaching system that comprises unobtrusive sensing
of each participants’ behaviors and combines it with artificial
intelligence tools aiding the coach in crafting individualized
messages to the participants. This original coaching system was
focused on cognitive and physical exercises, sleep, and socialization. Although the participants were encouraged to exercise
using YouTube videos, this system lacked the ability to track and
provide real-time feedback for physical exercises. This functionality is important in replicating the benefits of a personal
exercise coach.
Fortunately, with the introduction of more affordable motion
sensing technology and better video graphics, it is now possible
to develop home-based systems that enable coaching of both
physical and cognitive exercises. Such a possibility is collaborated by the explosion of exergames that combine exercises
with video games to enhance motivation and promote more
active lifestyle for wide population segments [5], [6]. Several
commercial fitness applications have been released to date, such
as Your Shape: Fitness Evolved (Ubisoft Montreal, 2010), UFC
Personnel Trainer (Heavy Iron Studios, 2011), Nike+ Kinect
Training (Microsoft Studios, 2012), etc. Unfortunately, many of
the available commercial fitness applications are geared toward
a younger population and are too difficult and not sufficiently
engaging for older users. In addition, older adults often require
specially designed user interfaces due to inherent sensory and
cognitive difficulties [7], [8].
Several research studies pertaining to well-being and exercise in older adults applied off-the-shelf technologies or developed customized systems to study short- and long-term effects
of computer-assisted exercise. Doyle et al. [9] introduced a
proof-of-concept custom-designed interactive vision-based system that delivered balance and strength exercises to older adults.
Even though the proposed technology was aimed for elderly to
use at home, the authors report only the results from in-lab testing with a small number of participants. Tsai et al. [10] recently
assessed the acceptability of a fitness testing platform, iFit, for
installation in an assisted living community with the aim of
promoting fitness and slowing the onset of frailty. Macek and
Kleindienst [11] proposed a custom-designed physical exercise

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

202

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

system using an ultrasound sensor and heart rate monitoring
device. The authors stressed the importance of collecting continuous physical measures for performance analysis during the
exercise. Doyle et al. [12] presented a smartphone-based exercise system, where they emphasized the importance of visual
feedback on quantitative measures in exergaming.
In recent work, Garcia et al. [13] and Pisan et al. [14] used
Microsoft Kinect camera in stepping exercise system targeting older population to predict the loss of balance under cognitive load. The physical health and cognitive abilities of the
participants were assessed using in-exercise collected data and
standardized clinical measures. The qualitative evaluation of
the system, however, was reported only from the initial laboratory testing. Similar proof-of-concept systems based on the
Microsoft Kinect camera were also presented by Lange et al.
[15] and Ganesan et al. [16], who both reported only on usability
and data gathered in a laboratory setting. For a more comprehensive survey of interactive exercise research in older adults,
we refer the reader to several systematic reviews found in the
literature [17]–[19].
In summary, although several researchers have studied interactive exercise in older adults, the majority used commercial
games without any direct measurements of the physical activity
or the participants were tested only in a controlled laboratory
environment. This is unfortunate because in order to capture the
time-varying characteristics of the exercise performance and to
better understand the changes over time, continuous physical
measurements (e.g., joint angles, positions, and velocities) are
needed. Furthermore, the higher level statistics of these measurements (e.g., average, standard deviation, variability), also
referred to as internal outcome measures [20], can provide additional parameters for quantitative analysis.
The algorithms that capture and quantify exercise activity
in commercial products are usually proprietary and are typically inaccessible for post hoc analysis. As a result, most of the
existing research studies rely on clinical assessment based on
external outcome measures that include various standardized
scales and subjective questionnaires to quantify the effect of
such intervention. These measures, obtained only intermittently,
do not provide any direct information on physical performance
during the exercise, nor they can be used for just-in-time coaching. To alleviate this issue, researchers used additional sensors
(e.g., body-worn motion trackers) to measure the activity during commercial game play [21], subject to the usual drawbacks,
including synchronization and usability issues.
The main focus of this paper is, therefore, on the research
necessary to design and deploy a general architecture for a
computer-based interactive exercise system with real-time assessment and guidance in combination with remote coaching
approaches [3], [4]. This paper extends the initial presentation
of our exercise system in [22] by including additional details
on the design, implementation, and deployment. Our interactive
exercise system is based on the Microsoft Kinect camera that
records user’s entire body kinematics and provides automated
visual and auditory feedback on the performance. To assess the
acceptability and usability and to examine the feasibility outside laboratory environment, we deployed the system into six
homes of elderly individuals who used it during a time period of
two to six weeks. Based on this experience, we provide guide-

lines for future development of interactive exercise systems for
older users with vision-based motion-tracking technology. The
particular lessons learned and reported in this paper include 1)
limitations on living space with respect to deployed technology,
2) usability issues with the camera and software, 3) usability issues with the user interfaces, 4) the form of visual and auditory
feedback, and 5) interpretation of physical measurements from
the captured kinematics in relation to clinical outcome measures
and standard components of physical fitness, such as balance,
flexibility, strength, and endurance [23].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the design of the proposed automated coaching system
based on the Kinect camera. The pilot study design is presented
in Section III, and the results of the pilot study are evaluated in
Section IV. User feedback and lessons learned are elaborated in
Section V, and finally, future work is discussed in Section VI.
II. EXERCISE SYSTEM DESIGN
Our goal in this research was to develop an architecture for
automated exercise coaching of older users that would motivate
them and track their physical performance while being able
to exercise in their home. The initial phase included detailed
needs analysis for the complete coaching system that included
focus groups with older adults, caregivers, coaches, etc. [3].
In this paper, however, we focus on the resulting requirements
restricted to the interactive exercise coaching system as follows:
1) use of unobtrusive, low-maintenance, and low-cost measurement modality;
2) inclusion of age-appropriate exercises for older adults;
3) development of an elderly-friendly user interface;
4) the ability to obtain raw measurements that would provide
estimations of balance, endurance, strength, and flexibility
[23];
5) compatibility for future integration with the coaching platform.
Although we considered other options including wearable devices, to meet the requirements for an unobtrusive, low-cost, and
low-maintenance solution, we opted for the Microsoft Kinect
camera [24]. This approach allowed us to develop a customized
solution, as opposed to use a commercially available fitness
application.
A. Usability, User Interface, and Control Flow
The first implementation was based on a PC with an LCD
screen controlled by a variety of possible navigation methods.
In adherence to the design recommendation for older users,
the key design objective was set to accommodate potentially
reduced cognitive, sensory, and motor capabilities [7]. Accordingly, the amount of information and choices presented on each
screen were minimized. The color and size of text was carefully
selected to provide high contrast and visibility since the users
would operate the system from a distance. Switching between
screens was controlled by a set of buttons that were consistently positioned at the bottom of the display. To address the
possibility of different sensory impairments, we implemented
various modes of navigation, such as keyboard, mouse, remote
control, and speech. All of these modalities were tested at various stages of the development and deployment. Gesture controls

OFLI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF AN INTERACTIVE EXERCISE COACHING SYSTEM FOR OLDER ADULTS: LESSONS LEARNED

Fig. 1. User interface control flow displaying the main screens of the exercise
system. The bottom three screens were common for each of the 12 exercises in
the program.

were avoided because of the potential difficulties due to various
motor impairments that affect elderly. The user interface was
implemented in C++ programming language using OGRE 3-D
graphics library [25].
Fig. 1 shows the control flow of the user interface. When the
exercise software is started, the user is presented with the main
screen with a personalized greeting from where he/she can watch
several introductory videos, start the warm-up, or start a new exercise session. The screen also provides access to the camera
setup where the Kinect camera tilt can be adjusted. The exercise session consists of a sequence of 12 exercises (more details
on the exercise selection are provided in Section III-B). Each
exercise consists of three stages: 1) Instructions—including a
demonstration of the routine, 2) execution—computer-assisted
exercise by the user, and 3) exercise summary—the overall evaluation of the performance.
Each exercise is presented in a form of video instructions
of the coach explaining the health benefits of the exercise and
demonstrating the routine. The users can at any time start the
exercise once they familiarize themselves with the instructions.
After watching the instructions, users perform the exercise on
their own by following the video feedback. The performance
is measured in real time using the Kinect skeleton representation, while various corrective alerts are provided by the system
via textual and computer-generated audio cues. More details on
the movement analysis and feedback are provided in Sections
II-B and II-C. Once the user completes a predefined number
of repetitions or selects the “End Exercise” button, the display
of that exercise ends, and the performance is recorded into the
database. Afterwards, a message of encouragement is briefly
displayed showing the remaining number of exercises followed
by the summary screen. The summary screen presents a weekly
chart with performance scores observed in the particular exercise. The user can also view monthly or the last ten session
summary.
B. Real-Time Movement Analysis
We used the skeleton representation from the Microsoft
Kinect to measure the movement kinematics. The Kinect is
a depth-sensing camera that provides relatively robust 3-D re-

203

Fig. 2. Overview of the data processing pipeline for automated coaching.
Kinect 3-D joint position data are processed into higher-level performance
measures which are in turn used to verify exercise execution, count repetitions,
and provide feedback on performance.

construction even in low-light conditions [24]. The accompanying Kinect software development kit (Kinect SDK) provides
segmentation of human blobs even in cluttered scenes and realtime pose estimation with the 3-D locations of 20 joints [26]. In
our architecture, the Kinect camera pose estimation is applied in
three areas: 1) to quantify the performance of each exercise, 2)
to support repetition counting, and 3) to trigger feedback alerts
that attempt to correct an exercise performance. The processing
of the raw skeletal data is performed in real time as shown in
Fig. 2.
To quantify the performance of each exercise, we first extracted measurement primitives from the skeletal data, i.e., joint
angles, angles relative to the vertical or horizontal plane, distances, absolute positions, etc. These measurement primitives
for a particular exercise were chosen based on the goals of the
specific exercise (i.e., primary measurements). These internal,
hidden variables were also used to count repetitions, trigger
alert messages, compute movement features, and generate overt
feedback to the user. The actual performance metrics were derived by potentially nonlinear combinations of several input
primitives. To represent the participants’ relative performance,
the primary measurements were normalized to form movement
scores bounded by the range of 0 and 1, based on the maximum
range of the measurement primitives (e.g., range of motion of elbow flexion between 0◦ and 90◦ translates into a score of 0 to 1).
Since the Kinect output is noisy, the extracted exercise-specific
metrics were smoothed by moving average filters.
To track execution of exercise repetitions, it was necessary to
divide each exercise into stages identified by the exercise stage
detection module that was designed to uniquely determine the
instantiated exercise stage from the pose measurements. In this
model, the stage transitions can be triggered by a single or combination of several different measurements or scores, detected
as transitions either using a fixed threshold or a dynamically
adjusted threshold controlled by a hysteresis function. Again, to
improve the robustness of this approach, the stages were filtered
using a time constant to define the expected minimal duration of
each stage. In principle, these inferences could be learned using
standard machine learning techniques, but the small amounts of
data and high variability would present considerable challenges
to the machine learning approaches.

204

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 3. Exercise analysis example for the exercise Buddha’s Prayer: (a) Performance evaluation is done by extracting primary measurements related to the
exercise; (b) exercise execution is verified using hidden measurements and corrective feedback is provided to the user; and (c) stage detection determines the stage
of the exercise and tracks number of repetitions.

Finally, the correctness of exercise execution was checked
based on selected complex pose measurements. In each stage,
we defined constraints of the movement, such as keeping the
hands close to each other, keeping the feet on the floor, maintaining the torso in upright position, etc. The constraints were
defined as thresholds for selected pose measurements, which
can be based on a single measurement primitive or a combination of multiples as mentioned above. If the constraint was
violated, the alert module executed a message via textual and
audio cues as described in the next section.
As an example, Fig. 3 shows the Buddha’s Prayer exercise
[27], which consists of lifting the arms upward and downward
while keeping the palms close together and sitting tall in the
chair. The goal of the exercise is to lift the hands as high as
possible without losing contact between the palms. Fig. 3(a)
shows the relevant joints involved in the exercise. The primary
measurement M is defined as the minimum vertical distance
of the left (LW(z)) and right wrist (RW(z)) as measured from
the ground plane. The minimum is chosen in order to ensure
that sufficient lift is exerted in both hands. The corresponding
score, which is shown on the screen via the performance bar
(see Fig. 4), is calculated as a ratio of the difference of vertical
distance between shoulders and current wrist position, normalized by the length of the arm, which corresponds to the maximal
possible lift.
Fig. 3(b) shows the verification of the exercise correctness
(keep the palms close), which is determined from the hidden
measurement. The hidden measurement in this case is defined
as the Euclidean distance d between the two wrist positions. If
the distance exceeds the threshold, the messaging system will
display the alert. In addition, the exercise requires subject’s
upright sitting posture; therefore, the system also tracks the tilt
angles with respect to the ground normal for the upper body.
Finally, Fig. 3(c) shows the stage detection, which is used
to track exercise repetitions. The stage detection alternates between two stages (1 and 2) through a hysteresis function. If the
current exercise stage is set to 1 and the primary measurement
is increasing, the stage detector will transit to stage 2 once the
hysteresis threshold Δ is exceeded. Once the stage detector is
in stage 2, the transition to stage 1 will occur only if the primary measurement is decreasing and exceeds its value, reduced

Fig. 4. Feedback screen displayed during the exercise performance includes
video of the instructor, video captured by the Kinect camera, and various feedback elements related to the exercise performance on the top-left side of the
screen.

for the hysteresis threshold. Table I shows the measurements
collected for each exercise.
C. In-Exercise Feedback
During the design phase, we explored several visualization
options on how to present the instructions from the coach and
in-exercise feedback to the users. We considered 1) full-screen
video of the coach with Kinect video insert, 2) video of the coach
with Kinect 3-D data presented side by side, and 3) Kinect video
and skeletal data with pictorial cues of the exercise. Informal
usability assessment with coaches and several users suggested
a preference for a full-screen video visualization.
For the in-exercise feedback, the video is overlaid with additional feedback data as shown in Fig. 4. In the top portion
of the screen, the consecutive number of the exercise, the exercise name, and current repetition count are presented. In the
lower-right corner, a video of the user captured by the Kinect

OFLI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF AN INTERACTIVE EXERCISE COACHING SYSTEM FOR OLDER ADULTS: LESSONS LEARNED

205

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF PHYSICAL EXERCISES INCLUDED IN THE INTERACTIVE COACHING SYSTEM [27]

camera is displayed for reference. To provide assistive feedback during the exercise, the user is also presented with visual
cues on the targeted performance measurements, which are displayed in a form of a dynamic performance bar whose length
corresponds to the performance score as defined by the given
complex pose measurement. A white vertical line denotes the
maximum value achieved during a particular session. Below the
performance bars, we display the corrective and encouraging
message cues. The messages are also conveyed to the user via
text-to-speech synthesis. We use additional audio cues (short
“ding” sounds) whenever movement repetition is successfully
counted.
D. Database
The data storage for the exercise system was implemented locally using MySQL [28]. For each user, the system tracked the
start and end time of each exercise session. Within the session,
data in each time instance (at approx. 30 Hz) consisted of raw
Kinect skeletal data for 3-D positions of 20 joints, current value
of observed primary and hidden measurements, position of the
video feedback, current exercise stage, current repetition count,
and feedback messages if provided. Overall exercise performance was stored in the summary table, which included name
of the exercise, number of completed repetitions, and observed

primary measurements with corresponding name, minimal and
maximal values.
III. PILOT STUDY DESIGN
A. Study Participants
The study participants were selected from a pool of subjects
of the Oregon Center for Aging & Technology (ORCATECH)
Living Lab at Oregon Health & Science University [29] who
were also enrolled in a health coaching program. A total of six
independently living elder subjects (two male, four female) were
included in the pilot study. All the subjects were Caucasian with
a mean age 81, ranging from 74 to 91. The selection criteria
included the ability to 1) speak and read English, 2) understand
and follow instructions, and 3) ambulate without any assistive
devices. All the participants had normal or corrected vision, and
none of the participants had any known health problems that
would prevent them from using the designed system safely on
their own.
B. Exercise Program
We based our exercise program on Sue Scott’s Able Bodies
Balance Training book [27], which offers more than 130 exercises to enhance balance, flexibility, strength, and endurance in

206

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

older adults. We selected 12 exercises that are aimed to reduce
fall risk, increase balance, confidence, and have positive impact
on activities of daily living (ADL). Table I provides the list of
selected exercises with detailed information on each exercise.
The exercise selection was also determined by considering robust tracking with the Kinect camera, based on our initial tests
[30], while providing sufficient variety of exercises that engage
different parts of the body.

TABLE II
OVERALL USER EXPERIENCE WITH THE SYSTEM

Participants

1
2
3
4
5
6

D

S

Ŝ

SCE

˜
SCE

ˆ
SCE

EER

ESU

29
28
44
17
44
14

12
12
11
10
16
11

15
14
22
9
22
7

118
121
130
112
124
99

144
144
132
120
192
132

180
168
264
108
264
84

82%
84%
98%
93%
65%
75%

66%
72%
49%
104%
47%
118%

C. Performance Assessment—Outcome Measures
During the course of the pilot study, the participants’ exercise
performance was continuously monitored by the coaching system using the primary measurements extracted from the Kinect
pose estimation as defined in Section II-B. We converted these
primary measurements into several internal outcome measures
by analyzing higher-level statistics, such as averages, deviation,
and variability to assess and provide feedback about the participants’ overall performance of each exercise in each session as
well as across sessions.
We also evaluated the participants’ physical abilities at the beginning and at the end of the coaching intervention using several
external outcome measures which included standardized clinical tests, such as the senior fitness test (SFT) developed by Rikli
and Jones [31] and the Berg balance scale (BBS) [32]. The SFT
measures the physical parameters associated with functional
ability and identifies the risk for loss of the ability to perform
specific ADL. We included the following four items in our pilot
study: 1) the chair-stand test (CST) and 2) arm-curl test (ACT)
for measurement of muscle strength in lower and upper body,
respectively; 3) the 4-foot up and go test1 (4FUGT) for assessment of agility and balance; and 4) the 2-minute step-in-place
test (2MSPT) for evaluation of aerobic endurance. The BBS on
the other hand is a 14-item scale developed for measuring both
static and dynamic balance abilities of older adults. Table I provides a list of internal and external outcome measures for each
exercise.
D. Experimental Protocol
A phone interview was first conducted to determine which
participants were appropriate for the pilot study based on healthrelated inclusion criteria and availability of physical space to
accommodate the Kinect camera system. Selected participants
were initially visited by the health coach to obtain informed consent and further information on general health, physical activity
levels, and computer usage. Next, the health coach administered
the initial fitness tests (i.e., SFT and BBS) and recorded participant’s preintervention scores. The exercise system with the
Kinect camera was then installed and the participant was given
training on how to use the system. The health coach led the participant through the exercises and provided specific instructions
to augment provided instructional videos. The participants were
instructed to complete at least ten sessions and were suggested
to exercise preferably once every other day during the course
of the enrollment. During this time, the health coach checked in
1 Rikli and Jones [31] designed this test originally for an 8-ft distance but due
to space limitations in elderly homes, we modified the test to 4-ft distance.

D: # days the system was deployed in a home.
S: # sessions (days) the system was used for exercise by a user.
Ŝ: D /2, expected # sessions under exercise-every-other-day regimen.
SCE: total # successfully completed exercises by a user in S sessions.
˜ 12 × S, expected SCE by a user in S sessions.
SCE:
ˆ 12 × Ŝ, expected SCE by a user in Ŝ sessions.
SCE:
˜ effective exercise rate.
EER: SCE/ SCE,
ˆ effective system usage.
ESU: SCE/ SCE,

with the participants on weekly basis to note any issues with the
exercise intervention or the system. Afterwards, postintervention tests and usability feedback was gathered and the system
was removed.
IV. PILOT STUDY RESULTS
A. Data Collection Overview
Table II provides a summary of the user experience with
the exercise system. We can observe that the duration of the
exercise regimen varied considerably between the participants.
Some participants (e.g., participants #3 and #5) had the exercise
system in their homes for a longer term (approx. six weeks),
whereas others (e.g., participants #4 and #6) completed their
sessions in a shorter term (approx. two weeks). We can see from
ESU rates that some participants (e.g., participants #4 and #6)
used the system more frequently than others, even exceeded the
recommended exercise regimen. On the other hand, the analysis of EER rates and completions of individual exercises (not
shown in this paper) reflect that some participants (e.g., participants #5 and #6) struggled to complete the required number
of repetitions in several exercises or concluded their workout
sessions by skipping a few of the exercises entirely. Since one
of our goals was to obtain information on system usage without providing restrictions on the exercise regimen, the resultant
exercise data are not fully controlled and, thus, the participants
cannot be easily compared. Due to limited space, we illustrate
several different analysis directions and present a sample of
results based on the pilot study data.
B. Evaluation of Internal Outcome Measures
In this section, we provide an example of an internal outcome
measure which evaluates the in-exercise performance from the
Kinect measurements for one subject, as described in Section IIB. Fig. 5 shows the extracted primary measurement of wrist lift
for the Buddha’s Prayer exercise as well as the corresponding
detection of stages, repetition counts, and selected skeletal key
frames, as performed by participant #6 on day 11.

OFLI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF AN INTERACTIVE EXERCISE COACHING SYSTEM FOR OLDER ADULTS: LESSONS LEARNED

207

TABLE III
PRE- AND POSTINTERVENTION SCORES

Participant
ID
1
2
3
4
5
6

Fig. 5. Primary measurement example for Buddha’s Prayer (participant #6;
day 11): (a) Wrist lift (dashed curve), stage detection (dark/light shades), repetition counts (solid vertical lines), and maximum/minimum values of the wrist
lift measurement in each exercise repetition (diamonds/squares, respectively),
(b)–(g) skeletal poses for key frames marked with cross markers in (a).

Sex
F
M
M
F
F
F

Age
79
75
91
74
80
80

BBS
(score/56)

CST
(# stands)

Pre
45
55
48
56
55
55

Pre
8
12
8
9
10
11

Post
48
55
52
56
56
55

Post
12
15
9
10
13
13

ACT
(# curls)
Pre
14
16
15
16
15
16

Post
16
21
14
14
15
16

2MSPT
(# steps)
Pre
72
100
64
112
82
130

Post
47
107
50
107
99
102

4FUGT
(sec)
Pre
6.0
7.0
10.0
6.9
9.6
5.5

Post
8.4
6.5
7.8
6.9
6.5
4.5

Notes:
F: Female
M: Male
BBS: Berg Balance Scale
CST: Chair Stand Test
ACT: Arm Curl Test
2MSPT: 2-min in Place Step Test
4FUGT: 4-Foot Up and Go Test

relation with individual’s flexibility and strength levels, it is
difficult to directly infer overall trends in flexibility and strength
changes.
A closer look at individual sessions in Fig. 6 shows a considerable trend in decreasing of the wrist lift in each set. The results
indicate that the subject may have fatigued toward the end of
the set. Similarly, in-session trends can be analyzed for the exercise repetition times. Specifically, the participant took longer
to complete the first few arm lifts as compared to the last set in
almost all of the exercise sessions. The decline in the wrist lift
decrease and the repetition times (i.e., smaller variance in data
points within a session) indicates some overall improvement in
the endurance levels.
C. Evaluation of External Outcome Measures

Fig. 6. Analysis of the wrist lift measurements across all exercise sessions as
observed in participant #6: (a) Box plot of the maximum distance traveled by
the wrists in each repetition, (b) box plot of the time taken to complete each
repetition. Circular markers denote chronological data points for each session.
The box represents the extent between 25th and 75th percentile from the median;
the whiskers extend to the minimum and maximum values.

Fig. 6 presents a longitudinal, exercise-specific evaluation of
the participant’s performance across all exercise sessions. In
this particular case, we review results of the Buddha’s Prayer
exercise performed by participant #6. The analysis of repetition
times can provide information on general flexibility, strength,
and endurance levels both during an exercise session and across
multiple sessions. For instance, Fig. 6(a) shows a slight decrease
in the wrist lift measurements across multiple exercise sessions.
This trend roughly corresponds to the reduction of the average
exercise repetition times across multiple sessions as shown in
Fig. 6(b). Since this observation provides only a coarse cor-

Table III presents the pre- and postintervention scores for
the external outcome measures introduced in Section III-C as
well as the participant demographics. We see that participants
#2 and #5 performed at least the same between their pre- and
postintervention scores for all tests. However, participants #3
and #4 showed decline in ACT and 2MSPT, while participant #1 showed decline in 2MSPT and 4FUGT, and participant
#6 showed decline only in 2MSPT. We observe that 2MSPT
scores for most of the participants deteriorated in the postintervention assessment. It is also important to note that BBS
significantly suffered from the ceiling effect as four out of six
participants achieved the perfect (or almost perfect) scores in
both pre- and postintervention tests. In this paper, we defer
from performing further statistical analysis of the external outcome measures due to a small sample size, short duration of the
study, and relatively open exercise regimen that the participants
followed.
V. DISCUSSION—LESSONS LEARNED
In this section, we discuss usability issues and lessons learned
from the reported pilot study. The summary of our findings can
be found in Table IV.

208

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS IN THE PILOT STUDY
Category

Benefits

Limitations

Implications

Living Space

• Participants liked the fact that they could
exercise at home.

• Kinect 2 has improved skeletal tracking
and wider field of view (60◦ HFOV versus
43◦ HFOV).
• Set up the system in a living room or
common space for multiple users.

Computer System

• All-in-one computer was easy to set up
by a non-technical person, i.e., health
coach.

User Interface

• Participants found the exercise software
easy to use.
• Participants were able to use wireless
keyboard and mouse successfully.

• Only few participants had the required
8 + space in front of their computer.
• Accuracy of tracking was affected in
some exercises due to small space.
• Chair or other objects were sometimes
interfering with tracking.
• It was difficult to find space for the
computer since it was rather large and
bulky.
• Participants thought the all-in-one
computer would not be appropriate as a
long-term solution.
• 23 screen was still too small for some
older adults.
• Several participants still had difficulty
seeing text on the screen.

In-Exercise Feedback

• Participants liked the video guidance
through the exercise sessions.
• Most participants liked receiving
encouraging feedback from the exercise
system.

• Participants questioned when the system
is able to see them.
• Participants did not understand meaning
of performance measures.

Exercise Regimen

• Participants in general liked included
exercises.

Outcome Measures

• Kinect-based internal outcome measures
proved to be robust enough to perform
exercise tracking in most cases.

• Some participants found exercises too
easy for their level of fitness.
• Some exercises were consistently
performed incorrectly.
• Participants asked to have more variety
and control over the exercises for
longer-term use of the exercise system.
• Proposed outcome measures for tracking
the exercises were difficult to convey to
the participants.
• External outcome measures (e.g. BBS,
SFT) suffered from ceiling effect.

A. System Setup
Since the system was aimed to be used in a home setting, the
main usability limitation was imposed by the Kinect camera. The
field of view of the Kinect is 43 ◦ × 57 ◦ (vertical × horizontal)
with the depth range between 0.8 and 4 m. To capture full body,
the user had to be standing or sitting between 1.8 to 3.0 m away
from the camera.
To determine the availability of the space and to examine
other constraints in homes of potential users, we had at the start
of this project surveyed the living accommodations of 30 participants in the ORCATECH Living Lab program. The survey
included information on the type of home, location of the main
computer, size of computer monitor, available space in front of
the computer desk, type of chair, availability and type of TV
screen, and available space in front of the TV screen. The initial
survey showed that majority of participants had a desktop computer with a monitor size between 14 and 17 . The computer
was typically located either in the office space or a bedroom with
1.2 to 2.5 m (about 4 to 8 ) available in front of the computer.
Twelve participants reported to have a newer or flat screen TV

• Use of a small-desktop PC connected to
an existing large screen TV set.
• Configure the computer to work as a
turn-key system.

• Improvements in the UI: larger fonts,
buttons with familiar icons, more contrast
in colors.
• Better use of text-to-speech to assist
users in reading larger amounts of text.
• Use of dedicated remote to control
interaction.
• Adding feedback with the Kinect body
tracking information (e.g., human figure,
skeleton).
• Simplified feedback through repetition
counting.
• Provide more effective feedback to
correct improper performance.
• Development of more intuitive
performance scores (e.g., scores related to
balance, strength, flexibility, endurance).
• Provide larger variety of exercises with
different difficulty levels for different parts
of the body.
• Provide participants with a weekly
schedule of exercises based on their past
performance.
• Derive performance measures based on
standard components of physical fitness
from Kinect data.
• Select appropriate clinical measures
based on participant fitness levels to avoid
the ceiling effect.
• Use of process evaluation methodology
[33] to assess effectiveness of intervention.

in their living room with sizes ranging from 24 to 52 . The
participants reported to have anywhere between 1.0 and 2.5 m
(about 3 to 8 ) of free space available in front of the TV screen;
however, some participants stressed that they would not want to
rearrange furniture to accommodate the system. We have also
determined that almost all of the participants had older computers with operating systems that would not be compatible with
the Kinect camera. Based on this survey and careful evaluation
of different options, we decided to use an all-in-one computer
with 23 monitor that would provide more flexibility in terms of
system setup in different rooms while providing smaller footprint and large display. We set up two identical systems that
were moved between participants’ homes to collect the entire
dataset.
From the deployment in the six homes, we found that the allin-one computer was initially very easy to setup by the coach,
however, in some of the homes, it was difficult to find space for
the system as it was somewhat heavy and bulky. Most participants had the computer placed next to their existing computer
system. One participant used a cart with wheels to set up the

OFLI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF AN INTERACTIVE EXERCISE COACHING SYSTEM FOR OLDER ADULTS: LESSONS LEARNED

computer screen closer while keeping sufficient distance for the
Kinect camera in order to view the screen better. The participants reported that although they did not mind having the system
in their home, they did not see it as a viable long-term solution.
They expressed preference to use the exercise system either
with an existing computer at their desk or having it connected
to their TV. At the start of the study, however, majority of the
participants did not have newer TV sets or sufficient space in
their living room that could accommodate the system.

B. Kinect Tracking
Our exercise system relies on the pose estimation given by
the Kinect software. The Kinect tracking algorithm, however,
was primarily designed and trained for in-game interactions
with several assumptions, such as users are standing, the view
is unobstructed, body limbs are away from the trunk, there is
no object interaction, etc. In our previous publication [30], we
examined the accuracy of the Kinect when tracking six of the
exercises included in this study. Through the comparison with an
optical motion capture system, we determined the distribution
of joint position accuracy in three different orientations with
respect to the camera. Based on these findings, we determined
which of the joints were more reliable to track in particular
exercises. The highest errors were found in hip and ankle joints,
in particular during the sitting exercises. Similarly, from these
pilot data, we observed that the sitting skeleton often had much
larger errors in the lower parts of the body, especially in the
hips. The accuracy of the sitting pose was also influenced by the
position of the Kinect camera. If the camera was positioned too
low and was, thus, unable to observe user’s thighs, the estimate
of the hip position was less accurate. These errors also increased
when a chair with larger footprint was used. A more stable
skeleton was observed when subjects were performing standing
exercises. However, some of the exercises had to be performed
while holding on to a chair, which sometimes also influenced
the tracking accuracy.
Another issue which occasionally prevented participants from
being able to complete the set of exercises was faulty user identification. The Kinect keeps track of users identities (by assigning
a user ID number) while they are in the scene. If the user leaves
the scene or is fully occluded by another user, the tracking system will assign him/her with a new ID number. Our system
assumed that the user who is the closest to the camera was
the active user whose skeletal data were recorded. Although
the participants exercised alone, there were several instances
where a piece of furniture was misidentified as a human user
and tracked instead. Since the users had no feedback on what
is being tracked by the system, their activity was not counted
for the particular session. When analyzing such data, we also
noticed that when two skeletons are tracked in the scene, regardless of which one is used for the measurement, the stability
of measured joint positions is decreased.
While selecting the exercises for this study, we performed
extensive testing in the lab [30] to determine which measurements are the most reliable under given conditions. Although it
was not possible to achieve stable full-body skeleton tracking in
some of the exercises, the extracted measures were sufficiently
reliable to track exercise repetitions and trigger corrective cues.

209

C. Exercise Selection
For the pilot study, we used a set of 12 exercises, which
included activities of upper and lower extremities, primarily focusing on improving balance and strength. The exercises were
chosen with regard to safety considerations (since the participants were performing the exercises without direct supervision)
and the ability of the Kinect to robustly recognize and track the
user performing a particular exercise.
The most challenging exercise was Cops and Robbers which
consists of three stages: Extension of arms, retraction of arms,
and rotation of forearms to vertical position. During initial testing, subjects were typically combining the second and third
stage; therefore, the system was not able to properly count the
repetitions. After discussing the issue with the coach, we decided to modify the requirements of this exercise and define only
two stages, which helped the participants to get their repetitions
counted even when performance was only partially correct. We
believe it is necessary to provide clearer reminders of particular
steps before and during the exercise.
Overall, the participants liked the selection of exercises, although some of them felt that the exercises were not challenging
enough and did not have sufficient diversity to use this system
for a longer time period. Other participants reported that “the
exercise made them sore” as they exceeded their regular level of
activity. In the future, we thus plan to include broader selection
of exercises that would target different levels of users, from easy
to more challenging, and provide workout for different parts of
the body, such as upper, lower, and full body. To compensate
for the limitations of the Kinect to track the human body in
more challenging poses, some of the exercises could provide
only video instructions while no real-time detection of exercise
stage is performed.
D. In-Exercise Feedback
While designing the in-exercise feedback screen, we tried to
incorporate familiar elements of traditional workout videos as
opposed to use 3-D graphics that is typical for video games in
order to appeal to older adults. The feedback on the exercise
performance was overlaid on top of the video layer in form
of performance bars, repetition counter, and textual cues. Additional audio cues were played along the side of the textual
messages.
The participants reported that they found the in-exercise feedback screen useful, although some of the participants did not understand how the performance bars related to their movement.
Some also did not remember that the thick mark inside the performance bar represented their last maximal performance, which
they were supposed to reach or exceed. The subjects liked the
audio cues that were provided by the system, for example to
remind them to sit tall during a particular exercise or to encourage them. One of the participants, however, mentioned that “the
kudos and feedback were not him” and he did not think they
were necessary.
The participants liked the instructor. They mentioned that “the
instructor talks clearly, speaks to the camera.” They found the
demonstrations of each exercise to be useful for correct performance. The subjects, however, complained about the readability
of the textual information provided during the exercise as it was

210

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

too small for them to read from such a distance. This issue could
be addressed by reducing the amount of textual information and
use of a bigger screen, such as a TV screen.
Although the participants were able to see the output video
captured by the Kinect camera during their exercise performance, they could not tell if the system was tracking them correctly or not. As discussed earlier, some of the subjects were not
tracked properly or their repetitions were not always counted.
We initially decided to provide only the video feedback in order
to minimize the complexity of the visual feedback. In the future,
we plan to include more focused feedback on the data output
from the Kinect (e.g., segmented human figure) that would provide better cues to users to be able to self-correct some of the
camera/tracking related issues.
E. User Interface
For the interaction with the exercise software, we implemented several options, such as a mouse, keyboard shortcuts,
touch screen, and voice control. During our initial testing, we
also considered the use of a wireless presentation remote, however, we decided against it as it required turning it off after each
use, otherwise the battery life was significantly reduced. We also
determined that the voice control would be too challenging for
the participants to use it reliably; therefore, it was turned off for
the pilot study. We eventually opted for using wireless keyboard
and mouse for interacting with the software since all the participants in our pilot study were computer users and were, thus,
already accustomed to the keyboard/mouse. Keyboard shortcuts
(i.e., single key strokes) or mouse clicks were used to interact
with the on-screen buttons. Overall, the subjects reported that
“the interaction with the screens was very intuitive and they
were able to easily find their way around the program.” One of
the participants reported that “the text on the buttons was difficult to read,” however most participants were able to read the
button labels. With increased complexity of the exercise software that would in the future offer more variety in the selection
of exercises, the user interface will require the use of symbolic
buttons, color cues, and less textual information.
F. Outcome Measures
As discussed previously, the internal and external outcome
measures need to be able to detect changes in user performance
that are associated with the standard components of the physical
fitness, such as balance, flexibility, strength, and endurance. The
quantification of these are important in order to guide the health
coach as well as to provide feedback to the users which will
incentivize them to exercise more regularly.
In our pilot study, we computed several high-level performance primitives from the Kinect skeletal tracking as the internal outcome measures to evaluate user performance and to provide in-exercise feedback, stage detection, repetition counting,
and exercise correctness verification. These measurement primitives proved to be robust enough, however, for each exercise,
the selection of the appropriate measures had to be determined
manually in collaboration with an exercise consultant. There is
a need to develop a more generalized framework that would
define appropriate measures for different exercises in more automated manner. Another open issue relates to the interpretation

of the Kinect-derived performance measures in terms of aforementioned standard components of the physical fitness.
The effects of the exercise intervention also need to be interpreted in terms of standardized clinical measures, as those are
the most useful for the health coach. The subjects in our pilot
study were evaluated by several different scales at the beginning
and the end of their exercise regime. Although we did not find
a significant correlation by direct comparison of our internal
outcome measures against the external outcome measures, we
observed some trends that could be explored further with the
help of more sophisticated approaches and data collected over a
longer time period. For instance, instead of using primary measurements directly as the internal outcome measures, one could
extract more advanced parameters that could consider a subject’s
simplified dynamics model (e.g., mass and inertia) to relate the
performance to the standard components of physical fitness and
provide a better foundation for direct comparison between such
internal measures and the external outcome measures.
For the future studies, selecting the appropriate clinical tests
will be as important as selecting the appropriate exercises for
our coaching system. For this pilot study, we administered BBS
and SFT. The BBS was developed originally to measure balance
among older adults who need assistance in ADLs and live in residential care facilities. However, all participants in our pilot study
were living independently. Therefore, the BBS scores suffered
significantly from the ceiling effect as four out of six participants achieved the perfect (or almost perfect) scores in both
pre- and postintervention tests, leaving no room to detect potential improvements. Alternatively, to better account for cases
where standard clinical tests fall short of measuring changes successfully, a comprehensive process-evaluation plan [33] can be
developed to assess the overall implementation of the proposed
exercise coaching system.
G. Social Aspects
Another important factor influencing exercise adherence is
the social aspect. Social support can in general increase the selfefficacy and subsequently enhance adherence [34]. In our study,
we initially discussed various possibilities to include social interaction between the participants, such as having the exercise
system in a common space for different users to use, providing
ability for participants to share their scores with others, forming
a competitive environment, etc. However, we had decided to exclude that component in the first iteration of the exercise system
as we did not yet fully understand the potential technical difficulties (e.g., wireless internet connectivity) and participants’
interest in such interactions. The social interaction with regard
to the exercise system was thus primarily limited to the weekly
communications with the health coach. We will, however, explore some of the aforementioned social elements in our future
work.
VI. CONCLUSION
Interactive exercise systems hold promise in promoting physical activity for all ages as shown by several previous studies.
One of the interesting questions remains on how to balance the
attractiveness and effectiveness of the exercise systems in realworld settings while considering various factors, such as age

OFLI et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF AN INTERACTIVE EXERCISE COACHING SYSTEM FOR OLDER ADULTS: LESSONS LEARNED

and educational level of users, system and environmental constraints, type of feedback, level of gamification, incentives, and
social interaction. In our pilot study, we deployed an interactive
exercise system with automated feedback and coaching capabilities for older adults in their homes. Physical performance
metrics and inference algorithms were based on data from the
Microsoft Kinect camera mounted in users’ homes. In this paper, we showed that despite several real-world challenges, the
system was able to collect continuous exercise data during the
entire deployment period, while the participants expressed positive attitude toward using such a system for longer term in the
future. Although this study was limited in terms of number of
subjects and duration of the trials, it provided several insights
on the system deployment and usability issues concerning elderly users. In our future work, we are planning to improve the
software capabilities with a wider selection of exercises, more
focused and relevant in-exercise and postexercise feedback, and
a more flexible user interface. This will provide a foundation
for a subsequent more controlled research study with a larger
number of participants studied over a longer period of time, with
a goal of understanding how best to help older adults to achieve
improved physical functioning and maintain independence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Marcoe for feedback during
software development and support with the pilot study, S. Scott
for feedback and assistance in designing the exercise program,
E. Seto for contributions to the pilot study design, and S. Hagler
for help with the recording of the exercise videos.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Sun, I. Norman, and A. While, “Physical activity in older people: A
systematic review,” BMC Public Health, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 449–465, 2013.
[2] P. Donovan, J. Papay, J. Hibbard, K. Lawson, M. Moore, and R. Wolever,
Three Pillars of Health Coaching: Patient Activation, Motivational Interviewing and Positive Psychology. Wall Township, NJ, USA: Healthcare
Intelligence Network, 2010.
[3] H. B. Jimison and M. Pavel, Integrating Computer-Based Health Coaching Into Elder Home Care, A. Mihailidis, J. Boger, H. Kautz, and
L. Normie, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2008.
[4] D. Rivera and H. Jimison, “Systems modeling of behavior change: Two
illustrations from optimized interventions for improved health outcomes,”
IEEE Pulse, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 41–47, Nov../Dec. 2013.
[5] J. Szer, “Video games as physiotherapy,” Med. J. Aust., vol. 1, no. 9,
pp. 401–402, 1983.
[6] A. N. Krichevets, E. B. Sirotkina, I. V. Yevsevicheva, and L. M. Zeldin,
“Computer games as a means of movement rehabilitation,” Disability
Rehabil., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 100–105, 1995.
[7] W. Ijsselsteijn, H. H. Nap, Y. de Kort, and K. Poels, “Digital game design
for elderly users,” in Proc. Conf. Future Play, 2007, pp. 17–22.
[8] J. Doyle, D. Kelly, and B. Caulfield, “Design considerations in therapeutic exergaming,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Technol.
Healthcare, 2011, pp. 389–393.
[9] J. Doyle, C. Bailey, B. Dromey, and C. Scanaill, “BASE—An interactive
technology solution to deliver balance and strength exercises to older
adults,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Technol. Healthcare,
2010, pp. 1–5.
[10] T.-H. Tsai, A. M.-K. Wong, C.-L. Hsu, and K. C. Tseng, “Research on
a community-based platform for promoting health and physical fitness in
the elderly community,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1–9, 2013.
[11] J. Macek and J. Kleindienst, “Exercise support system for elderly:
Multi-sensor physiological state detection and usability testing,” in Proc.
Human-Comput. Interaction, 2011, vol. 6947, pp. 81–88.

211

[12] J. Doyle, D. Kelly, M. Patterson, and B. Caulfield, “The effects of visual
feedback in therapeutic exergaming on motor task accuracy,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Virtual Rehabil., 2011, pp. 1–5.
[13] J. A. Garcia, K. Felix Navarro, D. Schoene, S. T. Smith, and Y. Pisan,
“Exergames for the elderly: Towards an embedded Kinect-based clinical
test of falls risk,” Stud. Health Technol. Informat., vol. 178, pp. 51–57,
2012.
[14] Y. Pisan, J. G. Marin, and K. F. Navarro, “Improving lives: Using Microsoft
Kinect to predict the loss of balance for elderly users under cognitive load,”
in Proc. 9th Aust. Conf. Interactive Entertainment: Matters Life Death,
2013, pp. 29:1–29:4.
[15] B. Lange, C.-Y. Chang, E. Suma, B. Newman, A. Rizzo, and M. Bolas,
“Development and evaluation of low cost game-based balance rehabilitation tool using the Microsoft Kinect sensor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 1831–1834.
[16] S. Ganesan and L. Anthony, “Using the Kinect to encourage older adults
to exercise: A prototype,” in Proc. Extended Abstracts Human Factors
Comput. Syst., 2012, pp. 2297–2302.
[17] E. Brox, L. Luque, G. Evertsen, and J. Hernandez, “Exergames for elderly: Social exergames to persuade seniors to increase physical activity,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Technol. Healthcare, 2011,
pp. 546–549.
[18] L. H. Larsen, L. Schou, H. H. Lund, and H. Langberg, “The physical effect
of exergames in healthy elderly—A systematic review,” Games Health
J., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 205–212, 2013.
[19] K. J. Miller, B. S. Adair, A. J. Pearce, C. M. Said, E. Ozanne, and
M. M. Morris, “Effectiveness and feasibility of virtual reality and gaming
system use at home by older adults for enabling physical activity to improve health-related domains: A systematic review,” Age Ageing, vol. 43,
no. 2, pp. 188–195, 2013.
[20] M. van Diest, C. Lamoth, J. Stegenga, G. Verkerke, and K. Postema,
“Exergaming for balance training of elderly: State of the art and future developments,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 101–112,
2013.
[21] B. S. Lange, S. M. Flynn, C. Y. Chang, W. Liang, C. L. Chieng, Y. Si,
C. Nanavati, and A. A. Rizzo, “Development of an interactive stepping
game to reduce falls in the elderly,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Disability,
Virtual Reality Associated Technol., 2010, pp. 223–228.
[22] S. Obdrzálek, G. Kurillo, E. Y. W. Seto, and R. Bajcsy, “Architecture of an
automated coaching system for elderly population,” in Proc. Stud. Health
Technol. Informat., vol. 184, pp. 309–311, 2013.
[23] C. J. Caspersen, K. E. Powell, and G. M. Christenson, “Physical activity, exercise and physical fitness: Definitions and distinctions for healthrelated research,” Public Health Reports, vol. 100, no. 2, pp. 126–131,
1985.
[24] Z. Zhang, “Microsoft Kinect sensor and its effect,” IEEE Multimedia,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 4–10, Feb. 2012.
[25] OGRE—Open source 3D graphics engine. (2014). [Online]. Available:
http://www.ogre3d.org
[26] J. Shotton, A. Fitzgibbon, M. Cook, T. Sharp, M. Finocchio, R. Moore,
A. Kipman, and A. Blake, “Real-time human pose recognition in parts
from single depth images,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., 2011, pp. 1297–1304.
[27] S. Scott, Able Bodies Balance Training. Champaign, IL, USA: Human
Kinetics, 2008.
[28] Oracle, MySQL. (2014). [Online]. Available: http://www.mysql.com
[29] What is the ORCATECH living laboratory? (2014). [Online]. Available:
http://www.orcatech.org/resources/living-laboratory
[30] S. Obdrzalek, G. Kurillo, F. Ofli, R. Bajcsy, E. Seto, H. Jimison, and
M. Pavel, “Accuracy and robustness of Kinect pose estimation in the
context of coaching of elderly population,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 1188–1193.
[31] R. E. Rikli and C. J. Jones, “Development and validation of a functional
fitness test for community-residing older adults,” J. Aging Phys. Activity,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 129–161, 1999.
[32] K. Berg, S. Wood-Dauphinée, J. I. Williams, and D. Gayton, “Measuring balance in the elderly: Preliminary development of an instrument,”
Physiotherapy Can., vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 304–311, 1989.
[33] R. P. Saunders, M. H. Evans, and P. Joshi, “Developing a processevaluation plan for assessing health promotion program implementation:
A how-to guide,” Health Promotion Practice, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 134–147,
Apr. 2005.
[34] E. McAuley, G. J. Jerome, D. X. Marquez, S. Elavsky, and B. Blissmer,
“Exercise self-efficacy in older adults: Social, affective, and behavioral
influences,” Ann. Behav. Med., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2003.

212

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Ferda Ofli (S’07–M’11) received the B.Sc. degrees
both in electrical and electronics engineering and
computer engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Koç University, Istanbul,
Turkey, in 2005 and 2010, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher in the
Teleimmersion Laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. His research
interests include the areas of multimedia signal processing, computer vision, pattern recognition, and
machine learning.
Dr. Ofli received the Graduate Studies Excellence Award in 2010 for outstanding academic achievement at Koç University.

Gregorij Kurillo received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in 2001 and
2006, respectively.
He was a Research Assistant with the Laboratory of Robotics and Biomedical Engineering at the
University of Ljubljana from 2002 to 2006. From
2006 to 2009, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher, and
since 2009 the Head Research Engineer at the Teleimmersion Laboratory at the University of California,
Berkeley, CA, USA. He currently also holds a shared
research appointment with the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of California, Davis, CA. His research interests include
camera calibration, 3-D vision, image processing, robotics, virtual reality, and
rehabilitation engineering.

Štěpán Obdržálek received the M.S. degree in computer science and the Ph.D. degree in computer vision
from the Czech Technical University (CTU), Czech,
Prague.
Since then, he was a Research Fellow at the Centre for Machine Perception, CTU Prague, and at the
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. His research interests include feature-based object recognition and localization, textureless object recognition,
intelligent vehicles, 3-D motion analysis, and egomotion estimation.

Ruzena Bajcsy (LF’08) received the Master’s and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Slovak
Technical University, Bratislava, Slovakia, in 1957
and 1967, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA, in 1972.
She is currently a Professor of electrical engineering and computer sciences at the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, and the Director Emeritus
of the Center for Information Technology Research
in the Interest of Science, Berkeley. Prior to joining
Berkeley, she headed the Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate at the National Science Foundation. She is a Member of the National Academy of Engineering and the National Academy of Science Institute
of Medicine as well as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM) and the American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
In 2001, Dr. Bajcsy received the ACM/Association for the Advancement
of Artificial Intelligence Allen Newell Award, and was named as one of the
50 most important women in science in the November 2002 issue of Discover
Magazine. She received the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Computer and Cognitive Sciences in 2009 and the IEEE Robotics and Automation Award in 2013
for her contributions in the field of robotics and automation.

Holly Brugge Jimison (M’81) received the Ph.D. degree in medical information sciences from Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 1990.
She is currently a Professor of practice in the
College of Computer and Information Science and
the Bouvé College of Health Sciences at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. She directs the
Consortium on technology for proactive care with research projects on computational modeling of patient
data from sensors in the home and environment as
well as technology for health coaching interventions.
She is a Fellow of the American College of Medical Informatics.

Misha Pavel (LM’10) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute
of Brooklyn, Brooklyn, NY, USA, the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in experimental psychology from New York University, New
York, NY, USA.
He is a currently a Professor of practice jointly
appointed between the College of Computer and Information Sciences and the Bouvé College of Health
Sciences at Northeastern University, Boston, MA,
USA. He came to Boston from a position of the Program Director of Smart
and Connected Health on a leave from Oregon Health and Science University
where he was a Professor at the Department of Biomedical Engineering, with
a joint appointment in the Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical
Epidemiology. He is also a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland. Previously, he served as the Chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering, which he founded in 2001, and as the Director
of the Point of Care Laboratory, which focuses on unobtrusive monitoring, neurobehavioral assessment, and computational modeling in support of healthcare,
with a particular focus on chronic disease and elder care. His earlier academic
appointments included positions at New York University and Stanford University. In addition to his academic career, he was a Member of the Technical
Staff at Bell Laboratories in early 1970s, where his research interests included
network analysis and modeling, and later at AT&T Laboratories with focus on
mobile and Internet-based technologies. His current fundamental research interest includes the intersection of multilevel computational modeling of complex
behaviors of biological and cognitive systems, and augmented cognition. His
most recent efforts are focused on fundamental science and technology that
would enable the transformation of healthcare to be proactive, distributed, and
patient centered.

