IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1363

Extraction of Time and Frequency Features From
Grip Force Rates During Dexterous Manipulation
Keivan Mojtahedi, Qiushi Fu, and Marco Santello∗

Abstract—The time course of grip force from object contact
to onset of manipulation has been extensively studied to gain insight into the underlying control mechanisms. Of particular interest to the motor neuroscience and clinical communities is the
phenomenon of bell-shaped grip force rate (GFR) that has been
interpreted as indicative of feedforward force control. However,
this feature has not been assessed quantitatively. Furthermore, the
time course of grip force may contain additional features that could
provide insight into sensorimotor control processes. In this study,
we addressed these questions by validating and applying two computational approaches to extract features from GFR in humans:
1) fitting a Gaussian function to GFR and quantifying the goodness of the fit [root-mean-square error, (RMSE)]; and 2) continuous
wavelet transform (CWT), where we assessed the correlation of the
GFR signal with a Mexican Hat function. Experiment 1 consisted
of a classic pseudorandomized presentation of object mass (light or
heavy), where grip forces developed to lift a mass heavier than expected are known to exhibit corrective responses. For Experiment
2, we applied our two techniques to analyze grip force exerted for
manipulating an inverted T-shaped object whose center of mass was
changed across blocks of consecutive trials. For both experiments,
subjects were asked to grasp the object at either predetermined or
self-selected grasp locations (“constrained” and “unconstrained”
task, respectively). Experiment 1 successfully validated the use of
RMSE and CWT as they correctly distinguished trials with versus without force corrective responses. RMSE and CWT also revealed that grip force is characterized by more feedback-driven
corrections when grasping at self-selected contact points. Future
work will examine the application of our analytical approaches
to a broader range of tasks, e.g., assessment of recovery of sensorimotor function following clinical intervention, interlimb differences in force control, and force coordination in human–machine
interactions.
Index Terms—Continuous wavelet transform (CWT), feedback,
feedforward, hand, sensorimotor memory.

I. INTRODUCTION
ENSORIMOTOR control of precision grip has been extensively studied over the past three decades. A typical experimental task consists of grasping, lifting, holding, and replacing

S

Manuscript received April 18, 2014; revised October 20, 2014 and November
25, 2014; accepted December 27, 2014. Date of publication December 27,
2014; date of current version April 17, 2015. This work was supported by a
Collaborative Research under Grant BCS-1153034 from the National Science
Foundation. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
K. Mojtahedi and Q. Fu are with the Neural Control of Movement Laboratory,
School of Biological and Health Systems Engineering, Arizona State University.
* M. Santello is with the Neural Control of Movement Laboratory, School of
Biological and Health Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ 85287-9709 USA (e-mail: marco.santello@asu.edu).
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 236 KB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2388592

an instrumented grip device using the thumb and index fingertip
[1]. This paper has shown that humans learn to anticipate the
forces required to manipulate an object after a few object lifts
[2]–[4]. Specifically, grip forces scale to object weight before
somatosensory information is available to influence motor commands, hence the definition of “preprogrammed” grip forces [5],
[6]. Furthermore, this anticipatory force control is influenced by
“sensorimotor memories” that are built and updated as subjects
acquire implicit knowledge of the object’s physical properties
(weight or mass distribution) through previous manipulations
[4], [7]–[10].
It has been proposed that precision grips are controlled by
feedforward and feedback control mechanisms. The role of
feedforward control is to preset grip (normal) and load (vertical) forces during lifting. This control mechanism is considered
critically important for dexterous control of grasping and manipulation as it bypasses sensory feedback delays [11]. The feedback control is essential for sensorimotor learning, as well as
maintenance and updating of feedforward control. Specifically,
sensory feedback is used to change ongoing motor commands
when a mismatch occurs between predicted and actual sensory
consequences of motor commands [1], [12], [13] as well as to
update internal models [14]–[16].
To further characterize and identify the role of feedback and
feedforward mechanisms for the control of movement, several
studies introduced the analysis of the shape of movement or
force trajectories. Specifically, these studies have proposed that
bell-shaped movement velocity or force rate trajectories would
denote feedforward control, whereas a less bell-shaped profile
would indicate feedback-driven corrections. This general theoretical framework emerged from studies of arm movements
[17]–[19], force control mechanisms [20]–[23], and grasping
[5], [6], [13]. With regard to grasping, several studies have reported that when subjects lifted an object with a constant weight
over consecutive trials, grip and load force rate profiles were
characterized by a bell-shaped profile with a single peak. The
facts that grip force rate (GFR) peak is scaled to object mass and
that it occurs before object lift onset, i.e., before subjects can
sense object mass, are considered evidence for anticipatory force
control. Therefore, bell-shaped profiles of GFR are considered
evidence for preprogrammed or feedforward force control [13],
[24]. In contrast, the implementation of feedback-driven force
corrections becomes evident when force rates are not singlepeaked anymore, and thus lose their bell-shaped profiles. This
occurs, for example, when the mass of an object is larger than
expected and, therefore, planned grip and load forces need to
be modified to ensure that the object can be lifted [3], [5], [13],
[25]. Tactile afferents play a key role in detecting the mismatch

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1364

between expected and actual object properties and upgrading
digit forces [1], [26], [27]. Therefore, these studies have revealed that digit force rate signals embed important information
about the underlying neural control mechanisms.
However, to date the observations of existence or absence of
bell-shaped force rate profiles, hence the involvement of feedforward or feedback controls, have been descriptive. Specifically, to
the best of our knowledge, no attempts have been made to quantify digit force rate profiles to compare grasp control strategies
across different task conditions to infer the underlying control
mechanisms. The present study was designed to quantify these
qualitative descriptions of digit force rate profiles. Specifically,
we sought to extract features from GFR to discriminate between
feedback and feedforward force controls.
It should be noted that there might be additional features in
the GFR signal that could be used to gain insight into neural
control of manipulation. Specifically, signal processing methods could be useful for extracting information beyond defining
the absence or presence of bell-shaped force profiles, thus revealing subtler features that might not be apparent in the time
domain. Signal feature extraction is a common problem in various engineering and biomedical applications. Here, we propose
the application of two methods for extracting features from the
GFR. One method consists of fitting a Gaussian function to
GFR and quantifying the goodness of the fit using the rootmean-square error (RMSE). The second approach consists of
applying continuous wavelet transform (CWT), which is based
on the correlation of the GFR signal with a Mexican Hat function. For this approach, we introduced the mean of the ratio of
slow bell-shaped component to the sum of slow and fast bellshaped components (Ravg ) as a CWT feature. Note that RMSE
is a curve fitting method, whereas CWT is a time–frequency domain analysis. By using both approaches on the same set of data
(see below), we aimed to characterize strengths and weaknesses
of each analysis.
RMSE and Ravg were applied to force data measured during two experiments. For Experiment 1, subjects grasped and
lifted an object whose mass was unexpectedly changed across
consecutive trials. This experimental design is the same as that
used by previous studies describing bell-shaped GFR profiles
when object mass was invariant across trials and irregular GFR
profiles—denoting force corrections prior to object lift—when
object mass on trial n was unexpectedly changed relative to trial
n − 1 [13], [25], [28]–[30]. Therefore, we used this protocol to
validate the extent to which the Gaussian and CWT techniques
could quantitatively capture the expected bell-shaped grip force
profiles or their disruption when lifting objects with predictable
or unpredictable mass. For Experiment 2, subjects grasped and
lifted an object with an asymmetrical or symmetrical mass distribution while trying to prevent it from rolling during the lift.
For both experiments, subjects grasped the object at predetermined or self-chosen locations. These tasks are defined
as “constrained” and “unconstrained” grasp, respectively [12].
There has been extensive research on feedforward or feedback
force control probed by presenting subjects with predictable
object properties (e.g., mass) and unexpected changes in object
properties using constrained grasp tasks [31]–[33]. Therefore,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Experiment 1 capitalized on this previous work to validate our
analytical approach and its ability to correctly discriminate trials characterized by feedback-driven force corrections—arising
from an unexpected change in object mass—from those without
such force corrections associated with predictable object mass. It
should be noted that when subjects grasp objects at constrained
points, they can use sensorimotor memory of digit forces used in
previous manipulations and, therefore, can anticipate the necessary forces before acquiring sensory feedback about object
mass or mass distribution, i.e., before object lift [13], [25].
However, object grasping and manipulation during activities of
daily living often occur at unconstrained contacts, i.e., we grasp
objects at different contacts depending on intended use and/or
our knowledge of its properties. Furthermore, as digit placement in unconstrained grasping tasks varies from trial to trial,
subjects have to compensate for such variability by modulating
digit forces to meet manipulation task constraints, e.g., lifting
the object straight to counter an external torque, [12]. Two alternative control mechanisms could mediate such digit force-toposition modulation. The first mechanism would rely on sensory
feedback of digit placement (e.g., vision and/or proprioception
and/or touch) following contact that would then drive positiondependent force modulation. An alternative mechanism would
use sensory feedback of digit placement (vision and/or proprioception) to plan forces in a feedforward fashion before contact.
Experiment 2 was designed to determine whether grasping at
constrained versus unconstrained contacts would involve different force control mechanisms (feedforward and feedback,
respectively) or similar mechanisms (both feedforward) by applying the above Gaussian and/or the CWT techniques.
For Experiment 1, we hypothesized that both RMSE and
CWT would perform similarly well in distinguishing feedbackdriven grip force corrections from preprogrammed force control. This hypothesis was based on the expectation that these
two phenomena should be distinguishable in both time and frequency domains. For Experiments 1 and 2, we hypothesized that
unconstrained grasping, unlike constrained grasping, would be
characterized by a transition from feedback- to feedforwarddriven modulation of grip forces. This expectation was based
on the theoretical framework that subjects initially plan a given
force-position distribution, but subsequently may make force
corrections if the actual and planned digit placement do not
match [12], [34], [35].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subjects
The present paper consists of novel analyses performed on
data obtained from a new experiment (see Experiment 1) and
previously published data [12] (see Experiment 2). For Experiment 1, we tested 24 right-handed subjects (12 males, 12 females; age: 19–24 years). For Experiment 2, 24 right-handed
subjects (12 males, 12 females; age: 20–26 years) were tested.
Hand dominance was self-reported. Subjects had no history or
record of neurological disorders and were naı̈ve to the purpose of the studies. Subjects gave informed written consent
to participate in the experiments, which were approved by the

MOJTAHEDI et al.: EXTRACTION OF TIME AND FREQUENCY FEATURES FROM GRIP FORCE RATES DURING DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION

Institutional Review Board at Arizona State University and were
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
B. Experimental Apparatus
For both Experiments 1 and 2, we used the same grip devices.
These devices have been described in detail in [12]. Briefly, the
grip devices consisted of two custom-made inverted T-shaped
objects, i.e., a graspable vertical block attached to a horizontal
base [see Fig. 1(a), (d)]. For both devices, we asked subjects to
grasp, lift, hold, and replace the objects using thumb and index
fingertip. The only difference between the two grip devices was
that one allowed to be grasped anywhere on its vertical graspable
surfaces (“unconstrained” grasping), whereas the other did not
(“constrained” grasping). Specifically, the graspable surfaces of
the unconstrained grip device consisted of two long parallel bars
(length: 80 mm; width: 30 mm), whereas the graspable surfaces
of the constrained grip device consisted of two collinear circular
plates (diameter 20 mm). For both grip devices, each graspable
surface was mounted on a force/torque transducer [see Fig. 1(b),
(c)]. The weight of the unconstrained device was 436 g and was
25 g heavier than constrained device.
1) Experiment 1: For this experiment, we changed the mass
of each grip device by adding 400 g to the center slot [C,
Fig. 1(a)]. Therefore, the total mass of the “light” and “heavy”
unconstrained object was 436 and 836 g, and 461 and 861 g for
the “light” and “heavy” constrained object, respectively.
2) Experiment 2: In our previous work [12], we used the same
grip devices used for the present study but with slightly different dimensions of graspable surfaces relative to Experiment 1.
Specifically, the graspable surfaces of the unconstrained grip
device were 140-mm long and 22-mm wide [Fig. 1(a), (b)]. For
the constrained grip device, the diameter of the graspable surfaces was 22 mm [Fig. 1(c), (d)]. The design of the grip devices
allowed changes in their center of mass (CM) by adding a mass
(400 g) in one of three slots [L, C, or R in Fig. 1(a), (d)] at the
base of the object. The added mass to the left, center, or right slot
created external torques with respect to the CM of the unloaded
grip device of −255, 0, and 255 N·mm. Note that the definitions
of “left” and “right” CM locations refer to the mass added on the
thumb and index finger side of the grip device, respectively. The
total mass of both grip devices (grip device plus added mass)
was 796 g. A 50-g mass was added in the middle of the object
to eliminate the difference between the weights of the graspable
surfaces of the two grip devices [see Fig. 1(c)] [12].
C. Experimental Tasks
We asked subjects to start the movement to reach the object
placed 30 cm in front of them after a verbal signal from the
experimenter. We instructed subjects to reach, grasp, lift, and
replace the object at a natural speed; to grasp the object with the
thumb and index fingertips and only on the graspable surfaces;
to lift the object vertically to a comfortable height (15–20 cm)
while trying to maintain its vertical alignment, i.e., to minimize
object roll; to hold it for ∼1 s; and to replace it on the table (see
[12] for more details). For both experiments and before starting
data collection, an experimenter demonstrated the task to the
subjects.

1365

1) Experiment 1: Subjects were asked to grasp, lift, hold, and
replace the grip device at a natural speed using the thumb and
index fingertip. Before starting data collection, subjects performed four consecutive trials with the “heavy” followed by
four trials with the “light” object to familiarize with the two
object masses and frictional conditions. After the practice trials,
subjects were informed that first experimental trial would consist of lifting the light object and that for all subsequent trials
object mass would be changed unpredictably [see Fig. 2(a)].
Subjects performed 60 experimental trials. This sequence (eight
practice trials followed by 60 experimental trials) was performed
for both the unconstrained and constrained grip devices. The
order of trials for constrained and unconstrained tasks were randomized within and across subjects. To prevent subjects from
anticipating the change in object mass, view of the object and
mass changes was prevented on each trial and white noise was
played during experiment. Additionally, the experimenter pretended to change mass when two consecutive trials were characterized by same mass.
The pseudorandom changes in object mass were designed
to analyze digit forces across the following pairs of trials: 1)
“heavy” to “light” object (HL) when at least two consecutive
lifts of a heavy object were followed by one lift of the light
object; 2) “light” to “heavy” (LH) when at least two consecutive
lifts of a light object were followed by one lift of the heavy
object; 3) “light” to “light” (LL), and 4) “heavy” to “heavy”
(HH) consisting of two consecutive lifts of the light or heavy
object, respectively [18]. We analyzed nine occurrences of each
of the above pairs of trials.
2) Experiment 2: The CM of the object on a given block
of trials could be located on the left, center, or right side of
the object [see Fig. 2(b)]. When object CM was on the left or
right side of the object, the mass added to its base caused an
external torque. Subjects were asked to grasp and lift the grip
device while minimizing object tilt during the lift. We reported
that subjects learn this task after three lifts by modulating digit
placement and force distribution to generate a “compensatory
torque” as a function of object CM at object lift onset [see 12
for more details]. After practice trials, subjects performed three
blocks of ten consecutive trials per CM location for a total of 30
experimental trials [see Fig. 2(b)]. Subjects were informed that
CM location would remain the same for the entire block of trials.
The experimenter changed object CM across blocks of trials out
of view to prevent subjects from anticipating object CM location.
The sequence of CM blocks of trials was counterbalanced across
subjects. The blocked presentation of trials for each object CM
was used to allow subjects to learn and anticipate the magnitude
and direction of the external torque caused by the added mass
[10], [36].
D. Data Recording
For both experiments, we measured forces and torques
exerted by the thumb and index finger using two six-axis
force/torques sensors [ATI Nano-25 SI-125–3 and ATI Nano-17
SI- 50–0.5 for Experiments 1 and 2, respectively; ATI Industrial
Automation; Fig. 1(b), (c)]. For Experiment 1, object kinematics
was recorded using a motion tracking system (Phase Space, San

1366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 1. Experimental setup. The grip devices consisted of two custom-made inverted T-shaped objects. Subjects could choose digit placement on two long
graspable surfaces ((a), c) in unconstrained device, whereas the constrained device could only be grasped on two small graspable surfaces ((d), c). For both grip
devices, force/torque sensors ((b), (c), d) mounted on either side of a central block ((b), (c), e) to measure the x-, y-, or z-components of forces and torques of
the thumb and index fingers. For Experiment 1, object position was measured by motion tracking system using infrared markers. For Experiment 2, note that the
dimensions of the object was slightly different than shown in the figure (see text for more details) and object position was measured by a magnetic tracker ((a), (d),
a). For the constrained device, a 50-g mass ((c), f) was added to match the weight of both devices. View of sensors was blocked by two panels ((a), (d), b). Units
are in millimeters [15].

Fig. 2. Experimental conditions and tasks. Experiments 1 and 2 consisted of two tasks each, that differed depending on whether subjects could choose where
to grasp the object (unconstrained task) or whether they had to grasp at predetermined locations (constrained task). Twelve subjects performed each task in each
experiment. (a): Experiment 1 consisted of four conditions that differed depending on the object mass presented across two consecutive trials: LL, LH, HH, and
HL. The bold letter denotes the trial preceding the trial used for analysis, whereas the underlined, italicized, and bold letter denotes the trial used for analysis. (b):
Experiment 2 consisted of three conditions that differed depending on the object CM location: left (L), center (C), and right (R). The underlined and italicized
letters denote the last seven trials of the block used for analysis.

Leandro, CA; sampling frequency: 480 Hz). For Experiment
2, object kinematics (position and orientation) was tracked by
a magnetic tracker (Fast track, Polhemus; sampling frequency:
120 Hz) mounted on the top of the vertical block [see Fig. 1(a),
(d)]. Force and torque data were recorded through two analog-todigital converter boards (PCI-6220 DAQ, National Instruments;
sampling rate, 1 kHz). We used custom software (LabView, National Instruments) to synchronize data collection of force and
position data.
E. Data Processing
We resampled position data at the same sampling rate of
the force data, after which both data were run though a

fifth-order Butterworth low-pass filter (cutoff frequency, 30 Hz).
To compute GFR (first derivative of force with respect to time),
the force rate signals were smoothed by a fifth-order, zero-phase
lag, low-pass Butterworth filter (cutoff frequency, 14.5 Hz) [37],
[38]. We processed the data as follows:
1) Grip force was defined as the normal component of each
digit force exerted at the digit center of pressure with
respect to the graspable surfaces;
2) Loading phase was defined as the time between digit
early contact and object lift onset. Digit early contact
was defined as the time at which the sum of grip force
exerted by both digits crossed a threshold of 0.1 N and
remained above it for 200 ms. Object lift onset was defined as the time at which the vertical position of the grip

MOJTAHEDI et al.: EXTRACTION OF TIME AND FREQUENCY FEATURES FROM GRIP FORCE RATES DURING DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION

1367

device crossed a threshold of 5 mm and remained above
it for 200 ms.
F. Curve Fitting: Gaussian Function
We fitted a Gaussian function to the time course of GFR data
to quantify the extent to which its shape resembled a bell shape
typical of preprogrammed force control. This analysis was applied after amplitude-normalization of GFR during the loading
phase. To quantify the extent to which GFR was characterized
by a bell-shaped profile, we computed the RMSE between the
best-fitted Gaussian function (below) and the time course of
normalized GFR data.
We estimated three parameters: The amplitude of the peak
of the Gaussian function (a), the time of the peak (b), and the
width of the function (c), as follows:
f (t) = a exp((t − b)/c)2 ).

(1)

We applied the method of nonlinear least squares to estimate
these three parameters. We used the syntax command of “Fit”
from the model-based calibration toolbox of MATLAB software
to implement our curve fitting.

Fig. 3. Mexican Hat waveform. The Mexican Hat waveform approximates a
bell-shaped profile. The correlation or the inner product of a signal with the
Mexican Hat waveform shown here will yield the spectral component of the
signal at the frequency of 2.5 Hz, which corresponds to the scale (s) of 100 and
translational time (τ ) of 0.

TABLE I
PSEUDOFREQUENCIES OF DIFFERENT SCALES
Fast bell-shaped functions

G. Continuous Wavelet Transform
To extract further features from the normalized GFR data in
the time–frequency domain, we used CWT. A wavelet (small
wave) is a window function of finite length with an average
value of zero. A “mother” wavelet is a prototype for generating
other window functions that differ in terms of their dilation
or compression (scale, s) relative to the mother wavelet and
translation in time (τ ).
The CWT is the integral of GFR (h(t)) over the duration of
the loading phase multiplied by the scaled and shifted versions
of the wavelet function


 +∞
t−τ
1
∗
h(t)ψ
dt.
(2)
H(s, τ ) = √
s
s −∞
As seen in (2), the transformed signal (H(s,τ )) is a function
of two variables, s and τ , the scale and translation parameters,
respectively. ψ(t) is the transforming function, i.e., the mother
wavelet. CWT coefficients can be regarded as the inner product
of the signal with a basis function ψ ∗ ((t − τ )/s). If the signal
has a spectral component that corresponds to the value of s,
the product of the wavelet with the signal at the location τ
(translational time) where this spectral component exists gives
a relatively large value.
The scale is inversely proportional to the frequency in which
a larger scale value gives a smaller frequency and vice versa,
thus forming the pseudofrequency equation
f0 .fs
(3)
s
where f0 is a wavelet central frequency of the mother wavelet
function and fs is the sampling frequency. Throughout the
manuscript, we will use the term “frequency” to refer to pseudofrequency.
In this study, we considered a “Mexican Hat” waveform as the
mother wavelet (see Fig. 3), which is the negative normalized
fpseudo =

Lower
scales
Scale
(unitless)

17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
27.5

Slow bell-shaped functions

Higher
frequencies

Shorter
periods

Higher
scales

Lower
frequencies

Longer
periods

Pseudo
frequency
(Hz)

Period
duration
(ms)

Scale
(unitless)

Pseudo
frequency
(Hz)

Period
duration
(ms)

14.28
12.500
11.11
10.00
9.09

70
80
90
100
110

80
90
100
110
120

3.125
2.77
2.50
2.27
2.08

320
360
400
440
480

second derivative of a Gaussian function approximating a bellshaped profile.
We consider two types of the bell-shaped function (Mexican
Hat waveform): “slow” and “fast.” The slow bell-shaped function is equivalent to the lower frequency (or higher scale) or
longer period. Conversely, a fast bell-shape, which means that
the Mexican Hat is faster or has a shorter duration, is related to
higher frequency (lower scale) or shorter period. Table I shows
the pseudofrequencies associated with each scale. We defined
the slow bell-shaped component (S(τ )) in (4) as the average
of five scales of slow bell-shaped functions. Similarly, the fast
bell-shaped component (F(τ )) is defined in (5).
It is necessary to define a feature which includes the
information of both fast and slow bell-shaped components. We
defined the percentage ratio (R(τ ) in (6)) of slow bell-shaped
component to the sum of slow (S(τ )) and fast (F(τ )) bell-shaped
components and computed the average of R(τ ) (Ravg ) over
translational time during the loading phase. Similar to Ravg , we
calculated Savg (the average of S(τ )) and Favg (the average of
F(τ ))
1
H(s = (70 + i × 10), τ )
5 i=1
5

Slow : S(τ ) ≡

(4)

1368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1
H(s = (15 + i × 2.5), τ )
5 i=1

(5)

S(τ )
× 100.
S(τ ) + F (τ )

(6)

5

Fast : F (τ ) ≡
Ratio : R(τ ) ≡

As the GFR data is filtered with a cutoff frequency of 14.5 Hz
(see Data Processing), the smallest scale (or highest frequency)
of the fast bell-shaped component (see (5)) is 17.5 (14.28 Hz).
The largest scale (or lowest frequency) in the fast bell-shaped
component was defined based on the scale or frequency at which
Favg of GFR from LH trials was statistically significantly larger
than LL or HH trials. The choice of scales for the slow bellshaped component (5) should take into account any scale within
the range of the loading phase duration. We found that Savg
was significantly different for all pairwise comparisons of trial
combinations (p = 0.001).
H. Statistical Analysis
For Experiment 1, we performed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with repeated measures on RMSE, Ravg , Savg , and
Favg with one within-subject factor (Trial; pair of trials with
the same or different mass: LL, LH, HH, and HL; four levels)
and one between-subject factor (Task; constrained and unconstrained group, two levels). For all trial pairs, we analyzed the
second trial of the pair. For LH and HL, the second trial is
the trial on which the object mass was unexpectedly changed
[see Fig. 2(a)].
For Experiment 2, we performed ANOVA with repeated measures on RMSE and Ravg with one within-subject factor (CM;
three levels: left, center, and right) and one between-subject factor (Task). We used the mean of the last seven trials of each CM
[see Fig. 2(b)] as they represent learned trials [12].
When the assumption of sphericity was violated in the
ANOVAs, we used Greenhouse-Geisser. Comparisons of interest for statistically significant differences (p = 0.05) were
further analyzed using post hoc tests with Bonferroni’s corrections. Statistical analysis was performed using IBM Sciences
Statistical Package for the Social Statistics.
III. RESULTS
A. Curve Fitting: RMSE
We fitted the best Gaussian function to the normalized GFR
of the thumb during the loading phase on each trial of the constrained and unconstrained task, and computed the RMSE between the fitted curve and GFR from Experiments 1 and 2. The
magnitude of RMSE is inversely proportional to the extent to
which GFR resembles a bell-shape profile.
1) Experiment 1: Fig. 4(a), (c) shows the time course of
thumb grip force for a light object and a heavy object trial
both preceded by a light object (LL and LH trials, respectively)
from one subject performing a constrained grasp task. The GFR
associated with lifting a light object after a light object is well
fitted by a Gaussian function [see Fig. 4(b)]. In contrast, when
object mass was unexpectedly changed after lifting a light object
(LH), the time course of the GFR is not well described by

bell-shaped profile [see Fig. 4(d)]. As a result, RMSE computed
on LH is approximately four times larger for than LL (0.054
and 0.014, respectively).
The pattern described for an individual subject was common
to all subjects as indicated by a significantly larger RMSE in
LH than LL (p = 0.010) and HH (p = 0.001). No significant
difference was found in RMSE when comparing LL and HH
(p = 1.000; see Fig. 6(a)). Therefore, trials that did not elicit a
change in GFR, i.e., two consecutive trials with the same mass
(LL and HH), were characterized by a profile that resembled a
bell shape to a greater extent than trials preceded by a different
mass, as subjects changed the rate of digit force development
during the loading phase. These results confirm previous qualitative observations (see Section I) and validate the use of RMSE
computed on the Gaussian fit to GFR for correctly discriminating trials with versus without feedback-driven force corrections.
RMSE was also significantly larger in the unconstrained than
constrained task [F(1,22) = 7.714, p = 0.011; see Fig. 6(c)].
We also found a main effect of Trial [F(1.963,43.176) = 8.368,
p = 0.001; see Fig. 6(a)], whereas the interaction between Task
and Trial was not statistically significant (p = 0.383).
2) Experiment 2: Fig. 5 shows the time course of thumb grip
force for a constrained and unconstrained grasp task (A, B and
C, D, respectively), each performed by a subject on an object
with the left and right CM. The GFR associated with the constrained task is well fitted by a Gaussian function for both object
CM [see Fig. 5(a), (b)], whereas the GFR associated with the
unconstrained task was not for either object CM [see Fig. 5(c),
(d)]. For the two subjects shown in Fig. 5, RMSE computed
on the unconstrained task is approximately seven to eight times
larger than for the constrained task (left CM: 0.046 and 0.006,
respectively; right CM: 0.014 and 0.002, respectively).
RMSE was not significantly different across object CM [no
significant main effect of CM or interaction with Task: p = 0.395
and 0.647, respectively; see Fig. 6(b)]. GFR from the constrained
task was better described by a bell-shaped profile than the unconstrained task [see Fig. 6(d)]. Statistical analysis revealed
that RMSE was significantly smaller for the constrained than
unconstrained task (F(1,22) = 4.419, p = 0.047).
B. Continuous Wavelet Transform: R(t)
In this section, we describe the results of the CWT method
applied to the GFR from Experiments 1 and 2. The goal of this
analysis was to obtain a feature that could quantify the correlation between the normalized GFR and a bell-shaped function
(Mexican Hat; (2)). The CWT coefficients represent this correlation in time and scale (or frequency) domains.
1) Experiment 1: Fig. 7 shows the CWT coefficients associated with GFR for a light object trial preceded by a light object
trial [LL, see Fig. 7(a)]. In this example, CWT coefficients are
larger at larger scales (lower frequencies) than a heavy object
trial preceded by a light object trial [LH, see Fig. 7(b)], i.e., the
red color of coefficients within the scale 80–100 for LL extends
over a larger area than coefficients computed on the LH trial.
This result implies that this LL trial is correlated to a stronger
degree with the larger scale. Furthermore, the CWT coefficients

MOJTAHEDI et al.: EXTRACTION OF TIME AND FREQUENCY FEATURES FROM GRIP FORCE RATES DURING DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION

1369

Fig. 4. Bell-shaped curve fitting: LL and LH trial pairs. The time course of thumb grip force from the second trial of the “LL” condition and “HL” condition are
shown in (a) and (c), respectively. Normalized GFRs computed on the same data are shown in (b) and (d), respectively, together with the Gaussian function that
generated the best fit to GFR from contact to object lift onset (vertical dashed lines), and corresponding RMSE of the fit. Note the four times higher RMSE for LH
than LL condition, denoting a less bell-shaped GFR profile for the former condition where object mass was unexpectedly increased. Data in (a), (b), (c), and (d)
are from the same subject.

Fig. 5. Bell-shaped curve fitting: Constrained and unconstrained tasks. The time course of normalized thumb GFR from the constrained task is shown in (a) and
(b) (left and right CM, respectively) and from the unconstrained task is shown in (c) and (d) (left and right CM, respectively). Normalized GFRs are shown together
with the Gaussian function that generated the best fit to GFR from contact to object lift onset (vertical dashed lines), and corresponding RMSE of the fit. Note the
sevenfold higher RMSE for unconstrained than constrained task for both centers of mass, denoting a less bell-shaped GFR profile for the former condition where
subjects could choose contact points on the object. Data from each task is from two subjects.

1370

Fig. 6. RMSE of Gaussian fit to GFR (all subjects). The RMSE of the Gaussian
fit to GFR is shown for the experimental conditions of Experiment 1 (trial pairs;
(a)) and Experiment 2 (object CM; (b)) for constrained and unconstrained tasks.
(c) and (d): RMSE computed on data pooled across trial pairs and object CM,
respectively. LL, LH, HH, and HL denote data from the second trial of light–
light, light–heavy, heavy–heavy, and heavy–light trial pairs, respectively. L, C,
and R denote left, center, and right CM, respectively. Data are means averaged
across all subjects. Vertical bars denote standard errors of the mean. Asterisks
indicate a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05).

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

alent to the lower frequency (or higher scale) or longer period.
Conversely, a fast bell-shape, which means that the Mexican
Hat is faster or has a shorter duration, is related to higher frequency (lower scale) or shorter period. In sum, the time-to-time
corrections of grip force from contact to object lift onset lead
to oscillations in GFR which can be projected on the fast bellshaped profile captured by CWT. Therefore, a larger number of
grip force corrections as they occur in LH trials [see Fig. 7(b)],
GFR will be characterized by more oscillations, hence stronger
correlations with fast bell shape.
The above difference in GFR from two pairs of consecutive
trials can be quantified by (4)–(6), where S(t) and F(t) represent
the slow and fast bell-shaped components, respectively. Hence,
we can use the ratio (R(t)) of slow bell-shaped component to
the sum of slow and fast bell-shaped components, i.e., S(t) over
S(t) + F(t), to quantify differences among experimental trials.
In sum, a larger R(t) would denote that there are less oscillations or corrections in the GFR signal and, thus, that it is
more bell shaped. For the example shown in Fig. 7, S(t) of the
LL trial is larger than S(t) of the LH trial [compare the intensity at higher scales, i.e., 80, of the absolute values of CWT
coefficients from Fig. 7(a) versus (b)]. Furthermore, the F(t)
of the LL trial is smaller than F(t) of the LH trials [compare
the intensity at lower scales, i.e., 20, of Fig. 7(a) versus (b)].
Therefore, R(t) of the LL trial would be larger than R(t) of the
LH trial.
2) Experiment 2: Fig. 8 shows the transformed signal of
GFR for constrained and unconstrained tasks (top and bottom
row plots, respectively) of left and right CMs (see Fig. 8(a), (b),
respectively). CWT coefficients obtained from the constrained
and unconstrained task can be interpreted as described above
for data from Experiment 1. Specifically, for both CMs, the
magnitude of the CWT coefficients for the constrained task is
higher within the scale 80–100 than the unconstrained task.
Conversely, CWT coefficients within the scale 20–30 are larger
for the unconstrained than constrained task.
C. CWT Analysis With Average Coefficients: Savg , Favg ,
and Ravg

Fig. 7. Continuous wavelet transformation: LL and LH trial pairs. The transformed signal of normalized GFR is a function of the scale and translation
parameters (s and τ , respectively) of the Mexican Hat waveform. Larger values
of CWT coefficients indicate that a signal has a spectral component at those
particular values of s and τ . The absolute values of CWT coefficients of normalized GFR were obtained for the second trial of the LL and LH trials ((a)
and (b), respectively) and are plotted in two dimensions. The CWT coefficients
computed on the LL trial are larger at the higher scale than the LH trial, whereas
CWT coefficients from the LH trial are larger at lower scales than the LL trial.
Note that the duration of the loading phase was time normalized in order to plot
the CWT coefficients. Data are from the same subject and trials shown in Fig. 4.

of LH trials exhibit stronger correlations with lower scales than
the LL trial, i.e., the light blue of coefficients within the scale
20–30 for LH trial extends over a larger area than coefficients
computed on the LL trial.
The fast and slow types of the bell-shaped function can be
interpreted using Table I. The slow bell-shaped function is equiv-

1) Experiment 1: Savg was not significantly different across
tasks (F(1,22) = 3.974, p = 0.059). However, we found statistically significant differences in Savg across trial pairs (main effect
of Trial; F(3,66) = 83.021, p = 0.001), but no significant interaction between Task and Trial (F(3,66) = 0.365, p = 1.077).
Savg was smallest for LH, increasingly larger for HH and LL,
and largest for HL. All pairwise comparisons between Trials
revealed significant differences (p = 0.001 for all comparisons).
These results indicate that the general bell shape of GFR
during the loading phase can be captured by Savg (correlation
between the slow bell-shaped profile and GFR in the range of
320–480 ms, see (4) and Table I).
There was no significant difference between tasks for
Favg (F(1,22) = 0.009, p = 0.926). Although the assumption
of sphericity was violated for the repeated measure design, ANOVA revealed a significant difference between Trial
(F(2.127,46.791) = 13.780, p = 0.001) but not a significant

MOJTAHEDI et al.: EXTRACTION OF TIME AND FREQUENCY FEATURES FROM GRIP FORCE RATES DURING DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION

1371

Fig. 8. Continuous wavelet transformation: Constrained and unconstrained tasks. The transformed signals of normalized thumb GFRs in the constrained task
from the trial of the left and right CM condition are shown in (a) and (b), respectively. Similarly, the transformed signals of GFR in the unconstrained task are
shown in (c) and (d), respectively. The CWT coefficients computed on the constrained task are larger at the higher scale than the unconstrained task, but CWT
coefficients from the unconstrained task are larger at lower scales than the constrained task. Note that the duration of the loading phase was time normalized in
order to plot the CWT coefficients. Data are from the same subject and trials shown in Fig. 5.

interaction between Trial and Task (F(2.127,46.791) = 2.769,
p = 0.070). Favg was smallest for HH, increasingly larger for
LL and HL, and largest for LH. All pairwise comparisons of
Trials revealed significant difference with the exception of HL
versus LL and LH (p = 1.000 and 0.174, respectively). We
found that Favg of the LH trial was significantly larger than
Favg from LL and HH trials (p = 0.044 and p = 0.001, respectively). We found Favg from HH was significantly smaller than
LL (p = 0.004). These results show that grip force corrections
in LH trials can be captured by Favg (correlation between the
fast bell-shaped profile and GFR in the range of 70–110 ms, see
(5) and Table I).
We found that Ravg from the LH Trial was significantly
smaller than Ravg from LL, HH, and HL trials (p = 0.001 for
all comparisons). This result indicates that the LH trial could not
be well described by a slow bell-shaped function (larger F(t))
as well as the other three trial pairs. Furthermore, no significant
difference was found when comparing LL and HH [p = 1.000;
see Fig. 9(a)]. These results are consistent with the expected
findings of similar GFR on the trial preceded by the same mass
(LL and HH) and less bell-shaped GFR on trials preceded by a
different mass, hence a smaller value of Ravg . The constrained
task was characterized by a significantly larger Ravg value than
the unconstrained task [see Fig. 9(b)]. Ravg was significantly
larger for the constrained than unconstrained task (F(1,22) =
5.894, p = 0.024) and significantly larger across trial pairs (main
effect of Trial; F(3,66) = 40.850, p = 0.000), but there was no
significant interaction between Task and Trial (F(3,66) = 0.364,
p = 0.780).
2) Experiment 2: We found that Ravg was significantly larger
for the constrained than the unconstrained task (F(1,22) = 5.003,
p = 0.036), although there was no significant main effect of CM
(F(2,44) = 0.880, p = 0.422) or interaction between these two
factors (F(2,44) = 0.444, p = 0.644) [see Fig. 9(b), (d)].

Fig. 9. R av g of CWT on GFR (all subjects). The R av g of CWT of GFR
is shown across trial pair and CM conditions (Experiment 1, left column, and
Experiment 2, right column, respectively) for the constrained and unconstrained
conditions. Data are shown in the same format as Fig. 6.

D. Temporal Evolution of Coefficients
At last, we evaluated the effect of temporal resolution of Ravg
on the ability of Ravg to identify transition time points in control
mechanisms during the loading phase in LL versus LH trials for
constrained and unconstrained tasks. By testing several window
sizes or window numbers (e.g., 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, and 20) on the
temporal evolution of CWT coefficients, we were able to identify
the epoch within 55% to 65% of the time-normalized loading
phase as the best candidate for the transition time point for both
tasks. Importantly, for all of the above temporal resolutions, we
found no significant difference in Ravg between constrained and
unconstrained tasks in the first 50% of loading phase (for details
refer to Supplemental Materials and Fig. S1).

1372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

IV. DISCUSSION
Previous work has assessed qualitatively GFR during the
loading phase of grasping and manipulation to distinguish feedback from feedforward control of digit forces, the former case
being characterized by a bell-shaped GFR profile. However,
without a formal definition or quantitative assessment of what
should be considered a “‘bell shape” profile, this approach is limited because it cannot objectively determine whether and when
such profile exists, or differences among GFR profiles across
trials or tasks. The purpose of the present study was to validate and test two novel features of GFR: RMSE and Ravg that
could objectively quantify and discriminate bell-shaped versus
nonbell-shaped GFR profiles. Specifically, we first validated the
application of time- and time–frequency-domain techniques using a classic task where object mass was unpredictably changed
across trials. This validation was performed to ensure that our
features could correctly identify trials predominantly characterized by corrective versus preprogrammed force responses.
We then applied our features to analyze GFR used in a manipulation task performed with and without contact constraints.
The results revealed that the latter scenario is characterized by
feedback-driven corrective forces responses to a greater extent
than constrained grasping. We discuss these findings and the application of the above techniques to the analysis of digit forces
and control strategies for dexterous manipulation.
A. Validation of Time- and Frequency-Domain Techniques for
Feature Extraction From GFR
1) RMSE Feature: Previous work has described feedbackdriven force responses when lifting an object heavier than
expected (LH), and preprogrammed digit forces (bell-shaped
GFR) for consecutive lifts with the same object mass (LL and
HH) [13], [35], [38], [39]. We found that the previously described bell-shaped profiles of GFR for expected object mass,
and irregularly shaped GFR for unexpected changes in object
mass, could be correctly identified by the RMSE obtained from
fitting a Gaussian function to GFR [see Fig. 6(a).
2) Ravg Feature: The present study also investigated whether
there might be additional GFR features that, similar to RMSE,
not only could distinguish trials based on the lack or occurrence of feedback-driven force responses but could also provide
additional information. The Ravg feature was identified as a potentially useful feature to quantify the correlation between the
time course of GFR with a Mexican Hat function, i.e., an ideal
bell-shaped function. We found that the Ravg feature applied on
the GFR from LL and LH trials was able to detect not only the
occurrence of corrective force responses but also their timing
and intensity [see Figs. 7–9].
It is worth mentioning that Savg or Favg are not sufficiently
sensitive features for identifying sensorimotor control processes
when used in isolation. This is because neither feature contains
the complete frequency information of GFR and thus can only
represent partial information, e.g., low (or high) frequency. As
a result, neither Savg nor Favg could reliably discriminate constrained from unconstrained tasks as Ravg could, or correctly
identify HH and LL as being similar. The sensitivity of these

two features was optimized when they were combined as ratio,
Ravg .
B. Comparison Between RMSE Versus Ravg
Fitting a Gaussian function to GFR allowed us to assign
an RMSE value to each force rate signal and compare trials
within and across tasks. Even though this approach is a timedomain method and could correctly differentiate between trials
with and without online force corrections [see Fig. 6(a)], a single value (goodness of fit) cannot provide valuable information
such as when force corrections start or their intensity. As an example, Fig. 7(b) shows a twofold difference in intensity across
two time points (0.2 and 0.8) at the frequency of 9.09 Hz (scale
80).
The time–frequency analysis (CWT) can provide all the information provided by the RMSE obtained from the Gaussian fit.
Additionally, however, CWT can assess quantitatively the temporal evolution of digit force rates. Therefore, the CWT method
is superior to Gaussian fit. However, we reported the result of
the Gaussian fit method as an approach that would be easy to
interpret in the context of the literature that has described the
existence of absence of bell-shaped GFR profiles.
C. Insights Provided by CWT Approach
Our CWT approach provided five insights that have not been
described in the literature on force control for grasping and
manipulation.
1) Temporal characteristics of GFR: Ravg is a novel feature
based on the ratio of slow bell-shaped component to the
sum of slow and fast bell-shaped components that can
capture the temporal characteristics of GFR. This feature
was justified by two components, one associated with the
loading phase (general bell shape from contact to object
lift onset; see Table I, (4)), and one associated with fast
force corrections (see Table I, (5)).We found that Favg is
significantly larger in LH trials than LL trials. Therefore,
CWT could capture grip force corrections in LH trials
by identifying the best correlation between the fast bellshaped profile and GFR. Based on (5), we also know that
these fast bell-shaped components are in the range of 70–
110 ms. This range is consistent with the delay associated
with sensorimotor feedback loop of tactile afferents [1],
[39], [40]. Therefore, the fast bell-shaped component of
CWT is compatible with physiological delays of corrective force responses embedded in the GFR.
2) Frequency components of GFR: Our CWT approach can
be used to extract the slow and fast frequency components
of GFR. Specifically, a fast bell-shaped profile is equivalent to high-frequency responses and can, therefore, be
interpreted as high-frequency fluctuations in GFR (see
Table I, (5)). Conversely, for more bell-shaped GFR profiles, the fast bell-shaped components decrease and interdependently, the slow bell-shaped components increase
[see Fig. 7(a), (b)].
3) Frequency components of control mechanisms: This study
determined the GFR frequency components associated

MOJTAHEDI et al.: EXTRACTION OF TIME AND FREQUENCY FEATURES FROM GRIP FORCE RATES DURING DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION

with preprogrammed and feedback-mediated force control mechanisms. Specifically, CWT revealed that the intensity of higher frequency GFR components was larger
for LH than LL or HH trials. Conversely, the intensity
of lower frequency GFR components was larger when
planned grip force development matched the expected object mass.
4) Identification of transition time points in control mechanisms: Ravg feature could describe the temporal evolution of the combination (ratio) between feedback and
feedforward force controls. Specifically, constrained and
unconstrained tasks in both experiments revealed that the
relative role of feedforward and feedback mechanisms
changes from ∼60% of the time-normalized loading phase
to object lift onset of the loading phase (see Supplemental
Materials, Fig. S1). This finding extends the sensorimotor control point framework [1], [13], [25] in important
ways by identifying when the initial feedforward force
development starting at contact merges with a feedbackmediated force control (55–65% of loading phase) for the
unconstrained task in both experiments. Hence, the combination of feedback and feedforward force controls after
∼60% of loading phase appears to rely more on feedback
in the unconstrained than constrained task. However, the
combination of feedback and feedforward force controls
is similar for both tasks in the first half of the loading
phase. Note that the ∼60% transition point appears to be
independent of object properties/experimental condition
and mainly reflects whether the object is grasped at constrained versus unconstrained contacts (see Supplemental
Materials).
5) Adjustable temporal resolution of GFR analysis: The continuous method of wavelet transform allows the adjustment of number of windows in order to determine the
time point(s) at which a given control mechanism starts
to operate. For the present study, the systematic analysis
of the effect of number/size of time windows allowed the
identification of 55–65% of the time-normalized loading
phase as best candidates for control mechanism transition point for constrained and unconstrained tasks (see
Supplemental Materials and Fig. S1).
D. Digit Force Control Underlying Constrained
and Unconstrained Grasping Tasks
It has been pointed out that a given manipulation can be
performed by changing the neural drive of hand muscles to
modulate digit forces [41] and/or applying digit forces at different locations on the object [12], [36]. For objects with symmetrical mass distribution (Experiment 1; center CM, Experiment 2), when subjects could choose digit placement, thumb
and index finger were placed collinearly as to avoid generating torques while lifting the object [12]. However, for objects
with an asymmetrical mass distribution (left and right CM, Experiment 2), subjects had to generate a compensatory torque at
object lift onset, which is a function of both digit forces and
positions, whereas for constrained grasping, the compensatory
torque is a function of digit forces only [12]. Most importantly,

1373

unconstrained grasping is characterized by trial-to-trial variability in digit placement, which requires trial-to-trial modulation of
digit forces such that a given compensatory torque can be generated in a consistent fashion. When changing grip type from one
trial to the next, e.g., from two- to three-digit grip, subjects are
required to modulate digit force distribution to an even greater
extent than when grasping an object with the same number of
digits on consecutive trials [34]. Remarkably, subjects are able
to effectively modulate digit forces in both of these scenarios
[12], [34]. Our recent work has further extended these results by
showing that digit force modulation to position results from interactions between feedforward planning of digit forces is based
on visual estimation of object size and haptic feedback [35].
These findings led us to propose that grasping at unconstrained contacts must rely on 1) sensing digit placement and
2) transforming sensory feedback about the relative position of
the digits into forces that are appropriate to generate the desired
compensatory torque. Experiment 2 sought to identify force development arising from 2) by comparing unconstrained versus
constrained grasping. The rationale for such comparison is that
constrained grasping does not require sensing of actual digit position for modulating digit forces, as these can be consistently
generated on each trial in a fairly stereotypical fashion by relying on sensorimotor memories [12], [34]. In contrast, and as
pointed out above, grasp performance would significantly degrade if the CNS could not compensate digit placement variability with appropriate force modulation. It should be emphasized
that an alternative framework could account for subjects’ ability to perform manipulation at unconstrained contacts: Subjects
could plan digit forces and position before making contact with
the object. If this were the case, one would predict that grip
force should develop in a similar fashion for constrained and
unconstrained grasping. Both of our features, RMSE and Ravg ,
support the theoretical framework of feedback-driven corrective force responses following object contact for unconstrained
grasping. Specifically, the RMSE feature revealed that GFRs
were better fitted by a Gaussian function for constrained than
unconstrained grasping (see Fig. 6). The CWT approach confirmed this observation, and the Ravg feature further revealed
that the constrained task is characterized by significantly smaller
fast bell-shaped components and larger slow bell-shaped components than the unconstrained task (see Fig. 9). In both experiments, we found two similar findings: 1) GFR is controlled
through similar combinations of feedback and feedforward force
control during the first 50% of normalized loading phase (same
Ravg ; see Supplemental Materials Fig. S1); and 2) for the constrained task, GFR control is dominated by feedforward control
in the last 40% of normalized loading phase (see Supplemental
Materials, Fig. S1), whereas the unconstrained task GFR control
appears to rely to a greater extent on feedback control (please
refer to Supplemental Materials).
The present findings represent the first experimental evidence
in support of the hypothesis that grasping at unconstrained contacts on an object is characterized by more grip force corrections
than grasping at constrained contacts. Furthermore, our Ravg allowed us to determine the time course of the transition from a
purely anticipatory to a more feedback-driven grip force control
(for more details please refer to Supplemental Materials).

1374

E. Methodological Consideration and Data Interpretation
It should be emphasized that the interpretation of the
difference in GFR between constrained and unconstrained
grasping—i.e., the unconstrained task being characterized by
more feedback-driven force corrections than the constrained
task—is based uniquely on the theoretical framework described
in Section I and how bell-shaped force rates are interpreted in
the motor neuroscience literature, rather than the proposed analytical techniques. Although other techniques might be able
to quantify the extent to which GRF might resemble a bellshaped profile, the choice of our techniques was motivated by
the need to extract features that could identify differences in
grip force control across task conditions. Specifically, the main
objectives of the feature extraction methods we propose were
1) to identify differences in timing and magnitude of force corrections across task conditions, and 2) the extent to which these
force corrections may cause the time course of GFR to deviate
from a “bell-shaped” profile typically associated with ballistic
movement velocity or force rate trajectories.
The present study first validated that a Gaussian fit and CWT
applied to GFR can reliably identify differences in grip force
control (see Experiment 1). Note that previous studies in the literature have not provided any quantitative assessment of GFR
profiles. Such validation allowed us to apply these techniques to
quantify the extent to which grip force development resembles
a bell-shaped profile in grasping at constrained versus unconstrained contacts (see Experiments 1 and 2).
F. Conclusion and Biomedical Engineering Applications
The main contribution of the present study to biomedical engineering consists of a novel approach to quantify the temporal
interactions between feedforward and feedback control of force.
Although the present data focused on digit forces associated
with dexterous manipulation, the impact of our study extends
to a wide variety of motor tasks by capitalizing on a universal feature of human motor control, i.e., the shape of endpoint
trajectories, joint angle excursion, and/or force rate.
The proposed analytical approach can be used not only to
address questions about mechanisms underlying neural control
of force, but also for clinical applications. Examples of these
applications include the study of the effects of neurological
disorders or peripheral neuropathies as a function of disease
severity or to quantify the effectiveness of medical intervention,
e.g., sensorimotor functional recovery in individuals affected
by carpal tunnel syndrome following surgical intervention [42].
An important biomedical engineering application is the identification of brain areas responsible for feedback and feedforward
force control to target for noninvasive brain stimulation, e.g.,
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Specifically, TMSinduced “virtual lesions” can be elicited to identify the cortical
areas responsible for implementing corrective or anticipatory
force responses, as well as their temporal interactions. This
is a significant application of our approach in the context of
noninvasive brain stimulation techniques for rehabilitation of
sensorimotor function [43]–[45]. Another biomedical application of our technique is the quantification of how humans adapt

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

to control forces when physically interacting with rehabilitation
robotic devices, i.e., exoskeletons. This is a very active area of
biomedical engineering research that would benefit from a detailed characterization of how humans respond, through voluntary or reflex muscle activation, to motion induced by external
devices, as well as how they adapt to different parameters of
physical interactions [46]–[48].

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. D. Frakes for advice on
the applications of CWT analysis.

REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Johansson and J. R. Flanagan, “Coding and use of tactile signals
from the fingertips in object manipulation tasks,” Nature Rev. Neurosci.,
vol. 10, pp. 345–359, 2009.
[2] A. M. Gordon et al., “Visual size cues in the programming of manipulative
forces during precision grip,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 477–482,
1991.
[3] A. M. Gordon et al., “The integration of haptically acquired size information in the programming of precision grip,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 83,
no. 3, pp. 483–488, 1991.
[4] J. R. Flanagan et al., “Sensorimotor prediction and memory in object
manipulation,” Can. J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 87–95, 2001.
[5] P. Jenmalm and R. S. Johansson, “Visual and somatosensory information
about object shape control manipulative fingertip forces,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 4486–4499, 1997.
[6] A. M. Gordon et al., “Memory representations underlying motor commands used during manipulation of common and novel objects,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 1789–1796, 1993.
[7] S. Green et al., “Motor adaptation and manual transfer: Insight into
the persistent nature of sensorimotor representations,” Brain Cognition,
vol. 72, pp. 385–393, 2010.
[8] J. Hermsdorfer et al., “Anticipatory scaling of grip forces when lifting
objects of everyday life,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 212, pp. 19–31, 2011.
[9] L. L. C. D. Bursztyn and J. R. Flanagan, “Sensorimotor memory of
weight asymmetry in object manipulation,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 184,
pp. 127–133, 2008.
[10] J. R. Lukos et al., “Anticipatory control of grasping: independence of
sensorimotor memories for kinematics and kinetics,” J. Neurosci., vol. 28,
no. 48, pp. 12765–12774, 2008.
[11] J. Hermsdörfer et al., “Preserved and impaired aspects of feed-forward grip
force control after chronic somatosensory differentiation,” Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair, vol. 22, pp. 374–384, 2008.
[12] Q. Fu et al., “Anticipatory planning and control of grasp positions and
forces for dexterous two-digit manipulation,” J. Neurosci., vol. 30, no. 27,
pp. 9117–9126, 2010.
[13] R. S. Johansson and G. Westling, “Coordinated isometric muscle commands adequately and erroneously programmed for the weight during
lifting task with precision grip,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 71, pp. 59–71,
1988.
[14] J. R. Flanagan et al., “Sensorimotor prediction and memory in object
manipulation,” Can. J. Exp. Psychol., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 87–95, 2001.
[15] J. R. Flanagan and A. M. Wing, “The role of internal models in motion
planning and control: Evidence from grip force adjustments during movements of hand-held loads,” J. Neurosci., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1519–1528,
1997.
[16] B. M. Quaney et al., “Can internal models of objects be utilized
for different prehension tasks?,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 93, no. 4,
pp. 2021–2027, 2005.
[17] M. Jeannerod, “The timing of natural prehension movements,” J. Motor
Behav., vol. 16, pp. 199–208, 1984.
[18] C. Ghez et al., “Impairments of reaching movements in patients without
proprioception. II. Effects of visual information on accuracy,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 361–372, 1995.
[19] J. Gordon et al., “Impairments of reaching movements in patients without
proprioception. I. Spatial errors,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 73, pp. 347–360,
1995.

MOJTAHEDI et al.: EXTRACTION OF TIME AND FREQUENCY FEATURES FROM GRIP FORCE RATES DURING DEXTEROUS MANIPULATION

[20] C. Ghez, “Contributions of central programs to rapid limb movement in
the cat,” Integration in the Nervous System. Tokyo, Japan: Igaku-Shoin,
1979, pp. 305–319.
[21] J. Gordon and C. Ghez, “EMG patterns in antagonist muscles during
isometric contraction in man: Relations to response dynamics,” Exp. Brain
Res., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 167–171, 1984.
[22] D. S. Vicario and C. Ghez, “The control of rapid limb movement in the
cat. IV. Updating of ongoing isometric responses,” Exp. Brain Res., vol.
55, no. 1, pp. 134–144, 1984.
[23] C. Ghez and J. Gordon, “Trajectory control in targeted force impulses. I.
Role of opposing muscles,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 225–240,
1987.
[24] A. M. Gordon et al., “Development of human precision grip III. Integration
of visual size cues during the programming of isometric forces,” Exp. Brain
Res., vol. 90, p. 399–403, 1992.
[25] P. Jenmalm et al., “Lighter or heavier than predicted: Neural correlates
of corrective mechanisms during erroneously programmed lifts,” J. Neurosci., vol. 26, no. 35, pp. 9015–9021, 2006.
[26] I. Birznieks et al., “Encoding of direction of fingertip forces by human
tactile afferents,” J. Neurosci., vol. 21, no. 20, pp. 8222–8237, 2001.
[27] R. S. Johansson and I. Birznieks, “First spikes in ensembles of human
tactile afferents code complex spatial fingertip events,” Nature Neurosci.,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 170–177, 2004.
[28] H. Forssberg et al., “Development of precision grip. I. Basic coordination
of force,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 85, pp. 451–457, 1991.
[29] H. Forssberg et al., “Development of human precision grip. II. Anticipatory control of isometric forces targeted for object’s weight,” Exp. Brain
Res., vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 393–398, 1992.
[30] A. M. Gordon et al., “Anticipatory control of manipulative forces in
Parkinson’s disease,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 145, no. 2 Pt 1, pp. 477–488,
1997.
[31] J. Lukos et al., “Grasping uncertainty: Effects of sensorimotor memories
on high-level planning of dexterous manipulation,” J. Neurosci., vol. 109,
pp. 2937–2946, 2013.
[32] R. S. Johansson and G. Westling, “Programmed and triggered actions to
rapid load changes during precision grip,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 71, no. 1,
pp. 72–86, 1988.
[33] R. S. Johansson and G. Westling, “Roles of glabrous skin receptors and
sensorimotor memory in automatic control of precision grip when lifting rougher or more slippery objects,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 56, no. 3,
pp. 550–564, 1984.
[34] Q. Fu et al., “Transfer of learned manipulation following changes in
degrees of freedom,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, no. 38, pp. 76–84, 2011.
[35] Q. Fu and M. Santello, “Coordination between digit forces and positions:
Interactions between anticipatory and feedback control,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 111, pp. 1519–1528, 2014.

1375

[36] J. R. Lukos et al., “Choice of contact points during multi digit grasping:
Effect of predictability of object center of mass location,” J. Neurosci.,
vol. 27, no. 14, pp. 3894–3903, 2007.
[37] J. R. Flanagan and M. A. Beltzner, “Independence of perceptual and
sensorimotor predictions in the size-weight illusion,” Nature Neurosci.,
vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 737–741, 2000.
[38] J. R. Flanagan et al., “Predictions precedes control in motor learning,”
Current Biol., vol. 13, pp. 146–150, 2000.
[39] G. Westling and R. S. Johansson, “Responses in glabrous skin mechanoreceptors during precision grip in humans,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 66,
pp. 128–140, 1987.
[40] R. S. Johansson and J. R. Flanagan, The Senses: A Comprehensive Reference, vol. 6, E. Gardner and J. H. Kaas, Eds. San Diego, CA, USA:
Academic, 2008, pp. 67–86.
[41] I. Salimi et al., “Specificity of internal representations underlying grasping,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 84, pp. 2390–2397, 2000.
[42] M. Santello, M. Ross, J. Light, and P. Parikh, “Effects of carpal tunnel release surgery on recovery of sensorimotor hand function,” Soc. Neurosci.,
Abstract control no. 14324, 2014.
[43] D. H. Benninger et al., “Transcranial direct current stimulation for the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry,
vol. 81, no. 10, pp. 1105–1111, 2010.
[44] N. Bolognini et al., “Using non-invasive brain stimulation to augment motor training-induced plasticity,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 6,
pp. 1–13, 2009.
[45] M. Zimerman et al., “Modulation of training by single-session transcranial
direct current stimulation to the intact motor cortex enhances motor skill
acquisition of the paretic hand,” Stroke, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 2185–2591,
2012.
[46] S. K. Banala et al., “Novel gait adaptation and neuromotor training results
using an active leg exoskeleton,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 216–225, Apr. 2010.
[47] J. L. Contreras-Vidal and R. G. Grossman, “NeuroRex: A clinical neural
interface roadmap for EEG-based brain machine interfaces to a lower body
robotic exoskeleton,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 1579–1582.
[48] A. Montagner et al., “A pilot clinical study on robotic assisted rehabilitation in VR with an arm exoskeleton device,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Virtual
Rehabil., 2007, pp. 57–64.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

