IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

1563

Sensitivity of Noninvasive Cardiac
Electrophysiological Imaging to Variations
in Personalized Anatomical Modeling
Azar Rahimi∗ , Student Member, IEEE, and Linwei Wang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: Noninvasive cardiac electrophysiological
(EP) imaging techniques rely on anatomically-detailed heart-torso
models derived from high-quality tomographic images of individual subjects. However, anatomical modeling involves variations
that lead to unresolved uncertainties in the outcome of EP imaging, bringing questions to the robustness of these methods in clinical
practice. In this study, we design a systematic statistical approach
to assess the sensitivity of EP imaging methods to the variations
in personalized anatomical modeling. Methods: We first quantify
the variations in personalized anatomical models by a novel application of statistical shape modeling. Given the statistical distribution of the variation in personalized anatomical models, we then
employ unscented transform to determine the sensitivity of EP
imaging outputs to the variation in input personalized anatomical
modeling. Results: We test the feasibility of our proposed approach
using two of the existing EP imaging methods: epicardial-based
electrocardiographic imaging and transmural electrophysiological
imaging. Both phantom and real-data experiments show that variations in personalized anatomical models have negligible impact
on the outcome of EP imaging. Conclusion: This study verifies the
robustness of EP imaging methods to the errors in personalized
anatomical modeling and suggests the possibility to simplify the
process of anatomical modeling in future clinical practice. Significance: This study proposes a systematic statistical approach to
quantify anatomical modeling variations and assess their impact
on EP imaging, which can be extended to find a balance between
the quality of personalized anatomical models and the accuracy of
EP imaging that may improve the clinical feasibility of EP imaging.
Index Terms—Noninvasive cardiac electrophysiological imaging, personalized anatomical modeling, sensitivity study, statistical
shape modeling, unscented transform.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONINVASIVE cardiac electrophysiological (EP) imaging, also known as inverse electrocardiography, mathematically reconstructs subject-specific cardiac electrical dynamics from noninvasive body-surface potential (BSP) measurements. Different EP imaging systems have been developed,

N

Manuscript received October 21, 2014; revised December 18, 2014; accepted
January 15, 2015. Date of publication January 21, 2015; date of current version
May 18, 2015. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
under CAREER Award ACI-1350374 and the National Institute of Heart, Lung,
and Blood of the National Institutes of Health under Award R21Hl125998.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. Rahimi is with the Galisano College of Computing and Information Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14607 USA
(e-mail: axr8834@rit.edu).
L. Wang is with the Rochester Institute of Technology.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2395387

delivering the reconstruction of potential dynamics on the epicardium [1], [2], activation front on both the epicardium and
the endocardium [3], and intramural action potential dynamics
[4]–[8] or current density/activation front [9], [10] throughout
the depth of the ventricular wall. Developments in the past three
decades have led to applications of EP imaging in important
clinical problems, such as ventricular arrhythmia [11], [12],
dyssynchronous heart failure [13], atrial fibrillation [14], and
myocardial ischemia [15]. To move toward future clinical translation, several components within current EP imaging systems
remain to be examined regarding both their clinical practicability and their influence on the robustness of these systems.
One such component is personalized anatomical models that
are needed to establish the mathematical relationship between
the cardiac electrical source v and body-surface measurements
Φ (Φ = Hv), where the constructed transfer matrix H is specific
to each subject’s heart-torso geometry. The role of anatomical
modeling in the accuracy of EP imaging has been previously
studied. It was shown that using a generic instead of personalized anatomical model in EP imaging would fail to accurately
estimate cardiac electrical activity of individual subjects [16].
Further studies also confirmed that certain global anatomical parameters, such as size, position and orientation of the heart with
respect to electrode placement on the torso, must be subjectspecific in order for noninvasive EP imaging to be accurate
[17], [18]. Therefore, it has been a standard practice in current EP imaging systems to utilize a high-quality, anatomicallydetailed heart-torso model generated from individual subjects’
tomographic scans.
Personalized anatomically-detailed heart-torso model can be
constructed either directly from patient’s tomographic data or
by customizing a template model to patient’s anatomy [19].
However, taking either approaches, construction of detailed
anatomical models puts high demands on the quality of tomographic images needed. It also involves a time-consuming,
expert-dependent image-analysis process, the complexity of
which reduces the cost-effectiveness of the otherwise promising technique of EP imaging in clinical practice. Furthermore, it
introduces model variations stemming from a variety of factors
such as image quality, segmentation expertise, segmentation
methods, and/or registration techniques. This in turn leads to
unresolved uncertainties in the outcome of EP imaging systems
that bring questions to their robustness in clinical practice.
In this study, we will investigate the sensitivity of EP imaging
outcomes to the variation in detailed personalized anatomical
modeling. This will help us understand and verify the robustness

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1564

of current EP imaging systems (to modeling variations
inherent in these systems). Furthermore, it will shed lights on
the quality of anatomical models that is actually needed for reliable EP imaging, which in the long term will provide guidance
for establishing a clinically practicable procedure of anatomical modeling for EP imaging. Considering the solution of the
inverse EP problem y as a function of input anatomical model
x, y = g(x), where g represents the complex process of the inverse estimation of cardiac electrical activity, we approach our
problem in two steps: 1) modeling the probabilistic/statistical
distribution of the input variable x, the personalized anatomical
models, and 2) quantifying the uncertainty of the outcome y in
relation to the uncertainty in input x. In this study, we focus on
the variation in modeling the ventricles of individual subjects.
To model the variations in input variable x, we propose a
novel application of statistical shape modeling (SSM) [20]. SSM
provides a parametric shape model that captures the pattern
of variability among a set of shapes. It is conventionally used
to represent the shape variation among a population of subjects. However, in the context of EP imaging, the importance
of subject-specific global anatomical parameters have been established [17], [18]. Therefore, in this study, the variation to
be modeled is that of the personalized shapes, assuming that
its global parameters have been correctly personalized to the
individual’s images. To do so, we build an SSM for each specific subject rather than a population of subjects. Training SSM
over a set of subject-specificanatomical models derived from the
same subject’s anatomical images with different image quality,
different inter/intra-individual segmentation, or different segmentation methods, we derive a parametric description of the
variation in personalized anatomical model in terms of their
mean and variance.
To assess the sensitivity of the output variable y to the uncertainties in input variable x, there are two general groups
of techniques: analytical versus simulation-based approaches.
Analytical approach is based on the differentiation of system
equations with respect to the parameters of interest [21]. In our
problem, the system g represents a complex process including
the construction of personalized anatomical models, the calculation of transfer matrix H, and the inverse estimation of cardiac
electrical activity. Therefore, it cannot be explicitly formulated
and analytically assessed.
Alternatively, simulation-based approaches provide sensitivity evaluation based on multiple simulations of the system g for
different input values. The most well-known simulation-based
approach is Monte Carlo (MC) analysis that generates a large
number of random samples from the input parameter space.
These samples are then propagated through the system to obtain the corresponding outputs, using which the statistics of the
output variable can be calculated. However, given the large dimensionality of the input anatomical model x (more than 1000
points), application of MC analysis to our problem will require
a large number of simulations that is computationally expensive
if not impossible.
Deterministic sampling is another class of simulation-based
techniques that balances between the analytical and random
sampling techniques. An example of such techniques is gen-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

eralized polynomial chaos-stochastic collocation method that
approximates the system function by a linear combination of orthogonal polynomials using collocation points (samples). These
collocation points are derived with the aid of collocation methods originally used in numerical differentiation/integration [22].
This method is previously used to study the sensitivity of the
forward electrocardiographic simulation to the position of the
heart [18]. However, the number of required collocation points
increases exponentially with the dimension of the input variable. Alternatively, unscented transform (UT) is a deterministic
sampling method that preserves the system equation g(x) intact and approximates the distributions of input/output variables
instead. Particularly, it uses optimization methods to find a minimalnumber of samples that can preserve the statistical moments
of a given distribution up to a desired order [23]. Compared
to SC, in the presence of a high-dimensional input variable x,
UT requires substantially less number of samples to accurately
estimate statistics of output variable up to the second moment
[24].
Therefore, we will apply the UT to the SSM, trained for each
subject, to draw a set of samples from the statistical distribution
of input personalized anatomical models. EP imaging will be
carried out on each sample to obtain the corresponding outcome.
The statistics of the EP imaging outcome will be calculated to
study its uncertainty subject to anatomical modeling variations.
The feasibility of our approach is demonstrated on a set of phantom and real-data experiments. In these experiments, we employ
two of the existing EP imaging methods as testbeds: epicardialbased electrocardiographic imaging (ECGI) [1] and transmural electrophysiological imaging (TEPI) [6]. Our results report
that, as verified by statistical test of equivalence, uncertainties
of personalized anatomical models have negligible impact on
the accuracy of EP imaging.
The implication of this finding is two-fold. On one hand,
it shows that the current practice of EP imaging—reliant on
detailed personalized anatomical model—is robust to modeling
errors at the level of shape variations inherently associated with
image quality, segmentation users, and segmentation methods.
On the other hand, it indicates the possibility that high-level
complexity in personalized anatomical models might not be
necessary for reliable EP imaging and, as a result, the process
of anatomical modeling in current EP imaging systems may be
simplified for improved clinical feasibility in future practice.
A preliminary version of this study has been reported in [25],
[26].
II. CARDIAC EP IMAGING
Cardiac EP imaging approaches essentially aim to recover
cardiac bioelectrical sources from measurements of the bioelectrical field in the torso volume conductor, in particular on the
body surface. The quasi-static electromagnetism [27] explains
the relation between the field measurements within the torso
volume and cardiac bioelectrical sources as
∇.((Dint + Dext )∇φe (r)) = ∇ · (−Dint ∇u(r)) ∀r ∈ Ωh
(1)

RAHIMI AND WANG: SENSITIVITY OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMAGING TO VARIATIONS

∇.(Di ∇φi (r)) = 0 ∀r ∈ Ωi , ∪Ωi = Ωt/h .

(2)

On a bidomain heart model, (1) describes how the extracellular potential φe within the heart volume Ωh originates from the
gradient of action potential u. r stands for the spatial coordinate,
Dint and Dext are the effective intracellular and extracellular
conductivity tensors, and their summation Dk = Dint + Dext
is bulk conductivity tensor.
On the monodomain torso model, (2) describes how the potential φi distributes within the volume conductor Ωi external
to the heart with conductivity tensor Di , assuming that no other
active electrical source exists within the torso.
Within the myocardium (1), the anisotropic ratio of Dk is
a magnitude smaller than that of Dint [28], [29]. Therefore,
we only retain the intracellular anisotropy and assume isotropic
bulk and torso conductivity, which converts Dk and Di to scalars
σblk and σi , respectively. This is similar to an oblique dipole
layer model, where the anisotropy of primary current is considered whereas that of passive/secondary current is neglected
[29]. Intracellular conductivity tensor Dint is obtained by mapping a 3-D experimentally-derived mathematical fibrous model
to the personalized ventricular geometry of the subject [30]. Its
conductivity is assumed to be 0.24 Sm−1 in longitudinal direction and 0.024 Sm−1 in transversal direction [31]. Isotropic
bulk conductivity σblk is calculated as an intermediate value between longitudinal and transversal conductivities (0.48 Sm−1
and 0.12 Sm−1 , respectively) [31]. Torso conductivity value σt
is assumed to be 0.2 Sm−1 [31]. Based on these assumptions,
the forward relationship between cardiac action potential u and
body-surface voltage data φ can be described in the following
Poisson’s (3) within the heart and Laplace’s (4) external to the
heart:
σblk ∇2 φe (r) = ∇ · (−Dint ∇u(r)) ∀r ∈ Ωh
σt ∇ φ(r) = 0 ∀r ∈ Ωt/h .
2

(3)

(4)

To preserve the continuity of potentials and currents on the
interface, a boundary condition on the heart surface Γh is defined
as
φe (r) = φ(r)
∂ φ(r)
σblk ∂ φ∂en(r) + Dint ∂ u∂ (r)
n = σt ∂ n .

∀r ∈ Γh

1565

In these approaches, the equivalent source model takes the form
of epicardium potentials [1], [2] or AT on the ventricular surface [3], [32], [33]. By formulating the source model on the
heart surface, these approaches avoid the nonunique solutions
induced by the underlying biophysics. Recent efforts start to
examine the forward model that includes the domain of 3-D
myocardium, solving both the Poison’ s (3), (5) and the Laplace
(4), (6). The source model in these approaches represent the real
physiological sources in the heart, in the form of 3-D transmural
action potential [4]–[8] or current density/activation wavefront
[9], [10] throughout the myocardial wall. Because of the 3-D
source model beneath the heart surface, this type of approaches
faces additional challenges of nonunique solutions induced by
the underlying biophysics of the problem.
A. Surface-Based EP Imaging Methods
Surface-based EP imaging considers equivalent source models on the ventricular surface in forms of epicardial potential [1],
[2], [12], or activation time (AT) [3], [32], [33]. These surfacebased EP imaging methods often overcome the ill-posedness of
the inverse problem by employing regularization with various
constraints on spatial and/or temporal properties of the solution, such as Tikhonov regularization (zero-order, first-order,
second-order) [34], truncated-SVD [35], [36], state-space filtering framework (Kalman filter) [37], and recently L1-normbased sparsity models [11], [38], [39].
In this paper, we consider ECGI technique, as presented in
[1]. ECGI solves the inverse problem for the equivalent current
source models located on the epicardium of the heart. Using
boundary element method, (4) and (6) can be numerically solved
on a subject heart-torso model to obtain linear relationship between body-surface measurements Φ and epicardial potential
ve : Φ = Hve . ECGI then solves the inverse problem using
zero-order Tikhonov regularization treating each time instant
separately
v̂e = arg minv e ||Φ − Hve ||2 + β||ve ||2 .

(7)

The first term in (7) provides the least square solution while
the second term imposes constraint on the spatial smoothness of
the solution. The regularization parameter β controls the relative
weight of two terms. For details of the ECGI algorithm, please
refer to [1].

(5)

Similarly, a boundary condition is defined on the torso surface
that assumes no current (flux) leaves the torso surface Γt
∂φ(r)
= 0 ∀r ∈ Γt
(6)
∂n
where n stands for the outward normal of a surface.
Existing EP imaging techniques can be generally divided into
two categories, according to how the aforementioned bidomain
equations are solved (also known as forward modeling). In earlier approaches, the forward model is constructed on the domain
external to the heart surface by solving the Laplace (4) and (6).

B. Transmural EP Imaging Methods
In the past decade, transmural EP imaging has been emerged
that considers transmural source models in forms of transmural
action potential [4]–[8], or current density/activation wavefront
[9], [10]. In the reconstruction of current density or activation wavefront, different orders of smoothness constraints have
been imposed on the spatial or temporal properties of the solution, through methods such as Laplacian-weighted minimum
norm [4], or lead-field-normalized-weighted minimum norm in
combination with truncated-SVD [9]. In the reconstruction of
transmural action potential, physiological constraints are often
used [6]–[8]. For instance, Ohyu et al. proposed a maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimation of transmural action potential

1566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 1. Two different segmentations (red and blue contours) of one MRI slice
at the short axis view.

(AP) by modeling AP as a simplified template step function [8].
Another example is the method proposed by He et al. that
presents a parameterized cellular automaton heart model, where
deterministic regularization is used to optimize the model parameters [7]. Wang et al. also proposed another transmural
EP imaging approach that guides MAP estimation of the transmembrane potential distribution using a 3-D whole-ventricle
electrical excitation model [6].
In this study, we consider TEPI method, as presented in [6].
TEPI solves the inverse problem for the transmural action potential within the myocardium. Using a proper combination of
numerical methods, such as mesh-free and boundary element
methods [6], [40], one can numerically solve (3)–(6) on a subject heart-torso model, and obtain linear relationship between
body-surface measurements Φ and transmural action potential
 For detailed specification of the heart-torso modu: Φ = Hu.
els and calculation of the forward problem using mesh-free and
boundary element methods, please refer to [40].
TEPI combines a physiological spatiotemporal prior of action
potential with BSP data through Bayesian statistical regularization to overcome the ill-posedness of the problem. Assuming
action potential u and BSP Φ as random variables, TEPI seeks
the MAP estimate of uk at time instant k that maximizes the
posterior density function of uk given all body-surface measurements ,Φ1:k , up to the time instant k, where k = 1, . . . , t
and t is the total number of measurements over time.
uˆk = arg maxu k {f (uk |Φ1:k )}.

(8)

At each time step k, a prediction of the distribution of uk
is first obtained by a probabilistic simulation of a macroscopic
Aliev–Panfilov model [41] based on its estimation from the
previous iteration uk −1 . An MAP estimation of uk is then calculated using the predicted prior and the likelihood according
to the Bayes rules. For details of TEPI, please refer to [6].
III. SENSITIVITY ASSESSMENT OF EP IMAGING TO VARIATIONS
IN PERSONALIZED VENTRICULAR SHAPES
Anatomical modeling involves variations and uncertainties
that are caused by different factors such as different segmentation techniques, inter/intra-individual difference in segmentation, and image quality. As an example, Fig. 1 presents two
different segmentation results (red and blue contours) of one

cardiac MRI slice at the short axis view performed by two experts. The visible difference in local details of endocardium
and epicardium contours would eventually lead to two different heart models built for the same subject. In contrast with
global anatomical parameters (heart size, position and orientation) whose importance on EP imaging is well established, the
influence of these local shape variations on the accuracy of EP
imaging has not been investigated or well understood.
To determine the sensitivity of the EP imaging outcome y to
the local anatomical modeling variations x, we formulate the
problem as y = g(x), where x contains the 3-D coordinates of
all surface nodes, y is the corresponding EP imaging outcome,
and g represents a complex process including the construction
of personalized anatomical models, the calculation of transfer
matrix H, and the inverse estimation of cardiac electrical activity. As summarized in Fig. 2, first, we will model the statistical
distribution accounting for variations in personalized anatomical modeling. Second, we will quantify the output uncertainty
resulting from the input variation. Detailed descriptions of these
two steps are provided in the following sections.
A. Uncertainty Quantification in Personalized
Anatomical Models
As a first step, we need to quantify the variations/uncertainties
in personalized anatomical models. Because of the importance
of subject-specific global anatomical parameters (heart size, position, and orientation with respect to torso) on the accuracy
of EP imaging [17], [18], we train a personalized SSM for
each subject on a set of anatomical models that have identical
global parameters correctly customized to the subject. This set
of training models will include shape variations resulted from
two major causes: different image resolution and interindividual difference in segmentation. For the former, cardiac MR/CT
images of each subject are downsampled to generate different
image resolutions. For the latter, different experts are recruited
to perform manual segmentations for each subject’ s images.
These segmentation results by different users on images with
different resolutions provide the basis for constructing the training set of anatomical models to build the subject-specific SSM.
For each segmentation result, a surface mesh of the heart will
be built with nodal positions represented in Cartesian coordinates (xi , yi , zi i = 1, 2, . . . , n). For each subject, all surface
meshes in the training set have the same number of nodes with
known correspondence. Concatenating the coordinates of all n
nodes to one vector, each surface mesh (anatomical model) can
be described as x = (x1 , y1 , z1 , . . . , xn , yn , zn )T . It must be
noted that, as mentioned earlier, the training anatomical models
for each subject are aligned and share identical global anatomical parameters tailored to that subject.
Constructing the statistical shape model consists of two steps:
1) extracting the mean shape, 2) calculating the covariance matrix of the training shapes [20]. The mean shape x̄ is calculated
by averaging over all training samples as
1
xi .
s i=1
s

x̄ =

(9)

RAHIMI AND WANG: SENSITIVITY OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMAGING TO VARIATIONS

Fig. 2.

1567

Outline of the proposed approach to investigate the uncertainty of EP imaging subject to variations in personalized anatomical models.

The covariance matrix Px of the training samples is
calculated as
1 
Px =
(xi − x̄)(xi − x̄)T .
s − 1 i=1
s

(10)

The variation of personalized anatomical models for a specific
subject is thus modeled as a high-dimensional Gaussian random
variable with mean x̄ and covariance Px : N (x̄, Px ).
B. Simulation-Based Sensitivity Evaluation
Given the statistical description of personalized anatomical
modeling, we are interested in quantifying the resulting statistical distribution of the EP imaging output. As described earlier,
the complex relationship g between EP imaging output y and
the input anatomical model x cannot be analytically formulated.
Therefore, simulation-based techniques should be used to obtain output statistics based on multiple simulations of y = g(x)
using samples drawn from the input distribution x. Because of
the high-dimensionality of x, we employ the UT to reduce the
number of samples and accordingly the number of EP imaging
processes needed to be carried out.
UT is established based on the principle that, given a nonlinear
function y = g(x), it is easier to approximate a probability distribution than it is to approximate an arbitrary nonlinear function [23]. Accordingly, a set of weighted points (sigma points),
S = {i = 1, 2, . . . , p : Xi , Wi }, is selected deterministically so
as to minimize the error in approximating the statistical moments
of x up to a desired order. Applying the nonlinear function g to
each point yields a set of transformed points, statistics of which
gives an estimate of the output statistics that otherwise could
not be derived analytically.
Given the Gaussian shape model N (x̄, Px ), derived in the
previous section, different sets of sigma points can be used to
capture the output statistics up to the second order. An example
that we employed in our study is a set of 2L sigma points
(samples) symmetrically-distributed around the mean along the
direction of second-order variation
√
LPx )i , i = 1, . . . , L
Xi = x̄ + ( √
(11)
Xi+L = x̄ − ( LPx )i , i = 1, . . . , L
Wi = 1/2L, i = 1, . . . , 2L

where L represents dimension of the input variable x (3n in
this
√ and
√ case, n being the number of nodes in the shape model)
( LPx )i denotes the ith row or column of the matrix LPx .
Wi is the weight assigned to the ith sigma point.
Because L = 3n is large in our study (n is at the order of 103 ),
2L sigma points still requires a large amount of EP imaging processes. To further reduce the number of sigma points needed,
we propose to sample the sigma points only along the predominant (instead of all) directions of variance in x. To extract
the principal directions of variance in x, principle component
analysis is applied to Px to decompose the covariance matrix
into the principle modes of variations Ψ (eigenvectors) and the
corresponding value of variances λ (eigenvalue)

√
Px = λΨ.
(12)
The modes of variations are sorted in an order with descending variances such that λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ≥ λ3n . Therefore, the
covariance matrix Px can be approximated by the c highest
modes of variations as

√
√
√
(13)
P̃x = [ λ1 ψ1 ; λ2 ψ2 ; · · · ; λc ψc ].
Replacing the full size covariance matrix Px with the reduced
covariance matrix P̃x in (11), we can reduce the number of
required sigma points to 2c as
√
Xi = x̄ + √cλi ψi , i = 1, . . . , c
Xi+c = x̄ − cλi ψi , i = 1, . . . , c
(14)
Wi = 1/2c, i = 1, . . . , 2c.
√
to
To guarantee plausible shapes, c should be restrained
√
a certain interval. A common approach is to limit c to lie
within [−3, +3], treating all modes as independent distributions
[20]. This is approximately equivalent to taking the first ten
eigenvectors (c = 10) in sampling thesigma points, which accounts for 98% of the total variation ( Li=1 λi ). As an example,
Fig. 3 presents anatomical variations around mean geometry x̄
(shown in red color) along the (a) first, (b) second, and √
(c) third
λi and
principle
directions
(white
and
blue
contours
show
−3
√
+3 λi i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, respectively).
Each sigma point represents a personalized anatomical model
following the statistical distribution modeled for a specific subject using his or her SSM.

1568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 4. ECGI solution (epicardial potential) obtained on two ventricular models for the same subject in the healthy setting, at two different time instants
of cardiac depolarization and repolarization phases. (a) Venticular model 1.
(b) Venticular model 2.

Fig. 3. Examples of anatomical variations around mean geometry model along
(a) first, (b) second, and (c) third principle directions. Mean geometry model is
shown in red color while the two sample geometry models are shown in white
and blue.

C. Statistical Analysis
For each subject, on each anatomical model Xi sampled from
his/her personalized SSM, EP imaging can be carried out using
identical BSP data acquired for that specific subject
Yi = g(Xi ).

(15)

According to the UT theory, the first two moments of the
output distribution can be obtained as
ȳ =

2c


Wi Yi

(16)

i=0

Py =

2c


Wi (Yi − ȳ)2 .

(17)

i=0

In this way, the mean and variance of EP imaging output (16)
and (17) are calculated, which provide information about the
distribution/uncertainty of the EP imaging solutions.
In addition, pooled from results across multiple subjects, we
conduct a statistical test of equivalence to investigate the statistical equivalency of the EP imaging outputs Yi obtained on different anatomical models Xi drawn from subject-specific SSM
models. To do so, a specific accuracy measure θ (explained in
Section IV) is extracted from the EP imaging outputs. θs obtained on the same subject yet with different anatomical models
(drawn from the SSM) are randomly paired up and the difference of each pair (dθ) is calculated. The hypothesis test of
equivalence based on paired t-test is then performed on the dθs
of multiple subjects. Assuming parameter dθ ∼ N (δ, σ 2 ) to be

the measure of the intrasubject difference of the paired observations of θs, statistical equivalency is obtained if δ/σ lies within
an established range [−ε, ε], ε > 0 [42]. The alternative and null
hypotheses are defined as
Alternative hypothesis (H1 ) : −ε ≤ δ/σ ≤ ε
Null hypothesis (H0 ) : δ/σ < −ε or δ/σ > ε.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
As mentioned before, we consider two EP imaging approach
(ECGI and TEPI, described in Section II) as testbeds for our
experiments. Solution of ECGI is in the form of epicardial potential dynamics while TEPI solution is in the form of transmural
action potential dynamics. We conduct two sets of synthetic and
real-data experiments.
A. Synthetic Experiments
Synthetic experiments are conducted on four subjects including one canine heart and three human hearts. A realistic human
torso model with 370 vertices on the triangulated body surface is
coupled with all the heart models to set up the phantom experiments [43]. For each subject, MR/CT images are down-sampled
to generate three sets of images with different resolutions. A set
of seven ventricular models are developed using manual segmentation of MR/CT images with specific resolution performed
by different experts (total 21 segmentations for each subject).
This set serves the training set for constructing subject-specific
SSM. From each subject-specific SSM, 20 ventricular models
are generated using the ten highest Eigen values of the covariance matrix. BSP data, including 370 electrodes located on
the vertices of the torso surface mesh, are simulated on the
mean shape provided by the trained SSM for each subject and
are corrupted with 20-dB white Gaussian noise. For each subject, the identical BSP data are coupled with the SSM-sampled
ventricular models for EP imaging to ensure that the only factor affecting EP imaging outputs is the variation in the input
ventricular shape.
In the synthetic experiments the ground truth is available in
form of epicardial/action potential dynamics. Therefore, quantitative accuracy of the solution is evaluated in terms of average

RAHIMI AND WANG: SENSITIVITY OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMAGING TO VARIATIONS

1569

Fig. 5. (a) Overlap of two ventricular models of one subject, shown in Fig. 4, in short-axis view from base to apex. (b) ECGI solution at two corresponding
nodes on the two ventricular models in healthy setting.

Fig. 7. STD map of ECGI output on a mean anatomical model during ST
segment of an ECG cycle for (a) healthy, and (b) postinfarction settings.

Fig. 6. ECGI solution (epicardial potential) obtained on two ventricular models for the same subject in the postinfarction setting, at two different time instants
of cardiac depolarization and repolarization phases. (a) Venticular model 1.
(b) Venticular model 2.

relative error (RE) and average correlation coefficients (CC)
between estimated and true potentials over a cardiac cycle [1].
Experiments are conducted on both healthy and postinfarction
settings; for the latter, the infarct region extends from basal to
midanteroseptal and inferoseptal in each subject’s ventricle.
1) ECGI Results: Fig. 4 gives an example of the epicardial potential reconstructed on two ventricular models for the
same subject in the healthy setting at two time instants during
depolarization and repolarization stages. Variation in two personalized anatomical models is also shown in short-axis views
in Fig. 5(a). Despite visible difference in anatomical details,
similar epicardial potential patterns can be observed for two
anatomical models during cardiac cycle. Estimated epicardial
potential dynamics for two corresponding nodes on the surface
meshes of two ventricular models in the healthy setting are also
very similar [see Fig. 5(b)]. An example of epicardial potential
reconstruction for the same anatomical models in the postinfarction setting is shown in Fig. 6. Likewise, potential dynamics are
consistent for the two ventricular models during depolarization
and repolarization.
The mean and variance of the ECGI outputs on a mean
anatomical model are calculated according to (16) and (17).
Standard deviation (STD) map of ECGI outputs for healthy and
postinfarction settings during the ST segment of an ECG cycle
is presented in Fig. 7. STD ranges from 2.63e − 9 to 1.4e − 4
in the healthy setting while in the postinfarction setting there is
a slight increase in the STD range (6.43e − 8, 0.007). Low STD
in both settings indicates robustness of ECGI outcomes to the
variations in personalized anatomical models.

On ECGI outputs obtained on the 80 ventricular models for
the four subjects, error measures RE and CC for the same subject
are randomly paired up (40 pairs for the paired t-test) and RE
difference and CC difference are calculated for each pair. Paired
results of the four subjects have RE difference (dθ) with mean
0.03 and variance 0.19. Assuming the commonly used equivalence limits ε = 0.5 [42], with 40 number of pairs, dθ resides
in the rejection region at α level = 5%. The CC difference for
the paired population has normal distribution N (0.04, 0.032),
also reporting the rejection of null hypothesis for the tolerance
ε = 0.5 at α = 0.05.
2) TEPI Results: Fig. 8 presents four snapshots of transmural action potential estimation on two ventricular models of
one subject in the healthy setting during depolarization and recovery stages. Transmural action potential propagates similarly
through two models during cardiac cycle despite visible anatomical detail differences [shown in Fig. 9(a)]. Estimated transmural
action potential dynamics for two corresponding nodes on the
two ventricular models during one cardiac cycle are presented
in Fig. 9(b). It can be seen that slight difference in the position
of the corresponding nodes does not affect the estimated action
potential dynamics. Fig. 10 shows snapshots of transmural action potentials obtained on two ventricular models of the same
subject in the postinfarction setting, where late activation (left)
and early repolarization (right) at infarct region are similar in
two anatomical models.
Similarly, mean and variance of TEPI outputs are determined
[see (16) and (17)]. STD map of TEPI outputs on a mean anatomical model during the ST segment of an ECG cycle for both
healthy and postinfarction settings are shown in Fig. 11. TEPI
output STD ranges between 8.25e − 6 to 0.03 for different ventricular models during a cardiac cycle in healthy setting. In
postinfarction settings, STD range increases (9.25e − 6, 0.05)
compared to healthy setting. The small range of variation in

1570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 8. TEPI solution (transmural action potential) obtained on two ventricular models for the same subject in the healthy setting, at two different time instants of cardiac depolarization and repolarization phases. Color encodes the value of action potential. (a) Venticular model 1.
(b) Venticular model 2.

Fig. 9. (a) Overlap of two ventricular models of one subject, shown in Fig. 8, in short-axis view from base to apex. (b) TEPI solution at two corresponding nodes
on the two ventricular models in healthy setting.

Fig. 10. TEPI solution (transmural action potential) obtained on two ventricular models for the same subject in the postinfarction setting, at two
different time instants of cardiac depolarization and repolarization phases. Color encodes the value of action potential. (a) Venticular model 1.
(b) Venticular model 2.

Fig. 11. STD map of TEPI output on a mean anatomical model during ST
segment of an ECG cycle for (a) healthy, and (b) postinfarction settings.

TEPI output in both settings confirms its low sensitivity to the
variations in input anatomical models.

Likewise, TEPI outputs on the entire population are collected
and its errors in RE and CC on ventricular models for the same
subject are randomly paired up (40 pairs in total for the four
subjects). The difference of RE (dθ) for the paired results of
all four subjects has mean 0.01 and variance 0.03 that belongs
to the rejection region at α =0.05, choosing equivalence limits
to be ±ε for ε = 0.5 and a number of 40. The null hypothesis
is thus rejected and the alternative hypothesis can be accepted.
Similarly, the difference of CC for the paired population has
a normal distribution N (0.02, 0.016) that reports the rejection
of the null hypothesis for the tolerance ε = 0.5 at α =0.05.

RAHIMI AND WANG: SENSITIVITY OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMAGING TO VARIATIONS

Fig. 12. (a) ECGI solution for two ventricular models constructed for case
3 and case 4 during depolarization. Black and red contours show the ECGI
estimated and the reference infarct region, respectively. (b) STD map of ECGI
output on a mean anatomical model for case 3 and case 4 at the corresponding
time instants. Color encodes the value of potential magnitude.

Therefore, in our phantom experiments, the null hypothesis is
successfully rejected, and we can conclude that local variations
in personalized ventricular models do not affect the accuracy of
either EP imaging methods being considered. In another words,
variations in the shape level does not impact the accuracy of EP
imaging systems.
B. Real Data Experiments
Real data experiments are performed on four postinfarction
human subjects [44]. The datasets include end-diastolic MR images of heart/torso geometries and 123-lead BSP recordings for
each subject. MRI data of each subject’s heart includes ten slices
from base to apex with 8-mm interslice spacing and 1.33-mm
pixel spacing. The torso surface is described by boundary elements with 370 vertices. BSP measurements were recorded by
Dalhousie University standards [20] at 123 known anatomical
sites and interpolated to 370 nodes of the Dalhousie torso model;
each BSP recording consists of a single averaged PQRST complex sampled at 2 kHz. Gold standards of the infarct are provided
in terms of the location and size of the infarct with regard to
the 17-segment division of the LV according to AHA standards
[45].
Similar to the phantom experiments, seven ventricular models
are built for each subject based on manual segmentations of
three different images resolutions by different experts in order
to create the SSM training set (in total 21 segmentations for each
subject). Using trained SSM for each subject, 16 ventricular
models are generated, giving 64 heart models in total among
the four subjects. For each subject, 16 ventricular models are
coupled with identical measured BSP data as inputs to the two
EP imaging methods under study.
In real-data experiments, because the ground truth of epicardial/action potential dynamics (e.g., intracardiac electrogram

1571

recording) is not available, infarct quantification is used to assess the solution accuracy. Infarct region can be identified based
on the characteristic features of the estimated potential dynamics. In this study, we extract two most representative features of
the infarct region: AT and action potential duration (APD) which
is defined as the difference between AT and repolarization time
(RT). In ECGI, late AT is used as a main characteristic of the
infarct region. AT is set at the maximum negative derivative of
the QRS segment of epicardial potential trace [46]. In TEPI, regions associated with late AT and/or short APD are identified as
infarct regions [47]. AT is set at the maximum first derivative of
action potential upstroke and RT is set at the maximum second
derivative of action potential downstroke [48]. Infarct region is
finally quantified in terms of infarct size (IS) and center that are
calculated based on the 17 segments of the left ventricle (LV)
[45]. IS describes the ratio of estimated infarcted segments to
the total number of segments. Infarct center (IC) represents the
center of the infarct scar segments.
1) ECGI Results: Fig. 12(a) shows ECGI solutions for two
ventricular models of case 3 and case 4 during depolarization.
For each subject, despite the visible difference in anatomical
details of the two ventricular models, similar potential dynamics
can be observed. Infarct regions detected by ECGI methods for
two ventricular models of the same subject are also identical, as
highlighted with black contour with good match with the ground
truth. Detected infarct region for case 1 corresponds to segments
1, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 13 and 15 with center located at segment 9.
In case 2, segments 4, 5, 9, 10, 11 are associated with infarct
region (center at segment 10). In case 3, detected infarct region
is centered at segment 12 and extends to segments 3, 4, 5, 11
and 16. In case 4 the infarct region is detected to be at segments
1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 15, and 17 with center at segment 15. The STD
map of ECGI solution for these two cases at the corresponding
time instants are also shown in Fig. 12(b). Low peak value on
the STD map (0.004 mV) indicates robustness of ECGI solution
to the variations in personalized anatomical modeling.
Hypothesis test of equivalence is conducted on randomly
paired up ECGI outputs of the same subject (32 pairs in total for
four subjects) using IS and IC as accuracy measures. IS difference and IC difference for paired ECGI observations have normal distribution N (0.1, 0.17) and N (0.6, 1.17), respectively,
that falls within the rejection region of the null hypothesis. In
another words, the alternative hypothesis is accepted meaning
that variations in shape level have negligible impact on accuracy
of ECGI output.
2) TEPI Results: Fig. 13(a) presents TEPI solutions for two
ventricular models of case 3 and case 4. Despite variations in
anatomical details, similar potential dynamics can be observed
on two anatomical models of the same subject. The infarct regions detected for the two anatomical models (highlighted with
black contours) are consistent and match the ground truth (red
contour) as well. In case 1, detected infarct region (segments
1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, and 15) centers at segment 8. The infarct
region in case 2 extends to segments 2, 3, 8, 9, 14, and 15 with
center 9. In case 3, segments 3, 4, 9, 10, and 15 are detected
to be associated with infarct (center at segment 10). In case 4,
infarct region is estimated to be at segments 9, 10, 11, and 15

1572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 13. (a) TEPI solution for two ventricular models constructed for case 3 and case 4. Black and red contours show the TEPI estimated and the reference infarct
region, respectively. (b) STD map of TEPI output on a mean anatomical model for case 3 and case 4 at the corresponding time instants. Color encodes the value
of potential magnitude.

(center at 15). The STD map of TEPI solution for these two
cases during repolarization are also shown in Fig. 13(b). Maximum STD corresponds to low value of 0.001 mV that shows
low sensitivity of TEPI method to the variations in anatomical
modeling.
TEPI outputs on ventricular models for the same subject are
randomly paired up, and hypothesis tests of equivalence are performed on the 32 pairs for the four subjects. IS difference and IC
difference of paired observations for TEPI outputs have normal
distribution N (0.01, 0.06) and N (0.4, 1.8), respectively. For a
sample of 32 pairs and the equivalence limit ε = 0.5, it reports
the rejection of null hypothesis and acceptance of alternative
hypothesis at 5% level. Therefore, the real-data experiments
results confirm the findings of synthetic experiments.
V. DISCUSSIONS
A. Bound of Ventricular Shape Variations for Accurate
EP Imaging
As the current study demonstrates that error in modeling
anatomical details of patient-specific geometry does not significantly impact accuracy of EP imaging methods, the next natural
question is what is the bound of such modeling errors in order to
guarantee accurate EP imaging results. However, it is difficult
to statistically model the complete range of modeling errors that
could be involved in a geometrical model. The SSM built in this
paper represents only the error in modeling an anatomicallydetailed model. In the proposed approach of sensitivity study,
sampling using the method of UT has exhausted the distribution
space as defined by the SSM, i.e., by scaling the eigenvalues
up to ±3λ [20]. To go beyond the distribution defined by the
SSM (i.e., to add even larger scaling values), we will obtain
in-valid geometrical models [20]. Therefore, an alternative approach need to be taken to investigate the “bound” of shape
variations for valid EP imaging.
As a first step, we propose a minimal model that is based
on analytic descriptions of regular 3-D geometrical shapes (see
Fig. 14). In this minimal ventricular model, LV epicardium and

Fig. 14.

Cardiac minimal anatomical model. (a) LV model. (b) RV model.

endocardium are described by two concentric circles at short
axis and an ellipsoid at long axis. Right ventricle (RV) surface
is represented using two concentric circles intersecting with LV
circles at short-axis and a parabola at long axis [49]. Subjectspecific global anatomical parameters (heart size, position and
orientation) are incorporate into this minimal model through
parameters of the geometrical shapes such as center and radii
of endocardium and epicardium circles as well as length of the
ellipsoid. This minimal ventricular model (see Fig. 14) can be
seen as an anatomically-plausible model that is personalized
to a subject’s heart anatomy without including realistic shape
details. The construction details of this model and its use in
phantom experiments were previously described [50].
Here, on the four human subjects in real-data experiments,
we construct corresponding minimal anatomical model for each

RAHIMI AND WANG: SENSITIVITY OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMAGING TO VARIATIONS

Fig. 15. ECGI solution for minimal ventricular models of case 3 and case 4
during depolarization. Black and red contours show the ECGI estimated and the
reference infarct region, respectively.

1573

EP imaging methods are only validated againstgold standard in
terms of 17 segments of AHA standard due to the challenge of
obtaining intracardiac validation data in humans. To date, transmural EP imaging validation against intracardiac measurements
is only reported in animal studies [51], [52]. In future study,
more analysis will be conducted on real cases with intracardiac
EP measurements asgold standard to obtain sensitivity study in
terms of RE and CC. The sensitivity of EP imaging methods
to personalized anatomical models variations in other cardiac
pathologies is remained to be verified.
C. Impact of Heart Motion

Fig. 16. TEPI solution for minimal ventricular models of case 3 and case
4. Black and red contours show the TEPI estimated and the reference infarct
region, respectively. Color encodes the value of potential magnitude.

subject. Coupling minimal model of each subject with its BSP
measurements, we reconstruct EP outcomes for each subject
using ECGI and TEPI methods. Similarly, infarct quantification
is performed as explained in the real-data experiments section.
The results of ECGI method for case 3 and 4 are presented in
Fig. 15. As can be seen, the reconstructed epicardial potential
maps for the minimal model of both cases are similar to that
of realistic anatomical models of Fig. 12. TEPI results on minimal models of case 3 and case 4 are presented in Fig. 16. As
highlighted in the Figs. 13 and 16, there is a good agreement
between the infarct region detected using detailed anatomical
details (see Fig. 13) and the one detected minimal model (see
Fig. 13) in both cases.
This preliminary study reports negligible role of anatomical
details in accurate EP imaging as well as potentials of the proposed minimal model to be used as a generic model that can be
quickly personalized to a patient’ s global geometrical parameters. In the future, it would be interesting to build a SSM that
includes variations both in the global parameters and the shape
details, which will then allow us to investigate the “bound”
of modeling error toward nonpatient-specific models. This will
require a comprehensive set of training data and substantial
modeling effort in order to build an SSM like this, which will
constitute the next step of our study.
B. Validation Against Intracardiac EP Data
In this study, the findings are limited to healthy and postinfarction settings. Furthermore, in real-data postinfarction setting,

It is a common practice in cardiac EP imaging to use static
heart due to model complexity, computational cost, and more
importantly, the challenge to acquire temporally-aligned bodysurface mapping and tomographic imaging data. However, neglecting heart motion in cardiac EP imaging will affect the solutions. In the depolarization stage, this effect can be assumed to
be minimal because, as a result of the delay between electrical
activation and mechanical contraction, the depolarization of the
ventricles can be expected to be close to completion before it
starts to contract. The repolarization of the ventricles, however,
will be accompanied by the deformation of the heart and it remains unclear how the neglect of this deformation would affect
EP imaging. Because the current study focuses on the effect of
shape variations instead of heart motion on cardiac EP imaging,
we follow the common practice in the field to adopt a static heart
model to isolate the factors of interest (shape variations).
D. Impact of Fiber Architecture
In this study, fiber structures on sample ventricular models are obtained by mapping a detailed, experimentally-derived
mathematical model [30] to the patient-specific geometry of
our ventricular models. The 3-D fiber architecture is fixed for
each patient among the multiple ventricular models with shape
variations, again to isolate the factor of shape variation and its
effect on cardiac EP imaging. It therefore does not affect the
observations of our sensitivity study.
VI. CONCLUSION
Noninvasive cardiac EP imaging focuses on noninvasive and
mathematical reconstruction of cardiac electrical activity using
body surface measurements data. It has been shown diagnostic
potential in current practice of clinical EP study for different
cardiac pathologies [11]–[15]. To move toward future clinical
translation, several components within current EP imaging systems remain to be examined regarding both their clinical practicability and their influence on the robustness of these systems.
One such component is personalized anatomically-detailed
ventricular modeling, preparation of which involves inevitable
variations and uncertainties that may impact reliability of EP
imaging outcome. While global anatomical parameters (heart
size, position and orientation) have been proven to be important, shape variation caused by personalized anatomical modeling errors has not been investigated. This paper, for the first

1574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

time, we demonstrate that, when global anatomical parameters are correctly captured, modeling errors introduced during
subject-specific modeling may not impact accuracy of EP imaging outcome. This study not only verifies the robustness of the
investigated EP imaging methods to the errors in personalized
geometrical modeling, but also suggests the possibility to simplify the process of anatomical modeling in future practice of
EP imaging.
While this study only considers two sources of variations in
personalized ventricular models, the presented approach can be
used to study a wider variety of anatomical variations such as
that in modeling the torso model. Furthermore, the presented
approach can be extended to study different levels of model
complexity starting from global anatomical parameters (heart
size, location, orientation with respect to surface electrodes) to
variations in shape details. This can help us find the balance
between the complexity/quality of anatomical models and the
accuracy of EP imaging for improved cost-effectiveness of these
techniques in future clinical practice.

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Rudy and B. Messinger-Rapport, “The inverse problem of electrocardiography: Solutions in terms of epicardial potentials,” Critical Rev.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 16, pp. 215–268, 1988.
[2] A. J. Pullan et al., “Noninvasive electrical imaging of the heart: Theory
and model development,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 29, pp. 817–836, 2001.
[3] G. Huiskamp and F. Greensite, “A new method for myocardial activation
imaging,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 443–446, Jun.
1997.
[4] B. He and D. Wu, “Imaging and visualization of 3-d cardiac electric
activity,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 181–
186, Sep. 2001.
[5] B. F. Nielsen et al., “Computing ischemic regions in the heart with
the bidomain model: First steps towards validation,” IEEE Trans. Med.
Imaging, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1085–1096, Jun. 2013.
[6] L. Wang et al., “Physiological-model-constrained noninvasive reconstruction of volumetric myocardial transmembrane potentials,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 296–315, Feb. 2010.
[7] B. He et al., “Noninvasive imaging of cardiac transmembrane potentials
within three-dimensional myocardium by means of a realistic geometry
aniostropic heart model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 10,
pp. 1190–1202, Oct. 2003.
[8] S. Ohyu et al., “Use of the ventricular propagated excitation model
in the magnetocardiographic inverse problem for reconstruction of electrophysiological properties,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 6,
pp. 509–519, Jun. 2002.
[9] Z. Liu et al., “Noninvasive reconstruction of three-dimensional ventricular
activation sequence from the inverse solution of distributed equivalent
current density,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1307–
1318, Oct. 2006.
[10] A. Rahimi et al., “Hierarchical multiple-model bayesian approach to
transmural electrophysiological imaging,” Med. Image Comput. Comput.Assisted Interv., vol. 8674, pp. 538–545, 2014.
[11] S. Ghosh and Y. Rudy, “Application of l1-norm regularization to epicardial potential solutions of the inverse electrocardiography problem,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 692–699, 2011.
[12] C. Ramanathan et al., “Noninvasive electrocardiographic imaging for
cardiac electrophysiology and arrhythmia,” Nature Med., vol. 10, pp. 422–
428, 2004.
[13] T. Berger et al., “Single-beat noninvasive imaging of ventricular endocardial and epicardial activation in patients undergoing CRT,” PLoS ONE,
vol. 6, no. 1, art. no. e16255, 2011.
[14] P. S. Cuculich et al., “Noninvasive characterization of epicardial activation
in humans with diverse atrial fibrillation patterns,” Circulation, vol. 122,
pp. 1364–1372, 2010.

[15] P. S. Cuculich et al., “The electrophysiological cardiac ventricular substrate in patients after myocardial infarction: Noninvasive characterization
with electrocardiographic imaging,” J. Amer. College Cardiology, vol. 58,
no. 18, pp. 1893–1902, 2011.
[16] G. Huiskamp and A. Van Oosterom, “Tailored versus realistic geometry in
the inverse problem of electrocardiography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 827–835, Aug. 1989.
[17] B. J. Messinger-Rapport and Y. Rudy, “The inverse problem in electrocardiography: A model study of the effects of geometry and conductivity
parameters on the reconstruction of epicardial potentials,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-33, no. 7, pp. 667–676, Jul. 1986.
[18] D. Swenson et al., “Cardiac position sensitivity study in the electrocardiographic forward problem using stochastic collocation and boundary
element methods,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 2900–2910,
2011.
[19] P. Lamata et al., “Personalization of cubic hermite meshes for efficient
biomechanical simulations,” Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Interv., vol. 13, pp. 380–387, 2010.
[20] T. Heimann and H.-P. Meinzer, “Statistical shape models for 3d medical image segmentation: A review,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 543–563, 2009.
[21] R. R. Dickerson et al., “Direct measurements of ozone and nitrogen
dioxide photolysis rates in the troposphere,” J. Geophys. Res.: Oceans,
vol. 87, pp. 4933–4946, 1982.
[22] D. Xiu and G. E. Karniadakis, “The wiener–askey polynomial chaos for
stochastic differential equations,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 619–644, 2002.
[23] S. J. Julier and J. K. Uhlmann, “A new extension of the kalman filter to
nonlinear systems,” in Proc. Aerosp./Defense Sensing, Simulation Controls, 1997, pp. 182–193.
[24] F. Augustin et al., “An accuracy comparison of polynomial chaos type
methods for the propagation of uncertainties,” J. Math. Ind., vol. 3,
pp. 2–24, 2013.
[25] A. Rahimi et al., “Impact of anatomical variations in ventricular shape on
non-invasive electrocardiographic imaging,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 39,
pp. 957–960, 2012.
[26] A. Rahimi and L. Wang, “The impact of ventricular shape variations on
inverse electrocardiography: A feasibility study,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int.
Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2013, pp. 564–567.
[27] R. Plonsey, Bioelectric Phenonmena. New York, NY, USA: McGraw Hill,
1969.
[28] R. Hren et al., “Simulated epicardial potential maps during paced activation reflect myocardial fibrous structure,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 26,
no. 6, pp. 1022–1035, 1998.
[29] P. ColliFranzone et al., “Potential fields generated by oblique dipole
layers modeling excitation wavefronts in the anisotropic myocardium.
Comparison with potential fields elicited by paced dog hearts in a volume
conductor,” Circulation Res., vol. 51, pp. 330–346, 1982.
[30] M. Nash, “Mechanics and material properties of the heart using an anatomically accurate mathematical model,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Eng. Sci.,
Univ. Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 1998.
[31] G. Fischer et al., “A bidomain model based bem-fem coupling formulation
for anisotropic cardiac tissue,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 28, no. 10, pp.
1229–1243, 2000.
[32] P. M. van Dam et al., “Noninvasive imaging of cardiac activation and
recovery,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1739–1756, 2009.
[33] Y. Serinagaoglu et al., “Improved performance of bayesian solution for
inverse electrocardiography using multiple information sources,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 2024–2034, Oct. 2006.
[34] H. S. Oster and Y. Rudy, “The use of temporal information in the regularization of the inverse problem of electrocardiography,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 65–75, Jan. 1992.
[35] Y. Okamoto et al., “Limitation of the inverse problem in body surface
potential mapping,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 749–
754, Nov. 1983.
[36] B. Messnarz et al., “A new spatiotemporal regularization approach for
reconstruction of cardiac transmembrane potential patterns,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 273–281, Feb. 2004.
[37] D. H. Brooks et al., “Inverse electrocardiography by simultaneous imposition of multiple constraints,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 46, no. 1,
pp. 3–17, Jan. 1999.
[38] G. Shou et al., “On epicardial potential reconstruction using regularization
schemes with the l1-norm data term,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, no. 1,
pp. 57–72, 2011.

RAHIMI AND WANG: SENSITIVITY OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL IMAGING TO VARIATIONS

[39] L. Wang et al., “Application of l1-norm regularization to epicardial potential reconstruction based on gradient projection,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 56, no. 19, pp. 6291–6310, 2011.
[40] L. Wang et al., “Coupled meshfree-bem platform for electrocardiographic
simulation: Modeling and validations,” in Proc. Med. Imag. Augmented
Reality, 2008, pp. 98–107.
[41] R. R. Aliev and A. V. Panfilov, “A simple two-variable model of cardiac
excitation,” Chaos, Solitions Fractals, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 293–301, 1996.
[42] S. Wellek, Testing Statistical Hypotheses of Equivalence and Noninferiority. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2010.
[43] R. MacLeod et al., “Construction of an inhomogeneous model of the
human torso for use in computational electrocardiography,” in Proc. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1991, pp. 688–689.
[44] A. L. Goldberger et al., “Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet components of a new research resource for complex physiological signals,”
Circulation, vol. 101, pp. e215–e220, 2000.
[45] M. D. Cerqueira et al., “Standardized myocardial segmentation and
nomenclature for tomographic imaging of the heart,” Circulation,
vol. 105, pp. 539–542, 2002.
[46] J. E. Burnes et al., “Noninvasive ecg imaging of electrophysiologically
abnormal substrates in infarcted hearts : A model study,” Circulation,
vol. 101, no. 5, pp. 533–540, 2000.
[47] L. Wang et al., “Noninvasive computational imaging of cardiac electrophysiology for 3D infarct quantitation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1033–1034, Apr. 2011.

1575

[48] I. R. Efimov et al., “Optical mapping of repolarization and refractoriness
from intact heart,” Circulation, vol. 90, pp. 1469–1480, 1994.
[49] F. Czegledy et al., “A new mathematical model for right ventricular
geometry,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Nov. 1990, pp. 1813–
1814.
[50] A. Rahimi et al., “Toward clinically-feasible noninvasive electrophysiological imaging: Investigating the impact of local anatomical details,” in
Proc. Statist. Atlases Comput. Models Heart: Imaging Model. Challenges,
2012, pp. 188–197.
[51] X. Zhang et al., “Noninvasive three-dimensional electrocardiographic
imaging of ventricular activation sequence,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol., vol. 289, no. 6, pp. H2724–H2732, 2005.
[52] C. Han et al., “Noninvasive three-dimensional cardiac activation imaging from body surface potential maps: A computational and experimental study on a rabbit model,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 27, no. 11,
pp. 1622–1630, Nov. 2008.
[53] R.G. Wise et al., “Geometrical Models of Left Ventricular Contraction
from MRI of the Normal and Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat Heart,” J.
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 2657–2676, 1999.

Author’s photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

