450

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

An Optimal Pulse System Design by Multichannel
Sensors Fusion
Dimin Wang, David Zhang, Fellow, IEEE, and Guangming Lu

Abstract—Pulse diagnosis, recognized as an important branch of
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), has a long history for health
diagnosis. Certain features in the pulse are known to be related with
the physiological status, which have been identified as biomarkers.
In recent years, an electronic equipment is designed to obtain the
valuable information inside pulse. Single-point pulse acquisition
platform has the benefit of low cost and flexibility, but is time consuming in operation and not standardized in pulse location. The
pulse system with a single-type sensor is easy to implement, but is
limited in extracting sufficient pulse information. This paper proposes a novel system with optimal design that is special for pulse
diagnosis. We combine a pressure sensor with a photoelectric sensor array to make a multichannel sensor fusion structure. Then, the
optimal pulse signal processing methods and sensor fusion strategy are introduced for the feature extraction. Finally, the developed
optimal pulse system and methods are tested on pulse database acquired from the healthy subjects and the patients known to be
afflicted with diabetes. The experimental results indicate that the
classification accuracy is increased significantly under the optimal
design and also demonstrate that the developed pulse system with
multichannel sensors fusion is more effective than the previous
pulse acquisition platforms.
Index Terms—Information measurement, multichannel sensors
fusion, optimal wrist pulse system design, sphygmology.

I. INTRODUCTION
ULSE diagnosis is an important noninvasive approach for
health diagnosis in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
and traditional Indian ayurvedic medicine [1], [2]. The pulse
originates from the heart, but is transmitted by blood through
arteries and flows a long way from the heart. The conditions
of heart, nerves, muscles, skin, arterial walls, and blood parameters (volume, contents, viscosity, pressure, and velocity)
interact with each other [3]. Consequently, the healthy conditions of the internal organs are able to manifest in the pulse. And
pulse diagnosis on arteriosclerosis [4], ventricular tachycardia
[5], coronary heart disease [6], and diabetes [7], [8] are studied.

P

Manuscript received October 15, 2014; revised December 17, 2014; accepted
January 7, 2015. Date of publication January 15, 2015; date of current version
March 3, 2016. This work was supported in parts by the GRF fund from the
HKSAR Government, the central fund from Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
the NSFC fund (61332011, 61020106004, 61272292, 61271344), Shenzhen
Fundamental Research fund (JCYJ20130401152508661), and Key Laboratory
of Network Oriented Intelligent Computation, Shenzhen, China.
D. Wang is with the Electronic Engineering Department, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: flower_of_di@aliyun.com).
D. Zhang is with the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong China
(e-mail: csdzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk).
G. Lu is with the Biocomputing Research Center, Shenzhen Graduate School,
HIT, China (e-mail: luguangm@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2392132

Chinese medicine practitioners used to take patients’ pulse at
three close points called Cun, Guan, and Chi, along the artery
at the wrist. By applying gradually increasing contact pressures, physicians were able to detect the healthy conditions of
the internal organs [3]. However, it is difficult to master the
pulse diagnostic skills without long-term clinical experiences
[9]. Sometimes, the pulse diagnosis even varies with different
physicians. Thus, to build the objective pulse diagnostic system
is necessary for the development of pulse analysis. With the
development of computer and sensor technology, computerized
pulse diagnosis gains lots of attentions.
In recent years, many pulse acquisition systems have been
developed with a single-point transducer [10]–[12]. Joshi et al.
[13] used a single MLT1010 piezoelectric transducer from AD
instruments to acquire pulse signals at Guan region. Although
single-point pulse systems have the advantages of flexibility,
low cost, and convenience, they run counter to the “three regions and nine divisions” criterion in TCM clinical science.
According to the ancient Chinese and Indian medicine, pulses
taken at Cun, Guan, and Chi respond to the health conditions of
different internal organs [14]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a wrist pulse acquisition platform with the multichannel
structure.
Wrist pulses are generally regarded as pressure signals in
physiology. The original design is inspired from imitation. Consequently, many pulse acquisition platforms are introduced to
detect the dynamic contact pressures at the wrist along the artery
[13]–[20]. These published systems use only the pressure type
sensors, which are accepted both in psychological and implementation. However, the pressure sensors are not able to detect
the weak pulsations and the dynamic pressure is easily noised by
the body movements and respiration, which limits the applications. Other sensor types, including electromechanical film [21],
polyvinylidene fluoride [22], optical sensor [23], Doppler ultrasonic [24], and electrocardiograph [5] are then developed, the
principles of which are different from that of pressure sensors.
Although the substitutes succeed in acquiring pulse waveforms,
they are not able to get the static contact pressures. The classic
pulse taking is based on touching the wrist with three levels
of pressures, superficial palpation, intermediate palpation, and
deep palpation to feel the different aspects of the pulse form.
In addition, the contact pressures have effect on the amplitudes
of pulse signals. The single-type sensor is insufficient to obtain satisfied pulse information. On the basis of the information
diversity, the pulse acquisition system should contain different
types of sensors.
Additionally, the former acquisition platforms only focus on
point information and ignore the surface information. Since

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: OPTIMAL PULSE SYSTEM DESIGN BY MULTICHANNEL SENSORS FUSION

Fig. 1.

Diagram of the pulse processing procedure.

TCM physicians used to take pulse from the surface feeling of
fingers. From the viewpoint of hemodynamics theories, Wang
et al. also proved that the pulse waveform should be matched
by both a longitudinal and a transverse wave model [23]. Consequently, both temporal and spatial pulse information are necessary for pulse wave analysis. Wang et al. [19] presented a
single-type sensor pulse system with array design, which is effective in measuring the width of the pulses but short in sensor
fusion. Moreover, the pulse spatial information along the radial
artery is required for the pulse location. The traditional manual
operations should be replaced by objective method, which guarantees that pulsations are all acquired under the same criterion.
Therefore, the sensor array which performs similar surface feeling of a finger when taking pulse is needed for pulse acquisition
platforms.
In this paper, we propose an optimal pulse acquisition system, which improves the former platform designs. Our focus is
on the multidimension pulse information fusion. The pressure
sensor and photoelectric sensor array are combined to make a
fusion sensor. The idea of multichannel optimization is outlined
as follows. The five candidate channels are first compared to select the optimal pulse taking positions. Then, the multichannel
combination is presented to reduce the feature space. Finally, the
feature level fusion strategy of different sensors and channels is
introduced.
Besides the description of the sensor fusion method and channel combination, in this paper, much attention is concentrated
on the experimental comparisons. We do experiments using the
health and diabetes pulse database to verify the novel design
and test the system performance for diabetes diagnosis. All
the experimental results indicate that the classification accuracy
is increased significantly after optimization. What is more is
that the experimental results also demonstrate that the proposed
pulse system with multichannel sensors fusion outperforms the
former pulse acquisition platforms.
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The proposed pulse system consists of three independent
channels corresponding to the Cun, Guan, and Chi positions,
respectively. Each channel contains a pressure sensor, regarded
as main sensor, and an array of nine photoelectric sensors,
regarded as subsensors. Fig. 1 shows the system structure,
which includes four parts, multichannel sensing, different sensor
fusion, signal processing, and user interface. The pulsations are
first detected by the sensors and transformed from physical sig-

Fig. 2.

451

Pulse acquisition system and the software design.

TABLE I
FUNDAMENTAL WORKING PARAMETERS OF THE SYSTEM
System working parameters
Working temperature
Sampling time
Static contact pressure
Pressure pulse amplitude
Signal magnification
Sampling rate
Signal resolution
Band-pass filter

Specifications
25 ± 15 °C
60 s
100 ± 100g
0∼5000 mV
1000
500 Hz
2.50 mV
0.3 Hz∼170 Hz

nals into weak voltage outputs. The analog signals are then
proposed by the amplification and filtering module, the analog
to digital conversion module and the micro digital signal processing module subsequently. Finally, the digital pulse signals
are sent to a computer through a universal serial bus (USB) interface for visualized operations. The pulse waveforms acquired
are stored in ODBC database format.
When taking a patient’s pulse, pulsations at the patient’s wrist
are first felt with our fingers to ensure the rough positions of Cun,
Guan, and Chi. Then, the sensor probe is tied to the patient’s
left wrist closely with each channel aligned at the corresponding position. Next, we subtly adjust the sampling position and
the static contact pressure of each channel by watching the acquired real-time pulse signals displayed on LCD (see Fig. 2).
Once stable pulse waveforms with high amplitudes are acquired,
pulsations at the wrist are considered to be detected by the sensors straight at the three body parts. Finally, we preview the
acquired pulse waveforms for a moment to check the stability
before starting the pulse sampling phase. When the acquired
pulse sample meets the requirements of duration and quality,
we stop the sampling phase, take down the probe, and save the
pulse records.
Table I shows the specification parameters of the proposed
system. The pulse sampling is conducted under a quiet indoor
environment. The patients are required to hold a sitting position
and keep calm. Talking or body movements are forbidden. In
our experiments, pulse signals are taken from the left hand of
patients uniformly. The duration of each sample is required to
last at least 1 min. Because the heart occasionally races, which
would indicate arrhythmia, we may miss this unusual pulse
status within a short sampling time. And duration more than a
minute would be unnecessary. The pulse sampling rate is set to

452

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 4.

Fig. 3.

Pulse probe with multichannel sensor structure.

500 Hz to cover the frequency bands of the pulsations. During
the whole sampling phase, the static contact pressures and the
positions of sensors are fixed. And patients do not feel any
discomfort due to the noninvasive approach.
A. Multichannel Design
The principle of the pulse diagnosis is based on the fact that
blood travels at different pace at different organs, resulting in
different shapes, which indicate the healthy conditions of a particular internal organs [3]. In traditional Chinese pulse diagnosis
(TCPD), physicians used to press their index finger, middle finger, and ring finger upon the Cun, Guan, and Chi three positions
of patients’ wrist, respectively. The middle finger is pressed
over the eminent head of the radius and the other two fingers are
placed adjacent to that one along the artery. The relations of the
positions with the organs are based on the “Maijing (The Pulse
Classic)” compiled by Wang Shuhe, which is the first extant
book specializing in sphygmology. It was considered that the
pulses from Cun, Guan, and Chi have different meanings and
bring supplementary information [20]. And the healthy conditions were judged by making integral consideration to the
pulses at different points. The similar phenomenon can be seen
in traditional Indian ayurvedic medicine [13]. Consequently,
we conclude that pulses from the three points are different and
should be acquired completely.
In the proposed system, we design a multichannel pulse acquisition probe to simulate the tactile sensations of the physicians’
fingers. And the channel optimization is employed to finalize the
design. Fig. 3 shows the optimized pulse system structure with
three channels, which are placed on the Cun, Guan, and Chi
three positions of the patients’ wrist during the pulse sampling.
Each channel has three degrees of freedom for adjustment. Step
motors are developed to control the contact static pressures at
the top.
B. Different Sensors Fusion
A type of a photoelectric sensor known as the near infrared
light (NIR) is selected as a subsensor attached to the main sensor,
strain gauge. The blood absorbs most of the NIR light, and the

Combination of pressure and photoelectric sensors.

reflected light changes as the blood flow changes in the radial
artery. It provides a different way of feeling pulsations. The
small size of NIR also meets the requirement of sensor array
design, which is introduced to simulate the surface feelings
of fingertip in each channel. The array is composed of nine
photoelectric sensor pairs, infrared LEDs, and phototransistors,
placed in an equidistance longitudinal direction (see Fig. 4).
The motivation of the array design is that the analysis of pulse
waveform has to include both temporal and spatial dimensions.
Sensor array is able to detect not only the temporal waveforms
but also the spatial information to locate the center of pulsation.
Then, we combine the pressure sensor with the photoelectric sensor array in each channel. The combination of different
type sensors are usually thought to bring more pulse information than the single-type sensor. Fig. 4 shows the sensor fusion
structure that implemented in our system. At each channel, the
strain gauge is selected as the main sensing element to detect the
pressure pulse waveforms. The subsensor, photoelectric sensor
array, is placed under the pressure sensor to acquire the photoelectric pulse signals. The different type sensors have specific
advantages in pulse acquisition. The photoelectric sensor is capable of feeling weak pulsations and the pressure sensor is able
to detect the arterial elasticity. The theory of these two kinds is
different in ways of detecting the pulsations. The photoelectric
sensor, which is usually recognized as volume sensor, detects
the instantaneous changes of blood flow along the radial artery.
In contrast, the strain gauge responds directly to the pressure
changes.
III. MULTICHANNEL OPTIMIZATION
Pulse waveform acquired from multichannels brings more
information than that from single-point transducer due to the
complementarities. However, there is an inherent tradeoff between channels and benefits. The increase is not satisfied just
by adding more channels to the transducer, as uncorrelated or
noised channels are bound to affect the performance. Therefore,
the first proposed multichannel optimization, equal to the decision of pulse taking positions, is developed through the experimental verification. It mainly consists of three steps, the Guan
pulse with high SNR and stability is first selected as the reference. Then, multiple linear regression is applied to compare the
correlation relationship between the pulse of other channels and

WANG et al.: OPTIMAL PULSE SYSTEM DESIGN BY MULTICHANNEL SENSORS FUSION

Fig. 5.

453

Five candidate pulse taking channels before optimization.

the Guan channel. Finally, the optimal selection of the channels
is obtained based on the information measurement criterion.
A. Selection of Base Channel
Despite more than three positions at the wrist are available for
pulse taking, standard Chinese pulse diagnosis is always limited
to the Cun, Guan, and Chi, which are confirmed by experiences.
In order to ensure the convincing pulse taking positions at the
wrist along the radial artery, we extend the three-point sensing
into five-channel sensing. Fig. 5 displays the candidate pulse
taking positions. Besides the traditional Cun, Guan, and Chi
three points in the TCM theory, we add another two positions
alongside them, which are named as fourth point and fifth point
for convenience. The other positions at the wrist out of this area
are not chosen, where one can hardly feel any pulsations as the
radial artery goes deeper.
Fig. 6 shows the coarse pulse signals without preprocessing,
which are taken from the five candidate positions of one subject simultaneously. Waveforms from most of the channels are
similar in shape except the channel-5, pulse signals of which
are seriously corrupted by noises, baseline wanderings, and outliers. Fig. 7 presents the partial enlarged view of an interval.
The pulse signals are aligned and placed in one coordinate for
comparison. It is obvious that pulse from channel-2 has the
best performance with the highest amplitudes in contrast with
the other four channels. And pulse from channel-5, which has
the lowest amplitudes of all, almost moves in a straight line. It
is known that amplitude is the manifestation of energy, which
determines the capacity to resist noises and remain stable.
Thus, the evaluation criterions, including signal to noise ratio
(SNR) and pulse stability, are employed to measure the signal
quality. Since the pulse information is concentrated in the low
frequency bands less than 10 Hz, signals are decomposed into
signal and noise parts through a low-pass filter with 10-Hz cutoff
frequency. SNR is defined as the ratio of the energy of pulse
spectral graphs below 10 Hz to that above 10 Hz by the formula

SNRdB = 10 log10

Psignal
Pnoise


(1)

where P is the average power and the variance of the signal and
noise are calculated as the signal energy and noise energy.

Fig. 6.

Original pulse waveforms taken from the five testing positions.

Fig. 7.

Pulse comparison in details among the five channels.

Pulse waveform is a typical periodic signal with similar shape
in each cycle. Therefore, self-similarity is introduced to evaluate
the pulse stability. Pulse from each channel is regarded as an independent class, and the segmented single-period pulse signals
are for the elements of each class. In this paper, the period segmentation is performed by using the adaptive sliding window
method [25].
Suppose that we have segmented a set of N single-period
signals, organized in a matrix Xj = [x1j , x2j , . . . , xN j ] for jth
channel. Fig. 8 shows the normalized single-period pulse signals, which are acquired from the five channels of a healthy

454

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

TABLE II
EVALUATION AMONG THE FIVE CHANNELS
Channel

1

2

3

4

5

Sw
77.4
68.1
87.3
140.1
159.1
Signal energy 2.99e + 07 7.17e + 08 3.64e + 08 1.78e + 07 1.79e + 06
Noise energy 1.04e + 05 5.58e + 05 7.99e + 05 7.10e + 04 1.34e + 04
SNR(dB)
24.6
31.1
26.6
23.9
21.2

We collect 465 pulse samples from 465 subjects in total with
the proposed system. The average criterion results are shown
in Table II. Pulse signal with the highest SNR is obtained from
channel-2 (Guan), and the intraclass distance is the smallest
among the five channels. The signal energy and SNR gradually
degrades in the other channels, since radial artery goes deeper
apart from the Guan region. The signal energy of channel-5 is
less than 1% of that of channel-2, resulting in the lowest SNR
of all. Therefore, pulse waveform from channel-2 (Guan) is
selected as the basic component. Fig. 8 also illustrates that segmented single-period pulses from Guan stay in a more compact
state. By contrast, pulses of channel-5 are easily disturbed by
noise and stay in a chaotic state.
B. Multichannel Selection
Fig. 8.

Normalized single-period pulse signals from the five channels.

subject within one sampling period. Each xij is normalized to
the same length and amplitude. The self-similarity is then transformed into the form of inner-class divergence defined by the
following formulas:
m
j =

Sj =

N
1 
xij , j = 1, 2, . . . , 5
N i=1

(2)

N
1 
(xij − m
 j )(xi j − m
 j )T .
N i=1

(3)

The subscript j is a mark of channel. The vector xij stands for
the ith single-period pulse of the jth channel. And m
 j is the average single-period waveform of the jth channel. The intraclass
scatter matrix is defined by the matrix Sj , which measures the
cluster degree. In general, single-period waveforms have high
correlations with each other in the same channel. Inspired by
the PCA method, we decompose the matrix Sj into the diagonal
matrix.
Sj = Pj diag(λj 1 , λj 2 , . . . , λj n , 0, . . . , 0)Pj−1

sjw =
λj i .

(4)
(5)

i=1,2,...,n

λj i is the nonzero eigenvalues of the matrix Sj . We define
the dispersion measure sjw by multiplying λj i of each matrix Sj ,
repectively. As Sj is a positive definite matrix, there exists λj i >
0. A more concentrated set will result in a smaller dispersion
measure value.

The second stage is the multichannel selection. Pulse signals from multichannels are compared with the selected Guan
pulse to select the channels with significant improvement. We
intend to give an explanation about the reason why pulse should
be taken at the Cun, Guan, and Chi three positions.
Single-period waveforms of Guan channel are selected and
regarded as the reference. We randomly select half of them
as base set, and the other part is regarded as validation set.
The base set is written as X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ]. Each singleperiod waveform xi = [xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xiL ]T is normalized to the
same length and amplitude. Then, the multiregression method
is introduced to calculate the errors between fitting sets and the
bases. For each fitting sample yj = [yj 1 , yj 2 , . . . , yj L ]T , it is
assumed to be generated by the following model:
yj = X β + e.

(6)

A generalized version of (6) is to find β such that the following
objective function is minimized:
 2.
f (yj ) = min ||yj − X β||
β

(7)

Multiregression approach is proposed for learning the optimal
 The related algorithms are included in the toolbox
value for β.
of MATLAB.
Thus, the errors between fitting sets and bases are calculated.
Through selecting proper error margins, we classify the singleperiod waveforms of the fitting sets into three patterns. The first
pattern contains pulses represented by the reference (training
samples from Guan channel) with little error. The second class
is for pulses with additional information, which are expected.
The last pattern stands for the contaminated pulses.

WANG et al.: OPTIMAL PULSE SYSTEM DESIGN BY MULTICHANNEL SENSORS FUSION

455

Table III presents the statistical results of pulse information
measure, intraclass distance, and correlation coefficient of the
four channels compared with bases. The Cun and Chi channels
are with information ratios up to 80% and 55%, respectively.
The information ratio of Chi channel is lower than that of Cun
channel as a result of the high correlation up to 0.94, which
indicates that many fitting sets of Chi are classified into the
first class with no additional information. The information ratios of channel-4 and channel-5 are less than 25%. Since the
fitting sets from these two channels have low correlation and
large intraclass distance, resulting in large fitting errors to the
base set. Therefore, the Cun and Chi channels besides Guan
are selected as the optimal channels for pulse taking based on
the fitting evaluation. The result of multichannel optimization is
also consistent with the significance of Cun, Guan, and Chi in
the TCM theory.
Fig. 9.

Errors of single-period waveforms fitting to the basis.

IV. OPTIMIZATION OF DIFFERENT SENSORS FUSION

TABLE III
EVALUATION AMONG THE FITTING SETS
Channel
Information measure
Intraclass distance
Correlation coefficient

Cun

Chi

4

5

79.0%
59.1
0.92

54.2%
54.5
0.94

24.1%
64.0
0.89

3.4%
103.1
0.72

The validation set is recognized as bringing no additional
information as a result of the high correlations with base set.
The maximum fitting errors of the validation set is defined as
the lower limit of information threshold
C1 =

max

y j ∈ Channel−2

f (yj ).

(8)

If the fitting error of yj is below C1 , it means that yj belongs
to the first pattern and brings no additional information.
The upper limit of the threshold is defined by the average
fitting error among fitting sets
C2 =

M
1 
f (yj ).
M j =1

(9)

If the fitting error of yj is bigger than C2 , it means that yj
belongs to the third class and brings no improvements to the
pulse analysis. Fitting sets belonging to the second class are
considered as bringing complementary information.
The fitting errors of fitting sets of a certain subject are shown
in Fig. 9. The ratio of pulses belonging to the second class at
each channel is defined as pulse information measure. It can
be seen that fitting sets with errors between C1 and C2 are
mostly concentrated in Cun and Chi channel, which means that
these two channels bring most of the pulse information. The
fitting errors of the fourth channel and fifth channel exceed the
threshold C2 , which demonstrate that pulse signals of these two
channels are buried in the noises.

The second improvement is the sensor fusion design. The
motivation is to combine the advantages of pressure sensor
and photoelectric sensor array. The pressure sensor, which detects the pressure changes at the wrist, obtains the pulsations
directly. And the photoelectric sensor penetrates skin and reflects the blood information below skin. The fusion sensor acquires the pulse waveforms by different means. Therefore, not
only the pulse rate, pulse width, and oxygen saturation are detected by the photoelectric sensor arrays, but also the shape and
pulse depth are acquired by the pressure sensors.
The proposed system is composed of three independent channels corresponding to Cun, Guan, and Chi three positions. Nine
subsignals, photoelectric pulse, and one main signal, pressure
pulse, are acquired simultaneously at each channel. It is necessary to reduce the data dimensions and to combine the features
from different type sensors. Since the pulse from Cun, Guan, and
Chi bring supplementary information [20], the data dimension
reduction is performed at each channel, respectively.
Since the pulse features from array signals are redundant
due to the high correlations. We extract a representation of the
array signals at each channel. The algorithm is described by the
following formulas:
1
xi
9 i=1
9

xi = [xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xiN ]T , u =
1
Sw =
(xi − u)(xi − u)T .
9 i=1

(10)

9

(11)

The vector xi denotes to the array signals with N sampling
points. Matrix Sw denotes to the total scatter matrix of array
signals.


ei = (xi − u) − φ1 φT1 (xi − u)2

=
(xi − u)T (xi − u) − φT1 (xi − u)(xi − u)T φ1


2
=
xi − u22 − φT1 (xi − u)2 .
(12)

456

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

And φ1 is the unit principal vector of Sw . The residual error
vector (xi − u) is projected onto the principal vector φ1 and ei
is defined as the projection error, which stands for the pulse energy deviating from the principal direction. Therefore, the most
representive signal y of each array is determined by selecting
the array signal xi with the least value ei


2
y = arg min xi − u22 − φT1 (xi − u)2 .
(13)
x i

TABLE IV
DATA ORGANIZATION
Age distribution

Healthy

30∼50 50∼60 60∼80
30
47
48

BMI distribution

< 20
4

20∼25
83

> 25
38

Gender
distribution
Female Male
51
74

Diabetes

27

44

54

2

78

45

52

73

Total

57

91

102

6

161

83

103

147

The simplified ei consists of two parts. The vector (xi − u)
describes the similarity between array signal and the average,
and φT1 (xi − u) denotes to the projection of the residual error
on unit principal vector. In general, the pulse with the highest
amplitudes is selected as it contributes the most to the principal
vector. The array selection is performed to keep more pulse
information and remove the redundant array signals.
Finally, pulse waveforms from 30 sensors are reduced to 6
signals. Each channel includes one pressure signal and one representative photoelectric signal. Pulse features extracted from
the six signals are combined to form a feature vector in a serial strategy. The subscript pri and phi denotes to pressure and
photoelectric pulse signal of ith channel, respectively.
f = [fpr 1 , fph 1 , fpr 2 , fph 2 , fpr 3 , fph 3 ]
fpr /ph = [fam p , ffre , fp ca ].
The features of amplitudes, frequencies, and PCA components are extracted in our experiments. The pulse amplitudes
reflect the energy information, and the frequencies describe
the pulse period variance. We normalize the segmented singleperiod pulse waveforms of each subject to the same scale, calculate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues, and sort the eigenvectors
by contribution degree. The first five eigenvectors and eigenvalues are selected as PCA features. The feature vector extracted
from each signal contains 262 elements. And the fusion feature
is 1572-dimension for one subject.
V. RESULTS BEFORE AND AFTER OPTIMIZATION
Our goal is to compare the system performances before and
after optimization. The experiments are performed on pulse
database of healthy subjects and patients known to be afflicted
with diabetes. Clinical medical studies demonstrated that the
loss of arterial elasticity and endothelial function caused by
certain disease such as diabetes results in decrease flexibility
of vasculature and heightened stress to the circulatory system
[26]. Many researches [8], [23], [25]–[29] have been published
on this issue, which attracts increasingly attentions.
In total, we collected 250 pulse samples from 125 healthy
subjects and 125 diabetes patients, respectively. The database
is built in Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong. All patients
were inpatient volunteers from the Hospital. The labels of the
subjects are determined according to the recent health check. For
each subject, the three pressure pulse and 27 photoelectric pulse
from Cun, Guan, and Chi were acquired as one pulse sample.
The distribution of the pulse database is ensured to avoid the
influence caused by biological interpatient variability. Table IV

Fig. 10.

Signal processing stage at each channel.

lists the organization of the dataset. The age, BMI, and gender
distribution is similar between healthy and diabetes patients.
Fig. 10 shows the signal preprocessing stage before feature
extraction. The original pressure pulse and array signals of each
channel are preprocessed by the denoising, baseline wander
removal and period segmentation models sequentially. The array
selection is used to obtain the most representive signal from the
nine array signals. Then, the fusion pulse features proposed in
Section IV-B are extracted in the selected set. Next, the feature
dimension is reduced by projecting the serial fusion features
onto the PCA subspace. Last, SVM classifier is applied to predict
the patterns of the testing samples. To reduce the influence
caused by sample partitioning, the five-fold cross validation is
employed in our experiments. We randomly divide the samples
of each pattern into five equal folds. Each fold contains 25
different samples and each sample only belongs to one fold.
In each cross validation, four folds are for training and the left
for testing. The classification accuracy is obtained by averaging
recognition rates of the five-fold cross experiments.
A. Experiment 1
In the first experiment, the performance between single-type
sensors and fusion sensor is compared. The pulse at Cun, Guan,
and Chi acquired by pressure sensor, photoelectric sensor, and
fusion sensor are used to distinguish the healthy subjects from
the diabetes patients, respectively. The classification results are
shown in Table V. It can be seen that pressure pulse is superior
to photoelectric pulse in diabetes diagnosis, and pulse acquired
from Guan channel achieves higher classification accuracy than
that from the other two channels. That is why the former pulse

WANG et al.: OPTIMAL PULSE SYSTEM DESIGN BY MULTICHANNEL SENSORS FUSION

457

TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF THE SENSORS FUSION
Before Optimization
Channel
Cun
Guan
Chi

Pressure sensor
77.2%
85.2%
72.8%

Photoelectric sensors
58.4%
63.6%
56.4%

TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF THE MULTI-CHANNEL

After Optimization
fusion sensors
77.6%
85.6%
76.8%

acquisition platforms are generally designed by pressure sensor
with single Guan channel. An accuracy of 85.2% is obtained
in Guan position just by using pressure pulse features, and the
recognition rate reaches 85.6% by extracting the fusion features of pressure and photoelectric pulse from Guan channel.
Similarly, the performance of Cun channel increases to 77.6%
by using the pulse from fusion sensors. The improvements of
sensor fusion in Cun and Guan channels are not obvious as
that in the chi channel. Because the photoelectric array design,
which provides spatial information for pulse locations, guarantees the high quality of pressure pulse signals. However, the pressure pulses from Chi position are often unavailable due to the
weak pulsations. Then, the photoelectric signals provide significant supplements to the pressure pulses in Chi channel. Hence,
the accuracy of fusion sensors at the Chi channel is increased
by 4%.
The other reason is that, in the case of serial feature fusion
at each channel, the dimension of feature vector is redoubled,
and the accuracy estimation of principal vector is more difficult.
Due to the dimensional increase and high correlation after feature fusion, estimation accuracy of PCA subspace is decreased
and noise information is also increased. That is why the serial
feature fusion strategy at Cun and Guan channels underperforms
in this experiment. Conversely, the array pulses at Chi channel
contains information, which are not able to be detected by pressure sensors. This may be the key reason why sensor fusion at
the Chi channel outperforms the other channels in information
fusion problems.

Before optimization

After Optimization

Channel Combination

Classification accuracy

Cun
Guan
Chi
C u n + G u an
C u n + C hi
G u an + C hi
C u n + G u an + C hi

77.6%
85.6%
76.8%
90%
84.8%
88.4%
91.6%

TABLE VII
CLASSIFICATION RESULT BETWEEN HEALTHY AND DIABETES
Pulse
System

Single
Channel [7]

simplex
sensors [19]
Our
proposed

Sample
Healthy

DBU

50

21

195

203

125

125

Method

Sensitivity

Specificity

Classification
accuracy

AR
model
Gaussian
model
WT
method
SampEn

85.7%

74.3%

82.3%

84.0%

90.4%

85.9%

88.9%

77.1%

85.4%

92.6%

87.6%

90.2%

Fusion
Feature
+ SVM

94.6%

88.6%

91.6%

design of multichannel is verified in this experiment, which implies that pulse from different channels bring complementary
information. Based on the results of Experiments 1 and 2, we
can draw the following conclusion:
1) the classification accuracy is significantly increased after
optimization;
2) the performance of the proposed system is improved after channel combination, which demonstrate the “three
regions and nine divisions” criterion in TCM clinical
science.

B. Experiment 2

C. Experiment 3

In the second experiment, the performances of multichannel
combination are compared. There are seven possible channel
combinations: Cun, Guan, Chi, Cun plus Guan, Cun plus Chi,
Guan plus Chi, and three channels. We do the experiment based
on two sets of original pulse feature vectors: 262-dimensional
pressure feature and 262-dimensional photoelectric feature.
The fusion features of each candidate combination group are
extracted.
Table VI gives the classification results. The classification
rate of single channel pulse reaches the best accuracy of 85.6%
in the Guan channel. The performance is similar to the previous classification results of the system with single channel [7],
[19]. It demonstrates that the proposed system obtains quality
pulse for diagnosis. The classification accuracy is significantly
increased by using the pulses from two channels or three channels. The best accuracy of 91.6% is achieved by combining the
pressure pulse features and array pulse features from all of the
three channels. A ratio of 6% increase is obtained compared
with the best performance of using single channel. The optimal

In this experiment, we intend to compare the proposed system
with other pulse acquisition platforms on diabetes diagnosis. Table VII gives the classification results. C. Yinghui [7] introduced
a single-point pulse system, proposed AR model and Gaussian
model to match the pulse waveforms besides the WT method.
The classification reached 85.9% by using the fitting parameters
as features. W. Peng [19] proposed a multichannel pulse system with pressure sensors. The SampEn features from the three
channels Cun, Guan, and Chi were extracted, and an accuracy
of 90.2% was obtained. On the basis of multichannel structure,
we enrich the sensor types by combining the pressure sensor
with the photoelectric sensor array.
It is evident in Table VII that the classification accuracy of the
proposed system is much higher than that of the other platforms
on diabetes recognition. And, based on the pulse preprocessing
technique and array selection, a recognition accuracy of 91.6%
is achieved using the fusion features plus kernel SVM classifier.
By this experiment, we can draw a conclusion that the performance of the pulse system with multichannel sensors fusion

458

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

is superior to the former pulse systems in diabetes diagnosis.
Moreover, this experiment also indicates that the period segmentation preprocessing techniques is more suitable for extracting
pulse features.
VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
An optimal pulse system with multichannel sensors fusion
is introduced in this paper. The optimization including channel
decision, array selection, and sensor fusion are proposed to improve the performance. Besides, the novel probe structure and
the information measurement criterion are also presented. Related experiments on diabetes diagnosis are developed to test
the system ability and the accuracy is increased significantly
after optimization. The experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed system is better or at least not worse than the previous pulse acquisition platforms. Although the current system
achieves satisfactory results on classifying diabetes from health
samples, the fusion features containing redundant information
are used for recognition. This is a problem we are setting out to
research on.
The system is of practical applications in auxiliary diagnosis for patients who suffering from diabetes. Compared with
the traditional blood test, it has the advantages of no pain, no
injection, and convenience, which is more acceptable in daily
health monitoring. Further, we will extend the pulse diagnosis
experiments for more types of disease.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the editor and the anonymous
reviewers for their help in improving the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Selvan and M. Begum, “Nadi Aridhal: A pulse based automated diagnostic system,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Electron. Comput. Technol., 2011,
pp. 305–308.
[2] S. Walsh and E. King, Pulse Diagnosis: A Clinical Guide. New York, NY,
USA: Elsevier Health Sciences, 2007.
[3] C. T. Lee and L. Y. Wei, “Spectrum analysis of human pulse,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-30, no. 6, pp. 348–352, Jun. 1983.
[4] S. A. CARTER, “Indirect systolic pressures and pulse waves in arterial occlusive disease of the lower extremities,” Circulation, vol. 37,
pp. 624–637, 1968.
[5] H. M. Haqqani, J. B. Morton, and J. M. Kalman, “Using the 12-Lead
ECG to localize the origin of atrial and ventricular tachycardias: Part
2—Ventricular tachycardia,” J. Cardiovascular Electrophysiol., vol. 20,
pp. 825–832, 2009.
[6] S. S. Franklin, S. A. Khan, N. D. Wong, M. G. Larson, and D. Levy,
“Is pulse pressure useful in predicting risk for coronary heart disease? The Framingham heart study,” Circulation, vol. 100, pp. 354–360,
1999.
[7] Y. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Wrist pulse signal diagnosis
using modified Gaussian models and Fuzzy C-Means classification,” Med.
Eng. Phys., vol. 31, pp. 1283–1289, 2009.
[8] Y. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Computerized wrist pulse
signal diagnosis using modified auto-regressive models,” J. Med. Syst.,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 321–328, Jan. 2011.
[9] B. Flaws, The Secret of Chinese Pulse Diagnosis. Boulder, Co, USA: Blue
Poppy Enterprises, Inc., 1995.
[10] C.-H. Chen, E. Nevo, B. Fetics, P. H. Pak, F. C. P. Yin, W. L. Maughan,
and D. A. Kass, “Estimation of central aortic pressure: waveform by
mathematical transformation of radial tonometry pressure validation of
generalized transfer function,” Circulation, vol. 95, pp. 1827–1836, Apr.
1997.

[11] E. Kaniusas, H. Pfutzner, L. Mehnen, J. Kosel, C. Tellez-Blanco, G. Varoneckas, A. Alonderis, T. Meydan, M. Vazquez, M. Rohn, A. M. Merlo,
and B. Marquardt, “Method for continuous nondisturbing monitoring of
blood pressure by magnetoelastic skin curvature sensor and ECG,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 819–828, Jun. 2006.
[12] L. Jianwen, R. X. Li, and E. E. Konofagou, “Pulse wave imaging of
the human carotid artery: An in vivo feasibility study,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 174–181,
Jan. 2012.
[13] A. Joshi, A. Kulkarni, S. Chandran, V. Jayaraman, and B. Kulkarni, “Nadi
tarangini: A pulse based diagnostic system,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc, 2007, pp. 2207–2210.
[14] C.-H. Luo, Y.-F. Chung, C.-S. Hu, C.-C. Yeh, X.-C. Si, D.-H. Feng, Y.-C.
Lee, S.-I. Huang, S.-M. Yeh, and C.-H. Liang, “Possibility of quantifying
TCM finger-reading sensations: I. Bi-Sensing Pulse Diagnosis Instrument,” Eur. J. Integrative Med., vol. 4, pp. e255–e262, 2012.
[15] Y.-F. Chung, C.-S. Hu, C.-H. Luo, C.-C. Yeh, X.-C. Si, D.-H. Feng, S.M. Yeh, and C.-H. Liang, “Possibility of quantifying TCM finger-reading
sensations: II. An example of health standardization,” Eur. J. Integrative
Med., vol. 4, pp. e263–e270, 2012.
[16] T. Chu-Chang, L. Shing-Hong, C. Jan-Yow, C. Jian-Jung, and L. WenMiin, “A novel noninvasive measurement technique for analyzing the
pressure pulse waveform of the radial artery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 288–297, Jan. 2008.
[17] D. Giri, U. Rajendra Acharya, R. J. Martis, S. Vinitha Sree, T.-C. Lim,
T. Ahamed VI, and J. S. Suri, “Automated diagnosis of coronary artery
disease affected patients using LDA, PCA, ICA and Discrete Wavelet
Transform,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 37, pp. 274–282, Jan. 2013.
[18] S. Fu and S. Lai, “A system for pulse measurement and analysis of Chinese
medicine,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1989,
pp. 1695–1696.
[19] P. Wang, W. Zuo, and D. Zhang, “A compound pressure signal acquisition
system for multichannel wrist pulse signal analysis,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 1556–1565, Jun. 2014.
[20] P. Wang, W. Zuo, H. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Design and implementation
of a multi-channel pulse signal acquisition system,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
Biomed. Eng. Informat., 2012, pp. 1063–1067.
[21] H. Sorvoja, V. M. Kokko, R. Myllyla, and J. Miettinen, “Use of EMFi as
a blood pressure pulse transducer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 54,
no. 6, pp. 2505–2512, Dec. 2005.
[22] M. Toda and M. L. Thompson, “Contact-type vibration sensors using curved clamped PVDF film,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 6, no. 5,
pp. 1170–1177, Oct. 2006.
[23] Y.-Y. L. Wang, W.-K. Sze, J.-G. Bau, S.-H. Wang, M.-Y. Jan, T.-L. Hsu,
W.-K. Wang, “The ventricular-arterial coupling system can be analyzed
by the eigenwave modes of the whole arterial system,” Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 92, pp. 153901-1–153901-3, 2008.
[24] D. Zhang, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, and Y. Zheng, “Wavelet based analysis of
doppler ultrasonic wrist-pulse signals,” in Proc. Int. Conf. BioMed. Eng.
Inform., 2008, pp. 539–543.
[25] D. Wang and G. Lu, “Period segmentation for wrist pulse signal based on
adaptive cascade thresholding and machine learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Med. Biometrics, May 30 2014–Jun. 1 2014, pp. 63–67.
[26] J.-J. Shu and Y. Sun, “Developing classification indices for Chinese pulse
diagnosis,” Complementary Therapies Med., vol. 15, pp. 190–198, Sep.
2007.
[27] I. Wakabayashi and H. Masuda, “Association of pulse pressure with fibrinolysis in patients with type 2 diabetes,” Thrombosis Res., vol. 121,
pp. 95–102, 2007.
[28] T. Chen, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, and Z. Luo, “A design of pulse wave signal
collecting and analysis system based on USB,” in Proc. Intell. Inform.
Technol. Appl., Workshop, 2007, pp. 107–111.
[29] N. Arunkumar and K. Sirajudeen, “Approximate Entropy based ayurvedic
pulse diagnosis for diabetics-a case study,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Trendz
Inform. Sci. Comput., 2011, pp. 133–135.
[30] S. W. Kim, D. G. Hwang, Y. K. Choi, H. S. Lee, D. H. Park, S. S. Lee,
G. W. Kim, S. G. Lee, and S. J. Lee, “Improvement of pulse diagnostic
apparatus with array sensor of magnetic tunneling junctions,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 99, art. no. 08R908, 2006.
[31] P. Dupuis and C. Eugène, “Combined detection of respiratory and
cardiac rhythm disorders by high-resolution differential cuff pressure
measurement,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 498–502,
Jun. 2000.
[32] M. Nitzan, “Automatic noninvasive measurement of arterial blood pressure,” IEEE Instrum. Meas. Mag., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 32–37, Feb. 2011.

WANG et al.: OPTIMAL PULSE SYSTEM DESIGN BY MULTICHANNEL SENSORS FUSION

Dimin Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2009, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department
of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China.
From September 2010 to September 2011, he was
a Research Assistant at the Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
His current research interests include signal processing, pattern recognition, machine learning, and computerized medical diagnosis.

David Zhang received the Graduate degree in computer science from Peking University, Beijing, China.
He received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Harbin Institute of Technology
(HIT), Harbin, China, in 1982 and 1985, respectively.
In 1994, he received the second Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University
of Waterloo, ON, Canada.
From 1986 to 1988, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
at Tsinghua University and then an Associate Professor at the Academia Sinica, Beijing. He is the Chair
Professor since 2005 at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, where he is the
Founding Director of the Biometrics Research Centre (UGC/CRC) supported
by the Hong Kong SAR Government in 1998. He also serves as the Visiting
Chair Professor in Tsinghua University, and an Adjunct Professor in Peking
University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, HIT, and the University of Waterloo. He is the Founder and Editor-in-Chief, International Journal of Image and
Graphics; Book Editor, Springer International Series on Biometrics; Organizer,
the International Conference on Biometrics Authentication; an Associate Editor
of more than ten international journals including IEEE Transactions. He is the
author of more than 10 books, more than 300 international journal papers and
around 30 patents from USA/Japan/HK/China. Recently, he has been selected
as a Highly Cited Researcher 2014 by Thomson Reuters.
Prof. Zhang is a Croucher Senior Research Fellow, a Distinguished Speaker
of the IEEE Computer Society, and a Fellow of IAPR.

459

Guangming Lu received the Graduate degree in
electrical engineering, the Master’s degree in control theory and control engineering, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and engineering from the
Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China,
in 1998, 2000, and 2005, respectively.
From 2005 to 2007, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at Tsinghua University. He is currently a Professor at the Biocomputing Research Center, Shenzhen
Graduate School, HIT. His current research interests
include pattern recognition, image processing, and
automated biometric technologies and applications.

