1514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

A Robust and Artifact Resistant Algorithm
of Ultrawideband Imaging System for Breast
Cancer Detection
Tengfei Yin, Student Member, IEEE, Falah H. Ali∗ , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Constantino Carlos Reyes-Aldasoro, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: Ultrawideband radar imaging is regarded
as one of the most promising alternatives for breast cancer
detection. A range of algorithms reported in literature shows satisfactory tumor detection capabilities. However, most of algorithms
suffer significant deterioration or even fail when the early-stage artifact, including incident signals and skin-fat interface reflections,
cannot be perfectly removed from received signals. Furthermore,
fibro-glandular tissue poses another challenge for tumor detection,
due to the small dielectric contrast between glandular and
cancerous tissues. Methods: This paper introduces a novel Robust
and Artifact Resistant (RAR) algorithm, in which a neighborhood
pairwise correlation-based weighting is designed to overcome the
adverse effects from both artifact and glandular tissues. In RAR,
backscattered signals are time-shifted, summed, and weighted by
the maximum combination of the neighboring pairwise correlation
coefficients between shifted signals, forming the intensity of each
point within an imaging area. Results: The effectiveness was
investigated using 3-D anatomically and dielectrically accurate
finite-difference-time-domain numerical breast models. The use
of neighborhood pairwise correlation provided robustness against
artifact and enabled the detection of multiple scatterers. RAR
is compared with four well-known algorithms: delay-and-sum,
delay-multiply-and-sum, modified-weighted-delay-and-sum, and
filtered-delay-and-sum. Conclusion: It has shown that RAR exhibits improved identification capability, robust artifact resistance,
and high detectability over its counterparts in most scenarios
considered, while maintaining computational efficiency. Simulated
tumors in both homogeneous and heterogonous, from mildly to
moderately dense breast phantoms, combining an entropy-based
artifact removal algorithm, were successfully identified and
localized. Significance: These results show the strong potential of
RAR for breast cancer screening.
Index Terms—Breast cancer detection, delay-and-sum (DAS),
finite-difference time-domain (FDTD), ultrawideband (UWB)
imaging.

Manuscript received February 6, 2014; revised October 17, 2014 and December 5, 2014; accepted January 6, 2015. Date of publication January 15,
2015; date of current version May 18, 2015. This paper has supplementary
downloadable material available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
T. Yin is with the Communications Research Group, School of Engineering
and Informatics, University of Sussex.
∗ F. H. Ali is with the Communications Research Group, School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9RH, U.K. (e-mail:
f.h.ali@sussex.ac.uk).
C. C. Reyes-Aldasoro is with the City University London.
This paper contains supplemental material available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 58.9 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2393256

I. INTRODUCTION
REAST cancer is the most common cancer among females
[1], and one of the leading causes of death worldwide
[2]. Although less common in males, detected incidences of
breast cancer among males have been increasing recently [3].
Early diagnosis of breast cancer is one of the most challenging
and important aspects for the management of the disease, as
it may be possible to detect the cancer before it spreads [4].
Three commonly used screening methods for breast cancer are
X-ray mammography [5], Ultrasound (US) [6], and Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) [7]. A higher rate of false-positive
examination results with US makes it less popular than
mammography [8], whereas MRI is usually suggested to be
used in conjunction with mammography [9]. Despite the merits
of mammography, its deficiencies are evident: low sensitivity
[10], painful breast compression [11], and radiation exposure
from X-rays, which brings a potential threat of increasing the
cancer risk [12]. The limitations of existing methods constitute
a motivation for better options.
In the last few decades, different modalities of microwave
imaging for breast cancer detection, including passive, hybrid,
and active approaches, have attracted considerable attention.
The passive imaging techniques seek to identify tumors based
on the temperature differences between normal and cancerous
breast tissues with the aid of radiometers [13], [14]. Hybrid
approaches differentiate biological tissues by the distinctive
acoustic waves radiated from the thermoelastic expansion when
tissues are under microwave illumination [15]. Active methods
distinguish normal and malignant breast tissues based on their
contrast of dielectric properties at microwave frequencies [16].
Based on the reconstruction technique used, active detection
methods can be categorized into microwave tomography and
ultrawideband (UWB) radar-based imaging. In microwave
tomography, the spatial distributions of dielectric constant
and/or conductivity within the breast are iteratively calculated;
thus, nonlinear inverse scattering problems are involved. More
details on tomographic imaging systems can be found in [17]
and [18]. UWB radar methods, on the other hand, aim to
identify the presence and location of strong scatterers such as
tumors, rather than quantitatively computing the distribution of
dielectric properties.
UWB radar-based imaging systems face several challenges for breast cancer detection, two of them is the antenna design, and the construction of realistic finite-difference

B

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YIN et al.: ROBUST AND ARTIFACT RESISTANT ALGORITHM OF ULTRAWIDEBAND IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

time-domain (FDTD)-based [19] breast model. Another difficult
challenge is image formation algorithm. The image formation
algorithm is expected to provide superior tumor identification
ability, accurate positioning, strong robustness, and fast computation speed. A variety of image formation algorithms have
been proposed over the last decade. Hagness et al. [20], [21]
first proposed the confocal microwave imaging (CMI) technique
which adopted delay-and-sum (DAS) beamforming algorithm.
Research on beamforming algorithms for CMI has evolved
into two branches: data-dependent and data-independent. Some
promising data-dependent beamforming algorithms that have
been considered are multistatic adaptive microwave imaging
[22], multi-input multi-output [23], and time-reversal multiple signal classification [24], [25]. Data-dependent algorithms
can reconstruct high-resolution images when the array steering vector corresponding to the signal of interest is accurately
known, which is difficult in realistic breast imaging scenarios. In contrast, data-independent beamformers are free from
this prior information and have been constantly developed. A
number of data-independent algorithms are proposed in recent years, including delay-multiply-and-sum (DMAS) [26],
modified-weighted-delay-and-sum (MWDAS) [27], and filtered
delay-and-sum (FDAS) [28], [29]. Compared with the classical
DAS algorithm, improved performance of clutter rejection is
offered by DMAS and MWDAS. FDAS shows its capability of
detecting multiple scatterers in dense breasts, where the presence of fibro-glandular tissue is considered. It is recognized
that the increased heterogeneity of normal breasts introduced
by glandular tissues constitutes a big challenge for tumor detection. There are two reasons for this: first, although there is a large
dielectric contrast between adipose and cancerous tissues, the
difference between glandular and cancerous tissues is much less
pronounced. Also the glandular tissue introduces a significant
amount of attenuation and dispersion in backscattered signals,
making it more difficult to detect any small tumors present. Despite the strengths of these algorithms, all of them are only examined in scenarios assuming an ideal artifact removal method
is applied. However, this assumption is oversimplified and infeasible in a real setup. Because the artifact is typically several
orders of magnitude greater than the reflections from tumors
within the breast, even a very small amount of residual artifact
can easily mask the desired tumor response, which may result in
the failure of existing algorithms to identify any tumors present.
In this paper, a new Robust and Artifact Resistant (RAR)
image formation algorithm for early breast cancer detection is
proposed. Extensive simulations and analyses using backscattered signals received from three-dimensional (3-D) anatomically realistic MRI-derived numerical breast models were
conducted to validate the performance of the proposed algorithm. Results showed that RAR offered superior tumor identification, accurate localization, and strong artifact resistance
over existing data-independent algorithms. The robustness of
RAR was demonstrated under various scenarios: homogenous
and heterogeneous breast models with varied densities, combining both ideal and practical artifact removal methods were
considered. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
in Section II, the breast model and the configuration of imaging

1515

TABLE I
TISSUE PARAMETERS ASSUMED FOR THE SINGLE-POLE DEBYE MODEL

Fat-High
Fat-Median
Fat-Low
Fibro-glandular High
Fibro-glandular Median
Fibro-glandular Low
Skin
Malignant Tumor

ε∞

εs 1

τ 1 (ps)

σ s (S/m)

3.9870
3.1161
2.8480
14.2770
13.8053
12.8485
15.9300
20.2800

7.5318
4.7077
3.9521
54.7922
49.351
37.4915
39.7600
45.5000

13.0000
13.0000
13.0000
13.0000
13.0000
13.0000
13.0000
13.0000

0.0803
0.0496
0.2514
0.6381
0.7384
0.2514
0.8310
1.3000

system are introduced. Section III presents the RAR algorithm,
and Section IV describes the assessment criteria of algorithms
and corresponding results. Concluding remarks are summarized
in Section V.
II. BACKSCATTERED SIGNAL ACQUISITION
A. Breast Model
Realistic models must incorporate various attributes of the
breast, including geometrical properties, spatial distribution of
different constituent tissues, and the dispersive property. In this
study, 3-D anatomically accurate FDTD-based breast models
are developed and employed, based on UWCEM MRI breast
phantoms repository [30]. Besides skin layer and malignant
tumor, the breast model comprises three types of fatty and three
types of fibro-glandular tissues. The dielectric properties of skin,
fatty, and glandular tissues used in the model are based on
Lazebnik’s studies [31], whereas those representing malignant
tumors are obtained from Bond et al. [32].
The dispersive nature of tissues is incorporated into the FDTD
model using the time-domain auxiliary differential equations
[19, Ch. 9] for a single-pole Debye model. In a Debye model,
the dielectric spectrum of a tissue sample is characterized by
different dispersive regions or “poles” at a range of frequencies.
In each dispersive region, there is a relaxation time, which describes the time needed for electron polarization to relax toward
a new equilibrium when there is an applied electric field. The
relaxation time is regarded as a constant in the simplest form.
The dispersion in frequency domain through Debye model can
be described as [33]:
εr (ω) = ε∞ + σs /jωε0 + (εs1 − ε∞ )/(1 + jωτ1 )

(1)

where εr (ω) is the calculated relative permittivity at a certain
frequency, ε∞ is the permittivity in infinite frequency, σs is
the static conductivity (in siemens per second), ε0 is the freespace permittivity (8.854 pF/m), εs1 is the
√ permittivity at static
frequency of the dispersive pole, j = −1, ω is the angular
frequency (in radians per second), ω = 2πf , f (in Hz) is the
frequency of input signal, and τ1 is the relaxation time of the
dispersive pole (in picoseconds). Debye parameters for each
tissue type are summarized in Table I [34].
Fig. 1 illustrates the 3-D breast phantom and antenna configuration used in our simulation. To focus on the breast tissue
response and avoid possible interference, the chest wall is not

1516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 3. Modulated Gaussian pulse used as the UWB excitation signal in the
FDTD breast model simulations. (a) Time domain. (b) Frequency domain.

Fig. 1. Three-dimensional FDTD breast model with two concentric rings
of 24 antennas (indicated by solid dots) surrounding the breast. The different
tissue types are represented by difference values: fat-high(3.1), fat-median(3.2),
fat-low(3.3), fibro-glandular (FG)-high(1.1), FG-median(1.2), FG-low(1.3), and
skin(−2).

Fig. 2. Breast medium types represented by relative permittivity at center
frequency of input pulse [30]. A tumor with 10 mm diameter is constructed as
a sphere. The 2-D slices are taken at the x cross sections of Fig. 1.

included as assumed in [25] and [28]. Two concentric rings of
antennas are positioned around the skin layer, which has a thickness of 1.5 mm, with a 10 mm spacing to the skin surface. Each
element is modeled as a point source with horizontal polarizations (x-directed). The outer ring of antennas is at x = 80 mm
(antennas 1 to 24), and the inner ring (antennas 25 to 48) is at
x = 130 mm, in which the position of both rings are related to
the chest wall. The same yz plane coordinates for both rings of
antennas are: (39, 101), (50, 120), (63, 140), (82, 153), (100,
158), (116, 159), (131, 158), (147, 154), (162, 145), (174, 132),
(185, 116), (192, 97), (189, 74), (178, 56), (166, 47), (152, 39),
(135, 34), (119, 32), (103, 31), (84, 38), (71, 44), (59, 55), (43,
69), and (37, 83).
For completeness, six breast medium types with various structures and radiographic density classifications are evaluated with
the proposed algorithm. The medium types are selected from the
UWCEM database [30] and shown in Fig. 2. The density follows
the definitions of the American College of Radiology (ACR)
[35]. The details of these phantoms are the following (ACR
type, Breast ID, characteristics): 1) medium type A: ACR-I-ID071904, homogenous breasts composed of fatty-median tissue

only, all other tissues are replaced by the fatty-median tissue;
2) medium type B: ACR-I-ID-071904, heterogeneous breasts
composed of three types of fatty tissues, all glandular tissues are
replaced by the fatty-median tissue; 3) medium type C: ACR-IID-071904, full heterogeneous breasts composed of three types
of fatty, and three types of glandular tissues with a percentage
less than 25%; 4) medium type D: ACR-II-ID-010204, full heterogeneous breasts contain glandular tissues with a percentage
ranging between 25% and 50%; 5) medium type E: ACR-III-ID070604PA2, full heterogeneous breasts contain glandular tissues
with a percentage ranging between 50% and 75%; 6) medium
type F: ACR-IV-ID-012304, full heterogeneous breasts contain
glandular tissues with a percentage over 75%.
Although tumors have irregular shapes, for this study they are
constructed as spheres. Without losing generality, a 10 mm diameter tumor placed at three different positions are considered:
1) close to the center of the outer ring; 2) at the center between
the two antenna rings; and 3) off-center between the two antenna
rings. Position 1 at (x, y, z) = (80, 119, 94) represents tumor locations on different x cross sections and are close to one of the
antenna rings. Positon 2 at (x, y, z) = (95, 119, 94) is representative for those which are between two antenna rings and center
at the yz plane with different x cross sections. Those off-center
at the yz plane with different x cross sections and are close to
the skin surface are represented by Position 3 at (x, y, z) =
(95, 99, 112). In addition, since a high proportion of breast
cancers are invasive ductal carcinomas, which start at fibroglandular regions [36], tumors which are located within fatty
and glandular tissues are both considered. To avoid the strong
reflections from skin–fat interface, the entire model and antenna
array are considered to be positioned inside an immersive liquid
with the same permittivity as that of fat-median tissue at the center frequency of the input pulse, as it is generally done [26], [27].
B. Measurement Setup
The antenna array is excited with a modulated Gaussian pulse
(see Fig. 3), which is given by


(2)
G(t) = sin[ωc (t − b)]exp −[(t − b)/c]2
where ωc = 2πfc is the center angular frequency with fc = 6.85
GHz, the center position of Gaussian envelope b = 0.375 (ns),
and c = 0.0802 (ns) is the standard deviation which controls
the width of Gaussian envelope. Gaussian modulated pulses
are selected since they are considered to present better spectral control in practical use [37]. The input pulse width is

YIN et al.: ROBUST AND ARTIFACT RESISTANT ALGORITHM OF ULTRAWIDEBAND IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

0.56 (ns), which has a full-width at half maximum bandwidth
of 6.6 GHz. The acquisition of backscattered signals can be
implemented by monostatic or multistatic method. In the monostatic approach, each element in the antenna array transmits the
pulse and receives backscattered signals from the breast model
sequentially. In the multistatic method, each element in the antenna array takes a turn to transmit and the backscattered signals
are recorded at all elements. Despite the advantage of multistatic approach in terms of capturing more information about
the target, its disadvantages are obvious, such as additional hardware cost and high algorithmic complexity. Monostatic method
is adopted for data acquisition in this study. To discretize the
FDTD problem space, a rule of thumb to select the grid size is
to keep it below one-tenth of the wavelength, with the purpose
of making numerical dispersion error negligible [38]. Assuming
the breast is mainly composed of fatty-median tissue, and using
the center frequency of input pulse as a baseline, obtaining the
wavelength is 21 mm, thus one-tenth of wavelength is 2.1 mm.
A smaller grid size of Δx = Δy = Δz = 1 mm is employed
for capturing the response from small sized tumors and adapting possible smaller wavelengths in dense breasts. The time step
represented by Δt is determined by the Courant-Friedich-Lecy
stability condition [19], which equals 1.91 (ps) in our simulation. Ten-layer convolutional perfectly matched layer (CPML)
[39] absorbing boundary conditions are placed around the computational domain to attenuate outgoing radiation.
III. IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION
A. Preprocessing for Artifact Removal
Recorded backscattered signals consist of two parts: the early
stage and the late stage. The majority of early-stage parts consist
of incident signals and strong reflections from skin–fat interface,
whereas the late-stage parts include tumor response, glandular
tissue response, fatty tissue response, and the multireflections
between these tissues. Tumor, glandular, and fatty responses
refer to the signals directly reflected from these tissues. For
identification, only tumor response is needed, and all other signals are viewed as interference, which can be categorized as the
early-stage artifact and the late-stage clutter. The late-stage clutter mainly includes glandular and fatty tissues responses, which
mix with tumor response and should be suppressed for effective tumor detection. The early-stage artifact includes incident
signals and skin–fat reflections. The incident signal refers to
the transmitted signal being received directly (nonreflected) at
the same transmitting antenna. These artifact can be several orders of magnitude greater than the desired tumor response; thus,
they must be removed before applying any image reconstruction
algorithms.
Ideal removal of the early-stage artifact is realized with the
aid of a priori information generated from a tumor free breast
model. The ideal tumor response from the ith transceiver in a
discrete form denoted as Si (n) can be obtained by
Si (n) = Si

with tum or (n)

− Si

tum or free (n)

(3)

where n = 1, 2, . . . , k, and K is the signal sampling number,
Si with tum or (n) is the backscattered signal received at the ith

1517

Fig. 4. Block diagram illustrating the RAR algorithm used to calculate the
intensity of the lth pixel Il in the imaging region indicated by the mesh area.

transceiver from a breast with tumor, and Si tum or free (n) represents the backscattered signal received at the same transceiver
from a breast which is exactly the same as the previous one
except that no tumor present. Si with tum or (n) is composed of
early-stage artifact, tumor response, glandular tissue response,
fatty tissue response, and the multireflections between different
tissues, while Si tum or free (n) comprises similar level of earlystage artifact, glandular tissue response, fatty tissues response,
and multireflections between them, thus Si (n) is the signal dominated by tumor response. This method not only removes the
early-stage artifact, but also the glandular tissue response, fatty
tissue response, and the multireflections between tissues. This
is not feasible in practice; however, it could serve as a useful
benchmark of the best performance of algorithms possible. A
number of more practical artifact removal algorithms have been
developed, these can be classified as adaptive and nonadaptive
techniques. Adaptive methods include Wiener filter [32], recursive least squares filter [40], and singular value composition
[41], whereas some other promising techniques include average
subtraction [20], rotation subtraction [42], frequency domain
pole splitting [43], and entropy-based time window [44]. Robustness to local variations of skin thickness and differences in
antenna-skin distances are observed in adaptive filtering methods; however, varied levels of distortion to the tumor response
are introduced. Considering both the capability of preserving
tumor response and the effectiveness of removing artifact, the
best results are offered by Wiener filter and entropy-based time
window [45].
The performance of beamformers closely depends on the outcome of artifact removal. If artifact cannot be removed effectively, the residual artifact could easily mask the tumor response.
For completeness and fairness, it is thus essential to evaluate all
beamformers in various cases with both ideal and nonideal artifact removal, under the same conditions.
B. RAR Algorithm
The block diagram in Fig. 4 shows RAR to reconstruct the intensity value of each pixel in breast model. Let l represent the lth
location of a pixel within the imaging area L. For each location,
RAR explores and exploits the correlation between time-shifted

1518

signals. To time-shift each signal, an estimated average velocity
for all propagation channels, between transmitter to scatterer and
back to receiver, is assumed to be sufficiently close to the actual
speed and could well represent the characteristics of propagation channels. Higher correlation between time-shifted signals
at neighboring antenna pairs is more likely to occur at tumor
positions. Considering the larger dielectric property of tumor
than other comparably sized tissues, tumor response is the dominant part of received signals within a certain time widow, in
most if not all cases. Thus, time-shifted signals should have a
higher correlation between tumor responses resulted from the
same strong scatterer, compared with those signals from other
heterogeneous breast tissues. The enhancement of tumor detection is achieved by rewarding this correlation. To calculate the
intensity value of l, three steps are involved.
Step 1: Each preprocessed Si (n) is time-shifted based on the
corresponding round-trip time delay at l. The time-shifted signals are expressed as Si (n + τil ), where n = 1, 2, . . . , k, and
τil is the two-way travel time from the ith transceiver to a specific location l within the imaging region. Propagation distance
is calculated based on space coordinates in the model. Signal
propagation speed is calculated under the assumption that each
traversed medium, including immersive liquid, skin layer, and
underlying breast tissue, has a constant relative permittivity at
the center frequency of input pulse. The relative permittivity at
center frequency is chosen because it represents the majority
of tissues’ permittivity across the frequency range of the input
pulse. The average dielectric property of underlying breast tissue is assumed to be established through an appropriate patientspecific dielectric properties estimation algorithm such as the
one developed by Winters et al. [46].
Prior to further processing, a window truncation for each timeshifted signal is applied. The utility of time window truncation
is twofold. First, it only preserves the desired tumor response.
Second, it reduces the algorithmic complexity since only truncated signals are needed in the following steps. The time window
is represented as Wα , where Wα = αΔt. α is an integer and
Δt is the time step used in FDTD, which equals 1.91 (ps) as
explained in Section II-B. W294 which represents a length 294
Δt = 562 (ps), equals to the input pulse is used as a default
time window, unless otherwise specified. The selection of this
length is because backscattered signals from dispersive biological tissues are a distorted version of the excitation pulse as
frequency-dependent tissues broaden the duration of the input
pulse. Studies show that this broadening effect is directly proportional to the tumor size [32]. The aim of this paper is to
detect early-stage breast cancer when the tumor size is small;
thus, a short-length time window, which is comparable to the
input pulse width, is selected. Larger or smaller time windows
could result in either high clutter or tumor location bias. Thus,
the time-shifted signal after truncation with length of Wα can
be represented as Si (n + τil ), where n = 1, 2, . . . , α.
Let A be the number of antennas. After artifact removal,
A calibrated signals containing tumor responses are collected
in a monostatic way. Thus, for every single location l, there
areA sets of time delays corresponding to each transceiver. Let
Suml (n) (n = 1, 2, . . . , α) denote the sum of all time-shifted

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

signals within the time window Wα at l given by
Suml (n) =

A


Si (n + τil ).

(4)

i=1

Step 2: To enhance tumor response, and eliminate the adverse effects resulted from both the early-stage artifact and the
late-stage clutter, a weight factor wfl for the lth location is
introduced. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient rij l between
neighboring pair of time-shifted signals is calculated as

 α
α
α



rij l =
Xi (n)Xj (n)/
Xi (n)2
Xj (n)2
(5)
n =1

n =1

n =1

where Xi (n) = Si (n + τil ) and Xj (n) = Sj (n + τj l ) with j =
i + 1, are the time-shifted signals at l from the ith and (i + 1)th
transceiver, respectively. rij l measures the degree of coherence
between time-shifted signals. High positive correlation between
signals received from neighboring antenna pairs is expected at
tumor locations, considering all time-shifted signals are a broadened version of the same input pulse, after reflection from the
same strong scatterer. Based on (5), the neighborhood pairwise
correlation coefficients vector Pl composed of (A − 1) elements
for l is obtained, where A is the number of antenna. Thus, Pl
can be expressed as
Pl = [r12 l r23 l . . . r(A −1)A l ].

(6)

Considering correlation coefficient rij l is in the range of
[−1, 1], all coefficients are linearly normalized to the range of
[0, 1], avoiding negative coefficients generating a high weight
Pl

Nor

= (Pl + 1)/2.

(7)

Let Pl Sort be the sorted Pl Nor in a descending order and Ri l
be the sorted coefficients, i = 1, 2, . . . , (A − 1). Therefore,
	

(8)
Pl Sort = R1 l R2 l . . . R(A −1) l
where R1 l > R2 l > . . . > R(A −1) l . The associated weighting factor wfl for the lth location is introduced as
i=(A −1)/2

wfl =




Ri

l

(9)

i=1

which is the product of the first half elements of Pl Sort . The
neighborhood pairwise correlation ensures that the correlation
between two antennas for each location is measuring the reflection from the same scatterer, because of the short distance
between two neighboring antennas. The distance between adjacent array element of 20 ± 5 mm is used since it provided an
optimum trade-off between performance and complexity. Considering the useful tumor response contained in signals from
different antennas varies, depending on tumor locations, skin
thickness variations, differences in antenna-skin distances, and
interfering responses from other tissues, the selective multiplication of the maximum half coefficients is adopted. This mechanism implements the adaptive combination of antenna pairs,
which guarantees the introduced weight can focus on those
strongest scatterers, regardless of tumor’s position. Considering malignant tumors’ higher scattering cross-section relative

YIN et al.: ROBUST AND ARTIFACT RESISTANT ALGORITHM OF ULTRAWIDEBAND IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

to comparably sized heterogeneity in normal breast tissue [32],
wfl adaptively rewards potential tumor locations with a high
weight, thereby enhancing tumor identification in most if not all
cases.
Step 3: The last step calculates the intensity for the lth location. Although the maxima of coherent addition of time-aligned
signals may no longer exactly correspond to the tumor location
in a complex medium, the sum still has a relatively high value
at tumor locations, since signals from some, if not all antennas,
are still able to add coherently. The constructed signal Cl (n) in
the RAR algorithm is therefore
Cl (n) = wfl · Suml (n).

1519

Fig. 5. Illustration of ideal artifact removal. (a) Signal recorded at antenna 4
of Fig. 1. A tumor with a 10 mm diameter is placed at (x, y, z) = (95, 99, 112).
(b) Signal recorded from a tumor-free breast model. (c) Pure tumor response
obtained by subtracting (b) from (a), which is indicated by dotted boxes.

(10)

Let Il denote the intensity of a specific location l within the
desired imaging area, and it is given by
Il =

α


[Cl (n)]2 .

(11)

n =1

The procedure is repeated for every location within the imaging region as shown in Fig. 4, and L loops in total are required.
The distribution of intensity at each location Il is displayed as an
image. The pairwise correlation in the proposed RAR algorithm
measures the backscattered energy intensity from each scatterer. The combination of neighboring antennas ensures that the
strong reflection received at each neighborhood antenna pair is
from the same strong scatterer, considering possible multiscatterer cases. The maximum combining of correlation coefficients
implements an adaptive selection of neighborhood paired antennas, only those that have a high correlation can contribute to the
weight factor, yielding a flexible beamforming. The efficacy and
robustness of RAR are demonstrated under a variety of challenging scenarios, where nonperfect artifact removal, and in breasts
with varied levels of glandular tissues are considered, and these
are presented in the following sections.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, algorithm performance is analyzed in depth.
The superiority of RAR is demonstrated via comparisons with
four techniques, including DAS, DMAS, MWDAS, and FDAS.
First, algorithms were evaluated in mostly sparse breasts with
medium type A and B, applying an idealized artifact removal
method. Then combining practical artifact removal methods, the
algorithm effectiveness was investigated for dense breast models with various medium compositions and tumor positions. The
computational analysis of algorithms is also provided considering its significance in practical use.
A. Ideal Artifact Removal
Serving as a benchmark of imaging algorithm performance,
ideal artifact removal (see Fig. 5) for obtaining clear tumor
response was first applied. It can be seen that desired tumor
response indicated by the dotted box in Fig. 5(c), which exists
in later time, is totally obscured in received signals in Fig. 5(a).
This is due to its small order of magnitude, compared with that
of incident signals and skin reflections appear earlier.

Fig. 6. (a) Two-dimensional slice of breast model of medium type A. (b)–(f)
Imaging results with ideal artifact removal. Tumor’s position is indicated by
dotted circle. (a) Medium type A. (b) DAS. (c) DMAS. (d) MWDAS. (e) FDAS.
(f) RAR.

All reconstructed images were normalized to the maximum
intensity value of the 3-D imaging volume. Same datasets were
applied for all algorithms. To assess algorithm’s imaging performance, two quantitative metrics were applied, which are signalto-clutter ratio (SCR) and signal-to-mean ratio (SMR). SCR was
defined as the ratio of the maximum tumor response to the maximum clutter response, whereas SMR was defined as the ratio of
mean tumor response to the mean response of the whole image.
The maximum or mean tumor response was assumed to be the
peak or average intensity of an area defined by twice physical
extent of the tumor [26], whereas clutter response was those
outside this area. SCR defines the difference between tumor
and clutter response, whereas SMR shows the image contrast
between tumor and nontumor areas.
Fig. 6 presents the reconstructed images through the five techniques, representing a distribution of energy resulted from each
voxel within the breast model. The peak intensity of image is
usually regarded as the tumor position, which has the strongest
reflection among all heterogeneous breast tissues with a comparable size [32]. It can be seen that the embedded 10 mm diameter
tumor is clearly identified and accurately localized by all algorithms. However, the clutter rejection capability of them varies
due to the different weighting mechanisms employed. Specifically, the image offered by DAS [see Fig. 6(b)] is filled with the
strongest level of clutter, which is indicated by the smallest SCR
of 7.01 dB (see Table II). This shows its limited capability for
discriminating against clutter since it does not account for any
dispersive propagation effect. The result of FDAS [see Fig. 6(e)]

1520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

TABLE II
SCR AND SMR OF ALGORITHMS IN DIFFERENT SCENARIOS
Fig. 6

Fig. 7

Fig. 9

Fig. 10

Fig. 11

−2.30
−4.63
−78.48
1.25
4.76

−3.58
−5.63
−107.49
−4.24
4.01

−1.87
−12.35
−705.34
−2.86
20.09

7.62
7.29
−56.50
11.55
17.12

6.90
7.14
−89.97
8.93
14.29

Fig. 14

Fig. 15

Fig. 16

Ave

−0.65
−2.35
−17.86
−0.31
0.05

−2.80
−5.28
−129.46
−0.47
−0.26

−2.00
−3.54
−67.63
−1.68
4.08

9.09
11.09
−3.34
10.97
17.25

5.63
5.48
−114.12
8.30
9.19

8.07
7.43
−133.92
9.17
16.51

SCR (dB)
(b) DAS
(c) DMAS
(d) MWDAS
(e) FDAS
(f) RAR

7.01
14.92
415.58
11.43
13.99

4.98
10.82
403.25
6.77
8.47

(b) DAS
(c) DMAS
(d) MWDAS
(e) FDAS
(f) RAR

17.22
20.75
21.14
17.22
20.98

17.03
20.27
21.08
16.47
20.67

Fig. 12

Fig. 13

−11.94
−25.91
−728.06
−17.85
5.27
SMR (dB)

SCR (dB)
(b) DAS
(c) DMAS
(d) MWDAS
(e) FDAS
(f) RAR

−6.5
−12.28
−306.46
−11.89
3.92

−1.83
−0.49
−40.11
0.09
0.48

−2.46
−4.57
−87.19
−1.60
0.10
SMR (dB)

(b) DAS
(c) DMAS
(d) MWDAS
(e) FDAS
(f) RAR

2.58
−3.07
−285.34
1.12
18.16

9.52
11.13
−61.82
10.71
11.43

7.02
6.61
−65.01
9.24
15.89

Best results of each case are highlighted in Bold

Fig. 7. (a) Two-dimensional slice of breast model with medium type B. (b)–
(f) Imaging results with ideal artifact removal. (a) medium type B. (b) DAS.
(c) DMAS. (d) MWDAS. (e) FDAS. (f) RAR.

is cleaner than that of DAS, which validates the effectiveness
of its filtering process, but its performance is still inferior to the
other three algorithms. It is observed that DMAS, MWDAS,
and the proposed RAR algorithm provided almost clutter-free
images [see Fig. 6(c), (d), and (f)]. Assuming perfect tumor
response could be captured, the cross multiplying of weighted
tumor response from all channels in MWDAS forms particularly high weights [see Fig. 6(d)], which achieved the strongest
clutter rejection with a SCR of 415.58 dB in this case.
Imaging results in Fig. 7 employ the same ideal artifact removal method as in Fig. 6, but the breast model is changed from

homogeneous fatty to heterogeneous fatty [see Fig. 7(a)], in
which three different fatty tissues, fatty-low, fatty-median, and
fatty-high are included. With increased heterogeneity, more dispersion of received signals is expected due to the increased propagation behavior difference of frequency components among
various tissues. Furthermore, the estimated average propagation
velocity might not as well represent the actual speed as in the homogeneous case, leading to a mismatch between the estimated
and actual time delay. This is reflected by the imaging results.
Compared Fig. 6(b) with Fig. 7(b), both of which are the results
of DAS, more clutter outside the circle is observed in Fig. 7(b),
corresponding to a 2.03 dB decrease of SCR. The same trend
applies for all algorithms considered. Despite a slight degradation of clutter suppression, the inserted tumor is accurately
localized by all techniques. This also indicates the fault-tolerant
capability of these algorithms for certain propagation time-delay
mismatch.
B. Realistic Artifact Removal
Previous results show that all algorithms present decent tumor identification and localization capabilities, regardless of
homogeneous or heterogeneous breasts, assuming the tumor response could be ideally extracted. However, perfect removal
of artifact is unlikely in practice, it is therefore critical to test
algorithms’ performance in scenarios applying more realistic
artifact removal methods. The artifact is a mixed signal composed of incident signals and skin–fat interface reflections; thus,
pure tumor response can be difficult to recover. Even the stateof-the-art artifact removal methods are unable to completely
remove the interference. However, desired tumor response can
be easily obscured by the artifact that has a much higher order
of magnitude, especially when the tumor has a relatively small
size. All these pose a great challenge to the image reconstruction
algorithms.
Based on the latest review study provided in [45], which
evaluated seven different artifact removal methods, the best two
are Wiener Filter [32] and the entropy-based time window [44].
The correlation measure between recovered tumor response by
these two techniques and perfect tumor response are 0.66 and
0.60 (ranging from 0 to 1), respectively. In Wiener Filter, the
artifact in each propagation channel is estimated as a filtered
combination of the signals from all other channels, then the
estimated artifact is subtracted from the signal received at the
chosen channel. Wiener Filter can remove most of the artifact.
However, this method requires the prior knowledge of the time
interval in which only artifact is included. Moreover, distortion
is introduced to tumor response, which might result in tumor
location bias. By contrast, the entropy-based method introduces
zero distortion to tumor response, has higher computational
efficiency, and does not require any prior information. Hence,
given both efficacy and efficiency, the entropy-based is chosen
as the artifact removal method for the following study as used
in [47] and [48].
Fig. 8 illustrates the entropy-based time window truncation
for artifact removal. The ideal tumor response at antenna 4 is
shown as the solid curve in Fig. 8(a). Comparing the actually

YIN et al.: ROBUST AND ARTIFACT RESISTANT ALGORITHM OF ULTRAWIDEBAND IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

Fig. 8. (a)–(d) represent the preprocessed signals of antenna 4, 16, 33, and
46 as numbered in Fig. 1, exemplifying the performance difference between
artifact removal methods. The solid and dotted curves are the results based on
ideal and entropy-based method for artifact removal, respectively. The circle
indicates where tumor response is expected to appear. A tumor with 10 mm
diameter is placed at (x, y, z) = (95, 99, 112) of the model shown in Fig. 1.

received signal [see Fig. 5(a)] with the entropy-truncated signal
shown as the dotted curve in Fig. 8(a), it is noted that this method
effectively removes the majority of the early-stage artifact composed of incident signals and skin-fat reflections, which has a
several higher orders of magnitude than the tumor response. As
shown in Fig. 5(a), the pure tumor response that has an order of
magnitude of 1e-5 is completely overwhelmed. This efficacy can
also be noticed at antenna 16 [see Fig. 8(b)], where almost all
artifact is removed and no obvious distortion is imported, compared with the ideal tumor response within the time period from
1.0 to 1.5 (ns). However, for antenna 33 and 46 [see Fig. 8(c) and
(d)], there is still a large amount of residual artifact with high
amplitudes. This is because in entropy-based method, the time
window truncation of same length is used for signals received at
all antennas [44]. Hence, depending on tumor-antenna distance
variations, truncated signals of different antennas could contain
varied percentages of useful tumor response versus residual artifact, which could potentially lead to location bias in constructed
images.
Fig. 9 displays the imaging results where using the same
medium type B as in Fig. 7. Instead of using ideal artifact removal, the entropy-based method is applied. Compared with
Fig. 7, it is noticed that the performance of DAS, DMAS, MWDAS, and FDAS suffers significantly. The result of DAS [see
Fig. 9(b)] is seriously unrecognizable, only an area with high
intensity is observed. However, none of these high-intensity positions reveal the actual tumor location indicated by the dashed
circle. Although the results of DMAS, MWDAS, and FDAS
[see Fig. 9(c)–(e)] only show a few focused areas, the peaks of
these images are far away from the actual tumor position. In
contrast, the tumor is conspicuously shown at the correct location in the image constructed by RAR [see Fig. 9(f)]. This
demonstrates the robust performance of RAR even if the artifact cannot be removed faultlessly. Specifically, the SCR of
DAS, DMAS, MWDAS, FDAS, and RAR are −11.94, −25.91,
−728.06, −17.85, and 5.27 dB, respectively. The positive SCR
of RAR signifies that it is the only algorithm that reveals the

1521

Fig. 9. (a) Two-dimensional slice of breast model with medium type B. (b)–
(f) Imaging results with entropy-based artifact removal. (a) Medium type B. (b)
DAS. (c) DMAS. (d) MWDAS. (e) FDAS. (f) RAR.

tumor with correct location, which illustrates its clear advantage
of excellent artifact resistance. These results also prove that effective artifact removal is vital for imaging, even for breasts
with relatively low heterogeneity.
The reason behind the robustness of RAR lies in the fact that
except RAR, all other algorithms simply exploit the amplitude
information of time-shifted signals, expecting the maximum coherent addition or multiplication could occur at tumor locations.
According to the results shown in Section IV-A, this is indeed
the case when tumor responses can be perfectly extracted, and
all algorithms can perform well. Nevertheless, when the artifact
cannot be removed effectively, it is very likely that at some nontumor positions, only the artifact from one propagation channel
can be greater than the coherent sum of tumor responses from all
other channels, due to the different orders of magnitude between
artifact and tumor response. For RAR, in addition to utilizing the
coherent addition of tumor responses from various propagation
channels, it also explores the phase coherence between signals.
The introduced adaptive weight control mechanism of RAR
ensures its robustness on two aspects. First, the neighborhood
pairwise correlation between all antennas measures the average
coherence, which is less likely to be distorted by one or two
artifact signals with abnormally large amplitudes. This is because phase coherence is independent of signal amplitude, only
the linear relationship between signal shapes affects correlation coefficients. Second, the maximum combining of pairwise
coefficients adaptively focuses on those points with large scattered energy. Considering the relatively high magnitude of scattered energy from tumors over other tissues, this maintains the
capability of RAR in terms of localizing tumors in most if not
all cases with a much higher chance.
Aside from artifact, it is agreed that the glandular tissue forms
another challenge for tumor detection. This is not only due to
the substantial amount of attenuation and dispersion to received
signals introduced by glandular tissues, the small dielectric contrast between cancerous and glandular tissue could easily result
in misidentification of glandular tissues as tumors. Thus, it is
important to evaluate algorithm’s performance in such cases.
Results shown in Fig. 10 are based on the collected signals

1522

Fig. 10. (a) Two-dimensional slice of breast model with medium type C. (b)–
(f) Imaging results with ideal artifact removal. (a) Medium type. C (b) DAS. (c)
DMAS. (d) MWDAS. (e) FDAS. (f) RAR.

from breast model with medium type C, with the same ideal
artifact removal used as in [29]. Results reveal that the presence of glandular tissue can seriously deteriorate algorithms’
performance, even assuming the early-stage artifact is ideally
removed. Compared Figs. 10(b) with 7(b), both using the ideal
artifact removal, it is observed that DAS failed to correctly
localize the tumor in Fig. 10(b) where considered glandular tissues. Although the actual tumor position has a relatively high
value, the peak of the constructed image no longer corresponds
to tumor’s position, which was the case in Fig. 7(b). This indicates the limited detectability of DAS to separate the scattering
due to glandular tissues and the scattering due to the tumor. After
combining signals from all propagation channels, the multireflections between tumor and glandular tissues could generate a
higher intensity than those reflections from tumor or glandular
tissues individually, which is indicated by the peak at the lower
right part of Fig. 10(b). Similar erroneous tumor locations are
also offered by DMAS and MWDAS [see Fig. 10(c) and (d)].
Neither of them localized the tumor correctly, which indicates
their vulnerability to the interference caused by glandular tissues. Despite clutter, the result offered by FDAS [see Fig. 10(e)]
revealed the tumor accurately, which shows its advantage over
DAS, DMAS, and MWDAS. This confirms the efficacy of the
compensation of attenuation and dispersion offered by the filtering process in FDAS. The result is consistent with its original
presentation [28], whereas the slight difference is due to the different percentages of glandular tissues contained in the breast
models used. However, the best imaging result is provided by
RAR [see Fig. 10(f)], which not only pinpoints the tumor accurately, but also provides the best clutter rejection. RAR ensures
that high weights measured by correlation coefficients are obtained at tumor positions. Because after time-shifting the same
signals at neighboring antenna pairs for tumor and nontumor positions, higher correlation is obtained between tumor responses
which resulted from the same high-contrast scatterer, whereas
lower correlation is expected for those signals from low-contrast
heterogeneous breast tissues. Thus, signals with high weights at
tumor positons generate large intensities after being combined,
thereby discriminating tumor responses against glandular re-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

sponse. Comparing the results offered by FDAS and RAR [see
Fig. 10(e) and (f)], although both identified the tumor, the clutter
suppression capability varies considerably, and an improvement
of SCR with 3.51 dB is offered by RAR. This is nontrivial,
because the much more cleaner image offered by RAR can remarkably reduce the uncertainty of the existence of multitumors
that are located near this region, which is greatly desirable in
practice.
Undoubtedly, it is not realistic to assume the early-stage
artifact could be ideally removed, especially considering the
enormous impact of artifact, which has been confirmed in
Fig. 9. Therefore, combining the entropy-based artifact removal
method, the algorithm performance for heterogeneous breast
models with medium type C is investigated and results are
shown in Fig. 11 (Figs. 11–18 are available in supplemental
materials.). In this challenging scenario, the proposed RAR is
the only algorithm which reveals the tumor with correct location
[see Fig. 11(f)], whereas with other four techniques, the tumor
is either unidentifiable or with wrong estimated locations [see
Fig. 11(b)–(e)]. Similar to results in Fig. 9, when the early-stage
artifact cannot be effectively removed, the late-stage signals no
matter tumor or glandular tissue response is totally masked by
the residual artifact, because of the distinctively different order
of magnitudes. Even the filtering process introduced in FDAS
is unable to be immune to this interference. This can be clearly
illustrated by comparing Figs. 10(e) and Fig. 11(e), where ideal
and entropy-based artifact removal methods are applied, respectively. These results once again confirm RAR’s superiority over
other methods in terms of both strong artifact resistance, and
high detectability of distinguishing the scattering from tumor
and glandular tissues.
Since a high percentage of breast cancers are invasive ductal
carcinomas, which start at fibro-glandular regions [36], it is
worth testing the imaging algorithms in the case considering
tumors are very close to or grow from the glandular tissues.
Fig. 12 shows a tumor located very close to glandular tissues.
In the analysis of this case, the backscattered response from
tumor and glandular tissues could easily overlap due to the small
spacing, raising a challenge about the specificity of algorithms.
Encouragingly, although with a decrease of SCR from 4.10 to
3.92 dB with respect to Fig. 11(f), RAR was still able to localize
the tumor correctly [see Fig. 12(f)]. The other four algorithms
failed to do so, this proves the effectiveness of RAR for cases
of ductal carcinoma.
So far, breasts with homogenous and inhomogeneous structures and tumors at different locations have been considered.
The breast models employed before are assumed to be mildly
dense, in which the fibro-glandular tissue is less than 25%. It
should be considered that the increased glandular tissues could
noticeably increase the breast density and result in further signal
attenuation. Therefore, for comprehensive analysis, moderately
and severely dense breasts are used to test algorithms in the
following scenarios. In Fig. 13, the breast with medium type D
is used. Although the percentage of glandular tissues for this
type is normally between 25% and 50%, which belongs to a
moderately dense category, the randomly scattered glandular
tissues can seriously reduce the homogeneity of propagation

YIN et al.: ROBUST AND ARTIFACT RESISTANT ALGORITHM OF ULTRAWIDEBAND IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

channels, making the detection of tumors much more difficult.
From the results shown in Fig. 13, it is clear that RAR is again
the only method that identified the tumor correctly. However,
strong scattered clutters are generated. Specifically, comparing
Fig. 12(f) with Fig. 13(f), the SCR of RAR results dramatically
decreased from 3.92 to 0.48 dB. This indicates that the increased
glandular tissues not only cause the change of breast density and
corresponding signal attenuation, it also complicate the propagation channels, rendering the identification of strong scatterers
such as tumors more difficult to be achieved. Results in Fig. 14
employed the same breast model as in Fig. 13, but the tumor
is moved within the scattered glandular tissues to simulate the
invasive ductal carcinoma. In comparison to Fig. 13, algorithm
performance in scenario of Fig. 14 further degraded due to the
further reduced uniformity of assumed propagation channels.
Encouragingly, the proposed RAR algorithm in this case still
kept its edge with a positive SCR of 0.10 dB (see Table II), indicating its robustness to certain deviation between the assumed
uniform propagation channels and the actual ones.
For completeness, the performance of all algorithms in very
dense breasts with medium type E and F are also investigated.
In Fig. 15, a tumor in breast model with medium type E, which
includes glandular tissues with percentage ranging from 50% to
75% is considered. It is noted that the result offered by RAR algorithm [see Fig. 15(f)] is the one with highest SCR of 0.05 dB,
while all others have a negative SCR, corresponding to a poorer
performance. Although the peak in the result of RAR does not
exactly correspond to the tumor position, a relatively high intensity within the circle is observed. Also the peak generated
by RAR is quite close to the tumor position, and this explains
why RAR has a positive SCR. However, when the breast model
with medium type F is considered (see Fig. 16), all algorithms
failed to differentiate between the tumor and the glandular tissue, and none were able to provide images with discernable
and correct tumor positions. For both scenarios considered in
Figs. 15 and 16, tumors located within fatty tissues instead of
within glandular tissues are also tested to simulate various clinical scenarios. The results obtained were similar, which indicated
the limited detection capability of these algorithms for severely
dense breasts.
The poor performance of algorithms considered for severely
dense breasts with medium type E and F is mainly due to the
following three reasons. 1) Dense breasts could considerably
attenuate the propagated signals, resulting in very weak tumor
response contained in received signals. 2) The reflected energy
from other scatterers such as glandular tissues might be equivalent or even higher than that from tumors, due to the variability in
adipose versus glandular tissue compositions. 3) For almost fully
dielectrically heterogeneous ACR-III and ACR-IV breasts, the
assumed uniform propagation channel would not be able to represent the actual one, and fatal inaccuracy of time delay estimation could occur, leading to incorrect localization. Specifically,
when the percentage of glandular tissues is higher than a certain
threshold, the average estimated time delay of each propagation
path might be far from the actual ones. To solve these problems,
the following potential solutions could attenuate the effect of
previous problems respectively: 1) Employ multistatic instead

1523

of monostatic acquisition to collect more useful backscattered
signals from the tumor. 2) Enhance the contrast between tumor
and the background through increasing the relative permittivity
of tumor, such as using the contrast agent described in [36]. 3)
Improve the accuracy of individual propagation channel estimation. The investigation of these solutions is beyond the scope of
this study.
The imaging with the RAR algorithm from different view
angles is also tested for completeness. The results shown in
Fig. 11 with a tumor at (x, y, z) = (95, 99, 112) are selected as
an example. On one hand, images are reconstructed at different
x planes, where x = 85 mm, 95 mm, and 105 mm are selected.
Results illustrated that the largest intensity occurs at plane x =
95 mm, corresponding to the actual tumor position, proving that
RAR is able to accurately identify the plane that bears the tumor.
On the other, the y and z cross-section imaging results by RAR
are displayed in Fig. 17, where y = 99 mm and z = 112 mm
are chosen, respectively. It is observed that the reconstructed
images clearly identify the tumor in both cases, with accurate
positioning and strong clutter suppression.
SCR and SMR statistics of algorithms are summarized in
Table II. Based on the calculated average of all ten scenarios, the
proposed RAR algorithm achieves the highest SCR of 4.08 dB
and SMR of 16.51 dB, respectively, indicating its excellent performance and strong robustness. It should be noted that RAR
is the only algorithm which provided a positive SCR in results
shown in Figs. 11, 12, 14, and 15, proving its distinct advantage.
On the other hand, MWDAS has the smallest SCR and SMR in
average. In spite of its excellent clutter rejection with ideal artifact removal (see Figs. 6 and 7), this efficacy suffer significantly
even with a small portion of residual artifact, indicating its limitation in more practical scenarios. The second best technique is
FDAS, although it is very sensitive to artifact, results show that
the filtering is beneficial since in most cases it outperforms the
original DAS algorithm and achieves the second high SCR of
−1.68 dB and SMR of 9.17 dB. Comparing DMAS with DAS,
results reveal that the pure coherence-based algorithm DMAS
is not always superior to the classic DAS. In scenarios assuming
the early-stage artifact could be perfectly removed, DMAS outperforms DAS without question (see Figs. 6 and 7), however,
in later scenarios considered denser breasts and nonperfect artifact removal, DAS shows more robustness than DMAS. This
is because the pair multiplication used in DMAS could lead to
erroneous peaks in more complicated environments with less
coherence among all propagation channels.
The performance of RAR algorithm with respect to tumor size
was also considered. Combining entropy-based artifact removal
method, in breasts with medium type A and B, tumors as small
as 5 mm in diameter were successfully identified. However, in a
more dielectrically heterogeneous breast with medium type C,
when the tumor size is less than 7 mm in diameter, the imaging
results are quite blurry, which can hardly be used to identify
the tumor. As for medium type D, the smallest tumor that were
successfully recognized at different positions were 10 mm as
shown in Figs. 13 and 14. Additionally, the sensitivity of RAR
to the error of average dielectric permittivity estimation is examined. Coupled with entropy-based artifact removal method,

1524

in mostly fatty breasts such as medium type A and B, even when
the relative error is up to 30%, only a minor reduction of SCR
is observed. However, for fully heterogeneous breasts with low
to medium density such as medium type C and D, when the
relative error is over 5%, the resulted images can rarely localize
the tumor precisely. This reinforces the need to have an accurate
average dielectric permittivity estimation. In our study, the collected signals are assumed to be noiseless; in practice, however,
possible measurement errors and noise need to be considered.
C. Computational Analysis
Besides robustness, complexity of algorithms is of great importance, especially for imaging 3-D realistic breast models.
In this section, the time complexity of algorithms is analyzed.
As described before, A sets of tumor responses are collected
in monostatic case; thus, A signals are needed to be processed.
Let K refer to signal sampling points and α be the window
length, which is smaller than K. Both K and α are much more
larger than A, which determine the calculation numbers for raw
and truncated signals, respectively. The number of arithmetic
operations (without distinguishing between addition and multiplication) needed to calculate each pixel’s intensity is analyzed.
All algorithms considered need the same time-shifting process,
only other different processes are compared.
To sum A time-shifted signals, DAS needs (A − 1)K additions. Then, the summed signal is truncated by the window
length α, thus α and (α − 1) operations for multiplication and
addition are required to obtain the energy of this signal. DAS
thus has an asymptotic complexity of O(K).
The first step in DMAS is generating CA2 sets of pairs from A
signals for pair multiplication, and [(A(A − 1)/2) − 1]K multiplications are required. Step 2 sums A(A − 1)/2 signals with K
sampling points, [(A(A − 1)/2) − 1]K additions are involved.
The last integration within the time window requires α and
(α − 1)operations for multiplication and addition, respectively.
Ignoring small values in summed operations of all steps, DMAS
has an asymptotic complexity of O(K).
Unlike DAS and DMAS, MWDAS brings forward the windowing of signals; thus for each signal, only α calculations are
needed. Step 1 requires (A − 1)α summations and one division
to obtain the reference waveform. Step 2 involves weighting
signals from A channels via the generated reference waveform,
requiring Aα multiplications. Step 3 is the energy calculation
of weighted signals and needs(2α − 1) operations. Last step
multiplies signal energy from all channels, where (A − 1) multiplications are needed. Thus, MWDAS requires (4Aα − 1) operations in all and has a complexity of O(α).
Two additional parts are needed for FDAS in addition to that
of DAS. First is the collection of distance-dependent reference
waveforms for filter design. Second is the filtering process. Since
the gathering of reference signals could be precomputed, main
extra computational burden of FDAS lies in the filtering process
when calculating each pixel intensity. For K sampling points,
K(N K) multiplications are required to implement FIR filtering
in time domain, where N is the filter length. Combined with
extra DAS operations and ignore small values, FDAS has a
complexity of O(K 2 ) as a result.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

In RAR, the windowing of signal is brought forward; thus,
only α calculations is required for each signal. Step 1 involves
(A − 1) calculation of neighborhood pairwise correlation coefficients, which requires 6α(A − 1) operations following (5).
Then, the normalization needs 2(A − 1) operations. Step 3 sorts
(A − 1) normalized correlation coefficient for the maximum
combining. For a sorting algorithm with (A − 1) numbers, the
time complexity is up to O(A2 ). To generate the weighted
value, which is the product of the first half number of sorted
coefficients, [(A − 1)/2] − 1 multiplications are involved. Step
4 weights the signal and α multiplications are required. Last
step calculates the energy and needs (2α − 1) operations. Accordingly, ignoring small values in summed operations, RAR
has an asymptotic complexity of O(α).
Simulation results on a PC with Intel (R) Core (TM) 2 Duo
CPU E7500 2.93GHz (2 CPUS) combined with MATLAB
R2014a software confirmed the computation overhead of algorithms. 48 signals with 1500 sampling points in each signal
are processed, where a time window length of 294 is employed.
Thus, A = 48, K = 1500, and α = 294 in our simulation tests.
Calculated processing time employs the mean of three replicates to reduce random errors. Fig. 18 compares the complexity
and processing time to calculate a single pixel intensity of algorithms. Simulation results verified the time complexity analysis.
As can be seen, the complexity is mainly determined by the number of points needed to be processed in each signal, which can be
K or α in different methods. A extensively higher computation
burden than other algorithms is observed in FDAS, which requires the largest processing time of 1.37 s, whereas this time for
DAS is only 0.0003 s. In addition, the same linear growth is observed in DAS, DMAS, MWDAS, and RAR, whereas FDAS has
an exponential tendency. This demonstrates that RAR maintains
the same level of high computational efficiency, even compared
with the simplest DAS algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION
A novel imaging algorithm for early breast cancer detection
entitled RAR is proposed. The efficacy of RAR is verified under
a number of scenarios, using FDTD-based 3-D breast models
with various structures and densities.
Simulation results showed imaging algorithm performance
is more sensitive to the early-stage artifact, compared with the
late-stage clutter, due to the different orders of magnitude of
these two types of interferences. Results with superior robustness were provided by RAR in comparison to other algorithms,
including DAS, DMAS, MWDAS, and FDAS. In the four of
the six challenging scenarios (see Figs. 11, 12, 14, and 15),
RAR was the only algorithm which clearly identified and accurately localized tumors. These scenarios considered practical
artifact removal, various tumor positions, and breasts ranging
from mildly to moderately density classifications. Simulations
also proved the computational efficiency of RAR, which has
the same asymptotic complexity as DAS, DMAS, and MWDAS
algorithms. The significant improvement provided by RAR is
only at the expense of negligible increased computational effort. These results show the high potential of RAR for the earlystage cancer detection in low to medium density breasts. The

YIN et al.: ROBUST AND ARTIFACT RESISTANT ALGORITHM OF ULTRAWIDEBAND IMAGING SYSTEM FOR BREAST CANCER DETECTION

investigation of RAR’s performance for further enhancement of
tumor detection in severely dense breasts will be involved in
future work.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Bray et al., “The changing global patterns of female breast cancer
incidence and mortality,” Childhood, vol. 4, pp. 229–239, 2004.
[2] A. Jemal et al., “Global cancer statistics,” CA-Cancer J. Clin., vol. 61,
no. 2, pp. 69–90, Apr. 2011.
[3] V. Speirs and A. M. Shaaban, “The rising incidence of male breast cancer,”
Breast Cancer Res. Treat., vol. 115, no. 2, pp. 429–430, May 2009.
[4] I. Schreer and J. Lüttges, “Breast cancer: Early detection,” RadiologicPathologic Correlations from Head to Toe, New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2005, pp. 767–784.
[5] A. Bleyer and H. G. Welch, “Effect of three decades of screening mammography on breast-cancer incidence,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 367, no. 21,
pp. 1998–2005, Nov. 2012.
[6] H. D. Cheng et al., “Automated breast cancer detection and classification using ultrasound images: A survey,” Pattern Recog., vol. 43, no. 1,
pp. 299–317, Jan. 2010.
[7] M. Morrow et al., “MRI for breast cancer screening, diagnosis, and treatment,” The Lancet, vol. 378, no. 9805, pp. 1804–1811, Nov. 2011.
[8] J. G. Elmore et al., “Screening for breast cancer,” JAMA, J. Amer. Med.
Assoc., vol. 293, no. 10, pp. 1245–1256, 2005.
[9] D. Saslow et al., “American Cancer Society guidelines for breast screening
with MRI as an adjunct to mammography,” CA-Cancer J. Clin., vol. 57,
no. 2, pp. 75–89, 2007.
[10] J. G. Elmore et al., “Ten-year risk of false positive screening mammograms
and clinical breast examinations,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 338, no. 16,
pp. 1089–1096, Apr. 1998.
[11] A. Poulos et al., “Breast compression in mammography: How much is
enough?” Australas. Radiolol., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 121–126, Jun. 2003.
[12] D. L. Preston et al., “Radiation effects on breast cancer risk: A
pooled analysis of eight cohorts,” Radiat. Res., August, vol. 158, no. 2,
pp. 220–235, Aug. 2002.
[13] B. Bocquet et al., “Microwave radiometric imaging at 3 GHz for the
exploration of breast tumors,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 38,
no. 6, pp. 791–793, Jun. 1990.
[14] F. Bardati and S. Iudicello, “Modeling the visibility of breast malignancy
by a microwave radiometer,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 1,
pp. 214–221, Jan. 2008.
[15] L. H. V. Wang et al., “Microwave induced acoustic imaging of biological
tissues,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 3744–3748, Sep. 1999.
[16] S. C. Hagness et al., “Two-dimensional FDTD analysis of a pulsed microwave confocal system for breast cancer detection: Fixed-focus and
antenna-array sensors,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 45, no. 12,
pp. 1470–1479, Dec. 1998.
[17] P. M. Meaney et al., “A clinical prototype for active microwave imaging of the breast,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 48, no. 11,
pp. 1841–1853, Nov. 2000.
[18] A. E. Souvorov et al., “Two-dimensional computer analysis of a microwave flat antenna array for breast cancer tomography,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 1413–1415, Aug. 2000.
[19] A. Taflove and S. C. Hagness, Computational Electrodynamics: The
Finite-Difference Time-Domain Method, 3rd ed. Norwood MA, USA:
Artech House, 2000, ch. 7–9, pp. 273–406.
[20] X. Li and S. C. Hagness, “A confocal microwave imaging algorithm for
breast cancer detection,” IEEE Microw. Wireless Compon. Lett., vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 130–132, Mar. 2001.
[21] E. C. Fear et al., “Confocal microwave imaging for breast cancer detection:
Localization of tumors in three dimensions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 812–822, Aug. 2002.
[22] Y. Xie et al., “Multistatic adaptive microwave imaging for early
breast cancer detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 8,
pp. 1647–1657, Aug. 2006.
[23] Y. F. Chen et al. “Multiple-input multiple-output radar for lesion classification in ultrawideband breast imaging,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
Process., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 187–201, Feb. 2010.
[24] E. A. Marengo et al., “Time-reversal MUSIC imaging of extended targets,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1967–1984, Aug. 2007.
[25] M. D. Hossain et al., “Beamspace time-reversal microwave imaging for breast cancer detection,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag.
Lett., vol. 12, pp. 241–244, Feb. 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6461384

1525

[26] H. B. Lim et al., “Confocal microwave imaging for breast cancer detection:
Delay-multiply-and-sum image reconstruction algorithm,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1697–1704, Jun. 2008.
[27] F. Yang and A. S. Mohan, “Detection of malignant breast tissues using
microwave imaging,” in Proc. IEEE APMC Asia Pacific Microw. Conf.,
Dec. 2009, pp. 397–400.
[28] A. Shahzad et al., “Prefiltered beamforming for early-stage breast
cancer detection,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 12, pp.
500–503, Apr. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/
articleDetails.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6495469&queryText%3DPrefiltered+
beamforming+for+early-stage+breast+cancer+detection
[29] A. Shahzad et al., “A preprocessing filter for multistatic microwave breast
imaging for enhanced tumour detection,” Prog. Electromagn. Res. B,
vol. 57, pp. 115–126, 2014.
[30] UWCEM numerical breast phantoms repository. (2012). Computational Electromagnetics Laboratory. University of Wisconsin. Madison,
WI, USA. [Online]. Available: http://uwcem.ece.wisc.edu/MRIdatabase/
index.html
[31] M. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave
dielectric properties of normal, benign and malignant breast tissues obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 6093–6115,
2007.
[32] E. J. Bond et al., “Microwave imaging via space-time beamforming for
early detection of breast cancer,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 51,
no. 8, pp. 1690–1705, Aug. 2003.
[33] M. Okoniewski et al. “Simple treatment of multi-term dispersion in
FDTD,” IEEE Microw. Guided Wave Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 121–123,
May 1997.
[34] E. Zastrow et al., “Development of anatomically realistic numerical breast
phantoms with accurate dielectric properties for modeling microwave interactions with the human breast,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 12, pp. 2792–2800, Dec. 2008.
[35] American College of Radiology, Breast Imaging Reporting and Data
System Atlas, 4th ed. Reston, VA, USA: Amer. Coll. Radiol., 2003.
[36] Y. Chen et al., “Feasibility study of lesion classification via contrast-agentaided UWB breast imaging,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5,
pp. 1003–1007, May 2010.
[37] J. A. LaComb et al., “Ultra wideband surface wave communication,” Prog.
Electromagn. Res. C, vol. 8, pp. 95–105, 2009.
[38] P. Dimbylow, “FDTD calculations of the whole-body averaged SAR in
an anatomically realistic voxel model of the human body from 1 MHz to
1 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 479–490, Mar. 1997.
[39] J. A. Roden and S. D. Gedney, “Convolutional PML (CPML): An efficient
FDTD implementation of the CFS-PML for arbitrary media,” Microw. Opt.
Technol. Lett., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 334–338, 2000.
[40] J. M. Sill and E. C. Fear, “Tissue sensing adaptive radar for breast cancer detection-experimental investigation of simple tumor models,” IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 3312–3319, Nov. 2005.
[41] P. K. Verma et al., “Analysis of clutter reduction techniques for through
wall imaging in UWB range,” Prog. Electromagn. Res. B, vol. 17,
pp. 29–48, 2009.
[42] M. Klemm et al., “Improved delay-and-sum beamforming algorithm for breast cancer detection,” Int. J. Antennas
Propag., vol. 2008, art. no. 761402, 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijap/2008/761402/abs/
[43] A. Maskooki et al., “Frequency domain skin artifact removal method for
ultra-wideband breast cancer detection,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 98,
pp. 299–314, 2009.
[44] W. Zhi and F. Chin, “Entropy-based time window for artifact removal in
UWB imaging of breast cancer detection,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,
vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 585–588, Oct. 2006.
[45] M. A. Elahi et al., “Artifact removal algorithms for microwave imaging
of the breast,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 141, pp. 185–200, 2013.
[46] D. Winters et al., “Estimation of the frequency-dependent average dielectric properties of breast tissue using a time-domain inverse scattering
technique,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3517–3528,
Nov. 2006.
[47] M. D. Hossain and A. S. Mohan, “Breast cancer detection in highly dense
numerical breast phantoms using time reversal,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electromagn. Adv. Appl., Sep. 2013, pp. 859–862
[48] M. D. Hossain and A. S. Mohan, “Beamspace time reversal maximum
likelihood estimation for microwave breast imaging,” Antennas Propag.
Soc. Int. Symp., Jul. 2014, pp. 1921–1922.
Authors’, photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

