498

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Accuracy Improvement on the Measurement
of Human-Joint Angles
Dai Meng, Student Member, IEEE, Todd Shoepe, and Gustavo Vejarano, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A measurement technique that decreases the root
mean square error (RMSE) of measurements of human-joint angles using a personal wireless sensor network is reported. Its operation is based on virtual rotations of wireless sensors worn by the
user, and it focuses on the arm, whose position is measured on 5
degree of freedom (DOF). The wireless sensors use inertial magnetic units that measure the alignment of the arm with the earth’s
gravity and magnetic fields. Due to the biomechanical properties
of human tissue (e.g., skin’s elasticity), the sensors’ orientation is
shifted, and this shift affects the accuracy of measurements. In
the proposed technique, the change of orientation is first modeled
from linear regressions of data collected from 15 participants at
different arm positions. Then, out of eight body indices measured
with dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, the percentage of body fat
is found to have the greatest correlation with the rate of change in
sensors’ orientation. This finding enables us to estimate the change
in sensors’ orientation from the user’s body fat percentage. Finally,
an algorithm virtually rotates the sensors using quaternion theory
with the objective of reducing the error. The proposed technique
is validated with experiments on five different participants. In the
DOF, whose error decreased the most, the RMSE decreased from
2.20◦ to 0.87◦ . This is an improvement of 60%, and in the DOF
whose error decreased the least, the RMSE decreased from 1.64◦
to 1.37◦ . This is an improvement of 16%. On an average, the
RMSE improved by 44%.
Index Terms—Inertial magnetic unit (IMU), joint angle, motion
capture, quaternion, wireless sensor network (WSN).

I. INTRODUCTION
IFFERENT motion-capture (mocap) technologies have
been developed in recent years. One of them is based
on inertial/magnetic mocap systems that consist of electromagnetic, angular velocity, and acceleration sensors, also known
as inertial magnetic units (IMUs). IMUs are attached to a user
using straps and move along with the body segments they are
attached to, allowing the measurement of the motions.
The use of IMUs could have a positive impact on the future of rehabilitative medicine. For example, IMUs can provide
real-time visual and audio biofeedback to patients during rehabilitation exercises. One of the principle steps in therapeutic

D

Manuscript received July 21, 2014; revised November 23, 2014; accepted
January 15, 2015. Date of publication January 22, 2015; date of current version
March 3, 2016. This work was supported by Seaver College of Science and
Engineering and its Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
at Loyola Marymount University.
D. Meng and G. Vejarano are with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA 90045
USA (e-mail: dmeng@lion.lmu.edu; gvejaran@lmu.edu).
T. Shoepe is with the Department of Health and Human Sciences, Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA 90045 USA (e-mail: tshoepe@
lmu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2394467

rehabilitation is restoration of preinjury ranges of motion [1],
and biofeedback could be used to promote increased joint mobility by providing positive reinforcement to patients performing
an exercise [2]. Correspondingly, negative reinforcement could
be used to limit range of motion of patients following surgery,
where adequate time must be afforded for sufficient stabilization to take place relating to structural and procedural surgical
fixations. Furthermore, successful rehabilitation often requires
daily performance of exercises, where only a small portion can
be monitored by a clinician, and IMUs could eventually serve
a role in tracking patient activity and progress during home
rehabilitation for clinician review at subsequent follow-up appointments. In an another example, the promotion of patient
autonomy is essential to long-lasting efficacy and adherence of
rehabilitative and preventative programming [3], [4].
However, the accuracy of measurements performed by IMUs
is affected by the biomechanical properties of human tissue,
and this limits the use of IMUs for rehabilitative medicine. The
reason for the reduced accuracy is that human tissue, such as
subcutaneous adipose tissue and skin’s elasticity, misaligns the
IMUs at different body positions causing errors in the measurements [5]–[7]. The objective of this paper is to reduce the effects
of the human tissue properties on the accuracy of IMU-based
mocap systems.
The focus of this paper is on the arm. Specifically, the problem
addressed is the improvement of the accuracy of the measurements of IMU-based mocap systems on the human arm. This is
achieved by applying the theory of quaternions1 [8] for mathematical modeling of the effects of tissue properties on the IMU
mocap system measurements. This process can be summarized
in three steps. First, the human-body index that most affects
the accuracy of measurements is identified. The human indices
considered in this paper are eight in total:
1) Body total mass: Total mass of user’s body.
2) Body fat mass: Total amount of fat in user’s body.
3) Body lean mass: Total mass without fat mass and bone
mineral content.
4) Body fat percentage: Ratio of fat mass and total mass.
5) Arm fat mass: Total amount of fat in user’s arm.
6) Arm lean mass: Arm’s total mass without arm’s fat mass
and bone mineral content.
7) Arm total mass: Total mass of user’s arm.
8) Arm fat percentage: Ratio of arm’s fat mass and arm’s
total mass.
Second, the effects of human tissue on the measurements
of human-joint angles are estimated using the identified body
1 Quaternions are four-dimensional vectors that can be used to perform rotations in three-dimensional (3-D) spaces.

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MENG et al.: ACCURACY IMPROVEMENT ON THE MEASUREMENT OF HUMAN-JOINT ANGLES

index. Third, the measurements are corrected by the estimated
amount resulting in higher measurement accuracy.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section II,
the related work and contributions are presented. Section III
provides a description of the protocol followed to perform the
joint-angle measurements of the arm. Section IV presents a description of the IMU-based mocap system in which the improvement on accuracy is implemented and evaluated experimentally.
This improvement and its implementation are explained in
Section V. Finally, in Section VI, the experimental evaluation is
performed.
II. RELATED WORK
A considerable amount of work has already been devoted to
the problem of improving the accuracy of measurements of joint
angles of the arm [9]–[13]. These mocap systems are based on
reflective markers placed on the user’s arm and tracked by the infrared (IR) cameras. The measurements are affected by the skin
deformation and displacement that causes marker movement
with respect to the underlying bones. The measurements’ accuracy is improved by modeling the marker movement with respect
to landmark bones as the user performs selected movements. For
example, in [9], an algorithm is proposed that compensates for
the marker movement. Experimental results on six participants
show that the root mean square error (RMSE) decreases from
9◦ to 3◦ on the upper arm.
In this paper, we address the same problem but for the case
of IMU-based mocap systems.
Previous work on IMU-based mocap systems uses Kalman
filters to measure human motion [14]–[16]. In [14], an armmotion experiment was performed on 2 DOFs, but the accuracy
of the measurements of the arm movements was not reported. It
was only reported that the pitch, yaw, and roll of the IMU was
measured with an RMSE of 0.2◦ , 1.5◦ , and 0.2◦ , respectively. In
[15], the design and testing of a portable magnetic system combined with IMUs was presented. The magnetic system consists
of three orthogonal coils attached to the body. Experimental
results showed that the orientation of the upper arm could be
measured with an RMSE of 2.3◦ . In [16], a Kalman-based fusion algorithm removed the effects of drifting error and error
in the measurement of gravity. Experiments showed that head
movements could be measured with an average RMSE of 3.3◦ .
Besides Kalman filters, the concept of quaternion [8] has also
been widely used to measure human-body motion. In [17]–[21],
quaternions were used to perform rotations of objects that represent body segments such as the upper arm and forearm in a
3-D space. An extended Kalman filter for real-time estimation
of rigid body orientation was presented in [17]. Experiments
were performed by rotating an IMU along each of its three axes.
However, the accuracy of the measurements was not reported.
In [18], the problem of nonlinear relationship between estimated orientations, represented by quaternions, and expected
measurements was addressed with an unscented Kalman filter. The filter was evaluated with the simulation of a random
walk, but its accuracy was not reported either. In [19], a quaternion based extended Kalman filter was developed along with

499

a procedure of sensor bias compensation. The objective was to
reduce the effects that body motion and magnetic disturbance
have on the measurements of the earth’s gravity and magnetic
fields, respectively. Experimental results considered only one
IMU, whose pitch, yaw, and roll were measured with RMSEs
of 1.40◦ , 4.13◦ , and 1.31◦ , respectively. In [20], a 3-DOF orientation estimation algorithm was presented. Experimental results
showed that the algorithm was able to track rotations of an IMU
placed on a precision tilt table, but the accuracy of the measurements was not determined. In [21], a quaternion-based adaptive
Kalman filter for drift-free orientation estimation was presented.
Experimental results showed that an IMU’s pitch and roll were
measured with RMSEs of 0.75◦ and 0.65◦ .
As is the case with this paper, previous work [5], [22]–[25]
has focused on upper limbs. In [22], a protocol for measuring
single-joint movements of the shoulder and elbow is evaluated.
The measurements are found to have an RMSE no greater than
3.6◦ . In [23], an upper-limb motion estimation algorithm was
developed that models the relationship between upper-arm and
forearm movements. A link structure with 5 DOFs was proposed to model the upper-limb skeleton structure. Experimental
results showed an RMSE of 2.36◦ , 0.88◦ , 2.90◦ , 6.18◦ , and
13.04◦ on the 5 DOFs, respectively. In [5], the problems caused
by noise and drifts in the IMUs and by the properties of human
tissue were addressed. The proposed solution is a calibration
process and a noise insensitive tracking algorithm. Experimental results on hand movements showed errors of 5◦ . In [24], a
wearable WSN using accelerometers measured the arm motion
in the sagittal plane only, and the focus was on flexions at the
elbow. Experimental results showed that the standard deviation
of the measurement error of the angle at the elbow increases
linearly from 2.5◦ to 7.0◦ when the angular speed of the flexion
increased from 10◦ /s to 80◦ /s. In [25], a factorized-quaternion
approach for determining arm motions was proposed. It allows
the implementation of anatomical arm constraints that match the
range of motion of the human arm. Experiments were conducted
using a WSN equipped with triaxial accelerometers attached to
the arm under dynamical conditions. The standard deviation of
the error for the upper arm and forearm was 9.64◦ and 14.38◦ ,
respectively.
Other mocap technologies different from IMUs have been developed as well. To the best of our knowledge, these include IR
cameras [26], combination of IR cameras and IMUs [27], combination of ultrasonic sensors and IMUs [28], and optical linear
encoders [29]. IR-camera mocap systems are characterized for
having high levels of accuracy. Therefore, their measurements
can be used as a reference when determining the RMSE of other
mocap systems. For example, IR cameras were used with this
purpose in [15], [16], [19], [22], and [23], and in this paper.
For the rest of the related work, the RMSE was measured using
other techniques: a high-precision tilt table [14], a goniometer
[24], and a commercially available IMU-based mocap system
[25]. The method used to measure the RMSE in [21] was not
reported.
Prior to this paper, its authors developed an IMU-based mocap
system [6]. The focus of the system was on the upper arm
and forearm using 5 DOFs. As in [5], the experimental results

500

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 1. Arm model. (a) Shoulder angles: α 1 , α 2 , and α 3 . (b) Elbow angle:
σ 1 . (c) Elbow angle: σ 2 .

showed that the RMSE is dependent on the positions of the arm.
The RMSE was greater when the participant reached extreme
positions. In the arm position that was most affected, the RMSE
increased by 173% under static conditions.
In this paper, the problem of reducing the effects of human
tissue properties is addressed under static conditions. The contributions are as follows.
1) The correlation between each of the eight body indices
listed earlier and the variation of the RMSE is measured
experimentally on 15 participants. The body index that
correlates the highest is identified. This index is the body
fat percentage.
2) The variation of the RMSE as a function of the arm position is modeled using quaternions. This model is parameterized with the identified body index, i.e., body fat
percentage.
3) Using the parameterized model and the theory of quaternions, an algorithm is developed that reduces the effects
that human tissue has on the RMSE. In order to use the
algorithm, it is necessary that the body fat percentage be
known a priori.
4) The improvement on the accuracy of the IMU-based mocap system using the proposed algorithm is experimentally
evaluated on other five participants. The results show that
with the algorithm, the RMSE decreases by 44% on average, from an average of 2.18◦ to an average of 1.23◦ .
III. PROTOCOL FOR THE MEASUREMENT
OF UPPER-LIMB KINEMATICS
Based on the framework for the definition of standardized
protocols for measuring upper-limb kinematics in [30], the following aspects specify the protocol followed in this paper.
The joints to be investigated are the shoulder (i.e., rotations
of the humerus bone at the glenohumeral rotation center) and
elbow (i.e., movements of the forearm relative to the humerus).
The mechanical equivalent model of the selected joints is
based on the recommendation of the International Society of
Biomechanics on joint coordinate systems for the reporting of
human-joint motion [31]. The model consists of angles α1 , α2 ,
α3 , σ1 , and σ2 as shown in Fig. 1.
Movements of the upper arm relative to the thorax (i.e., at
the shoulder joint) can be approximated with three rotations

[31] that we represent with α1 , α2 , and α3 [see Fig. 1(a)].
These are rotations of the humerus bone (i.e., upper arm) at the
glenohumeral rotation center (i.e., shoulder joint). The elevation
of the humerus as it moves away from and toward the thorax is α1
(i.e., flexion, extension, adduction, and abduction), the cardinal
direction of the humerus (i.e., north, south, east, west) is α2
(i.e., transverse flexion, extension, adduction, and abduction),
and the internal/external rotation of the humerus2 is α3 .
Movements of the forearm relative to the humerus (i.e., at the
elbow joint) can be approximated with two rotations [31]: the
flexion and extension at the elbow [see Fig. 1(b)] that we represent with σ1 , and the axial rotation of the forearm [see Fig. 1(c)]
that we represent with σ2 (i.e., pronation, supination).
The arm movements to be measured are listed later along with
the reference coordinate system, which is based on the earth’s
gravity and magnetic north. The movements are such that only
one angle is varied per movement (i.e., while one angle varies,
all other angles are kept constant). This is for reducing cross
talk between the joint angle being varied and other joint angles
[22].
1) Movement 1 (α1 ): The arm is always kept straight (i.e., elbow fully extended). The arm’s initial position is to point
down to the floor (α1 = 180◦ ). The arm moves at the
shoulder (i.e., anterior movement of the humerus) along
the sagittal plane in order to raise it completely (α1 decreases to 0◦ ). When the arm is parallel to the floor, α1 is
90◦ .
2) Movement 2 (α2 ): The arm is always kept straight (i.e.,
elbow fully extended). The arm’s initial position is to point
to the user’s right. The arm moves at the shoulder toward
the user’s left along the transverse plane (i.e., transverse
flexion of the humerus). When the arm points north, α2 is
0◦ .
3) Movement 3 (α3 ): The arm is always kept straight (i.e.,
elbow fully extended), parallel to the floor, and pointing
to the user’s front. In the initial position, the user performs
an internal rotation of the humerus to its maximum. Then,
the user performs an external rotation. When the Y -axis
of the shoulder sensor3 is parallel to the floor, α3 is 0◦ .
4) Movement 4 (σ1 ): The upper arm is always kept parallel
to the floor and pointing to the user’s front. In the initial
position, the elbow is fully extended (σ1 = 0◦ ), and then,
it is flexed along the sagittal plane. When the forearm
points up [see Fig. 1(b)], σ1 is 90◦ .
5) Movement 5 (σ2 ): This movement is similar to Movement
(Movt.) 3 with the difference that the rotation is performed
at the elbow [see Fig. 1(c)], i.e., the forearm is rotated.
The sensor configuration used to measure the joint angles
is shown in Fig. 1. The location of the sensors was determined
under two considerations. First, each sensor needs to be far from
the joint that it measures because it follows arm movements
more accurately in this way, and second, the effects of tensing
and relaxing muscles and tissue (i.e., skin and fat) on the sensors’
2 If the humerus is thought of as a cylinder with an axis between the centers
of any two circumferences of the cylinder, the internal/external rotation is the
rotation along this axis toward/away from the thorax.
3 The axes of the sensors are explained in Section IV.

MENG et al.: ACCURACY IMPROVEMENT ON THE MEASUREMENT OF HUMAN-JOINT ANGLES

Fig. 2.

WIMU Mocap system and IR-Camera Mocap system.

501

Fig. 3.

Algorithm to calculate joint angles: α 1 , α 2 , α 3 , σ 1 , and σ 2 .

Fig. 4.
2.

Adjustment of a sensor’s orientation. (a) Adjustment 1. (b) Adjustment

orientation should be minimum. The sensors are attached to the
arm with elastic cuffs that are tightened to the comfort of the
user.
Finally, the last aspect of the protocol is the refinement that
can be applied to the measurements in order to minimize the
error. This refinement is the main focus of this paper, and it is
described in Section V.
IV. MOCAP SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The mocap system considered in this paper consists of
the mechanical model of the limb to be tracked described in
Section III, a number of wireless sensors (i.e., one sensor per
joint), and a software application that processes the measurement data in order to find the joint angles. The system is shown
in Fig. 2 on a skeleton mannequin. Two wireless sensors are
placed on each arm. The sensors connect wirelessly to the laptop forming a WSN, and the WSN connects through the Internet
to the desktop computer where the joint angles are calculated.
We refer to this system as the wireless IMU (WIMU) mocap
system. Fig. 2 also shows the IR-camera mocap system that is
used to determine the RMSE of the WIMU mocap system.
Each wireless sensor has an IMU, and the total number of
sensors depends on the number of joints to be tracked. There
needs to be one sensor per joint. This number of sensors is
denoted by M . A wireless sensor is shown in Fig. 4. The IMU
of the sensor is referenced to the 3-D coordinate system shown in
Fig. 4. The accelerometer and magnetometer measure the earth’s
gravity and magnetic fields on the X, Y , and Z dimensions at a
rate Rs that is configurable. We denote the nth measurement of
the fields by sensor i with the following vectors:
gi [n]  (gi,X [n], gi,Y [n], gi,Z [n])
m
 i [n]  (mi,X [n], mi,Y [n], mi,Z [n]).
Each sensor in the network has an identification (ID) and
transmits packets to the receiver connected to the laptop computer at a rate Rt that is also configurable. In our experimental
evaluation, Rt and Rs are equal. Therefore, each packet carries

one sample of each field (i.e., gravity and magnetic) only. A
packet also carries the sensor ID, packet length, packet number,
and received signal strength indicator (RSSI). The ID is used to
identify which sensor has been placed on each joint. The packet
length and number are used for debugging, and the RSSI is used
to guarantee that the user is close enough to the receiver for the
wireless links to be reliable.
The angles are all updated with every packet reception according to the algorithm in Fig. 3. Before executed, the algorithm
requires that all sensors be calibrated.4 The input to the algorithm is the last N received measurements Gi [n] and Mi [n] of
every sensor as defined below, the ID of the sensor that transmitted the last received packet, and the body index b (i.e., body
fat percentage of the user). The output of the algorithm is the
current joint angles α1 [n], α2 [n], α3 [n], σ1 [n], and σ2 [n]
Gi [n]  (gi [n], gi [n − 1], . . . , gi [n − (N − 1)])
 i [n], m
 i [n − 1], . . . , m
 i [n − (N − 1)]).
Mi [n]  (m
The algorithm operates as follows. The sensor that transmitted the received packet is identified first (see lines 2 and 3 in
Fig. 3). The measurements performed by this sensor on every
dimension are then normalized (see lines 4 and 5) as explained
in [6] using the calibration data. Therefore, all coordinates vary
4 A description of the implementation details of the algorithm and the calibration process can be found in [6].

502

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

in the interval (−1, 1) indicating the alignment of the axis (i.e.,
X, Y , and Z in Fig. 4) with the corresponding field. After the
normalization, the orientation of the sensor is updated (see line
6). The orientation of sensor i is given by its pitch oi,p , yaw
oi,y , and roll oi,r , which are calculated from the normalized
gravity and magnetic-field measurements (gi,x , gi,y , gi,z ) and
(mi,x , mi,y , mi,z ) as explained in [6]. In the algorithm in Fig. 3,
the orientation of sensor i is denoted by oi = (oi,p , oi,y , oi,r ).
Once the sensor’s orientation is updated (see line 9), the joint
angles are calculated [6] (see lines 10 and 11). However, in order
to reduce the effects of human tissue and improve accuracy, the
sensors’ orientation are virtually adjusted (see line 12) as explained in Section V. This is done using the user’s body index b
and the calculated joint angles because as the experimental analysis of the RMSE in Section V-B shows the RMSE correlates
with the joint angles determined in lines 10 and 11 and the body
index. With the adjusted orientations, the joint angles are finally
recalculated, achieving better accuracy. This improvement in
accuracy is evaluated experimentally in Section VI.
V. ACCURACY IMPROVEMENT USING QUATERNIONS
Due to the properties of human tissue, the sensors experience small changes in their orientation at certain arm positions.
The accuracy improvement is achieved by virtually reorienting
the sensors in order to counteract the effects of human tissue.
As shown in Fig. 4, each sensor has axes X, Y , and Z. Let
these axes be represented in the 3-D coordinate system formed
by the following three orthogonal vectors: the earth’s gravity,
the magnetic north, and the cross product between gravity and
magnetic north. In this coordinate system, the X-, Y -, and Zaxes of sensor i are represented by unit-length vectors si,X [n],
si,Y [n], and si,Z [n], respectively. Given that si,Z [n] can be generated from the cross product between si,X [n] and si,Y [n], only
si,X [n] and si,Y [n] are needed to represent the sensor’s orientation, and the coordinates of si,X [n] and si,Y [n] can be obtained
as follows.
The spherical coordinates of si,X [n] can be determined from
the sensor’s pitch oi,p and yaw oi,y
si,X [n] = (1, oi,p , oi,y ).
The rectangular coordinates of si,Y [n] can be determined by
considering the plane in which si,Y [n] lies when the sensor’s roll
varies (i.e., the Y Z plane in Fig. 4). Let di = (si,X ,y , −si,X ,x , 0)
represent si,Y [n] when the roll is zero (i.e., oi,r = 0). Also, let
the cross product of si,X [n] and di be ei = si,X [n] × di . Vectors
di and ei are orthogonal and lie on the plane. Therefore, si,Y [n]
can be determined from oi
si,Y [n] = ei cos oi,r + di sin oi,r .
A. Adjustment of Sensors’ Orientation Using Quaternions
The adjustment of the sensors’ orientation is based on the
concept of quaternion and its rotation operation [8]. A quaternion is a four-dimensional vector that can be used to perform
rotations on objects in a 3-D space.

From observations of the sensors on the arms of participants
and the fact that α2 had the smallest RMSE in the experimental
results obtained in [6], it was concluded that the orientation of
a sensor was mostly affected by the tissue properties on two
directions of rotation: when the axes of rotation are X and Y in
Fig. 4. In the WSN setup considered in this paper (see Fig. 1),
the effect on the orientation due to rotations along the Z-axis
was negligible due to the location of the sensors on the arms and
the straps that attach them to the body. Therefore, as shown in
Fig. 4, where the axes are vectors si,X [n], si,Y [n], and si,Z [n],
the orientation of a sensor is adjusted in those two directions of
rotation that are affected:
1) Adjustment 1 [see Fig. 4(a)]: This is an adjustment of the
◦
,
pitch, i.e., sensor i is virtually rotated around si,Y by θi,1
which is equivalent to a rotation of the sensor’s XZ plane
θ
θ
◦
by θi,1
. Let quaternion ai,1 = cos i2, 1 + si,Y sin i2, 1 represent the adjustment. Then, Adjustment 1 is performed
as follows:
s i,X = ai,1 si,X a∗i,1 .
2) Adjustment 2 [see Fig. 4(b)]: This is an adjustment of the
◦
,
roll, i.e., sensor i is virtually rotated around si,X by θi,2
which is equivalent to a rotation of the sensor’s Y Z plane
θ
θ
◦
by θi,2
. Let quaternion ai,2 = cos i2, 2 + si,X sin i2, 2 represent the adjustment. Then, Adjustment 2 is performed
as follows:
s i,Y = ai,2 si,Y a∗i,2 .
B. Correlation Between RMSE and Body Indices
In order to perform the adjustments, it is necessary to have
the values of θi,1 and θi,2 for every sensor in the WSN and
every participant. The approach followed to obtain these values
consists of four steps. In step 1, the values of θi,1 and θi,2 that
made the measurement error equal to zero for five different arm
movements on 15 different participants were measured.5 In step
2, the correlation of θi,1 and θi,2 with each of the movements and
for each of the sensors and participants was calculated; a linear
regression of θi,1 and θi,2 as a function of the arm positions (i.e.,
joint angles) was also determined for each of the sensors and
participants. In step 3, the correlation between the parameters
of the regressions (i.e., slope and intersection with the Y -axis)
of θi,1 and θi,2 with the different body indices listed in Section I
was calculated. Finally, in step 4, the parameters were modeled
as functions of the body index using the body index of highest
correlation so that they can be estimated for any user whose
body index is known a priori.
The 15 participants were of the following characteristics:
males, 19–23 years old, 1.71–1.89 m, and 59.93–88.83 kg.
They were asked to perform the five movements described in
Section III.
In order to measure θi,1 and θi,2 experimentally for step 1, the
reference values of si,X and si,Y were measured using a Vicon
5 Participants were recruited from the undergraduate population of male students following Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects approval. All potential participants were notified of all potential risks and
benefits to participation and a written informed consent was obtained.

MENG et al.: ACCURACY IMPROVEMENT ON THE MEASUREMENT OF HUMAN-JOINT ANGLES

TABLE I
CONFIGURATION OF THE WIMU MOCAP SYSTEM
Parameter

Value

Sampling Rate: R s
Packet Rate: R t
Number of Sensors: M
History Size: N
Magnetic-Field Inclination: Θ

20 Hz
20 Hz
2
5
41 ◦

IR-camera mocap system [26], which is a procedure similar to
the one performed in [22]. The reflective markers of this system
were placed on Vicon plastic plates of square shape. Each plate
had four markers at the corners of the square. Two plates were
used, which were attached to the upper arm and forearm, respectively. Also, the Vicon mocap system was calibrated using
a digital compass and a level such that its coordinate system
matched the coordinate system of the WIMU mocap system.
This coordinate system is based on the earth’s gravity and magnetic north as explained previously. For each movement, the
participant was asked to take the arm to the movement’s initial
position and then move the arm in the direction of the final position by an average of 7◦ . Measurements were taken at every
7◦ . The measurements were finished once the user reached the
final position. For every measurement, the plates with reflective markers were adjusted manually to realign them with the
humerus and radius bones. This was done by locating the bones
manually and reorienting the marker plates so that two parallel sides of each plate were also parallel to their corresponding
bones, i.e., humerus and radius. The attached sensors were adjusted in the same way, but only once. This was done prior to
the measurements with the participant standing straight and with
the arm at rest. Therefore, the shifts in orientation of IMUs with
respect to the marker plates were measured at every arm position. For each measurement, the values of si,X and si,Y were
obtained from both mocap systems: Vicon and WIMU. In the
following, these are denoted by vi,X and vi,Y for Vicon and si,X
and si,Y for WIMU. Therefore, θi,1 and θi,2 were determined
according to


si,Y · vi,Y
−1
θi,1 = cos
|si,Y | |vi,Y |


si,X · vi,X
−1
θi,2 = cos
.
|si,X | |vi,X |
In order to perform the measurements with the WIMU mocap
system, the system was configured with the same parameter
values given in [6]. These parameters are shown in Table I.
Remark: It should be noted that the previous procedure to
measure θi,1 and θi,2 is susceptible to the following errors. First,
θi,1 and θi,2 are based on the difference in orientation of the sensors and marker plates, not on the difference in orientation of
the sensors and bones. The orientation of the bones is estimated
with the IR-camera mocap system and marker plates that are
realigned with the bones at every arm position in order to minimize the effects that human tissue has on the plates’ orientation
[7], [9]–[13]. Second, the coordinate system of the IR-camera

503

mocap system is referenced to the earth’s gravity and magnetic
north with a level and digital compass, respectively. Therefore,
all measurements of vectors vi,X and vi,Y directly depend on
the use and accuracy of these instruments. Finally, all measurements of vectors si,X and si,Y depend on the calibration of the
WIMU mocap system described in [6].
Fig. 5 shows the measured values of θi,1 and θi,2 for two
different participants and the adjustments selected in Table II.
These are the participants of lowest and highest body fat percentage (i.e., 13.5% and 24.0%). The results show that θi,1 and
θi,2 tend to vary linearly with the arm position. Therefore, at
the extreme positions (i.e., initial and final positions of every
movement), the orientation of the sensors is affected the most.
This result is in accordance with the experimental results of [6],
which show that when the user performs the greatest effort to
achieve an arm position, the accuracy of the measurements of
the human-joint angles is the lowest.
For step 2, the correlation coefficient of the linear regression
of θi,1 and θi,2 as a function of the arm positions was calculated
for all 15 participants, five movements, two sensors, and two
adjustments (i.e., 15 × 5 × 2 × 2 = 300 linear regressions). In
order to find the general trend, the averages of the correlation
coefficients among all participants were calculated (i.e., 300
15 =
20 averages of correlation coefficients). These are shown in
Table II. The results show that the five adjustments highlighted
in Table II have a linear behavior. The highlighted adjustments
include θ1,1 and θ2,1 in Movt. 1, θ2,2 in Movt. 3, and θ1,2 and
θ2,2 in Movt. 5. From now on, we refer to these five adjustments
as the selected adjustments. Therefore, not all of the measured
movements were affected by the properties of human tissue. In
Movts. 2 and 4, the orientation of the sensors was not affected
significantly. The error in those cases did not correlate with
the arm positions; it showed a random behavior with mean and
standard deviation of 0.78◦ and 0.19◦ for α2 in Movt. 2 and 0.86◦
and 0.15◦ for σ1 in Movt. 4. Also, for Movts. 1, 3, and 5, the
orientation of the sensors was affected in only two, one, and two
out of the total of four possible adjustments (i.e., θ1,1 , θ1,2 , θ2,1 ,
and θ2,2 ) respectively. Fig. 5 shows the selected adjustments for
two out of the 15 participants.
For step 3, the parameters of the linear regressions of the
selected adjustments (i.e., slope and intersection with the Y axis) are estimated from one of the body indices listed in
Section I. This body index is identified from the correlation
between the following two variables: the slope of the linear
regressions of the selected adjustments and the body indices.
The eight body indices were obtained using dual energy Xray absorptiometry (DXA) (see Fig. 6), which uses a threecomponent model for estimation of lean mass, fat mass, and
bone mineral. All body composition scans and analyses were
performed by the same experienced and licensed Radiologic
Technician using a densitometer (Hologic Discovery; Waltham,
MA; USA). DXA is cheaper and more accessible than clinical
reference techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging and
computed-tomography. In addition, DXA is also more common and less reliant on subject compliance than other laboratory methods such as hydrometry and underwater weighing;

504

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 5. Linear regression: Adjustment versus arm position. (a) Movement 1: upper arm, adjustment 1 (θ1 , 1 ). (b) Movement 1: forearm, adjustment 1 (θ2 , 1 ). (c)
Movement 3: forearm, adjustment 2 (θ2 , 2 ). (d) Movement 5: upper arm, adjustment 2 (θ1 , 2 ). (e) Movement 5: forearm, adjustment 2 (θ2 , 2 ).

TABLE II
AVERAGE CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS: ADJUSTMENT VERSUS ARM POSITION

Movt.1
Movt.2
Movt.3
Movt.4
Movt.5

Fig. 6.

θ1 , 1 :
Upper Arm,
Adjustment 1

θ1 , 2 :
Upper Arm,
Adjustment 2

θ2 , 1 :
Forearm,
Adjustment 1

θ2 , 2 :
Forearm,
Adjustment 2

−0.985
−0.004
−0.014
−0.012
0.278

0.034
0.214
−0.001
0.087
−0.923

−0.984
−0.021
0.054
0.129
0.093

−0.021
−0.053
0.961
−0.110
−0.927

Measurement of the body indices using DXA.

TABLE III
AVERAGE CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS: SLOPE OF THE ADJUSTMENT’S LINEAR
REGRESSION VERSUS HUMAN BODY INDEX

Body fat percent
Arm fat percent
Arm fat mass
Body fat mass
Arm lean mass
Body lean mass
Arm total mass
Body total mass

Movt.1
θ1 , 1

Movt.1
θ2 , 1

Movt.3
θ2 , 2

Movt.5
θ1 , 2

Movt.5
θ2 , 2

−0.722
−0.534
−0.439
−0.506
0.472
0.374
0.312
0.175

−0.574
−0.419
−0.372
−0.385
0.321
0.295
0.194
0.143

−0.765
−0.653
−0.655
−0.594
0.414
0.304
0.191
0.09

−0.586
−0.477
−0.421
−0.420
0.344
0.298
0.193
0.134

−0.207
−0.205
−0.103
−0.040
0.213
0.217
0.175
0.177

furthermore, it provides for better precision than common field
methods such as skin folds and electrical impedance [32].
Table III shows the correlation coefficients between the slope
of the linear regression of each selected adjustment and each
body index. The columns of Table III correspond to the selected adjustments, and the rows correspond to the body indices.
The rows are in descending order such that the body index of
strongest average correlation (i.e., body fat percentage) is listed
first. Also, for each selected adjustment, the body index of highest correlation is highlighted. The results show that body fat

percentage correlates the most for the first four selected adjustments, and it correlates almost equally to the body lean mass for
the last selected adjustment, which is the body index of highest
correlation in this case. Therefore, we selected body fat percentage to estimate the parameters of the linear model, i.e., slope
and Y -axis intersection, of each of the selected adjustments for
any person. For example, in the worst case scenario (i.e., θ2,2
in Movt. 3), for every point increase in body fat percentage, the
error’s magnitude increases by an extra 0.765◦ for every 1◦ the
arm moves.
Fig. 5 shows how the slope of the linear regression changes
when the body fat percentage changes from 13.5% to 24.0%.
For the participant of higher body fat percentage (i.e., 24.0%),
the magnitude of the error increases at a faster rate as the arm
moves from the initial to final position. This trend is confirmed
by the correlation coefficients in Table III. The error tends to
change linearly with the arm positions, and the rate of change
(i.e., the slope of the linear regression) is correlated with the
body fat percentage as given in Table III.
Fig. 7 shows the linear regression of the rates of change of
the selected adjustments as functions of the body fat percentage.
The results show graphically that the magnitude of the rate
of change of the selected adjustments increases with body fat
percentage. Therefore, for people of higher body fat percentage,
the necessary adjustments will be of larger magnitude in order
to virtually reorient the sensors and improve the accuracy. This
improvement is verified experimentally in the following section.
Finally, for step 4, the parameters of the linear models of the
selected adjustments (i.e., slope and intersection with the Y axis) are determined from the linear regressions of step 3 (i.e.,
Fig. 7). This can be done for any user whose characteristics are
similar to those of the 15 participants considered previously,
i.e., males, 19–23 years old, 1.71–1.89 m, and 59.93–88.83 kg.
Remark: Table III shows that body fat percentage was found
to be superior to arm-only indices (i.e., arm fat mass, arm lean
mass, arm total mass, and arm fat percentage). The following
reasons can be identified for this finding. First, it has been shown
that DXA measurements of whole-body composition are more
accurate than DXA measurements of regional-body composition [33]. Regional assessments in absorptiometry represent
more recent additions to these machine capabilities. Second,
body fat distribution and tissue variations might also play a role
in sensors’ orientation. Adipose tissue occurs in two major categories: visceral or that which is in-between and covers deep
internal organs and subcutaneous or the fat deposited underneath
the skin and on top of underlying organs [34]. Subcutaneous fat,
comprising the majority of total fat in the arms and legs is separated into two separate layers distinct in anatomy, location,

MENG et al.: ACCURACY IMPROVEMENT ON THE MEASUREMENT OF HUMAN-JOINT ANGLES

505

Fig. 7. Rate of change of adjustments as functions of body fat percentage. (a) Movement 1: upper arm, adjustment 1 (θ1 , 1 ). (b) Movement 1: forearm, adjustment
1 (θ2 , 1 ). (c) Movement 3: forearm, adjustment 2 (θ2 , 2 ). (d) Movement 5: upper arm, adjustment 2 (θ1 , 2 ). (e) Movement 5: forearm, adjustment 2 (θ2 , 2 ).

Fig. 8. Comparison of estimated and actual adjustments. (a) Movement 1: upper arm, adjustment 1 (θ1 , 1 ). (b) Movement 1: forearm, adjustment 1 (θ2 , 1 ). (c)
Movement 3: forearm, adjustment 2 (θ2 , 2 ). (d) Movement 5: upper arm, adjustment 2 (θ1 , 2 ). (e) Movement 5: forearm, adjustment 2 (θ2 , 2 ).

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF THE ERRORS BEFORE AND AFTER ADJUSTMENTS

Error before adjustments

Error after adjustments

Mean
Standard Deviation
RMSE
Mean
Standard Deviation
RMSE

Movt. 1
α1

Movt. 1
α2

Movt. 1
σ1

Movt. 3
σ2

Movt. 5
α3

Movt. 5
σ2

Average

0.70 ◦
2.05 ◦
2.20 ◦
0.12 ◦
0.83 ◦
0.87 ◦

−0.83 ◦
1.97 ◦
2.13 ◦
0.24 ◦
1.16 ◦
1.37 ◦

−1.67 ◦
1.73 ◦
2.41 ◦
0.21 ◦
1.19 ◦
1.22 ◦

0.27 ◦
1.54 ◦
1.64 ◦
−0.09 ◦
1.26 ◦
1.37 ◦

−0.17 ◦
1.98 ◦
1.98 ◦
−0.03 ◦
1.17 ◦
1.26 ◦

−1.83 ◦
1.80 ◦
2.69 ◦
−0.41 ◦
1.24 ◦
1.31 ◦

0.91 ◦
1.84 ◦
2.18 ◦
0.18 ◦
1.14 ◦
1.23 ◦

and metabolic activity [35]. The deep subcutaneous tissue layer
(DSAT) overlies and is anchored to connective tissue fascia
surrounding muscles and bones, demonstrates more irregular
patterns, and exhibits larger cellular volumes. The superficial
subcutaneous adipose tissue layer (SSAT), lying immediately
below the dermis of the skin, includes more densely packed
lobular structures and smaller, more compact structures [36].
Proportionate expression of DSAT to SSAT would likely be
related to the sensors’ adjustments due to differences in the density and dynamic tissue properties of DSAT and SSAT coupled
with varied frequency and manner of connective tissue anchors
(retinacula cutis) to the over- and underlying structures [37]. Additionally, the divergent metabolic function of these layers likely
plays a role in deposition patterns as the DSAT layer thickness
is more sensitive to whole-body fat percentage and obesity [36].
It, therefore, appears reasonable that whole-body measures of
body fat could be a better indicator of tissue-specific properties by separating effects of the two subcutaneous fat layers on
sensor data acquired on the skin surface.
Remark: Table III also shows that the orientation of the sensor attached to the wrist is correlated with the body fat percentage. The following reason can be identified for this finding. Soft tissue elements, while proportionately decreased between the upper arm and forearm, comprise the vast majority of
overall mass of both segments. Specifically, cadaveric dissection has revealed that skin and adipose tissue alone comprise
a third of the overall mass of the forearm [38]. This value has

further been shown to be almost identical to the proportion
of skin and adipose tissue found in whole-body investigations
[39], which also supports the finding that body fat percentage
was the greatest indicator of adjustments. However, the notable
contribution of skin, which was not directly assessed in the
present study, might also play a significant role in the change
of sensor orientation seen at the wrist. Regional differences
in elastic properties of skin have been documented previously
[40], [41] using noninvasive instrumentation with positioning
similarities to the sensors in the present study. Perhaps more
importantly, net elasticity of forearm skin could be higher than
in the upper arm [40], a finding that could be a factor in the
observed change in orientation of the sensor at the wrist. Furthermore, net elasticity as measured, is purported to be a strong
indicator of solid, static components of the skin as it excludes
viscous pull of extracellular fluid matrix components of the skin
[40]. Future research could look at elucidating the differential
effects of skin, adipose, and muscle elements on IMU precision.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Two experimental comparisons were performed in order to
quantify the improvement in accuracy of the proposed approach
of estimating the values of the selected adjustments from the
body fat percentage of the user. The two comparisons were
done on five different participants of characteristics similar to
those of the previous 15 participants. The first is a comparison

506

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

of the estimated and actual selected adjustments, i.e., the adjustment estimated from the body fat percentage of the participant
was compared with the adjustment measured on the participant
with the procedure explained in Section V-B. The second is the
comparison of the RMSE of measured joint angles with and
without the estimated selected adjustments.
Fig. 8 shows the comparison of the estimated and actual selected adjustments for one of the five participants whose body
fat percentage was 17.7%. The results show that the estimated
adjustments follow the actual adjustments closely. The actual
adjustments decrease with the arm positions around the estimated adjustments that vary linearly.
The results of all estimated adjustments on the accuracy of the
measurements of human-joint angles on the five participants are
summarized in Table IV. For Movt. 1, adjustments θ1,1 and θ2,1
decreased the RMSE of α1 , α2 , and σ2 by 1.33◦ , 0.76◦ , and 1.19◦
on average, respectively. These correspond to improvements of
60%, 36%, and 49% respectively. For Movt. 3, adjustment θ2,2
decreased the RMSE of σ2 by 0.27◦ on average. This is an
improvement of 16%, and for Movt. 5, adjustments θ1,2 and
θ2,2 decreased the RMSE of α3 and σ2 by 0.72◦ and 1.38◦
on average, respectively. These correspond to improvements of
36% and 51%. The average RMSE reduction across all cases
listed in Table IV is 0.95◦ , which is an improvement of 44%.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
An algorithm for wireless sensor networks was developed
that improves the accuracy of measurements of joint angles of
the human body. The focus was on measurements at the shoulder and elbow with 3 and 2 DOFs, respectively. Its principle of
operation is based on the virtual adjustment on the alignment
of the sensors with the different body segments (i.e., upper arm
and forearm) being tracked with the earth’s gravity and magnetic fields. The virtual adjustment is based on estimating the
necessary rotations to reorient the sensors. This estimation is
calculated from the user’s body fat percentage. This body index was found to have the highest correlation with the rate of
change of the necessary rotations. A total of eight body indices
were considered in a group of 15 participants. The indices are
the body’s and arm’s total mass, fat mass, lean mass, and fat
percentage. Experimental results on another group of five participants of characteristics similar to those of the former group
of 15 showed that the proposed algorithm improved the accuracy
of the measurements of human-joint angles. In the DOF whose
error decreased the most, the RMSE decreased from 2.20◦ to
0.87◦ . This is an improvement of 60%, and in the DOF whose
error decreased the least, the RMSE decreased from 1.64◦ to
1.37◦ . This is an improvement of 16%. On average, the RMSE
improved by 44%.
Future research could look at elucidating the differential effects of skin, adipose, and muscle elements on IMU precision.
Also, the problem of developing a more complete model that
considers more than one body index (i.e., body fat percentage)
should be addressed. This model can be developed using multivariate regression analysis, in which the inputs to the model
would consider several indices such as body fat percentage and

skin elasticity and the outputs would include the adjustments
on the orientation of the sensors. The impact on the practicality of the model should be addressed. This analysis requires
an overview of the different instruments available for the measurement of the indices and a comparison of their accuracy,
accessibility, and long-term side effects. Finally, the problem
of extending the adjustments on sensors’ orientation to movements and participants not considered in this study should be
addressed. The movements considered in this study limit the
joint angles to be varied one at a time in order to minimize cross
talk between angle measurements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Seaver College of Science
and Engineering and its Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science at Loyola Marymount University for
funding this project. Also, the authors are grateful to all volunteer participants and the Department of Health and Human
Sciences and its Chair, Dr. H. Almstedt, for facilitating and
performing the measurements of body indices.
REFERENCES
[1] K. E. Wilk, M. M. Reinold, and J. R. Andrews, “Rehabilitation of the
thrower’s elbow,” Clinics Sports Med., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 765–801, 2004.
[2] K. Gibson, A. Growse, L. Korda, E. Wray, and J. C. MacDermid, “The
effectiveness of rehabilitation for nonoperative management of shoulder instability: A systematic review,” J. Hand Therapy, vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 229–242, 2004.
[3] M. Cardol, B. D. Jong, and C. Ward, “On autonomy and participation in
rehabilitation,” Disability Rehabil., vol. 24, no. 18, pp. 970–974, 2002.
[4] D. K. Chan, C. Lonsdale, P. Y. Ho, P. S. Yung, and K. M. Chan, “Patient
motivation and adherence to postsurgery rehabilitation exercise recommendations: The influence of physiotherapists’ autonomy-supportive behaviors,” Archives Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 90, no. 12, pp. 1977–1982,
2009.
[5] H. Yang and J. Ye, “A calibration process for tracking upper limb motion
with inertial sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mechatronics Autom., Aug. 2011,
pp. 618–623.
[6] D. Meng and G. Vejarano, “Development of a wireless sensor network for
the measurement of human joint angles,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Connected
Vehicles Expo, Dec. 2013, pp. 356–361.
[7] A. Leardini, L. Chiari, U. D. Croce, and A. Cappozzo, “Human movement
analysis using stereophotogrammetry: Part 3. soft tissue artifact assessment and compensation,” Gait Posture, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 212–225, 2005.
[8] B. Y. Bar-ltzhack, and Y. Oshman, “Attitude determination from vector
observations: Quaternion estimation,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.,
vol. AES-21, no. 1, pp. 128–136, Jan. 1985.
[9] A. G. Cutti, A. Cappello, and A. Davalli, “In vivo validation of a new
technique that compensates for soft tissue artefact in the upper-arm: Preliminary results,” Clinical Biomechanics, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. S13–S19,
2006.
[10] A. Page, H. de Rosario, V. Mata, and A. Besa, “Model of soft tissue artifact
propagation to joint angles in human movement analysis,” J. Biomechanical Eng., vol. 136, no. 3, p. 7, 2014.
[11] H. D. Rosario, A. Page, A. Besa, and A. Valera, “Propagation of soft tissue
artifacts to the center of rotation: A model for the correction of functional
calibration techniques,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 46, no. 15, pp. 2619–2625,
2013.
[12] Y. Zhang, D. G. Lloyd, A. C. Campbell, and J. A. Alderson, “Can the
effect of soft tissue artifact be eliminated in upper-arm internal-external
rotation?” J. Appl. Biomechanics, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 258–265, 2011.
[13] X. Jing, S. Qiu, and X. Fan, “Real time human motion compensation based
on joint dof constraints for upper limb soft tissue artefacts,” in Proc. 6th
Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Informat., Dec. 2013, pp. 295–300.
[14] R. Zhu and Z. Zhou, “A real-time articulated human motion tracking using
tri-axis inertial/magnetic sensors package,” vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 295–302,
Jun. 2004.

MENG et al.: ACCURACY IMPROVEMENT ON THE MEASUREMENT OF HUMAN-JOINT ANGLES

[15] D. Roetenberg, P. J. Slycke, and P. H. Veltink, “Ambulatory position and
orientation tracking fusing magnetic and inertial sensing,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 883–890, May 2007.
[16] T. Liu, Y. Inoue, and K. Shibata, “Simplified Kalman filter for a wireless inertial-magnetic motion sensor,” in Proc. IEEE Sensors, Oct. 2011,
pp. 569–572.
[17] J. L. Marins, X. Yun2, E. R. Bachmann, R. B. McGhee, and M. J. Zyda,
“An extended Kalman filter for quaternion-based orientation estimation
using MARG sensors,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
2001, vol. 4, pp. 2003–2011.
[18] E. Kraft, “A quaternion-based unscented Kalman filter for orientation
tracking,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Inform. Fusion, Jul. 2003, vol. 1,
pp. 47–54.
[19] A. M. Sabatini, “Quaternion-based extended Kalman filter for determining
orientation by inertial and magnetic sensing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1346–1356, Jul. 2006.
[20] X. Yun, E. R. Bachmann, and R. B. McGhee, “A simplified quaternionbased algorithm for orientation estimation from earth gravity and magnetic
field measurements,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 638–
650, Mar. 2008.
[21] S. Sun, X. Meng, L. Ji, Z. Huang, and J. Wu, “Adaptive Kalman filter for
orientation estimation in micro-sensor motion capture,” in Proc. 14th Int.
Conf. Inform. Fusion, Jul. 2011, pp. 1–8.
[22] A. G. Cutti, A. Giovanardi, L. Rocchi, A. Davalli, and R. Sacchetti, “Ambulatory measurement of shoulder and elbow kinematics through inertial
and magnetic sensors,” Medi. Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 46, no. 2,
pp. 169–178, 2008.
[23] Z.-Q. Zhang, W.-C. Wong, and J.-K. Wu, “Ubiquitous human upper-limb
motion estimation using wearable sensors,” vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 513–521,
Jul. 2011.
[24] G. X. Lee, K. S. Low, and T. Taher, “Unrestrained measurement of arm
motion based on a wearable wireless sensor network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 1309–1317, May 2010.
[25] G. X. Lee and K.-S. Low, “A factorized quaternion approach to determine
the arm motions using triaxial accelerometers with anatomical and sensor
constraints,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1793–1802,
Jun. 2012.
[26] Vicon motion systems ltd. (2014). [Online]. Available:
http://www.vicon.com
[27] Y. Tao and H. Hu, “A novel sensing and data fusion system for 3-d
arm motion tracking in telerehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1029–1040, May 2008.
[28] H. Zhao and Z. Wang, “Motion measurement using inertial sensors, ultrasonic sensors, and magnetometers with extended kalman filter for data
fusion,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 943–953, May 2012.
[29] K. D. Nguyen, I.-M. Chen, Z. Luo, S. H. Yeo, and H. B.-L. Duh, “A
wearable sensing system for tracking and monitoring of functional arm
movement,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 213–220,
Apr. 2011.
[30] A. Kontaxis, A. G. Cutti, G. R. Johnson, and H. E. J. Veeger, “A framework
for the definition of standardized protocols for measuring upper-extremity
kinematics,” Clinical Biomechanics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 246–253, 2009.
[31] G. Wu, F. C. T. van der Helm, H. D. Veeger, M. Makhsous, P. V. Roy,
C. Anglin, J. Nagels, A. R. Karduna, K. McQuade, X. Wang, F. W. Werner,
and B. Buchholz, “ISB recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate
systems of various joints for the reporting of human joint motion part
ii: Shoulder, elbow, wrist and hand,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 981–992, 2005.
[32] T. R. Ackland, T. G. Lohman, J. Sundgot-Borgen, R. J. Maughan,
N. L. Meyer, A. D. Stewart, and W. Muller, “Current status of body composition assessment in sport,” Sports Med., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 227–249,
2012.
[33] R. J. Toombs, G. Ducher, J. A. Shepherd, and M. J. D. Souza, “The impact
of recent technological advances on the trueness and precision of DXA to
assess body composition,” Obesity, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 30–39, 2012.
[34] S. A. Sadananthan, B. Prakash, M. K.-S. Leow, C. M. Khoo, H. Chou,
K. Venkataraman, E. Y. Khoo, Y. S. Lee, P. D. Gluckman, E. S. Tai, and
S. S. Velan, “Automated segmentation of visceral and subcutaneous (deep
and superficial) adipose tissues in normal and overweight men,” J. Magn.
Resonance Imag., 2014, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmri.24655.
[35] R. Cancello, A. Zulian, D. Gentilini, S. Maestrini, A. D. Barba,
C. Invitti, D. Cora, M. Caselle, A. Liuzzi, and A. M. D. Blasio, “Molecular
and morphologic characterization of superficial- and deep-subcutaneous
adipose tissue subdivisions in human obesity,” Obesity, vol. 21, no. 12,
pp. 2562–2570, 2013.

507

[36] D. E. Kelley, F. L. Thaete, F. Troost, T. Huwe, and B. H. Goodpaster,
“Subdivisions of subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue and insulin resistance,” Am. J. Physiol.—Endocrinol. Metabolism, vol. 278, no. 5,
pp. E941–E948, 2000.
[37] Y. G. Illouz, “Study of subcutaneous fat,” Aesthetic Plastic Surg., vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 165–177, 1990.
[38] J. Clarys, A. Martin, and D. Drinkwater, “Gross tissue weights in the
human body by cadaver dissection,” Human Biol., vol. 56, no. 3, pp.
459–473, 1984.
[39] J. Clarys and M. Marfell-Jones, “Anthropometric prediction of component
tissue masses in the minor limb segments of the human body,” Human
Biol., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 761–769, 1986.
[40] J. S. Everett and M. S. Sommers, “Skin viscoelasticity: Physiologic mechanisms, measurement issues, and application to nursing science,” Biological Res. Nursing, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 338–346, 2011.
[41] H. S. Ryu, Y. H. Joo, S. O. Kim, K. C. Park, and S. W. Youn, “Influence
of age and regional differences on skin elasticity as measured by the
cutometer,” Skin Res. Technol., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 354–358, 2008.

Dai Meng (S’13) received the B.S. degree in electronic information engineering from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2012 and the M.S. degree in
electrical engineering from Loyola Marymount University (LMU), Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2014.
During the M.S. study, he was a Research Assistant
and conducted research on motion-capture wireless
sensor networks at the Intemnets Laboratory at LMU.
He is currently with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, LMU.

Todd Shoepe received the B.S. degree in fitness program management in 1998 and the M.S. degree in
exercise physiology in 2001 from Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. In 2013, he received the
EdD degree in learning technologies from Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA, USA.
He has been at Loyola Marymount University, Los
Angeles, CA, since 2005, where he is an Assistant
Professor in the Department of Health and Human
Sciences.
Mr. Shoepe is a Member of the American College
of Sports Medicine as well as the National Strength and Conditioning Association, where he has held certifications since 2000 and 2005, respectively. He is
also an active Member in the Human Anatomy and Physiology Society, American Association of Anatomists, and Sigma Xi.

Gustavo Vejarano (M’07) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Universidad del Valle,
Cali, Colombia, in 2005 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, in 2009
and 2011, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science and the Director at the Intemnets Laboratory, Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. In 2006, he was at ZTE Corporation as
an Engineer for the deployment of a city-wide cellular network. He is a Councilor in the Engineering Division of the Council on Undergraduate Research,
and he has been a Mentor of the NASA-MUST and NSF-SEAGEP programs.

