486

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Automatic Differentiation of Normal and Continuous
Adventitious Respiratory Sounds Using
Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition
and Instantaneous Frequency
Manuel Lozano, José Antonio Fiz, and Raimon Jané, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Differentiating normal from adventitious respiratory
sounds (RS) is a major challenge in the diagnosis of pulmonary
diseases. Particularly, continuous adventitious sounds (CAS) are
of clinical interest because they reflect the severity of certain diseases. This study presents a new classifier that automatically distinguishes normal sounds from CAS. It is based on the multiscale
analysis of instantaneous frequency (IF) and envelope (IE) calculated after ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD).
These techniques have two major advantages over previous techniques: high temporal resolution is achieved by calculating IF-IE
and a priori knowledge of signal characteristics is not required for
EEMD. The classifier is based on the fact that the IF dispersion of
RS signals markedly decreases when CAS appear in respiratory
cycles. Therefore, CAS were detected by using a moving window
to calculate the dispersion of IF sequences. The study dataset contained 1494 RS segments extracted from 870 inspiratory cycles
recorded from 30 patients with asthma. All cycles and their RS
segments were previously classified as containing normal sounds
or CAS by a highly experienced physician to obtain a gold standard classification. A support vector machine classifier was trained
and tested using an iterative procedure in which the dataset was
randomly divided into training (65%) and testing (35%) sets inside a loop. The SVM classifier was also tested on 4592 simulated
CAS cycles. High total accuracy was obtained with both recorded
(94.6% ± 0.3%) and simulated (92.8% ± 3.6%) signals. We conclude that the proposed method is promising for RS analysis and
classification.
Index Terms—Asthma, continuous adventitious sounds (CAS),
ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD), instantaneous
frequency (IF), respiratory sounds (RS), wheezes.

Manuscript received May 30, 2014; revised December 3, 2014; accepted
January 16, 2015. Date of current version March 3, 2016. This work was
supported in part by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
under Grant TEC2010-21703-C03-01.
M. Lozano is with the Innovation Group at Health Sciences Research Institute
of the Germans Trias i Pujol Foundation, 08916 Badalona, Spain and also with
the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, 08028 Barcelona, Spain (e-mail:
mlozano@ibecbarcelona.eu).
J. A. Fiz is with the Pulmonology Service at Germans Trias i Pujol University Hospital, 08916 Badalona, Spain and also with the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia and the Biomedical Research Networking Center
in Bioengineering, Biomaterials and Nanomedicine, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
(e-mail: jafiz@msn.com)
R. Jané is with the Department of Automatic Control (ESAII) at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 08034 Barcelona, Spain and also with the Institute
for Bioengineering of Catalonia and the Biomedical Research Networking Center in Bioengineering, Biomaterials and Nanomedicine, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
(e-mail: rjane@ibecbarcelona.eu)
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2396636

I. INTRODUCTION
ULMONARY auscultation is an essential technique even
in cursory physical examinations. Respiratory sounds (RS)
contain relevant information about the structure and function of
the respiratory system. Therefore, the skills of understanding
and interpreting RS are crucial. However, physician subjectivity
is a substantial problem in this field and it may lead to an
incorrect diagnosis.
RS are generally classified as normal or abnormal [1], [2].
Normal RS originate in healthy lungs, as a consequence of the
airflow through the airways during normal breathing. On the
other hand, abnormal RS appear in certain pulmonary disorders
and they are further classified into discontinuous adventitious
sounds and continuous adventitious sounds (CAS). Discontinuous adventitious sounds are explosive and transient sounds that
are short in duration but contain a wide range of frequencies. In
contrast, CAS typically last more than 100 ms and are characterized by quasi-periodic waveforms with a fundamental frequency
of over 100 Hz [1], [2].
Identifying abnormal sounds is a key step in the computerized
analysis of RS [3]. From a clinical point of view, CAS are important because they are present in various respiratory diseases
involving some degree of airway obstruction, such as asthma
or COPD [1]. These diseases produce changes in the mechanical properties of the airways, and these changes explain the
presence of CAS [4]. Further, there is a relationship between
the number of CAS and the severity of airway obstruction in
asthmatic patients, severe airway obstruction being related to
more CAS [5], [6]. Moreover, the characteristics of CAS, such
as mean frequency, duration, intensity, and respiratory phase in
which they appear, are also related to the severity of airway obstruction [7], [8]. Therefore, detecting and analyzing CAS may
help to assess the severity of obstructive pulmonary diseases,
such as asthma, in which measuring the extent of obstruction
and its reversibility is important for reaching a correct diagnosis
[9]. However, estimating the number of CAS and their characteristics is quite difficult by audition alone. Consequently, there
is need for an efficient algorithm to identify and distinguish CAS
from normal RS in a straightforward and reliable way.
Several previous studies have proposed a range of RS classification schemes focused exclusively on distinguishing normal from abnormal RS [10]–[13]. Those studies followed the
standard methodology of pattern recognition, which comprises

P

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LOZANO et al.: AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIATION OF NORMAL AND CONTINUOUS ADVENTITIOUS RESPIRATORY SOUNDS

feature extraction, dimensionality reduction, and pattern classification. Features were extracted using either wavelet coefficients [10], morphological complexities (lacunarity, sample
entropy, kurtosis, and skewness) [11], multiscale principal component analysis in Fourier domain [12], or hidden Markov models [13]. The sounds analyzed included many types of adventitious RS, not only CAS. Accordingly, the techniques used did
not take into account certain features that are relevant to the accurate identification of CAS, such as temporal features. Further,
some other studies followed similar methodologies even though
they were focused specifically on wheeze and nonwheeze epoch
classification within RS signals. For example, such studies have
been based on the combination of Mel frequency cepstral coefficients and Gaussian mixture models [14], [15], or linear analysis
using the Fisher discriminant method and the Neyman–Pearson
test after extraction of features [16].
In contrast to the aforementioned techniques, the analysis of
time–frequency distributions is the most common and straightforward method for CAS identification. The combined analysis
of time, frequency, and energy features provides extra information about duration, pitch variation, and magnitude, strengthening the identification of CAS. In this context, many studies
have been focused on the identification of wheezing-episodes
from spectrograms [17]–[23], by applying temporal and spectral
continuity criteria to previously detected peaks. Alternatively,
digital image processing techniques have also been applied to
the spectrogram for wheeze detection [24], [25], and the scalogram, calculated using the wavelet transform, has been used
to classify RS [26]. Recently, more advanced TFDs have been
proposed for the detection and analysis of CAS, involving either
the combination of the wavelet decomposition with third-order
spectral features (instantaneous bispectrum/bicoherence) [27],
or the derivation of a temporal-spectral dominance spectrogram
from the short-time Fourier transform [28].
Despite the widespread use of Fourier and wavelet-based
techniques, they have some limitations. First, they are nonadaptive techniques, which are limited by the fact that a priori knowledge of the signal characteristics is required for the
correct choice of fixed analysis parameters. Second, as is well
known, the Fourier transform, like any integration-based transform, is governed by the uncertainty principle, which limits the
combined time–frequency resolution, and in turn, the accuracy
of TFDs.
Besides the technical aspects, many previous studies used
RS signals recorded either at constant airflows or during forced
expiratory maneuvers. However, CAS may appear at different
airflow levels which, in turn, affect the properties of CAS.
Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) was proposed as an
alternative and suitable tool for the analysis of nonlinear and
nonstationary signals, such as RS [29]. Since EMD is an adaptive and direct decomposition technique [29], [30], a priori
knowledge of the signal characteristics is not required for the
choice of analysis parameters. Moreover, EMD allows a signal
to be decomposed into a set of components for which the instantaneous frequency (IF) and envelope (IE) can be defined at
any point. Therefore, high temporal and spectral resolutions are
achieved [31], [32].

487

In order to take advantage of the EMD-IF properties, we had
previously developed a new method for RS analysis based on
customized IF and IE estimation by EMD, adapted to RS signal
characteristics [33]. In that previous study, we showed that the
IF distribution changed when CAS appeared in a respiratory
cycle [33]. Nevertheless, we found that the EMD had a mode
mixing effect when applied to RS from some inspiratory cycles,
which resulted in poor separation of frequency scales.
Building on the results of our previous work, in this study, we
propose a new method to automatically identify CAS and distinguish them from normal RS. The proposed algorithm makes use
of ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) for IF estimation, which improves on the performance of EMD [34]. As
we reported in [33], the IF dispersion markedly decreases when
CAS appear in respiratory cycles. This property concerns not
only wheezes, but any CAS or musical sounds [1] that are characterized by a dominant fundamental frequency. Accordingly,
this study uses this property to detect CAS at a wide range of
frequencies. For that purpose, a set of thresholds was applied
to the IF dispersion of RS from each inspiratory cycle, delimiting RS segments with a lower IF dispersion. Then, a specific
set of features was extracted from the IF and IE sequences to
characterize each delimited RS segment within each inspiratory
cycle. These features were used to train and test our RS segment
classifier, which was a support vector machine (SVM) classifier. Finally, the whole set of inspiratory cycles were classified
as containing CAS or only normal RS, depending on whether
they contained at least one CAS segment or not. The proposed
technique was tested on recorded RS from asthmatic patients,
who performed a variable airflow respiratory maneuver to provide CAS at a wide range of airflow levels. This technique was
also tested on simulated CAS to analyze the effect of SNR on
the performance of the proposed classifier.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Acquisition
Recorded RS were obtained at the Pulmonary Function Testing Laboratory, Germans Trias i Pujol University Hospital,
Badalona, Spain. All recordings were acquired from patients
who had previously been diagnosed with asthma in the Pulmonology Service at this hospital. First, lung function was
measured by spirometry (Hyp’Air Compact, Medisoft). Then,
four piezoelectric contact microphones (TSD108, Biopac Systems, Inc.) were placed on the surface of the patient’s back,
on each side of the spinal cord, at the base and near the upper lobe of the right/left lung. An additional microphone was
placed on the surface of the neck, over the right side of the
trachea, at the level of the cricoid cartilage. All sensors were
attached to the skin using adhesive rings. The airflow signals
were recorded simultaneously with the sound signals, using
a pneumotachograph (with an integrated differential pressure
transducer, TSD107B, Biopac Systems, Inc.). All signals were
sampled at 12 500 samples/s, using a 16-bit analogue-to-digital
converter (MP150, Biopac Systems, Inc.). After digitalization,
the sound signals were band-pass filtered (70–2000 Hz) and the

488

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

TABLE I
ANTHROPOMETRIC AND SPIROMETRIC CHARACTERISTICS
Feature/Set

Total

Number of subjects
Age (yr)
BMI (kg/m2 )
FVC (% of predicted)
FEV 1 (% of predicted)

30
45 ± 14
25 ± 4
87 ± 15
80 ± 17

BMI = body mass index; FVC =
forced vital capacity; FEV1 = forced
expiratory volume in 1 s.

TABLE II
DISTRIBUTION OF THE RECORDED RS
Inspiratory cycles

Total
Normal
CAS

RS segments

Total

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Total

870
385
485

163
105
58

213
94
119

254
109
145

240
77
163

1494
861
633

respiratory phases were automatically detected using the airflow
signal as the reference signal.
Patients were asked to perform a respiratory maneuver consisting of progressively varying their airflow levels, ranging
from shallow breathing to the deepest breaths they were able to
take. We used this maneuver because CAS do not only appear
at high airflows, but also at moderate and low airflows. Further,
at the beginning and at the end of the respiratory maneuver,
patients were asked to hold their breath for a few seconds. Corresponding signal segments were used to evaluate background
noise and heart sound interference.
After cycle segmentation, the minimum and the maximum
peak flow values of the inspiratory phases delimited the airflow
range of each patient. In order to allow comparisons of signals
from these different airflow ranges, each one was divided into
four proportional intervals or quartiles, from Q1 to Q4, grouping
the peak flow values of the corresponding patient in ascending
order, from lowest to highest, respectively.
B. Study Dataset
For this study, RS signals were recorded from 30 asthmatic
subjects, whose main anthropometric and spirometric characteristics are summarized in Table I. After cycle segmentation,
the study dataset was formed by RS from the inspiratory phase
measured with the four microphones on the back, where auscultation is typically performed. We manually selected the inspiratory cycles from the dataset by audiovisual inspection, rejecting
those inspiratory cycles containing artifacts (clicks, bursts, or
scratches), surrounding noises (background talking or swallowing), or strong heart sound interference (this signal normally
being much weaker than RS on the surface of the back). In
the end, a total of 870 inspiratory cycles from different airflow
quartiles formed the study dataset, including 385 with normal
sounds and 485 with CAS (see Table II).

A total of 1494 RS segments were extracted from the inspiratory cycles in this dataset. All inspiratory cycles and their corresponding RS segments were manually classified by a highly
experienced physician who, by audiovisual inspection, differentiated those with audible CAS from those with only normal
sounds. In this way, we obtained the target classification labels
for both the inspiratory cycles and the RS segments. Besides using his personal experience and knowledge in RS analysis, the
physician followed the criteria explained in a recent publication
about RS [1], and the CORSA guidelines of the European Respiratory Society [2], [3]. According to these guidelines, CAS
are defined as musical sounds, heard on inspiration, expiration,
or both, with a duration of over 100 ms, and a fundamental
frequency above 100 Hz. This definition of CAS includes both
wheezes and rhonchi. The main difference between them is that
rhonchi have lower pitch than wheezes. Based on this definition,
different types of CAS were included in the dataset, including
some polyphonic CAS. In any case, the goal of this study is not
to distinguish between different types of CAS, but to automatically differentiate CAS from normal RS.

C. Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition of RS
The proposed algorithm for RS classification is based on the
fact that RS segments containing CAS have lower IF dispersion
than RS segments containing normal sounds in a respiratory
cycle, as we reported in [33]. Consequently, the first step of
our RS classification scheme is the estimation of the IF of the
RS for each inspiratory cycle in the dataset. However, estimating the IF only makes sense for monocomponent or, at least,
narrowband signals. As RS are multicomponent signals, we
need to decompose them before being able to calculate a physically meaningful IF. In this context, we previously described
in [33] that the EMD allows RS signals to be decomposed into
a set of components, called intrinsic mode functions (IMFs),
for which the IF can be defined at any point. While, ideally,
each IMF would contain different frequency components of
the RS signal, we found that EMD had a mode mixing effect
when applied to some RS signals containing CAS. Due to this
mode mixing effect, some frequency components of CAS appeared in different IMFs, leading to poor separation of frequency
scales.
Recently, EEMD was proposed as an improvement to EMD
to overcome this mode mixing effect [34]. EEMD consists of
the iterative application of the original EMD to a signal plus
white noise. The idea behind EEMD is that EMD acts as an
adaptive dyadic filter bank when applied to white noise, thereby
separating the different frequency scales of a signal naturally
without any a priori subjective criteria [34]. Moreover, another
previous study showed that the computational cost of the EEMD
was reduced by replacing white noise by band-limited noise
[35], just covering the bandwidth of the signal to be decomposed.
In this study, we developed a customized EEMD algorithm
adapted to RS signals, for use prior to IF calculations. The basic
steps involved in our customized EEMD algorithm are described
as follows.

LOZANO et al.: AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIATION OF NORMAL AND CONTINUOUS ADVENTITIOUS RESPIRATORY SOUNDS

489

defined as in (2) and (3), by the phase derivative and envelope
of the analytic signal, respectively.
IFi (t) =

1 dΦi (t)
2π dt

IEi (t) = |zi (t)| = ai (t).

Fig. 1. EEMD applied to RS from an inspiratory cycle containing a wheeze.
IMFs 1–4 cover all the frequency range of interest for CAS detection. The major
components of the wheeze are within IMF 2 (solid line box).

1) Generate a low-pass filtered white noise signal. Since the
fundamental frequency of CAS is typically below 1000 Hz
[1], the cutoff frequency of the low-pass filter was empirically set to 1150 Hz.
2) Add this band-limited noise signal to the RS signal from
an inspiratory cycle at an SNR of 0 dB.
3) Decompose the resulting noisy signal into noisy IMFs 1–4
using the original EMD algorithm reported by Rilling and
Flandrin [36], [37].
4) Repeat steps one to three 100 times.
5) Calculate the final IMFs as the mean of those resulting
from the iteration process.
Fig. 1 illustrates the EEMD method applied to RS from an inspiratory cycle containing a wheeze. IMFs 1–4 were obtained in
decreasing order of frequency, with IMF 1 including the highest
frequency components in the RS. In this case, the main components of the CAS were within IMF 2. We found that EEMD
provided an efficient way to separate the different frequency
scales for computerized RS analysis. Moreover, since the frequency range of interest for CAS detection is from 100 Hz
upwards, IMFs 1–4 proved sufficient to cover this range.
D. Instantaneous Frequency of RS
As defined by Gabor [38], the IF can be calculated from the
phase of a complex signal by taking the time derivative. The
most practical way to obtain a unique complex signal from a
real one is to construct the analytic signal.
In this study, we calculated an analytic signal, zi (t), from
each IMF, si (t), as
zi (t) = si (t) + jH[si (t)] = ai (t)ej Φ i (t)

(1)

where H[·] is the Hilbert transform, ai (t) is the absolute value
of zi (t), and Φi (t) is the phase of zi (t). Once we had obtained
the analytic signal from each IMF, IFi (t) and IEi (t) could be

(2)

(3)

A major challenge in calculating the IF for RS is to obtain
a physically meaningful frequency, which means not having
negative values. In relation to this issue, (2) would only yield true
positive values for the IF if si (t) were to be a monocomponent
signal, the phase signal of which is monotonically increasing
point-by-point. However, IMFs are not truly monocomponent
signals, and therefore, their phase signals could produce unusual
negative IF values.
In order to ensure real positive IF values, we developed
a smoothing function, which consisted of applying a shapepreserving piecewise cubic interpolation to segments where the
phase was not increasing.
The complete algorithm to calculate IF and IE comprises the
following steps.
1) Calculate IMFs 1–4 by means of EEMD from RS of each
inspiratory cycle.
2) Calculate the analytic signal, zi (t), using the Hilbert transform for each IMF.
3) Obtain the phase signal, Φi (t), for each zi (t).
4) Smooth the phase signal using the smoothing function,
which prevents IF from taking negative values.
5) Calculate IFi and IEi by differentiating the smoothed
Φi (t) and taking the absolute value of zi (t), respectively.
The time derivative is calculated using a five-point least
squares polynomial approximation [39].
Fig. 2 shows an example of IF sequences obtained from two
inspiratory cycles, one containing a wheeze (a) and another with
normal RS (b). The IF dispersion was low for as long as the CAS
lasted, as shown in IF 2 in Fig. 2(a). In contrast, IFs from normal
RS had uniform dispersions throughout the inspiratory cycle, as
shown in Fig. 2(b).
E. RS Classification
1) Extraction of Candidate CAS Segments: Our RS classifier
works at two levels: the classification of RS segments within an
inspiratory cycle, and the classification of the entire inspiratory
cycle. The algorithm extracts RS segments that are candidates
for being CAS segments within an inspiratory cycle. Then, feature extraction is applied to each extracted RS segment. These
features are used to classify each RS segment, as a normal or
CAS segment, using an SVM classifier. Finally, the whole inspiratory cycle is classified as containing CAS or normal sounds,
depending on the classification of its RS segments (see Fig. 3).
Given that CAS segments have lower IF dispersion than segments containing normal RS, candidate CAS segments can be
detected using a moving window that slides over the entire IF
sequences to calculate the IF dispersion (σIFi ). In this study,
we used a window length of 40 ms (125 samples at 3 125 samples/second) with 92% overlap (115 samples). Both parameters

490

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 2. Instantaneous frequencies (IF 1–IF 4) for IMFs 1–4 from the CAS cycle in Fig. 1(a), and from one inspiratory cycle with normal RS (b). As shown in
(a), a segment with a markedly lower IF dispersion appears within IF 2, and this corresponds to the location of the wheeze. In contrast, IFs from normal RS (b)
are highly variable throughout the entire inspiratory cycle.

Fig. 3.

Flowchart of the proposed RS classification algorithm.

were determined empirically. The window length (40 ms) is less
than half of the minimum CAS duration (100 ms). Shorter window lengths would produce highly variable σIFi sequences, due
to unusual spurious IF values. On the other hand, longer window lengths would produce only slight variations in the σIFi
sequences, making it more difficult to detect CAS segments.
The 92% overlap was chosen to increase the number of data
points in the σIFi sequences. If the overlap was small, CAS

segments would produce only a few data points with low IF dispersion, whereas, by increasing the overlap between adjacent
windows, we obtained more data points improving the accuracy
of the detection of CAS segments.
After calculation of the σIFi sequences, a thresholding
method was used to detect candidate CAS segments. Thresholds Th1, Th2, and Th3 represent different levels of IF dispersion (see Fig. 3) and these were also determined empirically.
Threshold Th1 was the mean of an entire σIFi sequence, that is,
the mean IF dispersion throughout an entire inspiratory cycle.
It was chosen as the reference value to detect CAS segments.
The IF dispersion of normal RS segments was expected to be
above Th1, whereas the IF dispersion of CAS segments was expected to be below Th1. However, using only Th1 was a weak
criterion, which might lead to false CAS segment detections. To
avoid false detections, we defined two more restrictive thresholds (Th2 and Th3). Th2 was the upper limit for the IF dispersion
of a candidate CAS segment. That is, all segments with an IF
dispersion below Th2 were potentially CAS segments. Furthermore, threshold Th3 was used to distinguish those segments
with high probability of being CAS segments, due to their very
low IF dispersion.
Fig. 4 shows how IF can track not only constant monophonic
CAS (a), but also variable monophonic (b) and polyphonic
(c) CAS. As shown, the σIFi sequences are below Th2 throughout the presence of CAS.
2) Feature Extraction: Every candidate CAS segment was
labeled as one of the following types according to its minimum
σIFi and duration, d1 [see Fig. 5(a)].
Type 1: min(σIF ) ≤ Th3, d1 ≥ 100 ms
Type 2: min(σIF ) ≤ Th3, d1 < 100 ms
Type 3: min(σIF ) > Th3, d1 ≥ 100 ms
Type 4: min(σIF ) > Th3, d1 < 100 ms

LOZANO et al.: AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIATION OF NORMAL AND CONTINUOUS ADVENTITIOUS RESPIRATORY SOUNDS

491

Fig. 4. Instantaneous frequency (IF i), instantaneous envelope (IE i), and IF dispersion sequence (σ IF i ) from: (a) one CAS cycle containing a constant monophonic
wheeze, (b) one CAS cycle containing a variable monophonic wheeze with frequency sweeping, and (c) one CAS cycle containing a polyphonic wheeze, which
main components are at mean frequencies of 327 Hz (IF 2), 266 Hz (IF 2), and 134 Hz (IF 3).

for the resulting compound segment, according to the following
sequence.
Priority order: Type 1 > Type 2 > Type 3 > Type 4
Each compound segment was labeled as the same type as its
highest priority subsegment.
In the final classification stage, only type 1–3 RS segments
were taken into account [see Fig. 5(b)]. Moreover, according to
the standard definition of CAS [1]–[3], only RS segments whose
total duration (DT ) were greater than or equal to 100 ms were
considered candidate CAS segments. The following features
were defined, as in (4)–(6), to characterize the segments [see
Fig. 5(b) and (c)].
ER1 = 100 ∗

ES
ES
ER2
, ER2 = 100 ∗
, ETR =
EIM F
ET
DT
DR =

Fig. 5. Characteristic parameters of candidate CAS segments, extracted from
the IF dispersion (a), (b), and the instantaneous envelope (IE) (c).

Q=
As different RS segments might belong to the same CAS, a
grouping algorithm was used to merge RS segments, based on
maximum IF dispersion and time elapsed between two adjacent
RS segments. Moreover, since the merged segments might have
different labels, a priority order was established to set the label

d2
d1

σIF,D T
σIF − 0.75σσ I F

(4)

(5)

(6)

where EIM F is the sum of all terms of the squared IE of an IMF,
ES is the subinterval of EIM F corresponding to the segment
location, ET is the sum of EIM F1 , EIM F2 , EIM F3 , and EIM F4 ,
and σIF,D T is the mean IF dispersion over the length of the
segment. These five features correspond to measurements that

492

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 6. Flowchart of the proposed training and testing procedure for the SVM
classifier.

depend either on the energy (ER1 , ER2 , and ETR) or on the IF
dispersion (DR and Q) of RS segments.
3) RS Segment Classification Using SVMs: The proposed
SVM classifier works at the segment level of our classification
scheme (see Fig. 3). That is, the input to the SVM classifier was a
numerical data vector containing features ER1 , ER2 , ETR, DR,
and Q, and the IMF number (from 1 to 4) of an RS segment. In
order to train and test our SVM classifier, we used an iterative
procedure, as illustrated in Fig. 6.
First, the inspiratory cycles from the full dataset were divided
into two subsets, one for training (559 cycles) and another for
testing (311 cycles). Due to the high between-subject variability
of the RS, the subsets were formed independently, and hence,
included inspiratory cycles from different asthmatic patients.
Then, 921 RS segments extracted from the training inspiratory cycles were used to find the optimum parameters for our
SVM classifier (the regularization parameter, C, and the kernel
parameter, σ). For that purpose, we used a 5 × 5 grid with increasing sequences of C (from 1 to 3) and σ (from 0.1 to 1).
Each combination of parameters was the starting point for finding a local minimum of the tenfold cross-validation loss function. The parameters that produced the lowest cross-validation
loss were chosen as the optimum parameters (Copt = 2.72 and
σopt = 1.61).
Having found the optimum SVM parameters, we employed
them to train an SVM classifier using the RS segments from the
training inspiratory cycles. The resulting SVM classifier was
validated using the RS segments from both training and testing
inspiratory cycles and the target labels from the manual RS
segment classification. The performance of the SVM classifier
was evaluated in terms of accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and
positive predictive value.

Since the results obtained might depend on the initial grouping of the inspiratory cycles, we repeated the training and testing
steps using different partitions of the data. For that purpose, the
inspiratory cycles from the dataset were randomly divided into
training (65%) and testing (35%) sets inside a loop. The random
partitions were done in such a way that each subset contained a
proportionate share of the normal and CAS Q1-Q4 inspiratory
cycles from the full dataset (see Table II). After each random
partition, the RS segments from the resulting training and testing
inspiratory cycles were used to train and test an SVM classifier
with the optimum parameters (Copt and σopt ). The total performance of the SVM classifier was calculated as the mean and the
standard deviation of the classification results of each iteration.
4) Inspiratory Cycle Classification: Considering the RS segment classification obtained in each iteration of the previous
stage, each entire inspiratory cycle was classified as containing
CAS if any of its RS segments was classified as a CAS segment. Otherwise, the entire inspiratory cycle was classified as
containing normal sounds.
The performance of the SVM classifier was also evaluated
at cycle level, by comparing the inspiratory cycle classification obtained with the classifier to the manual inspiratory cycle
classification.
We selected the SVM with the best performance, among all
iterations, for the classification of simulated CAS cycles in the
next Section II-F.
F. Simulation of CAS Cycles
This section describes a procedure to study the effect of duration and SNR of simulated CAS on the performance of the
classifier. For that purpose, the classifier was tested on 4592
simulated CAS cycles. The procedure to obtain the simulated
CAS cycles was as follows.
1) Eight CAS segments were manually extracted from different inspiratory cycles with CAS from the study dataset.
2) Either time contraction or dilation was applied to those
eight CAS segments in order to obtain 41 new CAS segments, ni (t), thus covering time durations from 100 to
500 ms, in increments of 10 ms.
3) Each one of those 41 CAS segments was added to seven
inspiratory cycles with normal sounds, sk (t), as in (7), at
16 SNRs, SNRj , from –5 dB to 10 dB, in increments of
1 dB. As a result, a total of 656 simulated CAS cycles,
wij k (t), were obtained for each original normal sound
cycle, sk (t).
wij k (t) = sk (t) + nij k (t),
i = 1 . . . 41, j = 1 . . . 16,

k = 1 . . . 7.

(7)

In the aforementioned equation, i is the CAS segment subscript,
j is the SNR subscript, and k is the subscript for the inspiratory
cycle with normal sounds. In this study, the SNR was defined as


SNRj
Pn j k
SN Rj = 10 log
(8)
→ Pn j k = PS k 10 1 0
PS k

LOZANO et al.: AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIATION OF NORMAL AND CONTINUOUS ADVENTITIOUS RESPIRATORY SOUNDS

TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION OF RECORDED RS SEGMENTS
Parameter/Set
Accuracy (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Positive Predictive Value (%)

Total

Training

Test

94.9 ± 0.3
93.9 ± 0.6
95.6 ± 0.6
94.1 ± 0.7

95.4 ± 0.4
94.5 ± 0.6
96.1 ± 0.6
94.7 ± 0.8

94.0 ± 0.8
92.8 ± 1.7
94.8 ± 1.4
93.0 ± 1.7

493

for classifying recorded RS from inspiratory cycles as normal
sounds or CAS. Among all iterations, the best SVM classifier
had an accuracy of 95.1%, a sensitivity of 94.2%, a specificity of
96.1%, and a positive predictive value of 96.8%, at cycle level.
That SVM classifier was used to obtain the classification results
for the simulated CAS cycles described in the next Section III-B.
Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of our classifier for different airflow levels. Fig. 7 shows the distribution of
the CAS cycles from the dataset (485 cycles) among the four
quartiles. Moreover, the mean FEV1 value was calculated from
the asthmatic subjects who provided CAS in each quartile. As
shown, cycles containing CAS not only appear at high airflows
(Q3 and Q4), but also at low and moderate airflows (Q1 and Q2).
It is noteworthy that patients who provided CAS at low airflows
had lower FEV1 values than those who only provided CAS
at high airflows. In fact, there is a direct relationship between
the two variables. Patients with severe asthma (with low FEV1
values) may produce CAS as much at low airflows as at high
airflows. However, those with mild asthma only generate CAS
at high airflow levels. Independently of the airflow quartile, our
classifier performed very well in all cases (see Table IV).

Fig. 7. Distribution of CAS cycles from the dataset among airflow quartiles
(black). Mean FEV1 of patients who provided CAS cycles at each airflow
quartile (gray). Mean and standard deviation of the airflow levels included in
each airflow quartile (white).


nij k (t) =

B. Effect of SNR on Detection of Simulated CAS Cycles
Pn j k
ni (t)
Pn i

(9)

where PS k (t) is the power of sk (t), nij k (t)is the ni (t) CAS
segment added to the sk (t) inspiratory cycle at SN Rj , Pn j k (t)
is the power of nij k (t), and Pn i is the power of ni (t).
In this way, we obtained a set of simulated CAS cycles that
allowed us to explore the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm
in terms of two basic parameters of CAS: duration and intensity.
The influence of these parameters on each simulated CAS cycle
was calculated as the percentage increase in mean power with
respect to the original cycle with normal sounds, sk (t), given
by the following expression:
ΔPij k = 100

Pw i j k
.
PS k

(10)

This new parameter allowed us to analyze the classification
results of the simulated CAS cycles for different ranges of power
increase.
III. RESULTS
A. Recorded RS Classification
The performance of the SVM classifier at segment level, obtained after the training and testing described in Section II-E3,
is summarized in Table III. As shown, high accuracy (94.0% ±
0.8%) and sensitivity (92.8% ± 1.7%) were achieved with the
test set for classifying recorded RS segments.
The performance of the SVM classifier at cycle level is reported in Table IV. As shown, our classifier achieved high total accuracy (94.6% ± 0.3%) and sensitivity (94.2% ± 0.4%)

This section describes the results of the sensitivity analysis
described in Section II-F.
Fig. 8 shows the results after obtaining 656 simulated CAS
cycles from one inspiratory cycle with normal sounds, sk (t).
The power increase (ΔPij k ) parameter was used to evaluate
the effect of adding CAS segments to an inspiratory cycle with
normal sounds, with different durations and different SNRs.
Three thresholds were set for power increases of 200%, 125%,
and 110%, defining the boundaries for four regions of interest
(R1–R4), plotted in Fig. 8.
The same procedure (described in Section II-F) was applied
to six more inspiratory cycles with normal sounds, sk (t). Then,
the classifier was applied to the total set of 4592 simulated CAS
cycles. As shown in Fig. 9, the proposed classification algorithm achieved high accuracy for detecting cycles containing
CAS in regions R1 (98.7% ± 1.4%) and R2 (93.9% ± 4.1%),
while the accuracy was markedly lower in region R4 (76.4%
± 13.4%). However, region R4 corresponds to very low SNR
values. This region included weak CAS, which had very low
energy and only slightly increased the mean power of the RS
signals (ΔP ≤ 110%). Although there is no standard criterion
for amplitude in the definition of CAS, considering the recorded
CAS in the study dataset, regions R1–R2 represented more realistic SNR values. For this reason, the number of simulated
CAS cycles progressively decreased from region R1 to region
R4. In any case, the overall accuracy, including all regions, was
92.8% ± 3.6%. This high accuracy demonstrates that the proposed method offers high performance under both low and high
SNR conditions. In fact, high accuracy (87.7% ± 7.3%) was
achieved in region R3, which still represents an unfavorable
scenario, in which the SNR may be below 0 dB.

494

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION OF RECORDED RS FROM INSPIRATORY CYCLES
TOTAL
Accuracy (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Positive predictive value (%)

Total

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

94.6±0.3
94.2 ± 0.4
95.0 ± 0.9
96.0± 0.7

95.3 ± 0.7
92.3 ± 1.2
97.0 ± 0.9
94.4 ± 1.6

94.5 ± 0.6
94.7 ± 0.5
94.2 ± 1.2
95.4 ± 0.9

94.1 ± 0.6
94.5 ± 0.8
93.6 ± 1.5
95.1 ± 1.1

94.7 ± 0.6
94.4 ± 0.5
95.4 ± 1.6
97.7 ± 0.8

TRAINING
Accuracy (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Positive predictive value (%)

Total

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

95.0 ± 0.6
94.6 ± 0.7
95.6 ± 1.0
96.4 ± 0.8

95.5 ± 1.3
92.5 ± 2.7
97.2 ± 1.3
94.9 ± 2.3

94.8 ± 1.3
94.9 ± 1.4
94.7 ± 1.9
95.8 ± 1.5

94.7 ± 1.2
94.8 ± 1.3
94.5 ± 2.2
95.8 ± 1.6

95.2 ± 1.1
94.9 ± 1.3
96.0 ± 2.4
98.0 ± 1.1

TESTING
Accuracy (%)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
Positive predictive value (%)

Total

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

93.7 ± 1.2
93.6± 1.9
93.9±2.0
95.1 ± 1.5

94.9 ± 2.3
91.9 ± 5.1
96.5 ± 2.9
93.8 ± 4.9

93.8 ± 2.2
94.2 ± 2.8
93.2 ± 3.5
94.7 ± 2.6

92.9 ± 2.1
93.8 ± 3.1
91.8 ± 4.1
94.0 ± 2.8

93.8 ± 2.3
93.5 ± 2.7
94.3 ± 4.0
97.2 ± 1.9

Fig. 8. Percentage increase of mean power (ΔP i j k ) of simulated CAS cycles,
w i j k (t), with respect to their original normal sound cycles, sk (t), as a function
of SNR and duration of CAS segments.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Asthma is characterized by a series of variable symptoms,
including airflow limitation, shortness of breath, cough, and
the presence of CAS [9]. Although these symptoms vary over
time and CAS are not always present in asthma, when present,
such sounds clearly indicate airway obstruction [4]. Therefore,
detecting and analyzing CAS can provide some additional information about the pulmonary function of these patients.
This study demonstrates that the analysis of RS in terms
of EEMD-based IFs provides an efficient, simple, and robust
method for CAS detection and RS classification.
First, we have shown the viability of estimating the IF by
EEMD. The definition of the IF of multicomponent signals,
such as RS, has been a subject of controversy, since strictly
speaking the concept of IF is only meaningful for monocomponent signals. In this study, we found that EEMD allowed us
to decompose RS into IMFs for which a physically meaningful
IF was defined point-by-point. EEMD represented a key step
in the multiscale analysis of the IF in RS, as it determined the
quality of the IF estimation, and thus, the performance of our
RS classifier.
Indeed, we opted to use EEMD as it improves on the original
EMD method, which had a mode mixing effect when applied to

Fig. 9. Accuracy in simulated CAS cycle detection for regions R1–R4, which
represent different SNR conditions (see Fig. 8).

RS from some inspiratory cycles [33]. After comparing several
methods addressing that mode mixing effect [34], [40]–[42],
we identified some clear advantages of EEMD. The IMFs from
EEMD had smaller frequency overlaps than IMFs from other
methods. Due to properties similar to a dyadic filter bank, EEMD
achieved a much better separation of different frequency scales,
which reduced the mode mixing effect and improved the IF
estimate. Moreover, thanks to the better separation of frequency
scales, EEMD allowed us to analyze only IMFs 1–4 to cover the
frequency range of interest, which goes from 100 Hz upwards for
CAS detection. However, other methods required us to analyze
at least five IMFs for the same purpose.
Two parameters determined the effectiveness of the EEMD:
noise amplitude and number of iterations. If the added noise
amplitude was too small (high SNR), there were few changes in
the maxima of the original sound signal, and therefore, the benefits of EEMD were not evident. On the other hand, using high
amplitude noise (low SNR) produced slightly noisy IMF components, but provided a reference scale distribution to enhance
EMD and avoid the mode mixing effect. Furthermore, the residual noise level was able to be reduced by increasing the number
of iterations. Indeed, a key issue was finding a balance between
the SNR and number of iterations in order to minimize the mode
mixing effect and obtain an acceptable residual noise level.

LOZANO et al.: AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIATION OF NORMAL AND CONTINUOUS ADVENTITIOUS RESPIRATORY SOUNDS

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF CAS DETECTION ALGORITHMS
Features

Year

Method

Performance (%)

EEMD + IF

2014

Proposed
method

Spectrogram
Spectrogram
Spectrogram
Spectrogram
Spectrogram
Spectrogram
MFCC + GMM
MFCC + GMM
Linear analysis
Dominance
spectrogram
FT + DWT + PCA

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2007
2009
2009
2011

Homs [18]
Hsueh [24]
Lin [25]
Taplidou [19]
Jain [20]
Riella [21]
Chien [14]
Bahoura [15]
Aydore [16]
Jin [28]

Real: 94.6 (Acc),
94.2 (S), 95.0 (Sp)
Sim: 92.8 (Acc)
71 < (S) < 100
89 < (S) (Sp)
96.7 (S), 90.9 (Sp)
95.5 (S), 93.7 (Sp)
84 (S), 86 (Sp)
84.8 (Acc)
90 < (Acc)
94.6 (S), 91.9 (Sp)
93.5 (Acc)
92.4 (Acc)

2012

Xie [12]

97.3 (Acc)

Acc: accuracy, S: sensitivity, Sp: specificity, MFCC: Mel frequency cepstral coefficients,
GMM: Gaussian mixture models, FT: Fourier transform, DWT: discrete wavelet transform,
PCA: principal component analysis.

As RS are random in nature, for this study, we added bandlimited noise to RS signals from inspiratory cycles at an SNR
of 0 dB, in order to perceive the benefits of EEMD. Despite this
low SNR, applying 100 iterations to RS from each inspiratory
cycle proved sufficient to obtain slightly noisy IMFs that allowed us to calculate a meaningful IF in a moderate time. Using
fewer iterations would result in a higher residual noise level,
whereas using more iterations would substantially increase the
computation time. Furthermore, the slight residual noise was not
a problem for our application, since we did not need a perfect
decomposition to reconstruct the original signal from the IMFs,
but rather we wanted to use them for IF estimates.
Although there are several methods of IF calculation [32], we
found that the Hilbert method produced more accurate IF values
than other methods, such as the Teager–Huang method, which
produced more dispersed values.
We have presented a set of features, which were extracted
from the IF and IE sequences, to train and test an SVM classifier for RS segments. For that purpose, a moving window was
applied to the IF sequence from each IMF to calculate the dispersion, since we found that RS segments containing CAS were
characterized by markedly lower IF dispersion [33]. We used
the standard deviation just as a tool for measuring dispersion
within each IF sequence. Then, we applied a set of thresholds
(see Fig. 3) to the IF dispersion in order to detect candidate
CAS segments. Since these thresholds were proportional to the
IF dispersion of each IMF, they adapted to the characteristics of
each signal. The extracted IF dispersion and energy features [see
Fig. 5(b) and (c)] allowed us to achieve high sensitivity (94.2%)
and accuracy (94.6%) in CAS detection and RS classification.
As shown in Table V, the performance of our method is
similar to or better than that reported for many previous CAS
detection methods. However, these different approaches cannot
be directly compared because there are some important differences between them, which affect the classification results. The
main differences are in the following: the position and number
of sensors (tracheal or lung sounds, monochannel, or multichan-

495

nel recordings), the respiratory maneuver performed (constant
airflow, forced expiratory maneuver, or variable airflow), the
respiratory disease of patients (asthma, COPD, or others), the
size of the dataset, the types of CAS included in the dataset, or
the parameters for evaluating the performance of the classifiers.
Despite the aforementioned differences, our approach has
some objective advantages over previous approaches. We have
shown the ability of our method to detect CAS derived from a
wide range of airflow levels. Thanks to the progressive respiratory maneuver, which was performed by the asthmatic patients,
the dataset of this study included CAS appearing at low airflows
as well as that appearing at high airflows. This is a strength
compared to previous studies for which RS were recorded at
constant airflows or during forced expiratory maneuvers. We
have shown that CAS may appear under different respiratory
conditions, and that this has no effect on the performance of our
classifier.
We have also performed a detailed sensitivity analysis of the
influence of the SNR (amplitude of CAS) on the performance
of the proposed classifier. We applied our classifier to simulated
CAS cycles with different SNRs (see Fig. 8). As shown in
Fig. 9, an overall accuracy of 92.8% was achieved. Although
the performance of the RS classifier diminished from region
R1–R4, the accuracy was high (87.7% in region R3) even at low
SNRs. These results reinforce the reliability of our method, in
that they demonstrate that this technique works properly under
both high and low SNR conditions.
In contrast to previous approaches for RS analysis, such
as those based on spectrograms or wavelet transformations,
EEMD-IF used in the first stage of our classification scheme is an
adaptive technique, which does not require a priori knowledge
of the RS signal characteristics. That is, IF and IE sequences
are calculated without choosing fixed analysis parameters and
regardless of the type of RS and their temporal or spectral characteristics. On the other hand, IF and IE sequences allow us to
work independently in either a time-frequency or a time-energy
domain. For this reason, we were able to use dispersion-based
criteria on IF sequences, this representing a novel and straightforward technique for detecting CAS segments. Moreover, IF
and IE sequences are defined point-by-point, thus providing
very high time resolution. In fact, EEMD-IF provides precise IF
values, which represent the frequency content of RS signals at
each time instant.
Thanks to the aforementioned properties of EEMD-IF, on
which the proposed method relies, this is a suitable technique
for RS classification, and also represents an alternative way
of accurately analyzing RS signals. Consequently, unlike some
techniques previously used for CAS detection, EEMD-IF could
be used not only for detecting CAS, but also for characterizing
these sounds. Although this proposed EEMD-IF technique has
not been widely applied to RS analysis, various EMD-based
approaches have already been used in previous studies either
for detection and analysis of discontinuous adventitious sounds
[43], [44], or for detection and separation of heart sounds from
lung sounds [45]–[47].
In this study, we have focused on inspiratory cycles because
inspiratory sounds are much louder than expiratory sounds on

496

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

the back, where we recorded the analyzed RS. Nevertheless,
this classifier could be effectively applied to RS from expiratory
cycles and even from the full respiratory cycle. What is more,
although this study is focused on RS from the surface of the back,
the proposed classifier could be also applied to tracheal sounds.
These factors do not have influence on the hypothesis of our
method. That is, it depends on the variations of the IF dispersion
inside a cycle, regardless of whether it is an inspiratory, an
expiratory, or a full cycle.
The use of our RS classifier is a prior step for a detailed
analysis of RS. Specifically, easier CAS detection will facilitate new research into the analysis and characterization of these
sounds. On the other hand, the identification of normal inspiratory sounds, without CAS, is the basis for future analysis of
normal inspiratory sound intensity. This classifier could be the
first stage of a more complex system for the analysis of RS.
Such a system could serve as much for the diagnosis of patients
with obstructive respiratory diseases as for their long-term monitoring. The idea is that this type of system could be used in a
routine way together with the spirometry. The combined information from these techniques could increase the reliability in
the diagnostic assessment of these patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all the team in the Pulmonary
Function Testing Laboratory at Germans Trias i Pujol University
Hospital, for their collaboration in the patient recruitment as well
as the performing of the spirometry tests and also thank the joint
research Unit between Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia
and Health Sciences Research Institute of the Germans Trias i
Pujol Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Bohadana, G. Izbicki, and S.S. Kraman, “Fundamentals of lung auscultation,” New Eng. J. Med., vol. 370, pp. 744–751, Feb. 2014.
[2] A. R. A. Sovijärvi, L. P. Malmberg, G. Charbonneau, J. Vanderschoot,
F. Dalmasso, C. Sacco, M. Rossi, and J. E. Earis, “Characteristics of
breath sounds and adventitious respiratory sounds,” Eur. Respiration Rev.,
vol. 10, pp. 591–596, 2000.
[3] A. R. A. Sovijärvi, F. Dalmasso, J. Vanderschoot, L. P. Malmberg,
G. Righini, and S. A. T. Stoneman, “Definitions of terms for applications of respiratory sounds,” Eur. Respiration Rev., vol. 10, pp. 597–610,
2000.
[4] N. Meslier, G. Charbonneau, and J. L. Racineux, “Wheezes,” Eur. Respiration J., vol. 8, pp. 1942–1948, Nov. 1995.
[5] J. J. Marini, D. J. Pierson, L. D. Hudson, and S. Lakshminarayan, “The
significance of wheezing in chronic airflow obstruction,” Amer. Rev. Respiration Dis., vol. 120, pp. 1069–1072, Nov. 1979.
[6] J. A. Fiz, R. Jané, A. Homs, J. Izquierdo, M. A. Garcı́a, and J. Morera,
“Detection of wheezing during maximal forced exhalation in patients with
obstructed airways,” Chest, vol. 122, pp. 186–191, Jul. 2002.
[7] C. S. Shim and M. H. Williams, “Relationship of wheezing to the severity
of obstruction in asthma,” Arch. Internal Med., vol. 143, pp. 890–892,
May 1983.
[8] J. A. Fiz, R. Jané, J. Izquierdo, A. Homs, M.A. Garcı́a, R. Gómez,
E. Monso, and J. Morera, “Analysis of forced wheezes in asthma patients,” Respiration, vol. 73, pp. 55–60, Aug. 2006.
[9] E. D. Bateman, S.S. Hurd, P.J. Barnes, J. Bousquet, J.M. Drazen,
M. FitzGerald, P. Gibson, K. Ohta, P. O’Byrne, S.E. Pedersen, E. Pizzichini, S.D. Sullivan, S.E. Wenzel, and H.J. Zar., “Global strategy for
asthma management and prevention: GINA executive summary,” Eur. Respiration J., vol. 31, pp. 143–78, Jan. 2008.

[10] A. Kandaswamy, C. S. Kumar, R. P. Ramanathan, S. Jayaraman, and
N. Malmurugan, “Neural classification of lung sounds using wavelet coefficients,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 34, pp. 523–537, Sep. 2004.
[11] A. Mondal, P. Bhattacharya, and G. Saha, “Detection of lungs status using
morphological complexities of respiratory sounds,” Sci. World J., vol.
2014, pp. 182938–1–182938 -9, Feb. 2014.
[12] S. Xie, F. Jin, S. Krishnan, and F. Sattar, “Signal feature extraction by
multi-scale PCA and its application to respiratory sound classification,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50, pp. 759–768, Jul. 2012.
[13] S. Matsunaga, K. Yamauchi, M. Yamashita, and S. Miyahara, “Classification between normal and abnormal respiratory sounds based on maximum
likelihood approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
Process., Taipei, Taiwan, 2009, pp. 517–520.
[14] J. C. Chien, H. D. Wu, F. C. Chong, and C. I. Li, “Wheeze detection using
cepstral analysis in Gaussian mixture models,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. Conf., Lyon, France, 2007, pp. 3168–3171.
[15] M. Bahoura, “Pattern recognition methods applied to respiratory sounds
classification into normal and wheeze classes,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol.
39, pp. 824–843, Sep. 2009.
[16] S. Aydore, I. Sen, Y. P. Kahya, and M. Mihcak, “Classification of respiratory signals by linear analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2009, pp. 2617–2620.
[17] S. A. Taplidou, L. J. Hadjileontiadis, T. Penzel, V. Gross, and S. M. Panas,
“WED: An efficient wheezing-episode detector based on breath sounds
spectrogram analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Cancun,
Mexico, 2003, pp. 2531–2534.
[18] A. Homs-Corbera, J. A. Fiz, J. Morera, and R. Jané, “Time-frequency
detection and analysis of wheezes during forced exhalation,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 182–186, Jan. 2004.
[19] S. A. Taplidou and L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Wheeze detection based on
time-frequency analysis of breath sounds,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 37,
pp. 1073–1083, Aug. 2007.
[20] A. Jain and J. Vepa, “Lung sound analysis for wheeze episode detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Vancouver, Canada, 2008, pp.
2582–2585.
[21] R. J. Riella, P. Nohama, and J. M. Maia, “Method for automatic detection
of wheezing in lung sounds,” Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res., vol. 42, pp. 674–684,
Jul. 2009.
[22] J. Zhang, W. Ser, J. Yu, and T. T. Zhang, “A novel wheeze detection method
for wearable monitoring systems,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Intell. Ubiquitous
Comput. Educ., Chengdu, China, 2009, pp. 331–334.
[23] A. Oliveira, C. Pinho, J. Dinis, D. Oliveira, and A. Marques, “Automatic
wheeze detection and lung function evaluation: A preliminary study,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Health Inform., Barcelona, Spain, 2013, pp. 323–326.
[24] M. L. Hsueh, J. C. Chien, F. C. Chang, H. D. Wu, and F. C. Chong,
“Respiratory wheeze detection system,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc. Conf., Shanghai, China, 2005, pp. 7553–7559.
[25] B. S. Lin, B. S. Lin, H. D. Wu, F. C. Chong, and S. J. Chen, “Wheeze
recognition based on 2D bilateral filtering of spectrogram,” Biomed. Eng.
Appl. Basis Commun., vol. 18, pp. 128–137, Jun. 2006.
[26] S. A. Taplidou, L.J. Hadjileontiadis, I.K. Kitsas, K.I. Panoulas, T. Penzel,
V. Gross, and S.M. Panas, “On applying continuous wavelet transform in
wheeze analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., San Francisco,
CA, USA, 2004, pp. 3832–3835.
[27] S. A. Taplidou and L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Analysis of wheezes using
wavelet higher order spectral features,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol.
57, no. 7, pp. 1596–1610, Jul. 2010.
[28] F. Jin, S. S. Krishnan, and F. Sattar, “Adventitious sounds identification and extraction using temporal-spectral dominance-based features,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3078–3087, Nov.
2011.
[29] N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng,
N. C. Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition
and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series
analysis,” Proc. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 454, pp. 903–995, Mar. 1998.
[30] N. E. Huang, X. Chen, M. T. Lo, and Z. Wu, “On Hilbert spectral
representation: a true time-frequency representation for nonlinear and
nonstationary data,” Adv. Adapt. Data Anal., vol. 3, pp. 63–93, Apr.
2011.
[31] B. Boashash, “Estimating and interpreting the instantaneous frequency of
a signal–Part 1: Fundamentals,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 520–538,
Apr. 1992.
[32] N. E. Huang, Z. Wu, S. R. Long, K. C. Arnold, X. Chen, and K. Blank, “On
instantaneous frequency,” Adv. Adapt. Data Anal., vol. 1, pp. 177–229,
Apr. 2009.

LOZANO et al.: AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIATION OF NORMAL AND CONTINUOUS ADVENTITIOUS RESPIRATORY SOUNDS

[33] M. Lozano, J. A. Fiz, and R. Jané, “Estimation of instantaneous frequency
from empirical mode decomposition on respiratory sounds analysis,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 981–984.
[34] Z. Wu and N.E. Huang, “Ensemble empirical mode decomposition: A
noise-assisted data analysis method,” Adv. Adapt. Data Anal., vol. 1, pp.
1–41, Jan. 2009.
[35] J. Zhang, R. Yan, R. X. Gao, and Z. Feng, “Performance enhancement of
ensemble empirical mode decomposition,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process.,
vol. 24, pp. 2104–2123, Oct. 2010.
[36] G. Rilling, P. Flandrin, and P. Gonçalvès, “On empirical mode decomposition and its algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE/EURASIP Workshop Nonlinear
Signal Image Process., Grado, Italy, 2003.
[37] [Online]. 2012 Available: http://perso.ens-lyon.fr/patrick.flandrin/emd.
html
[38] D. Gabor, “Theory of communication,” J. IEE–Part III: Radio Commun.
Eng., vol. 93, no. 26, pp. 429–457, Nov. 1946.
[39] W. J. Tompkins, “Finite impulse response filters,” in Biomedical Digital
Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1993, pp.
111–116.
[40] N. Rehman and D. P. Mandic, “Multivariate empirical mode decomposition,” Proc. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 466, pp. 1291–1302, 2010.
[41] N. Rehman and D. P. Mandic, “Filter bank property of multivariate empirical mode decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 5,
pp. 2421–2426, May 2011.
[42] H. Hong, X. Wang, and Z. Tao, “Local integral mean-based sifting for
empirical mode decomposition,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 16,
no. 10, pp. 841–844, Oct. 2009.
[43] L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Empirical mode decomposition and fractal dimension filter. A novel technique for denoising explosive lung sounds,” IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 30–39, 2007.
[44] B. A. Reyes, S. Charleston-Villalobos, R. Gonzalez-Camarena, and
T. Aljama-Corrales, “Analysis of discontinuous adventitious lung sounds
by Hilbert-Huang spectrum,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
Vancouver, Canada, 2008, pp. 3620–3623.
[45] S. Charleston-Villalobos, L. F. Dominguez-Robert, R. GonzalezCamarena, and A. T. Aljama-Corrales, “Heart sounds interference cancellation in lung sounds,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.,
New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 1694–1697.
[46] C. Papadaniil and L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Efficient heart sound segmentation and extraction using ensemble empirical mode decomposition and
kurtosis features,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
1138–1152, Jul. 2014.
[47] L. ChingShun, W. A. Tanumihardja, and S. HongHui, “Lung-heart sound
separation using noise assisted multivariate empirical mode decomposition,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Intell. Signal Process. Commun. Syst., Naha,
Japan, 2013, pp. 726–730.

Manuel Lozano was born in Barcelona, Spain, in
1983. He received the B.Eng. degree in telecommunications engineering and the M.S.E. degree in biomedical engineering from the Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya, Barcelona, in 2008 and 2011, respectively,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering.
Since 2011, he has been working as a Research
Technician in the Innovation Mixed Unit, Health Sciences Research Institute of the Germans Trias i Pujol
Foundation (IGTP), Badalona, Spain, and the Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia, Barcelona. His research interests include
biomedical signal processing and multichannel respiratory sound analysis in
respiratory diseases.

497

José Antonio Fiz was born in Pamplona, Spain, in
1953. He received the Diploma degree in medicine
from the University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,
in 1978. He specialized in Pulmonology at the University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain and received the
M.S.E. degree in bioengineering from the Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, in 1994.
Since 1991, he has been working in the Respiratory Physiology and Sleep Laboratories, Germans
Trias i Pujol University Hospital, Badalona, Spain.
In 2008, he joined the Institute for Bioengineering of
Catalonia and the Biomedical Research Networking center in Bioengineering,
Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Barcelona. His research interests include respiratory sound analysis, sleep apnea, neural networks applied to
clinical data, and clinical time series analysis.

Raimon Jané (M’91–SM’14) received the Ph.D.
from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC),
Barcelona, Spain, in 1989.
He is currently the Director of Research in the Department of Automatic Control (ESAII), UPC, and
the Scientific Group Leader of the Biomedical Signal Processing and Interpretation Group, Institute for
Bioengineering of Catalonia, Barcelona. Since 2008,
he has been the Principal Investigator of the Biomedical Signals and Systems (SISBIO) Group, CIBERBBN, Barcelona. He is Professor of the Master’s and
the Coordinator of the Ph.D. programs in biomedical engineering. His research
interests include multimodal and multiscale biomedical signal processing in
cardiorespiratory diseases and sleep disorders. He is currently member of IEEE
EMBS Technical Committee on Cardiopulmonary Systems.
Prof. Jané received the Barcelona City Prize, from the Barcelona Council, in
the area of technology research, in 2005. Since 2012, Prof. Jané is the President
of the Spanish Society of Biomedical Engineering (SEIB).

