IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

563

Skull Segmentation and Reconstruction From
Newborn CT Images Using Coupled Level Sets
Sona Ghadimi, Hamid Abrishami Moghaddam, Reinhard Grebe, and Fabrice Wallois

Abstract—This study presents a new approach for segmentation
and reconstruction of newborn’s skull including bones, fontanels,
and sutures from computed tomography (CT) images. The segmentation approach relies on propagation of a pair of interacting
smooth surfaces based on geodesic active regions. These surfaces
evolve in opposite directions; the exterior surface moves inward
while the interior one moves in outward direction. The moving
surfaces are forced to stop when arriving at the outer or the inner
surface of the cranial bones using edge information. Since fontanels
and sutures are not directly detectable in CT images, this method
imposes specific propagation constraints for coupled interfaces to
prevent the moving surfaces from intersecting each other and penetrating into the opposite region. Finally, an algorithm for level
set initialization is introduced which enforces the evolving surfaces
to conform to the shape of the head. The proposed method was
evaluated using 18 neonatal CT images. The segmentation results
achieved by the suggested method have been compared with manual segmentations by two different raters, performed to establish
a reliable reference. The comparison of the two segmentation results using the Dice similarity coefficient and modified Hausdorff
distance shows that the proposed approach provides satisfactory
results.
Index Terms—Computed tomography (CT) images, coupled
level sets, fontanels–sutures, newborn, skull.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE impact of fontanels and sutures on neuronal source
localization in infants by either high-density (HD) electroencephalography or HD functional optical imaging has been
demonstrated [1]. Realistic neonatal head models as created
from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are commonly used to
identify the different head tissues exhibiting different electrical
and optical properties. Nevertheless, the main issue in prematures and neonates is accurate identification and extraction of
the fontanels–sutures which induce inhomogeneities in the skull
and show significant differences in specific conductivities and
optical properties. This has already been done by refinement
of the electrical mesh of the skull [2] or by manual extraction

T

Manuscript received August 10, 2014; revised November 29, 2014; accepted
January 5, 2015. Date of publication February 3, 2015; date of current version
March 3, 2016. This work was supported in part by the EGIDE France and
the CISSC Iran under Grant 961/93-9-2 (Jundi Shapour Scientific Collaboration
Program).
S. Ghadimi and H. Abrishami Moghaddam are with the Faculty of Electrical
Engineering, K.N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, and also with
the Faculté de Médecine, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens 80036,
France (e-mail: sona.ghadimi@gmail.com; moghadam@eetd.kntu.ac.ir).
R. Grebe is with the Faculté de Médecine, Université de Picardie Jules Verne,
Amiens 80036, France (e-mail: reinhard.grebe@u-picardie.fr).
F. Wallois is with the Faculté de Médecine, Université de Picardie Jules
Verne, Amiens 80036, France, and also with the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
d’Amiens, Amiens 80000, France (e-mail: fabrice.wallois@u-picardie.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2391991

of fontanels from the identified skull through manual segmentation of fMRI [1]. As stated by the authors in the recently
published articles in [1] and [2], those techniques are rough,
imprecise, and finally not sufficiently accurate for exact source
localization. Hence, it is crucial to provide a realistic model of
the skull that identifies the cranial bones and the fontanels–
sutures from computed tomography (CT) segmentation in
neonates.
The neonates’ skull is not fully ossified at birth, bones can
move slightly relative to each other. This ability is related to the
fontanels–sutures. Fontanels are the fibrous, membrane-filled
gaps appearing where more than two cranial bones are juxtaposed, as opposed to sutures, which are narrow seams of fibrous
connective tissue that separate the flat bones of the skull [3].
During fetal and postnatal life, the membranous bones are enlarged by apposition of new layers at the edges [4].
Two common modalities used in neuroimaging are the MRI
and the CT. Due to MRI’s inherent weakness concerning hard
tissue imaging; few works have been published so far on skull
segmentation in newborns using MRI [5]–[10]. In all the proposed methods, the extracted skull models suffer from low accuracy and absence of any information about the location of
fontanels.
Unlike MRI, CT scanning has some limitations such as the
need to expose the subject to ionizing radiation and the lack
of good contrast for soft tissues. Nevertheless, since it provides
the best contrast for bone definition, CT is a preferred modality
in cranial studies. Fontanels–sutures in CT images cannot be
seen as a tissue with a particular identifiable gray level. They
are just seen as discontinuities between cranial bones. Lapeer
and Prager [11] proposed a method based on thin-plate splines
using three 2-D orthogonal atlas images and a homologous 3-D
object to construct a mesh-model of a newborn skull. The performance of their warping approach was affected by the presence
of the fontanels–sutures in neonatal skull. We previously [12]
applied a variational level set [13] to the thresholded cortical
bone image to reconstruct the inner and outer skull surfaces and
extract subsequently the fontanels using morphological processing. The method was highly relied on cortical bone contrast and
there was no constraint to prevent the inner and outer surfaces
from crossing over. Recently, we suggested an approach to take
more advantage of the skull shape and used a level set method
based on the Mumford–Shah functional [14] combined with a
priori shape model of the closed skull geometry [15]. Indeed,
the application of the model is indispensable to enforce the level
set algorithm to converge toward the desired structures. On the
other hand, the performance of this algorithm depends highly on
the quantity and quality of the manually segmented data necessary for model creation. Manual segmentation of high-resolution

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

564

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Flow diagram of the proposed skull segmentation and fontanels–sutures reconstruction algorithm.

3-D CT scans of neonatal head is a tedious and time-consuming
task and suffers from being biased to the raters.
To overcome the aforesaid drawbacks, a new framework
based on variational coupled level set approach is presented to
segment neurocranial bones and reconstruct fontanels–sutures
from neonatal CT images. Coupled level set method was used
previously to segment different tissues such as brain [16], [17]
and bladder wall [18], [19]. It is important to clarify this study
does not suggest taking CT images from newborns for skull
segmentation and reconstruction (due to the risks caused by
exposing babies to X-ray). Instead, the aim of this paper is to
process CT images which have been already acquired from babies for other clinical reasons The perspective of proposing this
fully automated segmentation algorithm is its usage for creating
a realistic skull model; since all previous attempts for creating
CT structural atlases [15] or fontanels models [1], [2] were based
on manual segmentation which is tedious, time consuming and
suffers from being biased to the raters. The proposed method is
developed in a way that beside segmentation, it performs surface reconstruction as well. The coupled level sets evolve until
determining the position and shape of fontanels–sutures as well
as extracting inner and outer surface of cortical bones. In order
to reconstruct the shape of the fontanels–sutures, in addition to
using an efficient level set initialization, it is essential to propose
a specific propagation constraint that prevents the coupled level
sets from crossing each other during evolution.
In presented approach partial volume effect (PVE) is not corrected. PVE has been considered previously for skull segmentation from MRI cerebral data [20]. However, since in general,
CT scanners provide higher resolution data from skull compared to MRI and due to the absence of significant MRI signal
from hard tissues, PVE in MR images happens more frequently
than CT data. Also, most of neonatal cerebral MR studies used
nearly 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 voxels, e.g., 0.86 × 0.86 × 1 in [21] and
1.25 × 1.25 × 1.95 in [22], while in our application, we had access to CT images with voxel size of 0.35 × 0.35 × 0.63 mm3 ,
i.e., nearly 13 times better resolution. Furthermore, in CT scans,
PVE is mainly encountered in the skull base region where bony
prominences are in close proximity to soft tissue structures [23].
In our approach, the skull base is not of interest due to the ab-

sence of fontanels. Therefore, PVE correction is out of the scope
of this paper and it can be considered in a further study.
The major contributions of the presented work are 1) presenting a new framework based on coupled level set method
for both segmentation and shape reconstruction and 2) proposing an efficient method for level set initialization in which the
approximate shape of the object is incorporated.
II. METHODS
In neonates, skull is made up of cortical bone, sutures, and
fontanels. Cortical bone can be easily identified and extracted
from CT images by evaluating the voxel intensities; while sutures and fontanels are not detectable in a similar way. They
can only be identified as gaps between cranial bones. As shown
in Fig. 1, the proposed algorithm consists of three stages: I)
level set initialization; II) coupled level set evolution; and III)
fontanels–sutures reconstruction. For sufficient accuracy and
efficiency, it is indispensable to have a good initialization for
the two level sets which is described in Section II-A. Then, by
introducing and applying the coupled level sets, the inner and
the outer surfaces of the skull are extracted and fontanels and
sutures are identified. In Section II-C, details concerning the
reconstruction of fontanels and sutures are presented.
A. Level Set Initialization
In level set methods, a proper initialization enables the algorithm to converge efficiently toward the accurate shape. The goal
of the proposed coupled level sets is skull segmentation, so the
aim of the level set initialization procedure is to initialize two
surfaces close enough to the cranial bones. To have appropriate
initial surfaces for the coupled level sets, the fast tagging algorithm presented by Zhao et al. [24], [25] is applied. It provides
a crude approximation in the vicinity of the steady-state level
set solution. This algorithm consists of three steps: computing
distance, defining temporary boundary, and marching protocol
(see Fig. 2).
Due to importance of accurate reconstruction of fontanels–
sutures in this application, in addition to cranial bones, head
surface voxels of neonatal CT image (extracted from CT

GHADIMI et al.: SKULL SEGMENTATION AND RECONSTRUCTION FROM NEWBORN CT IMAGES USING COUPLED LEVEL SETS

565

Fig. 2. Axial view of the initialization and evolution of the inner and outer temporary boundary voxels by tagging algorithm for Subject 2. (a) Object of the
initialization procedure which consists of cranial bones and head surface voxels, (b) the modified object, and (c) illustration of Euclidean distance values of back
ground voxels to the nearest object voxel. (d) Definition of two rectangular cubes inside and outside the modified object to start tagging algorithm. To have a clear
illustration, the modified object is overlaid on the distance image. (e)–(h) Temporary boundary voxels initialization and evolution after 20, 30, and 55 iterations.
Middle column is the zoomed out of the red rectangular zone in two consecutive iterations. The fourth and fifth columns (from left) show 3-D renderings of
different stages during the evolution of the initial inner and outer cuboids (yellow and green in the second column) to the final interior and exterior skull surface.

images by histogram thresholding using Otsu’s method [26])
was added to the dataset for the implemented fast tagging algorithm. So the dataset consists of object (cranial bones and
head surface) and background voxels [see Fig. 2(a)]. It is noteworthy that in order to prevent the inner contour initialization
from leaking into large fontanels–sutures gaps and consequently
from overlapping with initialized outer contour (head surface),
before starting fast tagging algorithm, the object is modified.
First, thick head surface (3–5 voxels thickness) is obtained from

head mask, and then combined with the cranial bones (using
morphological “or” and “closing” functions) [see Fig. 2(b)].
Under this circumstance, two contours never meet each other
and the inner contour would not leak to the large gaps.
To commence fast tagging, for each background voxel of the
binary dataset, the Euclidean distance from the nearest object
voxel is computed [see Fig. 2(c)]. Then, two rectangular cubes
were defined outside and inside the object for the outer and
inner coupled level sets, respectively [see Fig. 2(d)]. As shown

566

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

in Fig. 2(d), for the coupled level sets, two initializations are
necessary. Since the procedure is the same for both contours;
hereafter, we explain the initialization only for the outer contour.
All background voxels outside the outer cube are labeled as
exterior background voxels. All voxels that do not belong to the
initial exterior background and the object voxels are marked as
interior background voxels. Those interior voxels that have at
least one neighboring exterior voxel are marked as temporary
boundary voxels. Temporary boundary voxels are illustrated as
green contour in Fig. 2(d) and (e). The rectangular cube will
march toward head surface and cranial bones. Considering the
direction of marching cube, the objective of the algorithm is
to identify as many exterior voxels as possible and hence to
provide a good basis to define the initial outer level set.
All temporary boundary voxels are put in an array according
to their distance values and checked one by one. If all interior
neighbors of a temporary boundary voxel have smaller distance
value than itself, it will be labeled as an exterior background
voxel, taken out of the array and all its interior neighbors are
added into the array. Otherwise, if it has an interior neighbor
with a larger or equal Euclidean distance value than itself, this
temporary boundary voxel will remain in the array and none of
its interior neighbors are labeled as temporary boundary voxels. An offset distance ε has been defined between the initial
evolving contour and the object voxels. Considering this offset guarantees that the initial inner and outer contours remain
in their proper shape and position and never meet each other.
The stopping criteria for marching process are defined as either
no more temporary boundary voxels are labeled or the maximal distance of the unlabeled temporary boundary voxels to the
object voxels is less than ε.
Fig. 2(e) illustrates initialized interior and exterior cubes as
temporary boundary voxels on distance image while the cranial
bones are overlaid. Tagging algorithm evolution of the interior
and exterior temporary boundaries after 20, 30, and 55 iterations are shown in Fig. 2(f)–(h), respectively. Middle column
in Fig. 2 illustrates marching of temporary boundary voxels in
a small red rectangular zone, which is shown in the second
column (from left). For example, the upper matrix in Fig. 2(i)
shows the temporary boundary (green) voxels in the zeroth and
the lower matrix shows them in the first iteration. In both matrices, exterior and interior voxels are shown in gray and pink
colors, respectively. The marching procedure on the temporary
boundary voxels is repeated until the maximum distance of the
temporary boundary voxels is smaller than an offset (ε ≥ 2)
as illustrated in Fig. 2(h). The fourth and fifth columns (from
left) in Fig. 2 demonstrate 3-D rendering of interior and exterior
temporary boundary voxels shown in the second column.
B. Deformable Model Using Coupled Contours
To extract the inner and outer surfaces of the skull by the
coupled contours, the geodesic active contour introduced by
Caselles et al. [27] is used. It incorporates information regarding
the boundary of the object as follows:

g(|∇I|)ds.

E(Γ) =
Γ

(1)

Here, I is the 3-D intensity matrix describing a given image from which the object boundaries have to be detected. Γ
is the looked-for contour and a subset of Ω (a bounded open
subset of 3 ). g(.) is an edge detector function which is applied to the gradient magnitude of image (|∇I|), g(|∇I|) =
1/(1 + |∇ (Gσ ∗ I) |2 ), where Gσ is the Gaussian smoothing
filter. Its value is 1 in uniform regions and approaches zero
near the boundaries. Comparing
 equation (1) with the classical length (surface) definition, Γ ds, it becomes obvious that
the above surface (1) is obtained by weighting the Euclidean
element of surface ds by g(|∇I|).
In the proposed method, coupled active contours are created,
an interior contour (Γin ) inside and an exterior contour (Γout )
outside the skull. Each evolving contour separates two regions
Ω and Ω̃ which are inside and outside the contour, respectively.
The region outside of the inner contour (Ω̃in ) and inside of the
outer one (Ωout ), is of special interest which is called interacting
region (Ω̃in ∩ Ωout ) in this paper.
The energy functional for each contour is stated in (2). The
first term is the geodesic term. The second term is the (weighted)
volume of each contour Ωx =in,out . This term, which was used,
previously in [16] and [28] behaves like a balloon force and
its modulation by the edge indicator function forces it to stop
surface expansion near the desired boundary. The advantage of
applying this term is increasing the speed of inflating/deflating
the volumes and also it can help to not trap by a meaningless
local minimum. The third term is the (weighted) volume of the
region (Ω̃in ∩ Ωout ) surrounded by the coupled contours. This
term is added to this functional to impose the mutual interaction
of the two moving surfaces. It provides an interacting behavior,
which cannot be realized using two independent contours. The
advantages of proposing this term will be discussed later in this
section:

Ein =


g(|∇I|)ds + ei

Γin


g(|∇I|)ds + eo

Γout

g(|∇I|)dv
Ω̃ i n ∩Ω o u t

Ω in


Eo u t =


g(|∇I|)dv + ei o

g(|∇I|)dv + eo i

Ωout

g(|∇I|)dv.

Ω̃ i n ∩Ω o u t

(2)

Here, Ein and Eout are the energy functionals corresponding
to the contours placed inside and outside the object, respectively,
{ei , eio }⊂ R− and {eo ,, eoi }⊂ R+ . {ei ,, eio } are negative coefficients since their corresponding volume terms are expected
to apply an outward pressure (balloon) force to expand the evolving contour placed inside the object.
The level set method [29] consists in capturing moving interfaces. Consider a closed surface Γ = Γ(t) which moves in time
and let Ω(t) be the region enclosed by Γ(t). Define φ (x, t) as
a Lipschitz continuous function and Γ(t) as its zero level set,
such that
⎧
φ (x, y, z, t) > 0 in Ω(t)
⎪
⎪
⎨
φ (x, y, z, t) = 0 on Γ(t)
(3)
⎪
⎪
⎩ φ (x, y, z, t) < 0 in Ω̃(t)

GHADIMI et al.: SKULL SEGMENTATION AND RECONSTRUCTION FROM NEWBORN CT IMAGES USING COUPLED LEVEL SETS

567

and
Γ(t) = {(x, y, z) ∈ Ω : φ (x, y, z, t) = 0} .


(4)

Using above definitions, it is clear from level set theory that

g(|∇I|)ds =
g(|∇I|)|∇H(φ(x, y, z))| dxdydz

Γ

Ω


=

g(|∇I|)δ(φ(x, y, z))|∇φ(x, y, z)| dxdydz
Ω




g(|∇I|)dv =

g(|∇I|)H(φ(x, y, z))dxdydz

Ω

(5)

Ω

where H(.) is a Heaviside and δ(.) is a Dirac delta function as
follows:

1, if x ≥ 0
d
H(x).
H(x) =
δ(x) =
dx
0, if x < 0,
Applying (4) and (5) enables us to rewrite (2) as follows:
E(φ) = Eout (φout ) + Ein (φin )

Eout (φout ) =
g(|∇I|)δ(φout )|∇φout |dxdydz
Ωo u t

g(|∇I|)H(φout )dxdydz
Ωo u t


+ eoi

Ω o u t ∩Ω̃ i n



g(|∇I|)H(φΩ o u t ∩Ω̃ i n )dxdydz

g(|∇I|)δ(φin )|∇φin |dxdydz

Ein (φin ) =
Ωin



+ ei

g(|∇I|)H(φin )dxdydz
Ωin


+ eio

Ω o u t ∩Ω̃ i n

IV in Fig. 3(b)], which is undesirable in the aforementioned
application. For this purpose, we introduce a constraint based
on the Heaviside function to stop the evolution of contours when
they coincide with each other:
H (2 (H (φout ) − H (φin )) + 1) = 1.



+ eo

Fig. 3. Two-dimensional visualization of contours and corresponding regions
in Subject 3. (a) Presenting three proper regions, (b) the contour intersection
and creation of a forbidden region IV. In this region, φ in > 0 (H (φ in ) = 1)
and φ o u t < 0(H (φ o u t ) = 0). The green curve represents skull and the red and
blue curves are the interior and exterior contours, respectively.

g(|∇I|)H(φΩ o u t ∩Ω̃ i n )dxdydz.
(6)

By defining these contours and their corresponding level sets,
three different regions can be identified as mentioned before: I)
the inside of the interior contour, II) the area enclosed between
the two contours and III) the outside of the exterior contour. A
2-D presentation of these regions is shown in Fig. 3(a).
These regions can be distinguished by the Heaviside function
as follows:

φin > 0 → H(φin ) = 1
I:
φout > 0 → H(φout ) = 1
φin < 0 → H(φin ) = 0
II :
(7)
φout > 0 → H(φout ) = 1
φin < 0 → H(φin ) = 0
III :
φout < 0 → H(φout ) = 0.
In order to reconstruct the shape of the fontanels–sutures,
the proposed method must prevent intersection between the two
evolving contours, in places corresponding to fontanels–sutures.
Such contour intersection would create a forbidden zone [region

(8)

This constraint does not affect the evolution inside the
three proper regions (I, II, and III) and prevents from developing a region IV. It was simply implemented in the codes
as a condition which is checked in each iteration. Whenever
H (2 (H (φout ) − H (φin )) + 1) equals zero, the two contours
are crossing; hence, the evolution for correspondent voxels will
be stopped instantly at that location
I → H(2 × (1 − 1) + 1) ⇒ H(1) = 1
II → H(2 × (1 − 0) + 1) ⇒ H(3) = 1
III → H(2 × (0 − 0) + 1) ⇒ H(1) = 1
IV → H(2 × (0 − 1) + 1) ⇒ H(−1) = 0.
Henceforth, minimization of the energy E(φ) in (6) with respect to φin and φout is performed using variational calculus
with the classical Euler–Lagrange theorem, introducing an artificial time variable t and moving in the steepest descent direction
toward a steady state:
	
∇φin 

∂φin
= δ(φin )div g(|∇I|)
∂t
|∇φin |
+ ei g(|∇I|)δ(φin ) + eio g(|∇I|)δ(φout−in )
	
∂φout
∇φout 

= δ(φout )div g(|∇I|)
∂t
|∇φout |
+ eo g(|∇I|)δ(φout ) + eoi g(|∇I|)δ(φout−in ). (9)
More details about functional minimization using Euler–
Lagrange theorem can be found in [30] and [31]. The evolution
of the level sets will be stopped when they touch each other or
encounter the cranial bones. The above equation reveals that in
the proposed coupled level sets, each contour (e.g., interior one)
is not only influenced by its own internal and external forces;
but also by a term (δ(φout−in )) which is controlled by another

568

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 5. Illustration of the effect of one voxel thick skull. (a) Axial view of
brain window of Subject 6 CT image in which the coinciding two level sets on
both sides of the skull are zoomed out. (b) Schematic of the effect in 2-D. (c)
Four different 2-D patterns in one of the orthogonal slices and (d) five different
3-D patterns for two specified voxels (A and B) causing erroneous fontanel
detection.

Fig. 4. Behavior of two independent and coupled level sets. The first row
shows cranial bones and two contours, the second row presents only the contours
in which the contours smoothness is better visualized. The first column from
the left: two smooth independent level sets and their failure in small gaps (green
circle), the second column: two nonsmooth independent level sets and their
cross over in gaps before stopping (shown by two green arrows), and the third
column: the smooth coupled level sets.

(exterior) contour. This mutual term δ(φout−in ) is the delta function defined in the interacting region. The mutual interaction of
the two contours is very useful in the three following situations:
1) If one of the contours traps in a meaningless local minimum,
while the other one keeps moving on, this term will bring the
trapped one out from that minimum. 2) If smooth contours are
desired, in small gaps two contours cannot tolerate very sharp
deformations to reach each other unless using this term with
proper coefficient. 3) To achieve maximum smoothness near
to the desired boundaries and minimum distance between two
contours, and in order to stop contours evolution while they are
tangent to each other the use of this term seems indispensable.
Fig. 4 illustrates an example of how independent and coupled
level sets behave in the same situation. The first column from
left is related to two smooth independent level sets. These contours could not reach each other in small gaps after 6000 iterations. The second column concerns two nonsmooth independent
level sets after 200 iterations. The third column is relevant to
the smooth coupled level sets. The coupled contours smoothly
touched each other in small gaps after 200 iterations.
C. Fontanels–Sutures Reconstruction
The movement of exterior and interior surfaces terminates
when they touch each other or encounter the outside or inside
edge of cranial bones, respectively. Accordingly, to localize
fontanels–sutures, the proposed algorithm looks for exterior/interior voxels, which have at least one interior/exterior
moving surface voxel in its 3 × 3 × 3 cubic 3-D neighborhood.
These voxels are marked as fontanels–sutures. Therefore, in
locations where interior and exterior level sets coincide with
each other, it is assumed that there exists a fontanel or a suture.

Fig. 6. Three-dimensional renderings of the reconstructed fontanels–sutures
of Subject 15, (a) without and (b) with applying the two mentioned
considerations.

However, there are some exceptions, which must be considered
carefully as will be described hereafter.
1) In some parts of the skull with cranial bones of only one
voxel thickness, the interior and exterior surface located
on both sides of the bone are recognized as coinciding in
3 × 3 × 3 cubic 3-D neighborhood; so, these voxels are
labeled wrongly as fontanel–suture. Fig. 5(a) shows an
example of this situation on an axial slice of a processed
CT image in which the concerned region is zoomed out
[see Fig. 5(b)]. To prevent such mislabeling, all 2 × 2 × 2
voxel configurations in which one voxel thick bone is
placed between interior and exterior surfaces have been
considered and removed from final extracted fontanels
and sutures. Some 2-D configurations in one of the three
orthogonal planes and a few similar examples in 3-D space
are shown in Fig. 5(c) and (d), respectively.
2) In the lower part of the skull, a number of different small
bones forming a complex structure of soft tissues exist
which are neither fontanel nor suture. Obviously, this part
of the skull is not of interest regarding to the here investigated fontanels and sutures; so the part caudal to the plane
from the nasion to the inion has been excluded manually
from evaluation.
Fig. 6(a) and (b) shows 3-D renderings of the reconstruction
results with and without above considerations, respectively. In

GHADIMI et al.: SKULL SEGMENTATION AND RECONSTRUCTION FROM NEWBORN CT IMAGES USING COUPLED LEVEL SETS

569

Fig. 8. (a) Coronal view of the CT image of Subject 3. (b) Brain window of
corresponding CT image for enhancing visibility of skull and brain. The zoomed
out part shows that using brain window helps rater to correctly extract fontanels
and sutures by visualizing brain borders.
Fig. 7.

Describing the subjects by their ages at the date of birth and exam.

both figures, the frontal fontanel in sagittal view is zoomed
out to clearly illustrate the effect of avoiding erroneous fontanel
labeling. The isolated scattered voxels around fontanels–sutures
in Fig. 6(a) are the mislabeled fontanels caused by one-voxel
thickness cranial bones. The green rectangle indicates the wrong
labeled fontanels in foramen magnum zone (the large hole in
skull base where spinal cord leaves the brain).
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The CT data used in this study were selected from the image
database acquired during recent years at the university hospital
center Amiens-France, which is a regional referral, subspecialty
care center. All of the examinations have been performed for
routine diagnostic purposes in the context of the clinical treatment of newborns. The Institutional Review Board approval was
obtained for this study. Ethical permission for this study was
given by the local ethics committee (Commission d’Evaluation
Ethique de Recherches Non Interventionelles, CEERNI), CHU
Amiens, Approval No. 66, 2011.
The images were acquired using a LightSpeed 16, GE Medical Systems, with a matrix of 512 × 512 pixels and a voxel
size of 0.35 × 0.35 × 0.63 mm3 . The images were re-sliced to
1 × 1 × 1 mm3 cubic voxels. To evaluate the proposed algorithm, the skulls from 18 neonates of different ages have been
selected. Gestational age at the date of birth and the age at the
date of exam are given in weeks in Fig. 7 for each subject.
The algorithm was implemented using MATLAB R2013a
(8.1.0.604) environment and its free available toolbox SPM12
and no external optimization package has been used. The average total computation time for segmentation of 18 images
with a spatial resolution of 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 is 267 ± 56 s on
a PC with 3.50 GHz Intel Core i-7 processor. From this computational time, 47 ± 20 s are used for level set initializations
and 223 ± 37 s are used for the coupled level set segmentation
method.
A. Qualitative Evaluation
A gold standard is normally required as a reference to evaluate
the results achieved by an automatic segmentation and reconstruction algorithm. Since there is not any established gold standard for neonatal fontanels–sutures, a reliable reference has to be
created. Generally, this is done through manual segmentations

Fig. 9. (a) Original CT image of Subject 2, (b) brain window of overlaid
manual segmentation by the rater 1 on CT image, (c) manual segmentation by
the rater 1 overlaid on the original CT, (d) automatic segmentation overlaid on
the original CT, and (e) 3-D surface visualization of head mask (gray surface),
cranial bones (blue) and reconstructed fontanels–sutures (green) of the CT
image in (a) by the proposed algorithm. The red and green fontanels–sutures are
related to manually drawn and automatically reconstructed fontanels–sutures,
respectively. And the cyan and blue tissues are associated to manually and
automatically segmented cranial bones, respectively.

performed by experts. However, this is a very demanding and
time-consuming task, especially for 3-D images. Using brain
window for visualizing increases the accuracy of the manual
segmentation. As shown in Fig. 8, by visualizing the CT images
using brain window the rater could define the brain border that
is extremely helpful for recognizing the position and shape of
fontanels–sutures. Without this windowing, manual segmentation of fontanels and sutures is a very difficult task and mostly
unreliable.
Fig. 9 presents a comparison between automated and manual
segmentations. Fig. 9(a) shows the original CT image of Subject 2. The manual segmentation of bones and fontanels–sutures

570

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

TABLE I
AVERAGE OF SIMILARITY AND DISSIMILARITY BETWEEN AUTOMATICALLY
AND MANUALLY SEGMENTED FONTANELS–SUTURES USING DSC AND MHD
IN 3-D BY TWO RATERS

Rater 1
Rater 2
Rater 1 versus rater 2

DSC

MHD

0.81 ± 0.05
0.79 ± 0.07
0.84 ± 0.04

0.22 ± 0.05 mm
0.22 ± 0.06 mm
0.15 ± 0.04 mm

are overlaid on brain window of CT image and the original CT
images in Fig. 9(b) and (c), respectively. Fig. 9(d) gives the
results from the automated segmentation. After rough visual
inspection, it seems that the proposed algorithm extracted
correctly the fontanels–sutures. For further visualization, 3-D
surface reconstruction of the head mask, cranial bones, and
fontanels–sutures of the CT image are shown in Fig. 9.
B. Quantitative Evaluation
1) Dice Similarity Coefficient: To quantitatively evaluate the
segmentation results, dice similarity coefficient (DSC) [32] has
been used. This metric measures the overlap between the two
images A and B, the manually and the automatically segmented
images, by:
DSC =

2 × |A ∩ B|
.
|A| + |B|

(10)

This overlap measure is normalized in a way that “0” indicates
complete dissimilarity and “1” indicates complete agreement.
The evaluation is performed only for the fontanels–sutures in
accordance with the objective of this study.
For manual segmentation, two raters were recruited. The average and standard deviation of the DSCs for the 18 subjects are
0.81 ± 0.05 and 0.79 ± 0.07 for rater 1 and rater 2, respectively.
It is noteworthy that our algorithm determines the position of
fontanels–sutures regardless of their thickness, which results
in narrow ring shaped structures of only one voxel thickness.
This type of objects is less appropriate than compact ones for
similarity evaluation by DSC.
Also, Dice coefficient is applied to compute the interrater
reliability. The amount of 0.84 ± 0.04 in Table I shows acceptable level of reliability. In our previous study [15], we achieved
0.73 ± 0.07 on ten images of the same database using DSC
measure by one recruited rater. In comparison with previously
reported method, the average of calculated DSC values by two
raters 0.8 ± 0.06 shows that the proposed method gives better
results for fontanel extraction without using a skull model.
2) Modified Hausdorff Distance: In addition to using DSC as
a similarity measure, the segmentation results were reevaluated
using the modified Hausdorff distance (MHD), which is a dissimilarity measure [33], [34]. Using this, dissimilarity measure
helped us to recheck the performance of the proposed algorithm in suture places. The original Hausdorff distance (HD)
is a metric between two point sets. Given two nonempty finite
sets of points A = (a1 , ..., an ) and B = (b1 , ..., bm ), and an
underlying distance d(a, b) which is defined as Euclidean dis-

Fig. 10. Illustration of two different kinds of outliers in segmentation. First
row shows a kind of outlier which apprears in manual segmentation as correct
sutures while automatic algorithm could not segment them (Subject 9). Second row represents another kind of outliers in which automatic segmentation
wrongly detected them as fontanels (Subject 7). Left column is automatically
segmented fontanels–sutures and right column is related to manually extracted
fontanels–sutures.

tance d(a, b) = ||a−b||, the HD is given by:
DH (A, B) = max(h(A, B), h(B, A))
h(A, B) = max(min d(a, b))
a∈A

b∈B

(11)

where h(A,B) is called the directed HD from set A to B. Since
the standard HD provides unreasonable values in the presence
of outliers, Dubuisson and Jain [33] have proposed and tested
different MHDs. They determined that the MHD based on the
mean hm ean of the distances is the best for matching two objects
and defined as follows:
DH m e a n (A, B) = max(hm ean (A, B), hm ean (B, A))
1
hm ean (A, B) =
d(a, B).
(12)
n
a∈A

Generally, outliers are wrongly detected voxels which do not
belong to the proper desired object and are appeared as noise in
the images. Outliers are not connected to the object and usually
are placed far from it. For the actual application, in some parts of
the head 1-voxel sutures have to be reconstructed. Sometimes,
the coupled level sets could not touch each other in these places
due to using smoothed edge information. Then, mistake in these
places causes a large distance. Also another kind of outliers
may happen in our application because of possible errors in
cranial bones detection using histogram thresholding [26]. If
some bone voxels were not recognized correctly, gaps were
created in cranial bones’ surfaces which do not correspond to
real fontanels–sutures. The algorithm detects them as fontanels–
sutures. These wrongly extracted fontanels–sutures are named
outliers. Fig. 10 illustrates these two outliers.
The third column of Table I presents the mean MHD-based
dissimilarity values for different raters. The obtained average

GHADIMI et al.: SKULL SEGMENTATION AND RECONSTRUCTION FROM NEWBORN CT IMAGES USING COUPLED LEVEL SETS

571

TABLE II
AVERAGE OF SIMILARITY AND DISSIMILARITY BETWEEN ALGORITHM PERFORMANCES BY CONSIDERING MUTUAL TERM FOR 18 IMAGES
Algorithm performance
With mutual term
Without mutual term
Without mutual term
p-value between row 1 and 2
p-value between row 1 and 3

Number of iterations

DSC by R1

MHD by R1

DSC by R2

MHD by R2

29.67
29.67
51.39

0.81 ± 0.05
0.54 ± 0.11
0.74 ± 0.06
5.4E–09
9.3E–04

0.22 ± 0.05
0.38 ± 0.08
0.400 ± 0.5
1.04E–08
0.13

0.79 ± 0.07
0.52 ± 0.1
0.71 ± 0.07
5.06E–08
1.07E–03

0.22 ± 0.06
0.37 ± 0.06
0.39 ± 0.49
2.68E–08
0.11

R1 and R2 correspond to rater 1 and rater 2, respectively.

software-SPSS (version 21.0). Assumptions for normality were
tested using the Shapiro–Wilk test. All variables were normally
distributed.
The Student’s t-test revealed no difference for the DSC
values (t-value = 1.65, df = 17, p-value = 0.116) and the
MHD ones (t-value = 0.61, df = 17, p-value = 0.549), which
means that the two raters performed similarly in manual
segmentations.
Moreover, to quantitatively investigate the effect of the mutual
term g(|∇I|)δ(φin ), as an attraction force between contours, on
the final segmentation, another experiment without this term
[based on (13)] has been performed


∇φin
∂φin
= δ(φin )div g(|∇I|)
+ ei g(|∇I|)δ(φin )
∂t
|∇φin |


∇φout
∂φout
= δ(φout )div g(|∇I|)
+ eo g(|∇I|)δ(φout ).
∂t
|∇φout |
(13)

Fig. 11. Qualitative evaluation of the segmented fontanels–sutures for each
subject by different raters.

values for mean MHD is 0.22 ± 0.05 mm for rater 1 and
0.22 ± 0.06 mm for rater 2 which show that the automatically reconstructed fontanel–sutures are very similar to the
manually segmented ones. Also to show the reliability of the
interrater, the mean MHD between two manually segmented
fontanels–sutures is calculated (see Table I, fourth row) and
equals 0.15 mm which represents reasonable difference between
two manually segmented fontanels–sutures.
Fig. 11 presents the obtained DSC and MHD values for each
subject by two raters.
3) Statistical Analysis: To evaluate the significance of the
difference between DSC and MHD values of two raters, twotailed paired Student’s t-test is applied. Statistical analysis
was performed with Statistical Package for Social Sciences

As explained in the last paragraph of Section II-B, by applying
the mutual term, the evolution will be fast and the results would
be smoother. Therefore, we conduct two experiments. First, the
algorithm based on (13) is executed with the same number of
iterations as the proposed algorithm (9). Second, the algorithm
runs till the best results are achieved. Table II presents the related
DSC, MHD and the obtained p-values by t-tests. It is noteworthy that the high value of MHDs for the second experiment in
comparison with the first one was due to the high dissimilarity
value for one of the subjects which increased the amount of
mean and standard deviation. Row 4 shows the p-values for algorithms performance with/without mutual term with the same
iteration numbers. All p-values suggest very strong presumption
against null hypothesis. That means there is significant difference in algorithms’ performance. Row 5 illustrates the p-values
for algorithms’ performance with/without mutual term. In this
experiment, the number of iterations is not limited and the best
results were achieved without any constraint. P-values for MHD
values by both raters are greater than 0.05 which demonstrate
no presumption against the null hypothesis. However, DSC
values reject the equivalence between the two methods (null
hypothesis).
Based on Table II and above discussion, we could conclude
that adding mutual term in level set evolution equation, speeds
up the evolution, improves solution contour smoothness, and
causes the coupled level sets perfectly reach each other in
fontanels–sutures positions. Although MHD values show no

572

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

significant difference between the results using the mutual term,
DSC values indicate the difference in detecting proper voxels
as fontanels–sutures.
IV. CONCLUSION
A new framework based on variational coupled level sets has
been developed for the extraction of new born skull including
fontanels and sutures from CT images. Beside segmentation,
the method is designed to have surface reconstruction properties. This approach applies a pair of interior/exterior surfaces
as geodesic active regions propagating towards and interacting with each other. The moving surfaces are forced to stop
alongside of the outer (convex) and inner (concave) surface of
cranial bones using edge information. In locations corresponding to fontanels–sutures, these moving surfaces touch each other
without crossing over. The proposed method utilizes hard tissue
contrast in CT image, prior information of head shape integrated in level set initialization, and a predefined constraint to
impose surface reconstruction properties. The generality of the
proposed approach enables it to adapt itself to the segmentation and surface reconstruction of other structures in different
images.
To assess the performance of the proposed method, 18 subjects with different fontanel–suture shapes and sizes were chosen. The segmentation and reconstruction results for fontanels–
sutures were evaluated quantitatively using the Dice similarity
coefficient and a modified Hausdorff distance. To overcome the
lack of established gold standards for fontanels and sutures, two
expert radiologists performed manual segmentations. DSC measure was applied and showed the acceptable level of interrater
agreement. We also suggest providing each rater’s reliability
using algorithms like STAPLE [35]. However, these algorithms
need more than two manual segmentations in order to provide
a reliable estimation of the raters’ sensitivity and specificity.
Regarding the required effort and time, it could be the subject
of a separate study. The overlap determined for manual and automatic segmentation using the DSC, and the calculated mean
distance between manual and automated segmentation for all
subjects by MHD measure provide satisfactory results. Considering difficulties in manual segmentation such as being tedious
and very time consuming, lacks of reproducibility and segmenting in 2-D (slice by slice) which causes some unwanted error in
comparison with 3-D segmenting, the proposed fully automatic
method can be used instead of manual segmentation in order to
construct realistic 3-D skull model from CT images. They can
further be coregistered with MRI head model to provide an accurate full head model including the fontanels–sutures in order
to assign specific electrical and optical properties in the different
tissues taking into account the specificity of the neonatal skull.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank P. Tahafchi for her precious
help in image processing. They would also like to thank Dr. K.
Kazemi for his valuable comments.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Lew, D. D. Sliva, M. Choe, P. E. Grant, Y. Okada, C. H. Wolters, and
M. S. Hämäläinen, “Effects of sutures and fontanels on MEG and EEG
source analysis in a realistic infant head model,” NeuroImage, vol. 76,
no. 1, pp. 282–293, Aug. 2013.
[2] N. Roche-Labarbe, A. Aarabi, G. Kongolo, C. Gondry-Jouet, M.
Dümpelmann, R. Grebe, and F. Wallois, “High-resolution electroencephalography and source localization in neonates,” Hum. Brain Mapp.,
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 167–176, Feb. 2008.
[3] J. Kiesler and R. Ricer, “The abnormal fontanel,” Am. Family Phys.,
vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 2547–2552, Jun. 2003.
[4] T. W. Sadler and J. Langman, Langman’s Medical Embryology. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
[5] J. Burguet, N. Gadi, and I. Bloch, “Realistic models of children heads
from 3D MRI segmentation and tetrahedral mesh construction,” in Proc.
2nd Int Symp 3D Data Process., 2004, pp. 631–638.
[6] S. Ghadimi, H. Abrishami Moghaddam, K. Kazemi, R. Grebe, C.
Goundry-Jouet, and F. Wallois, “Segmentation of scalp and skull in
neonatal MR images using probabilistic atlas and level set method,” in
Proc. Conf IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2008,
pp. 3060–3063.
[7] I. Despotovic, W. Deburchgraeve, H. Hallez, E. Vansteenkiste, and W.
Philips, “Development of a realistic head model for EEG event-detection
and source localization in newborn infants,” in Proc. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2009, pp. 2296–2299.
[8] M. Daliri, H. Abrishami Moghaddam, S. Ghadimi, M. Momeni, F.
Harirchi, and M. Giti, “Skull segmentation in 3D neonatal MRI using
hybrid hopfield neural network,” in Proc. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010, pp. 4060–4063.
[9] D. Mahapatra, “Skull stripping of neonatal brain MRI: Using prior shape
information with graph cuts,” J. Digit Imag., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 802–814,
Dec. 2012.
[10] C. H. Chen and J. Wu, “Head MRI segmentation on tissue optical properties,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Inf., Yantai, China, 2010,
pp. 286–289.
[11] R. J. A. Lapeer and R. W. Prager, “3D shape recovery of a newborn
skull using thin-plate splines,” Comput. Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 193–204, May 2000.
[12] K. Kazemi, S. Ghadimi, A. Lyaghat, A. Tarighati, N. Golshaeyan, H. Abrishami Moghaddam, R. Grebe, C. Gondary-Jouet, and F. Wallois, “Automatic fontanel extraction from newborn’s CT images using variational
level set,” in Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns (LNCS 5702),
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 639–646.
[13] H. K. Zhao, S. Osher, B. Merriman, and M. Kang, “Implicit and nonparametric shape reconstruction from unorganized points using variational level set method,” Comput. Vis. Image Underst., vol. 80, no. 3,
pp. 295–314, Dec. 2000.
[14] T. Chan and L. Vese, “Active contours without edges,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 266–277, Feb. 2001.
[15] N. Jafarian, K. Kazemi, H. Abrishami Moghaddam, R. Grebe, M. Fournier,
M. S. Helfroush, C. Gondry-Jouet, and F. Wallois, “Automatic segmentation of newborns’ skull and fontanel from CT data using modelbased variational level set,” Signal Image Video Process., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 377–387, 2014.
[16] R. Goldenberg, R. Kimmel, E. Rivlin, and M. Rudzsky, “Cortex segmentation: A fast variational geometric approach,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 1544–1551, Dec. 2002.
[17] L. Wang, F. Shi, W. Lin, J. H. Gilmore, and D. Shen, “Automatic segmentation of neonatal images using convex optimization and coupled level
sets,” NeuroImage, vol. 58, pp. 805–817, Oct. 2011.
[18] C. Duan, Z. Liang, S. Bao, H. Zhu, S. Wang, G. Zhang, J. J. Chen, and H.
Lu, “A coupled level set framework for bladder wall segmentation with
application to MR cystography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 903–915, Mar. 2010.
[19] H. Han, L. Li, C. Duan, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, and Z. Liang, “A unified EM
approach to bladder wall segmentation with coupled level-set constraints,”
Med. Image Anal., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1192–1205, Dec. 2013.
[20] H. Rifai, I. Bloch, S. Hutchinson, J. Wiart, and L. Garnero, “Segmentation
of the skull in MRI volumes using deformable model and taking the partial
volume effect into account,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 219–233,
Sep. 2000.
[21] M. Kuklisova-Murgasova, P. Aljabar, L. Srinivasan, S. J. Counsell, V.
Doria, A. Serag, I. S. Gousias, J. P. Boardman, M. A. Rutherford, A. D.
Edwards, J. V. Hajnal, and D. Rueckert, “A dynamic 4D probabilistic

GHADIMI et al.: SKULL SEGMENTATION AND RECONSTRUCTION FROM NEWBORN CT IMAGES USING COUPLED LEVEL SETS

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

atlas of the developing brain,” NeuroImage, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 2750–2763,
Feb. 2011.
M. Prastawa, J. H. Gilmore, W. Lin, and G. Gerig, “Automatic segmentation of MR images of the developing newborn brain,” Med. Image Anal.,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 457–466, Oct. 2005.
K. Sartor, G. Albrecht, K. R. Atzor, S. Bockenheimer, H. Brueckmann,
and M. Deinzer, Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, 1st ed.
New York, NY, USA: Thieme, Jun. 2002.
H. K. Zhao, S. Osher, and R. Fedkiw, “Fast surface reconstruction using
the level set method,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Workshop Variational Level Set
Methods, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2001, pp. 194–201.
H. K. Zhao and S. Osher, “Visualization, analysis and shape reconstruction
of unorganized data sets,” in Geometric Level Set Methods in Imaging,
Vision and Graphics, S. Osher and N. Paragios, Eds., New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2003, pp. 361–380.
N. Otsu, “A threshold selection method from gray level histograms,” IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., vol. SMC-9, no. 1, pp. 62–66, Jan. 1979.
V. Caselles, R. Kimmel, and G. Sapiro, “Geodesic active contours,” Int. J.
Comput. Vis., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 61–79, Mar. 1997.
C. Li, C. Xu, C. Gui, and M. D. Fox, “Distance regularized level set
evolution and its application to image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 3243–3254, Dec. 2010.
S. Osher and J. A. Sethian, “Fronts propagating with curvature-dependent
speed: Algorithms based on Hamilton–Jacobi formulation,” J. Comput.
Phys., vol. 79, pp. 12–49, Nov. 1988.

573

[30] C. Gout, C. Le Guyader, and L. Vese, “Segmentation under geometrical
conditions using geodesic active contours and interpolation using level set
methods,” Numer. Algor., vol. 39, pp. 155–173, Jul. 2005.
[31] H. K. Zhao, T. F. Chan, B. Merriman, and S. Osher, “A variational level set
approach to multiphase motion,” J. Comput. Phys., vol. 127, pp. 179–195,
Aug. 1996.
[32] L. R. Dice, “Measures of the amount of ecologic association between
species,” Ecology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 297–302, Jul. 1945.
[33] M. P. Dubuisson and A. K. Jain, “A modified Hausdorff distance for object
matching,” in Proc. 12th IAPR Int. Pattern Recognit., Jerusalem, Israel,
1994, pp. 566–568.
[34] D. P. Huttenlocher, G. A. Klanderman, and W. J. Rucklidge, “Comparing
images using the Hausdorff distance,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 850–863, Sep. 1993.
[35] S. K. Warfield, K. H. Zou, and W. M. Wells, “Simultaneous truth and
performance level estimation (STAPLE): An algorithm for the validation of image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 23, no. 7,
pp. 903–921, Jul. 2004.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

