IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

1683

Molecular Communication Modeling of
Antibody-Mediated Drug Delivery Systems
Youssef Chahibi∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Ian F. Akyildiz, Fellow, IEEE,
Sasitharan Balasubramaniam, Senior Member, IEEE, and Yevgeni Koucheryavy, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Antibody-mediated Drug Delivery Systems (ADDS)
are emerging as one of the most encouraging therapeutic solutions
for treating several diseases such as human cancers. ADDS use
small molecules (antibodies) that propagate in the body and bind
selectively to their corresponding receptors (antigens) expressed
at the surface of the diseased cells. In this paper, the Molecular
Communication (MC) paradigm, where information is conveyed
through the concentration of molecules, is advocated for the engineering of ADDS and modeling their complex behavior, to provide
a realistic model without the over-complication of system biology models, and the limitations of experimental approaches. The
peculiarities of antibodies, including their anisotropic transport
and complex electrochemical structure, are taken into account to
develop an analytical model of the ADDS transport and antigenbinding kinetics. The end-to-end response of ADDS, from the drug
injection to the drug absorption, is mathematically derived based
on the geometry of the antibody molecule, the electrochemical
structure of the antibody-antigen complex, and the physiology of
the patient. The accuracy of the MC model is validated by finiteelement (COMSOL) simulations. The implications of the complex
interplay between the transport and kinetics parameters on the
performance of ADDS are effectively captured by the proposed
MC model. The MC model of ADDS will enable the discovery
and optimization of drugs in a versatile, cost-efficient, and reliable
manner.
Index Terms—Molecular communication, pharmacokinetics,
protein-protein interactions, targeted drug delivery systems.

I. INTRODUCTION
NTIBODY-MEDIATED Drug Delivery Systems (ADDS)
are at the forefront of current therapeutic research [29].
The system uses artificial molecules that are constructed from biological materials to build and engineer drug delivery systems.
They are inspired by the naturally occurring immune mechanisms that enable the human body to diagnose itself and destroy
the exact source of the disease, in an adaptive and constructive

A

Manuscript received September 21, 2014; revised December 26, 2014; accepted January 26, 2015. Date of publication February 5, 2015; date of current
version June 16, 2015. This material is based on work supported by the FiDiPro
program of Academy of Finland “Nanocommunication Networks”, 2012-2016.
∗ Y. Chahibi is with the Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory, School
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA (e-mail: youssef,ian@ece.gatech.edu).
I. F. Akyildiz is with the Nano Communication Centre (NC2), Department of
Electronics and Communication Engineering, Tampere University of Technology and also with the Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory, School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology.
S. Balasubramaniam and Y. Koucheryavy are with the Nano Communication
Centre (NC2), Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
Tampere University of Technology.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2400631

Fig. 1.

Elements of ADDS.

fashion. The versatility in engineering ADDS and their attested
clinical success open up the possibility to develop sophisticated
therapeutic strategies to effectively target diseases [35]. Fig. 1
illustrates the elements of the ADDS. The drug injection occurs in the blood vessels, and the drug delivery occurs in the
extracellular matrix. The drug injection introduces antibodies
which are transported by the blood flow and diffused through
the tissues. The blood velocity field transports the antibodies
and some of them diffuse through the vascular walls into the
tissues. Upon arriving at the diseased cell, the antibodies bind
with the antigens located on the surface of the diseased cell
at the antigen-antibody binding site promote the selective targeting of the diseased cells without affecting the healthy cells.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1684

The interplay of these different transport and kinetic processes
contributes to the performance of the ADDS in maximizing the
delivery of the antibodies to the diseased cells.
In this paper, Molecular Communication (MC) paradigm [1],
where the information is conveyed through molecules, is proposed to model the ADDS while considering the unique properties of antibodies and the possibilities that they offer. This new
model will address the short comings of Physiologically-based
Pharmacokinetics (PB/PK) models that have been proposed for
ADDS propagation in the literature. PB/PK methods suffer from
many limitations that make them inapplicable to helping the current state-of-the-art in nanomedicine [14],[12]. The issue with
the PB/PK model is that the diseases that are meant to be targeted with ADDS, such as tumors, are highly localized and
grow quickly, and this model does not provide enough spatial
and temporal accuracy to assess the efficiency of the ADDS.
Also, by modeling complex molecules for the first time in the
area of MC, this work addresses the limitations in the existing
MC modeling works [23], [24].
By using the MC-ADDS paradigm, a bottom-up approach of
modeling the propagation of antibodies is proposed where the
appropriate structure of the antibody is determined, and from
that, propagation around the body is predicted. The MC-ADDS
model solves this problem by providing mechanistic models,
based on the laws of biophysics instead of empirical observations, and minimizing the need for parameters estimation.
This will provide higher spatial and temporal resolution tracking of the drug propagation in the micro and millisecond scale,
while being scalable to lower and higher resolutions with small
changes to the system model. In MC-ADDS, the human body
is modeled as a complex network of blood vessels and tissues
where the transmitted signal is modulated by the antibody concentration at the injection location, which is the location of the
body where the injection is administered, and the propagation in
the body is represented with simple analytical models, directly
derived from the physiology of the patient and the chemical and
electrical structure of the antibody molecule. Section VII will
show that the MC-ADDS modeling allows the calculation of
the end-to-end impulse response of the system, and evaluating
which kinetic processes are impeding the drug delivery.
In particular, the main contributions of this work are as
follows:
1) Modeling an end-to-end abstraction of ADDS as an MC
channel: The abstracted MC channels divide the ADDS
into three different channels corresponding to different
parts of the body. These three different channels include the vascular, extracellular, and antigen binding channels. Numerical evaluations are conducted for each channel to determine the influence on the delivery of the
antibodies.
2) Determining an optimized shape for the antibody molecular structure: The movement of the antibodies with the
blood flows is modeled based on their 3-D structure. The
optimized geometrical structure for the antibodies is determined based on the diffusion behavior, as well as their successful binding process to the diseased cells. The model
considers the chemical components within the blood that

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

affect the antibody, as well as the electrochemical properties of the antibody-antigen complex.
3) Validation of the end-to-end ADDS MC channel: Validations of the ADDS are conducted using both analytical
MC modeling and comparison to the COMSOL,1 finiteelement simulations. The comparison showed strong
agreement between the MC models and the COMSOL
simulations.
The MC-ADDS modeling will provide a clearer understanding of the mode of operation of antibodies, and enable the development of innovative methods to guide the engineering of
verifiable and safe antibody mediated therapies. This includes
the design and engineering of the drug structure [9], [26], mode
of administration, and dosage optimization [33]. This opens
up the possibility to optimize the properties of the ADDS to
achieve a desired therapeutic effect, by determining the drug
injection rate in terms of drug dosage concentration, the timing
of the dosage, and the location of injection, thus maximizing
the safety and success of ADDS and minimizing the costs [18].
The second motivation behind the use of MC-ADDS modeling, is to understand the physicochemical interactions between
ADDS and the body, which are more complex than in PDDS.
For example, ADDS undergo electrostatic forces within the Extracellular Matrix (ECM) due to negatively charged proteins
[3]. These electric forces significantly affect the intercellular
transport, antigen binding, and the absorption of the ADDS by
the cells.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we
explain the abstraction of the ADDS through the MC paradigm,
the objectives, and principles of this approach. Section III
presents the MC-ADDS Vascular Channel Model, which describes the MC analytical model of ADDS transport through the
blood vessels, taking into account the roles of tissue absorption,
and the plasma binding. Section IV introduces the MC-ADDS
Extracellular Channel Model, which is the MC analytical model
of ADDS transport through the extracellular matrix (ECM), taking into account the role of ECM protein binding. Section V
presents the MC-ADDS Antigen Binding Channel Model which
is developed through the MC paradigm, by incorporating the
electrochemical structure of the antibody molecule. Section VI
defines the realistic COMSOLMultiphysics model that was simulated to validate the MC-ADDS model. Section VII presents
numerical results that were evaluated using the MC-ADDS
model and the COMSOL Multiphysics simulation model. Section VIII concludes the paper with the main outcomes of the
MC-ADDS model and its prospective use for the design and
engineering of optimal ADDS.
II. MC ABSTRACTION OF ADDS
In this section, we present the MC-ADDS framework which
abstracts the kinetics processes that the antibody undergoes in
different parts of the body as MC channels. In the context of
communication theory, a channel is a communication medium
characterized by an input-output relationship. The combination
1 COMSOL and COMSOL Multiphysics are registered trademarks of COMSOL AB.

CHAHIBI et al.: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION MODELING OF ANTIBODY-MEDIATED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

Fig. 2.

1685

MC abstraction of the ADDS.

of several channels together enables establishing a network
between several transmitters and receivers. The concept of
channels is useful for modeling, analyzing the performance,
and optimizing a system regardless of the initial conditions and
input signals. As illustrated in Fig. 2, cascading the MC-ADDS
channels for each of these processes provides the end-to-end
MC-ADDS channel from the location where the antibodies are
injected to the location where they are absorbed by the cells. The
drug injection is abstracted as a MC-ADDS transmitter and the
drug absorption process is abstracted as a MC-ADDS receiver.
The antibody concentrations at different phases of their propagation in the body are considered as MC signals, which are the
inputs and outputs of the following MC-ADDS channels:
1) The MC-ADDS Vascular Channel models the propagation
of the antibodies by advection-diffusion through the force
of the blood flow, the Brownian motion of the antibodies
in the blood, and the chemical binding with the molecules
present in the blood. The MC-ADDS vascular channel is
characterized by a function hV (t). The input signal to the
MC-ADDS Vascular Channel is the ADDS Injection Concentration x(t), defined as the concentration of antibodies
in the injection location, which is represented as follows:
x(t) = Ab(t)|Injection lo cation .

(1)

Ab(t) denotes the antibody concentration at the location of
the injection at the time t. The output from the MC-ADDS
Vascular Channel is the Vascular ADDS Concentration
xV (t), which is defined as the concentration of antibodies
in the blood as a function of time t, as follows:
xV (t) = Ab(t)|Blo o d = hV (t) ∗ x(t)

(2)

where ∗ denotes the application of the impulse response
hV (t) to the signal x(t).
2) The MC-ADDS Extracellular Channel models the transport of the antibodies through the ECM. This channel
is located between the vascular tissues and the surface of
the target cells, and is driven by the interstitial pressure
between the blood vessel walls and the target cells, the
lymphatic flow, and the binding with the molecules of the
ECM. The MC-ADDS extracellular channel is characterized by a function hE (t). The output signal of the MCADDS extracellular channel is the ADDS Extracellular
Concentration xE (t), which is the concentration of antibodies in the ECM as a function of the time t as
follows:
xE (t) = Ab(t)|ECM = hE (t) ∗ xV (t) .

(3)

3) The MC-ADDS Antigen Binding Channel models the
antigen-antibody binding occurring at the surface of the
target cell. The antigen-antibody binding is influenced by
the chemical affinity between the antigens expressed by
the cell and the antibody, as well as the physical forces
exerted by the flow in the ECM. The MC-ADDS Antigen
Binding Channel is characterized by a function pB , which
provides the output of the MC-ADDS Antigen Binding
Channel as the ADDS-Antigen Concentration y(t), which
is the concentration of antibodies bound to the antigens
as a function of the time t, given the ADDS extracellular
concentration xE (t) as follows:
y(t) = AbAg(t)|Cell surface = pB xE (t) .

(4)

1686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

the axis of the blood vessels. It is formally defined as follows:
< z 2 (t) >= 2DZ t

(5)

where the variable z is the translational coordinate of the
antibody at the time t along the axis of the blood vessels.
The rotational diffusion coefficient DΘ is the parameter that
characterizes the diffusion of antibodies around their center. It
is formally defined as follows:
< θ2 (t) >= 2DΘ t

(6)

where the variable θ is the angle of rotation of the antibody
around its center.
A. MC-ADDS Vascular Channel Impulse Response

Fig. 3.

MC Abstraction of the ADDS

AbAg(t) denotes the concentration of drug antibodies that
are bound to antigens at the location of the injection at the
time t. pB is not time-varying because there is a scalar
relationship between the antibodies around the diseased
cells and the antibodies that bind to the antigens, in a
steady state. y(t) is determined from the number of antibodies that arrive around the surface of the diseased
cells and the thermochemical properties of the antibodyantigen binding.
This study will allow the optimization of MC-ADDS systems
by appropriately designing the antibody structure, shape, and
chemical characteristics to maximize its ability to deliver its
therapeutic effect where it is needed in a timely and efficient
way.
III. MC-ADDS VASCULAR CHANNEL MODEL
In this section, we derive an analytical model of ADDS vascular transport using the MC paradigm. As illustrated in Fig. 3,
the blood velocity field drives the transport of antibodies in the
vascular region, and also the antibodies diffuse randomly by
Brownian motion. The antibody molecule is characterized by
two diffusion parameters, namely: the translational diffusion
coefficient DZ , and the radial diffusion coefficient DR . DZ is
the parameter that characterizes the diffusion of antibodies along

In classical MC, only one parameter, namely the diffusion
coefficient D, is involved in the transport of the molecules according to Ficks law by Brownian motion, but in the case of
ADDS, we will consider two parameters, namely the translational diffusion coefficient DZ , which depends on the shape of
the molecule, and the radial diffusion coefficient DR , which depends also on the structure of the diffusion medium. Based on
the general theory of diffusion developed by Brenner [4], the
irregular shape of molecules has an important effect on their
transport. In fact, the irregularity causes coupling between the
rotational and the translational diffusion parameters of complex molecules [5]. In addition, to the translational-rotational
anisotropy due to molecule shape, there is a translational-radial
anisotropy owed to the nonhomogeneity of cells matrices where
one direction is more conducive to diffusion than the perpendicular direction. Examples of translational-radial anisotropy
include the transport of molecules in blood vessels, where the
nonuniform distribution of red blood cells affects the diffusion
in the radial direction [10], and the anisotropy in the ECM,
where the cells are organized in a preferential direction, due to
the direction of mechanical forces, especially the ones involving
connective tissues [28].
An MC-ADDS transport model is developed, enabling the
prediction of the propagation of antibodies in the vascular channel. This model is deterministic, but it should be noted that there
are many fluctuations in drug delivery systems in general owing to blood turbulence, Brownian motion, and ligand-binding
noise. These noise effects are explained in a previous work [6],
and can be applied to ADDS with little modifications. The impulse response hV (t, τ ) is obtained by cascading the impulse
responses of each channel between the drug injection site and
the drug delivery site, which can be expressed as follows:
hV (t, τ ) = hV 1 (t, τ ) ⊗ . . . hV i (t, τ ) . . . ⊗ hV L (t, τ )

(7)

where ⊗ denotes the operator for cascading the periodically
time-varying impulse responses of two systems as described in
[7], hV i (t, τ ) is the impulse response of the ith MC vascular
channel, and L is the number of blood vessels located between
the drug injection site and the drug delivery site.
The transport process in the ECM is dominated by diffusion, although there is an advective transport due to the plasma
exudating drug particles from blood vessels to the lymphatic

CHAHIBI et al.: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION MODELING OF ANTIBODY-MEDIATED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

1687

system in a directed way. However, the flow rate is so slow
that the dispersion due to advection is negligible. This coincides
with clinical observation of antibody transport [19]. The impulse
response hV i (t, τ ) is expressed for each MC vascular channel
based on the generalized anisotropic Taylor dispersion equation
with absorption [2], with the assumption of diffusion-dominated
transport around the blood vessels, as follows:


1
(l − mi (t, τ ))2
exp −
hV i (t, τ ) = 
(8)
2σi2 (t, τ )
2πσi2 (t, τ )
where:
1) The mean antibody velocity varies with time and is expressed as follows:
 t
mi (t, τ ) =
vi (r, t)dt ,
(9)
τ

2) The variance of the antibody concentration increases with
time and is expressed as follows:
 t
σi2 (t, τ ) = 2
Di (t ) dt ,
(10)
τ

where t and t are time parameters, The effective diffusion coefficient of the antibodies Di (t) is expressed as follows [2]:


KV
ri2
Di (t) = DZ Pf + DE Pw + Pf3 vi2 (t)
+
(11)
KE
48DR
where DZ is the translational diffusion coefficient of the ADDS
in the blood expressed in (14), DE is the diffusion coefficient
in the ECM, which is defined in Section IV, DR is the radial
diffusion coefficient due to anisotropy [10], ri is the radius of the
vessel i, KV is the nonspecific binding equilibrium constant in
the vascular channel, KE is the nonspecific binding equilibrium
1
is a kinetic ratio, and the
constant in the ECM, Pf = 1+K
V
effective blood velocity vi (t) is expressed as follows:
vi (t) = Pf ui (t).

(12)

The nonspecific binding equilibrium constant in the vascular
channel can be calculated from the nonspecific binding energy
ΔGV . This is calculated between the antibody and the proteins
contained in the blood in a similar way to the calculation of
the specific binding energy ΔG between the antibody and the
antigens in (24) (see Section V), and is represented as follows:

	
ΔGV
KV = exp −
(13)
RT
where ΔGV is the nonspecific binding free energy between the
antibody and the proteins in the vascular channel, and R is the
ideal gas constant. Finally, from (7) and (8), we obtain the MC
end-to-end impulse response of the ADDS.
B. MC-ADDS Vascular Channel Diffusion Coefficients
Here, we introduce the model of the structure of the antibody
which provides the reference geometrical and electrochemical
properties of the ADDS. These properties will be used to derive
the transport diffusion coefficients. The structural information
is obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [16], which

Fig. 4.
Bank.

3-D structure of the antibody-antigen complex from the Protein Data

hosts the tridimensional structural data of a large number of
biological molecules, including antibodies and their antigens.
A visualization of such a structure is presented in Fig. 4 which
represents the atomic structure of the antibodies as an assortment
of balls occupying the volume of the atoms and their bonds with
other atoms. The PDB also includes the constituting chemical
elements of the antibodies and their electric charges. Among all
the information provided by the PDB, in this paper we focus
on the geometry of a molecule and its charges. Each element of
the antibody is denoted as n, and the total number of elements
constituting the antibody as N . An element n possesses the
following information:
1) Cartesian coordinates, denoted by the vector (xn, yn, zn )
with a given Cartesian center O.
2) Radius, denoted by the scalar value ρn, which measures
half the distance between one atom and its closest element.
3) Charge, denoted by the value qn, which is the electric
charge born by the element n.
These three types of information are sufficient to describe the
kinetic parameters of the antibody. In the following, we explain how these parameters are derived directly from the PDB
information.
In the literature [8], [15], [34] all MC and pharmacokinetic models contain information on the basic shapes for the
molecules such as spheres, and rarely ellipsoids and rods, to
capture the antibody propagation. Therefore, there is a need for
a model that takes into account the antibody shape and structure to predict the diffusion parameters of this small molecule
without any empirical choices. The antibodies come in different
arbitrary shapes and structures as can be seen in X-Ray structure
analysis of this type of molecules [13]. As illustrated in Fig. 5,
the antibody-antigen is composed of several beads. In general,
the antibodies are roughly Y-shaped molecules and consist of
different heterogeneous regions (light chain and heavy chain).
The geometry of the antibody has an important effect on its
motion in the blood and tissues. The irregular shape can create
arbitrary motions and fluctuations that are different from the
case of spherical nanoparticles that were considered in PDDS.

1688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

the skew matrix of the bead m and is expressed as follows:
⎞
⎛
ym
0
−zm
⎟
⎜
0
−xm ⎠
(17)
Um = ⎝ zm
−ym

xm

0

where (xm, ym, zm ) are the Cartesian coordinates of the bead
with index m from an arbitrary origin O. Similarly, Un is the
skew matrix of the bead n expressed as follows:
⎛
⎞
yn
0
−zn
⎜
⎟
0
−xn ⎠
Un = ⎝ zn
(18)
−yn

xn

0

where (xn, yn, zn ) are the Cartesian coordinates of the bead with
index n from the origin O.
Fig. 5.

Bead model of an antibody.

IV. MC-ADDS EXTRACELLULAR CHANNEL MODEL
The translational diffusion coefficient DZ and the rotational
diffusion coefficient DΘ are calculated as follows [31]:


B T
tr(AZ )
DZ = k3η
(14)
B T
tr(AΘ )
DΘ = k3η
where kB is Boltzmann coefficient, T is the temperature of
the blood, η is the fluid viscosity, tr (·) is the trace function
of the matrices AZ and AΘ , which represent the translational
mobility tensor matrix and the rotational mobility tensor matrix
[5]. These matrices AZ and AΘ are expressed as follows [11]:
⎧
−1
N 
N 

δm , n I
⎪
⎪
AZ =
+
(1
−
δ
)
T
m,n
m,n
⎪
6π η R m , n
⎪
⎪
m =1 n =1
⎪
⎨

−1
N
N 

δ
I
AΘ = −
Um 6π ηmR, nm , n + (1 − δm,n ) Tm,n
Un
⎪
⎪
⎪
m =1 n =1
⎪


⎪
⎪
⎩
N
3
(15)
+ 8πη
n =1 ρn I
where m and n are the indices of two beads m and n in the
molecular compound, as illustrated in Fig. 5, N is the total
number of beads in the molecular compound, η is the fluid viscosity, Rm,n is the center-to-center distance between two beads
m and n, ρn is the radius of the bead n, δm,n is the Kronecker
delta function, Tm,n is the hydrodynamic tensor of the antibody calculated as follows from the geometric parameters of
the antibody molecule:


Rm,n R†m,n
1
Tm,n =
I+
2
8πηRm,n
Rm,n


ρ2m + ρ2n I Rm,n R†m,n
+
−
(16)
2
2
Rm,n
3
Rm,n
where Rm,n is the distance vector between the beads m and n,
{·}† is the transpose function of the vector Rm,n , Rm,n is the
center-to-center distance between two beads m and n, ρn is the
radius of the bead n, ρm is the radius of the bead m, and Um is

In this section, we present how the transport of ADDS in the
ECM is modeled. Due the differences between tissues in the
body in terms of geometry, arrangement, tortuosity, and density,
the transport of ADDS is going to vary greatly in different parts
of the body. The parameter DE denotes the diffusion coefficient
in a tissue surrounding a blood vessel. The structure of the ECM
is similar to foam. The antibodies will perform random motions
and collide with the membranes of the cells, thus affecting the
distribution of their concentration. Using the theory of transport
in porous media [21][27], it is possible to derive an expression
for DE based on the characteristics of the tissue. In practice,
it has been observed that the transport in the ECM is largely
dominated by the diffusion, therefore, we neglect the transport
due to interstitial pressure differences.
The MC-ADDS model of extracellular transport becomes a
diffusion MC channel [23] with a diffusion coefficient DE and
a nonspecific binding equilibrium constant KE in the ECM, as
follows:

	
−z 2
1
exp
hE (t) = √
(19)
(4DE + KE ) t
2πDE t
where z is the coordinate towards the target cell, KE is the
nonspecific binding equilibrium constant in the ECM, and DE
is the diffusion coefficient in the ECM. The nonspecific binding
equilibrium constant is a value that characterizes the rate of
the first-order linear reaction between two reactants such as the
antibody and other molecules
φ
DZ .
(20)
κ
As shown in Fig. 6, the diffusion coefficient DE is a function of
following parameters which can be estimated from the shape of
the ECM:
1) The porosity φ measures the propensity of the tissue components to allow the antibodies to pass.
2) The tortuosity κ is the arc length of the path over the
geometric distance between the input and the output locations of the channel. Typical values for the tortuosity
are measured experimentally from cellular imaging. The
DE =

CHAHIBI et al.: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION MODELING OF ANTIBODY-MEDIATED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

1689

concentration xE (t) as follows:
y(t) = pB xE (t) .

(22)

The antigen binding probability pB is found to be expressed as
[25]:

	
ΔG
Cag
exp −
pB =
(23)
RT
RT
where Cag is the concentration of antigens on the surface of
the diseased cells, and T is the temperature. In the following,
we derive the expression for the antigen-antibody binding free
energy ΔG, the binding probability, and the kinetic rates of the
antibodies in reaction with other proteins including extracellular
matrix proteins and antigens. The antigen-antibody binding free
energy ΔG is calculated as follows [20]:
Fig. 6.

ΔG = G+ − G−

Parameters of the MC-ADDS extrallelular transport model.

(24)

where G− is the unbound free energy defined as:
work in [32] cites values between κ = 1.55 and κ = 1.65
in the human adult brain. The work in [36] cites values
between κ = 2 and κ = 3, and the work in [36], mentions
that the tortuosity can be as high as κ = 9 in crowded
protein-loaded environments.
3) The free fluid coefficient DZ is the translational diffusion
coefficient of the antibodies in the fluid, which is calculated using the result in (14).
It is noted that extracellular transport may also be subject to
protein binding [22], in which case, the model of the following
section could supplement the binding of antibodies with gels
and ECM proteins. In fact, the nonspecific binding equilibrium
constant in the ECM KE can be calculated from the nonspecific
binding energy ΔGE , which is calculated between the antibody
and the proteins of the ECM (such as collagens) in a similar way
to the computation of the specific binding energy ΔG between
the antibody and the antigens in (24) (see Section V), as is
represented in the following:

	
ΔGE
KE = exp −
RT

(21)

where ΔGE is the nonspecific binding free energy between
the antibody and the ECM proteins. For simplicity, we assume
that the environment around the blood vessel is homogeneous,
but, technically, the different heterogeneous layers of cell types
around the blood vessels could be accounted for by cascading
the impulse response for each layer from the plasma to the target
diseased cells, based on their own tortuosity and porosity.
V. ADDS ANTIGEN BINDING CHANNEL MODEL
In this section, we derive the characteristic function pB of
the MC-ADDS Antigen Binding Channel, as a function of the
geometry and charge of the antibody, and the number of antigens
in the surface of the diseased cells. This function allows to obtain
the distribution of the ADDS antigen-antibody density at the
surface of the cell y(t) as a function of the ADDS extracellular

G− =

N


(Sm,n + Vm,n + Em,n )

m ,n =1
n = m

+

M
+N

(Sm,n + Vm,n + Em,n )

(25)

m ,n =N +1
n = m

where M is the total number of beads in the antigen, N is the
total number of beads in the antibody, m and n are the indices
of the beads, Sm,n is the pair solvent free energy for two beads
m and n, Vm,n is the pair van der Waals energy for two beads
m and n, Em,n is the pair electrostatic potential for the two
beads m and n. The equation in (25) consists of the addition
of the total energies for the antibody and the antigen, each
taken individually, where the first sum is the free energy for the
individual antibody, and the second sum is the free energy for
the individual antigen. G+ is the bound free energy defined as:
G+ =

M
+N

(Sm,n + Vm,n + Em,n )

(26)

m ,n =1
n = m

where Sm,n is the pair solvent free energy for two beads m
and n, Vm,n is the pair van der Waals energy for two beads
m and n, Em,n is the pair electrostatic potential for two beads
m and n. The equation in (26) consists of the free energy of the
antigen-antibody compound joined together. The PDB database
provides the antigen-antibody bead coordinates in their joined
state, therefore the bound free energy is directly computable
from the database.
The pair energies used in the expressions of the unbound and
bound free energies, in (25) and (26), respectively are expressed
as follows:
1) The pair solvent energy Sm,n for the beads m and n is
expressed as follows [30]:


1
1
1 qm qn
Sm,n =
−
,
(27)
8π 0
 fm,n

1690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

where qm is the charge on the bead m, qn is the charge
on the bead n, 0 is the free space permittivity,  is
the dielectric constant of interstitial fluid, and fm,n is
given by

2
+ ρm ρn e−g m , n
(28)
fm,n = Rm,n
where Rm,n is the distance between two elements m and n,
ρn and ρm are, respectively, the radii of the two elements
m and n, and gm,n is a ratio defined as follows:
gm,n =

Rm,n
.
4ρm ρn

(29)

This model is based on the generalized Born salvation free
energy [30] which is an approximation of the solution to
the Poisson-Boltzmann equation.
2) The pair van der Waals energy Vm,n for the beads m and
n is calculated as follows [17]:

2ρm ρn
A
Vm,n = −
2
6 Rm,n
− (ρm + ρn )2
+

2
Rm,n



2ρm ρn
− (ρm − ρn )2

2
− (ρm + ρn )2
Rm,n
+ ln
2
Rm,n
− (ρm − ρn )2

Fig. 7.

COMSOL simulation of ADDS propagation in the vascular channel.


(30)

where A is the Hamaker coefficient [17] which depends
on the properties of the material, and Rm,n is the centerto-center distance between two beads m and n.
3) The pair electrostatic potential Em,n for the beads m and
n is calculated as follows:
qm qn
Em,n =
,
(31)
8πRm,n
where qm is the charge on the bead m, qn is the charge on
the bead n, and  is the dielectric constant of interstitial
fluid.
Finally, based on the structure data of the antigen and antibody
from the PDB, namely the charges {qn ; n = 1 . . . M + N }, the
radii {ρn ; n = 1 . . . M + N }, the beads center-to-center distances {Rm,n ; m, n = 1 . . . M + N }, the medium parameters
{A, } we have derived the relationship between the ADDS
antigen-antibody density at the surface of the cell y(t) and the
ADDS extracellular concentration xE (t) as expressed in (22)
and (23).
VI. COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS SIMULATION
In this section, we present the simulation scheme used to validate the MC-ADDS model in a realistic 3-D environment. COMSOL Multiphysics is a finite-element modeling (FEM) software
package which helps to set up complex 3-D simulations involving different physical laws and models. In the interest to accurately capture the complexity of MC-ADDS systems, COMSOL
is used here to simulate two important physical laws involved
in the propagation of antibodies. First, the fluid dynamics (see
Section VI-A) provide the time-varying blood velocity field in
the blood vessels. Second, the advection-diffusion physics (see

Section VI-B) provide the time-varying concentration of the antibodies transported in an anisotropic manner through the blood
vessels and their surrounding tissues. By combining these two
physical laws, COMSOL provides a realistic reference model
for the spatio-temporal evolution of the antibody through the
body.
A. COMSOL Fluid Dynamics
The blood flow is simulated by COMSOL fluid dynamics
simulations to predict the blood velocity field in the tridimensional coordinates inside the blood vessels. The blood flow is
important since it is the main driving force transporting antibodies throughout the body. This realistic simulation is utilized
to demonstrate that the assumption of uniform blood velocity in
each blood vessel is valid for the analytical model. The uniform
blood velocity allowed us to derive the simple expressions of
time-varying impulse responses.
The COMSOL fluid dynamics is based on the Navier-Stokes
equation. Blood is supposed to be an incompressible fluid in
laminar flow with a density ρ = 1060 kg · m−3 and a fluid viscosity η = 0.005 Pa · s. The Navier-Stokes equation is written
as follows:


∂v
+ v · ∇v = −∇p + f
(32)
ρ
∂t
where p is the blood pressure, v is the blood velocity, ρ denotes
the blood density, ∇ is the vector differential operator, η is the
fluid viscosity, and f represents forces applies by the blood
vessel walls.
The geometry of the blood vessels network is presented in
Fig. 7. The networks consists of 9 curved blood vessels. The
3-D data was obtained from the COMSOL simulation library
and scaled down by a 100 factor to have the typical size of

CHAHIBI et al.: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION MODELING OF ANTIBODY-MEDIATED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

TABLE I
NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE BLOOD PRESSURE AT THE INLETS AND OUTLETS
OF THE BLOOD VESSELS NETWORK
i
pi , 0

0
11 208

1
11 148

2
11 148

3
11 148

4
11 148

5
11 148

TABLE II
PHYSIOLOGICAL LENGTHS AND RADII OF THE BLOOD VESSELS
Vessels

V1

V2

V3

V4

V5

V6

V7

V8

V9

Length [mm]
Radius [mm]

81
2.8

17
2.5

16
2.8

18
2.5

11
2.8

14
2.5

17
2.8

11
2.5

6
2.8

arterioles. The dimensions of the blood vessels are given in
Table II. The blood vessels are surrounded by elastic vascular
walls and muscles that apply stress on the surface of the blood
vessels. The outlets and inlets of the blood vessel network
are assumed to be open with a predefined blood pressure. The
objective of the simulation is to verify that the MC analytical
model properly predicts the diffusion through the walls and the
diffusion along the radial dimension by comparing the end-toend impulse response with the concentration at the output of
the COMSOL simulated network given an initial concentration
at the inlet of the network. The surrounding tissue is simulated
as a thin diffusion layer in COMSOL with a porosity of 1.6.
The boundary conditions for COMSOLfluid dynamics consist
of the time-varying pressure applied at the inlets and outlets of
the blood vessel network. The pressure at a vessel i is denoted
by pi (t) where t is the time-variable. The heartbeat period is
supposed to be constant and equal to 1s. The function pi (t) is
expressed as follows:



pi (t) = pi,0 sin(πt)

0 ≤ t ≤ 0.5 s

pi (t) = pi,0 (1.5 − 0.5 cos(−2π(0.5 − t)))

0.5 ≤ t ≤ 1 s
(33)
where pi,0 are pressure constants in (Pa) for which the numerical values are available in Table I.
B. COMSOL Advection-Diffusion
The COMSOL advection-diffusion physics are modeled using the time-varying advection-diffusion equation in different
domains of the simulated geometry. The geometry consists of
two domains, namely the blood vessels and the ECM that surrounds it. Each domain is denoted by the index i. The advectiondiffusion equation is expressed as follows:
∂c
= ∇ · (D∇c) − ∇ · (v c) + KV c
∂t

(34)

where ci is the antibody concentration in the domain i, Di is the
diffusion coefficient or matrix in the domain i and v is the blood
velocity calculated from the COMSOL fluid dynamics physics,
KV is the nonspecific binding equilibrium constant between the
antibody and the blood.

1691

Between two domains, there is a molecular flux discontinuity,
expressed by the following equation:
⎧
Di
⎨ −n · Di = D
(ci − cj )
j
(35)
D
⎩ −n · Dj = i (cj − ci )
Dj
where Di and Dj are the diffusion coefficients or matrices for
the domains i and j, respectively, ci and ci are the antibody
concentrations in the domains i and j, respectively, and n is the
unit vector normal to the surface boundary delimiting the two
domains i and j.
The following equation describes the initial concentration
antibodies at the time t = 0:
⎧
2
− z
⎪
2σ 2
⎨
e
c0 (x, y, z) = √ 0 2 C0 x ≥ x0 and z ≤ z0
(36)
2π σ 0
⎪
⎩
c0 (x, y, z) = 0
otherwise
where σ0 = 0.25 mm, C0 = 1 mol · L−1 , and σ0 = 0.35 mm,
x0 = 50 mm, and z is the third Cartesian axis as shown in
Fig. 7. A Gaussian function is used to have a smooth impulse,
which helps to avoid numerical problems.
The inlets and outlets of the blood vessel network are assumed as open extremities, which is expressed by the following
equation:
n · D∇c = 0 .

(37)

The anisotropic diffusion matrix is defined in the curvilinear
coordinates along the axis of the blood vessels.
Finally, the equations in (34), (35), (36), and (37) are applied
to the geometry of the vascular channel in Fig. 7. COMSOL
calculates the concentration c(x, y, z, t) of the antibodies in the
Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z, ) and time t.
VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we show numerical results which compare
the MC-ADDS analytical model with a finite-element methods
simulation model in a realistic 3-D geometry and show the
significance of anisotropy. COMSOL- was used to simulate
the propagation of antibodies using the complete advectiondiffusion equation in a 3-D setting, and the effect of anisotropy
on the impulse response of the system was evaluated.
Fig. 8 compares the mathematical model, derived in (7) and
(8) from Section III, from the MC-ADDS paradigm incorporating the effect of anisotropy and the complete 3-D simulation
with COMSOL on one blood artery. The translational and radial
diffusion coefficients, calculated based on the bead model, have
been used in both COMSOL and the MC-ADDS model. An excellent agreement between the two results is shown in the figure.
This is to our knowledge the first work to validate through FEM
the anisotropic transport of molecules undergoing advection and
diffusion. The anisotropic diffusion coefficient was specified in
COMSOL in matrix form in the cartesian coordinates, where
the x and y represented the radial diffusion, and z represents the
translational diffusion. The results show that MC anisotropic
model will allow taking into account realistic diffusion environments that occur in biology.

1692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Fig. 8. Validation of the analytical impulse response with COMSOL simulation results.

Fig. 10. Translational diffusion coefficient and rotational diffusion coefficients as functions of the angle between antibody arms.

Fig. 9. MC Vascular Channel impulse responses for different radial diffusion
coefficient D R .

by (14). from Section III-B. In this figure, our objective is to
quantify the effect of changing the shape of the antibody on the
diffusion parameters. The bead model of the antibody illustrated
in Fig. 5 at Section V has been considered, and we have varied the angle between the two long arms of the antibody from
−30◦ to 30◦ , and we have plotted the rotational diffusion coefficient DΘ and the translational diffusion coefficient DZ for
these different shapes. Note that the change in shape can have a
considerable effect on these two diffusion coefficient in a similar
way. The more the molecule resembles a rectangular shape the
higher the diffusion coefficient is, and the more the molecule resembles a spherical shape, the lower is the diffusion coefficient.
This can be explained by the fact that a spherical shape maximizes the contact surface area of the antibodies, which causes
more collisions, and therefore a higher diffusion coefficient due
to Brownian motion.
Fig. 11 shows the effect of the different kinetic processes on the MC-ADDS end-to-end response by cascading
the impulse responses of the different transport and kinetic processes through (7). The end-to-end impulse
response is calculated for three different sets of parameters, each corresponding to either the color red, green,
or blue, i.e. the end-to-end impulse response h1 (t) is for
DZ = 10−8 m2 /s, DE = 10−9 m2 /s, Cag = 0.01 mol/m2 ,
and ΔG = 5 kJ · mol−1 , the end-to-end impulse response
h2 (t) is for DZ = 5 · 10−8 m2 /s, DE = 0.5 · 10−9 m2 /s,
Cag = 0.05 mol/m2 , and ΔG = 5 kJ · mol−1 , and the endto-end impulse response h3 (t) is for DZ = 10−7 m2 /s,
DE = 10−8 m2 /s, Cag = 0.1 mol/m2 , and the antigenantibody binding free energy ΔG = 5 kJ · mol−1 obtained
through (24) in Section V. For the vascular impulse response,
we observe that increasing the translation diffusion coefficient
of the antibodies increases the delay and the dispersion of the
impulse response. The figures for the vascular and extracellular
impulse response are normalized with regard to the maximum
value of the impulse responses. The vascular impulse response

Fig. 9 illustrates how the normalized impulse response from
(8) presented in Section III, varies highly depending on the
radial diffusion coefficient. For a fixed translational diffusion
coefficient, the radial diffusion coefficient was varied from
DR = 10−7 m2 /s to DR = 10−4 m2 /s. The numerical evaluations of the MC-ADDS extracellular impulse response for these
different values show that the anisotropic transport due to a radial diffusion that is different from translational diffusion can
have an important effect on the transport of antibodies. It can
be seen that the impulse response is attenuated exponentially as
a function of the radial diffusion coefficient. Therefore, radial
diffusion coefficient is a critical parameter for the computational
and numerical evaluation of MC-ADDS systems.
Fig. 10 shows the dependence of the anisotropic diffusion
parameters on the angle between the arms of the antibody given

CHAHIBI et al.: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION MODELING OF ANTIBODY-MEDIATED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

Fig. 11.

1693

Numerical evaluation of the MC-ADDS end-to-end response.

hV (t) shows some periodic sharp drops due to the periodicity of
the heartbeat. For the extracellular impulse response hE (t), at a
fixed association and dissociation kinetic set of parameters, the
extracellular impulse response shows increased delay but decreased dispersion, due to the interplay of kinetic and diffusion
parameters in the ECM. For the binding probability function
pB , we see that the concentration of antigens in the surface of
the cells is a determining factor for the binding rate, and the
higher the binding energy, the lower is the binding probability.
This is explained by the fact that a high binding probability
is more likely if the required energy for the antibody-antigen
binding is low. The end-to-end impulse responses use the
average values for the binding probability. The figure shows
that the binding probability for these specific numerical values
is the most significant factor in the end-to-end impulse response,
and that although the vascular and extracellular parameters
are very dissimilar for the green and blue end-to-end impulse
response, the difference in the binding probability makes the
two end-to-end impulse responses mostly the same.
MC-ADDS systems are remarkably complex due to the interplay of different kinetic and transport processes. The MC
modeling approach allows capturing all the important kinetic parameters in a simple analytical expression and combining them
together. The MC-ADDS approach makes it possible to evaluate
numerically the effect of each of these kinetic parameters as well
as the geometry of the disease and the physiology of the patient.
Fig. 11 has shown that diffusion in the vascular space can exhibit
a trend that is opposite to the one in the extracellular space. This
means that values for the diffusion coefficient that are beneficial
for the transport in the vascular channel may be detrimental in
the extracellular channel. Therefore, there is a tradeoff value for
the diffusion coefficient that improves transport in the vascular channel without sacrificing the transport in the extracellular
transport. This is important for appropriate engineering the diffusion properties of the antibodies. The figure also shows the
importance of the binding parameters, which remain the most
critical barrier for the efficiency of ADDS. The numerical evaluation of these impulse responses and functions does not require
important computational resources, which makes the optimiza-

tion of MC-ADDS for a specific clinical scenario very tractable
using this approach.

VIII. CONCLUSION
The Molecular Communication (MC) framework was used
as an abstraction of antibody-mediated Drug Delivery Systems
(ADDS), which is one of the therapeutic methods at the forefront of pharmacological research. The proposed MC model
is based on the biophysical equations which govern antibody
transport and kinetics in the human body. Analytical expressions of the impulse responses and drug delivery probabilities
for the vascular transport, propagation in the ECM, and antigen
binding were derived to mathematically capture ADDS. The
transport and antigen-binding kinetics of ADDS are predicted
based on the geometry of the human body, and the shape and
electrochemical structure of the antibody-antigen compound.
The aim is to provide a novel model for ADDS based
directly on the chemical and structural information about the
antibody molecule. Based on the geometry and the charge
of the ADDS constituting elements, we have derived the
transport and binding parameters of the ADDS based on the
theory of anisotropic diffusion and the thermodynamics of
antibody-antigen interactions.
The derived MC model is based on the recent advances in
mass transport theory to provide an analytical solution to the
problem of ADDS transport. In the frame of the current, often
over-complicated models of system biology, the proposed MC
approach models the complex behavior of ADDS with a straightforward model. Using the MC paradigm, the ADDS transport
from the point of injection to the interior of a cell has been
abstracted as a cascade of MC channels, each characterized by
an analytical impulse response. The MC-ADDS model studies
the ADDS transport in the blood vessels, in the ECM, and
through the ligand binding. Compared with existing models,
the majority of the systems parameters are directly related to
the physiology, instead of using empirical values that involve
statistical estimations from experiments.

1694

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

There are several important issues that remain to be investigated on the modeling of ADDS systems. First, an optimization
framework should be devised to take advantage of the possibilities offered by the MC approach. Second, the interference from
the immune system and the endocrine system should be added
to the model as a feedback process to improve the targeting of
the disease. Finally, the toxicity of ADDS should be quantified
mathematically in this framework.
The MC-ADDS model allowed determining the parts of the
human body which influence the efficiency of the drug delivery,
and the ADDS molecule parameters that are critical to overcome the obstacles posed by these limiting parts. Moreover, the
MC model showed how the shape and electrochemical structure simultaneously affects the transport and antigen-binding
kinetics of the ADDS. Finally, the validation of the MC-ADDS
model against finite-element simulations in a realistic 3D geometry has shown that the model is a good approximation for the
anisotropic advection-diffusion in the complex geometry of the
body. This analytical model can be readily used to predict, design, and optimize advanced drug delivery systems in a versatile
and accurate manner, and to simulate sophisticated therapeutic
scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz et al., “Nanonetworks: A new communication paradigm
at molecular level,” Comput. Netw. J., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2260–2279,
Aug. 2008.
[2] A. M. Berezhkovskii and A. T. Skvortsov, “Aris-taylor dispersion with
drift and diffusion of particles on the tube wall,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 139,
no. 8, p. 084101, 2013.
[3] C. A. Boswell et al., “Effects of charge on antibody tissue distribution and
pharmacokinetics,” Bioconjugate Chem., vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 2153–2163,
2010.
[4] H. Brenner, “Coupling between the translational and rotational Brownian
motions of rigid particles of arbitrary shape: Ii. general theory,” J. Colloid
Interface Sci., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 407–436, 1967.
[5] D. Brune and S. Kim, “Predicting protein diffusion coefficients,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 90, no. 9, pp. 3835–3839, 1993.
[6] Y. Chahibi and I. Akyildiz, “Molecular communication noise and capacity
analysis for particulate drug delivery systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.
62, no. 11, pp. 3891–3903, Nov. 2014.
[7] Y. Chahibi et al., “A molecular communication system model for particulate drug delivery systems,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 12,
pp. 3468–3483, Dec. 2013.
[8] J. A. Champion et al., “Particle shape: a new design parameter for microand nanoscale drug delivery carriers,” J. Controlled Release, vol. 121,
no. 1, pp. 3–9, 2007.
[9] A. C. Chan and P. J. Carter, “Therapeutic antibodies for autoimmunity
and inflammation,” Nature Rev. Immunol., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 301–316,
2010.
[10] A. Chauvière et al., Cell Mechanics: From Single Scale-Based Models
to Multiscale Modeling, ser. Chapman & Hall/CRC Mathematical and
Computational Biology. New York, NY, USA: Taylor & Francis, 2010.
[11] J. G. de la Torre and V. A. Bloomfield, “Hydrodynamic properties of
complex, rigid, biological macromolecules: Theory and applications,”
Quart. Rev. Biophys., vol. 14, no. 01, pp. 81–139, 1981.
[12] G. Z. Ferl et al., “A predictive model of therapeutic monoclonal antibody
dynamics and regulation by the neonatal FC receptor (FCRN),” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 1640–1652, 2005.
[13] M. X. Fernandes and J. G. de la Torre, “Brownian dynamics simulation of
rigid particles of arbitrary shape in external fields,” Biophys. J., vol. 83,
no. 6, pp. 3039–3048, 2002.
[14] A. Garg and J. P. Balthasar, “Physiologically-based pharmacokinetic
(PBPK) model to predict IgG tissue kinetics in wild-type and FcRnknockout mice,” J. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacodyn., vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 687–709, 2007.
[15] Y. Geng et al., “Shape effects of filaments versus spherical particles in
flow and drug delivery,” Nature Nanotechnol., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 249–255,
2007.

[16] A. Gutmanas et al., “PDBe: Protein data bank in Europe,” Nucleic Acids
Res., vol. 42, no. D1, pp. D285–D291, 2014.
[17] H. Hamaker, “The london van der waals attraction between spherical
particles,” Physica, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 1058–1072, 1937.
[18] L. Hu and R. J. Hansen, “Issues, challenges, and opportunities in modelbased drug development for monoclonal antibodies,” J. Pharmaceutical
Sci., vol. 102, no. 9, pp. 2898–2908, 2013.
[19] M. Kim et al., “Current advances in mathematical modeling of anti-cancer
drug penetration into tumor tissues,” Frontiers Oncol., vol. 3, p. 278.
2013.
[20] V. Lafont et al., “Protein–protein recognition and interaction hot spots
in an antigen–antibody complex: Free energy decomposition identifies
efficient amino acids,” Proteins Struct. Function Bioinformatics, vol. 67,
no. 2, pp. 418–434, 2007.
[21] M. Matyka et al., “Tortuosity-porosity relation in porous media flow,”
Phys. Rev. E, vol. 78, no. 2, p. 026306, 2008.
[22] A. Onufriev et al., “Modification of the generalized born model suitable
for macromolecules,” J. Phys. Chem. B, vol. 104, no. 15, pp. 3712–3720,
2000.
[23] M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz, “Diffusion-based noise analysis for molecular communication in nanonetworks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 2532–2547, Jun. 2011.
[24] M. Pierobon and I. F. Akyildiz, “Noise analysis in ligand-binding reception for molecular communication in nanonetworks,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4168–4182, Sep. 2011.
[25] J. W. Piper et al., “Determining force dependence of two-dimensional
receptor-ligand binding affinity by centrifugation,” Biophys. J., vol. 74,
no. 1, pp. 492–513, 1998.
[26] L. G. Presta, “Molecular engineering and design of therapeutic antibodies,” Current Opinion Immunol., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 460–470, 2008.
[27] S. Ramanujan et al., “Diffusion and convection in collagen gels: Implications for transport in the tumor interstitium,” Biophys. J., vol. 83, no. 3,
pp. 1650–1660, 2002.
[28] D. Savéry and G. Cloutier, “Effect of red cell clustering and anisotropy
on ultrasound blood backscatter: A Monte Carlo study,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics Frequency Control, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 94–103,
Jan. 2005.
[29] A. M. Scott et al., “Antibody therapy of cancer,” Nature Rev. Cancer, vol.
12, no. 4, pp. 278–287, 2012.
[30] W. C. Still et al., “Semianalytical treatment of solvation for molecular
mechanics and dynamics,” J. Amer. Chem. Soc., vol. 112, no. 16, pp.
6127–6129, 1990.
[31] X. Sun et al., “Langevin dynamics for rigid bodies of arbitrary shape,”
J. Chem. Phys., vol. 128, no. 23, p. 234107, 2008.
[32] E. Syková et al., “Extracellular space diffusion and pathological states,”
Progress Brain Res., vol. 125, pp. 155–178, 2000.
[33] A. R. Tzafriri et al., “Mathematical modeling and optimization of drug delivery from intratumorally injected microspheres,” Clinical Cancer Res.,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 826–834, 2005.
[34] S. Venkataraman et al., “The effects of polymeric nanostructure shape on
drug delivery,” Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., vol. 63, no. 14, pp. 1228–1246,
2011.
[35] L. M. Weiner et al., “Antibody-based immunotherapy of cancer,” Cell,
vol. 148, no. 6, pp. 1081–1084, 2012.
[36] K. Whang et al., “A biodegradable polymer scaffold for delivery of osteotropic factors,” Biomaterials, vol. 21, no. 24, pp. 2545–2551, 2000.

Youssef Chahibi (S‘13) received the M.S. degree
from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA, USA, in 2012, and the Diplôme d’Ingénieur in
Telecommunications and Networks from the Institut
National Polytechnique de Toulouse, France, in 2011.
He has been working toward the Ph. D. degree at the
BWN Lab of the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, since
January 2012.
During 2011, he was a physical-layer Engineer at
Alcatel-Lucent, Antwerp, Belgium. In Summer 2014,
he was a guest research scholar at the Nano Communication Center (NCC)
at Tampere University of Technology, and during 2015, he was a fellow of
the Research Council of Norway at the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU) in Trondheim, Norway. His research interests include
nanoscale biologically-inspired communications, and drug delivery systems.

CHAHIBI et al.: MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION MODELING OF ANTIBODY-MEDIATED DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEMS

Ian F. Akyildiz (M‘86-SM‘89-F‘96) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Engineering from the University of Erlangen-Nurnberg,
Germany, in 1978, 1981, and 1984, respectively.
He is currently the Ken Byers Chair Professor
in Telecommunications with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, the Director of
the Broadband Wireless Networking Laboratory, and
Chair of the Telecommunication Group at Georgia
Tech. He is an honorary Professor with the School
of Electrical Engineering, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona,
Catalunya, Spain, and the Founder of N3Cat (NaNoNetworking Center in
Catalunya). He is also an honorary Professor with the Department of Electrical,
Electronic, and Computer Engineering, University of Pretoria, South Africa,
and the Founder of the Advanced Sensor Networks Lab. Since 2011, he is a
Consulting Chair Professor at the Department of Information Technology, King
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Since January 2013, he is also a
Finland Distinguished Professor Program (FiDiPro) Professor supported by the
Academy of Finland at the Department of Communications Engineering, Tampere University of Technology, , Finland. His current research interests include
nanonetworks, and Long Term Evolution advanced.
Dr. Akyildiz is the Editor-in-Chief of Computer Networks (Elsevier) Journal,
and the founding Editor-in-Chief of the Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier) Journal,
the Physical Communication (Elsevier) Journal, and the Nano Communication
Networks (Elsevier) Journal. He is an ACM Fellow (1997). He received numerous awards from the IEEE and the ACM. According to Google Scholar as of
October 2014, his h-index is 83 and the total number of citations he has received
is 64 211.

1695

Sasitharan Balasubramaniam (SM‘14) received
the Bachelor’s degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from the University of Queensland, Qld.,
Australia, in 1998, the Master’s degree in Computer
and Communication Engineering from the Queensland University of Technology, Qld., Australia, in
1999, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Queensland, in 2005.
He is currently an Academy of Finland Research
Fellow at the Nano Communication Centre, Department of Electronic and Communication Engineering,
Tampere University of Technology, Finland.
Dr. Sasitharan has published more than 70 papers and actively participates in
a number of technical programme committee for various conferences. He is the
General Co-Chair for ACM NANOCOM 2015 and was the TPC Co-Chair for
ACM NANOCOM 2014 and IEEE MoNaCom 2011, both conferences which
he co-founded. He is currently an Editor for the IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS
journal and Elsevier Nano Communication Networks. His current research
interests include bio-inspired communication networks, as well as molecular
communications.
Yevgeni Koucheryavy (SM‘09) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Tampere University of Technology
(TUT), Tampere, Finland, in 2004.
Prior joining TUT, he spent five years in the industry with R&D LONIIS, St. Petersburg, Russia, where
he held various technical and managerial positions.
He is an invited Expert for ITU-T and the Skolkovo
Foundation (Russia) and acts as an External Reviewer
for the state funding agencies of several European
countries. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Communications Engineering, TUT. His
current research interests include heterogeneous wireless communications and
systems, network and services performance evaluation, Internet of Things, and
machine-to-machine communications.

