1604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Burst and Tonic Spinal Cord Stimulation
Differentially Activate GABAergic Mechanisms
to Attenuate Pain in a Rat Model
of Cervical Radiculopathy
Nathan D. Crosby, Christine L. Weisshaar, Jenell R. Smith, Martha E. Zeeman, Melanie D. Goodman-Keiser,
and Beth A. Winkelstein∗

Abstract—Objective: Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) is widely
used to treat neuropathic pain. Burst SCS, an alternative mode
of stimulation, reduces neuropathic pain without paresthesia.
However, the effects and mechanisms of burst SCS have not been
compared to conventional tonic SCS in controlled investigations.
This study compares the attenuation of spinal neuronal activity
and tactile allodynia, and the role of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
signaling during burst or tonic SCS in a rat model of cervical
radiculopathy. Methods: The effects of burst and tonic SCS were
compared by recording neuronal firing before and after each mode
of stimulation at day 7 following a painful cervical nerve root compression. Neuronal firing was also recorded before and after burst
and tonic SCS in the presence of the GABAB receptor antagonist, CGP35348. Results: Burst and tonic SCS both reduce neuronal
firing. The effect of tonic SCS, but not burst SCS, is blocked by
CGP35348. In a separate study, spinal cord stimulators were implanted to deliver burst or tonic SCS beginning on day 4 after
painful nerve root compression; allodynia and serum GABA concentration were measured through day 14. Burst and tonic SCS
both reduce allodynia. Tonic SCS attenuates injury-induced decreases in serum GABA, but GABA remains decreased from baseline during burst SCS. Conclusion and Significance: Together, these
studies suggest that burst SCS does not act via spinal GABAergic
mechanisms, despite its attenuation of spinal hyperexcitability and
allodynia similar to that of tonic SCS; understanding other potential spinal inhibitory mechanisms may lead to enhanced analgesia
during burst stimulation.
Index Terms—Burst stimulation, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA),
neuropathic pain, radiculopathy, spinal cord stimulation (SCS).

I. INTRODUCTION
PINAL cord stimulation (SCS) has been used for decades
to treat a wide range of chronic pain conditions [1]. In particular, cervical radiculopathy and cervical brachialgia are neuropathic conditions that cause neck, shoulder, and arm pain from
spinal nerve and/or nerve root compression, and are commonly
treated with SCS [2], [3]. Conventional tonic SCS administers

S

Manuscript received November 5, 2014; revised December 31, 2014; accepted
January 27, 2015. Date of publication February 4, 2015; date of current version
May 18, 2015. This work was supported in part by an Ashton Fellowship
and a sponsored research project from St. Jude Medical. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
N. D. Crosby, C. L. Weisshaar, J. R. Smith, and M. E. Zeeman are with the
University of Pennsylvania.
M. D. Goodman-Keiser is with St. Jude Medical.
∗ B. A. Winkelstein is with the Department of Bioengineering and the Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
USA (e-mail: winkelst@seas.upenn.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2399374

continuous pulses of electrical stimulation with varying frequencies, pulse widths, and intensities to the dorsal columns from
electrodes implanted in the epidural space outside of the spinal
cord [1], [2], [4], [5]. Tonic stimulation also often induces tingling paresthesias in the dermatomal regions correlated with the
area of the spinal cord where the stimulation is applied, which
is used to guide electrode placement and SCS programming
[3], [6].
Despite many positive reports of SCS being effective for treating chronic pain, the reported success rate of SCS in clinical
studies has improved little [7]. Better understanding the neurophysiology of chronic pain and defining the mechanisms that
underlie SCS-induced analgesia can help to more effectively
design and administer SCS therapies.
In an effort to improve pain relief and to reduce side effects
such as paresthesia, alternative modes of stimulation have been
developed. Burst SCS is one such mode that uses periodic bursts
of electrical pulses for pain management rather than the continuous pulses used in tonic SCS [3], [6], [8], [9]. In 2010,
De Ridder et al. [3] reported that burst SCS may suppress neuropathic pain as well or potentially even better than tonic SCS,
possibly because burst stimulation delivers more charge per second than tonic SCS to activate different neuronal populations
while remaining below the threshold for paresthesia. Additional
clinical studies, including placebo controlled studies, have also
found that burst SCS decreases pain intensity more effectively,
while inducing significantly less paresthesias, than tonic SCS
[8], [9]. It has also been proposed that the differences between
burst and tonic stimulation may be due to the modulation of
the medial pain pathway by burst SCS, which could alter attention to pain rather than more effectively suppressing pain
signals [6]. Since animal models provide valuable platforms for
studying the mechanisms of SCS [10], initial comparisons of
burst and tonic SCS were conducted in a rat model of visceral
nociception [11]. However, no study has directly investigated
the relative effectiveness of those modes of SCS in modulating neuronal activity, pain symptoms, and relevant mechanisms
involved in nociception in the context of radicular pain.
Many neurophysiological and neurochemical mechanisms
have been proposed as responsible for the analgesic effects
of tonic SCS, including modulation of γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) signaling in the dorsal horn. GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the spinal cord, contributing to the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CROSBY et al.: BURST AND TONIC SCS DIFFERENTIALLY ACTIVATE GABAERGIC MECHANISMS TO ATTENUATE PAIN

inhibition of nociception in the spinal dorsal horn [12]. Mechanical allodynia after nerve injury is often accompanied by a
decrease of GABA in the dorsal horn [13], [14], probably leading to a disinhibition of neuronal firing. Tonic SCS has been
shown to stimulate GABA release in the dorsal horn that inhibits
neuronal excitability and also attenuates the release of excitatory neurotransmitters, including glutamate [15], [16]. The analgesic effects of tonic SCS have been attributed specifically to
GABAB receptor activation, since analgesia can be augmented
with GABAB agonists [17] or abolished by spinal perfusion
with GABAB receptor antagonists [15]. Based on these findings, GABAB agonists like baclofen have been used clinically
to enhance the effects of spinal cord stimulation, especially in
patients that do not experience sufficient pain relief from SCS
alone [17], [18]. The role that GABA signaling through the
GABAB receptors plays in the analgesic effects of burst SCS
remains unknown.
Cervical nerve root compression in the rat produces hallmarks
of chronic neuropathic pain, including sustained behavioral hypersensitivity [19]–[21], sustained tissue compression and late
axonal degeneration [21], [22], spinal neuroimmune activation
[19], [22], [23], and spinal neuronal hyperexcitability [19], [24].
As such, this study compares burst and tonic SCS for reducing
neuropathic pain signals and for modulating nociceptive mechanisms in a rat model of cervical nerve root compression. In
two separate studies, burst and tonic SCS were compared in
the context of GABAergic mechanisms for the attenuation of
neuropathic pain. In the first study, electrophysiological recordings of dorsal horn neurons were acquired on day 7 after a
painful nerve root compression, immediately before and at several times after acute burst or tonic SCS in order to compare
the degree of attenuation of neuronal firing induced by each
mode of stimulation. In order to compare the role of GABA
signaling in burst and tonic SCS, the spinal cord was superfused
with a GABAB receptor antagonist prior to the application of
SCS and spinal neuronal activity recordings. In order to relate
the findings from that electrophysiological study in anesthetized
rats to SCS-induced analgesia, a separate group of rats underwent implantation of spinal cord stimulators to deliver burst or
tonic SCS and allodynia was measured to compare the effects of
each mode of SCS on behavioral sensitivity. Because GABA is
transported across the blood–brain barrier and serum concentrations can serve as a marker of central nervous system function
[25]–[27], temporal serum GABA levels were also quantified
to evaluate the stimulation of GABA release by burst and tonic
SCS.
II. METHODS
A. Experimental Design
Two complementary experiments compared the effectiveness
of burst and tonic SCS for modulating pain and nociceptive
mechanisms in an established model of painful cervical nerve
root compression [19], [28]. Both studies used male Holtzman
rats (322–438 g) that were housed under conditions compliant
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.

1605

All experimental procedures were approved by the University of
Pennsylvania Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and
carried out under the guidelines of the Committee for Research
and Ethical Issues of the International Association for the Study
of Pain [29].
In the first study, burst and tonic SCS were assessed for attenuating dorsal horn neuronal hyperexcitability. Rats (n = 8)
underwent painful C7 dorsal nerve root compression [19], [28].
Hyperalgesia was assessed before injury and at day 7 prior to
making the electrophysiological recordings. Dorsal horn neuronal firing was quantified during mechanical stimulation of
the forepaw before and after the application of either burst or
tonic SCS on day 7. Since SCS has been shown to attenuate hyperexcitability of wide dynamic range (WDR) neurons
in the dorsal horn [30]–[32], the effects of burst and tonic SCS
were specifically evaluated in WDR neurons. In a separate group
of rats, the GABAB receptor antagonist, CGP35348 (n = 7),
was applied to the spinal cord during application of burst and
tonic SCS on day 7 after painful nerve root compression. Dorsal
horn neuronal firing was quantified before and after stimulation
to evaluate the role of GABAB receptor activation in the effects
of burst SCS relative to tonic SCS.
In the second study, burst and tonic SCS were evaluated for
attenuating allodynia in separate groups of rats that underwent
painful cervical nerve root compression and implantation of
a spinal cord stimulation system. Allodynia was measured in
the forepaws before nerve root compression (baseline) and at
days 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, and 14 after injury. The stimulator was
implanted at the time of nerve root compression on day 0 but
was not turned on until after behavioral testing on day 4 in
order to ensure the development of radiculopathy. At that time,
burst (n = 5 rats) or tonic (n = 7 rats) SCS was initiated and was
applied continuously through day 14. In addition, blood samples
were collected from each rat before nerve root compression,
and during the application of SCS on days 7 and 14 to quantify
serum GABA levels by ELISA. In a separate group, rats (n = 3)
underwent painful nerve root compression with no stimulator
implanted; allodynia and serum GABA levels were evaluated at
baseline, day 7, and day 14 to provide control responses from
nerve root compression alone for comparison with responses
from rats that received burst or tonic SCS after injury.
B. Painful Cervical Nerve Root Compression
Compression of the right C7 dorsal nerve root was performed
using procedures described previously [19], [20]. Briefly, rats
were anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane (4% for induction, 2–
3% for maintenance), and placed in a prone position. A midline
incision was made along the back of the neck from the base
of the skull to the T2 vertebra. The C6 and C7 vertebrae were
exposed by separating the paraspinal musculature overlying the
vertebrae. A C6/C7 hemilaminectomy and partial facetectomy
on the right side were performed to expose the C7 dorsal nerve
root between the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and the spinal
cord. The nerve root was compressed for 15 min with a 10-gf
microvascular clip (World Precision Instruments; Sarasota, FL,
USA) inserted through a small incision in the dura. After the

1606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

surgical procedure, incisions were closed using 3–0 polyester
suture and surgical staples. Rats were monitored during recovery
in room air before being returned to normal housing conditions.
C. Assessment of Behavioral Sensitivity
Mechanical hyperalgesia was measured in the ipsilateral and
contralateral forepaws of each rat that underwent painful nerve
root compression and electrophysiological recordings on day
7. Hyperalgesia was measured by applying a series of weighted
von Frey filaments (1.4, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 15, and 26 g) to the plantar
surface of the paw to identify the paw withdrawal threshold [19],
[22]. Each filament was applied five times to determine if the rat
displayed a positive response, exhibited by shaking, licking, or
withdrawing the forepaw. If the rat responded to two consecutive
filaments, the lesser of the two filament weights was recorded as
the paw withdrawal threshold. Rats not responding to any of the
filaments were assigned the maximum threshold of 26 g. Testing
was repeated in three rounds separated by at least 10 min, and
the average threshold from the three rounds was calculated for
each forepaw of each rat. For rats that underwent implantation of
the spinal cord stimulators, allodynia was measured separately
in the ipsilateral and contralateral forepaws by applying a 4-g
von Frey filament ten times, in three separate rounds of testing,
with 10 min of rest between rounds [20]. The total number of
paw withdrawals for each forepaw of each rat was summed
over the three rounds. A repeated-measures ANOVA compared
paw withdrawal thresholds or the number of paw withdrawals
to baseline at each time point.
D. Electrophysiological Recordings and SCS
Extracellular electrophysiological recordings were acquired
in the dorsal horn on day 7 after painful nerve root compression
to assess neuronal firing before and after burst and tonic SCS.
Rats were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg,
i.p.) and given supplementary doses (5–10 mg/kg, i.p.) as needed
based on toe pinch reflexes. With the rat in a prone position, an
incision was made along the back of the neck from the base of
the skull to the T2 vertebra. A bilateral laminectomy and dural
resection were performed to expose the spinal cord from C3 to
C7. A tracheotomy was performed and rats were connected to
a ventilator and CO2 monitor to control respiration throughout
the recording session (CWE; Ardmore, PA). A lateral thoracotomy was also performed to alleviate intrathoracic pressure and
to isolate the spinal cord from any movement of the rat during ventilation. Rats were immobilized on a stereotaxic frame
(David Kopf Instruments; Tujunga, CA, USA) using ear bars
and a vertebral clamp at T2 to stabilize the cervical spine. The
spinal cord was bathed in 37 °C mineral oil for the duration of
recording, and core temperature was maintained at 35–37 °C
using a temperature controller with a rectal probe (Physitemp;
Clifton, NJ, USA).
A monopolar platinum ball electrode was placed over the
C4 dorsal columns [see Fig. 1(a)], and a grounding electrode
was attached to the incised skin on the neck. The ball electrode
was spring loaded to avoid compression of the dorsal columns
[33]. Constant current stimulation was applied using a Grass

Fig. 1. Schematic of the application of SCS and recording of dorsal horn
neurons. (a) Painful nerve root (NR) compression was applied to the right
C7 dorsal nerve root proximal to the dorsal root ganglion (DRG). On day 7
after NR compression, monopolar burst and tonic SCS waveforms (inset) were
applied to the dorsal columns of the C4 spinal cord using a monopolar ball
electrode. Evoked neuronal firing was recorded in the C7 dorsal horn ipsilateral
to the site of NR compression during mechanical stimulation of the forepaw.
(b) In a separate study, a stimulator lead with planar electrodes and implantable
pulse generator (IPG) delivered bipolar burst or tonic SCS to the C3/C4 dorsal
columns beginning on day 4 after painful nerve root compression. The lead
included an anode (+) and a cathode (−) oriented in the rostral-caudal direction
at the midline of the spinal cord.

stimulator with a photoelectric stimulus isolation unit (S48
Stimulator, Grass Technologies; Warwick, RI, USA). The motor thresholds (MT) for burst and tonic SCS were identified
separately in each rat to be the stimulation intensities at which
small contractions were first observed in the paraspinal musculature or forelimbs. Burst and tonic SCS parameters were
chosen to match those parameters that have been used previously in preclinical and clinical studies, to enable comparison
of our findings with published reports [3], [6], [11], [30]. As
such, burst SCS was applied at 40 Hz at an amplitude of 90%
MT, with each burst containing five pulses at a frequency of
500 Hz with a pulsewidth of 1 ms. Tonic stimulation delivered
pulses at a frequency of 40 Hz with a pulsewidth of 0.3 ms and
amplitude of 90% MT.
A carbon fiber electrode (Kation Scientific; Minneapolis,
MN, USA) was lowered into the C7 spinal dorsal horn ipsilateral to the compressed nerve root using a micropositioner
[see Fig. 1(a)] (Narishige; Tokyo, Japan). Extracellular potentials were amplified with a gain of 103 and conditioned using a
bandpass filter between 0.3 and 3 kHz (World Precision Instruments; Sarasota, FL, USA). The signal was processed with a
60-Hz HumBug adaptive filter (Quest Scientific; North Vancouver, BC, Canada), digitally sampled at 25 kHz (Micro1401,

CROSBY et al.: BURST AND TONIC SCS DIFFERENTIALLY ACTIVATE GABAERGIC MECHANISMS TO ATTENUATE PAIN

CED; Cambridge, U.K.), then monitored with a speaker for
audio feedback (A-M Systems; Carlsborg, WA, USA) and
recorded using Spike2 software (CED; Cambridge).
As the electrode was lowered into the spinal cord, light
brushing and noxious pinch of the ipsilateral forepaw were
used to identify mechanically sensitive wide dynamic range
(WDR) neurons with receptive fields on the plantar surface of
the forepaw, based on their characteristic responses to the nonnoxious and noxious mechanical stimuli, as has been previously
reported by others [31]. Once a neuron was identified, baseline
evoked neuronal firing was recorded during mechanical stimulation of the forepaw consisting of five consecutive 1-s applications of the nonnoxious 1.4-g and noxious 26-g von Frey
filaments, and 10 s of noxious pinch with forceps [34], [35].
A baseline period of 2 s was recorded before each stimulus
to quantify spontaneous firing. Burst SCS was then applied for
5 min, during which time the evoked firing could not be recorded
because artifacts from the stimulation masked neuronal activity.
After SCS, evoked activity was immediately (0 min) recorded
during 1.4-g von Frey, 26-g von Frey, and pinch stimulation and
recording were repeated again at 2, 5, 10, and 15 min post-SCS.
The stimulation protocol was then repeated in the same neuron
using tonic SCS after neuronal firing returned to pre-SCS baseline. The protocol was reversed to apply tonic SCS before burst
SCS in alternating neurons in order to avoid any effects of the
order of burst and tonic SCS application. Recording continued
for up to 6 h for each rat, or until 4–6 neurons were recorded for
each mode of stimulation.
Voltage potentials from each recorded neuron were spikesorted and counted using Spike2 software (CED; Cambridge,
U.K.). Pre- and post-SCS firing were determined by counting
the spikes evoked separately by the 1.4-g filament, 26-g filament,
and noxious pinch in the baseline period prior to SCS, and at
each time point after SCS. Spontaneous firing was subtracted
from the spike counts for each mechanical stimulus in order
to isolate firing evoked by the forepaw stimulus. For each of
the 1.4-g filament, 26-g filament, and pinch stimuli, a repeatedmeasures ANOVA was used to compare the number of evoked
spikes between the pre-SCS baseline and evoked firing at each
post-SCS time point. Changes in neuronal firing immediately
(0 min) after SCS were calculated as the percent change in
spikes relative to the pre-SCS baseline values [30]. For neurons in which both burst and tonic stimulation protocols were
completed without losing the signal from the recorded neuron,
paired Student’s t-tests compared the percent changes in evoked
firing immediately after burst SCS to the changes in firing after
tonic SCS.
E. Spinal Superfusion of GABAB Receptor Antagonist
A separate group of rats underwent the same surgical and electrophysiological recording procedures described previously, but
received spinal application of the GABAB receptor antagonist,
CGP35348, for the duration of the SCS and dorsal horn electrophysiological recordings at day 7 after nerve root compression.
Rats were mounted on the stereotaxic frame and the burst and
tonic motor thresholds were determined. The spinal cord was

1607

then covered with agar (1 g agar/40 mL 0.9% saline) to form
a well directly over the C7 spinal cord for superfusion of the
drug solutions. A separate well was formed over the C4 dorsal
columns to allow contact of the stimulating electrode with the
spinal cord. CGP35348 (Abcam; Cambridge, MA, USA) was
solubilized in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (Harvard Apparatus;
Holliston, MA). The concentration of CGP35348 (10 mM) was
chosen based on previous studies applying it to the dorsal spinal
cord with effective modulation of spinal GABA signaling [36],
[37]. Based on the fact that peak dorsal horn drug concentrations
occur after 15–30 min of drug superfusion [38], CGP35348 was
applied to the C7 spinal cord for 20 min before the stimulation and recording protocols were initiated; drug solutions were
refreshed every 20–30 min throughout the recording session.
F. Implantation and Application of SCS
To evaluate the effects of burst and tonic SCS on behavioral sensitivity after painful nerve root compression, spinal cord
stimulators were implanted in rats to deliver dorsal column stimulation. A laminectomy was performed to expose the spinal cord
from C3-T1 with a facetectomy exposing the right C7 dorsal
nerve root. The nerve root was compressed as described earlier
[19], [20]. After removal of the compression clip, a customized
bipolar lead with two planar platinum/iridium electrodes (each
with a 3 mm2 surface area, 400-Ω impedance) was placed on the
spinal cord, and secured with sutures to the C2 and T2 vertebrae.
The anode and cathode were separated by 1 mm, arranged rostrocaudally at the midline over the C3/C4 dorsal columns [see
Fig. 1(b)]. The lead was tunneled subcutaneously and connected
to an implantable pulse generator (IPG) (Eon Mini Pulse Generator, St. Jude Medical; Plano, TX, USA), which was located
rostral to the left hip of the rat. Incisions were closed using 3–0
polyester sutures and surgical staples, and rats were monitored
during recovery, before being returned to normal housing conditions. Bipolar stimulation was applied continuously beginning
after behavioral assessment on day 4. Burst SCS was applied
with 5 pulses per burst at 500 Hz with a pulse width of 1 ms,
a burst frequency of 40 Hz, and amplitude of 80% MT. Tonic
SCS was applied at 50 Hz with a pulsewidth of 0.25 ms and
amplitude of 80% MT. These parameters were different from
those delivered by the Grass stimulator in the first study due to
a lack of resolution in the parameter settings of the IPG. However, because previous studies have demonstrated tonic SCS to
reduce pain and induce GABA release at amplitudes as low as
60% MT [11], [15], these IPG settings are sufficient to evaluate
the analgesic effects of SCS. The location of the stimulator lead
was confirmed to be over the C3/C4 dorsal columns at the termination of the study by visual inspection. Rats were removed
from the study if they displayed lethargy and/or paralysis after
IPG implantation, which was infrequent.
G. Quantification of Serum GABA Concentrations by ELISA
Blood samples were collected before nerve root compression
(baseline) and on days 7 and 14 in rats undergoing painful nerve
root compression alone or nerve root compression with IPG
implantation and SCS. Rats were anesthetized with isoflurane

1608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF GROUP INFORMATION, BEHAVIORAL THRESHOLDS, MOTOR THRESHOLDS, AND NEURON ACTIVITY DURING SCS MODES FOR GROUPS AFTER
PAINFUL NERVE ROOT COMPRESSION AND/WITH THE GABA B RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST
Day 7 Paw Withdrawal Threshold (% of BL)
Group
NR Compression
NR Compression + CGP

Motor Threshold (μA)

Rats

Weight (g)

Ipsilateral

Contralateral

Burst

Tonic

n=8
n=7

412 ± 36
396 ± 18

33 ± 11%∗
25 ± 10%∗

76 ± 26%
105 ± 34%

182 ± 60
183 ± 23

324 ± 68
319 ± 58#
#

Neurons Recorded per Rat
Burst

Tonic

6.1 ± 1.5
4.1 ± 1.3

6.4 ± 2.3
4.3 ± 1.7

NRC = nerve root compression, CGP = CGP35348, BL = baseline, SD = standard deviation, ∗ p < 0.0001, Day 7 versus BL; # p < 0.0002, Tonic versus Burst.

Fig. 2. Representative firing and quantification of neuronal activity in the C7 spinal cord before and immediately after burst and tonic SCS at day 7 following
painful nerve root compression in response to forepaw stimulation. (a) No change in neuronal firing is observed during stimulation of the ipsilateral forepaw by
a 1.4-g von Frey filament after burst or tonic SCS. Firing is significantly reduced after burst or tonic SCS during (b) 26-g von Frey filament (∗ p ࣘ 0.0014 versus
pre-SCS baseline), and (c) noxious pinch stimulation (∗ p < 0.0001 versus pre-SCS baseline).

(4%) and the tail was sterilized with alcohol. A 25-G needle with
a 1 mL syringe was used to collect 0.5 mL of blood from the
tail artery. Blood samples were allowed to clot for 20–40 min at
room temperature, and then, centrifuged for 15 min at 1000 g at
4 °C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged again for
ten minutes at 10 000 g at 4 °C. Serum was collected in a clean
Eppendorf tube and frozen at −80 °C. Serum GABA concentrations were measured by competitive ELISA (MyBioSource;
San Diego, CA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Each sample was compared to the standard curve from the assay kit to determine the GABA concentration. All samples and
standards were run in duplicate. Data are reported as the fold
change in concentration relative to the preinjury baseline; serum

GABA concentrations on each day were compared to baseline
by repeated-measures ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s HSD
test.
III. RESULTS
A. Burst and Tonic SCS Similarly Attenuate Dorsal Horn
Neuronal Hyperexcitability
The paw withdrawal threshold (PWT) in the ipsilateral
forepaw is significantly reduced from baseline at day 7 after
painful nerve root compression (p < 0.0001), but the PWT
in the contralateral forepaw is unchanged from baseline [see
Table I]. The average motor threshold is significantly higher

CROSBY et al.: BURST AND TONIC SCS DIFFERENTIALLY ACTIVATE GABAERGIC MECHANISMS TO ATTENUATE PAIN

for tonic stimulation relative to burst stimulation in rats undergoing electrophysiological recordings at day 7 after painful
nerve root compression (p ≤ 0.0002) [see Table I]. A total of
49 neurons were recorded after burst SCS, and 51 neurons were
recorded after tonic SCS [see Table I]. In 39 of those neurons,
paired firing data were collected after both burst and tonic SCS.
Firing evoked by 26-g von Frey filament stimulation is significantly reduced by 32 ± 5% from baseline immediately after
burst stimulation (p < 0.0001), and significantly reduced by
26 ± 7% from baseline after tonic stimulation (p < 0.0001)
[see Fig. 2]. Likewise, firing during noxious pinch is reduced by
43 ± 4% immediately after burst SCS (p < 0.0001), and by
37 ± 4% after tonic SCS (p < 0.0001) [see Fig. 2]. The percent
reductions in firing after burst and tonic SCS are not different
from each other during either the 26-g filament or noxious pinch
stimulation [see Fig. 2]. Neuronal firing evoked by 1.4-g filament stimulation of the ipsilateral forepaw is not changed from
baseline for either mode of stimulation [see Fig. 2].
The suppressive effects of burst and tonic SCS on dorsal horn
neuronal firing evoked by noxious stimulation are sustained for
up to 10 min after the cessation of SCS [see Fig. 3]. Compared to pre-SCS baseline firing, the number of spikes evoked
by 26-g von Frey filament stimulation of the ipsilateral forepaw
decreases immediately (at 0 min) and 2 min after burst SCS
(p ࣘ 0.0004). However, after tonic SCS the evoked firing remains decreased from pre-SCS baseline levels during 26-g filament stimulation at these times and also at 5 min and 10 min
(p ࣘ 0.035) [see Fig. 3]. The number of spikes evoked during
noxious pinch stimulation decreases from pre-SCS baseline levels at all of the time points measured up to 10 min after burst
SCS (p ࣘ 0.034), while pinch-evoked firing decreases after tonic
SCS from baseline only at 0, 2, and 5 min after stimulation
(p ࣘ 0.0016) [see Fig. 3]. The number of spikes evoked by
forepaw stimulation with the nonnoxious 1.4-g filament is not
different from baseline at any recorded time point after burst or
tonic stimulation [see Fig. 3]. Of note, evoked firing is not different after burst SCS compared to tonic SCS for any mechanical
stimulus at any pre- or post-SCS time point.
B. GABAB Receptor Antagonist Differentially Modulates the
Effects of Burst and Tonic SCS
The GABAB receptor antagonist, CGP35348, differentially
modulates the effects of burst and tonic SCS in the dorsal horn.
In the presence of CGP35348, burst SCS significantly attenuates dorsal horn neuronal firing by 36 ± 4% (p < 0.0001)
and by 44 ± 4% (p < 0.0001) during 26-g filament and noxious pinch stimulation of the ipsilateral forepaw, respectively
[see Fig. 4(a)]. That suppression of evoked firing is not different from the attenuation of neuronal activity after burst
SCS with no GABA receptor antagonist [see Fig. 4(a)]. However, CGP35348 abolishes the effects of tonic SCS, with no
change from baseline firing during the 26-g filament stimulation
(4 ± 8% change from baseline) or the noxious pinch application
(0.2 ± 7.3%) [see Fig. 4(b)]. The reduction in firing after tonic
SCS with CGP35348 is significantly less than the attenuation of
firing after tonic SCS with no GABAB receptor antagonist for

1609

Fig. 3. Evoked spike counts for up to 15 min after the cessation of burst and
tonic SCS application. (a) Burst and tonic SCS do not change firing evoked
by 1.4-g von Frey filament stimulation of the ipsilateral forepaw. (b) 26-g von
Frey filament evokes fewer spikes than at baseline for up to 2 min following
the application of burst SCS (∗ p ࣘ 0.0004 versus burst SCS baseline), and up
to 10 min after tonic SCS (#p ࣘ 0.035 versus tonic SCS baseline). (c) Noxious
pinch evokes fewer spikes than at baseline for up to ten minutes after burst SCS
(∗ p ࣘ 0.034 versus burst SCS baseline), and up to 5 min after tonic SCS (#p ࣘ
0.0016 versus tonic SCS baseline).

both the 26-g von Frey filament and pinch stimuli (p ࣘ 0.049)
[see Fig. 4(b)].
C. Burst and Tonic SCS Reduce Tactile Allodynia but
Differentially Stimulate GABA Release
Tactile allodynia develops after painful cervical nerve root
compression [see Fig. 5(a)]. In rats undergoing nerve root compression alone, the number of paw withdrawals in the ipsilateral
forepaw is elevated at days 1, 7, and 14 in response to 4-g von
Frey filament stimulation (p ࣘ 0.008) [see Fig. 5(a)]. For rats
with the implanted IPGs prior to SCS application, the number
of paw withdrawals also increases over baseline responses on

1610

Fig. 4. Effects of GABA B receptor antagonist on the attenuation of dorsal
horn neuronal firing by burst or tonic SCS. (a) Burst SCS alone and burst
SCS with CGP35348 (Burst + CGP) attenuate neuronal firing in response to
noxious ipsilateral forepaw stimulation by both the 26-g von Frey filament and
pinch (∗ p < 0.0001 versus pre-SCS baseline). (b) Tonic SCS alone attenuates
neuronal firing evoked by both 26 g and pinch stimulation (∗ p ࣘ 0.001 versus
pre-SCS baseline). However, tonic SCS with CGP35348 (Tonic + CGP) does
not induce any change in neuronal firing from baseline, and that percent change
from baseline is significantly less than the percent change after tonic SCS alone
(#p ࣘ 0.049 versus Tonic SCS alone).

days 1, 3, and 4 after nerve root compression (p < 0.0001)
[see Fig. 5(a)]. However, for burst SCS beginning on day 4,
the number of paw withdrawals is significantly reduced on days
5, 7, 10, and 14 from the corresponding levels on day 4 (p ࣘ
0.023), and the number of paw withdrawals after burst SCS is
not different from baseline [see Fig. 5(a)]. Likewise, tonic SCS
beginning on day 4 also significantly reduces the number of paw
withdrawals on all subsequent testing days compared to day 4 (p
ࣘ 0.005), also returning to baseline [see Fig. 5(a)]. The number
of paw withdrawals is not different on any day for rats receiving
burst SCS compared to those receiving tonic SCS. The number
of paw withdrawals for the contralateral forepaw is unchanged
from baseline on all days for all rats.
Following the behavioral results, serum GABA concentrations are also altered after a painful nerve root compression, but
unlike the pain symptoms, the GABA levels are differentially
regulated by the mode of SCS [see Fig. 5]. After painful nerve
root compression, serum GABA is significantly reduced to 11
± 6% of baseline levels on day 7 (p = 0.0007) and 27 ± 19%
of baseline on day 14 (p = 0.008) [see Fig. 5(b)]. During the
application of tonic SCS, serum GABA concentrations are 79
± 49% of baseline on day 7, and 88 ± 36% of baseline on
day 14, but are not different from baseline levels on either day

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 5. Allodynia and serum GABA concentrations during burst and tonic
SCS. (a) Painful nerve root compression (NRC only) induces an increase in
ipsilateral paw withdrawals (∗ p < 0.008, NRC only versus baseline). The groups
undergoing painful NRC before the application of burst SCS (NRC + Burst) or
tonic SCS (NRC + Tonic) also develop an increase in paw withdrawals after
the NRC injury (#p < 0.0001, NRC + Burst versus baseline; ࢳ p < 0.0001,
NRC + Tonic versus baseline). Both burst and tonic SCS application started
at day 4 significantly reduce the number of paw withdrawals from the number
of withdrawals that are detected on day 4 before the SCS is turned ON († p <
0.023, NRC + Burst versus day 4; ‡ p < 0.005, NRC + Tonic versus day 4). (b)
Serum GABA levels decrease from preinjury baseline levels on days 7 and 14
after a painful nerve root compression (NRC only) and nerve root compression
with burst SCS (NRC + Burst) (∗ p < 0.009). However, GABA levels measured
at these times after tonic SCS are not different from baseline.

[see Fig. 5(b)]. However, during the application of burst SCS,
serum GABA concentrations remain significantly decreased at
29 ± 34% of baseline on day 7 (p = 0.017), and 34 ± 20% of
baseline on day 14 (p = 0.009) [see Fig. 5(b)], similar to the
responses observed with no SCS treatment.
IV. DISCUSSION
Burst and tonic SCS similarly reduce dorsal horn neuronal
firing during noxious stimulation of the forepaw on day 7 and
also alter pain symptoms to the same degree after a painful
compression of the cervical nerve root [see Figs. 2, 3, and 5].
Tonic SCS is believed to activate GABAergic signaling in the
dorsal horn as a primary mechanism of action [16], [17], which
is supported by the ineffectiveness of tonic SCS in the presence
of the GABAB receptor antagonist [see Fig. 4(b)]. However, the
effects of burst SCS are not abolished by the GABAB receptor antagonist [see Fig. 4(a)]. This difference in effectiveness
is paralleled by the stimulation of GABA levels in serum, with
tonic SCS restoring serum GABA concentrations to preinjury
baseline levels but burst SCS not altering serum GABA levels
from those that are decreased after injury [see Fig. 5(b)]. Collectively these results suggest that, despite similar attenuation of
radicular pain by burst and tonic SCS, GABA signaling appears
to not contribute to burst SCS-induced analgesia.

CROSBY et al.: BURST AND TONIC SCS DIFFERENTIALLY ACTIVATE GABAERGIC MECHANISMS TO ATTENUATE PAIN

A. Effects of Burst and Tonic SCS on Neuronal Activity and
Tactile Allodynia
Painful nerve root compression induces increased evoked
dorsal horn neuronal firing during noxious stimulation of the
forepaw by between two and three times the activity in controls
[19]. Both burst and tonic SCS significantly reduce this hyperexcitability in dorsal horn WDR neurons [see Figs. 2 and 3].
This attenuation of neuronal hyperexcitability that parallels reduced behavioral sensitivity has also been reported for pharmacological interventions that attenuate pain after nerve root
compression and joint injury in the rat [19], [20], [24], [39].
Tonic SCS has been previously reported to reduce allodynia after
peripheral nerve injury by normalizing the responses of hyperexcitable WDR neurons [32], especially to innocuous stimuli
like the 4-g von Frey filament used in the current study [see
Fig. 5(a)]. Therefore, the attenuation of WDR neuronal activity in the dorsal horn is a likely contributor to the decrease
in behavioral sensitivity that is also observed with burst SCS
[see Figs. 2–5].
Burst and tonic SCS appear to attenuate neuronal firing for
different durations after the cessation of SCS in response to the
noxious 26-g von Frey filament and pinch stimuli [see Fig. 3].
However, those differences in the temporal effects of SCS modes
are likely an artifact of statistical testing, because the evoked
spike counts are not different between burst and tonic SCS for
any noxious or innocuous stimulus at baseline or at any of the
post-SCS times [see Fig. 3]. These results suggest that, overall,
neither mode of SCS is more or less effective at attenuating
spinal neuronal hyperexcitability over the duration following
stimulation that was tested in this study. Furthermore, the lack
of difference between the effects of tonic and burst SCS in
response to noxious stimulation (26 g, pinch) of the forepaw
suggests that burst SCS inhibits nociception by attenuating the
hyperactivity of nociceptive neurons in the dorsal horn, similar
to those effects reported for tonic SCS [32].
Similarly, the decreases in tactile allodynia are not different
between burst SCS and tonic SCS [see Fig. 5(a)], further supporting that burst stimulation is as effective as tonic stimulation
for reducing radicular pain in this model. Tang et al. [11] also
reported no significant differences in the effects of burst and
tonic SCS on lumbar dorsal horn neuronal firing in response to
noxious pinch. However, that study found the visceromotor reflexes to be more attenuated after burst SCS than after tonic SCS
[11]. That finding suggests that additional metrics, other than
evoked dorsal horn neuronal firing and behavioral hypersensitivity to mechanical stimulation, may be more sensitive to potential
differences between burst and tonic stimulation. However, the
study by Tang et al. [11] assessed nociceptive circuits in naı̈ve
animals, while our studies evaluate SCS-induced analgesia after
neuropathic pain is established. The extensive modifications in
sensory processing that occur in chronic pain states after nerve
injury complicate any direct comparisons between our findings
and those of Tang et al., despite both studies using matching
SCS parameters.
Although burst SCS reduces VAS pain scores significantly
more than tonic SCS in patients with chronic pain [3], [6],

1611

[8], our study detected no differences between burst and tonic
SCS for attenuating behavioral and/or neuronal sensitivity after
radicular injury [see Figs. 2, 3, and 5]. The electrophysiological
and behavioral metrics used in this study describe the analgesic
effects of burst and tonic SCS in allodynic rats; however, patientreported pain scores incorporate additional factors that were not
explicitly studied here, including spontaneous pain, emotional
perceptions of pain, and the presence or absence of paresthesia
during SCS [8], [40], [41]. Indeed, De Ridder et al. [6] suggested that burst SCS may modulate those affective dimensions
and attention to pain rather than suppressing nociception more
than tonic SCS, a notion that is at least indirectly supported by
our data showing similar spinal neuronal effects of burst and
tonic stimulation [see Figs. 2 and 3]. Paresthesia may also play
a particularly important role in determining pain outcomes during SCS because of the widely varying positive and negative
experiences patients associate with paresthetic sensation [8].
Additional behavioral assessments, incorporating measures of
paresthesia, spontaneous pain, and the affective dimensions of
pain may better capture those effects of burst SCS that are more
clinically relevant and capture all aspects of pain. In addition,
while no tissue or electrode damage were observed by visual
inspection, histology was not performed to evaluate the relative
effects on tissue or cell health from these SCS treatments. Future studies should also evaluate the potential for tissue damage
caused by the delivery of SCS.
B. GABAergic Mechanisms in Burst and Tonic SCS
Tonic SCS activates signaling through GABAB receptors to
inhibit nociception in the dorsal horn [15], [17]. The GABAB
receptor antagonist, CGP35348, abolishes the effects of tonic
SCS [see Fig. 4(b)], validating the role of GABAB receptor activation in tonic SCS-induced spinal inhibition. However, neuronal firing is significantly reduced from baseline after burst SCS
despite the spinal superfusion of CGP35348 [see Fig. 4(a)], indicating that GABAB receptor activation is not required for burst
SCS-induced inhibition in the dorsal horn. Spinal superfusion of
drug solutions can lead to steep drug concentration gradients in
the dorsal horn, which can be greatly affected by metabolism or
uptake of the drug [38]. Because CGP35348 reduces the effectiveness of tonic SCS on dorsal horn WDR neuronal firing [see
Fig. 4(b)], the effective concentration in the deep dorsal horn
was taken as sufficient to inhibit GABA signaling. However,
other drug delivery methods, like intrathecal injection or dorsal
horn microdialysis [15], [17], may produce more uniform drug
concentrations and inhibition of GABA signaling. Nonetheless,
based on studies with a radiolabeled neuropeptide showing that
peak dorsal horn concentrations occur after 15–30 min of superfusion [38], solutions were refreshed every 20–30 min in order
to maintain antagonist concentrations in the dorsal horn. Furthermore, burst and tonic SCS were applied sequentially during
recording of the same dorsal horn neurons, so any differential
effects of the two modes of SCS are not due to differences in
drug penetration or efficacy between rats.
GABA levels in the blood may be influenced by nonneuronal endogenous sources [42], leading to a lack of correlation

1612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

between serum and central nervous system GABA concentrations [25], [43]. Quantifying intracellular and extracellular
GABA concentrations in the dorsal horn would provide a more
direct measurement of GABA signaling and dysfunction in the
spinal cord [44], [45]. However, the changes in serum GABA
levels in this study [see Fig. 5(b)] are similar to those changes
in extracellular GABA in the dorsal horn after nerve injury and
after nerve injury with administration of tonic SCS in the rat
[14], [16]. Therefore, serum GABA levels may reflect extracellular concentrations in the dorsal horn and may also serve as a
proxy indicator of the effects of SCS on spinal inhibition.
Tonic SCS restores serum GABA concentrations nearly to
baseline levels, but serum GABA remains reduced during the
application of burst SCS [see Fig. 5(b)]. These results suggest
that burst SCS attenuates dorsal horn neuronal firing and tactile allodynia without inducing GABA release. Burst SCS has a
significantly lower motor threshold than tonic SCS [see Table I]
[11], and burst SCS also requires a lower amplitude than tonic
SCS to relieve pain in patients [3]. These findings may be due
to the fact that burst SCS has a longer pulse width than tonic
SCS and requires less temporal integration to reach the activation thresholds of stimulated neurons [3], [9]. Therefore, it is
possible that the burst SCS amplitudes that attenuate dorsal horn
neuronal firing are too low to activate the release of GABA in the
spinal dorsal horn, and instead activate other non-GABAergic
mechanisms to inhibit nociception in the spinal cord. After the
cessation of tonic SCS, GABA concentrations have been shown
to return to pre-SCS levels over the course of several hours [14],
[16]. However, burst and tonic SCS were not turned off in this
study since the goal was to monitor the effects of stimulation on
behavioral hypersensitivity; so, it was not possible to evaluate
post-SCS GABA concentrations.
In addition to inducing GABA release, tonic SCS also stimulates release of serotonin [46], acetylcholine [47], and noradrenaline [48], each of which contribute to the inhibitory effects
of SCS on dorsal horn neurons. Many of the inhibitory effects
of those additional neurotransmitters are attributed to secondary
activation of GABAergic interneurons in the dorsal horn [49]–
[51]. However, serotonin and noradrenaline can induce direct
inhibitory effects on dorsal horn projection neurons [52]–[54],
so it is possible that burst SCS attenuates nociception by activating inhibitory neurotransmitter systems that may partially act
independently of GABA signaling. Dorsal column stimulation
can also directly inhibit dorsal horn neuronal firing, either by
presynaptically depolarizing primary afferents to block excitatory neurotransmission, or producing hyperpolarizing inhibitory
potentials in dorsal horn neurons [55], [56]. Further studies are
required to determine what non-GABAergic neurotransmitter
systems or neurophysiological mechanisms may be activated
during burst SCS to inhibit nociception in the dorsal horn.
V. CONCLUSION
Overall, this study demonstrates that burst SCS attenuates
dorsal horn neuronal firing and tactile allodynia as well as tonic
SCS after painful nerve root compression. Burst and tonic SCS
both reduce spinal dorsal horn WDR neuronal firing and tactile

allodynia to the same degree after painful nerve root compression. However, despite these similarities between SCS modes
in their suppression of dorsal horn neuronal activity, burst and
tonic SCS appear to activate different cellular mechanisms. Unlike tonic SCS, burst SCS does not rely on GABA release and
activation of GABAB receptors to inhibit spinal neuronal firing.
Other neurochemical and neurophysiological mechanisms may
provide the spinal inhibitory effects that appear to be activated
by burst SCS for analgesia. This study highlights the need for
continued studies to elucidate the specific mechanisms underlying burst stimulation in order to continue developing burst SCS
as a treatment for chronic pain.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. R. Foreman for supplying
the stimulating ball electrode for our neuronal recordings.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Cameron, “Safety and efficacy of spinal cord stimulation for the treatment of chronic pain: A 20-year literature review,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 100,
pp. 254–267, 2004.
[2] K. M. Alo et al., “Four year follow-up of dual electrode spinal cord
stimulation for chronic pain,” Neuromodulation, vol. 5, pp. 79–88, 2002.
[3] D. De Ridder et al., “Burst spinal cord stimulation: Toward paresthesiafree pain suppression,” Neurosurgery, vol. 66, pp. 986–990, 2010.
[4] M. P. Stojanovic and S. Abdi, “Spinal cord stimulation,” Pain Physician,
vol. 5, pp. 156–166, 2002.
[5] A. K. Compton et al., “Spinal cord stimulation: A review,” Curr. Pain
Headache Rep., vol. 16, pp. 35–42, 2012.
[6] D. De Ridder et al. “Burst spinal cord stimulation for limb and back pain,”
World Neurosurg., vol. 80, pp. 642–649, 2013.
[7] T. C. Zhang et al., “Mechanisms and models of spinal cord stimulation
for the treatment of neuropathic pain,” Brain Res., vol. 1569, pp. 19–31,
2014.
[8] C. C. De Vos et al., “Burst spinal cord stimulation evaluated in patients
with failed back surgery syndrome and painful diabetic neuropathy,” Neuromodulation, vol. 17, pp. 152–159, 2014.
[9] S. Schu et al., “A prospective, randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled study to examine the effectiveness of burst spinal cord stimulation patterns for the treatment of failed back surgery syndrome,” Neuromodulation, vol. 17, pp. 443–450, 2014.
[10] B. Linderoth and R. D. Foreman, “Mechanisms of spinal cord stimulation in painful syndromes: Role of animal models,” Pain Med., vol. 7,
pp. S14–S26, 2006.
[11] R. Tang et al. “Comparison of burst and tonic spinal cord stimulation on
spinal neural processing in an animal model,” Neuromodulation, vol. 17,
pp. 143–151, 2014.
[12] M. Malcangio and N. G. Bowery, “GABA and its receptors in the spinal
cord,” Trends Pharmacol. Sci., vol. 17, pp. 457–462, 1996.
[13] G. M. Drew et al., “Mechanical allodynia following contusion injury of
the rat spinal cord is associated with loss of GABAergic inhibition in the
dorsal horn,” Pain, vol. 109, pp. 379–388, 2004.
[14] C. O. Stiller et al., “Release of γ-aminobutyric acid in the dorsal horn and
suppression of tactile allodynia by spinal cord stimulation in mononeuropathic rats,” Neurosurgery, vol. 39, pp. 367–375, 1996.
[15] J. G. Cui et al., “Spinal cord stimulation attenuates augmented dorsal horn
release of excitatory amino acids in mononeuropathy via a GABAergic
mechanism,” Pain, vol. 73, pp. 87–95, 1997.
[16] B. Linderoth et al., “Gamma-aminobutyric acid is released in the dorsal
horn by electrical spinal cord stimulation: An in vivo microdialysis study
in the rat,” Neurosurgery, vol. 34, pp. 484–489, 1994.
[17] J. G. Cui et al., “Effects of spinal cord stimulation on touch-evoked allodynia involve GABAergic mechanisms: An experimental study in the
mononeuropathic rat,” Pain, vol. 66, pp. 287–295, 1996.
[18] G. Lind et al., “Baclofen-enhanced spinal cord stimulation and intrathecal
baclofen alone for neuropathic pain: Long-term outcome of a pilot study,”
Eur. J. Pain, vol. 12, pp. 132–136, 2008.

CROSBY et al.: BURST AND TONIC SCS DIFFERENTIALLY ACTIVATE GABAERGIC MECHANISMS TO ATTENUATE PAIN

[19] K. J. Nicholson et al., “Upregulation of GLT-1 by treatment with ceftriaxone alleviates radicular pain by reducing spinal astrocyte activation and
neuronal hyperexcitability,” J. Neurosci. Res., vol. 92, pp. 116–129, 2014.
[20] K. J. Nicholson et al., “Riluzole effects on behavioral sensitivity and the
development of axonal damage and spinal modifications that occur after
painful nerve root compression: Laboratory investigation,” J. Neurosurg.
Spine, vol. 20, pp. 751–762, 2014.
[21] R. D. Hubbard and B. A. Winkelstein, “Dorsal root compression produces
myelinated axonal degeneration near the biomechanical thresholds for
mechanical behavioral hypersensitivity,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 212, no. 2,
pp. 482–489, 2008.
[22] S. M. Rothman et al., “Time-dependent mechanics and measures of glial
activation and behavioral sensitivity in a rodent model of radiculopathy,”
J. Neurotraum., vol. 27, pp. 803–814, 2010.
[23] S. M. Rothman and B. A. Winkelstein, “Chemical and mechanical nerve
root insults induce differential behavioral sensitivity and glial activation
that are enhanced in combination,” Brain Res., vol. 1181, pp. 30–43, 2007.
[24] J. R. Smith et al., “Salmon and human thrombin differentially regulate
radicular pain, glial-induced inflammation and spinal neuronal excitability
through the protease-activated receptor-1,” PLoS One, vol. 8, p. e80006,
2013, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080006.
[25] P. Bohlen et al., “The relationship between GABA concentrations in brain
and cerebrospinal fluid,” Brain Res., vol. 167, pp. 297–305, 1979.
[26] A. Kakee et al., “Efflux of a suppressive neurotransmitter, GABA, across
the blood–brain barrier,” J. Neurochem., vol. 79, pp. 110–118, 2001.
[27] P. Janik et al., “The analysis of selected neurotransmitter concentrations
in serum of patients with Tourette syndrome,” Neurol. Neurochir. Pol.,
vol. 44, pp. 251–259, 2010.
[28] K. J. Nicholson et al. “Transient nerve root compression load and duration differentially mediate behavioral sensitivity and associated spinal
astrocyte activation and mGluR5 expression,” Neuroscience, vol. 209,
pp. 187–95, 2012.
[29] M. Zimmerman, “Ethical guidelines for investigations of experimental
pain in conscious animals,” Pain, vol. 16, pp. 109–110, 1983.
[30] N. D. Crosby et al. “Stimulation parameters define the effectiveness of
burst spinal cord stimulation in a rat model of neuropathic pain,” Neuromodulation, vol. 18, pp. 1–8, 2015.
[31] Y. Guan et al., “Spinal cord stimulation-induced analgesia: Electrical stimulation of dorsal column and dorsal roots attenuates dorsal horn neuronal
excitability in neuropathic rats,” Anesthesiology, vol. 113, pp. 1392–1405,
2010.
[32] V. Yakhnitsa et al., “Spinal cord stimulation attenuates dorsal horn neuronal hyperexcitability in a rat model of mononeuropathy,” Pain, vol. 79,
pp. 223–233, 1999.
[33] C. Qin et al., “Is constant current or constant voltage spinal cord stimulation superior for the suppression of nociceptive visceral and somatic
stimuli? A rat model,” Neuromodulation, vol. 15, pp. 132–143, 2012.
[34] B. C. Hains et al., “Serotonergic neural precursor cell grafts attenuate
bilateral hyperexcitability of dorsal horn neurons after spinal hemisection
in rat,” Neuroscience, vol. 116, pp. 1097–1110, 2003.
[35] K. P. Quinn et al., “Neuronal hyperexcitability in the dorsal horn after
painful facet joint injury,” Pain, vol. 151, pp. 414–421, 2010.
[36] I. Buesa et al., “Disinhibition of spinal responses to primary afferent input by antagonism at GABA receptors in urethane-anaesthetised rats is
dependent on NMDA and metabotropic glutamate receptors,” Neuropharmacology, vol. 50, pp. 585–594, 2006.
[37] I. Buesa et al., “Morphine-induced depression of spinal excitation is not altered following acute disruption of GABAA or GABAB receptor activity,”
Eur. J. Pain, vol. 12, pp. 677–685, 2008.

1613

[38] H. Beck et al., “Controlled superfusion of the rat spinal cord for studying
non-synaptic transmission: an autoradiographic analysis,” J. Neurosci.
Meth., vol. 58, pp. 193–202, 1995.
[39] L. Dong et al., “Gabapentin alleviates facet-mediated pain through reduced
neuronal hyperexcitability and astrocytic activation in the spinal cord,”
J. Pain, vol. 14, pp. 1564–1572, 2013.
[40] E. Fernandez and D. C. Turk, “Sensory and affective components of pain:
Separation and synthesis,” Psychol. Bull., vol. 112, pp. 205–217, 1992.
[41] D. D. Price, “Psychological and neural mechanisms of the affective dimension of pain,” Science, vol. 288, pp. 1769–1772, 2000.
[42] S. L. Erdö, “Peripheral GABAergic mechanisms,” Trends Pharmacol. Sci.,
vol. 6, pp. 205–208, 1985.
[43] M. P. Biju et al., “Hypothalamic GABA receptor functional regulation and
liver cell proliferation,” Mol. Cell. Biochem., vol. 216, pp. 65–70, 2002.
[44] S. P. Janssen et al., “Decreased intracellular GABA levels contribute to
spinal cord stimulation-induced analgesia in rats suffering from painful
peripheral neuropathy: The role of KCC2 and GABAA receptor-mediated
inhibition,” Neurochem. Int., vol. 60, pp. 21–30, 2012.
[45] S. P. Janssen et al., “Differential GABAergic disinhibition during the
development of painful peripheral neuropathy,” Neuroscience, vol. 184,
pp. 183–194, 2011.
[46] B. Linderoth et al., “Dorsal column stimulation induces release of serotonin and substance P in the cat dorsal horn,” Neurosurgery, vol. 31,
pp. 289–296, 1992.
[47] G. Schechtmann et al., “Cholinergic mechanisms involved in the pain
relieving effect of spinal cord stimulation in a model of neuropathy,”
Pain, vol. 139, pp. 136–145, 2008.
[48] B. E. Levin and O. R. Hubschmann, “Dorsal column stimulation effect
on human cerebrospinal fluid and plasma catecholamines,” Neurology,
vol. 30, pp. 65–71, 1980.
[49] S. R. Chen and H. L. Pan, “Spinal GABAB receptors mediate antinociceptive actions of cholinergic agents in normal and diabetic rats,” Brain
Res., vol. 965, pp. 67–74, 2003.
[50] Z. Song et al., “Spinal 5-HT receptors that contribute to the pain-relieving
effects of spinal cord stimulation in a rat model of neuropathy,” Pain,
vol. 152, pp. 1666–1673, 2011.
[51] H. M. Zhang et al., “Signaling mechanisms mediating muscarinic enhancement of GABAergic synaptic transmission in the spinal cord,” Neuroscience, vol. 158, pp. 1577–1588, 2009.
[52] T. J. Grudt et al., “Inhibition by 5-hydroxytryptamine and noradrenaline in
substantia gelatinosa of guinea-pig spinal trigeminal nucleus,” J. Physiol.,
vol. 485, pp. 113–120, 1995.
[53] R. A. North and M. Yoshimura, “The actions of noradrenaline on neurones
of the rat substantia gelatinosa in vitro,” J. Physiol., vol. 349, pp. 43–55,
1984.
[54] K. Narikawa et al., “In vivo patch-clamp analysis of IPSCs evoked in
rat substantia gelatinosa neurons by cutaneous mechanical stimulation,”
J. Neurophysiol., vol. 84, pp. 2171–2174, 2000.
[55] M. Sonohata et al., “Actions of noradrenaline on substantia gelatinosa
neurones in the rat spinal cord revealed by in vivo patch recording,”
J. Physiol., vol. 555, pp. 515–526, 2004.
[56] K. Shimoji et al., “Dorsal column stimulation in man: Facilitation of
primary afferent depolarization,” Anesth. Analog., vol. 61, pp. 410–413,
1982.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

