1706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Enhanced Motor Imagery Training Using
a Hybrid BCI With Feedback
Tianyou Yu, Jun Xiao, Fangyi Wang, Rui Zhang, Zhenghui Gu, Member, IEEE, Andrzej Cichocki,
and Yuanqing Li∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: Motor imagery-related mu/beta rhythms,
which can be voluntarily modulated by subjects, have been widely
used in EEG-based brain computer interfaces (BCIs). Moreover,
it has been suggested that motor imagery-specific EEG differences
can be enhanced by feedback training. However, the differences
observed in the EEGs of naive subjects are typically not sufficient
to provide reliable EEG control and thus result in unintended
feedback. Such feedback can frustrate subjects and impede training. In this study, a hybrid BCI paradigm combining motor imagery and steady-state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs) has
been proposed to provide effective continuous feedback for motor imagery training. Methods: During the initial training sessions,
subjects must focus on flickering buttons to evoke SSVEPs as they
perform motor imagery tasks. The output/feedback of the hybrid
BCI is based on hybrid features consisting of motor imagery- and
SSVEP-related brain signals. In this context, the SSVEP plays a
more important role than motor imagery in generating feedback.
As the training progresses, the subjects can gradually decrease
their visual attention to the flickering buttons, provided that the
feedback is still effective. In this case, the feedback is mainly based
on motor imagery. Results: Our experimental results demonstrate
that subjects generate distinguishable brain patterns of hand motor imagery after only five training sessions lasting approximately
1.5 h each. Conclusion: The proposed hybrid feedback paradigm
can be used to enhance motor imagery training. Significance: This
hybrid BCI system with feedback can effectively identify the intentions of the subjects.
Index Terms—Brain–computer interface (BCI), hybrid feature,
motor imagery training, neuro-feedback, steady-state visually
evoked potentials (SSVEPs).

I. INTRODUCTION
RAIN–COMPUTER interfaces (BCIs) provide nonmuscular communication and control by directly translating
brain activities recorded from the scalp into computer control signals, thus enabling users with motor disabilities to con-

B

Manuscript received November 24, 2013; revised November 25, 2014; accepted February 1, 2015. Date of publication February 10, 2015; date of
current version June 16, 2015. This work was supported by the National
High-Tech R&D Program of China (863 Program) under Grant 2012AA011601,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 91120305 and
61401162, Guangdong Province Science Foundation for Research Team Program. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
* Y. Li is with the School of Automation Science and Engineering,
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China (e-mail:
auyqli@scut.edu.cn).
T. Yu, J. Xiao, F. Wang, R. Zhang, and Z. Gu are with the South China
University of Technology.
A. Cichocki is with the RIKEN Brain Science Institute.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2402283

vey their intent to the external world [1], [2]. For electroencephalography (EEG)-based BCIs, commonly used features include event-related P300 potentials [3], [4], steady-state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs) [5], [6] and motor imagery
(MI)-related mu/beta rhythms [7], [8]; among these features,
P300 potentials and SSVEPs are evoked by external stimuli,
whereas the mu/beta rhythm can be voluntarily modulated by the
subjects.
It has been well established that imagined movement of
the left or right hand results in event-related desynchronization (ERD) of the subject-specific band power (commonly mu
and beta) in the contralateral sensorimotor areas and eventrelated synchronization (ERS) on the ipsilateral side [9], [10].
The corresponding differences in EEG signals in the frequency
and spatial domains can be extracted to discriminate between
these mental states. These differences can be further incorporated into a BCI system. Several excellent applications, e.g.,
multidimensional control, have been achieved by sensorimotor
rhythm-based BCIs [11]–[14]. However, in many cases, these
differences are not sufficient to provide reliable EEG control
[15]–[17]. For example, it has been reported that for approximately 20% of potential users, the obtained accuracy does not
reach the criterion for controlling an application [15]. Moreover, many new users have difficulty adapting to the process of
completing an MI task. Therefore, one of the main issues in MIbased BCIs is determining how to efficiently train individuals
to perform MI tasks.
Feedback can help subjects test the effects of various control
strategies by providing them with instantaneous information
about EEG changes. Moreover, feedback may serve to maintain
subjects’ interest in and attention to a task [18]. Thus, it has
been accepted that task-specific differences can be enhanced by
several sessions of feedback training. In [18], Neuper et al. proposed to enhance EEG differences during left- and right-hand
MI through neuro-feedback. They used bar feedback, which has
been applied in most neuro-feedback studies on MI training.
The four subjects involved in the study achieved approximately
76% feedback accuracy on average after five training sessions.
Some of the subjects obtained higher performance with more
training sessions. Another study [19] used a real-time cortical
map of time–frequency features to train subjects performing
MI. An average off-line accuracy of 71.4% was achieved by
five subjects after a 30-min training session. In 2010, Blankertz
et al. tried to find a neurophysiological predictor of SMR-based
BCI performance [15]. Their study also achieved a feedback accuracy of 74.4% ± 16.5% among a large subject group (i.e., 80
subjects) in the first feedback session after a 30-min calibration.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YU et al.: ENHANCED MOTOR IMAGERY TRAINING USING A HYBRID BCI WITH FEEDBACK

Fig. 1. Timing of calibration (a) and feedback (b) trials of the NFP. The task
type was indicated by a cue arrow that randomly pointed to either the left or
right. During the calibration run, the subjects were instructed to imagine the
movement of either their left or right hands according to the cue arrow. During
the feedback runs, the task was to perform left- or right-hand imagery to extend
the feedback bar in the targeted direction, as indicated by the cue arrow, which
randomly pointed to either the left or right.

1707

with the data collected during an initial session. However, the
calibration data typically contains insufficient discriminability
at the beginning of training, particularly when the subject is
unfamiliar with the system. Therefore, the calibrated classifier
may not be sufficiently reliable to provide accurate feedback.
Unintended/inaccurate feedback (e.g., cursor movement in the
wrong direction in EEG-based cursor control systems) can frustrate subjects and impede training.
In this study, we propose a hybrid BCI system that combines
MI and SSVEP for MI training. In our system, subjects perform
an MI task indicated by a cue while focusing on a corresponding flickering SSVEP button. Continuous visual feedback is
based on hybrid features that consist of the MI and SSVEPs.
The learned classifier with hybrid features tends to assign large
weights to more discriminative features (MI or SSVEP features)
automatically. Specifically, the classifier assigns large weights
to the SSVEP features because SSVEP-based BCIs have the advantage of high detection accuracy even with little training [6],
[26]; therefore, accurate feedback is available at the beginning
of the training period. As the training proceeds, the subjects may
gradually decrease visual attention to the flickering button while
maintaining attention on the mental task of MI, provided that
they are becoming familiar with MI control. The classification
algorithm will gradually shift weight to the MI features (i.e.,
place larger weight on the MI features and decrease the weight
on the SSVEP features) if the subjects have learned to modulate
the related rhythmic activity. In this case, high feedback performance can be obtained. We hypothesize that accurate feedback
can facilitate MI training.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. The
methods, including the feedback paradigm and signal processing, are presented in Section II. The experimental results and
discussion are presented in Sections III and IV, respectively.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. METHODS

Fig. 2. GUI of the HFP. The dark arrow in the GUI indicates the current task
type. The feedback bar is placed in the center. The two red arrows with black
borders on the left and the right sides are the two SSVEP stimulus buttons.

A large variation in the results, however, were observed over the
sessions in these studies.
Most feedback-based training paradigms are conducted in a
supervised manner, which means that an initial model (classifier) has to be constructed to classify the incoming signal and
provide the content of the feedback. Some researchers set up a
classifier to detect MI using the data collected during executed
movements. This classifier is based on the finding that sensorimotor EEG changes in the motor cortex are similar during active/passive movement and MI tasks [20]. Adaptive methods can
be applied to update the model during feedback [21]–[24]. However, some studies have reported that feedback can have both
inhibitory and facilitative effects on EEG control and that these
effects vary across subjects [25]. The feedback performance of
BCIs depends largely on the initial model, which is calibrated

A. Subjects and Group Assignment
Twenty-four healthy volunteers (19 male, five female; aged
23–30; all right-handed) from the local research unit participated in our experiment. None of the subjects had prior experience with MI-based BCIs. All of the subjects provided informed
consent for this study after the experimental procedure was explained. Subjects were randomly assigned into intervention and
control groups, with 12 subjects in each group. The assignment
was even between the two groups.
B. Experimental Paradigms
Two different types of feedback were utilized and compared
in this study: 1) hybrid feedback and 2) normal (standard) feedback. Both types of feedback were continuous, i.e., the feedback
was provided according to a real-valued variable (linear distance
function), as described later. The EEG signals were analyzed,
and the feedback results were presented and updated in real
time. The continuous feedback was presented as a horizontal
bar, which was extended according to the results of the online

1708

Fig. 3. Timing of calibration (a) and feedback (b) trials of the HFP. The task
type was indicated by a cue arrow that randomly pointed to either the left or
the right. During the calibration run, the subjects were instructed to imagine the
movement of either their left or right hand while focusing on the corresponding
SSVEP stimulus (red thick arrow) button indicated by the cue arrow. During the
feedback runs, the task was to imagine left/right hand movements and focus on
the left/right SSVEP stimulus button to extend the feedback bar in the targeted
direction, as indicated by the cue arrow.

Fig. 4. Setup and timing of the evaluation experiment. The ball fell at a
predefined speed, and the horizontal offset of the ball was controlled by the
classification results (scores) of the subjects’ motor imageries. The subjects’
task was to control the ball such that it would fall onto the target bar as far as
possible from the center of the screen.

classification of the subjects’ real-time EEG signal. The subjects
in the intervention group received MI training with the hybrid
feedback paradigm (HFP), whereas the subjects in the control
group received MI training with the normal feedback paradigm
(NFP).

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

In both groups, the subjects were trained for five sessions
with one session per week. Each training session consisted of
one calibration run and two feedback runs, lasting for approximately 1.5 h. The interval between two neighboring runs was
approximately 5 min. Each run consisted of 60 trials. After the
five training sessions, all of the subjects were assessed in an
evaluation experiment. The evaluation session, including two
runs, was conducted one week later after the fifth training session at a similar time of day as the training session. The subjects
were told to avoid muscle tension and perform kinesthetic rather
than visual MI during the training [27].
1) NFP: Each normal feedback training session began with
a calibration run. During the calibration run, 60 left-/right-hand
MI tasks/trials were performed without feedback. These tasks
were pseudorandomly distributed throughout the run. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), a calibration trial started with a 2-s blank
screen, followed by a fixation cross that was displayed at the
center for 2 s. Then, a cue arrow that randomly pointed to either
the left or the right appeared. The subjects had 8 s to imagine
the movement of either their left or right hand, as indicated
by the cue arrow. The calibration data were employed to construct the classifier for the subsequent feedback runs.
During the normal feedback runs, a horizontal bar was presented on the computer screen as shown in Fig. 1. The subjects
were asked to extend the feedback bar in the targeted direction,
which was indicated by the cue arrow, by performing left-/righthand MI. Note that this feedback bar could only be extended in
the targeted direction; in other words, when a left cue arrow was
presented, the bar started from the right end of the bar frame
and was never extended beyond the right end and vice versa.
The length of the feedback bar was determined by the online
classification results of the subject’s real-time EEG signal and
was updated every 200 ms.
2) HFP: As shown in Fig. 2, the GUI for the hybrid feedback
training included two SSVEP stimulus buttons (the two red
arrows) that were presented on the left and right sides of the
screen, a feedback bar that was placed in the center of the
GUI, and a cue arrow above the feedback bar that indicated the
current task type. The flicker frequencies of these two buttons
were fl = 7.5 Hz (left) and fr = 6.0 Hz (right). The feedback
bar was only available during the training runs. The timing of
the trials during a calibration run was the same as that for the
normal feedback (see Fig. 3(a)). The two SSVEP buttons began
to flicker once a cue arrow that pointed randomly to either the
left or right appeared. In addition to imagining hand movements
during the task, the subjects were instructed to pay attention
to the corresponding SSVEP stimulus button. Specifically, in a
trial (“left” or “right” trial), the subjects were asked to imagine
either a left or right hand movement while paying attention to
the corresponding SSVEP stimulus button. Hybrid features that
consisted of both MI and SSVEP features were extracted from
the calibration data. These features were used to further train a
classifier for the hybrid feedback training runs.
Fig. 3(b) presents the paradigm of a hybrid feedback trial.
First, the strategies for extending the feedback bar of the GUI
(see Fig. 2) in the targeted direction were described to the subjects. In the case of “left” trials, the subjects were instructed to

YU et al.: ENHANCED MOTOR IMAGERY TRAINING USING A HYBRID BCI WITH FEEDBACK

1709

“P4,” “O1,” “Oz,” and “O2”) distributed in the parietal and occipital regions were selected and bandpass filtered between 4
and 32 Hz.
1) Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) for MI: The CSP was
applied for MI discrimination. The multichannel EEG signals
were first bandpass-filtered around μ–band (8–13 Hz) and β–
band (13–30 Hz). Next, two covariance matrices Σl and Σr were
calculated, which corresponded to the two classes, as shown
below.
Σl =

Fig. 5.

Names and distribution of electrodes.

imagine movements of their left hands while focusing on the
left SSVEP stimulus button. For the “right” trials, the subjects
were instructed to imagine movements of their right hands while
focusing on the right SSVEP stimulus button. As the training
proceeded, the subjects were told to pay more and more attention to the MI. In this case, the feedback bar was extended
mainly by MI. Online classification was performed with the hybrid features of MI and SSVEP. The feedback bar length was
calculated according to the online classification results and was
updated every 200 ms, as in the NFP feedback runs.
3) Evaluation Procedure: To compare these two feedback
training paradigms, each subject participated in an evaluation
experiment consisting of two runs, with each run consisting
of 60 trials. In the evaluation experiment, the subjects played
a basketball game using MI, as illustrated in Fig. 4. For each
trial, a horizontal bar extending across half of the screen width
appeared at the bottom of the screen, indicating the targeted
side. The ball was initially placed at the top center point of the
screen. During the 8-s task period, the ball fell at a predefined
speed, and the horizontal offset of the ball was controlled by the
classification results of the subjects’ MI. The task was to control
the ball to fall on the target bar as far as possible from the center
of the screen. Subsequently, the bar flashed as a reward if the
ball hit the target bar; otherwise, a blank screen was presented.
C. EEG Recording and Processing
The subjects were seated comfortably in an armchair with
their hands resting on the arms of the chair. A 19-in LCD
display was placed on the table approximately 1 m in front
of the subjects. Scalp EEG signals were recorded with a 32channel Quik-Cap and a SynAmps2 amplifier (Neuroscan Compumedics, USA) at a sampling rate of 250 Hz with bandpass
filtering between 0.05 and 100 Hz. The two channels that represented eye movements, “HEOG” and “VEOG,” were excluded
for signal processing. For MI feature extraction, the remaining
30 channels, as shown in Fig. 5, were used without further channel selection. The multichannel EEG signals were rereferenced
with the common average reference before further analysis. For
SSVEP detection, the signals from six electrodes (“P3,” “Pz,”



Xj ∗ X
j

j ∈Cl

trace(Xj ∗ X
j )

, Σr =



Xj ∗ X
j

j ∈Cr

trace(Xj ∗ X
j )

(1)

where Xj ∈ RC ×T denotes an EEG data matrix of the jth trial,
C is the number of EEG channels, T is the number of samples
in each trial, and Cl and Cr refer to the two classes (left- and
right-hand imagery, respectively) of the training data.
The CSP was utilized to find a spatial filter matrix W ∈
RC ×C that maximized the difference in the average band power
of the filtered signal, while maintaining a constant sum.
WΣl W = D,

WΣr W = I − D

(2)

where I is an identity matrix and D is a diagonal matrix. This
W can be obtained from the generalized eigenvectors of Σl
and Σr [28], which are ordered according to the corresponding
generalized eigenvalues. We constructed a matrix W0 termed
the CSP transformation matrix composed of the first m rows
(three in this study) and the last m rows of W. Given a new
EEG data matrix X, the projected log variances (In MATLAB:
log(diag(W0 XX W0 ))) were used as the features for learning.
2) Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) for SSVEP: CCA
was employed for multichannel SSVEP detection [29], [30]. In
contrast to the ordinary correlation of two variables, CCA attempts to find a pair of linear combinations for two sets of variables such that the correlation between the two combined canonical variables is maximized. Consider two multidimensional random variables X̄, Y and their linear combinations x = X̄ Wx
and y = Y Wy , respectively. CCA finds the weight vectors
Wx and Wy that maximize the correlation between x and y by
solving the following problem:
max ρ(x, y) = 

W x ,W y

=

E[x y]
E[x x]E[y y]

E[Wx X̄Y Wy ]
E[Wx X̄X̄ Wx ]E[Wy YY Wy ]

.

(3)

The maximum of ρ with respect to Wx and Wy is the maximum
canonical correlation. Projections onto Wx and Wy , i.e., x and
y, are called canonical variants [30].
For SSVEP feature extraction in this study, given a segment
of 5–32-Hz bandpass-filtered multichannel EEG signals X (a
sample matrix of the random vector X̄), we first constructed two
SSVEP models (reference signals), Yl and Yr , corresponding
to the two stimulus frequencies fl and fr , respectively. The
SSVEP models Yl and Yr had the same number of time points

1710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

as X and were set according to
⎛
⎞
sin(2πft)
⎜
⎟
⎜ cos(2πft) ⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
.
..
Yf = ⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜ sin(2πNh ft) ⎟
⎝
⎠

(4)

cos(2πNh ft)
where f = {fl , fr } and Nh is the number of harmonics. The
canonical correlation ρl and ρr between these two SSVEP models and the multichannel EEG signals X provided the SSVEP
detection features.
3) Classification and Feedback: For the NFP, only the MI
CSP features were used for model construction and online classification. In contrast, for the HFP, the CSP features and canonical
correlation coefficients were concatenated to construct hybrid
features for classification. Before training a classifier, each column of the training feature matrix X were linearly rescaled to
[−1, 1] , where X = [x(1), x(2), . . . , x(N )] , x(i) is a feature
vector of a trial, and N is the number of trials.
As indicated in (5), the extracted features x(k) (for the NFP,
x(k) consisted of the CSP features of MI, whereas for the HFP,
x(k) contained the CSP features as well as the canonical correlation features of SSVEP) were linearly combined by a weight
vector w and a bias w0 to calculate the classification score f (k).
Here, k denoted the kth update of the bar length w and the bias
w0 was obtained through linear discriminant analysis [31] of
the calibration data of each training session. A negative score
f (k) was classified as “left,” whereas a positive score f (k) was
classified as “right.” Next, we calculated the offset o(k), which
was proportional to the biased score with a coefficient a0 , using
(6). Given an x(k) extracted from an EEG segment when the
subject was in an idle state, the classifier output f (k) was expected to be zero. However, comparing the feedback phase with
the calibration phase, the mental state of the user varied and the
nontask related brain activity differed [32]. Thus, the obtained
f (k) might deviate from zero during feedback. Therefore, the
parameter b0 was used to eliminate such a bias. Specifically, a
number of idle trials, during which the subject was not performing any task, were collected. The same number of f (k)s were
obtained by classifying x(k)s extracted from these trials. b0 was
set to be the negative mean value of these f (k)s. On the other
hand, a0 controlled the movement speed of the bar and could
be adapted according to the subject’s state. Finally, based on the
offset o(k) of the current EEG signal window, the length of the
feedback bar l(k) was calculated using (8).
f (k) = w · x(k) + w0

(5)

o(k) = a0 · [f (k) + b0 ]

(6)

ˆl(k) = l(k − 1) + o(k)
⎧ˆ
ˆ
⎪
⎨ l(k), if (l(k) < 0 and cue = “lef t”)
l(k) =
or (ˆl(k) > 0 and cue = “right”)
⎪
⎩
0,
otherwise.

(7)

(8)

Fig. 6. Within-group averaged cross-validation accuracies for the MI and
SSVEP features (calculated using the calibration data) and the rates of successful online feedback for the training sessions of the HFP group. The standard
deviations are also presented.

(8) indicates that the feedback bar could only be extended to the
targeted direction. Thus, the bar was extended from the right
end of the bar frame when a left cue arrow was presented. The
bar could not move beyond the right end and vice versa.
For the evaluation experiment, the horizontal position of the
ball was given by
l(k) = l(k − 1) + o(k)

(9)

where o(k) is the same as in (6).
III. RESULTS
A. Accuracies
The accuracies were calculated using the calibration data and
feedback training data separately. For the subjects in the HFP
group, a ten-fold cross validation was performed on the MI
and SSVEP features, which were extracted from the calibration
data. The resulting cross-validation accuracies were averaged
within the group (shown in Fig. 6 using white (MI) and gray
(SSVEP) bars) for each training session. The rate of successful feedback was used to evaluate the performance of the online
feedback training data. Both the HFP and NFP provided positive
feedback only (i.e., the feedback bar could only be extended in
the targeted direction). Therefore, the feedback accuracies were
recomputed from the collected feedback EEG data rather than
being directly recorded during the online feedback training. In
contrast to the online feedback calculated using (8), the direction and length of the feedback bar was updated according to
the sign and absolute value, respectively, of l(k) in (9). A trial
was considered successful if the sign of the final l(k) was negative/positive for a “left”/“right” trial. The rates of successful
feedback were computed from the feedback runs of each session and were also averaged within the group. The dark bars in
Fig. 6 indicate the rates of successful feedback. The standard
deviations are presented to indicate the variances in this group.
For the NFP group, the same procedure was conducted to compute the accuracies, but the cross-validation accuracies of the
SSVEP features were not obtained. The average cross-validation

YU et al.: ENHANCED MOTOR IMAGERY TRAINING USING A HYBRID BCI WITH FEEDBACK

1711

Fig. 8. Mean and standard deviation of the offsets of the ball when hitting the
target bar for the two groups. The offset corresponds to the horizontal distance
between the hit position, where the ball falls on the target bar, and the horizontal
center of the screen. White bars indicate that the ball fell on the left side. Dark
bars indicate that the ball fell on the right side.
Fig. 7. Within-group averaged cross-validation accuracies for the MI features
(calculated by the calibration data) and the rates of successful online feedback
for the training sessions of the NFP group. The standard deviations are also
presented.

TABLE I
ACCURACIES OF THE TWO EVALUATION RUNS FOR EACH SUBJECT
IN BOTH THE HFP AND NFP GROUPS
HFP

NFP

Subject

Accuracy (%)
Run 1
Run 2

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12
Mean
STD

80.00
81.67
86.67
86.67
95.00
71.67
86.67
95.00
96.67
85.00
85.00
91.67
86.81
7.16

86.66
81.67
88.33
83.33
95.00
85.00
93.33
88.33
93.33
90.00
85.00
98.33
89.03
5.10

Subject
S13
S14
S15
S16
S17
S18
S19
S20
S21
S22
S23
S24
Mean
STD

Accuracy (%)
Run 1
Run 2
63.33
71.67
80.00
56.67
65.00
73.33
60.00
70.00
83.33
85.00
68.33
66.67
70.28
8.93

76.67
78.33
83.33
64.99
71.66
73.33
60.00
66.67
86.67
75.00
71.67
63.33
72.64
8.03

accuracies of the MI features (white bars) and rates of successful
feedback (dark bars) for each training session are presented in
Fig. 7.
For the HFP group, the cross-validation accuracies of the MI
features exhibited a steadily increasing trend with respect to
the training sessions. All subjects obtained an offline accuracy
greater than 83% in the fifth session. A two-sample t-test revealed that the MI offline accuracies in the fifth session for the
HFP group were higher than those for the NFP group (p < 0.01).
These offline accuracies revealed that the proposed HFP helped
the subjects generate brain patterns with better discrimination
during the left- and right-hand motor imageries. Moreover, the
high SSVEP accuracies in the earlier sessions demonstrated
that SSVEP is a good candidate for providing hybrid feedback.
However, the decrease in the offline accuracies of the SSVEP
features after the third session might imply that the subjects
shifted their attention to the MI control. Moreover, the hybrid
feedback performance was always better than that of the MIonly features for all of the sessions. This observation demon-

strated the effectiveness of the hybrid feedback approach. For
some subjects, the unsatisfactory performance of the SSVEP
and hybrid feedback during the first session may have been because the subjects were not familiar with the system because
this phenomenon disappeared in the subsequent sessions. For
the NFP group, the within-group average cross-validation accuracies varied around 87% and the average feedback accuracy
was 80% after five training sessions. These results are comparable with those reported in other studies [15], [18], [19]. For each
training session, a two-sample t-test revealed that the feedback
accuracies were significantly lower for the NFP group than for
HFP group (p < 0.01). This discrepancy was observed because
the feedback accuracies of the motor imageries were relatively
low for the NFP group. In this group, a number of unintended
feedbacks occurred during the feedback-based training, which
might have distracted the subjects [25], [33].
Based on Figs. 6 and 7, the cross-validation/offline accuracy
of motor imageries in session 1 was higher for the NFP group
than for the HFP group. This finding is explained below. For the
HFP group, the hybrid features for both the MI and SSVEP were
used to obtain high feedback performance. Because all of the
subjects were new to MI-based BCI and because it was difficult
for these subjects to achieve a satisfactory success rate with only
MI in the first training session, they paid more attention to the
SSVEP to improve their feedback performance. In other words,
the SSVEP may have distracted the subjects from focusing on
the MI tasks in the initial sessions in the HFP group. In the
NFP group, however, there was no distraction, and the subjects
paid full attention to the MI tasks. In fact, an oral report after
each training session on the strategy that which task (MI or
SSVEP) was paid more attention to during the feedback process
was given by the subjects in the HFP group. These reports
revealed that SSVEP played a major role at the beginning of
training for most subjects, especially in the first training session.
The findings also showed that, as the training proceeded, all
subjects used the attention-shift strategy, i.e., changing their
focus from the flickering buttons to the MI, as long as the hybrid
feedback performance was not seriously deteriorated by the shift
in attention.
In the evaluation experiment, a trial was considered successful
if and only if the ball fell onto the target bar. Table I presents

1712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Fig. 9. Scalp maps of two spatial filters (the first and last rows of the CSP transformation matrix W) and the corresponding spatial patterns (the first and last
rows of A, where A = (W −1 ) ) for each of the three selected sessions (sessions 1, 3, and 5) and for all subjects in the HFP group. These CSP filters were trained
using the calibration data gathered from each training session.

the accuracies of the two evaluation runs for all subjects in
both the HFP and NFP groups. With respect to the average
accuracy of two runs, the HFP group performed significantly
better than the NFP group (two-sample t-test, p < 0.001). Most
of the subjects in the HFP group achieved an average accuracy
of over 85%, which is sufficient for practical BCI applications.
Paired t-tests were used to evaluate the accuracies of the two
evaluation runs for both the HFP and NFP groups. The test
results, p = 0.1981 for HFP group and p = 0.2149 for NFP
group, revealed no significant changes in the accuracy between
the first and the second evaluation run for both the HFP and
NFP groups. However, an increasing tendency for the accuracy
was observed for each of the two groups as the test proceeded,
i.e., the mean accuracy was higher for the second evaluation run
than for the first evaluation run. This result could be attributed
to the fact that the first evaluation run served as training to some
extent, and thus the subjects performed better in the second
evaluation run.
The mean offsets of the ball, which were first averaged for
the left and right trials separately for each subject and then
averaged for the group, and the standard deviations are presented
in Fig. 8. A two-sample t-test was performed with respect to the
relative offset for the HFP and NFP groups. Specifically, the

average offset of “left” trials was compared with that of the
“right” trials for each group. These two average offsets were
significantly different for the NFP group (p < 0.01), but not
for the HFP group (p = 0.13). Moreover, the large standard
deviations for the NFP group indicated that the subjects in this
group gained unbalanced control of left- and right-hand motor
imageries, which would hinder the practical application of MIbased BCIs. From this viewpoint, the HFP subjects performed
better.
Additionally, there was a decrease in feedback accuracy for
the NFP group relative to that measured in the last training session in the evaluation experiment. The reasons for this result
may be two-fold. First, during the training sessions, the feedback bar was only extended in the targeted direction; in other
words, when a left cue arrow was presented, the bar started from
the right end of the bar frame and it was never extended beyond
the right end and vice versa. That is, only positive feedback was
provided to the subjects, whereas in the evaluation experiment,
both positive and negative feedbacks were provided to the subjects. The negative feedback might have distracted the subjects.
Second, we used a basketball game to provide feedback in the
evaluation experiment, which was different from the feedback
content of the training sessions. These differences in feedback

YU et al.: ENHANCED MOTOR IMAGERY TRAINING USING A HYBRID BCI WITH FEEDBACK

Fig. 10.

1713

Scalp maps of the CSP filters and patterns for all subjects in the NFP group.

setting may have affected the momentary mental state of the
subjects and their performance.
B. Changes in Brain Patterns
In Fig. 9, two spatial filters (the first and last rows of the
CSP transformation matrix W) and the corresponding spatial
patterns (the first and last rows of A, where A = (W−1 ) )
[34], are plotted as scalp maps for three selected sessions (session 1, 3, and 5) and for all of the subjects in the HFP group.
The CSP filters were trained using the calibration data obtained
from each training session, which indicated the weights of the
original signals for obtaining optimally discriminative projected
variances [32]. For most of the subjects in the HFP group, spatial discriminability of hand MI appeared in the third training
session. This discrimination became more apparent in the fifth
session. The scalp maps indicated that the primary sensorimotor areas, e.g., “C3” and “C4,” were associated with the leftand right-hand motor imageries in the experiment, consistent
with the neurophysiology background mentioned in various reports, e.g., [32]. Specifically, because the first filter/pattern was
obtained by maximizing the variance of the first class (“left”
class), it was associated with an ERD over the right motor cortical area. Such an association was clearly observed in the third
training session for subjects S4, S9, and S12 in the HFP group.
The association became more common and apparent in the fifth
training session, i.e., for subjects S3, S4, S5, S8, S9, S11, and

S12. Accordingly, the association of the ERD over the left motor area with the last filter/pattern, corresponding to the second
class (“right” class) underwent a similar change as the feedback training proceeded for most subjects in the HFP group.
In addition to the contralateral ERD, ipsilateral ERS was also
observed for some subjects in the HFP group, i.e., S3, S5, S6,
S10, and S12. Fig. 10 presents the trained CSP filters for the
subjects in the NFP group for comparison. However, only a few
neurophysiologically reasonable spatial patterns were observed.
We also calculated the ERD time courses for electrodes “C3”
and “C4” during the feedback of the left/right-hand MI for each
session and each subject. We averaged these values within each
of the two groups. The raw EEG signals were first bandpass
filtered for the μ band. The amplitude data were squared to obtain power data, which were then averaged across all trials with
the same class label. The trial-averaged power data were finally
smoothed to reduce the variability and to obtain the ERD time
courses [10]. These ERD time courses were averaged within
each group to illustrate the changes at the group level. Samplewise statistical tests (paired t-tests) were performed to test the
significance. The gray shaded areas denote significant time periods for “right” < “left” for “C3” and “left” < “right” for “C4”
(p < 0.05). The resulting time courses of three selected sessions
for the two groups are presented in Fig. 11. Fig. 11 (right) shows
that the contralateral desynchronization in the μ band became
more pronounced as the training proceeded for the HFP group.

1714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Fig. 11. ERD time courses for electrodes “C3” and “C4” during the feedback training for the left-/right-hand MI. These time courses were calculated from the
online feedback data and averaged for all of the left- and right-hand movement imagery trials. The black curves represent the responses for the “left” trials, and
the magenta curves represent the responses for the “right” trials. The gray shaded areas denote the significant time periods for “right” < “left” for “C3” and “left”
< “right” for “C4” (paired t-test, p < 0.05).

In contrast, contralateral desynchronization was not observed
for the NFP group for either the left- or right-hand motor imageries until the fifth session. The desynchronization was less
pronounced in the NFP group than in the HFP group, as shown
in Fig. 11 (right).
To further investigate the role of SSVEPs in the hybrid feedback, the amplitude spectra of the SSVEP responses were computed, as shown in Fig. 12. The amplitude spectra were computed by fast Fourier transformation of a linearly combined multichannel SSVEP response. The combining coefficients were
obtained by maximizing the canonical correlation of the multichannel SSVEP response and the constructed SSVEP model
(see the description in Section II or [29], [30] for more information or for details regarding the CCA approach). Fig. 12 presents
the within-group averaged amplitude spectra of three selected
sessions. Although no substantial changes were observed across
training sessions, reasonable SSVEP responses were observed
throughout the entire training procedure.
IV. DISCUSSION
The main objective of this study was to investigate the effect
of feedback accuracy on MI training. The proposed HFP can
help to prevent frustration in subjects by presenting feedback
that better reflects the subjects’ intention. The cross-validation

and feedback accuracies indicated that the feedback obtained
using the HFP was more accurate than the NFP. In the evaluation experiment, both groups of subjects achieved an evaluation
accuracy above the chance level (50%). However, the subjects
in the HFP group exhibited a remarkably improved feedback
performance for MI, demonstrating that the proposed HFP provided significantly better MI training than did the NFP. Furthermore, visualization of the related brain patterns demonstrated
neurophysiologically reasonable changes in brain activity for
the subjects in the HFP group. These results demonstrate the
efficacy of the proposed MI training approach.
In the experiment, the subjects were provided positive feedback by way of the SSVEP to prevent frustration. In this manner, the subjects were expected to exhibit better MI training
and future BCI performance. It appears that this effect could be
achieved by providing fake positive feedback at the beginning
of the training without the need for constructing hybrid feedback with the SSVEP and MI. In fact, if fake positive feedback
without measuring the SSVEP is provided, subjects might not
actively participate in the BCI control but still obtain correct
results (of course, these results are fake). This approach is opposite to attracting the subjects’ attention. On the other hand,
the subjects’ intentional control could not affect the movement
of the feedback bar. That is, the result of their efforts in modulating the rhythms would not solicit feedback, and they could not

YU et al.: ENHANCED MOTOR IMAGERY TRAINING USING A HYBRID BCI WITH FEEDBACK

1715

Fig. 13. (a) Changes in the classifier weights corresponding to the MI and
SSVEP features, during the training sessions for all subjects in the HFP group.
The white bars indicate the weights of the MI features, and the dark bars
indicate the weights of the SSVEP. (b) Difference in weight ratios between the
MI and SSVEP (i.e., w n 1 − w n 2 ). Stars indicate significant differences. One
star: p < 0.05; two stars: p < 0.01. Only the significant results are annotated.

analyzed the trained weights of the classifier for each of the
training sessions. The elements of the classifier weights, i.e.,
w in (5), were divided into two sets corresponding to the MI
and SSVEP. The elements in these two sets were then averaged
and normalized to provide two weight values for each classifier. Specifically, because 2 m (six in this study) MI features and
two SSVEP features were extracted from each EEG epoch, there
were eight elements in w. The magnitude of these elements were
rescaled to fall within [0, 1] as indicated below
Fig. 12. SSVEP amplitude spectra. The plots in the left column are the amplitude spectra for the “left” trials, with the target button flickering at 7.5 Hz.
In contrast, the right column contains the spectra for the “right” trials, with the
target button flickering at 6.0 Hz. In each subplot, the dark curve indicates the
amplitude spectra, and the vertical magenta and blue dashed lines indicate the
target frequency and the second harmonic, respectively.

|wi |
.
wi = 8
i |wi |

Two average weights wm 1 and wm 2 were calculated as follows:
wm 1 =

evaluate the effectiveness of control based on the fake feedback.
Thus, providing fake positive feedback without the subjects’
active involvement would not be useful for training.
In our hybrid BCI system, the SSVEP was combined with
MI, to provide highly accurate feedback. The four main reasons
for choosing the SSVEP as a supplementary tool for feedback
are as follows: 1) SSVEP- and MI-related brain activities can
be produced simultaneously; 2) SSVEP is a type of evoked
potential that can be stably detected for naive subjects with
little training; and 3) SSVEP can be detected based on a single
trial of EEG data. This detection does not require an averaging
procedure, which is commonly used in event-related potential
calculations. Therefore, the detection speed for the SSVEP is
comparable to that for the MI, and feedback can be provided as
fast as possible. Finally, the arrow-type SSVEP stimulus button
can serve as a cue that attracts subjects’ attention to a given MI
task, enhancing the subjects’ performance [35]. However, other
alternatives such as nonvisual attention are viable. For example,
use of auditory attention is promising for those end-users who
have difficulty in focusing their eye-gaze.
As mentioned in Section II, the subjects in the HFP group
were instructed to shift their attention from the SSVEP to MI
as the training progressed. To verify whether the subjects applied this strategy and how well the strategy worked, we further

(10)

1 
(w + wb ),
2 a

wm 2 =

1 
(w + w8 )
2 7

(11)

where wa and wb were the largest two of the six weights corresponding to MI features, whereas w7 and w8 were the two
weights corresponding to SSVEP. Furthermore, the two average
weights were normalized to weight ratios as follows:
wm i
wn i = 
, i ∈ {1, 2}.
(12)
wm i
These two ratios might indicate the contributions of the MI and
SSVEP features to the classification. Fig. 13 presents the group
mean and standard deviation of the weights for each training session. As the training progressed, the MI features dominated the
classification, and the weight of the SSVEP features decreased.
The differences between wn 1 and wn 2 for all subjects and all sessions were calculated and fed into a one-way repeated measures
ANOVA, which revealed that there was a significant change
in these differences (p < 0.001, F (4, 44) = 16.524). Post-hoc
Bonferroni-corrected paired t-tests show that the differences in
weight ratios in both the fourth and fifth sessions were greater
than that in the second session (p < 0.05), and the differences
in the fifth session are larger than that in the first three session as
well (p < 0.05). These findings imply that the strategy of attention shifting from the SSVEP to the MI was actually employed
by the subjects.
To obtain more precise information regarding the weight shift,
the change in each single weight was plotted in Fig. 14. For

1716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Fig. 14. Changes in each individual weight (six weights for MI and two
weights for SSVEP). Stars indicate significant differences. One star: p < 0.05;
two stars: p < 0.01; three stars: p < 0.001.

each individual weight, one-way repeated measures ANOVA
and post-hoc paired t-tests were performed. The results show
that among all of the MI features, the first and the last MI features
make the largest contribution to the classification, as indicated
by the larger mean weights MI(1) and MI(6) in Fig. 14. On the
other hand, the third and fourth MI features are generally less
important, as indicated by the smaller mean weights MI(3) and
MI(4). The two weights of the SSVEP decrease significantly,
as indicated by the SSVEP(1) and SSVEP(2) in Fig. 14. This
result implies that the contribution of SSVEP features decreases
as the training proceeds.
V. CONCLUSION
This study proposed a hybrid BCI system that provides continuous feedback based on the hybrid features of MI and SSVEP
for MI training. In contrast to previous studies, which have focused on providing diverse types of feedback or improving the
detection algorithm, we attempted to enhance MI training by
presenting feedback that more accurately reflects subjects’ intention. During the initial training sessions, the subjects needed
to focus on flickering buttons to evoke SSVEPs during MI tasks.
As the training progressed, the subjects began to gradually disregard the flickering buttons as long as the feedback remained
effective. By combining the SSVEP and MI features, the classifier that was used to provide feedback automatically assigned
large weights to the features with better discriminative capabilities. Therefore, accurate feedback could be maintained throughout the entire training period. The efficacy of the proposed system was validated experimentally. Although encouraging results
were obtained with healthy participants, extended studies should
be conducted with patients with impaired motor function.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Pfurtscheller et al., “Current trends in graz brain-computer interface
(BCI) research,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 216–219,
Jun. 2000.
[2] J. R. Wolpaw et al., “Brain-computer interfaces for communication and
control,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 113, no. 6, pp. 767–91, 2002.

[3] L. A. Farwell and E. Donchin, “Talking off the top of your head: Toward a
mental prosthesis utilizing event-related brain potentials,” Electroenceph.
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 510–23, 1988.
[4] J. D. Bayliss, “Use of the evoked potential P3 component for control in a
virtual apartment,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 113–116, Jun. 2003.
[5] A. P. Liavas et al., “A periodogram-based method for the detection
of steady-state visually evoked potentials,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 242–248, Feb. 1998.
[6] M. Cheng et al., “Design and implementation of a brain-computer interface with high transfer rates,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 10,
pp. 1181–1186, Oct. 2002.
[7] J. R. Wolpaw and D. J. McFarland, “Control of a two-dimensional movement signal by a noninvasive brain-computer interface in humans,” in
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 2004, pp. 17 849–17 854.
[8] D. McFarland and J. Wolpaw, “Sensorimotor rhythm-based braincomputer interface (BCI): Feature selection by regression improves performance,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 372–379, Sep. 2005.
[9] J. Decety, “The neurophysiological basis of motor imagery,” Behav. Brain
Res., vol. 77, no. 1–2, pp. 45–52, 1996.
[10] G. Pfurtscheller and D. S. F. Lopes, “Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desynchronization: Basic principles,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 1842–1457, 1999.
[11] Y. Li et al., “An EEG-based BCI system for 2-D cursor control by
combining mu/beta rhythm and P300 potential,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2495–2505, Oct. 2010.
[12] A. J. Doud et al., “Continuous three-dimensional control of a virtual
helicopter using a motor imagery based brain-computer interface,” PLoS
One, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. e26322–e26331, 2011.
[13] K. LaFleur et al., “Quadcopter control in three-dimensional space using
a noninvasive motor imagery-based brain-computer interface,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 046003–046017, 2013.
[14] H. Yuan and B. He, “Brain-computer interfaces using sensorimotor
rhythms: Current state and future perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1425–1435, May 2014.
[15] B. Blankertz et al., “Neurophysiological predictor of SMR-based BCI
performance,” Neuroimage, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1303–1309, 2010.
[16] C. Guger et al., “How many people are able to operate an EEG-based
brain-computer interface (BCI)?,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 145–147, Jun. 2003.
[17] B. Blankertz et al., “The berlin brain–computer interface: Accurate performance from first-session in bci-naive subjects,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 2452–2462, Oct. 2008.
[18] C. Neuper et al., “Enhancement of left-right sensorimotor EEG differences during feedback-regulated motor imagery,” J. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 373–382, 1999.
[19] H. J. Hwang et al., “Neurofeedback-based motor imagery training for
brain-computer interface (BCI),” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 179, no. 1,
pp. 150–156, 2009.
[20] V. Kaiser et al., “First steps toward a motor imagery based stroke BCI:
New strategy to set up a classifier,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 5, pp. 00086–
00095, 2011.
[21] C. Vidaurre et al., “Study of on-line adaptive discriminant analysis
for EEG-based brain computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 550–556, Mar. 2007.
[22] H. Zhang et al., “Learning from feedback training data at a self-paced
brain-computer interface,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 046035–
046046, 2011.
[23] J. Lu et al., “Adaptive laplacian filtering for sensorimotor rhythm-based
brain-computer interfaces,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 016002–
016015, 2013.
[24] J. Lu et al., “Adaptive spatio-temporal filtering for movement related
potentials in EEG-based brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 847–857, Jul. 2014.
[25] D. J. McFarland et al., “EEG-based communication and control: Shortterm role of feedback,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 7–11,
Mar. 1998.
[26] Y. Wang et al., “A practical vep-based brain-computer interface,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 234–239, Jun. 2006.
[27] C. Neuper et al., “Imagery of motor actions: Differential effects of kinesthetic and visual-motor mode of imagery in single-trial EEG,” Brain Res.
Cogn. Brain Res., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 668–677, 2005.
[28] Y. Li and C. Guan, “Joint feature re-extraction and classification using
an iterative semi-supervised support vector machine algorithm,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 33–53, 2008.

YU et al.: ENHANCED MOTOR IMAGERY TRAINING USING A HYBRID BCI WITH FEEDBACK

[29] Z. Lin et al., “Frequency recognition based on canonical correlation
analysis for ssvep-based bcis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 6,
pp. 1172–1176, Jun. 2007.
[30] G. Bin et al., “An online multi-channel ssvep-based brain-computer interface using a canonical correlation analysis method,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 046002–046007, 2009.
[31] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2006.
[32] B. Blankertz et al., “Optimizing spatial filters for robust EEG single-trial
analysis,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 41–56, Jan. 2008.
[33] T. Ono et al., “Daily training with realistic visual feedback improves
reproducibility of event-related desynchronisation following hand motor
imagery,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 124, no. 9, pp. 1779–1786, 2013.
[34] S. Haufe et al., “On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models
in multivariate neuroimaging,” Neuroimage, vol. 87, pp. 96–110, 2014.
[35] M. Gazzaniga et al., Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biology of the Mind.
New York, NY, USA: Norton, 2008.

Tianyou Yu received the Ph.D. degree in pattern
recognition and intelligent systems from the South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China,
in 2013.
He is currently with the School of Automation
Science and Engineering, South China University of
Technology. His research interests include noninvasive brain–computer interfaces, pattern recognition
and machine learning.

Jun Xiao received the M.S. degree in biomedical
engineering from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2006. She
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligent systems at the South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
Her research interests include noninvasive brain–
computer interfaces and brain-signal analysis.

Fangyi Wang received the B.E. degree in electronic
and information engineering from Xi’an Peihua University, Xi’an, China, in 2005, and the M.S. degree in
signal and information processing from Jiangxi Science and Technology Normal University, Nanchang,
China, in 2012. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligent
systems at the South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
His current research interests include the fields of
sparse representation, fMRI data analysis and brain–
computer interface.

Rui Zhang received the B.S. degree in information
and computing science from the University of South
China, Hengyang, China, in 2010. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligent systems at the South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
His research interests include noninvasive brain–
computer interfaces and brain-signal analysis, and
their applications in BCI.

1717

Zhenghui Gu (S’00–A’02–M’03) received the Ph.D.
degree from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2003.
From 2002 to 2008, she was with the Institute for
Infocomm Research, Singapore. In 2009, she joined
the College of Automation Science and Engineering,
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
China, as an Associate Professor. Her research interests include the fields of brain signal processing and
pattern recognition.

Andrzej Cichocki received the M.Sc., Ph.D., and
Dr.Sc. (Habilitation) degrees, all in electrical engineering, from the Warsaw University of Technology,
Warsaw, Poland.
Since 1972, he has been with the Institute of Theory of Electrical Engineering, Measurement and Information Systems, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Warsaw University of Technology, where he received the title of a Full Professor in 1995. He spent
several years at the University Erlangen-Nuerenberg,
Germany, at the Chair of Applied and Theoretical Electrical Engineering directed by R. Unbehauen, as an Alexander-vonHumboldt Research Fellow and Guest Professor. From 1995 to 1997, he was a
Team Leader of the Brain Information Processing Group, Laboratory for Artificial Brain Systems, Frontier Research Program RIKEN, Japan. He is currently
the Head of the Laboratory for Advanced Brain Signal Processing, RIKEN
Brain Science Institute, Wako-shi, Japan. He is the author of more than 250
technical papers and four monographs (two of which have been translated to
Chinese). His research interests include signal processing, inverse problems,
neural network and learning algorithms, tensor analysis, and brain–computer
interface.

Yuanqing Li (M’05) was born in Hunan, China, in
1966. He received the B.S. degree in applied mathematics from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in
1988, the M.S. degree in applied mathematics from
South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China,
in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in control theory
and applications from the South China University
of Technology, Guangzhou, in 1997.
Since 1997, he has been with the South China
University of Technology, where he became a Full
Professor in 2004. From 2002 to 2004, he was with
the Laboratory for Advanced Brain Signal Processing, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Saitama, Japan, as a Researcher. From 2004 to 2008, he was with
the Laboratory for Neural Signal Processing, Institute for Infocomm Research,
Singapore, as a Research Scientist. He is the author or coauthor of more than 60
scientific papers in journals and conference proceedings. His research interests
include blind signal processing, sparse representation, machine learning, brain–
computer interface, EEG, and fMRI data analysis.

