1614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

32-Channel System to Measure
the Electrophysiological Properties
of Bioengineered Cardiac Muscle
Betsy H. Salazar, Anilkumar K. Reddy, Zewei- Tao, Sridhar Madala, and Ravi K. Birla*

Abstract—The purpose of this study was to develop, assess,
and validate a custom 32-channel system to analyze the electrical
properties of 3-D artificial heart muscle (3D-AHM). In this study,
neonatal rat cardiac cells were cultured in a fibrin gel to drive
the formation of 3D-AHM. Once the tissues were fully formed, the
customized electrocardiogram (EKG) sensing system was used to
obtain the different electrophysiological characteristics of the muscle constructs. Additionally, this system was used to evaluate the
electrical properties of native rat hearts, for comparison to the fabricated tissues and native values found in the literature. Histological evaluation showed extensive cellularization and cardiac tissue
formation. EKG data analysis yielded time delays between the signals ranging from 0 to 7 ms. Optical maps exhibited slight trends
in impulse propagation throughout the fabricated tissue. Conduction velocities were calculated longitudinally at 277.81 cm/s, transversely at 300.79 cm/s, and diagonally at 285.68 cm/s for 3D-AHM.
The QRS complex exhibited an R-wave amplitude of 438.42 ±
36.96 μV and an average duration of 317.5 ± 16.5 ms for the tissue
constructs. The data collected in this study provide a clearer picture about the intrinsic properties of the 3D-AHM while proving
our system’s efficacy for EKG data procurement. To achieve a viable and permanent solution, the bioengineered heart muscle must
physiologically resemble native heart tissue as well as mimic its
electrical properties for proper contractile function. This study allows us to monitor such properties and assess the necessary changes
that will improve construct development and function.
Index Terms—Cardiac patches, cell culture, conduction maps,
conduction velocity, heart, tissue engineering.

I. INTRODUCTION
ISSUE damage and organ failure are major health care
issues in the U.S. due to the limited availability of compatible donors. Tissue engineering is an interdisciplinary field
that applies the principles of engineering and the life sciences
toward the development of biological substitutes that restore,
maintain, or improve tissue function [1]. Cardiovascular tissue

T

Manuscript received October 20, 2014; revised January 5, 2015; accepted
January 22, 2015. Date of publication February 4, 2015; date of current version
May 18, 2015. This work was supported in parts by the National Institutes of
Health under Grant R01-EB011516 and the Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Cullen College of Engineering, University of Houston. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
B. H. Salazar and Z. Tao are with the Biomedical Engineering Department,
University of Houston.
A. K. Reddy is with the Baylor College of Medicineand also with Indus
Instruments.
S. Madala is with the Indus Instruments.
* R. K. Birla is with the Biomedical Engineering Department, University of
Houston, Houston, TX 77204 USA (e-mail: rkbirla@uh.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2399437

engineering centers on the fabrication of tissue equivalents to
replace or improve function of the damaged heart or its components. Due to the prevalence of heart disease in the U.S.,
cardiovascular tissue engineering has been at the forefront of
modern day medicine. Heart muscle tissue engineering is focused on the development and fabrication of 3-D artificial heart
muscle (3D-AHM), which can be used to repair, replace, and/or
augment lost functionality of infarcted heart muscle.
There are several models to support the fabrication of 3DAHM. Among these methods are those based on the use of
biodegradable gels, synthetic scaffolds, and self-organization
techniques [2], [3]. Zimmerman et al. used the gel collagen type
I mixed with neonatal rat cardiac myocytes to develop circular
engineered heart tissue (EHT) [4]. Carrier et al. have generated
cardiac constructs by seeding rat and chick myocytes on PGA
scaffolds [5]. Shimizu et al. used a self-organization strategy,
in which 2-D sheets of cardiac myocytes were stacked on top
of each other using a temperature-sensitive polymer, yielding a
3-D cardiac construct [6]–[9].
Substantial work has been done in our laboratory to further
the development of artificial heart muscle tissue and other cardiovascular components [10]–[15]. In one study, tissue culture
plates were coated with PDMS, and then, with the adhesion
protein laminin; primary cardiac myocytes were cultured on
this culture surface. This resulted in the formation of a cohesive
cell monolayer. Spontaneous contractions of this cell monolayer resulted in the formation of self-organized contractile 3-D
cardiac tissue termed cardioid [14]. In another study using primary cardiac myocytes and two different approaches (layering
and embedding), our group formed bioengineered heart muscle (BEHM) [13]. Both methods showed uniformly distributed
cardiac cells on the BEHMs and could be electrically paced at
frequencies of 1–7 Hz.
Collective research from our laboratory and other investigators has demonstrated the feasibility of fabricating functional
3D-AHM using a variety of different approaches. The most common strategy has been to culture primary cardiac cells within a
complex 3-D scaffold; subsequent remodeling and reorganization of the cells leads to recapitulation of a partial subset of heart
muscle function. As investigators continue to develop models
for 3D-AHM, it becomes imperative to design instrumentation
that accurately records the functional performance of these tissue equivalents. The ability to replicate conduction velocities
that match mammalian tissue is critical to the success of the
artificial tissue. The electrophysiological properties of artificial
heart muscle need to be comparable to that of mammalian tissue,

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SALAZAR et al.: 32-CHANNEL SYSTEM TO MEASURE THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF BIOENGINEERED CARDIAC MUSCLE

prior to in vivo utilization of these tissue equivalents. Therefore,
the evaluation of the electrophysiological properties of the fabricated myocardium is of utmost importance [16], [17]. This study
addresses this need by developing a novel system to record the
EKG properties of 3D-AHM.
There are several systems that have been used in the past
to measure the electrical properties of 3D-AHM. One research
group used a custom fabricated cylindrical Plexiglas chamber,
fitted into an electrically grounded brass casing, with eight direct contact microelectrodes placed from 1.5 to 5 mm away from
the stimulation site. The pacing of the tissue constructs was increased over time to test the system’s effect on the specimens
[18]. Another group employed a method called contact fluorescence imaging (CFI), which placed the target specimen in a
chamber above a fiber optic bundle. Results were acquired by:
filtering the light that passed through the specimen, converting
the signals to voltage, and analyzing the readings at 61 points
with custom software and MATLAB [19]. A third group used
the commercially available system MEA1060 amplifier with 60
channels from Multi Channel Systems (Reutlingen, Germany),
to record the action potentials of the bioengineered tissue [20].
In this study, we developed a novel system to measure the
electrical properties of 3D-AHM that has been pioneered in our
laboratory. Our method for fabricating 3D-AHM is based on
the culture of primary cardiac cells within a complex 3-D fibrin gel. Remodeling of primary cells and functional integration
with the fibrin led to the formation of artificial tissue, which
exhibits histological markers that are present in native mammalian tissue. For this study, we developed a novel system to
measure the changes in electrical activity of 3D-AHM using
a custom 32-electrode system. Our system consisted of a 32channel RHD2000-Series Amplifier Evaluation System from
Intan Technologies (Los Angeles, CA, USA), fitted with goldplated pins to provide direct contact between the electrodes and
bioengineered heart muscle. The purpose of this study was to develop, test, and validate a novel 32-electrode system to measure
the electrical activity of 3D-AHM. Furthermore, we developed
conduction maps, which illustrate the propagation of electrical activity and also quantify the conduction velocity and other
metrics associated with the EKG properties of 3D-AHM.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Isolation of Neonatal Primary Cardiac Cells
Neonatal cardiac cells were isolated from the hearts of 1
to 2 day old Sprague–Dawley rats utilizing a preestablished
method [12]. Each heart was cut into 3 to 4 sections and placed
in a chilled PBS phosphate buffer. All the sections were gently
rinsed in the PBS to remove blood, cells, and subsequently,
transferred to a secondary phosphate buffer solution for
additional mincing. Tissues were minced into 1 mm2 fragments and transferred to a dissociation solution consisting of
0.32 mg/mL filtered collagenase type 2 (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lakewood, NJ, USA) and 0.6 mg/mL pancreatin in phosphate buffer. The minced tissues and 15 mL of
dissociation solution were placed in an orbital shaker for 30 min
at 37 °C and 60 r/min to initiate serial digestion. Once the first

1615

digestion was completed, the supernatant was collected in 3 mL
of horse serum in order to neutralize the enzyme and placed in
a centrifuge at 1000 r/min for 5 min at 4 °C. The cell pellet was
resuspended in 5 mL of horse serum and kept in an incubator at
37 °C supplied with 5% CO2 . Fresh dissociation solution was
added to the partially digested tissue and the procedure for the
digestion was repeated 2 to 3 times. The cells acquired during
the serial digestion were pooled, centrifuged, and suspended in
culture medium. Cell viability was determined by Trypan blue
(4%) staining according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
B. Preparation of the Plates
Tissue culture plates (35 mm) were coated with 2 mL of
SYLGARD (PDMS, type 184 silicone elastomer) (Dow Chemical Corporation, Midland, MI, USA). The plates were air dried
for two weeks to allow the silicone coating to form properly
and sterilized with 80% ethanol before use. Four minutien pins
(Fine Science Tools, Foster City, CA, USA) 0.1 mm in diameter,
were placed in the culture plate to form a 2 cm × 2 cm square.
C. Fabrication of 3D-AHM
Fibrin gel was formed by adding 1 mL of culture medium
containing 10 U/mL thrombin to the coated surface of each culture plate. Afterwards, 500 μL of saline containing 20 mg/mL
fibrinogen was added. The culture plates were shaken well to
ensure complete mixing of both solutions and complete plate
coverage. Subsequently, the plates were placed in the incubator
to promote the formation of the gel within 45 min. Primary cardiac cells were diluted in culture medium at 2 million cells/mL
and plated in 2 mL of culture medium for each plate after the
gel was fully formed.
The cells were cultured in an incubator at 37 °C supplied with
5% CO2 and underwent media changes every other day. As the
cells organize, the spontaneous contractile force of the neonatal cardiomyocytes results in the delamination/migration of the
cell monolayer that heretofore covered the entire surface of the
plate. As a result of the minutien pin placement, the 3D-AHM
forms around the pins using them as anchor points. Through the
first 3–4 days in culture, the 3D-AHM fully forms into the desired shape. However, for this experiment, the cardiac constructs
were maintained in culture for 7–10 days before measuring the
electrical potential.
D. Assessment of Contractile Properties
After 6–7 days in culture, which allows the tissue to fully organize and begin synchronous contraction, the contractile properties of the heart tissue were examined using a high sensitivity
microforce transducer (Panlab, Barcelona, Spain). The tissues
were attached to the force transducer using a thin light rigid wire
to minimize force lost to vibration. The output signals from
the force transducer were acquired using the PowerLab16/35
data acquisition system (ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO,
USA) processed, and transmitted to LabChart for analysis. To
calculate the change in length of the constructs during the

1616

contraction cycle, videos were made and analyzed with the open
source program Tracker 4.87 (Open Source Physics).
E. Morphology
After 7 days in culture, the formed 3D-AHM was examined histologically. Samples were all washed in PBS and gently
patted dry using VWR light-duty tissue wipers. Samples were
suspended upright in a peel-a-way disposable embedding mold
(VWR International, Radnor, PA, USA) and frozen using liquid
nitrogen. Following the tissue was covered using Tissue Tek
OCT compound (VWR International, Radnor, PA, USA) and
placed in a −80 °C freezer. Once the samples were completely
solidified, each sample was sliced using a cryotome (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Tissue samples were
cut at a thickness of 6–10 μm and placed on VWR Microslides.
The cross sections were stained with Masson’s Trichrome according to manufacturer’s protocol, and subsequently, images
were taken under a light microscope.
F. Immunofluorescence
Tissue samples were frozen in OCT compound, sectioned
to 6–40-μm thicknesses and placed on VWR Microslides. The
thicker slices were used to produce z-stack images that display
the 3-D structures within the sample slices. Cross sections were
fixed in chilled acetone for 10 min; nonspecific epitope antigens
were blocked using 10% goat serum at room temperature for 1 h.
The tissue segments were incubated with mouse anti-α-actinin
monoclonal antibody (1:200; Sigma, A7811), rabbit anticonnexin 43 (1:100; Abcam, ab11370), rabbit anticollagen type I
(1:100; Abcam, ab34710), and rabbit anti-ki67 (1:100; Abcam,
ab66155) at room temperature for 2 h. Afterwards, the tissue
sections were treated with goat antimouse and goat antirabbit
secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 546, and
Alexa Fluor 633; Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA)
1:400 at room temperature for 1 h. Nuclei were counterstained
with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (2.5 μg/ml) at room
temperature for 5 min. Fluorescent images were obtained with a
Nikon C2+ confocal laser-scanning microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc., Melville, NY).
G. Design, Fabrication, and Testing of EKG Monitoring
System for 3D-AHM
Our laboratory acquired the commercially available system
RHD2000-Series Amplifier Evaluation System from Intan Technologies (Los Angeles, CA, USA). This system consists of a
highly customizable modular interface board containing an Opal
Kelly XEM 6010 USB/TPGA interface module. This USB interface board can support up to 256 low noise amplifier channels
with sampling rates ranging from 1 to 30 kS/s. For our purposes,
we used one 32-channel evaluation board fitted with gold-plated
pins to provide direct contact between the electrodes and the bioengineered cardiac muscle. Solid wires were affixed to the included reference and ground electrodes on the evaluation board.
A Cole-Parmer Stable Temp Dry Block Heater (Vernon Hills,
IL, USA) at 37 °C was used to keep the tissues viable during

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

prolonged testing. The reference electrode was placed in direct
contact with the culture media, while the metallic surface of the
hot plate served as felicitous grounding source. The electrode
board was connected to the amplifier board, which communicates with the USB interface board through a serial peripheral
interface cable. The amplifier settings used for data acquisition
were a sampling rate of 5.00 kS/s and a bandwidth between
0.09 Hz and 1.00 kHz. The action potential of each tissue was
measured from 30 to 60 min, creating files containing two min
of recording on each file capture. After the data were collected,
the RHD files were run through an open-source m-file provided by Intan Technologies to import the recorded data into
MATLAB for analysis. After reviewing and graphing each
individual 2-min dataset, the most visually applicable waves
with minimal interference from physical, acoustic, or electronic
sources were selected. In order to avoid nonconforming signals,
we verified that the data were consistent throughout the different segments collected for each 3D-AHM. The selected data
files were then processed with the signal processing toolbox in
MATLAB for cross correlation, to determine the lag in signals
between all 32 channels. This information was used to create
tables showing the time delays from channel to channel, as well
as to calculate the conduction velocity of the cardiac construct.
Peak analysis was used in order to evaluate the QRS complex
and obtain all its properties.
H. EKG Monitoring of Native Mammalian Tissue
Additionally, to validate our current system for EKG data
collection, the electrophysiological properties of native mammalian tissue were evaluated. Briefly, the hearts of 2–3 month
old anesthetized Sprague-Dawley female rats were removed and
immediately place in warm tissue culture medium 199 (Gibco,
Grand Island, NY). A Cole-Parmer Stable Temp Dry Block
Heater (Vernon Hills, IL, USA) at 37 °C was used to maintain
the temperature of the heart during testing with the electrode
board placed directly on top of the heart. Three different hearts
were measured for approximately 10 min each, and files containing 1 min of recordings were created. After the data were
collected, the RHD files were analyzed following the aforementioned procedure in MATLAB.
III. RESULTS
A. 3D-AHM Formation and Contractile Properties
During the 3D-AHM-fabrication process [see Fig. 1(a)], we
plated each cardiac construct with 4 × 106 cells. We observed
that the delamination process during patch formation began on
the third day after cell plating and was completed between days
4–5 [see Fig. 1(b)]. The cardiac constructs started to contract
spontaneously after 3 days in culture. We also found the contractile forces of the constructs plated with 4 × 106 cells to be in
the range of 500–700 μN after 6–7 days in culture [see Fig. 1(c)
and (d)].
We also noted that the constructs were able to maintain contractile performance for a period of 8 days after which, a significant decrease in performance was observed. Length change with

SALAZAR et al.: 32-CHANNEL SYSTEM TO MEASURE THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF BIOENGINEERED CARDIAC MUSCLE

1617

Fig. 1. Method for fabrication of 3D-AHM and contractile assessment.
(a) Schematic showing the overview of the patch formation process. FG: fibrin
gel, PP: prepared plate, NC: isolated neonatal cardiac cells, DF: delamination
of fibrin gel, PF: patch formation completed. (b) Image showing the formed
3D-AHM. (c) Image showing the setup used to obtain the contractile force of
the fabricated tissue. (d) Contractile properties of the cultured tissue with a
plating density of 4 million cells/construct.

respect during construct contraction was found to be 0.2 mm.
This is approximately 1% with respect to the entire length of
the tissues.
B. Histological Data
The physiological properties of the fabricated 3D-AHM were
examined approximately after one week in culture. The images
obtained from Masson’s trichrome staining show the distribution of the cardiomyocytes in relation to the fibrin gel. The
cross-sectional image in Fig. 2(a) shows a layer of cardiomyocytes, which has migrated toward the middle of the cardiac
construct and a diminished fibrin gel at the bottom. A second
image [see Fig. 2(b)] shows the distribution of the real cardiac
tissue comprised of cardiac cells and self generated extracellular
matrix proteins formed along the fibrin gel matrix.
In addition, we stained the cardiac constructs to evaluate the
distribution of α-actinin, connexin 43, collagen type I, and ki67
in the tissue [see Fig. 2]. Positive staining for α-actinin permits
the visualization of z-lines of cardiac myofibrils [see Fig. 2(c)–
(f)]. Positive staining for connexin 43 indicates the presence
of cardiac gap junctions in the fabricated tissue [Fig. 2(c) and

Fig. 2. Histological Assessment of 3D-AHM. (a) Masson’s trichrome crosssectional image showing layer of cardiomyocytes and fibrin gel. (b) Masson’s
trichrome image showing the distribution of the real cardiac tissue formed along
the fibrin gel matrix. (c) Cross-sectional image from 3D-AHM by immunofluorescent staining showing growth of heart muscle (α-actinin) and the presence
of cardiac gap junctions (connexin 43). (d) Immunofluorescent image showing
positive staining for α-actinin and connexin 43. (e) Immunofluorescent image
showing the presence of collagen type I in the fabricated tissue. (f) Immunofluorescent image illustrating nuclear division and cell proliferation by the presence
of ki67.

(d)]. Positive staining for collagen type I indirectly denotes the
presence of cardiac fibroblasts embedded within the cardiac
construct [see Fig. 2(e)]. And finally, positive staining for ki67
illustrates nuclear division and cell proliferation [see Fig. 2(f)].
C. Cross Correlation and Time Delays
We observed the electrophysiological properties of the tissue
using the previously described system (see Fig. 3) at day 6–7.
The raw data were analyzed to select the optimal 2-min sample
for the subsequent data analysis [see Fig. 4(a)]. The selected
data were run through an m-file, which was written to obtain the
cross-correlation values between each signal channel and one of
the electrodes located at a corner of the board. Cross correlation

1618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 3. Patch formation process and setup of the EKG acquisition system for
the engineered tissues. (a) Schematic showing the overview of the method used
to measure the electrical properties of the tissue. PP: plate preparation, PF: patch
formation, EM: electrical measurements. (b) Setup of the culture plate using the
EKG system. EB: evaluation board, AB: amplifier board, SB: sampling board,
TC: tissue construct.
Fig. 5. Optical maps. (a) Optical map of the time delay between the different
channels when electrode 1 was picked as the reference. (b) Optical map of the
time delay between the different channels when electrode 32 was picked as
the reference. (c) Optical map of the time delay between the different channels
when electrode 8 was picked as the reference. (d) Optical map of the time delay
between the different channels when electrode 25 was picked as the reference.

throughout the fabricated 3D-AHM (see Fig. 5). These maps
are obtained by assigning a range of colors to the time-delay
values in the tables of Fig. 4(c) using the MATLAB command
“imagesc.” This process expresses the impulse propagation from
the reference channel to the remaining 31 channels visually with
respect to time. We obtained four optical maps corresponding
to the values acquired with reference to the four different corner
channels. In each of the optical maps, it can be seen that from the
reference in a diagonal direction, that time is incrementing from
0 to 7 ms as the distance increases. However, at certain channels,
the time delay is not gradually increasing. The patch does not
appear to be contracting uniformly, and at some channels, the
3D-AHM exhibits an asynchronous impulse.
Fig. 4. EKG acquired data, data cross correlation and signal time delay tables.
(a) Screen shot of the 32-channel system during testing and close up of one of the
channels. (b) Cross correlation between the reference channel 1 and channel 32.
(c) Table containing the time delays between signals when different reference
points (in red) are chosen.

as seen in Fig. 4(b) provides a peak where the signals overlap,
giving us the number of sample lags in between the two signals.
Since we know the sampling rate of the system, we were able
to calculate the time delay using the acquired values. With the
dataset acquired, we produced tables showing the time delay
between each electrode and the chosen reference electrode [see
Fig. 4(c)]. We found that the delay between the signals was in
the range of 0–7 ms.
D. Optical Maps
Once the time-delay tables were formulated, we used these
values to construct optical maps to monitor impulse propagation

E. Conduction Velocities
The impulse propagation along with the known distance traveled between channels allowed us to calculate the longitudinal,
transverse, and diagonal impulse propagation velocity of the
construct, as well as, the localized conduction velocities. We
used electrode 8 as our reference to acquire the desired conduction values. We selected this reference electrode for its location
in the corner of the electrode board as shown in Fig. 6(a). Additionally, we chose this channel to simplify our calculations
due to the fact that we had previously acquired the time delays
to monitor impulse propagation with reference to each of the
corner channels. With this reference channel, we were able to
calculate a longitudinal conduction velocity of 277.81 cm/s, a
transverse conduction velocity of 300.79 cm/s, and a diagonal
conduction velocity of 285.68 cm/s [see Fig. 6(b)]. Fig. 6(c)
shows a table with the localized conduction velocities, which
are on the range of 127–488 cm/s.

SALAZAR et al.: 32-CHANNEL SYSTEM TO MEASURE THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF BIOENGINEERED CARDIAC MUSCLE

1619

Fig. 6. Acquisition system schematic and conduction velocities. (a) Schematic
showing the system used for the electrophysiological data acquisition and electrode configuration. (b) Table containing the longitudinal, traverse and diagonal
conduction velocities with respect to the reference electrode. (c) Table containing localized conduction velocities with respect to the reference electrode.

Fig. 7. Evaluation of the QRS complex from the data collected. (a) 10-s
segment that shows the Q-wave, R-wave, and S-wave clearly marked. (b) Detail
image of the QRS complex. (c) Waveforms of the eight channels chosen to obtain
average values. (d) Average values calculated from QRS complex analysis.

Fig. 8. Native mammalian tissue EKG analysis. (a) Image of the rat heart after
removal from anesthetized rat. (b) Setup of the system to collect EKG signals.
(c) Optical map of the time delay between the different channels when electrode
41 was picked as the reference. (d) Table containing localized conduction velocities with respect to the reference electrode. (e) 5-s segment that shows the
Q-wave, R-wave, and S-wave clearly marked.

G. Native Mammalian Tissue Properties
F. Peak Analysis
The previously chosen 2-min file of raw data was also run
through an m-file written to perform peak analysis of the acquired data. We extracted a 10-s segment and identified the
QRS complex in the EKG signal [see Fig. 7(a)], which can be
clearly seen in Fig. 7(b). In order to calculate the amplitude of
the R-wave, the time to peak, and the relaxation time, we chose
eight channels evenly distributed across the board to obtain the
average values. Fig. 7(c) shows the raw data of the eight chosen
channels (1, 8, 13, 14, 19, 20, 25, and 32). The average amplitude of the R-wave for the all 10-s segments was found to be
438.42 ± 36.96 μV [see Fig. 7(d)]. The average time to peak
(time between Q-wave and R-wave) for the eight chosen channels was found to be 147.3 ± 16.8 ms. The relaxation time (time
between R-wave and S-wave) for the eight chosen channels was
found to be 170.2 ± 8.1 ms. The overall average for the QRS
interval duration was found to be 317.5 ± 16.5 ms.

We observed the electrophysiological properties of the extirpated rat hearts [see Fig. 8(a)] by following the procedure
previously described to acquire the time-delay values, conduction velocities, optical maps, and QRS complex pertaining to
native mammalian tissue. However, data could not be acquired
from all 32 channels due to the board configuration and the
shape of the heart. Direct contact was only achieved with 10
of the 32 available channels as shown in Fig. 8(b). After the
data from these ten channels were collected and run through
the custom m-file, we utilized the time delays to obtain the
optical map for impulse propagation in reference to a chosen
electrode. The optical map acquired [see Fig. 8(c)] shows an
impulse propagation trend that gradually increases the time delay as distance increases, but this trend was not continuous at
one point. The impulse propagations were found to be in the
range of 0–4 ms and the conduction velocities in the range of
74–300 cm/s [see Fig. 8(d)]. For native heart comparison, peak

1620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

analysis [see Fig. 8(e)] performed in four randomly selected
channels and yielded an average R-wave amplitude of 4757.43 ±
1733.53 μV and an overall QRS interval duration of 27.22 ±
15.86 ms.
IV. DISCUSSION
The mammalian heart lacks adequate capacity to repair or
regenerate tissue damaged due to myocardial infarction caused
by a heart attack. While tissue engineering strategies to develop
artificial heart muscle for potential use in the replacement or
regeneration of infarcted myocardial tissue have made significant progress, there has been a bevy of instrumentation systems
specifically made for the measurement of electrical and mechanical properties of the in vitro grown tissue. Here, we describe the
development and use of a system to measure EKG of the 3DAHM that we generated in our laboratory using the advanced
methods previously developed by us [10]–[14].
The formation process of the 3D-AHM begins with the isolation of neonatal cardiac cells. The isolation yields cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, cardiac stem cells, and pacemaker cells. These cells are plated on
the fibrin gel, and they will begin to contract individually at different rates. After approximately 40 h in culture, clusters of cells
that have formed lead to a more uniform tissue level contraction [21]. Delamination follows as the tissue starts to contract
forming a geometrical shape designated by the placement of the
minutien pins. The delamination process is typically completed
after a term of 4–5 days in culture. The minutien pins were
placed to form a 2.54 cm2 square to facilitate the use of the
32-channel (1.60 cm × 0.18 cm) electrode board to measure the
construct’s electrophysiological properties.
Our system bypasses some of the problems innate to earlier
systems such as the fractionation and low amplitudes of recorded
waveforms seen by one research group [18]. The data collected
with this system could not be properly analyzed to obtain impulse propagation. Our system mitigates this problem by using
4× greater resolution data acquisition and different scalable parameters. With 32 separate channels, our system provides data
gathering throughout the whole construct as opposed to the linear arrangement in the aforementioned study. A second group
employing CFI was able to collect data 61 points with custom
software and MATLAB [19]. However, our system is simpler to
use, and with direct contact between the pins and specimen, this
structure produces higher resolution waves for data analysis.
Finally, a third group using a commercially available system to
record the action potentials of the bioengineered tissue [20] was
not able to collect the wide range of data available as with our
system.
Assessment of the contractile properties of the 3D-AHM
showed that our methods yielded functional tissues with forces
of 500–700 μN for patches containing 4 × 106 cells with a 6–
7 day incubation period in culture. These values are comparable
to those found in the literature. In one study, Zimmerman et al.
observed the twitch force of EHTs and found them to be 360 ±
60 μN. In a previous study, our group (Huang et al.) obtained the
contractile force measurement of BEHM to be 500 μN. Moving

toward an in vivo model requires further exploration into the improvement of the contractile force of fabricated cardiac tissue. In
addition, evaluation of the muscle construct contraction yielded
an overall change in length of approximately 0.2 mm (1%) with
respect to the entire length of the tissues. In a previous study,
the average shortening (dL/dt) of unloaded cardiomyocytes was
found to be −3.20 ± 0.66 [22]. Utilizing this same technique
shortening of our tissues was found to be −1.88. These two
values are not directly comparable; therefore, evaluation into
the shortening of individual cardiomyocytes within the tissues
should be performed in future studies.
Histological data displayed evidence of some degree of tissue
level organization from the isolated cardiac cells. The Masson
trichrome staining demonstrates evidence of the integration of
the plated cells with the fibrin gel and formation of 3D-AHM.
Fig. 2(a) shows the fibrin gel (pink) has degraded through time
and the cells (dark spots) have dispersed in the tissue. Fig. 2(b)
also shows evidence of the integration between the scaffold
and cell layer initially formed on top. The immunofluorescent
staining gave us chance to observe the cardiac markers found
in the 3D-AHM. The positive staining for α-actinin displayed
the presence of z-lines of cardiac myofibrils [see Fig. 2(c)–
(f)]. The presence of Cx43 indicates that cardiomyocytes in the
present tissues exhibit electromechanical coupling [see Fig. 2(c)
and (d)]. Additionally, the presence of collagen type I shows
the presence of fibroblasts in the formed tissue [see Fig. 2(e)].
And finally, there were signs of robust cell proliferation and
nucleic division in these fabricated cardiac tissues, which were
revealed by Ki67 positive staining [see Fig. 2(f)]. Furthermore,
a recently published study on the optimization of the cardiac
muscle fabricated within our laboratory shows the effect of the
supporting cells in the development of our tissues [23]. It also
confirms the presence of other cells types in the constructs that
were used for this study.
Study of the electrophysiological properties of the myocardium is pivotal due to the propagation of electrical impulses through the tissue. These impulses drive the coordinated
contractions of the heart, and subsequently, the flow of blood
through the body. It is important to evaluate the electrical activity of the tissue during the culture and fabrication stages for it is
this activity that directly correlates with the viability and functionality of the tissue. In the future, the observation and analysis
of these properties will grant us the capability to make the necessary adjustments to our current model in order to achieve a
more similar cardiac construct to native heart tissue. Also, in
order to be a functional tissue, the impulses must be comparable
to those of native mammalian tissues so as to be used in vivo
studies in the future.
With the goal to evaluate these electrical properties, we customized a commercially available system that enabled us to
acquire EKG signals from the fabricated 3D-AHM at 32 different locations. The 32 gold-plated pins fitted to the electrode
board came in direct contact with the tissue, which allowed us
to acquire a better signal from each point. The easy to use interface provided by Intan Technologies allowed us to modify
the amplifier-sampling rate and bandwidth to attain a clearer
signal. With the features available and our modifications, this

SALAZAR et al.: 32-CHANNEL SYSTEM TO MEASURE THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF BIOENGINEERED CARDIAC MUSCLE

system also provided a higher resolution signal than seen in
other data acquisition systems. Over periods of 30–60 min, the
system recorded the signal waves breaking them up into 2-min
RHD data files. These files were then run through a customized
MATLAB file provided to us by Intan Technologies to extract
the data for analysis. This allowed us to look at each individual
channel to obtain localized as well as overall conduction velocity and signal time delays between channels in any direction.
Additionally, we were able to evaluate in detail the QRS complex of each channel’s signal and obtain the overall average of
the tissue.
Determination of the time delay was done by obtaining the
maximum value of the cross-correlation function, which indicates the point where the signals are best aligned thus yielding
the number of samples the signal is lagging by. The lag in samples multiplied by the sampling rate used (5.00 kS/s) gave us
the time delay between each signal and the reference as seen in
Fig. 4(c). Due to the properties of the cross-correlation calculation process, error is minimized even if noise is present. With
the acquired time-delay values, we constructed optical maps to
visualize the propagation of the electrical impulse across the cardiac tissue with respect to the chosen reference (see Fig. 5). We
noted that a slight trend in impulse propagation could be seen
in the tissues; however, the overall propagation across the mapping area exhibited nonuniform characteristics. The absence of
uniformity may be due to the lack of electrical stimulation of
the tissue, which will be evaluated in subsequent studies. The
forming of cell aggregates during the patch formation process
or the presence of cardiac pacemaker cells causing contraction to start simultaneously at different parts of the construct
may also explain the asynchronous beating of the 3D-AHM.
Additionally, synchronous contraction relies on the appropriate
proportion of fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and smooth muscle
cells [23]. Since these supporting cells proliferate faster than
cardiomyocytes, this may also account for the uneven propagation of the signal. In the next step of the process, we acquired
the time-delay values of the native rat hearts, as well as tested
and constructed an optical map to visualize the propagation of
the electrical impulse with respect to the chosen reference [see
Fig. 8(c)]. A trend of gradually increasing time delays as distance increases was noted on the optical map, but again, the
trend is not continuous at every point. This asynchrony may be
explained by the fact that the board cannot provide the same
amount of contact between each gold plated pin and the heart
due to the rigid configuration of the board and the curved surface
of the heart.
We were also able to obtain the localized and overall conduction velocities of the 3D-AHM [see Fig. 6(b) and (c)] and
native heart tissue [see Fig. 8(d)], due to the ability of the
system to collect high-resolution data at 32 individual points
on the cardiac construct. Extensive analysis of the waves acquired with each channel along with known distances between
channels allowed us to calculate localized conduction velocities of the electrical signals over the total area of the construct,
which we did not see in other systems found in the literature.
Some investigators found the ventricular impulse propagation of
2-day-old Sprague–Dawley rats to be 25.4 cm/s [24] and that

1621

of 10-day-old rats to be 27 cm/s [25]. Another group reported
that bioengineered cardiac constructs exhibit an impulse propagation velocity of ࣈ15 cm/s in the longitudinal direction and
of ࣈ10 cm/s in the transverse direction [26]. Yet another group
showed an average impulse propagation of 8.6 ± 2.3 cm/s in
their cardiac constructs [17]. These values greatly differ from
those found in this study. We observed localized conduction
velocities to be within a range of 127–488 cm/s for 3D-AHM
and 74–300 cm/s in the native rat heart. The values depend on
the distance between the reference electrode and all other electrodes, as well as the respective time delay in the signals. Furthermore, we calculated longitudinal (277.81 cm/s), transverse
(300.79 cm/s), and diagonal (285.68 cm/s) conduction velocities in the fabricated tissue, which far exceed those reported in
noninfarcted adult rat myocardium (69 ± 6 cm/s longitudinally
and 19 ± 5 cm/s transversally) [27]. These high values were
consistent across all the different datasets acquired throughout
the duration of the study. The discontinuity of values collected
and those found in literature for the cardiac constructs may be a
result of the difference in methodology used in the formation of
the cardiac muscle. The majority of previous studies used only
ventricular cells; however, the tissues in this study were comprised of cells found in both the atria and ventricles of neonatal
rats. The spontaneous contraction rate of ventricular cells is
14–42 bpm and that of atrial cells is 13–100 bpm. [28] The
higher rate in the atrial cells seems to coincide with the presence of cardiac pacemakers, which have a higher contraction
rate of about 80–100 bpm. As shown in a previous study, cells
found in aggregates formed during culture and which beat at a
faster rate act as pacemakers [29] setting the rate of contraction
for the tissue. In our case, the faster beating pacemaker cells
could be leading to higher contraction rates in the constructs.
As well, the presence of pacemaker cells throughout the tissue
that fire at different rates can cause contraction to emanate from
different points and affect the values seen for the conduction
velocities. Furthermore, the occurrence of connexin 43 indicates electromechanical coupling, however, the levels seen in
our constructs may not be high enough to allow cardiac impulse
propagation evenly throughout the tissue and allow for overall
coordinated contraction, therefore affecting the values obtained.
To validate these hypotheses, studies with constructs fabricated
from only ventricular cells and treated to increase the gap junction presence need to be performed in the future. In regards to
the high values seen in the native rat heart, the lack of direct
contact between each pin and the tissue surface may account
for some error in the calculation of the conduction velocities.
This system was specifically designed for the assessment of 3DAHM and can provide some difficulty in assessment of other
tissues. We are currently working on a flexible system that can
be efficiently used to evaluate the electrical activity of native rat
hearts and our tissues bypassing the aforementioned issue.
From the data collected, we analyzed the QRS complex of the
EKG signal. From our tests, we found the average amplitude for
the R-wave of the fabricated constructs to be 438.42 ± 36.96 μV,
which is similar to the values previously obtained in normal rats
[30]. Moreover, we found the average R-wave amplitude of native tissue to be 4757.43 ± 1733.53 μV. We also obtained the

1622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

average time to peak (147.3 ± 16.8 ms) and average relaxation
time (170.2 ± 8.1 ms) for the R-wave. The overall average for
the QRS interval duration of 3D-AHM was found to be 317.5 ±
16.5 ms and of rat heart 27.22 ± 15.86 ms. This value of the fabricated tissue is much longer than the value found in normal rats
(23 ± 5 ms) [30], while the value of native tissue using our system is similar to other values found in literature. The difference
in these values could be possibly explained by the difference
between bioengineered cardiac constructs and the native heart.
Although, our tissues show the formation of cardiac tissue, further improvement is needed in order to closely resemble native
mammalian tissue that can be used in in vivo studies in the
future. In addition, further studies on the percentage of supporting cells and their effect on the electrical propagation within
the constructs could prove beneficial to better understand the
bioengineered constructs.
V. CONCLUSION
In summary, we demonstrated here that the system we developed is capable of quantifying the conduction velocity and
other metrics associated with the electrophysiological properties
of 3D-AHM. In the future, we will be working in the development of a custom EKG sensing system, which will allow us to
obtain all the desired data noninvasively in order to maintain the
integrity of the 3D-AHM. During our testing, the cardiac constructs showed some evidence of damage on the surface and we
need to prevent damage to the tissue to acquire more sustainable
constructs for implantation in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would also like to thank Mr. K. Hoffman for
proofreading and technical writing assistance.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Langer and J. P. Vacanti, “Tissue engineering,” Science, vol. 260,
no. 5110, pp. 920–926, May 1993.
[2] R. E. Akins et al., “Cardiac organogenesis in vitro: Reestablishment of
three-dimensional tissue architecture by dissociated neonatal rat ventricular cells,” Tissue Eng., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 103–118, Apr. 1999.
[3] H. G. Sachs and R. L. DeHaan, “Embryonic myocardial cell aggregates:
Volume and pulsation rate,” Dev. Biol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 233–240, Jan.
1973.
[4] W. H. Zimmermann et al., “Tissue engineering of a differentiated cardiac
muscle construct,” Circ. Res., vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 223–230, Feb. 2002.
[5] R. L. Carrier et al., “Cardiac tissue engineering: Cell seeding, cultivation
parameters, and tissue construct characterization,” Biotechnol. Bioeng.,
vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 580–589, Sep. 1999.
[6] T. Shimizu et al., “Cell sheet-based myocardial tissue engineering: New
hope for damaged heart rescue,” Curr. Pharm. Des., vol. 15, no. 24,
pp. 2807–2814. 2009.
[7] T. Shimizu et al., “Electrically communicating three-dimensional cardiac tissue mimic fabricated by layered cultured cardiomyocyte sheets,”
J. Biomed. Mater. Res., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Apr. 2002.

[8] T. Shimizu et al., “Two-dimensional manipulation of cardiac myocyte
sheets utilizing temperature-responsive culture dishes augments the pulsatile amplitude,” Tissue Eng., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 141–151, Apr. 2001.
[9] T. Shimizu et al., “Cell sheet engineering for myocardial tissue reconstruction,” Biomaterials, vol. 24, no. 13, pp. 2309–2316, Jun. 2003.
[10] R. Evers et al., “Fabrication of functional cardiac, skeletal, and smooth
muscle pumps in vitro,” Artif. Organs, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 69–74, Jan. 2011.
[11] F. Migneco et al., “Tissue-engineered heart valve prostheses: ‘State of the
heart’,” Regen. Med., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 399–419, May. 2008.
[12] N. R. Blan and R. K. Birla, “Design and fabrication of heart muscle using
scaffold-based tissue engineering,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res., A, vol. 86A,
no. 1, pp. 195–208, 2008.
[13] Y. C. Huang et al., “Contractile three-dimensional bioengineered heart
muscle for myocardial regeneration,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res., A, vol. 80,
no. 3, pp. 719–731, Mar. 2007.
[14] K. Baar et al., “Self-organization of rat cardiac cells into contractile 3-D
cardiac tissue,” The FASEB J., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 275–277, 2005.
[15] L. Khait et al., “Variable optimization for the formation of threedimensional self-organized heart muscle,” In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Animal,
vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 592–601, Dec. 2009.
[16] B. E. Griffith and C. S. Peskin, “Electrophysiology,” Commun. Pure Appl.
Math., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 1837–1913, 2013.
[17] M. Radisic et al., “Optical mapping of impulse propagation in engineered
cardiac tissue,” Tissue Eng., A, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 851–860, Apr. 2009.
[18] N. Bursac et al., “Cardiac muscle tissue engineering: Toward an in vitro
model for electrophysiological studies,” Amer. J. Physiol., vol. 277, no. 2,
pp. H433–H444, Aug. 1999.
[19] N. Bursac et al., “Cardiomyocyte cultures with controlled macroscopic
anisotropy: A model for functional electrophysiological studies of cardiac
muscle,” Circ. Res., vol. 91, no. 12, pp. e45–e54, Dec. 2002.
[20] T. Meyer et al., “Micro-electrode arrays in cardiac safety pharmacology: A novel tool to study QT interval prolongation,” Drug Saf., vol. 27,
no. 11, pp. 763–772, 2004.
[21] A. K. Kryukov et al., “Synchronization phenomena in mixed media of
passive, excitable, and oscillatory cells,” Chaos, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 0371291–037129-16, Sep. 2008.
[22] L. M. Delbridge and K. P. Roos, “Optical methods to evaluate the contractile function of unloaded isolated cardiac myocytes,” J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.,
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 11–25, Jan. 1997.
[23] Z. W. Tao et al., “Optimizing a spontaneously contracting heart tissue
patch with rat neonatal cardiac cells on fibrin gel,” J. Tissue Eng. Regen.
Med., Apr. 2014.
[24] M. Papadaki et al., “Towards a functional tissue engineered cardiac muscle,” Presented at the 21st Annu. Conf. Annu. Fall Meeting Biomedical
Engineering Society, Atlanta, GA, USA, 1999.
[25] L. S. Sun et al., “Sympathetic innervation modulates ventricular impulse
propagation and repolarisation in the immature rat heart,” Cardiovasc.
Res., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 459–463, Mar. 1993.
[26] N. Bursac et al., “Novel anisotropic engineered cardiac tissues: Studies
of electrical propagation,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 361,
no. 4, pp. 847–853, Oct. 2007.
[27] W. H. Zimmermann et al., “Engineered heart tissue grafts improve systolic
and diastolic function in infarcted rat hearts,” Nat. Med., vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 452–458, Apr. 2006.
[28] A. Shrier and J. R. Clay, “Comparison of the pacemaker properties of
chick embryonic atrial and ventricular heart cells,” J. Membrane Biol.,
vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 49–56, 1982.
[29] G. E. Mark and F. F. Strasser, “Pacemaker activity and mitosis in cultures of newborn rat heart ventricle cells,” Exp. Cell Res., vol. 44, no. 2,
pp. 217–33, Nov-Dec. 1966.
[30] R. S. Fraser et al., “Electrocardiogram in the normal rat,” J. Appl. Physiol.,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 401–402, Sep. 1967.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

