IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

1777

A Switched-Mode Breast Coil for 7 T MRI Using
Forced-Current Excitation
Jiaming Cui∗ , Student Member, IEEE, John C. Bosshard, Joseph V. Rispoli, Member, IEEE, Ivan E. Dimitrov,
Sergey Cheshkov, Mary Preston McDougall, Member, IEEE, Craig Malloy, and Steven M. Wright, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In high-field magnetic resonance imaging, the radio
frequency wavelength within the human body is comparable to
anatomical dimensions, resulting in B1 inhomogeneity and nonuniform sensitivity patterns. Thus, this relatively short wavelength
presents engineering challenges for RF coil design. In this study, a
bilateral breast coil for 1 H imaging at 7 T was designed and constructed using forced-current excitation. By forcing equal current
through the coil elements, we reduce the effects of coupling between the elements to simplify tuning and to ensure a uniform field
across both breasts. To combine the benefits of the higher power
efficiency of a unilateral coil with the bilateral coverage of a bilateral coil, a switching circuit was implemented to allow the coil to
be reconfigured for imaging the left, right, or both breasts.
Index Terms—7T, breast coils, dual mode, forced-current excitation (FCE), high field MRI.

I. INTRODUCTION
N recent years, efforts have been made to translate existing
MR technologies to 7 T in order to capitalize on the improved
sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [1]–[5]. Several clinical 7 T breast studies have demonstrated the feasibility and the
advantage of utilizing high field [3], [6]–[11]. Operating at high
fields, however, presents a number of engineering challenges.
Transmitting at a higher Larmor frequency creates a shorter radio frequency (RF) wavelength in the body, often resulting in
B1 inhomogeneity and nonuniform sensitivity [12]–[14]. When
designing high field coils with multiple elements, the shorter
RF wavelength also causes more complex element-to-element
interactions, complicating coil tuning. A number of research
groups have employed parallel RF transmission to address the
high-field inhomogeneity problem [15]–[19]. This method utilizes multiple transmit channels, individually controlling the
current on each coil element, to achieve a uniform excitation.
However, the high channel count needed to implement this technique is often expensive and available at a few research sites

I

only; hence, single-channel techniques are still needed. In the
past, our group has successfully applied the forced-current excitation (FCE) technique on high field multielement coil designs
to obtain some of the advantages of a two-channel transmitter at
much lower complexity and cost. The FCE technique exploits
transmission line properties to ensure that equal currents are
delivered to the feedpoints of all elements [20]. This approach
has been shown to mitigate inhomogeneity arising from the
asymmetric coil loading encountered in breast imaging [21].
In clinical practice, a bilateral study is preferred as it simplifies planning and interpretation of the results [11], [22]–[24].
Comparing images from both breasts can reduce false positive
detection in dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE)-MRI. Additionally, studies indicate that in women recently diagnosed with
unilateral breast cancer, additional cancer lesions are sometimes
detected in the contralateral breast [25]. Several 7T breast studies have indicated a need for bilateral coil design [8], [11].
On the other hand, in some applications, e.g., proton decoupling in second-nuclei applications, a unilateral coil may be
preferred, since it enables judicious use of the available total proton decoupling power in a single breast [26]–[28]. Our
group has reported a unilateral, quadrature FCE breast coil previously [21]. Here, we describe the extension of the unilateral
coil to a new switched-mode coil. The new coil can be configured for either bilateral operation or unilateral operation for
either breast. By extending the FCE approach to both sides of
the array, the mutual impedance between the left and right arrays is also mitigated, eliminating potential asymmetries caused
by mode splitting. The switched-mode coil was evaluated on
the bench and through MRI experiments in its different configurations. Efficiency comparison was made on bench with the
previously reported unilateral coil.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

Manuscript received August 15, 2014; revised January 10, 2015; accepted
January 30, 2015. Date of publication February 19, 2015; date of current version
June 16, 2015. This work was supported by CPRIT under Grant RP100625
and under NIH Grant EB016394 and Grant EB015908. Asterisk indicates
corresponding author.
∗ J. Cui is with the Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA
(e-mail: jm0828@tamu.edu).
J. C. Bosshard, J. V. Rispoli, M. P. McDougall, and S. M. Wright are with the
Texas A&M University.
I. E. Dimitrov is with the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
and also with Philips Medical Systems.
S. Cheshkov is with the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.
C. Malloy is with the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, and
also with VA North Texas Health Care System.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2403850

A. Coil Design
In designing the switched-mode coil, we initially duplicated
a previous unilateral coil construct [21] and added a switching
network to enable selectable bilateral and unilateral (left/right)
operation. The switching network was designed to enforce the
FCE condition in all modes. All coil conductors were etched
from copper-clad FR-4 PCB.
Each quadrature unilateral coil consisted of a Helmholtz pair
and a saddle pair, as previously described in [21]. In brief, the
two identical loops comprising the Helmholtz pair had 16 cm
i.d. and 17.2 cm o.d. and were coaxially separated by 8 cm in
the vertical y-direction. Each element was segmented by eleven

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Fig. 1. Switchable bilateral quadrature coil closed in a housing (left) and with
covers removed (right) forms.

Fig. 3. Schematic of switching network for operating mode control of the
Helmholtz/saddle pairs. The same dc signals for switching are routed to the
Helmholtz and saddle switching network.

Fig. 2. Possible quadrature B1 field arrangements (a) with the B1 fields in the
same direction. (b) with the B1 fields in opposite directions. The arrangement
on the left was chosen based on numerical simulations.

10 pF capacitors. A concentric coplanar shield surrounded each
loop, with 18 cm i.d. and 18.7 cm o.d.; the addition of coplanar
shields has been shown to reduce E-field radiation from the
coil [21]. To prevent eddy currents, each shield was segmented
in two locations by 1800 pF capacitors. The saddle pair coils
were affixed on opposite sides of a 15.2 cm i.d. acrylic tube
and centered inside the Helmholtz pairs. The elements were
rectangular with inner measurements (when flat) of 15.3 cm
width and 8.1 cm height and outer measurements of 16.5 cm
width and 9.4 cm height. When mounted at radius 7.6 cm,
each saddle produced an angular aperture of 120°. Analogous
to the coplanar shields on the Helmholtz elements, rectangular
shielding conductors of 0.4 cm width were spaced 0.5 cm outside
of the saddles. Each coil element was segmented by eleven 12 pF
capacitors, and the shield was segmented at two locations by
1800 pF capacitors.
To enable bilateral operation, the unilateral coil was duplicated and the two coils were spaced 19.2 cm center-to-center in
the x direction. In this paper, we define the term “left coil” as the
coil used to image the left breast of a patient (−x), and “right
coil” as the coil to image the right breast (+x). Photographs of
the coil are shown in Fig. 1.
The close proximity of the two quadrature coils raised
concerns of potential B1 field cancellation in the bilateral
configuration. Two feeding schemes were available: with the
B1 field having the same direction [see Fig. 2(a)]; with the
B1 field having the opposite direction [see Fig. 2(b)]. The
first arrangement provided better SNR in simulations and was
chosen for the final design.
B. FCE and Mode Switching
The theory behind the FCE method has been presented elsewhere [20]. In brief, in a single-channel multielement array
design, the elements are connected to a common voltage point
(CVP) through quarter-wavelength transmission lines. The re-

sulting current at the feed point of each element is equal despite
differences in loading and mutual impedance between elements
[20]. In this coil, all four elements in the two Helmholtz pairs
were connected to one CVP through quarter-wavelength segments of semirigid coaxial cable, and all four elements in the
two saddle pairs were connected to a second CVP using the
same method.
The circuit boards for the CVP included p-i-n diode switching networks allowing unilateral/bilateral mode selection. Four
operating modes were possible: Both coils activated (bilateral
mode, mode 1); Left coil activated with right coil detuned (mode
2); Right coil activated with left coil detuned (mode 3); Both
coils detuned (mode 4). Modes 1–3 were utilized for transmit/receive configurations, and mode 4 was included for potential future use with receive array inserts. To control mode switching of the two coils, we assembled a power supply switching
device to provide two dc supply signals which can be switched
between +12 and −12 V; positive polarity activates the corresponding coil, whereas negative polarity effectively disconnects
and detunes the coil.
A simplified schematic of the switching circuit with coil connections is presented in Fig. 3. RF chokes on the dc bias lines
and current limiting resistors are omitted for clarity.
The path for the RF is determined by the status of p-i-n
diodes D1 and D2 (UM9415, Microsemi, Lowell, MA, USA). A
+12/−12V signal forward/reverse biases D1 or D2, which connects/disconnects the corresponding coil elements to/from the
RF chain. In unilateral mode, it is necessary to detune the nonactive coil. The FCE implementation provides a straightforward
method to detune a coil: when D1 or D2 is reverse biased, D3 or
D4 is forward biased by the same dc signal, essentially creating
a short-circuit at the CVP. According to transmission line theory,
the quarter-wavelength coaxial lines transform the short-circuit
to an open-circuit at the feed of the coil elements, consequently
detuning those elements. When D1 or D2 is forward biased,
D3 or D4 is reverse biased by the same dc signal and does not
affect the RF chain. The switching network is followed by a single match/tune board after which the matched coil is connected
directly to one port of the scanner quadrature coil interface
box, which provides the RF preamplifier and transmit/receive

CUI et al.: SWITCHED-MODE BREAST COIL FOR 7 T MRI USING FORCED-CURRENT EXCITATION

switching. The apparatus and signal paths shown in Fig. 3 are
duplicated for the other set of coils (Helmholtz or saddles).
To summarize, by combining the FCE method and the diode
switching network, equal current is forced at the coil elements
within the same coil (modes 1–3), as well as the left and right
coils (mode 1). In modes 2 and 3, the unused coil is detuned.
C. Shielding
Because the quarter-wavelength coaxial lines connecting the
left and right elements to the CVP boards share a common
ground at the boards, upon implementing the bilateral design the
shields of these cables were found to support additional halfwavelength dipole modes, which degraded performance and
affected left-right symmetry. These cable modes were largely
mitigated by placing two identical parallel copper shields in
the transverse plane, superior and inferior to the coils, spaced
1 cm from the outer conductors. Each shield has dimensions of
40.7 cm (x) × 10.3 cm (y). The shields were segmented along the
x- and y-directions to mitigate the effect of eddy currents, with
four evenly spaced y-directed cuts, and one central x-directed
cut which skips the middle area where the switching circuit
boards were mounted.
D. Electromagnetic Modeling
FDTD simulation software (Xfdtd 7.4, Remcom, State College, PA, USA) was used to perform electromagnetic simulation
to calculate B1 + and specific absorption rate (SAR) generated
by the coil. The phantom previously utilized in [21] was used
for comparison purposes. This phantom included a cylinder consisting of breast fat material (σ = 0.033 S/m and εr = 5.54) and
a rectangular block consisting muscle material (σ = 0.77 S/m
and εr = 58.2). The dielectric properties of the different materials were obtained from [29]. The coil was simulated in modes
1–3. For each mode, the active coil elements were fed with high
impedance (1000 Ω), 1-A steady-state current sources to simulate the FCE drive condition. 0° and 90° phase offsets were
added to the Helmholtz and saddle feeds, respectively, to create
quadrature excitation. The nonactive coil elements in modes 2–3
are left open-circuited at their feed points.
E. Coil Testing—Bench Measurements
The switched-mode coil B1 + efficiency was initially evaluated on the bench in all three modes. A prototype Helmholtz
pair bilateral coil was also tested on bench to analyze the effect
of FCE on tuning and homogeneity.
1) FCE Versus non-FCE Performance: When the switchedmode coil operates in a bilateral mode, the coupling between the
two closely spaced quadrature coils creates multiple modes with
different relative current amplitudes and phases in the elements.
This complicates the coil tuning and affects the field homogeneity. To evaluate the impact of using the FCE method in such a
scenario, a prototype Helmholtz pair bilateral coil with slightly
smaller dimensions (14.8 cm i.d. for each coil) was tested on
the bench. FCE versus non-FCE performance was evaluated. In
the non-FCE case, 3λ/8 coax cables, instead of λ/4 were used to
excite the Helmholtz pair elements after the CVP. The following

1779

comparison data were collected: 1) S11 response of the bilateral
coil over a 50 MHz span centered at 298 MHz, 2) Field profiles
at 298 MHz along the central axis in the left coil using a shielded
pickup loop, and 3) Field strength measured as the S21 response
between the coil and the same pickup loop located at +1 cm on
the central axis of the left coil (0 cm represents the isocenter
of the coil, and positive values represent positions toward the
bottom of the coil), over a 50 MHz span centered at 298 MHz.
2) Switched Mode Coil-efficiency Comparison of the Three
Modes: As discussed above, one potential advantage of allowing unilateral operation on the switched-mode coil is higher
power efficiency over the bilateral mode. The incoming RF signal, as represented in Fig. 3, should divide evenly into the two
coils in bilateral mode owing to the symmetric circuit structure.
When switching from bilateral mode to unilateral mode, the input power is directed into the active coil and a 3 dB higher power
efficiency is expected. To evaluate the coil efficiency in modes
1–3 (bilateral, unilateral-right only, unilateral-left only), the
Helmholtz pairs and saddle pairs were tuned to 50 Ω at their feedpoints and excited in quadrature mode. One-dimensional field
profiles were measured along the x-axis through both coils using a measurement system dedicated for RF coil characterization
[30] and a quadrature shielded pickup loop. The measurements
were repeated for modes 1–3 and the B1 + profiles were plotted
together to compare efficiency. To fully evaluate the coil performance under potential coupling between the multiple elements,
the coil was tested unloaded where the highest quality factor
was achieved. Additionally, the insertion loss of the switching
circuit was measured to evaluate the effect of the diodes in the
RF path. The impact of such loss on the coil was then evaluated
on bench by comparing the efficiency of the coil in unilateral
mode to the purely unilateral coil described earlier [21].
F. Coil Testing—MRI Experiments
The switched-mode coil performance was evaluated on a
whole-body 7 T scanner (Achieva, Philips Medical Systems).
1) Phantom Imaging: The phantom was constructed out of
a container shaped as a tapered cylinder, 13.4 cm diameter at
the top decreasing to 10.8 cm diameter at the bottom. Two such
containers were filled with canola oil to mimic lipid properties
of the breast and were placed inside the two quadrature coils,
with the top of the phantom container at 1 cm above the top
Helmholtz loop.
Phantom images were acquired in coil modes 1–3. The coil
efficiencies of modes 1–3 were compared by recording the peak
transmit drive scale (DS) required to achieve a 90° tip angle
over a rectangular region in the center of the phantom.
2) In Vivo Breast Imaging: To test coil performance two
volunteers with different breast cup size were scanned under an
Internal Review Board approved protocol and after signing an
informed consent. In vivo bilateral coverage and fat suppression
uniformity were tested by acquiring coronal 3-D T1-weighted
fast gradient echo (THRIVE) images with and without fat
suppression. Additional in vivo imaging parameters were as
follows: FOV 370 mm × 285 mm × 150 mm (RL × FH
×AP), resolution 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm (overcontiguous),
TR/TE/FA: 4.0 ms/1.6 ms/8°, SPAIR with TI = 150 ms (for fat

1780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

In unilateral mode, the unused coil is detuned and does not
produce significant SAR; therefore, the B1 + /sqrt(total SAR) is
higher in unilateral mode. This is useful in cases where the peak
power or total SAR is limited. Accordingly, the SNR is also
higher in unilateral mode, by reciprocity. Of course, since the
left and right coils are identical, B1 + /sqrt(maximum SAR) was
found to be very close (within 0.3 dB) in the active coil for
all three modes. Thus, the mode does not change peak SAR
performance. Therefore, enabling the unilateral mode may be
advantageous in applications like proton decoupling if the peak
available power is limited.
Fig. 4.

Coil and phantom model. The shields are not shown for clarity.

TABLE I
CENTRAL AXIAL PLANE B1 + AND 10-G AVERAGED SAR MAPS IN MODES 1–3

The results were scaled to 1 W total input power to the coil. 0 dB corresponds to 1.97
μ T and 0.99 W/kg in the B1 + and SAR maps, respectively.

saturation), partial Fourier acquisition of 0.7 (halfscan) in the
first phase encoding direction, for a total scan time of 1:22 min
(no fat saturation) and 3:44 min (with fat saturation). The
original coronal images were also reconstructed in the axial
plane as 1-mm projections. Coil excitation homogeneity was
evaluated using B1 mapping with a dual TR acquisition [31]
with nominal flip angle of 50°, TR1/TR2 = 35/140 ms, and
resolution 3 mm × 3 mm × 2 mm.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Electromagnetic Modeling
The 3-D model of the coil and breast phantom is shown in
Fig. 4. B1 + field maps and 10-g averaged SAR maps at the
Larmor frequency (298.03 MHz at 7 T MRI) were obtained in
the central axial plane in modes 1–3, and are shown in Table I.
All modes had 1 W total power applied.
As expected, higher B1 + , as well as SAR are generated in
the active coil in unilateral mode as compared to bilateral mode
for the same amount of input power. The B1 + in the nonactive
coil in unilateral mode is suppressed by approximately 20 dB,
as compared to the active coil. In all three modes, highest SAR
is observed in the chest wall.

B. Coil Testing-Bench Measurements
1) FCE Versus non-FCE Performance: The FCE versus nonFCE performance was evaluated on the prototype Helmholtz
pair bilateral coil. In both cases, the coil was tuned to 50 Ω at
298 MHz—resonance frequency at 7 T. The S11 response of
the bilateral coil, the field profile along the central axis of the
left coil at 298 MHz measured with a pickup loop, and the S21
between the coil and the pickup loop located at +1 cm on the
central axis of the left coil, was recorded and compared for the
two cases, as shown in Fig. 5.
In the FCE case, presented with blue curves and symbols,
the coil behaves well despite the presence of four closely coupled elements: the S11 response shows a single mode in the
span (a), the field profile is uniform indicative of equal currents
in the elements (b), and the response peaks at the desired frequency (c). In the non-FCE case, the S11 response indicates
the presence of multiple modes. Since the coil elements are not
tuned independently and equal currents are not enforced, the
resulting field profile (b) is highly inhomogeneous. The 3λ/8
feedlines (non-FCE condition) did not ensure equal currents,
and indeed represented a “free” voltage excitation case in which
the mutual impedance between elements must be accounted for
to ensure operation in the proper mode [32]. In this case, that
would require more degrees of freedom in tuning the coil than
just a single matching network. This behavior is reflected in the
rapidly varying field intensity with frequency in the non-FCE
mode shown in Fig. 5(c).
2) Switched-Mode Coil-Efficiency Comparison of the Three
Modes: The B1 + profiles of the switched-mode coil operating
in modes 1–3 are plotted in Fig. 6. In unilateral mode (modes 2
and 3), the inactive coil was detuned. Since the two coils were
closely spaced, the active coil has some sensitivity over the
region within the detuned coil. This detected residual signal decreases toward the outer edge of the detuned coil and is primarily
due to the natural sensitivity of the “on” coil, as shown below.
When switching from bilateral mode to unilateral mode, a
1.8–3.5 dB increase in RF power sensitivity was observed within
the activated coil, with an increase of approximately 3 dB at the
central region of the coil. Enforcing equal currents in the left
and right coils results in symmetric fields despite high mutual
impedance between the two coils and slight differences in components and the fabrication process. When operated in unilateral
mode, the nonactive coil has 9–20 dB lower sensitivity than the
active coil.

CUI et al.: SWITCHED-MODE BREAST COIL FOR 7 T MRI USING FORCED-CURRENT EXCITATION

Fig. 5. Comparison between FCE mode and non-FCE mode. (a) S1 1 of the
bilateral coil over a 50 MHz span, good matching was achieved at the coil port
for both cases. (b) Normalized field profiles along the central axis of the left
coil at 298 MHz, presented in decibels. In non-FCE mode the coil exhibits field
inhomogeneity even when unloaded due to capacitor tolerances in the elements,
both of which are connected to a common tune capacitor. When operated in
FCE mode, the coil shows much better homogeneity. (c) Normalized S2 1 over
a 50 MHz span at +1 cm on the central axis of the left coil. When operated
in FCE mode, the desired mode (equal currents) appears at 298 MHz, giving
a uniform field plot. When operated in non-FCE mode, the coil shows a more
complex mode structure, and does not provide equal currents in the coil elements
resulting in an inhomogeneous field.

1781

Fig. 7. Coil mode performance as illustrated by phantom and in vivo imaging:
(a, top row) switched-mode coil: bilateral mode. (b) Switched-mode coil: right
only mode. (c) Switched-mode: left only mode. Original in vivo acquisition
(coronal) and reconstructed (axial) images are shown in the middle and right
columns, respectively. Symmetric performance is observed in the bilateral mode,
while excellent signal localization is seen in the unilateral modes.
TABLE II
TRANSMITTER (TX) DRIVE SCALE (DS), TRANSMITTER RELATIVE OUTPUT
POWER, AND BENCH MEASUREMENT OF THE THREE MODES
Mode
Bilateral-Mode 1
Left only-Mode 2
Right only-Mode 3

TX DS

TX Relative Output Power

Bench

0.512
0.352
0.334

0 dB
−3.3 dB
−3.7 dB

0 dB
−3.5 dB
−3.2 dB

C. Coil Testing-MRI Experiments

Fig. 6. One-dimensional B1 + profiles across the ROI, along x-direction. The
data measured in modes 1–3 are normalized to a global maximum and plotted
together for comparison. When operated in unilateral mode, the active coil
has around 3 dB higher sensitivity than when operated in bilateral mode. The
nonactive coil has much lower sensitivity (9–20 dB lower than the active coil),
which indicates successful detuning.

The insertion loss of the switching circuit was found to be
0.6 dB at 298 MHz, which is mainly caused by the series diodes.
The power efficiency of the switched-mode coil in unilateral
mode was measured to be 0.6 dB (13%) worse than that of the
purely unilateral coil, which does not have the diode switching
circuit.

1) Phantom Imaging: Phantom images were acquired with
the switched-mode coil. All images were acquired with a same
set of scan parameters and the same phantoms. Fig. 7(a)–(c)
are the images acquired with the switched-mode coil in the
three modes (for a discussion of the in vivo images, please
see the next section). When the switched-mode coil operates in
unilateral mode (modes 2–3), the residual signal received by the
detuned coil was predominantly suppressed, with the maximum
signal in that region only 10% of that in the active coil. This is
consistent with the bench results in Fig. 6. It is evident that the
inactive coil in the switched mode coil is effectively detuned by
the switching network.
On the 7-T Philips Achieva scanner, the output voltage of
the power amplifier is linearly proportional to the transmitter
drive scale, so the output power is proportional to the square of
the drive scale. The DS for a 90° tip angle using the switchedmode coil was recorded during the transmit gain calibration
phase in modes 1–3 is shown in Table II, along with relative
output power of each case, scaled to 0 dB for the bilateral
mode 1. The coil was also compared on the bench by measuring
the S21 between the coil and a pickup loop in the center of the
active coil in all modes. In each case, the coil was tuned to 50
Ω, and the power required to obtain the same field strength at
the pickup loop was recorded and scaled to the result of mode
1. The bench result is consistent with the MR measurements.
The results in Table II demonstrate that the switched-mode
coil, when in unilateral mode, is approximately twice as efficient

1782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

the left and right coils (when operated in bilateral mode). This
addresses the complication in tuning a multielement coil and
achieves better field homogeneity. The switched-mode performance was also evaluated. Bench measurements and MR experiments largely agreed and indicated that the switched-mode
coil is around 3 dB more efficient in unilateral mode than bilateral mode. This advantage in power efficiency has the potential
to facilitate high-power applications, such as proton-decoupled
second-nuclei applications. In vivo breast imaging in the bilateral mode demonstrated good bilateral coverage and uniform
fat suppression, which are both required for clinical research
studies.
REFERENCES
Fig. 8. (a) and ( b) In vivo 3-D THRIVE images (first two rows, with and
without fat suppression, respectively) in bilateral mode demonstrate coil performance for varying breast sizes. Good coverage of both breasts and the chest
wall is seen, along with uniform fat suppression attesting to the transmission homogeneity of the coil. (c) Flip angle maps demonstrate sufficient homogeneous
excitation over the bilateral FOV.

as its bilateral mode, which may be useful for certain applications, such as chemical exchange saturation transfer or proton
decoupling, that requires high-transmit field intensity.
2) In Vivo Breast Imaging: Similar to the phantom experiments, in vivo images were acquired with the switched-mode
coil in all three modes (see Fig. 7). Original in vivo acquisition (coronal) and reconstructed (axial) fat-suppressed images
are shown in the middle and right columns, respectively. Excellent signal localization is seen in the unilateral modes, with
less than 10% of the signal being excited in the nonenabled coil.
Fig. 8 shows in vivo images in bilateral mode with and without
fat suppression (top and middle rows, respectively). While the
volunteers presented different breast cup sizes (left: C/D, right:
A/B), the bilateral mode produced uniform excitation, as seen
from the images and from the B1 + field maps (bottom row). The
volunteer in vivo images demonstrate good bilateral coverage
and uniform fat suppression. Good coverage of the chest wall
and the axilla is also seen.
IV. CONCLUSION
At 7 T, FCE is one approach to overcome B1 inhomogeneity
as demonstrated in a unilateral breast coil [21]. Since clinical
breast imaging requires a bilateral coil, the FCE principle was
extended to the operation of two unilateral coils simultaneously,
or individually. A switched-mode coil operated at 7 T introduces significant challenges due to the high coupling between
two closely spaced unilateral quadrature coils when operated simultaneously. This coupling will introduce additional unwanted
modes, making it difficult to ensure operation in the desired
mode and with the desired current distribution. In addition, it is
desirable to have a coil that is relatively insensitive to the uneven
and variable coil loading presented by the general population.
By using the FCE method, the current at feed points of each coil
element was forced to be equal within the same coil, as well as

[1] J. T. Vaughan et al., “Whole-body imaging at 7T: Preliminary results,”
Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 244–248, 2009.
[2] G. Adriany et al., “Transmit and receive transmission line arrays for 7 Tesla
parallel imaging,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 434–445,
2005.
[3] M. A. Korteweg et al., “Feasibility of 7 Tesla breast magnetic resonance
imaging determination of intrinsic sensitivity and high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging, and 1H-magnetic
resonance spectroscopy of breast cancer patients receiving neoadjuvant
therapy,” Investigative Radiol., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 370–376, 2011.
[4] O. Kraff et al., “MRI at 7 tesla and above: Demonstrated and potential
capabilities,” J. Magn. Resonance Imag., vol. 41, pp. 13–33, 2014.
[5] B. Wu et al., “Shielded microstrip array for 7T human MR imaging,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 179–184, Jan. 2010.
[6] I. E. Dimitrov et al., “In vivo determination of human breast fat composition by 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy at 7 T,” Magn. Resonance
Med., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 20–26, 2012.
[7] B. L. Stehouwer et al., “7T versus 3T contrast-enhanced breast magnetic
resonance imaging of invasive ductulolobular carcinoma: First clinical
experience,” Magn. Resonance Imag., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 613–617, 2013.
[8] B. L. Stehouwer et al., “Dynamic contrast-enhanced and ultra-highresolution breast MRI at 7.0 Tesla,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 2961–2968, 2013.
[9] J. P. Wijnen et al., “Quantitative 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy
of the human breast at 7 T,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 68, no. 2,
pp. 339–348, 2012.
[10] D. W. Klomp et al., “31P MRSI and 1H MRS at 7 T: Initial results in
human breast cancer,” NMR Biomed., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 1337–1342,
2011.
[11] K. Pinker et al., “Clinical application of bilateral high temporal and spatial
resolution dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the
breast at 7 T,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 24, pp. 1–8, 2013.
[12] W. Mao et al., “Exploring the limits of RF shimming for high-field MRI
of the human head,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 918–922,
2006.
[13] F. Schick, “Whole-body MRI at high field: technical limits and clinical
potential,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 946–959, 2005.
[14] V. de Moortele et al., “B1 destructive interferences and spatial phase
patterns at 7 T with a head transceiver array coil,” Magn. Resonance
Med., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1503–1518, 2005.
[15] U. Katscher et al., “Transmit sense,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 49,
no. 1, pp. 144–150, 2003.
[16] G. Adriany et al., “A geometrically adjustable 16-channel transmit/receive
transmission line array for improved RF efficiency and parallel imaging performance at 7 Tesla,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 59, no. 3,
pp. 590–597, 2008.
[17] Y. Zhu, “Parallel excitation with an array of transmit coils,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 775–784, 2004.
[18] K. Feng et al., “A 64-channel transmitter for investigating parallel transmit
MRI,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2152–2160, Aug.
2012.
[19] L. L. Wald and E. Adalsteinsson, “Parallel transmit technology for high
field MRI,” MAGNETOM Flash, vol. 40, no. 1, p. 2009, 2009.
[20] M. P. McDougall et al., “A simple approach to overcoming mutual coupling effects in some transmit array coils for magnetic resonance imaging,”
in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, vol. 2008, pp. 2043–6.

CUI et al.: SWITCHED-MODE BREAST COIL FOR 7 T MRI USING FORCED-CURRENT EXCITATION

[21] M. P. McDougall et al., “Quadrature transmit coil for breast imaging at 7
tesla using forced current excitation for improved homogeneity,” J. Magn.
Resonance Imag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1165–1173, 2014.
[22] C. D. Lehman et al., “MRI evaluation of the contralateral breast in women
with recently diagnosed breast cancer,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 356,
no. 13, pp. 1295–1303, 2007.
[23] P. D. Friedman et al., “Breast MRI: The importance of bilateral imaging,”
Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 187, no. 2, pp. 345–349, 2006.
[24] R. Brown et al., “Breast MRI at 7 tesla with a bilateral coil and T1weighted acquisition with robust fat suppression: Image evaluation and
comparison with 3 Tesla,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 2969–2978,
2013.
[25] L. Liberman et al., “MR imaging findings in the contralateral breast of
women with recently diagnosed breast cancer,” Amer. J. Roentgenol.,
vol. 180, no. 2, pp. 333–341, 2003.
[26] E. S. Roig et al., “A double-quadrature radiofrequency coil design for
proton-decoupled carbon-13 magnetic resonance spectroscopy in humans
at 7T,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 894–900, 2015.
[27] S. Cheshkov et al., “Proton decoupled 13C MRS of the breast at 7T,”
in Proc. 20th Int. Soc. Magn. Reson. Med. Sci. Meeting, Melbourne,
Australia, 2012.
[28] D. Doddrell et al., “Theory of nuclear overhauser enhancement and 13C–
1H dipolar relaxation in proton-decoupled carbon-13 NMR spectra of
macromolecules,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3683–3689, 2003.
[29] N. E. Hasgall et al., “IT’IS database for thermal and electromagnetic
parameters of biological tissues,” Version 2.5, Aug. 1st, 2014, [Online].
Available: www.itis.ethz.ch/database
[30] J. S. Boyer et al., “An automated measurement system for characterization
of RF and gradient coil parameters,” J. Magn. Resonance Imag., vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 740–747, 1998.
[31] V. L. Yarnykh, “Actual flip-angle imaging in the pulsed steady state: A
method for rapid three-dimensional mapping of the transmitted radiofrequency field,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 192–200, 2007.
[32] Y. T. L. S.M. Wright et al., “Antennas IV: Microstrip antennas,” Handbook
of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering. Hoboken, NJ: New York:
Wiley, 2003, pp. 775–904.

Jiaming Cui (S’13) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2011. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
in Texas A&M University, TX, USA.
Mr. Cui is a Student Member of the International
Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine.

John C. Bosshard received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA, in 2006 and 2012,
respectively.
He has a background in radio communications,
working several summers at a family business. He
spent the summer of 2007 working in the receive coil
group in the magnetic resonance division of Siemens
Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany, and is currently in a postdoctoral position with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M
University. His research interests include magnetic resonance systems hardware
and parallel imaging.

Joseph V. Rispoli (M’12) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA, in 2002.
He worked as the Development Engineer for Dell,
Inc., from 2002 to 2010, and he is currently a Research Assistant and doctoral candidate in biomedical engineering at Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA.

1783

Ivan E. Dimitrov received the B.S. degree in physics
from University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA, in
1994, and the Ph.D. degree in molecular biophysics
and biochemistry from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, in 2000 on the topic of
MRI and MRS of hyperpolarized noble gases.
He then spent a year as a postdoctoral in the lab
of Alex Pines in UC Berkeley, working on polarization transfer techniques. From 2004, he joined Philips
Medical Systems where he works to develop clinically relevant applications of MRI and MRI, with
emphasis on ultrahigh-field breast imaging and spectroscopy, as well as advanced body applications. He contends that in vivo hyperpolarization will be
commercially available within several short years.
Sergey Cheshkov received the B.S. degree in physics
from Sofia University, Sofia, Bulgaria, in 1995. He
received the Ph.D. degree in physics from University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in 2001.
His main area of research was in advanced laserplasma particle accelerators. Following several positions in high-tech industry, he joined UT Southwestern as a postdoc in MRI in 2004 and was promoted
to Assistant Professor in 2006. He was co-PI and
later PI for the MRS subcore of the UTSW Gulf War
Neuro-imaging Project. His research interest include
high-field MR spectroscopy (proton and multinuclear) and MRI with applications in breast cancer.
Mary Preston McDougall (S’04–M’05) received the
B.S. degree from Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA, in 1997, the M.S. degree from
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, in
1999, and the Ph.D. degree from Texas A&M University in 2004, all in electrical engineering.
From 2004 to 2006, she was a Postdoctoral Research Assistant and then a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at Texas A&M. In 2006, she joined the
faculty of Biomedical Engineering at Texas A&M
and is now an Associate Professor. She also holds a joint appointment in the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department. Her research interests include RF coil design for high field MRI and applications of dynamic and
high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy.
Craig Malloy received the B.S. degree in chemistry
from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, and
the M.D. degree from the University of California at
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
After further training in internal medicine, cardiology and biochemistry, he joined the faculty at the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
1984. His research interests include the use of stable
isotopes for analysis of metabolic pathways in human
patients.

Steven M. Wright (S’78–M’85–F’10) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.
From 1984–1988, he was an Engineer/Scientist
for MRI at Saint Francis Medical Center, Peoria, IL,
USA. He joined the Faculty at Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA, in 1988, where he established the Magnetic Resonance Systems Lab. His
research interests include development of instrumentation and techniques for magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy and in computational electromagnetics.
Dr. Wright is a Member of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society and is a Fellow of the International Society of Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine and the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering.

