IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

669

A Novel Congestion Avoidance Technique for
Simultaneous Real-Time Medical Data Transmission
Naimah Yaakob, Member, IEEE, and Ibrahim Khalil, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The use of wireless body sensor networks (WBSN) in
medical services aims at providing continuous monitoring of patients’ physiological data. However, the scarce resources in WBSN
nodes limit their capabilities to cope with massive traffic during multiple, simultaneous data transmissions. This will create a
high tendency for congestion, causing severe performance degradation. Congestion may lead to high number of packet loss and
unbounded delay which are critical and may lead to wrong diagnosis. This paper, therefore, aims at improving this limitation
using a novel congestion avoidance technique to avoid losing realtime and life-critical medical data (e.g., electrocardiogram and
electroencephalography) which are vital for diagnosis. The main
idea is to integrate the existing rate control scheme of relaxation
theory (RT) with a method known as max-min fairness (MMF) to
achieve better performance. The MMF can be accomplished using
a progressive filling algorithm, which cuts-down excessive sending rates that may overwhelme the limited buffer in WBSN. This
paper builds upon our prior study, which provides a preliminary
analysis of RT technique in single node. Our current technique
integrates the MMF phase to enhance RT performance when the
transmission rates exceed certain threshold. Performance evaluation on RT-MMF technique shows remarkable performance improvements, while maintaining the desired quality of service.
Index Terms—Body sensor networks, congestion control, maxmin fairness, relaxation theory, remote healthcare monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
HRONIC diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, depression, asthma, cancer, and HIV/AIDS have
been reported among the most costly diseases with the health
care expenditure of 400 billion dollars in 2006 [1], [2]. In addition, early studies have found that more than one in every ten
people are suffering from diabetes. Further diagnoses have also
stated that over 29.1 million people of the US populations are
suffering from diabetes in 2014. A priori detection and collection of human physiological data such as blood pressure, heart
rate, and glucose level can be used to detect such chronic symptoms in advance. This can be done through the implementation
of efficient remote or pervasive healthcare monitoring systems.

C

Manuscript received August 6, 2014; revised January 23, 2015; accepted
February 17, 2015. Date of publication February 24, 2015; date of current
version March 3, 2016.
N. Yaakob is with the School of Computer Science and Information Technology, RMIT, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia (e-mail: naimahyaakob@
unimap.edu.my).
I. Khalil is with the School of Computer Science and IT, Royal Melbourne
Institute of Technology, Melbourne, 3000 VIC, Australia (e-mail: ibrahim.
khalil@rmit.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2406884

Fig. 1. Use of WBSN in remote aged-care facilities where massive data collections from various leads and multiple elderly people can result in congestion
scenario.

Hence, the adoption of intelligent wireless body sensor networks (WBSN) technologies in providing pervasive healthcare
monitoring systems [3]–[10] is suitable to remotely monitor
critical patients from the comfort of their houses without their
presence at medical centres. This technology is made up of
relatively tiny, wearable sensors attached on human bodies to
collect various physiological signals and send them over wireless network. These vital signals are important to be used by
physicians/doctors and caregivers for remote monitoring purposes. An example of WBSN scenario can be shown in Fig. 1
with several bio-signal transmission process in remote aged-care
facilities.
Despite its significant contributions in remote healthcare
monitoring systems, several issues regarding guaranteeing quality of service (QoS) still remain challenging [11], [12]. A robust
healthcare system should be able to adhere to high QoS standard
to enable continuous and uninterrupted services during monitoring process. For instance, packet loss is the main reason for
long transmission delay [13]–[15]. This will lead to outdated
information, thus delaying the emergency warning and appropriate actions that should be taken on affected patients. As such,
a system with low packet loss rate and negligible end-to-end delay is highly desired to cater emergency conditions and ensure
patients’ safety.
A. Problem Statement
However, the provisioning of such high QoS are challenging
in WBSN due to several reasons:
1) Very limited capacities and resources in WBSN such as
bandwidth and processing power create hurdles to achieve

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

670

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

maximum performance [16]1 during simultaneous and
multiple transmissions of real-time medical data.
2) Its transmission is subject to frequent disruption due to
high packet loss rate as a result of channel contention as
well as congestion due to buffer overflows.
Here, it is important to clearly highlight the difference between contention and congestion. Since data transmission in
WBSN are done using wireless medium, inevitable issue of
contention cannot be avoided. Huge amount of the sensed readings will be collected during monitoring processes, causing contention among packets trying to access the same shared medium
for transmission. On the other hand, congestion is a state of
buffer overloading which could cause high packet loss rate and
severely degrades the whole performance.
An example of congestion scenario in WBSN can be seen in
Fig. 1. Each node which is attached on human body, may contain
up to 12 electrocardiogram (ECG) leads, and also other types of
sensors. These sensors are used to collect various physiological
signals such as heart rate, body temperature, blood pressure, and
several subjective parameters [17] for early disease detection.
Each ECG’s lead may produce up to 360 samples/s. With each
sample size of 6 B, 72 packets/s (30 B/packet) [18] can be
originated from a single lead [19]. Heavy congestion may occur
when multiple leads have data to be sent to the local server at
the facility which is constrained by very limited resources, and
other sensors attach from other human bodies are also sending
their readings simultaneously. This will create high reporting
rates that may overload either intermediate nodes or the local
server’s buffer.
Congestion may result in severe degradation of WBSN performance since most of its top-level applications normally involve
life-death matters. For instance, congestion may cause some part
of patient’s abnormal ECG signals to be lost, thus lead to false
diagnosis as shown in Fig. 1. The correct information, though
might be received later (through retransmission process), will
become obsolete and no longer valid upon its arrival. Critical ailing patients might be seriously affected if no immediate actions
are taken during emergency conditions.
It is sufficient to mention that the study contained herein assumes the worst-case scenario of congestion where some packets are randomly lost before the important parts of the ECG signals are preserved. Since these packets might contain significant
information which are critical for successful diagnosis, there is
an urgent need to retransmit those lost ECG signals so that all the
information can be transmitted and diagnosed correctly. Nevertheless, the retransmission processes may sometimes make the
information received obsolete as they arrive later than the actual
emergency situation and may not be effective at the time of arrival. Therefore, the number of retransmissions should be kept
to the minimum.
Concerning with these arising issues inherent in WBSN, we
propose a novel technique of congestion avoidance that takes
1 Current paper is an extended study of this shorter paper which was published
in the second International ICST Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare-Mobihealth 2011, Kos Island, Greece 2011 and won the
Best Student Paper Award.

into account the adaptive transmission rate to ensure seamless
data forwarding. To realize this objective, we integrate our existing rate control technique [16] known as relaxation theory
(RT) and max-min fairness (MMF), later termed as RT-MMF.
For simulation purposes, RT-MMF is implemented by assuming only the ECG signals transmission, thus all the sensed
signals deserve the same priority. In this situation, data prioritisation is not needed since every single person under the wellness
monitoring condition, have the same priority.
B. Contributions
The significant contribution of this paper can really be seen
in the proposed RT-MMF technique which can curb-down the
overlimit transmission rates, thus contributes toward significant
packet loss reduction that improves overall WBSN performance.
Moreover, the fair allocation of resources avoids contention
among the packets and hence results in minimum incomplete
packets at end of transmission. This is also an important criteria
to ensure minimum packet loss at the end of transmission.
Our intensive observations in [16] suggest that RT alone may
not be adequate for handling simultaneous data convergence
in multiple nodes. Therefore, the proposed method integrates
RT and MMF to improve the existing scheme and solve the
arising congestion problems. This is done (locally) during the
physiological data transmission at each sensor node.
C. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) Versus WBSN
The key differences between WSN and WBSN that require
major attention are:
1) Sensors in WBSN only cover few centimetres (human
body) as compared to WSN (meters to several kilometers).
Thus, nodes in WBSN are extremely restricted by space,
size, and also power consumption.
2) Irreplaceable power supply in WBSN (i.e., implanted inside human bodies). However, in WSN power supply is
still possible to be replaced.
3) WBSN deals with patient’s physiological data which impose high QoS requirements. The lost of any important
data will threaten one’s life.
D. Limitation of Existing Methods
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to
address congestion directly from WBSN perspective. Though
there exist some congestion mitigation techniques in the literature [20]–[25], they are purposely designed for WSN which are
not suitable to monitor the internal environments and physiological changes of human bodies [26].
The collection of patient’s physiological signals (e.g., heart
rate) are of utmost importance to the caregiver or physician for
earlier disease detection. Thus, any congestion-control mechanisms design for WBSN should be able to maintain continuous
and reliable monitoring services as the loss or delay of any
signals may affect the monitored body.
Moreover, since these sensors are either attached or implanted
on/inside human bodies, energy need to be efficiently used,

YAAKOB AND KHALIL: NOVEL CONGESTION AVOIDANCE TECHNIQUE FOR SIMULTANEOUS REAL-TIME MEDICAL DATA

which imposes extra challenge in designing the congestion control method for WBSN. Since the sensed medical data need to
be timely sent in order to get accurate result, the replacement of
the sensor node cell implantable inside human bodies may not
be timely and are almost impossible. This reason makes WSN
incapable of avoiding congestion in WBSN.
With regards to all the concerns, congestion control techniques in WBSN should adhere all the tight requirements in
order to provide high quality services while preserving human’s
life in the case of critical-ailing patients. Thus, the existing congestion control mechanisms in WSN are unsuitable to be used
in WBSN.
Moreover, though some methods can mitigate congestion,
other important issues such as fairness and reliability have not
been addressed. In [22], for instance, the transmission throttling
of all the flows after congestion detection eliminates fairness
for the noncongested flows. Also, most of congestion detection
and mitigation techniques normally involve high notification of
messages that may consume extra energy. In addition, these techniques are mainly focusing on tackling congestion after it has
already occurred, whereas our approach provides a technique to
avoid or minimise congestion in the first place. A preliminary
version of this study has been reported in [16].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents several related approaches of congestion control in
WSN whereas Section III introduces the proposed system
model and methodology. Experimental setup, results, discussions and comparison analysis are described in Section IV, while
Section V concludes the paper while at the same time outlining
some of the future works.
II. RELATED WORK
Though some efforts have been made to deal with WSN’s
QoS issues [27]–[31], none of them has specifically addressed
congestion from WBSN perspective. Most of these methods are
focusing on QoS issues like energy efficiency, routing, and solving hidden-collision problem. For instance, the method found in
[30] aims at improving energy efficiency by means of clustertree which finds a suitable periodic schedule for sensor nodes.
While these techniques can ensure low energy consumption,
packet loss rate which can contribute to the energy depletion,
has not been considered.
On the other hand, the method proposed by [29] focuses on
routing, which takes into account the cost, energy and the reliable path to the sink node. To achieve reliability, this method
sends redundant packets to several different paths which consume extra energy and not suitable for the resource-constrained
WBSN. A hidden-node collision, which is based on medium
access control, addresses this problem [31] by splitting the nonhidden nodes into different clusters in order to avoid interference
between the overlapping clusters. However, the evaluation of
this method is only limited to throughput, probability of success
and energy consumption without considering the occurrence of
congestion.
Other approaches such as [22]–[25] are not applicable for
WBSN due to its unique and stricter QoS requirements as well as

671

involving a very large amount of traffic [16]. Moreover, though
some of them can mitigate congestion, other important issues
such as fairness and reliability have not been addressed. In [22],
for instance, the transmission throttling of all the flows after
congestion detection eliminates fairness for the noncongested
flows. The approach in [24] and [25] are similar with our proposed method. However, in LACAS [24], an attempt is made to
equate packet arrival rate with packet service rate; which may
not always hold in WBSN. Huge excessive data over small service rate, might lead to high number of packets dropped. On
the other hand, CODA [25] also throttles nodes’ transmission
once congestion is detected. Though this technique can achieve
energy efficiency, reliability issue which is the main concern in
real-time monitoring applications has not been addressed.
Other methods are focusing on compression technique,
known as compressive sampling [27] to extend network lifetime. This method aims at minimizing the number of transmitted
packets to preserve energy and extend network lifetime. Several
surveys in the literature have found that wavelet transform and
set partitioning in hierarchical trees are the other two common
methods extensively used to compress ECG signals. These techniques are known as synthesis coding. Here, the compression
method can help to extract important features of ECG signals
deserve for transmission. The size of ECG signals can be very
big and this may overconsume the already-limited bandwidth.
Such situation can thus cause network congestion or the so called
“hot spot.” This problem can be solved by extracting only the required features from the ECG signals before transmission, thus
reducing the overall packet size.
However, compression methods normally involve complex
algorithm and therefore require a lot of energy for effective computation. Such situation should be avoided in WBSN with scarce
energy resources. The computation of compression algorithm is
also expensive due to high computational cost. Moreover, the
compression tasks require sufficient amount of data. This will
cause unbounded delays as the method needs to collect or gather
enough data before performing compression. In the emergency
situation, such a long waiting time is unacceptable, especially in
a detection of chronic diseases such as ventricular tachycardia
(heart disease), any transmission delay and packet loss cannot
be afforded as emergency actions must be taken immediately.
Last but not least, compression and decompression tasks involve
high overhead which may also cause high energy consumption
and unwanted delay.
A. New Innovation of RT
This paper is a major extension of our previous study that
can be found in [16]. That earlier study contains the foundation
of this study, which innovated the use of RT [32] as a way to
avoid congestion in WSN. This current paper extends the study
further to include more number of nodes and thus delineate congestion in WBSN scenario. Data dissemination in this domain is
performed through communications between multiple intermediate nodes (multihops) before the information reach the final
destination. Simulation has been carried out using a powerful
network simulator-2 (NS-2) to measure the performance of the
proposed method.

672

Fig. 2.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Conceptual view of original RT operation.

Here, we would like to justify that our previous study was
solely based on the RT on a single node transmission. This makes
it difficult to measure or investigate how congestion can be effectively circumvented in such a scenario. Though the previous
study has considered the occurrence of physiological changes
in human bodies, it is only limited to one human body. Moreover, unlike the normal WSN, nodes in WBSN have to closely
monitor any physiological changes in human bodies without
fail. Hence, WBSN requires an efficient monitoring system that
can handle massive number of packets during simultaneous data
transmission while ensuring smooth packet delivery. This can
minimize the percentage of packet loss and also the use of energy for transmission.
Furthermore, since our previous study in RT is merely limited to a single node implementation, the performance is strictly
bounded by the high accumulated engineering level (EL) in multiple nodes transmission. As such, in this current paper, we have
made significant enhancement and contribution by integrating
RT with MMF method to solve the problem of RT in multiple nodes transmissions. This integration technique is therefore
able to handle massive number of traffic during simultaneous
data convergence from various nodes while maintaining high
performance.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
Our system design can be divided into two main parts, namely
RT [32] and MMF [33]. The conceptual view of original RT and
the flow diagram of our proposed system design are as illustrated
in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. All the notations used can be
referred in Table I. Both of our proposed methods are chosen
based on their unique characteristics in dealing with congested
networks. The RT is chosen to control the rate at which the
packets can be sent from each node. The control transmission
rate is called EL (L(f, ξ)), which is defined as the number of
slots based on available bandwidth, in order to transmit the
incoming packets (potentially after some buffering), without
any additional loss or delay. On the other hand, MMF will be

Fig. 3.

Flow diagram of the proposed RT-MMF scheme.
TABLE I
MATHEMATICAL NOTATIONS
No

Symbol

Explanation

1
2
3
4
5

ξ
EL or L (f , ξ )
f (t)
hn
cn

6

O (X n )

7

O (b)

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

a and b
B = hξ
i
ni
xi
x0
cy
p

Allowable unit delay
EL
Packets arrival function
EL candidates
The point on x-axis where the average (A)
intersects with f (t)
Accumulative incomplete packets
at specific time t
Incomplete packets at end of transmission
time b
Start and end time, respectively
Buffer size
Link number
Number of sources using link i
Sending rate of link i
Initial sending rate of the link
Link capacity
A constant value setting as sending rate

deployed if this EL exceeds WBSN threshold bandwidth at any
point, and the processes involve are as shown in the second part
of Fig. 3. Details explanation of our RT-MMF scheme can be
found in the following sections.
A. RT and its Limitations
In RT, the chosen EL will determine the number of available slots to transmit the awaiting packets. As the name applies,
this method allows the “relaxation” of the excessive incoming

YAAKOB AND KHALIL: NOVEL CONGESTION AVOIDANCE TECHNIQUE FOR SIMULTANEOUS REAL-TIME MEDICAL DATA

673

packets, so that they can be “postponed” to the future within
allowable unit delay (ξ). Besides avoiding any additional loss
or delay, this technique also allocates fair share of bandwidth
to each packet while minimizing the occurrence of congestion.
As shown in Fig. 2, f (t) represents the packets arrival function
from a single node over an interval of time [a, b]. At each arrival
time t, there will be only L(f, ξ) available spaces for the outgoing services. Thus, only a number of L(f, ξ) packets will be
transmitted. The excess traffics will be then put in the buffer for
at most ξ time slots. In this paper, we are concern on the number
of incomplete packets O(Xn ), which is the number of packets
that are still queued in a buffer at the end of transmission time
b. This is important in ensuring that all the packets have safely
arrived at their destination. Packets that are still in the buffer
at end of transmission will be considered lost, hence should be
avoided in order to ensure maximum performance.
The derivation of EL is based on the highest EL candidates
(hn ) where h = L(f, ξ) = max[h1 , h2 .., hn ]. The hn value is
derived from the average arrival rate (A) given that A(f, b − a)
b
1
= b−a
a f (t) dt = 0. The highest hn will be chosen as EL,
which constitutes together the service rate and buffer size so
that the occurrence of packet loss due to congestion can be
avoided in advance. Value h1 can be calculated as follows:
 cn
1
f (t) dt < h.
(1)
cn − a + ξ a

This will trigger undesirable false alarm which is dangerous
for the monitored patient. The second constraint enforces any
incomplete packets to be less than the buffer size (hξ) to avoid
the formation of buffer overloading. The last constraint implies
that the unit delay ξ should be less than b − a, or the system
may require a very large buffer to gracefully discharge all the
packets, which is very impractical in scarce resources WBSN. If
all these constraints are satisfied, there is no way that congestion
may occur, thus reducing packet loss rate.
Proper derivation of EL is crucial in order to ensure there is
no packet left in the buffer at the end of transmission. However,
in multiple nodes scenarios, RT produces very high EL which is
impractical in WBSN with scarce resources. This is due to the
increase of EL in every intermediate node, plus the generated
arrival rates from the current node itself. This scenario can be
explained in the following form:

Value cn is obtained from the intersection point between (A)
and f (t). There will be possibly n number of c values in which
h line intersects f (t) at various points. The following equations
are then used to obtain h2 :
 b
 b
1
1
f (t) dt <= h and
f (t) dt <= h. (2)
b−a a
b − cn c n

ELn > ELn −1 > ELn −2

Out of (1) and (2), the maximum value between these two values
is needed to be used for the comparison in (3). Therefore
 b
 b
1
1
L(f, ξ) = max[max[
f (t) dt,
f (t) dt],
b−a a
b − cn c n
 cn
1
f (t) dt].
(3)
cn − a + ξ a
Finally, we need to check whether the highest number of
incomplete packets occurs at point cn in such as way that
O(cn + ξ) = hξ and O(b) = 0, which are the two significant
validation tests to know that the obtained L(f, ξ) is absolutely
correct. In other words, the maximum permissible incomplete
packets, should be equal to the size of the buffer. The incomplete
packets that exceed buffer size at any time in the interval, may
violate the rules. This can result in some packet loss that will be
detrimental to WBSN performance.
On top of that, several constraints need to be satisfied in order to ensure proper EL derivation: 1) O(b) = 0, 2) O(Xn ) <=
hξ f or all n and 3) ξ < b − a. The first constraint imposes
zero incomplete packets at end of transmission time b, which
is an important criteria for real-time monitoring systems. For
instance, information loss in remote patient healthcare monitoring may lead to unbounded delay and outdated information.

f (tD ) = f (t1 ) + ELA 1 + ELB 1 + ELC 1
f (t2 ) + ELA 2 + ELB 2 + ELC 2
...
f (tn ) + ELA n + ELB n + ELC n

(4)

where f (t) is the arrival rate and A, B, C... are the sensor nodes.
D is the intermediate node that receives data from A, B and
C. So the resulting EL will be
(5)

where n is the number of nodes. The larger the number of nodes,
the larger the EL will be. This will violate sensor network characteristics and such high EL is infeasible to provision. Hence,
another technique is needed to lower down the large resulting
EL at the affected nodes.
The main objective is to handle the scarce resources in WBSN
in the sense that it can be fairly allocated. This is important to
serve all the collected readings without any failure. In particular, we aim at tackling the issues of losing important packets
in life-critical and emergency disaster applications. Thus, it is
very important to avoid the packets containing a very important
message to be queued in the buffer or lost due to congestion.
Algorithm 1 shows the various steps of the proposed RT
rate limiting method. As described, the key success depends on
the correct derivation of EL. The process begins by receiving
collected readings from various sensors placed in the event area.
The arrival rate is depend on the number of sensors transmitting
at one instant. To create different arrival rates at different unit
times, random number of packets are generated using random
number generator.
B. Integration of RT With MMF (RT-MMF)
In order to cater the high EL issue in RT, MMF is then deployed to improve RT performance in multiple nodes scenarios. The processes involved are as shown in the second part of
Fig. 3. We refer this integration technique as RT-MMF for the
rest of the paper. Upon obtaining the EL, the system will check
whether it is still below the link bandwidth. Once high value of
EL is detected (EL > bandwidth), the system will automatically

674

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 4. Proposed RT-MMF for topology simulation setup. This configuration
can also be used to represent other industrial distributed computer system which
incorporates the transfer of massive data.

Let ni be the number of sources using link i where i =
0, 1, ...I. The sending rate of link i is defined as xi with the
link capacity of cy. According to the progressive filling algorithm [34], the initial sending rate x0 was initially set to 0. It
is then being increased by letting xi = p until we hit the limit.
However, the increase in the rate is always be bounded by the
link capacity itself given by the following equation [34]:
n0 x0 + ni xi ≤ cy f or all i = 1, ..., I.

reset the EL of all sources to zero and starts sending with a new
rate. The basic concept behind MMF is to balance the sending
rate amongst the saturated links by allocating the same share of
resources. The idea is to decrease the sending rate of a source
having a larger sending rate in order to increase the sending rate
of other sources. This technique is best described by a simple
analogy of progressive filling as shown in the next section.
1) Progressive Filling Algorithm: This algorithm is used to
explain the processes involve in ensuring fair resource allocation
while dealing with the saturated or congested links [34]. The
topology for the proposed method in multiple nodes is illustrated
in Fig. 4. The steps involved can be best presented and explained
by Algorithm 2 and Fig. 4, respectively. All the notations involve
in this algorithm can also be found in Table I.

(6)

Here, the total sending rates [inclusive the initial sending rate
(x0 )] from all sources nodes which are using link i (given as
n0 x0 + ni xi ) should not exceed the maximum link capacity
itself. This is to avoid traffic overloaded as the limited link
capacity will not be able to cope with excessive incoming traffic.
The first rate which hits the limit is at pi = min{ n 0cy
+n i }. Since
pi is the first rate of x0 that hits the limit, x0 is the first sending
rate that reaches the maximum limit. Hence, this link is referred
as congested link. Thus, the first congested link have the sending
rate of


cy
.
(7)
x0 = min
n0 + ni
In (7), since there are only two sources at this current point, the
capacity of the link can be fully divided by the two sources. In
order to obtain the rates of the other, yet unsaturated sources,
the rate is continuously increased until the next limit is reached.
That rate is given by the following equation:
xi =

cy − n0 x0
.
ni

(8)

(8) reflects that since x0 sending rate is already been found, the
remaining link capacity (cy) can be allocated to other sources.
Therefore, the initial rate has to be excluded from the total link

YAAKOB AND KHALIL: NOVEL CONGESTION AVOIDANCE TECHNIQUE FOR SIMULTANEOUS REAL-TIME MEDICAL DATA

capacity to obtain the remaining capacity accessible by other
sources. If in any case ni is equal for all links, then the obtained
rate for all the sources will be the same. Then, in order to find the
next rate, the link capacity have to exclude both the previously
saturated links as follows:
xi+1 =

cy − n0 x0 − ni xi
.
ni+1

(9)

For clarification, the maximum sending rate generated in RTMMF can reach up to the link capacity itself. The RT-MMF
will be automatically applied to the system when the resulting
EL exceeds the link capacity at any point. This is regardless of
the prior obtained EL. Upon obtaining the EL, the system will
check whether it has exceeded the maximum link bandwidth.
Once exceeded, all the sending rates are reset to zero. To do
so, the current node will reset its sending rate and urge all
other nodes from the same or different links to do the same
via immediate broadcasting notification. Upon receiving the
notification, all other nodes will also reset their sensing rates
to zero. As referring to Fig. 3 and Algorithm 2, this is feasible
for implementation since the high EL which is greater than the
maximum capacity will only jeopardise overall performance. In
this algorithm, even though the rate is reset to zero, the new
sending rate will keep increasing at a constant pace until it
reaches the maximum capacity and the whole processes repeat.
Thus, resetting all the sending rates will not only ensure fairness
of all nodes, but also maintain high QoS.
This method avoids contention among the packets as the resources are fairly allocated to all links. The resulting sending
rate (xi ) is a dependent variable of the number of sources per
link and the given link capacity. The initial sending rate (p) was
set to 100 packets per second (pps). By this way, the fairness
can be assured among all the packets, thus reducing the packets
loss ratio and increasing transmission reliability.
Therefore, using the proposed method, the EL will never
go beyond the limit while maintaining the connectivity of the
network. Moreover, since the new rate is increasing within the
predefined threshold, the method of resetting the rate will not
introduce any major performance degradation on the underlying
applications as proven by the results.
Since RT-MMF is purposely designed to cater high traffic rate
during simultaneous data transmissions in WBSN, important
design consideration related to its implementation, plays huge
role in determining the efficiency of the overall system. As such,
critical issues such as where and when should this algorithm be
implemented and who is responsible for the operations, are
among the design challenges.
Considering the fact that congestion is highly likely to occur at the intermediate or the sink nodes which accumulate the
sensed readings from the upstream nodes, the implementation
of RT-MMF should be done at each intermediate node after
receiving incoming traffic from other nodes and before initiating any new transmissions. However, the deployment of sensors
in WBSN is unique in the sense that they are wearable, either
are attached or implanted inside human bodies. Unlike normal
WSN, the size of data generated by these kind of sensors may
tend to be very huge and overwhelm the limited capacity of the

675

TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Input Parameters

Setup

Area of sensor field
Number of sensor nodes
Bandwidth
Packet size
Simulation time
ξ
Sensor leads/sensor
Constant sending rate increment (p)

500 x 500 m
0–50
250 kb/s
30 B
10–1000 s
1, 2, 3
1–12
100 pps

nodes themselves. The situation may worsen with the addition
of data stream generated by the node itself if no appropriate
arrangements are made to tackle the situation. Considering this
fact, the rate adjustment should be implemented at each intermediate node, as well as the sink since traffic is growing with
the number of nodes. This is in order to avoid traffic overflow
and thus minimizing congestion.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section presents the results of RT-MMF obtained through
simulation analysis using a powerful simulator (NS-2). Some
parts of the results represent our previous works [16] with further enhancement. The results for the new integration technique
of RT-MMF can be found in multiple nodes section. Some configuration setup as specified in Table II have been used. The
following section describes several metrics that have been used
to evaluate our RT-MMF performance.
A. Performance Metrics
In order to evaluate the performance of RT-MMF, several
performance metrics have been used as follows:
1) Number of Packets Dropped: This is defined as the number
of packets that cannot reach their final destinations.
2) Average Transmission Delay: This is the duration between
the start time of sending a packet, until the packet is successfully received at its destination (including retransmission).
3) Average Energy Consumption: The average energy
consumption is defined as Energy used[node]
/Initial energy[node].
4) Throughputs: This metric measures the number of packets
that can be successfully received over a period of time. We
measure this metric over the number of arriving packets
(offered load).
B. Single Node
The experiments for a single node were conducted for three
time intervals: 10, 100 and 1000 s. The graphical view of all the
results obtained are illustrated in Figs. 5–7.
In order to rate the performance of our model, we compute
the comparison of O(Xn) in two cases: with and without RT.
The results are shown in Fig. 5(a). As can be seen from the

676

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 5. (a) Resulting O(X n) with and without RT in single node for b = 10. (b) Performance comparisons of the resulting O(X n) for b = 100, with and
without using RT. The horizontal line represents the buffer size at all times, in which any O(X n) that above this line is considered lost; EL1=608, EL2=540. (c)
Resulting O(X n) with proper selection of EL; EL1=591, EL2=565, EL3=565.

TABLE III
COMPARISON RESULTS BETWEEN THREE DIFFERENT ELS WHEN ξ = 1
Time

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total

Fig. 6.

RT operation for (a) ξ = 1, EL = 754 and (b) ξ = 2, EL = 516.

figure, our method outperforms the one without RT at all times.
The resulting O(b) is 0. In contrast, with lower value of EL
(i.e., 400), there are still approximately 600 O(Xn) at end of
transmission time b, which is not permitted in RT.
The bar graph in Fig. 6(a) and (b) show a clear picture on how
the arriving packets are being organized to fit the EL slots. This
is in order to avoid overwhelming the buffer occupancies in the
system. With correct selection of EL, we noticed that there is no
incomplete packet at all time except once when t = 2. Since the
calculated EL for this case is 754, the number of arrival at any
time t that are less than the EL, will be transmitted as per arrival.
At t = 2, there are excessive arrival of 95 packets beyond the
available EL slots. These extra packets are therefore stored in the
buffer as shown by the excess bar above the EL line in Fig. 6(a).
The buffer size for this case is equal to h ∗ ξ = 754 ∗ 1. Since the
buffer is still empty and not yet being occupied by the previous
transmissions, at t = 2, there are more than enough spaces to
keep the packets until the next transmission. In this case, the
buffered packets can be delayed to the future until one unit of
time (ξ = 1).

h = 500

h = 600

h = 754

O (Xn)

Loss

O (Xn)

Loss

O (Xn)

Loss

159
508
206
303
515
80
0
162
0
0
0

0
8
0
0
15
0
0
0
0
0
23

59
308
0
0
112
0
0
62
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
95
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table III proves the correct selection of EL for this particular
data. Not surprisingly, one of the tested value (h = 500) has
violated the above defined rules. Though its O(b) = 0, the total
loss of 23 indicates congestion occurrence which is detrimental
to WBSN performance. This value signifies the improper selection of EL. However, the performance was slightly improved for
the second case where h = 600 with no packet loss.
As the time for simulation is being extended to 100 seconds,
more real cases have been observed. The results are as illustrated
in Fig. 5(b) and (c). While Fig. 5(c) demonstrates the success of
applying RT by achieving both zero packet loss and incomplete
packets, Fig. 5(b) shows performance comparisons with and
without using RT.
Without improper selection of L(f, ξ), the incomplete packets
have a very high potential to overwhelm the assigned buffer size.
This can be clearly demonstrated by the points above the buffer
line in Fig. 5(b). These excessive packets will not be kept in
the buffer due to its limited size and thus lead to packets being
dropped. Although the resulting O(b) is 0, the occurrence of
packet loss has violated the RT characteristics. When RT is
employed, a proper derivation of EL can be reflected by zero
value in both O(b) and packet loss as depicted in Fig. 5(c).
With RT, the incoming packets can be relaxed to any value of ξ,
provided that ξ is not equal to b − a.

YAAKOB AND KHALIL: NOVEL CONGESTION AVOIDANCE TECHNIQUE FOR SIMULTANEOUS REAL-TIME MEDICAL DATA

677

Fig. 7. (a) Performance comparison between proper and improper selection of EL when b is extended to 1000 s. The horizontal line represents the buffer size at
all times, in which any O(X n) that above this line is considered lost. (b) Another performance comparisons with different sets of data. (c) Resulting packet loss
of (b) in different EL.

As we extended the experiment further to b = 1000, the number of O(Xn) happened to appear more frequently since it is
an accumulative incomplete packets. However, with the correct
derivation of EL, these O(Xn) tend to be vanished as the time
approaches the final point b. This is depicted in Fig. 7(a). On
the other hand, the value lower than the calculated EL (in this
case is 571) produced high number of O(Xn) to the extent that
violates the RT rules at some points (denoted by the O(Xn)
that exceeds the buffer size) and results in the number of packet
loss due to improper selection of EL.
Another performance comparison is shown in Fig. 7(b). This
new dataset possess a different EL value (652). Again, two different values (586 and 533) of lower rates have been chosen for
comparison purposes. As expected, the correct EL gives outstanding performance compared to the other two. As discussed
earlier, WBSN performance decreases without the use of RT.
This can obviously be noticed in the graph. In fact, some of
the packets have surpassed the limited capacity of the buffer,
and thus lost as depicted in Fig. 7(c). This information loss can
be detrimental to WBSN operation as it might contain useful
knowledge for diagnosis. On the other hand, no packet loss has
occurred when the correct EL value was used which affirmed
promising features in assisting good WBSN services. The outcomes have brought significant improvement to WBSN since it
is very sensitive to any information loss.
C. Multiple Nodes
To ascertain the effectiveness of RT-MMF in multiple WBSN
scenarios, this section shows the results obtained through simulation using NS-2.
1) Number of Packets Dropped: In WBSN, each sensor node
attached to human body, is capable of generating massive ECG
signals (up to 360 samples/s). This is in accordance with the
provision of continuous data collection for healthcare monitoring systems that require consecutive signal collections to
monitor critical ailing patients. However, with their limited capabilities, nodes in WBSN are unable to cope with tremendous
incoming traffic from other nodes. Therefore, many packets are
lost due to contention among packets during simultaneous data
transmissions.

This scenario is clearly shown by simulation in Fig. 8. The
number of packet drop suddenly increases at several congested
nodes (highlighted in the circle). This can be seen in both congested mode (CM) scenarios. Such scenarios occur when the
EL produced by RT at several intermediate nodes are too high
and overwhelm the limited capacities of the associated nodes,
hence the increase in the packet loss.
As EL is an accumulative parameter, the increase in the number of nodes will also increase the EL size up to a certain level
that exceeds the link capacity. Similarly, as each node can contain up to 12 ECG sensors, and each sensor can generate 72
packets/s, the increase in the number of sensors per node can
also contribute to the increase in the accumulated EL due to the
increase in the number of generated packets. Thus, the change in
the number of sensors may affect data transmission processes.
The limited link capacity may jeopardize the performance in the
sense that some data are lost due to insufficient bandwidth for
data transmission.
Fig. 9(a) on the other hand, shows performance comparison
of the congested scenario (CM-2) with our proposed RT-MMF.
Interestingly, our proposed RT-MMF has significantly reduced
the number of packet loss as shown by almost negligible value
in the number of packets dropped in the graph. This is due to the
main features of MMF that automatically reset the transmission
rate to zero once it nearly exceeds certain threshold. The undercontrol transmission rate avoids the formation of very high EL
that will overload the capacity constrained sensor nodes. Thus,
the increase in the number of sensors per node does not really
affect RT-MMF’s performance as compared to CM-2. This is
due to the introduction of MMF which resets all links to zero
and increases the rate constantly until one or more links are
saturated. Therefore, the resulting EL is still affordable to be
provided by all nodes.
2) Resulting EL: Performance comparison of the resulting
EL obtained using RT and RT-MMF is as shown in Fig. 9(b).
Both the RT scenarios result in very high EL as compared to the
proposed RT-MMF. The EL accumulated at every intermediate
node will tend to create higher EL at the next node. This is the
limitation in the original RT which is not suitable to be used in
WBSN with multiple nodes scenarios. Based on our algorithm,
RT-MMF is directly applied when EL exceeds certain threshold.

678

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 8. Impact of losing some of the ECG signals on the number of packet dropped and received (a) Abnormal signals detected on a patient (b) Some missing
packets received by the physician.

Fig. 9. (a) Congestion scenario of multiple WBSN nodes using RT. (b) Performance comparison of the resulting packets dropped with RT and RT-MMF.
(c) Performance comparison of the resulting EL value using RT and RT-MMF.

With only 250-kb/s bandwidth and 30-B packet size, only 1042
packets can be transmitted per second. All the excessive packets
above this value will have to be dropped. Therefore, our RTMMF only allows 1000 packets/s as the maximum transmission
value in this particular case. As shown in Fig. 9(b), MMF technique was applied at t = 60 s in which the EL is automatically
reset to zero and constantly increase by 100 packets/s. Huge difference in the resulting EL can be seen, proving the effectiveness
in the latter approach.
3) Average Transmission Delay: Fig. 10(a) demonstrates the
average transmission delay obtained at each sensor node. This
result is highly related with the number of packet loss obtained
from the previous graphs. Several nodes that experienced high
delay represents the intermediate nodes or cluster heads that
have to receive packets from downstream nodes more than they
can forward to the upstream nodes. These excessive packets will
have to be dropped and retransmitted again when there is available space in the buffer. The retransmission process, which is
crucial in ensuring reliability, is adding up additional transmission delay in the whole process. High transmission delay will
result in obsolete information as the data is no longer valid at
the time of decision making, thus should be avoided. As shown
in the figure, our proposed RT-MMF is able to cope with the
incoming high traffic volume, thus causing very low average
transmission delay. In addition, high delay experienced by CM2 also exceeds the maximum threshold of real-time applications,
thus is not acceptable.
4) Average Energy Consumption: Energy consumption is
also highly correlated with the resulting packet loss and trans-

mission delay. We measure this metric against the percentage of
the offered load. The offered load that are more than 100% indicates excessive packets that overwhelm the available resources.
Undoubtedly, even after this threshold, our RT-MMF still outperforms the original RT with significant reduction in energy
consumption. This is due to the massive reduction in packet loss
rate and the associated retransmission delay. Thus, the energy
for retransmitting the lost packets is significantly reduced. In
contrast, RT suffers from high energy consumption due to the
high number of packet loss, hence necessitates high number of
retransmissions. These retransmission processes incur extra energy and quickly deplete battery lifetime. This can be seen in
the high increase of energy even at just 60% incoming load, a
sign for congestion occurrence.
5) Throughputs: In normal transmission scenario, throughput will suddenly drop as soon as congestion occurs. As explained in the earlier section, the larger the number of nodes,
the higher the EL will be. This high EL will generate huge traffic
loads to the next node.
The increase in the percentage of offered load to access the
limited resources (bandwidth and buffer space), create high possibility of packets contention. Many packets are lost due to collision and insufficient buffer space. This can be seen as depicted
in Fig. 10(c), highlighted by the points in the circle. The rationale behind this throughput reduction can be explained as
follows. Throughput represents the number of successive packets received over overall network capacity. If the resulting packet
loss is high, the number of packets that can be received correctly
will be low. Thus, there is a sudden drop of throughput when

YAAKOB AND KHALIL: NOVEL CONGESTION AVOIDANCE TECHNIQUE FOR SIMULTANEOUS REAL-TIME MEDICAL DATA

Fig. 10.

679

Performance comparison between RT and RT-MMF for (a) average transmission delay, (b) energy consumption, (c) throughputs.

the load approaching 100% of overall offered load in RT. At
this point, the affected node is said to be saturated, and can no
longer receive any packets.
In contrast, our RT-MMF experienced no reduction of
throughput as the offered load increases. This can obviously be
seen by the continuous rise in the resulting throughput even in
high offered load condition. In this case, it achieves 85% better
than RT, hence indicates significant performance improvement.
For simulation purposes, the number of nodes in our experiment is set to 50. Through the performance analysis, it has been
proved that the proposed RT-MMF is able to maintain efficient
data delivery even during simultaneous transmission from various nodes. Using the current settings, the current number of
nodes is found to be optimal. However, the optimal number of
nodes might be different in other situations and conditions, depending on the type of application used. Based on the measured
performance results, we believe that that our method is able to
cater higher number of nodes while maintaining high QoS.
D. Comparison of Performance Analysis
Table IV provides a summary of performance comparison
between CODA [25], LACAS [24] and our RT-MMF method.
In CODA [25], congestion is detected using the combination of
both buffer occupancy and channel loading condition. Once a
threshold value of maximum theoretical throughput exceeds by
80%, a suppression message known as backpressure (BP) will
be sent to upstream nodes to throttle transmission. However, BP
is not guaranteed to be received by all nodes. Nodes that do not
receive BP, will not reduce transmission rate and overwhelm
the congested nodes causing packets to be lost. As a result,
CODA still exhibits quite high number of packet loss in densely
deployed nodes (30 nodes). In contrast, no packet loss occurs
using our RT-MMF method in dense network (50 nodes). The
fair allocation of resources in avoiding congestion, has indirectly
avoided the formation of incomplete packets in the buffer at end
of transmission.
In contrast with CODA, LACAS [24] uses different approach
known as learning automata (LA) to avoid congestion. However,
LA requires continuous interaction with environment and thus
requires extra energy. LA will predict a suitable transmission
rate (ψi ) based on the probability of the past node’s behavior
(Pψ i ). Once selected, the chances of getting selected in the next
iteration Pψ i+1 will be increased. However, if there is a sudden

TABLE IV
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING SOLUTIONS
No

Protocol

Approach

Limitations / Advantages

1

CODA
[25]

-Buffer occupancies and
channel loading

1. BP - not received by all
2. Constant ACK may
deplete energy
3. Loss of ACK
-false alarm.
-15 times energy saving

2

LACAS
[24]

3

Distributed
MMF [35]

4

RT-MMF

-Send BP for upstream
nodes to throttle transmission
- Disable RTS/CTS exchange
- Routing: Directed diffusion
- 30 Nodes
- Simulation time: 500 ms
-LA
-Predicts suitable (ψ i ) based
on past node’s behavior
- Using glomosim
- Bellman–Ford routing
- 100 nodes
- Simulation time: 100 s
-Uses decentralized algorithm
to achieve fairness. Nodes
probability for attempting
transmission.
-“Relax” or “Postpone”
excessive packets within
allowable unit
-The high EL is handled
by MMF (reset to 0,
increases with constant rate)

1. Continuous interaction
2. Sudden change of packets
arrival-(ψ i ) no longer valid.
- Throughput = 60–80%
- Energy consumption
- increase only 2.7% with
transmission range
Does not consider reliability.

1. Eliminates the occurrence
of congestion
2. Reliabilities and fairness
are assured
3. Achieved performance
improvement of more than
50% and 80% of packet
loss and transmission delay

increase of packets arrival, the chosen ψi will no longer be
feasible to accommodate the high incoming data. This method,
therefore, still produces high collision rates (close to 800), and
causes large number of packets being dropped.
The study proposed in [35] used a decentralized algorithm to
achieve MMF. In this method, a node has to compute a probability for attempting to transmit based on a topology information
within two-hops. Again, no reliability issues such as packets
loss or delay have been considered. Moreover, the achievement
of fairness shown in their simulation results are not clear. Our
proposed RT-MMF takes into account the scarce resources in
WBSN, by postponing the excessive packets and allocating fair
share of limited resources without additional buffer requirement.
In comparison with all the three methods, our proposed RTMMF technique is able to significantly curb down packet loss

680

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

occurrence as evident in Fig. 9(a). This affirms the effectiveness
of MMF method which can provide fair allocation of bandwidth for awaiting packets and avoid the formation of packet
contention, thus significantly reducing high number of packet
loss.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we have investigated the potentials and benefits of a novel congestion avoidance technique known as RTMMF as a mean to enhance remote healthcare delivery services.
This study has overcome significant RT’s limitations that have
been found in our previous study. For evaluation purposes, we
have performed simulation analysis using NS-2 and showed
that across multiple nodes scenarios RT-MMF always performs
much better than the original RT. Most importantly, RT-MMF
is able to curb down congestion during simultaneous data transmission, which is a significant indication of its effectiveness in
improving healthcare delivery services. We demonstrated that
the adjustment of the rate control using MMF allows our scheme
to achieve the desired QoS in real-time monitoring systems.
Some works for future consideration include the tradeoff
study between fairness issue and energy consumption which are
also important in ensuring a robust WBSN systems. Another
subsequent future work includes the consideration of network
coding as a way to increase routability, alleviate congestion and
overflow avoidance. This technique offers several advantages
including solving complicated routing that cannot be solved
using the traditional approach.
REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization (WHO), “The top 10 causes of death,” WHO,
Geneva, Switzerland, Tech. Rep. No. 310/May 2011.
[2] G. A. Mensah and D. W. Brown, “An overview of cardiovascular disease
burden in the United States,” Health Affairs, vol. 26, pp. 38–48, 2007.
[3] B.-R. Chen, S. Patel, T. Buckley, R. Rednic, D. McClure, L. Shih, D. Tarsy,
M. Welsh, and P. Bonato, “A web-based system for home monitoring of
patients with parkinson disease using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 831–836, Mar. 2011.
[4] M.-Z. Poh, N. Swenson, and R. Picard, “A wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term assessment of electrodermal activity,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1243–1252, May 2010.
[5] B. Otal, L. Alonso, and C. Verikoukis, “Highly reliable energy-saving mac
for wireless body sensor networks in healthcare systems,” IEEE J. Select.
Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 553–565, May 2009.
[6] S. Xiao, A. Dhamdhere, V. Sivaraman, and A. Burdett, “Transmission power control in body area sensor networks for healthcare monitoring,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 37–48,
Jan. 2009.
[7] S.-L. Chen, H.-Y. Lee, C.-A. Chen, H.-Y. Huang, and C.-H. Luo, “Wireless body sensor network with adaptive low-power design for biometrics
and healthcare applications,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 398–409,
Dec. 2009.
[8] B. Wang, L. Wang, S. Lin, D. Wu, B. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. Yin, and
W. Chen, “A body sensor networks development platform for pervasive healthcare,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Bioinformatics Biomed. Eng.,
Jun. 2009, pp. 1–4.
[9] J. Yoo and H.-J. Yoo, “Emerging low energy wearable body sensor networks using patch sensors for continuous healthcare applications,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010,
pp. 6381–6384.
[10] S.-L. Chen, H.-Y. Lee, C.-A. Chen, C.-C. Lin, and C.-H. Luo, “A wireless
body sensor network system for healthcare monitoring application,” in
Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circuits Syst. Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 243–246.

[11] Y. Li, C. S. Chen, Y. qiong Song, and Z. Wang, “Real-time qos support
in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Fieldbuses
Netw. Ind. Embedded Syst., 2007, pp. 373–380.
[12] M. Aalsalem, M. Iftikhar, J. Taheri, and A. Zomaya, “On the provisioning
of guaranteed qos in wireless sensor networks through limited service
polling models,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Wireless Opt. Commun. Netw.,
May 2008, pp. 1–7.
[13] D. Monteiro, B. Vaidya, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Performance assessment of congestion control transport protocols for wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Inform. Netw. Business Inform. Syst.,
Feb. 2010, pp. 7–17.
[14] J. Zheng and A. Jamalipour, Wireless Sensor Networks: A Networking
Perspective. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2009.
[15] Padmashree T and N. Cauvery, “A novel approach for congestion control
in healthcare wireless sensor networks,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Commun.,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 47–49, Oct. 2012.
[16] N. Yaakob, I. Khalil, and J. Hu, “On the effectiveness of relaxation theory
for controlling high traffic volumes in body sensor networks,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Commun. Healthcare Mobihealth, 2011,
pp. 16–23.
[17] F. Sufi, Q. Fang, and I. Cosic, “A mobile phone based intelligent scoring
approach for assessment of critical illness,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inform.
Technol. Appl. Biomed., 2008, pp. 290–293.
[18] G. Zhou, J. A. Stankovic, and S. H. Son, “Crowded spectrum in wireless
sensor networks,” in Proc. 3rd Workshop Embedded Netw. Sensors, 2006.
[19] I. Khalil and F. Sufi, “Real-time (ECG) data transmission with wavelet
packet decomposition over wireless networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell.
Sensors, Sensor Netw. Inform. Process., Dec. 2008, pp. 267–272.
[20] A. Woo and D. E. Culler, “A transmission control scheme for media access
in sensor networks,” in Proc. 7th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw.,
2001, pp. 221–235.
[21] F. Stann and J. Heidemann, “(RMST): Reliable data transport in sensor
networks,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Int. Workshop Sensor Netw. Protocols Appl.,
May 2003, pp. 102–112.
[22] O. Akan and I. Akyildiz, “Event-to-sink reliable transport in wireless
sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1003–1016, Oct.
2005.
[23] C.-Y. Wan, A. Campbell, and L. Krishnamurthy, “Pump-slowly, fetchquickly (PSFQ): A reliable transport protocol for sensor networks,” IEEE
J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 862–872, Apr. 2005.
[24] S. Misra, V. Tiwari, and M. Obaidat, “(LACAS): Learning automatabased congestion avoidance scheme for healthcare wireless sensor networks,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 466–479,
May 2009.
[25] C.-Y. Wan, S. B. Eisenman, and A. T. Campbell, “(CODA): Congestion
detection and avoidance in sensor networks,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Embedded Netw. Sensor Syst., 2003, pp. 266–279.
[26] B. Otal, L. Alonso, and C. Verikoukis, “Highly reliable energy-saving mac
for wireless body sensor networks in healthcare systems,” IEEE J. Select.
Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 553–565, May 2009.
[27] C. Caione, D. Brunelli, and L. Benini, “Distributed compressive sampling
for lifetime optimization in dense wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 30–40, Feb. 2012.
[28] J. Chen, X. Cao, P. Cheng, Y. Xiao, and Y. Sun, “Distributed collaborative control for industrial automation with wireless sensor and actuator
networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 4219–4230,
Dec. 2010.
[29] J. Heo, J. Hong, and Y. Cho, “(EARQ): Energy aware routing for real-time
and reliable communication in wireless industrial sensor networks,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 3–11, Feb. 2009.
[30] Z. H. Andlek and P. J. A. Andk, “Energy efficient scheduling for clustertree wireless sensor networks with time-bounded data flows,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 438–450, Aug. 2010.
[31] A. Koubaa, R. Severino, M. Alves, and E. Tovar, “Improving quality-ofservice in wireless sensor networks by mitigating hidden-node collisions,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 299–313, Aug. 2009.
[32] D. Minoli, Broadband Network Analysis and Design. Norwood, MA,
USA: Artech House, 1993.
[33] D. Bertsekas and R. Gallager, Data Networks. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA:
Prentice-Hall, 1987.
[34] E. P. J. Y. Boudec. (2008). Rate adaptation, congestion control and
fairness: A tutorial [Online]. Available: www.citeseer.csail.mit.edu/
boudec00rate.html
[35] X. Wang and K. Kar, “Distributed algorithms for max-min fair rate allocation in ALOHA networks,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., 2004.

YAAKOB AND KHALIL: NOVEL CONGESTION AVOIDANCE TECHNIQUE FOR SIMULTANEOUS REAL-TIME MEDICAL DATA

Naimah Yaakob (M’14) received the B.Sc. and
M.Sc. degrees in computer and information engineering from the International Islamic University,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 2004 and 2008, respectively. She received the Ph.D. degree in 2014 from the
School of Computer Science and Information Technology, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.
She is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University
Malaysia Perlis, Perlis, Malaysia. Her research interests include wireless sensor networks, wireless body
sensor networks, vehicular ad-hoc network, congestion control in distributed
networking systems and pervasive communication in healthcare environment.

681

Ibrahim Khalil (SM’09) received the Ph.D. degree in 2003 from the University of Berne, Bern,
Switzerland.
He is an Associate Professor at the School of Computer Science and Information Technology, RMIT
University, Melbourne, Australia. He has several
years of experience in Silicon Valley-based companies working on large network provisioning and management software. Before joining RMIT, he worked
for EPFL and the University of Berne in Switzerland
and Osaka University in Japan. His research interests
are anonymous networks, quality of service, wireless sensor networks and remote healthcare.

