IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

1843

Conceptual Network Model From Sensory Neurons
to Astrocytes of the Human Nervous System
Yiqun Yang∗ and Chai Kiat Yeo

Abstract—From a single-cell animal like paramecium to vertebrates like ape, the nervous system plays an important role in
responding to the variations of the environment. Compared to animals, the nervous system in the human body possesses more intricate organization and utility. The nervous system anatomy has
been understood progressively, yet the explanation at the cell level
regarding complete information transmission is still lacking. Along
the signal pathway toward the brain, an external stimulus first activates action potentials in the sensing neuron and these electric
pulses transmit along the spinal nerve or cranial nerve to the neurons in the brain. Second, calcium elevation is triggered in the
branch of astrocyte at the tripartite synapse. Third, the local calcium wave expands to the entire territory of the astrocyte. Finally,
the calcium wave propagates to the neighboring astrocyte via gap
junction channel. In our study, we integrate the existing mathematical model and biological experiments in each step of the signal
transduction to establish a conceptual network model for the human nervous system. The network is composed of four layers and
the communication protocols of each layer could be adapted to
entities with different characterizations. We verify our simulation
results against the available biological experiments and mathematical models and provide a test case of the integrated network. As
the production of conscious episode in the human nervous system
is still under intense research, our model serves as a useful tool
to facilitate, complement and verify current and future study in
human cognition.
Index Terms—Astrocyte, nervous system, network model, tripartite synapse.

GJC
IP3
AP
Ca2+
PNS
CNS
Glu
mOR-EG

LIST OF ACRONYMS
Gap junction channel.
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.
Action potential.
Calcium ion.
Peripheral nervous system.
Central nervous system.
Glutamate.
A mouse olfactory receptor.
I. INTRODUCTION

HE nervous system is the most essential structure in animals which coordinates voluntary and involuntary behaviors. Aiming at uncovering the cause of neurological disorder
and dysfunction for more effective therapy against diseases such

T

Manuscript received September 5, 2014; revised January 28, 2015 and January
6, 2015; accepted February 14, 2015. Date of publication February 19, 2015;
date of current version June 16, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ Y. Yang is with the School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798 Singapore (e-mail: yyang11@e.ntu.edu.sg).
C. K. Yeo is with the Nanyang Technological University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2405549

Fig. 1.

Nervous system—CNS and PNS.

as Alzheimer’s disease [1], biological experiments and methods
have been designed to probe the effect of certain chemical, cell
and tissue within the nervous system. On the other side, the
nervous system is viewed as a sophisticated information transmission and processing module in computer science to inspire
the progress of artificial intelligence. Motor nerves, which are
responsible for the control of muscles and sensing nerves, which
undertake the perception of the environment, spread throughout
the human body from the central nervous system (CNS). Versatile functions such as touch, olfactory and vision are effected
by the cooperation of sensing neuron, fibres and the control
center—the brain. However, owing to the massive information
streams, the susceptibility of multiple chemicals and the lack of
in vivo experiment technique, the mechanism of this complex
system still requires years of research. Conscious processing,
memory formation, etc., are all the persistent questions in this
area.
CNS and peripheral nervous system (PNS) (see Fig. 1) constitute the nervous system. CNS (in blue) comprises the brain
and the spinal cord while PNS (in orange) is primarily bundles
of nerves derived from the body of neurons and covered with
myelin sheath connecting to the CNS. Generally, there exist two
directions for signal transmission. The ascending signal pathway begins from the sensing neurons which have receptors to
detect the stimulation and traverses the PNS to the spinal cord.
The brain is the ultimate receiver where the cerebral cortex [2]
is responsible for information synthesis and decision. The descending pathway is the opposite except that the destination is
the motor neuron.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1844

Current research measures and simulates the signal transduction within a field of the nervous system, i.e., neural circuits [3],
cortex, synapse, etc. However, there lacks a complete model
for the entire system providing the relationships of adjacent
components and predicting the mechanism of human-specific
process.
In addition, recent works have shown the potential of astrocyte and its communication with the neurons in the human
brain. Astrocyte is a kind of star-shaped glial cell located in
the brain and the spinal cord [4]. The glia–neuron ratio in the
cerebral cortex is 3.72 [5] which implies its significant function
in the CNS. Other than metabolism and homeostasis, astrocyte
interferes with the synaptic activity [6]. Therefore, the communication in the cortex should be reconsidered to incorporate the
performance of astrocytes with the neurons.
Given the newly discovered potential of astrocyte in the human brain and the lack of a complete model for the nervous system, the prime motivation in establishing the proposed model
is to provide a means to simulate the response of the complex
nervous system thus enabling researchers to glean insights into
how the entire information processing and transmission takes
place upon the presence of a stimulus from the sensory neuron
to the astrocyte. With such a model as a starting point, and with
future and further validations from biological experiments, a
better and clearer understanding of the nervous system can be
achieved. This will then pave the way for nanosensors or biological carriers to deliver medication to targeted cell areas for
treatment of brain-related diseases.
In our study, a conceptual network model is proposed to
express the signal transmission from the PNS to the CNS. It is
divided into four layers: neurons in the PNS and the spinal cord,
neurons in the brain, single astrocyte and groups of astrocytes.
The external stimulation is eventually transformed to the states
of the grouped astrocytes. The state combination signifies the
current prototypic cognitive pattern induced by the stimulation
which is converted to conscious episode through associating
with the previous patterns. The parameters of each layer are
obtained from specific configurations (e.g., the olfactory sensory
system in layer 1 in the model) which could be adapted to other
sensory systems. In addition, the model is scalable as the metrics
employed such as network range, the number of astrocytes and
neurons can be altered to emulate the real-time signal processing
in the human body.
Our contributions are as follows:
1) The existing observations, biological experiment results
and simulation results are studied, consolidated and integrated to build a conceptual network model for the ascending signal pathway in the nervous system.
2) The communication fundamentals can be easily changed
to model other sensory systems.
3) The simulation results from the proposed model have been
verified against the available biological experiments and
mathematical models.
4) The model provides insight as well as facilitates the
demonstration of new biological experiments.
5) A complete test case for the integrated network is presented and the model can be further validated and

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

expanded from the results of future biological research
for better understanding of the nervous system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Relevant works
of astrocyte-centric hypothesis and astrocyte properties are
listed in Section II. The four-layer conceptual network framework is introduced in Section III and the characterizations of
each layer are detailed. Section IV describes the simulation
parameters and definitions, the numerical results and analysis.
Section V concludes this paper and presents some future research directions.
II. RELATED WORKS
In the last decade [7]–[9], the astrocyte-centric hypothesis
has become prevailing which challenges the neuron-centric perspective. The neuron doctrine claims that neuron is the core
component of the nervous system which has the capability of
memory, decision and information acquisition. Albeit astrocytes
being discovered in the CNS, they are regarded as merely performing supportive functions because of the inability to convey
electric pulses compared to neurons. However, experiments reported the existence of calcium waves [10] in the astrocytes
suggesting that it is probable for the information to be encoded
in a nonelectric form. For example, astrocyte of the sensory
cortex initiates calcium elevation in response to the peripheral
stimulation [9], [11], [12]. Moreover, the frequency and amplitude of calcium wave vary according to the types of stimulations
which further implies the astrocyte participation.
Furthermore, the discovery of interlaminar astrocyte in layer
I of the cerebral cortex as well as the obvious bigger size and
more branches of the protoplasmic astrocyte (a kind of astrocyte
emerging in all the cortex layers) compared to lower form of animals such as rodent indicate that the development of intelligence
may be accompanied with the evolution of astrocyte.
Evidence revealed that astrocyte is involved in the bidirectional communication at the tripartite synapse [9], [13]. Recent
observation proves such interaction in human brain tissue [14]. It
not only influences the firing rate and frequency of postsynaptic
neuron AP [15], but also generates calcium wave upon message
exchange between the synaptic neurons [9]. Neurotransmitter
corresponds to different synaptic pathway. For example, the
glutamate (Glu) mediates astrocyte calcium wave in the Schaffer collateral synaptic terminals [16]. In contrast, the astrocytes
in the stratum oriens of CA1 (a small Cornu Ammonis area)
respond solely to synaptically-released acetylcholine [17]. The
study in [18] shows that the incorporation of artificial astrocytes which present the biologically defined properties involved
in astrocyte-neuron communication, improves artificial neural
network performance in solving classification problems. The
findings thereby establishes the concept of artificial neuron–glia
networks.
III. NETWORK DESIGN
The ascending signal pathway is separated into different
stages according to their anatomy. Fig. 2 depicts the network
model overview. Layer 1 is defined as the neuron chain outside
the brain which is a long distance signal pathway. The neuron

YANG AND YEO: CONCEPTUAL NETWORK MODEL FROM SENSORY NEURONS TO ASTROCYTES OF THE HUMAN NERVOUS SYSTEM

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.

Four-layer network overview.

chain starts from the sensing neuron and spreads across the
spinal nerve/cranial nerve. Layer 2 includes the neurons in the
brain which receive APs from layer 1. Surrounded by the neurons in layer 2, the astrocyte in layer 3 will generate calcium
waves from its processes to the body. Layer 4 is a large-scale
astrocyte network which is made up of groups of small astrocyte networks. Each subnetwork includes several astrocytes as
presented in layer 3. Compared to the lower layers, information
in layer 4 is the state combination and coupling with layer 3
waves which are not physically loaded in carriers but stored in
unknown forms such as background field or expressed genes.
These states, in our model, indicate the cognitive pattern produced in a single trial. Definitely, more complicated processing
methods upon receiving the message, exist, contributing to the
final decision in the brain. Thereafter, the signal would return
in the descending pathway resembling the ascending pathway
(not discussed in this paper). The layered network is illustrated
as follows.
A. Layer 1
Layer 1 consists of one peripheral neuron and two intermediate neurons which could be called the sensing pathway. It is
classified into two categories according to their locations: the
spinal pathway and the cranial pathway. The former begins with
the spinal nerve rising from a segment of the spinal cord and
travels along the spinal cord to the brain. By comparison, the
latter starts at the cranial nerve which directly emerges from the
brain or brainstem, e.g., the optic nerve which conveys visual
information. Fig. 3 presents the schematic connection of layer
1 neurons in the spinal pathway and the structure is also applicable to the other pathway. The following anatomy introduction
is based on the spinal pathway.
1) Biological Entities: Located in the ganglion of the spinal
cord, the peripheral neuron (a.k.a. first-order neuron, afferent)
is a bipolar neuron whose longer axon1 contains receptors at the
terminal and shorter axon makes up a synapse2 with the secondorder neuron. The first-order neuron takes the responsibility of
1 Slender

projection of neuron.

Biological entities (a) and network entities (b) in layer 1.

sensing the stimulation. Every neuron owns a certain type of
receptors such as mechanoreceptors, photoreceptors, thermoreceptors and so on which are specific to the diverse sensory systems including somatosensory system, vision, motion, audition,
etc. The receptors are implanted in the sensing area, i.e., a finger
could detect the intensity of stimulation and transform it to an
electric pulse. If the stimulation strength exceeds a threshold,
the electric pulse would be stable enough to pass through the
nerve fibre; hence, an AP is triggered. Otherwise, local electric
oscillations called graded potentials would be generated. The
body of the neuron is housed in the dorsal root ganglion (spinal
cord). The sensing neuron has two directions: One goes to the
motor area via intermediate neuron constituting a reflex arc; the
other links to the dendrite of the second-order neuron in the
spinal cord.
The axon of the second-order neuron traverses different segments of the spinal cord to the third-order neuron. It is a multipolar cell which forms a number of synapses with different firstorder neurons. The second-order neuron in the spinal cord has
two kinds of locations: the dorsal column nuclei in the medula
for the lemniscal pathway and the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord. The neuron axons of both types get over the midline3
to the contralateral side of the spinal cord. The former crosses
midline at the decussation of medial lemniscus and extends to
the thalamus. The latter arrives at the contralateral side in the
anterolateral quadrant along the lateral spinothalamic tract.
The body of the third-order neuron lies in the thalamus whose
axon forms the corticonuclear tract at the ventral posterolateral
nucleus and goes up to the cerebral cortex. It is also a multipolar
cell with plenty of synapses.
2) Network Entities: The neuron chain is modeled as a signal
converter and two signal amplifiers (see Fig. 3). Characterizations of each component are detailed as follows.
Signal Converter: Owing to the variety of receptors, the transformation rule upon stimulations differ. Hence, we model one
kind of sensory neuron (i.e., the olfactory sensory neurons) for
the proposed conceptual model. The feature of the converter
could be adjusted to adapt to other sensory systems. For olfactory sensory neurons, it has been observed that the dose-response
curve of mOR-EG (a kind of mouse olfactory receptor) obeys
the Hill equations (see the Appendix) if the baseline is subtracted [19]. In (1), f represents the frequency of AP. C denotes

2 End of the axon of one neuron forms a cleft with the dendrite of the adjacent

neuron.

1845

3 Imaginary

line that divides the body into right and left halves.

1846

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Tripartite synapse: message exchange between astrocyte and neurons.

the concentration of the dose. The peak value is fm ax while the
baseline frequency is fbase . k1/2 indicates the concentration of
the stimulation when the frequency is half of fm ax .
f=

fm ax
1+

k1 / 2 n
C

+ fbase .

(1)

Signal Amplifier: By means of the interfaces with the previous
component in the neuron chain (see Fig. 3), the second-order and
third-order neurons exhibit signal divergence and convergence.
The hierarchical structure of the amplifier is interpreted in Fig. 8
of [20] (see Fig. 16 in the Appendix). Each evoked potential in
the first-order neuron is split and transmitted to three secondorder neurons. Subsequently, the signal is aggregated in the
second-order neuron and its amplitude and frequency rise. The
same applies to the third-order neuron.
B. Layer 2
1) Entities: Layer 2 entity is defined as the CNS neuron
which relays the AP to the cerebral cortex. These intermediate
neurons include the first-order and higher-order thalamic relay
neurons, as well as the cortical neurons. The signal transmission in this layer is related to various sessions in the brain. An
individual intermediate neuron which sustains the frequency of
the afferent AP is adopted so as to simplify our model.
2) Communication With Layer 3: The most important function of layer 2 neuron is to interact with the layer 3 entity—
astrocyte. The cortical neurons are located next to the processes
(branches) of the astrocytes. Two neurons and an astrocyte constitute a tripartite synapse. Fig. 4 shows the bidirectional communication at the tripartite synapse. The presynaptic neuron
receives an AP and releases neurotransmitters such as Glu, ATP,
GABA, etc., to the synapse triggering the generation of inositol
(1, 4, 5)-triphosphate (IP3 ) in the astrocyte. Then calcium ion
(Ca2+ ) is discharged from the intracellular store in the astrocyte.
In return, the astrocyte produces neuroactive molecules such as
Glu and D-serine to affect the AP property in the postsynaptic
neuron as well as the synaptic plasticity. Through the coordination with neurons, astrocyte summarises synaptic information
and elicits Ca2+ spikes. The detailed communication procedure
is as follows:

1) When an AP arrives at the presynaptic neuron, Glu and
other neurotransmitters are delivered to the synaptic cleft
while some of the Glu binds to the metabotropic glutamate
receptor (mGluRs) of the astrocyte.
2) IP3 is synthesized in the astrocyte which binds to the
IP3 Rs on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The sarco
endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase pumps Ca2+ from
the ER. When the Ca2+ transient exceeds the threshold,
Ca2+ oscillations are induced.
3) Gliotransmitters such as Glu are released to the cleft activating the extrasynaptic Glu receptors (NMDARs) on the
postsynaptic neuron. This motivates slow inward current
in the postsynaptic neuron which is much larger than the
excitatory postsynaptic current directly triggered by the
presynaptic neuron via neurotransmitter binding.
The calcium wave could be encoded by its amplitude or frequency [21]. The coding scheme of the astrocyte is modeled in
[22] and the range of AM, FM and AFM are calculated using
Li–Rinzel model [23]. [24] couples the neuronal activity while
we concentrate on the relationship of presynaptic neuron and
the astrocyte in our model.
C. Layer 3
1) Stimuli and Wave Area: The propagation of Ca2+ waves
within the astrocyte is characterized by the Ca2+ waves initiated at different astrocyte process sites. There exist two kinds of
Ca2+ waves: 1) the focal spontaneous Ca2+ waves which are
not aroused by AP [25]; 2) the expanded Ca2+ waves which are
restricted to the processes under single electric stimulus (AP).
However, trains of electrical stimuli evoke propagated Ca2+
waves which may cover the soma of astrocyte. In [26], electrical field stimulation (EFS) initiates APs in the mossy fibers
while the number of bursts is related to the propagation area of
Ca2+ waves. The extracellular Glu is generated at the tripartite
synapse which binds to the astrocyte plasma membrane. The
Glu concentration near the astrocyte processes is approximately
linear to the number of stimuli as well as the area of coverage
of Ca2+ . (2) shows the correlation
# of stimuli ∝ Glu concentration ∝ Ca2+ area.

(2)

Consequently, it could be deduced that only sufficient Glu
leads to the occurrence of Ca2+ wave in the soma due to its free
diffusion.
A simplified astrocyte is shown in Fig. 5 whose diameter of
the soma is 3.5 μm and the diameter of the process is 2 μm.
Each process has a length of 23.5 μm which marks the territory of the whole astrocyte (estimated from [27]). The diffusion
speed of Glu in the extracellular space could be estimated from
experiments [26].
2) Assumption of Multiple Inputs From Branches: Each neuron is allocated to only one astrocyte process while the microdomains of different tripartite synapses do not overlap.
Hence, APs trigger local Ca2+ waves in independent microdomains of an astrocyte. On account of the existence of
global Ca2+ waves and the insufficiency of an individual AP
to lead an expanded wave, we assume that the accumulation

YANG AND YEO: CONCEPTUAL NETWORK MODEL FROM SENSORY NEURONS TO ASTROCYTES OF THE HUMAN NERVOUS SYSTEM

Fig. 5.

Astrocyte with six processes.

Fig. 6.

Subnetwork and backbone network of astrocyte.

of local Ca2+ waves from several sites of the same astrocyte
would propagate to the soma and other branches hence inducing
a global Ca2+ wave. Further experiments could be conducted
to validate this hypothesis.
D. Layer 4
Layer 4 includes groups of astrocytes which have a hierarchical structure consisting of a subnetwork and a backbone-network
(see Fig. 6). Conscious episode is the data loaded in this layer.
We first assess the potential of the astrocyte to aggregate information from the lower layers.
1) Astrocyte and Cognitive Processing: Astrocyte could integrate synchronized synaptic inputs and generate intercellular
Ca2+ waves among several or hundreds of astrocytes [28]. Intercellular Ca2+ waves transmit via GJC—which is made up
of plasma membranes of adjacent astrocytes. The extracellular
ATP, Glu and other possible gliotransmitters, as well as the IP3
which diffuse through GJC, cooperate to generate Ca2+ release
in the unstimulated astrocyte.
The GJC permeability could be modified by external factors,
such as pH, transjunctional voltage and intracellular Ca2+ [29].
Therefore, the coupling level of two adjacent astrocytes varies
depending on intracellular and extracellular conditions. In this
regard, the astrocyte network could be divided into plenty of
subnetworks while the involvement of a subnetwork is flexible.
It is conceived that astrocyte participates in cognitive processing for the following reasons:
1) Astrocyte Ca2+ waves could propagate to a long distance [30] which have the potential to transmit conscious

1847

episodes through layers of cortex or to a distant region of
the human brain.
2) The discovery of new kinds of astrocytes and the giant
size of protoplasmic astrocyte with increasing number of
synapses imply the significant function of astrocytes in
higher order information processing.
3) Astrocyte along with postsynaptic neuronal activity release presynaptic type I mGLuRs, thus inducing long term
potentiation [9]. Besides, astrocyte could increase its dynamic range.
4) Astrocyte extends endfeets on the blood vessel to drive
the hemodynamic conditions to supply energy for brain
activity which directly regulates the blood-oxygen-leveldependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signals [31]. Since BOLD fMRI is correlated
with the prototypical cognitive patterns, astrocyte thus
takes part in cognitive processing.
It is proposed in [32] that AP represents the content of external
stimulation which is transformed to Ca2+ wave as the “feeling”
or “awareness” of the information. While the formation of conscious episode is still not well researched yet, our assumption
is that the state combination of certain astrocyte networks indicates the prototypical conscious pattern such as cold, thirst,
hunger and so on. The information of a physical stimulation
exerted at a restricted area is encoded in the frequency and
amplitude of Ca2+ wave while the spatially distributed Ca2+
waves encapsulate the cognitive pattern. The conscious episode
requires binding of a sequence of prototypical patterns. The
phase of Ca2+ wave is not discussed here though they may
have relevance in the information processing.
2) Subnetwork: We use (amplitude, frequency) pair to denote the Ca2+ wave in an astrocyte. Each astrocyte has a
unique id (order). The state combination is expressed in a
one-dimensional matrix while the element is the amplitudefrequency pair. We arrange the events into several time slots
and a stimulus is applied at the beginning of a time slot. For
instance, if we model a five-astrocyte network with only two
activated astrocytes, its state in a single time slot is

As = (0, 0)

(a2 , f2 ) (a3 , f3 ) (0, 0)


(0, 0) .

(3)

Different from utilizing trapped-ion quantum computing [31] to
explain the states transition, we assume that the entanglement
of the conscious episode involves three prototypical cognitive
patterns denoted as A1 , A2 and A3 . Matrix A(t) (4) stores the
conscious episodes formed according to the past stimuli where
A(t) will decay as the time passes. The degradation matrix B is
described in (5). When a new cognitive pattern is received, A(t)
would be updated as shown in (6).


A1 A2
⎛
β1 0
⎜
β2
B= ⎜
⎝0

A(t) =

0

0

A3
0



⎟
0 ⎟
⎠
β3

(4)

⎞
(5)

1848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

TABLE I
PARAMETER SET
Designation

Value

fm a x
k1 / 2
fb a s e

⎛

α10
⎜
A(t + t) = ⎜
⎝0
0

35.5 Hz
10 −5 . 6 M
2.18 Hz

α11

0

α21

α22

0

α32

⎞

⎛

As

⎞

⎜ ⎟
⎜ ⎟
⎟ ⎜ A1 ⎟
⎜ ⎟
0 ⎟
⎠ ⎜ ⎟ B.
⎜ A2 ⎟
α33 ⎝ ⎠
A3
0

(6)
Fig. 7. Property of signal converter in layer 1: simulation and biological results
comparison.

3) Backbone-Network: The backbone-network is the assembly of subnetworks and the transition function remains the same.
E. Extension
The termination of communication is the conscious episode
in the astrocyte network in our network model. In reality, the
descending pathway is also indispensable in the generation of
movement. First, astrocyte relays and interferes with the postsynaptic neuron AP. Second, the AP goes down the neuron chain
to the motor neuron and control the movement of muscles.
IV. RESULTS ANALYSIS
The conceptual network model based on the four layer structure is developed with the continuous time element being simplified to a discrete event list.
We first determine the parameters of each layer and compare
our simulation results to the biological experiments or mathematical models. After that, a test case of the entire integrated
network model is discussed.
A. Layer 1
1) Signal Converter: From the results of Fig. 3 in [19], we
set the parameters for mOR-EG cell in Table I. To simulate the
actual transmission process, additive white Gaussian noise with
N(0, 0.5) is incorporated into the signal converter.
The odor stimulation with changing concentration is carried
out in the first-order neuron in layer 1. Stimulus-response result
in our simulation and the result in [19] are compared in Fig. 7.
2) Signal Amplifier: On the basis of the aforementioned theoretical analysis, we characterize the signal divergence and
convergence in a two-dimensional area where the neurons are
patterned in a lattice. Nine first-order neurons receive the stimulus where the strength of the stimulus decreases from the center.
As displayed in Fig. 8, AP coverage for first-order neurons is
nine cells (in blue) and expands to 21 neurons when APs are
transmitted to the second-order neurons (an additional 12 green
nodes). Furthermore, the strength of the nine centered secondary
neurons elevates due to convergence from the surrounding primary neurons. The activated area of third-order neurons enlarges
to 37 neurons. Fig. 8(b) presents the frequency map for the 37

Fig. 8. (a) first-order neurons send APs to second-order neurons. (b) frequency
map of third-order neurons.

third-order neurons under a spatially distributed stimulus whose
strength reduces from the center to the edge. The primary receptive field [nine neurons in Fig. 8(a)] extends after two signal
amplifiers.
B. Layer 2
In our network model, there is only one CNS neuron in layer
2 as the intermediate neuron between a single layer 1 neuron
and a layer 3 entity (see Fig. 2). Its frequency is the same as the
corresponding third-order neuron in layer 1. Nevertheless, there
should be a queue of connected neurons between two layer
1 and layer 3 entities in the actual situation where the signal
would experience some attenuation. The single central neuron
is representative of the layer 2 entity while the model could be
improved when new biological research results are presented in
the future.
For the communication with layer 3, we acquire the parameters from the Li–Rinzel model for AFM encoding in the astrocyte combined with the mediation of AP [24]. The frequency of
AP and the amplitude/frequency of the Ca2+ waves in the astrocyte process are plotted in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively. The first
bifurcation point is at f = 15 Hz. When the frequency ranges
from 5 to 15 Hz, Ca2+ waves follow amplitude modulation
while frequency modulation is employed when the frequency is
greater than 15 Hz. The second bifurcation point is at f = 35 Hz
after which the frequency of Ca2+ waves rapidly rises to 1 Hz.
The behavior of the calcium wave as communication progresses

YANG AND YEO: CONCEPTUAL NETWORK MODEL FROM SENSORY NEURONS TO ASTROCYTES OF THE HUMAN NERVOUS SYSTEM

Fig. 9.

Fig. 10.

C a 2 + amplitude of different action potential frequency.

C a 2 + frequency of different action potential frequency.

to the next level (shown in Figs. 9 and 10), are demonstrated by
our proposed model which is founded on the published study
of [24].

1849

Fig. 11. (a) C a 2 + wave propagation distance per stimulus. (b) C a 2 + wave
propagation speed5 (in terms of area) per stimulus.

extracellular space and decreases to the minimum concentration
required to initiate the Ca2+ wave.
The stimulation is applied at a single branch of the astrocyte
and we envisage that if other branches receive the same AP,
the Glu and ATP would transmit over a longer distance.4 In
our simulation, we assume that for every stimulation from the
environment, at least eight spikes are initiated. The number is
selected to ensure that the evoked Ca2+ wave would propagate
across the current astrocyte and it alone, is not strong enough to
cover the entire astrocyte territory.
Under this circumstance, we study the location of the stimulus
which will result in a global Ca2+ wave coverage and justify that
if any two branches within an astrocyte get the AP, the astrocyte
would induce Ca2+ wave. The amplitude of Ca2+ wave drops
in the propagation as reported in [33]. The decay speed of Ca2+
wave follows the diffusion of extracellular neurotransmitters.
Therefore, the information embedded in Ca2+ wave would have
some distortion. We maintain the frequency of Ca2+ wave to
represent a component of information as there is no published
literature so far which indicates that the frequency would change
notably.

C. Layer 3
In this layer, the local Ca2+ waves propagate from the
branches to the soma of a single astrocyte producing the global
Ca2+ waves. We analyze the propagation speed and amplitude
degradation of Ca2+ wave during the propagation process while
its frequency is proposed to be invariant.
The shape of the astrocyte in our model is depicted in Fig. 5
and the following computation is based on the iGlusnFR concentration in Fig. 6 of [26] [Fig. 6(g) has been reproduced as
Fig. 17(b) in the Appendix.]. The wave coverage increases as
the stimuli number increases while the speed is not constant [see
Fig. 11(b)]. The propagation speed of Ca2+ wave per stimuli
is roughly estimated. The speed peaks at eight stimuli. When
the number of stimuli equals to 15, Ca2+ wave could reach almost the entire territory of the astrocyte domain [see Fig. 11(a)].
Glu concentration has similar varying pattern as the Ca2+ wave
coverage except for the deviation at the two stimuli [Fig. 6(f)
of [26], reproduced as Fig. 17(a) in the Appendix]. Hence, we
infer that the Glu generated at the stimulation point diffuses to

D. Layer 4
After the global Ca2+ wave floods the astrocyte domain,
intercellular Ca2+ wave could be formed by the diffusion of
extracellular Glu and ATP as well as the IP3 through the GJC.
Permeabilities of GJC are not identical while in every transmission trial they could be varied to form different subastrocyte
network topology. Fig. 12 depicts a lattice-shaped astrocyte network along with the GJC permeabilities between adjacent astrocytes. The red node represents the stimulated astrocyte while
the dark blue nodes denote the astrocytes with triggered Ca2+
4 Owing to experimental constraints, currently there are no biological experimental results for scenarios where the stimulation is applied to more than one
branch. Research is still ongoing to prove the hypothesis as it is intuitive that
with multiple stimuli, the transmission distance should be longer.
5 Wave propagation speed is expressed as

V =

Area c u rre nt − Area la st
.
#stimulic u rre nt − #stimulila st

1850

Fig. 12.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

Subastrocyte network topology.

TABLE II
PARAMETER SET
Fig. 13.
Designation

Value

β1
β1
β1
α10
α10
α21
α22
α32
α33

0.9
0.9
0.9
0.95
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55

wave. The remaining light blue nodes are the astrocytes failing to generate Ca2+ wave as a result of GJC permeability
restraints. More detailed explanation on the permeabilities can
be found in our previous study [33]. Due to the significance of
GJC permeability, we incorporate its variation to complete the
function of the network model.
Other than GJC permeability, the amplitude of Ca2+ wave
largely restricts the information transmission. In our model,
Ca2+ wave amplitude ranges from 0.05 to 0.53 μM while the
subnetwork diameter is at most 300 μm to ensure the minimum
concentration of Ca2+ wave.
The parameter set for (5) and (6) is listed in Table II. We
test an instance that a train of repeated stimuli is applied in a
continuous time slot (7  t). It is supposed that three astrocytes
in a subnetwork could be activated and their initial states are
resting (0 μM). Ca2+ wave amplitude from a single activation
is (0.04 μM, 0.15 μM, 0.20 μM). We define the matrix A1 in
(4) as the “current states” and the following results describe
the value of this matrix. The amplitudes of the three astrocytes
are plotted in Fig. 13. Apparently, repeated stimuli conduce to
strong response which lasts for a longer duration. The result
conforms with the biological facts that conscious processing is
related to memory of past prototypical cognitive patterns.
E. Integrated Network Model
In this session, a stimulus is projected to a receptive field of
first-order neuron as shown in Fig. 8(a) while the central and
edge odor concentrations are C1 = 10−5 M and C2 = 10−5.5 M ,
respectively. 49 layer two neurons [see Fig. 8(b)] are allocated
corresponding to the third-order neurons and they are arranged
into four groups: The first three groups each consists of two rows
and the last one has only one row. Every two adjacent neurons

Current states: C a 2 + wave amplitude of three astrocytes.

Fig. 14. Instantaneous C a 2 + wave amplitudes generated by a single stimulus
in all the astrocytes of the backbone-network.

connect to two branches of an astrocyte. Each group refers to
a subastrocyte network. The GJC permeability matrix for the
seven astrocytes in a subnetwork is
⎛

∞

⎜
⎜ 0.95
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜∞
⎜
⎜
P =⎜
⎜ 0.02
⎜
⎜∞
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜∞
⎝
∞

0.95

∞

0.02

∞

∞

∞

0.01

∞

0.9

∞

0.01

∞

∞

∞

0.01

∞

∞

∞

0.85

∞

0.9

∞

0.85

∞

0.015

∞

0.01

∞

0.015

∞

∞

∞

0.88

∞

∞

∞

⎞

⎟
∞ ⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
∞ ⎟
⎟
⎟
0.88 ⎟
⎟
⎟
∞ ⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
∞ ⎟
⎠
∞

(7)
where ∞ denotes connection toward itself or no connection.
Fig. 14 provides the amplitudes of Ca2+ wave in the four
subnetworks when a single stimulus is applied triggering a prototypical cognitive pattern.
We examine the situation that a second stimulus is applied
at t = 4  t. Average amplitude is counted to represent the
overall status of each subnetwork. The result is shown in Fig. 15.
The second stimulus “evokes” the fading “memory” of the first
stimulus and the response is enhanced.

YANG AND YEO: CONCEPTUAL NETWORK MODEL FROM SENSORY NEURONS TO ASTROCYTES OF THE HUMAN NERVOUS SYSTEM

1851

Fig. 15. Current states: average C a 2 + wave amplitude in the backbonenetwork with four subnetworks.

The proposed conceptual network serves as a fundamental
tool to study the performance of the components and will predict
their function and interaction. The simulation results presented
previously are consistent with available biological experiments
and mathematics models. If our model is further validated by
future biological experiments, the model will facilitate the accurate target application of medication to treat brain-related
diseases via nanosensors or other biological carriers.

Fig. 16. Diagram of the excitatory synaptic connections among three receptors
and the interneurons at the next two higher levels. The inset over each axon shows
its relative rate of discharge during stimulation.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we develop a conceptual network model based
on the cellular characterizations of the nervous system. This
model analyzes the signal processing pathway from the external
stimulation on the sensory neurons to the astrocytes, resulting
in the generation of conscious episode in the human brain. The
astrocyte-centric hypothesis is adopted in our model as the astrocyte regulates the information transmission. The proposed
conceptual network model is divided into four layers according to the anatomy and property of every component within
the signal pathway. We verify our simulation results against the
available biological experiments and mathematical models and
provide a test case of the integrated network. As the production
of conscious episode in the human nervous system is still under
intense research, our model serves as a useful tool to facilitate, complement and verify current and future study in human
cognition.
For future work, we plan to expand the network by introducing the descending signal pathway toward motor neurons.
Practical use of the model requires incorporation of different
features of the various sensing systems. In addition, the generation of global Ca2+ wave in layer 3 and the affection of
past prototypical cognitive patterns in layer 4 could be further
studied. Furthermore, relationship of conscious episode and the
memory formation could be investigated.
APPENDIX
A. Related Published Figures
The signal divergence and convergence published in Fig. 8
[20] is illustrated in Fig. 16. The experiment results published
in Fig. 6(f) and (g) [20] are duplicated in Fig. 17.

Fig. 17. (a) Area of the astrocyte C a 2 + and (b) iGluSnFR signals as a function
of EFS stimuli and in relation to the territory of an s.l. astrocyte.

B. Related Formulas
1) Hill Equation: Hill equation was originally introduced by
A.V. Hill in 1910 [34] to describe the relationship of two variables [shown in (8)]. ym ax , c and n are the parameters while x
is the dependent variable.
ym ax xα
.
(8)
cα + xα
2) Major Equation of Li–Rinzel Model Applied [24]: Intracellular Ca2+ is calculated in (9). Jchan represents the amount
of Ca2+ affected by IP3 and Ca2+ concentrations. Jleak is the
leaked Ca2+ from ER while Jpum p denotes Ca2+ pumped from
the cytosol into the ER.
y=

dCa2+
= Jchan (Ca2+ , h, IP3 )
dt
+Jleak (Ca2+ ) − Jpum p (Ca2+ ).

(9)

REFERENCES
[1] N. C. Berchtold and C. W. Cotman, “Evolution in the conceptualization
of dementia and alzheimers disease: Greco-roman period to the 1960s,”
Neurobiol. Aging, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 173–189, 1998.

1852

[2] E. R. Kandel et al., Principles of Neural Science. New York, NY, USA:
McGraw-Hill, 2000.
[3] D. Purves et al., “The organization of the nervous system,” chapter 1,
Neuroscience. MA, USA: Sinauer Associates, 2001.
[4] N. A. Oberheim et al., “Heterogeneity of astrocytic form and function,”
in Astrocytes. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012, pp. 23–45.
[5] F. A. Azevedo et al., “Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells
make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain,” J. Comparative Neurol., vol. 513, no. 5, pp. 532–541, 2009.
[6] G. Perea and A. Araque, “Glia modulates synaptic transmission,” Brain
Res. Rev., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 93–102, 2010.
[7] A. Volterra et al., “Astrocyte C a 2 + signalling: An unexpected complexity,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 327–335, 2014.
[8] A. Araque et al., “Gliotransmitters travel in time and space,” Neuron,
vol. 81, no. 4, pp. 728–739, 2014.
[9] G. Perea et al., “Tripartite synapses: astrocytes process and control synaptic information,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 421–431, 2009.
[10] E. Scemes and C. Giaume, “Astrocyte calcium waves: What they are and
what they do,” Glia, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 716–725, 2006.
[11] M. Navarrete et al., “Astrocytes mediate in vivo cholinergic-induced
synaptic plasticity,” PLoS Biol., vol. 10, no. 2, p. e1001259, 2012.
[12] N. Takata et al., “Astrocyte calcium signaling transforms cholinergic
modulation to cortical plasticity in vivo,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, no. 49,
pp. 18 155–18 165, 2011.
[13] A. Araque et al., “Tripartite synapses: Glia, the unacknowledged partner,”
Trends Neurosci., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 208–215, 1999.
[14] M. Navarrete et al., “Astrocyte calcium signal and gliotransmission in
human brain tissue,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1240–1246, 2013.
[15] S. Y. Gordleeva et al., “Bi-directional astrocytic regulation of neuronal
activity within a network,” Frontiers Comput. Neurosci., vol. 6, no. 92,
2012.
[16] G. Perea and A. Araque, “Properties of synaptically evoked astrocyte
calcium signal reveal synaptic information processing by astrocytes,” J.
Neurosci., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2192–2203, 2005.
[17] A. Araque et al., “Synaptically released acetylcholine evokes C a 2 +
elevations in astrocytes in hippocampal slices,” J. Neurosci., vol. 22,
no. 7, pp. 2443–2450, 2002.
[18] A. B. Porto-Pazos et al., “Artificial astrocytes improve neural network
performance,” PloS One, vol. 6, no. 4, p. e19109, 2011.
[19] T. Connelly et al., “Spontaneous and sensory-evoked activity in mouse olfactory sensory neurons with defined odorant receptors,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 110, no. 1, pp. 55–62, 2013.
[20] J. Dudel, “General sensory physiology,” in Human Physiology. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 1983, pp. 177–192.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 7, JULY 2015

[21] M. De Pittà et al., “Coexistence of amplitude and frequency modulations in intracellular calcium dynamics,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 77, no. 3,
pp. 0309031-1–0309031-4, Mar. 2008.
[22] M. De Pittà et al., “Glutamate regulation of calcium and ip 3 oscillating
and pulsating dynamics in astrocytes,” J. Biol. Phys., vol. 35, pp. 383–411,
2009.
[23] Y.-X. Li and J. Rinzel, “Equations for InsP 3 receptor-mediated [C a 2 + ]i
oscillations derived from a detailed kinetic model: A hodgkin-huxley like
formalism,” J. Theoretical Biol., vol. 166, no. 4, pp. 461–473, 1994.
[24] J. J. Wade et al., “Bidirectional coupling between astrocytes and neurons
mediates learning and dynamic coordination in the brain: A multiple
modeling approach,” PloS One, vol. 6, no. 12, p. e29445, 2011.
[25] M. A. Di Castro et al., “Local C a 2 + detection and modulation of synaptic
release by astrocytes,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 1276–1284,
2011.
[26] M. D. Haustein et al., “Conditions and constraints for astrocyte calcium
signaling in the hippocampal mossy fiber pathway,” Neuron, vol. 82,
no. 2, pp. 413–429, 2014.
[27] N. A. Oberheim et al., “Uniquely hominid features of adult human astrocytes,” J. Neurosci., vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 3276–3287, 2009.
[28] R. Min et al., “The computational power of astrocyte mediated synaptic
plasticity,” Frontiers Comput. Neurosci., vol. 6, no. 93, 2012.
[29] M. M. Lurtz and C. F. Louis, “Intracellular calcium regulation of
connexin43,” Am. J. Physiology-Cell Physiology, vol. 293, no. 6,
pp. C1806–C1813, 2007.
[30] N. Kuga et al., “Large-scale calcium waves traveling through astrocytic
networks in vivo,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 2607–2614, 2011.
[31] A. Pereira, Jr, and F. A. Furlan, “On the role of synchrony for neuron–
astrocyte interactions and perceptual conscious processing,” J. Biol. Phys.,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 465–480, 2009.
[32] A. Pereira, Jr, and F. A. Furlan, “Astrocytes and human cognition: Modeling information integration and modulation of neuronal activity,” Prog.
Neurobiol., vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 405–420, 2010.
[33] Y. Yang and C. K. Yeo, “An enhanced cluster-based network model for
calcium signaling,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 788–795,
Sep. 2013.
[34] S. Goutelle et al., “The hill equation: A review of its capabilities in
pharmacological modelling,” Fundam. Clinical Pharmacology, vol. 22,
no. 6, pp. 633–648, 2008.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

