IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1911

Automated Peripheral Neuropathy Assessment Using
Optical Imaging and Foot Anthropometry
Hafeez-U. R. Siddiqui∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Michelle Spruce, Stephen R. Alty, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Sandra Dudley* , Member, IEEE

Abstract—A large proportion of individuals who live with type-2
diabetes suffer from plantar sensory neuropathy. Regular testing
and assessment for the condition is required to avoid ulceration
or other damage to patient’s feet. Currently accepted practice involves a trained clinician testing a patient’s feet manually with a
hand-held nylon monofilament probe. The procedure is time consuming, labor intensive, requires special training, is prone to error,
and repeatability is difficult. With the vast increase in type-2 diabetes, the number of plantar sensory neuropathy sufferers has
already grown to such an extent as to make a traditional manual
test problematic. This paper presents the first investigation of a
novel approach to automatically identify the pressure points on
a given patient’s foot for the examination of sensory neuropathy
via optical image processing incorporating plantar anthropometry. The method automatically selects suitable test points on the
plantar surface that correspond to those repeatedly chosen by a
trained podiatrist. The proposed system automatically identifies
the specific pressure points at different locations, namely the toe
(hallux), metatarsal heads and heel (Calcaneum) areas. The approach is generic and has shown 100% reliability on the available
database used. The database consists of Chinese, Asian, African,
and Caucasian foot images.
Index Terms—Binary image, contours, diabetes, foot anthropometry, hue saturation voluminous (HSV), optical image processing, peripheral sensory neuropathy (PSN), plantar surface, polygon, Red, Green, and Blue (RGB), skin tone.

I. INTRODUCTION
IABETES mellitus (DM) is a chronic illness affecting
more than 8% of the developed world, with growing numbers also in countries such as China and India. Diabetic peripheral sensory neuropathy (PSN) is a common complication
of DM, with typically 60% of all type-2 diabetics developing
this condition within 10 years of being first diagnosed. With
the enormous growth of type-2 diabetes, the frequency of diabetic neuropathies is noticeably increasing, but actual numbers

D

Manuscript received October 21, 2014; revised February 13, 2015; accepted
February 14, 2015. Date of publication February 24, 2015; date of current version July 15, 2015. This work was supported by London South Bank University.
The work of H. U. R. Siddiqui is supported in part by the London South Bank
University Ph.D. Scholarship. Asterisks indicate corresponding authors.
∗ H.-U. R. Siddiqui is with the School of Engineering, London South Bank
University, London SE1 0AA, U.K. (e-mail: siddiqh3@lsbu.ac.uk).
S. R. Alty is with the School of Engineering, London South Bank University,
London SE1 0AA, U.K.
M. Spruce is with the School of Health and Social Care, London South Bank
University, London SE1 0AA, U.K.
* S. Dudley is with the School of Engineering, London South Bank University,
London SE1 0AA, U.K. (e-mail: dudleyms@lsbu.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2407056

remain undisclosed, with variable reports on diabetic patients
depending mostly on the criteria and methods used to identify
neuropathy [1]. Roughly 27-million diabetics are registered in
Europe alone. The number of PSN sufferers has already grown
to such an extent as to make a traditional manual PSN test challenging. This paper presents the first investigation of a novel approach to automatically identify the pressure points on a given
patient’s foot for the examination of PSN via optical image
processing.
In the United Kingdom, there are presently around 3.8-million
people living with diabetes and the current cost of direct diabetic patient care (treatment, intervention, and complications
assistance) is estimated at £9.8 billion [1], [2]. This number is
expected to increase to 6.25 million by 2035/6. This projected
growth is likely to have significant impact on National Health
Service (NHS) resources. Of course, this is not solely a U.K.
problem, but internationally, one can then appreciate the vast
issue.
One side effect of type-2 diabetes is PSN and this affects
the peripheral extremities of the body, often initializing with
numbness of the toes, and subsequently, extending to the plantar aspect of the feet. PSN is commonly regarded as a key factor
in the development of ulceration, thus its early diagnosis and
correct assessment are important factors to manage this condition and identify higher risk patients. Sufferers lose mobility and
this degenerative process has a dramatic impact on their quality
of life. If not carefully monitored and timely treated, lower limb
amputation is unfortunately a common consequence [3]. The
maintenance and appreciation of healthy feet is fundamental in
enabling sufferers to preserve an active and healthy lifestyle and
reduce sufferers’ risk of ulceration. One of the main causes of
ulceration is diabetic PSN [4]. Foot complications are indeed,
some of the most frequent problems of diabetic mellitus, a key
contributor to medical costs, as 50% of all inpatient admissions
of diabetes are due to foot disease [5].
Hitherto the Semmes–Weinstein monofilament examination
(SWME) method is one of the most common tests used to identify PSN and increased risk of ulceration, through the examination of five pressure points at specific weight bearing areas,
namely the toe (hallux), metatarsal, and heel (Calcaneum). An
extruded homopolymer monofilament (SWM) probe is applied
by a trained clinician. The SWM is designed to bend by 10 mm
(gauged commonly by sight) when 10 g (98 mN) force is applied. Studies have shown that the inability to detect the SWM,
when it bends by 10 mm at 10 g force, indicates a degree of
neuropathy. The rationale for this is based upon World Health
Organization (WHO) and National Institute for Health and Care

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Excellence (NICE) guidelines, which indicate that reduced sensation to a high pressure site is an accepted risk factor for the
development of ulceration [6]. Currently, professionals rely on
subjective judgment as to which areas may constitute a highpressure site; this is frequently based upon bony prominences,
deformity, or soft tissue indicators. On this basis, it is the gold
standard that all these identified areas are then tested for PSN
(a risk factor for the development of ulceration). The SWME,
although the most widely used, is considered cumbersome and
labor intensive. Repeatability is difficult to maintain and testing
can be prone to experimenter bias. Moreover, this issue may be
amplified when a patient is seen by a different practitioner on
each visit [7].
Ultimately, numbers suffering from type-2 diabetes has already reached such rates as to make a traditional PSN test
unfeasible. Furthermore, the resources required to test current
sufferers outstrip those provided by the U.K. NHS. Thus, there
is an imperative need to develop an automated system that is,
autonomous, repeatable, and simplifies the testing procedure,
thus enabling tests to be performed within medical drop-in centers and general practices but also, for example, in locally based
pharmacies. Additionally, a system that provides resultant photographic evidence of patients’ feet and their condition over
time is valuable to both medical practitioners and researchers.
Automated techniques such as that presented here would reduce
waiting times, increase the number of patients that can be tested,
and provide a neutral, unbiased selection of test points.
We describe a novel approach to automatically select suitable
pressure points, namely toe (hallux), metatarsal heads, and heel
(Calcaneum), on a given patient’s foot via optical image processing incorporating plantar anthropometry, i.e., automating
the accepted SWME. Importantly, these pressure points correspond to those chosen by a trained podiatrist for PSN examination. The system is embedded with in-house designed software,
which ultimately produces an image of the tested foot and the
five pressure points detected. These results are then sent to the
health care provider via email.
The human foot is a complex structure, playing an important role in the locomotion processes of the lower extremity [8].
People vary in foot shape, gender, age, race, and even lifestyle
habits play an important role in shaping the foot [9]. Foot anthropometry is the measurement of the size and proportion of
different parameters of the foot and is accepted in studies related
to ergonomics, forensics science, and anthropology. The most
common foot parameters used for foot anthropometry are foot
length, ball length, ball width, girth, heel width, instep height,
instep width, and toe height [10], [11].
Previous anthropometric studies of foot shape have used differing protocols and measurement devices. Most anthropometric
approaches directly measure the foot dimensions using a Vernier
caliper or cloth tape flat ruler, while others have used foot prints.
Additional studies have devised physical foot measurement platforms [10]. There are also methods devised to quantify foot
posture or mobility from digital images; these methods have a
commonality in that they involve capturing a digital image of
the foot. However, the postprocessing procedures differ among
them [12], [13]. Though their research objectives are diverse, the

Fig. 1. Processing input image. (a) Plantar image in RGB color space.
(b) Plantar image in HSV space. (c) Binary Image. (d) Outer boundary of
detected plantar surface

methods followed by those referenced involved manual intervention such as marking “bony” land marks, painting the plantar
surface with “face and body” paint, and attached retroreflective
targets [14], making the procedures cumbersome and difficult to
repeat, obviously unsuitable as an automated SWME replacement method.
Previous work presented by the authors [15] covered pressurepoint detection by plantar contact area using optical imaging.
An optical scanning technique obtained the human plantar surface and specific skin color space was used to detect the plantar
contact area, but only Caucasian and nonflat feet patient groups
were considered. Here, an improved imaging method to automatically identify suitable pressure points along the plantar
surface is proposed using the same physical system architecture as described in [15]. Furthermore, an improved algorithm
is presented that extracts plantar surface pressure points via a
combined optical image processing and plantar anthropometry
approach independently of patient’s race.
II. METHODOLOGY
The authors concentrate here on the optical image detection
and processing of a patient’s foot. In order to reflect the accepted
SWME method, the footrest again is a perforated sheet enabling
a mechanically driven 10-g (98 mN) probe to be admitted to the
patient’s foot through the perforations once the pressure points
have been correctly identified via the optical imaging method
described. This mechanical probe and optical integration will
be presented elsewhere. To assist the supervisory development
of the program, a fixed small and soft stud is introduced to the
underside of the perforated sheet as shown in Fig. 1(d).
The stud is known as a foot stopper (FS) and has two main
purposes:
1) it assists patients to position their foot correctly on the
perforated sheet;
2) it acts as a reference point for the algorithm used to perform the foot anthropometry calculations.
The blue color of the FS helps in its identification during the
image processing of the plantar surface in terms of spatial coordinates. The foot is scanned and the foot image is obtained in

SIDDIQUI et al.: AUTOMATED PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY ASSESSMENT USING OPTICAL IMAGING AND FOOT ANTHROPOMETRY

Red, Green, and Blue (RGB) color space as shown in Fig. 1(a).
RGB is an additive color system, where primary colors are
combined in different quantities to form other colors. In RGB
space, a color is described by indicating the amount of red, green,
and blue color. When all colors have the maximum value, the
resulting color is white and black vice versa [16]. In RGB color
space, the luminance information is embedded into each band in
the visible light spectrum of the image. Varying levels of brightness in an image causes RGB values to shift. The primary color
components are highly correlated, and therefore, it is difficult
to execute some image processing techniques that operate on
the intensity component of an image only [17]. An improved
alternative to RGB is a perceptual color space such as Hue,
Saturation, and Voluminous (HSV) that is closer to the human
color perception system. The HSV model is based on cylindrical coordinates and it is a nonlinear transformation of the RGB
system. HSV space decouples the brightness information from
the color information. Thus, HSV has one layer for brightness
information, i.e., V and two layers for color information, i.e., H
and S [17]. It is widely used in artificial vision systems, as it is
a powerful tool for the development of digital image processing
algorithm based on human color perception model. The HSV
model is perfectly suited to portray colors in practical terms
for human understanding [18] and is, therefore, ideal for medical application where the human eye is the ultimate diagnostic
tool. Thus, here, the scanned foot image is converted into HSV
color space [see Fig. 1(b)], and then, a skin classifier is used
as a threshold against the image in HSV space. Let A be the
HSV image with dimension M × N and H be the set of human
plantar skin color HSV space
⎛

a11

⎜
⎜
⎜ a21
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
A=⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜ a(M −1)1
⎜
⎜
⎝
aM 1
H = {x|

a12

a13

...

a22

a23

...
..
.

a(M −1)2

a(M −1)3

...

aM 2

aM 3

...

a1N

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
a(M −1)N⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
aM N

∀x ∈ human color skin tone, x ∈ Z}.

a2N

f (x) =

Hm in ≤ x ≤ Hm ax

⎩ 0,

otherwise

(a) Image plane. (b) V-and U-shaped foot [8].

(foot) pixels.
⎛
b11
b12
b13
...
⎜
⎜ b21
b22
b23
...
⎜
⎜
⎜
..
B =⎜
.
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜ b(M −1)1 b(M −1)2 b(M −1)3 . . .
⎝
bM 1

bM 2

bM 3

...

b1N

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
b(M −1)N⎟
⎠
b2N

bM N

.

M ×N

Otherwise, the pixels belong to the background and set to
black in color. The HSV image A under f(x) is a binary image
and can be represented by a matrix B with dimension M × N
as shown previously. Each bi,j has value either 0 or 1, where
i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , M and j = 0, 1, 2, . . . , N . The element of B
with value 1 is the part of the plantar surface. Let F be the set
that contains all points belonging to plantar surface or the image
foreground or more precisely F contains all white color pixels.
F = {p(x, y)|

∀f (p) = 1 ∧ p(x, y) ∈ B}.

(2)

Let S is the set that contains foot stopper color values in HSV
space.
M ×N

(1)
Using the selected threshold, an object (foot) image is extracted from the background image and yields a binary image,
where the white area shows the entire foot and black is the
foreground as shown in Fig. 1(c). If f(x) is a function given as
⎧
⎨ 1,

Fig. 2.

1913

where Hm in and Hm ax is the minimum and maximum values of
H and serve as lower and upper threshold bounds, respectively.
Any pixel of HSV image A, shown as a matrix A, that lies
within the human skin color space H is considered the object

S = {x| ∀x ∈ foot stopper color, x ∈ z}

1, x ∈ s
g(x) =
0, otherwise.

(3)

The HSV image A under g(x) gives the exact foot stopper
reference point FS (x , y ).
Subsequently, a contour is drawn around the plantar surface,
and is then, bounded by a rectangle called the foot rectangle. The
bounded rectangle encloses the entire foot, representing the foot
dimension in terms of width and length as shown in Fig. 1(d).
The total foot length including toe can be identified by the total
length of the rectangle bounding the entire foot.
The Cartesian plane used in the image processing is shown in
Fig. 2(a). The origin of Cartesian plane in the image processing
lies at top left corner of the image. Thus, the x-axis increases

1914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

from left to right as usual, while the y-axis increases from the top
of the foot to the bottom as indicated in Fig. 2(a). Subsequently,
the extreme points along the x-axis of the contours define the
width of the rectangle. The region of interest (ROI) for the toe
pressure area is bounded by a subrectangle, shown by dotted
line in Fig. 1(d), created mathematically using FS point and
top left corner point of the original foot rectangle area. The
subsequent algorithm then considers only those contour points
of the toe that lie within this subrectangle and this is explained
subsequently. A set T represents all the points in Toe pressure
region.
T = {p(x, y)|

∀y ≤ y  ∧ f (p) = 1}.

(4)

A central point of the toe polygon of set T is obtained by
applying trapezoidal centroid as follows:
Tx =

Ty =

1
6AT
1
6AT

N
−1


(Xi + Xi+1 )(Xi Yi+1 − Xi+1 Yi )

(Yi + Yi+1 )(Xi Yi+1 − Xi+1 Yi )

(6)

i=0

where AT is the area of the polygon comprises with the points
of T. N is the cardinality of the set T or more specifically N is the
number of vertices in the polygon. Subsequently, the pressure
point of the toe region is given as
T  (Tx , Ty ).

Pressure points extraction using anthropometry of plantar surface.

(5)

i=0
N
−1


Fig. 3.

(7)

Then, we must discover the metatarsal area in order to correctly identify the pressure points for this region. Pressure points
at edges of the metatarsal area normally lie at the first and fifth
metatarsophalangeal joint [6]. Generally, the metatarsal area is
the widest area of the plantar surface, but this is not the case for
all feet. Feet are generally classified in two shapes, V-shape and
U-shape [10]. The ratio of ball width (distance from first metatarsophalangeal joint to fifth metatarsal joint) and heel width, as
shown in Fig. 2(b), changes from person to person. A large
value of the ratio indicates a V-shape foot, while a small value
indicates a U-shape foot [10]. The only difference between U
and V shape foot is that the widest part of the foot, in a V-shaped
foot always lies in the metatarsal region.
Subsequently, in a V-shape foot, the extreme edges along xaxis are the metatarsophalangeal joint, first metatarsal joint at
one side and fifth metatarsal joint on the other. In the case of a Ushaped foot, the metatarsal area is first defined as the widest part
of the plantar surface may not be the actual metatarsal region.
To address these possible errors with such feet, the metatarsal
pressure points are ascertained by using the process of foot anthropometry and the contour’s extreme points along the x-axis
and the FS. To aid algorithm speed, the same process takes place
for both V- and U-shaped feet. As the metatarsal area lies in the
forefoot area minus the toe, any extreme x-axis points lying
above and below the forefoot area are excluded for metatarsal
pressure point search. The metatarsal ROI algorithm produces
an area bounded by two dotted lines, as shown in Fig. 3. The
lower boundary is the line dividing the entire plantar surface foot

rectangle in two, perpendicular to the y-axis, while the upper
boundary is the line that passes through the FS point and again
perpendicular to that point on the y-axis across the plantar surface. The area extracted between the bounded lines is qualified
for the metatarsal pressure points search. For pressure points at
metatarsal area, a subset M of F is considered, i.e., M ⊂ F
M = {p (x, y) | ∀ y ≥ y  ∧ y
≤

max p (y) + min p (y)
∧ p (x, y) Є F }
2

(8)

where max p(y) is the highest position in vertical direction
(Y-axis) in F. Similarly, the min p(y) is the lowest position
vertically (Y-axis) in the set F.
Once the metatarsal area is defined, the extreme points of
contours are found by running the algorithm on the selected
metatarsal area. The extreme points along the x-axis represent
the first and fifth metatarsal pressure points that are associated
with the metatarsal pressure points region.
The required pressure points at metatarsal are given as
M1 (Mx1 , My 1 )|Mx1 = min(x) ∧ M1 ∈ M

(9)

M2 (Mx2 , My 2 )|Mx2 = min(x) ∧ M1 ∈ M

(10)

M3 (Mx3 , My 3 )|(M1 (Mx1 , My 1 )
+ M2 (Mx2 , My 2 ))/2 ∧ M3 ∈ M

(11)

where M1, M2, and M3 are left, right, and middle metatarsal
pressure points, respectively.
The pressure point at heel is a point in Set F with largest
y-coordinate
H(x, y)|y = max H(y) ∈ F.

(12)

Hence, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12 are the extracted pressure points,
i.e.
T  (Tx , Ty ), M1 (Mx1 , My 1 ), M2 (Mx2 , My 2 ),
M3 (Mx3 , My 3 ), H(Hx , Hy ).

(13)

SIDDIQUI et al.: AUTOMATED PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY ASSESSMENT USING OPTICAL IMAGING AND FOOT ANTHROPOMETRY

TABLE I
DATABASE AGE GROUP
Age Group

TABLE II
DATABASE ETHNICITIES

Quantity

20–25
25–30
30–35
35–40
40–45
50–70

1915

5
11
16
25
8
5

The following algorithm shows the step-by-step procedure to
find the required pressure points from the ROI’s previously described. Those specific regions namely toe (hallux), metatarsal
heads, and heel (calcaneum).
1) Obtain the foot dimension in terms of length and width
using the bounded rectangle Rec1.
2) Obtain the toe ROI by drawing a rectangle Rec2 mathematically using FS(x , y ) and the rectangle top left point
TL(XTL , YTL ) as shown in Fig. 3.
3) Draw the polygon from the toe contour points bounded
by Rec2.
4) Obtain the central point of the toe contour using a trapezoidal centroid.
5) The metatarsal region is ascertained using the foot anthropometry. Once the ROI for the metatarsal is framed, a leftmost point along the x-axis is obtained as a left metatarsal
point. Similarly, the right most point at metatarsal region is assured by discovering the point with the largest
x-coordinate of the contour.
6) Heel pressure point can be identified by finding the point
with the largest y-coordinate in contours.
To test the systems accuracy, a qualified podiatrist with over
15 years experience collaborated to compare the automated and
manual SWM pressure detection methods. Foot images from
all 70 subjects were provided and the podiatrist independently
marked what she identified as the five pressure points on each
foot. She then drew a “circle of acceptance” with a diameter of
1 cm bounding those points and each image was stored separately from the automated findings. A success was considered
when the output of the machine identified the same area (anywhere inside the podiatrists drawn circle), a failure if not.

Ethnicity
Western European
Eastern European
African
Asian
Chinese
Total

Quantity
15
11
15
20
9
70

Fig. 4. Spots in the background similar to skin tone. (a) Input image.
(b) Contours of detected plantar surface and false positive detected object in the
background. (c) Superimpose of foot image and detected foot.

Fig. 5. Unwanted skin detection proximal to the plantar surface. (a) Input
image. (b) Binary image of detected plantar and skin other than plantar surface.
(c) Incorrect detected pressure points.

III. RESULTS
A group of healthy subjects (44 male and 26 female participants with a mean age of 32.85 (±7.4) years) were selected.
The database consists of 70 images of different ethnicities, age
groups, and gender, as given in Table I and II.
In the first phase, the algorithm initially showed 96% agreement with the pressure points chosen by the podiatrist. Issues
causing the 4% failure rates were identified and are presented.
The primary failure occurs when the image processing algorithm mistakenly detects a portion of background as a part
of the object (foot), e.g., if a skin tone exists in the background, as shown in the Fig. 4(a). The actual image and the
detected edges are superimposed to help the reader visualize the

unwanted background as part of the foreground (foot) as shown
in Fig. 4(c). A controlled background mitigates such false positive detection.
This controlled background was achieved by the use of a
short range optical flat-bed scanner and reduced external lighting
conditions. Failure may also occur if skin, other than foot plantar
surface, is exposed to the scanner, as shown in Fig. 5. The
algorithm extenuates minor patches in the background similar to
plantar skin color by Gaussian blur filtering and only considers
the single large patch of plantar skin in the image.
This constraint is avoided by ensuring foot placement is performed in a straight and upright manner. This is now ensured by

1916

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Manual and automated testing time comparisons were also
evaluated. This evaluation included pressure-point detection,
manual reporting (original SWME), and result storage. The automated system proposed takes a total 47 s per foot including
data storage and email transmission. The manual SWME process takes in total 180 s per foot between viewing a foot, making
a pressure-point decision, final data handling and storage. This
does not include SWM application in either case. This clearly
shows the time and information advantages of such an automated approach.
Future research will focus on 1) adding the developed algorithm directly to the physical system architecture and 2) more
complex image processing mechanisms to substitute the foot
stop with an embedded left and right large toe groove in the
perforated sheet. In parallel with the aforementioned, lesion
recognition on the plantar surface will be performed to avoid
subsequent probe application on pressure points, where they
may overlap a lesion. The authors will consider 3G system options to account for broadband and wireless fidelity restrictions
in developing countries, making use of mobile phone and tablet
systems at practitioner sites.

Object’s (foot) patches are numbered in binary image.

IV. CONCLUSION

Fig. 7.

After dilation with visible contour boundary.

a voice activated system explaining to the user how to place their
foot correctly on the scanner and a 5-s subscan test performed.
A final cause of failure is the object, the foot in this case,
appearing as separated patches in the binary image, rooted from
poor light. Consider Fig. 6, where the toe and other foot digits,
numbered by 1, 2, 3, and 4, appear separated from the rest of
the foot image, i.e., patch 5.
The fifth patch is the largest patch and comprises a major
portion of the foot, while the rest of the patches are the separated
foot digits. The rectangle only bounds the largest patch that
represents the foot.
The combination of a dilation followed by erosion morphological operations in image processing, known as “closing,” can
be used to connect objects in a binary image that are close to
each other, or to fill the gaps in the object by using a structure
element [19].
The operation is controlled by a structure element, which is
used to “smooth” the regional boundaries without significant or
obvious changes to the area [20]. If I is a binary image and E is
a structure element, then
I • E = (I ⊕ E)  E

(14)

where ⊕ and  denote dilation and erosion, respectively. Postclosing operation reduced the number of patches without deteriorating the actual size of the foot as shown in Fig. 7.
The aforementioned proposed solutions were implemented in
a second test phase with the same participants and procedures
as before and a 100% success rate was achieved.

For the first time as far as the authors are aware, an automated pressure-point detection system for PSN assessment of a
diabetic patient’s plantar surface using an optical imaging and
foot anthropometry process is presented. The proposed method
performs a thresholding process and bounds the foot image in a
rectangle followed by contours. Plantar pressure points are then
obtained using a combined approach of optical imaging over the
HSV 3-D color space and plantar anthropometry. The algorithm
was successfully applied on 70 participants with a 100% success
result, regardless of the patient’s race, age, or gender.
REFERENCES
[1] NHS. (2012, Nov. 6). Failings in diabetes care cost thousands of lives.
[Online]. Available: http://www.nhs.uk/news/2012/11November/Pages/
Failings-in-diabetes-care-cost-thousands-of-lives.aspx
[2] N. Hex et al., “Estimating the current and future costs of Type 1 and
Type 2 diabetes in the UK, including direct health costs and indirect
societal and productivity costs,” Diabetic Med., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 855–
863, 2012.
[3] S. R. Shah and K. M. Patil, “Processing of foot pressure images and
display of an advanced clinical parameter PR in diabetic neuropathy,” in
Proc. IEEE EMBS 2nd Int. Conf. Neural Eng., Arlington, VA, USA, 2005,
pp. 56–59.
[4] C. Hile and A. Veves, “Diabetic neuropathy and microcirculation,” Current
Diabetes Rep., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 446–451, 2003.
[5] M. Bharara et al., “Thermography and thermo-metry in the assessment
of diabetic neuropathic foot: a case for furthering the role of thermal
techniques,” Int. J. Lower Extremity Wounds, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 250–260,
2006.
[6] NICE. (2014, Apr.). Pressure ulcers: Prevention and management of pressure ulcers. [Online]. Available: http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg179
resources/guidance-pressure-ulcers-prevention-and-management-of-pressure-ulcers-pdf
[7] G. M. Bove, “Mechanical sensory threshold testing using nylon monofilaments: The pain field’s ‘Tin Standard’,” Int. Assoc. Study Pain, vol. 124,
pp. 13–17, 2006.
[8] A. Agić et al., “Foot anthropometry and morphology phenomena,” Collegium Antropologicum, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 815–821, 2006.

SIDDIQUI et al.: AUTOMATED PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY ASSESSMENT USING OPTICAL IMAGING AND FOOT ANTHROPOMETRY

1917

[9] F. T. Cheng and D. B. Perng, “A systematic approach for developing a
foot size information system for shoe last design,” Int. J. Ind. Ergonom.,
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 171–185, 1999.
[10] T. G. McPoil et al., “Can foot anthropometric measurements predict dynamic plantar surface contact area?” J. Foot Ankle Res., vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 28–37, 2009.
[11] B. Y. S. Tsung et al., “Quantitative comparison of plantar foot shapes
under different weight-bearing conditions,” J. Rehab. Res. Develop.,
vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 517–526, 2003.
[12] S. C. Cobb et al., “A digital photographic measurement method for quantifying foot posture: Validity, reliability, and descriptive data,” J. Athletic
Training, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 20–30, 2011.
[13] T. G. McPoil et al., “Arch height change during sit-to-stand: An alternative
for the navicular drop test,” J. Foot Ankle Res., vol. 3, pp. 3–13, 2008.
[14] J. A. Ali et al., “A dense surface modeling technique for foot surface
imaging,” in Proc. Surveying Spatial Sci. Biennial Conf., Wellington, New
Zealand, 2011, pp. 295–302.
[15] H. Siddiqui et al., “Automated peripheral neuropathy assessment of diabetic patients using optical imaging and binary processing techniques,” in
Proc. IEEE Point-of-Care Healthcare Technol., Bangalore, India, 2013,
pp. 200–203.
[16] W. Burger and M. J. Burge, “Color images,” in Digital Image Processing:
An Algorithmic Introduction Using Java, 1st ed., vol. 1, ch. 12. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2008, pp. 239–305.
[17] P. Sebastian et al., “The effect of color space on tracking robustness,” in Proc. 3rd Conf. IEEE Ind. Electron. Appl., Singapore, 2008,
pp. 2512–2516.
[18] A. C. Frery and T. Perciano, “Image data formats and color representation,”
in Introduction to Image Processing Using R, 1st ed., vol. 1. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2013, p. 22.
[19] B. S. D. Sagar, “Mathematical morphology: An introduction,” in Mathematical Morphology in Geomorphology and GISci, 1st ed., vol. 1.
New York, NY, USA: Chapman & Hall/CR, 2013, p. 32.
[20] N. Habili et al., “Segmentation of the face and hands in sign language
video sequences using color and motion cues,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 1086–109, Aug. 2004.

Michelle Spruce received the degree in podiatry
(first-class Hons.) from the University of Southampton, Southampton, U.K. and the Doctoral degree from
the Cardiovascular Division, Kings College London,
London, U.K.
Her work was the first to study the microcirculatory link between capillary occlusion and the development of diabetic neuropathic ulceration. Excerpts
of her Ph.D. thesis were presented at both national
and international conferences. As a Research Fellow
at London South Bank University, she was the first
Podiatrist to be elected onto the National Health Service London Steering Group,
where she secured public funding for the training of Clinical Technologists to
work with lower limb amputees returning from the UK’s conflict zones. Given
her academic standing, she strives to promote Podiatry and its educational opportunities in the BRIC countries and throughout Europe under the ERASMUS
programme. Meanwhile, she continues to speak at national and international
conferences, forever championing the need for patient empowerment and technological advance in the management of diabetic complications.

Hafeez-U. R. Siddiqui (S’15) received the B.Sc.
degree in mathematics from Islamia University
Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, Pakistan, in 1998, the
M.Sc. degree in computer science from Bahauddin
Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan, in 2000, and
the Master degree in telecommunications and computer network engineering from London South Bank
University, London, U.K., in 2009, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic
engineering.
He was a Lecturer of computer science in the
Network Institute of Computer Education, from 2001 to 2006. His research interests include biomedical engineering applications, data recognition, image processing, system embedded programming, and machine
learning.

Sandra Dudley (M’11) was born in Carlow, Ireland.
She received the B.Sc. (Hons.) and Ph.D. Degrees in
physics from the University of Essex, Essex, U.K., in
1998 and 2004, respectively.
She spent two years working as a Postdoctoral
Researcher at Essex University on a British Telecom
project resulting in world record broadband-system
power consumption for last mile access. In August
2009, she joined the School of Engineering, London
South Bank University, London, U.K., as a Lecturer
and become a Principal lecturer in March 2014. Her
research interests are in physical layer system design, automated health technologies, data recognition, optical-wireless systems, and solution finding for the
broadband urban-rural divide.
Dr. Dudley is an IET and IEEE journal reviewer.

Stephen R. Alty (SM’11–M’00) received the B.Eng.
degree (Hons.) in electronic engineering from the
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., in 1992 and
the Ph.D. degree in signal processing from Liverpool
John Moores University, Liverpool, in 1998.
He was a Lecturer with Liverpool John Moores
University. In 2002, he became a Lecturer in the
Division of Engineering, King’s College London,
London, U.K. Since 2011, he has been a Senior Lecturer with the School of Engineering, London South
Bank University, London. His research interests include adaptive signal processing and machine learning with applications in
biomedical engineering and pattern recognition.
Dr. Alty is a Subscriber to the signal processing society and Engineering in
Medicine & Biology Society.

