440

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Carotid and Jugular Classification in ARTSENS
Ashish Kumar Sahani, Malay Ilesh Shah, Jayaraj Joseph, and Mohanasankar Sivaprakasam

Abstract—Over past few years our group has been working on
the development of a low-cost device, ARTSENS, for measurement of local arterial stiffness (AS) of the common carotid artery
(CCA). This uses a single element ultrasound transducer to obtain
A-mode frames from the CCA. It is designed to be fully automatic
in its operation such that, a general medical practitioner can use
the device without any prior knowledge of ultrasound modality.
Placement of the probe over CCA and identification of echo positions corresponding to its two walls are critical steps in the process
of measurement of AS. We had reported an algorithm to locate the
CCA walls based on their characteristic motion. Unfortunately,
in supine position, the internal jugular vein (IJV) expands in the
carotid triangle and pulsates in a manner that confounds the existing algorithm and leads to wrong measurements of the AS. Jugular
venous pulse (JVP), on its own right, is a very important physiological signal for diagnosis of morbidities of the right side of the
heart and there is a lack of noninvasive methods for its accurate
estimation. We integrated an ECG device to the existing hardware
of ARTSENS and developed a method based on physiology of the
vessels, which now enable us to segregate the CCA pulse (CCP)
and the JVP. False identification rate is less than 4%. To retain the
capabilities of ARTSENS to operate without ECG, we designed
another method where the classification can be achieved without
an ECG, albeit errors are a bit higher. These improvements enable
ARTSENS to perform automatic measurement of AS even in the
supine position and make it a unique and handy tool to perform
JVP analysis.
Index Terms—A-mode, arterial stiffness (AS), ARTSENS,
common carotid artery (CCA), distension, jugular vein, jugular
venous pulse (JVP), ultrasound.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR diseases (CVD) have assumed epidemic proportions in developing countries. 31% of all
deaths worldwide are caused by CVD, 80% of which occur in
developing countries [1]. CVD are asymptomatic in nature and
sometimes a heart attack is the first sign of the disease. Early
diagnosis of the CVDs can be instrumental in reversal and delay
of the disease. Arterial stiffness (AS) is a significant marker for
evaluating future risk of CVD [2]. Atherosclerosis is frequent in
the common carotid artery (CCA). Determination of AS of the
CCA can provide valuable information regarding early vascular

C

Manuscript received August 8, 2014; revised October 20, 2014; accepted
January 11, 2015. Date of current version March 3, 2016.
A. K. Sahani and M. I. Shah are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India (e-mail:
ee10d043@ee.iitm.ac.in; malay327@gmail.com).
J. Joseph is with the Healthcare Technology Innovation Centre (HTIC), Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600113, India (e-mail: jayaraj@
htic.iitm.ac.in).
M. Sivaprakasam with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India and also with the Healthcare
Technology Innovation Centre (HTIC), Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai 600113, India (e-mail: mohan@ee.iitm.ac.in).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2403283

changes that might lead to CVD in future [3], [4]. ARTSENS
(arterial stiffness evaluation for noninvasive screening) is a lowcost device that our group has been developing over past few
years to enable large scale screening of CVD [5]. Conventionally, AS is measured by using expensive ultrasound imaging
machines and requires services of a trained radiologist. These
facilities are out of reach of large parts of population in developing countries. Moreover, while there is high occurrence of
CVD in developing countries the number of trained radiologists
is very small. As per the website of medical council of India (accessed on December 2012) only about 4% of medical specialists
are trained in ultrasound while it has one of the highest rates
of occurrence of CVD [6]. A tool that can segregate patients
with higher risk of CVD, who can then be recommended for
comprehensive analysis with the conventional methods, can go
a long way in optimizing the limited cardiovascular healthcare
facilities in the developing world. ARTSENS is being designed
as a portable and low-cost system, fully automatic in its operation, to enable a general medical practitioner, without any prior
knowledge of ultrasonography, to measure the AS. ARTSENS
uses a single-element ultrasound transducer to acquire A-Mode
frames from the CCA. Feasibility of using a single-element ultrasound transducer for measurement of AS has already been
demonstrated by us [5]. The measurements obtained from ARTSENS have already been validated against a state of the art AS
measurement system [7].
In the conventional image-based systems, the radiologist finds
the artery by looking at the image feedback, and once on artery,
places software cursors to mark the proximal wall (PW) and
distal wall (DW) of the CCA. Subsequently, diameter distension
plot is obtained by automated echo-tracking methods and AS is
calculated. The manual identification of CCA walls and cursor
placement requires high degree of technical expertise and long
time to perform each measurement [8]. In ARTSENS, there is
no image and the operator is insulated from the requirement of
interpretation of the signals. This requires the system to assist
the operator in placement of the probe at the correct anatomical
location of the CCA. We had earlier demonstrated an algorithm
that could guide the operator in placement of the probe over the
CCA and identify PW and DW in A-Mode frames [9]. More
specifically the central idea was that PW and DW will produce
two relatively strong echoes adjacent to each other and moving
in opposite phase. We had assumed that in the neck, CCA is
the only structure that satisfies this condition and the algorithm
performs satisfactorily in the sitting position. However, most
clinical recommendations for measurement of AS prefer the
readings to be taken in the supine position [10]. But once the
patient lies in the supine position, the internal jugular vein (IJV),
located laterally to the CCA dilates and its walls exhibit an
opposite phase motion similar to the CCA. This confuses the
wall identification algorithm, which sometimes identifies the

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SAHANI et al.: CAROTID AND JUGULAR CLASSIFICATION IN ARTSENS

441

Fig. 1. (a) Left figure shows the anatomical positions of both CCA and the IJV. The Carotid triangle has been marked on the left side of the neck. PC indicates
the position of the probe over the CCA and P J indicates the position of the probe over the IJV. The figure on right shows the A-Mode frames obtained from CCA
and IJV. It can be seen that the echo signals have similar characteristics. Even diameters of both the vessels are in same range. (b) Left figure shows a transverse
section of the neck with the position of CCA and IJV illustrated within the carotid sheath. The figure on the right shows the ultrasound B-Mode image of the two
vessels taken in transverse view while the patient lay in the supine position. The overlaid Doppler signals show the opposite directions of movement of venous and
arterial blood flow. The relatively similar shape and dimension of both vessels can be clearly seen. Fig. 3(a) shows the diameter distension waveform (D) for the
CCA and Fig. 3(b) shows it for the IJV. In this paper, we shall use the markedly different characteristics of the two waveforms for distinguishing the two vessels.

IJV as the CCA, and gives erroneous values of AS; we refer to
this case as a false CCA detection. In this paper, we propose
an extension to the existing algorithm, to differentiate the CCA
from the IJV based on their characteristic pulsations. Wang
et al. reported an automated algorithm to classify CCA and
IJV in B-mode images, specifically designed to assist invasive
catheterization [11]. It requires both vessels to be present in
the images and classifies both structures based on their relative
morphological features. ARTSENS algorithm has to process
A-Mode RF scans, for which, their method is not applicable.
Jugular venous pulse (JVP) is known to provide valuable
insights regarding the malfunctioning of the right side of the
heart [12], [13, pp. 271], [14, Ch. 19], [15, pp. 33–39 and pp.
679–681]. Cardiologists usually perform JVP analysis by manual observation of venous pulsations visible on skin surface of
the neck. This is one of the most difficult to master physical
diagnosis [14, Ch. 19]. This examination can be particularly
challenging in obese and short-necked patients [16]. Accurate
plots for JVP can be obtained by invasive catheters coupled
with flow meters [17], [18]. In some cases, ultrasonic Doppler
methods are utilized to obtain the JVP [19]. Observation of distension tracings of IJV obtained during false CCA detection in
ARTSENS showed that, ARTSENS can easily be extended to
act as a handy tool to perform noninvasive JVP analysis. We
expanded the ARTSENS hardware by including an integrated
ECG. In this paper, we propose a method (wECG) based on
relative timings of periodic physiological events of the two ves-

sels, with respect to ECG, in order to classify their distension
waveforms. However, since ECG can add appreciable operational costs and complexity to the device, we also present a
method (nECG), which is independent of ECG that can achieve
the same objective, even if with relatively higher errors.
II. PHYSIOLOGICAL UNDERSTANDING OF THE PROBLEM
A. CCA
CCAs run on both sides of the neck and are major superficial
vessels of the neck carrying oxygenated blood to the head and
neck. Each CCA is surrounded superiorly, by the digastric muscle, inferiorly, by the omohyoid muscle and posteriorly, by the
sternocleidomastoid muscle, which together form the carotid
triangle [20, pp. 563–564] [see Fig. 1(a)]. CCA can be located
by moving the probe in the carotid triangle. It distends with
left-ventricular pressure variations. CCA distension has a very
fast upstroke and relatively slow relaxation [see Fig. 3(a)].
B. IJV
IJV drains deoxygenated blood back from the face, neck, and
brain to the heart. It runs laterally parallel to the CCA. It is
contained in the carotid sheath and is closer to sternocleidomastoid muscle compared to the CCA [20, pp. 648–649]. Fig. 1(b)
clearly shows the position of both the CCA and IJV inside
the carotid sheath. Circulation of blood in veins is generally

442

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the current processing system of ARTSENS. This figure provides a fairly detailed software flowchart for steps after the identification
of vessel walls. Blocks explained in this paper are highlighted (dashed lines). Section III provides a detailed explanation of the blocks.

nonpulsatile in nature but changes in pressure owing to right
atrial and ventricular filling produce pulsations in the IJV. JVP
is a fairly accurate indication of right atrial pressure variations.
Right atrial pressure wave, generally, has slow rises, often of
low amplitudes, but rapid and appreciable fall [see Fig. 3(b)].
Ideally, JVP wave has four positive peaks (a, c, v, and h) and
two valleys (x and y) out of which c and h peaks may not be
distinctly visible in many cases [14], [15, pp. 33–35]. Modifications in relative amplitude of these peaks and valleys can
provide significant clues into abnormalities of the right side of
the heart.

the plane of vision where IJV is located and places the probe
so that only a longitudinal section of the CCA is visible. But,
ARTSENS being an imageless system of measurement of AS,
must possess the capability to automatically distinguish between
CCA and IJV. The echoes from the two vessels are so similar
that it is not possible to distinguish them only by looking at
the ultrasound frames [see Fig. 1(a)]. But once we observe the
diameter distension waveforms [see Fig. 3, Fig. 4(a), Fig. 5(a)]
for both the vessels, we see distinct differences between their
pulsations, which can be exploited to classify them separately.
III. ARTSENS SYSTEM BLOCKS

C. Why Does it Interfere With Measurement?
Normal IJV pressure, as determined by the vertical distance
of venous collapse above the midpoint of the right atrium, is
about 6–8 cm H2 O [14, Ch. 19]. In sitting posture, IJV pressure
is generally lower than the level of the carotid triangle and IJV
remains collapsed and nonpulsating. But when the patient is in
supine position, IJV pressure rises above the carotid triangle
and it expands to take a large circular shape in the carotid sheath
[see Fig. 1(b)] [16, Figs. 4 and 5] whose diameter changes
proportional to the arterial pressure. When the ultrasound beam
is directed into the carotid triangle, there is a high probability
that we hit the two walls of the IJV. With a similar diameter [see
Fig. 1(a)] and out of phase pulsating characteristics of its two
walls, the current algorithm for wall detection [9] sometimes
mistakes it for the CCA and starts the tracking of IJV walls,
which leads to wrong estimation of the AS in supine position. In
the traditional systems for measurement of AS, an experienced
operator guided by the in vivo B-Mode image sequence avoids

ARTSENS uses custom made hardware blocks that drive the
single-element transducer with a center frequency of 5 MHz
and having a narrow beam width. The transducer is driven
by high-voltage pulses of 150 V with a narrow pulsewidth of
100 ns. After firing each pulse, the received echoes are sampled at 100 MHz using a high-speed digitizer (NI USB-5133,
National Instruments) for about 52 μs to form one frame of
data, which equivalently gives us a depth of vision of nearly
40 mm; 1 mm has about 130 sample points. Pulse is repeated
every 12 ms, hence, we get about 83 frames per second. We integrated a 3-lead ECG into the ARTSENS hardware, designed
around ADS1292R (Analog front-end for biopotential measurements from Texas Instruments). The ECG signals are sampled
at 500 Hz. Software wrappers have been written in C to synchronize the timing of ultrasound frames and ECG data.
Once the frames are acquired, they first undergo the wall
detection process as explained by us in our earlier work [9]. If
the algorithm locks on to a pair of echoes, it can be from one of

SAHANI et al.: CAROTID AND JUGULAR CLASSIFICATION IN ARTSENS

443

Fig. 3. This figure shows the distension cycle obtained from (a) CCA and (b) IJV with simultaneously recorded ECG signals. Cycles are sliced according to
locations of ECG R-peaks. d0 is the value of first element of extracted cycle D 0 . A threshold line (T) is drawn between (rp , d0 ) and (rp + 1 , d0 ). CCP spends
most of its time period in positive side of T, while JVP remains in the negative side of T for most part of its time period.

the positions marked in Fig. 1(a), i.e., one of the vessels among
CCA and IJV. At this stage, we are not sure whether the vessel
is CCA or IJV. After identification of the walls, we trace the
diameter distension waveform (D) (see Fig. 3) by echo-tracking
of PW and DW [5]. Unlike distension traces obtained using
video image analysis, smooth and high resolution distension
waveforms can be obtained by tracking the echoes over the
RF frame sequences [21]. All distension traces shown in this
paper are unfiltered. The sampling rate of D is equal to the
frame rate of the system, i.e., 83 Hz. It has been shown that
all significant energy of a cardiac pulse waveform is contained
within 10 Hz [22], [23]; thus, as per Nyquist criterion, 83 Hz is
more than sufficient for faithful representation of the distension
waveform. We analyze D using wECG or nECG to classify the
distension cycles. We keep tracking until we have at least one
full cycle of distension. Both the methods slice the waveforms
into individual cycles and store them into separate arrays. The
ARTSENS software displays the extracted CCPs and JVPs in
separate panes to the operator, in real time. Arterial distensibility
is given by (1) [24]. Blood pressure is normally measured from
the brachial artery [2] using standard sphygmomanometer.
ΔD
distensibility =
ΔP × Dd
ΔD = Systolic diameter − Diastolic diameter
ΔP = Systolic pressure − Diastolic pressure
Dd = End − Diastolic lumen diameter.

TABLE I
CONTRASTING CHARACTERISTICS OF JVP AND CCP
(a)

(b)
(c)

In the JVP, a-wave occurs before the carotid upstroke and just after
the p-wave of the ECG whereas c-wave of IJV occurs
simultaneously with the upstroke of the CCA [see 14, Ch. 19].
Upstroke of CCA, happens few tens of milliseconds after the R-peak
of the ECG [see Fig. 3(a)]. Thus, peak of R-wave of ECG occurs
temporally very close to the maximum value of JVP, somewhere
between a-wave and c-wave [13, Fig. 16.4] [see Fig. 3(b)].
R-peak is also very close to the end diastolic valley of CCP, which is
also its minimum value (see Fig. 3)[15, Fig. 30.19].
In clinical examination, the IJV can be recognized from its dominant
inward movement while CCP shows a single sharp outward
movement [12], [13, p. 274]. In other words, in IJV, contraction is
faster than dilation while CCA has much faster dilation than
contraction.

of ARTSENS with vessel classification algorithms presented in
more detail. The parts of the software explained in this paper
are highlighted.
IV. VESSEL CLASSIFICATION WITH ECG
In this section, we shall explain in detail the steps involved in
wECG method of vessel classification. This involves first slicing
D into individual cardiac cycles followed by analysis of the
pulses to classify them as CCP or JVP. All classification methods
explained in this paper are based on contrasting characteristics
of JVP and CCP enlisted in Table I.

(1)

Both wECG and nECG extract multiple CCPs from D. ΔDi is
the difference between the maximum and minimum amplitude
of the ith CCP. ΔD is given as the median of all these measurements. ΔD is recalculated after arrival of every new CCP.
We continue the tracing of D until ΔD converges to a value and
does not change appreciably over multiple cycles. The detailed
procedure of calculation of AS has been explained in detail in
our past works [5], [25]. Fig. 2 shows the overall block diagram

A. Waveform Slicing
ECG R-peaks are detected by the method similar to the one
described in [26]. We extract individual cardiac cycles by slicing
D at R-Peaks. Let pth R-peak occurs at the time corresponding to
sample number rp of D and (p + 1) th R-peak occurs at the time
corresponding to sample number rp+1 of D. We extract the cycle
(D0 ) between rp and rp+1 . Suppose, D (rp ) = d0 then, we draw
a threshold line T between the points (rp , d0 ) and (rp+1 , d0 ).

444

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

As per argument (a) provided in Table I, if D0 is JVP, then it
will spend more than half of its time period below T, and as per
argument (b), CCP will spend more than half of its time period
above it.
r p + 1 −r p +1

NN =



1 ∀D0 (i) < d0

(2a)

1 ∀D0 (i) ≥ d0

(2b)

i=1
r p + 1 −r p +1

NP =


i=1

DC = NP /(rP +1 − rP + 1)
If DC > 0.5

(2c)

then, D0 is the CCA pulse, else it is JVP
B. Confirmation Check for CCA
With the binary classification strategy explained in last Section IV-A, motion artifacts will also get classified as CCP or
JVP. We introduce another layer of check based on the argument (c) enlisted in Table I. General observation of CCP shows
that CCA has extremely fast expansion; the rising slope is at
least twice that of falling slope. For JVP, albeit, there are no
extreme differences in rising and falling slopes but, in almost all
cases magnitude of falling slope is higher than the rising slope.
If D0 was found to be CCP, we first find the sample number
(Q), where it has the maximum value. We divide D0 into two
halves from Q.
Dl = {D0 (1) , D0 (2) , . . . , D0 (Q)}

(3a)

Dr = {D0 (Q + 1), D0 (Q + 2) , . . . ,
D0 (rP +1 − rP + 1)}.

(3b)

We find the rising slope (Sr ) as the magnitude of slope of the
line (Lr )drawn from minimum to maximum point in Dl . Falling
slope (Sf ) was found as the magnitude of slope of the line (Lf )
drawn from maximum to minimum point in Dr . If Sr < 2 ∗ Sf ,
then we ignore the waveform, else we classify it as the CCP.
C. Confirmation Check for IJV
If D0 was found to be IJV, we first find the sample number
(U ) where it has the minimum value. We divide D0 into two
halves from U.
Dl = {D0 (1) , D0 (2) , . . . , D0 (U )}

(4a)

Dr = {D0 (U + 1), D0 (U + 2) , . . . ,
D0 (rP +1 − rP + 1)}.

V. CCA DETECTION WITHOUT ECG
We want to retain the capability of ARTSENS to measure AS
even in the absence of ECG for the following reasons:
1) ECG requires additional probes to be connected to the
patient that will increase the complexity and the cost of
the device;
2) ECG connections will increase the time required for each
measurement;
3) connection of conductive materials to the patient’s body
will now require additional safety features to be built into
the system;
4) it is desirable to maintain the basic functionality of ARTSENS to measure AS even without ECG and maintain
backward compatibility of latest software with the data
obtained from previous clinical studies [7].
In this section, we explain another algorithm (nECG) that can
perform the vessel classification without ECG. In the absence of
ECG, we do not have any explicit marker of beginning or of the
end of the cycles. Slicing D into individual cardiac cycles
 might

be performed by looking at zero crossings (ZCs) of D − D̄ .
But D is only quasi periodic due to heart rate variability. Simple
ZC detection on entire signal fails due to following reasons:
1) D has a variable mean due to breathing (see Figs. 4 and
5);
2) D can show abrupt changes of mean owing to operator
hand motion (see Fig. 4).
A. Waveform Slicing
To get over the problem of variable mean, we extract only
short time sections of 1.5 s from the distension waveform for
processing. The mean can be assumed to be static in this short
time section. 1.5 s are enough to capture at least one full cardiac
cycle. To segregate the cycles present in this window, we first
mean subtract this window of data to obtain the array D0 (see
Figs. 4 and 5), and then, find the positive and negative ZCs,
which are then stored in P and N arrays, respectively.
P = [p1 , p2 , p3 , . . .] and N = [n1 , n2 , n3 , . . .].

In most cases, cutting the D0 between successive points of P
or N should give us complete cardiac cycles. But, for CCP, there
might be cases in which the dicrotic notch lies on the mean line,
and thus, contributes to ZCs. Similarly, in case of IJV waveform,
there might be cases where the v-wave contributes to ZCs. We
remove these ZCs by employing a strategy based on argument
(c) listed in Table I. Magnitude of slope at any given point r on
the distension waveform D is given by
s (r) = |D (r + 1) − D(r)| .

(4b)

We find the rising slope (Sr ) as the magnitude of slope of
the line (Lr )drawn from minimum to maximum point in Dr .
Falling slope (Sf ) was found as the magnitude of slope of the
line (Lf )drawn from maximum to minimum point in Dl . If
Sr > Sf , then we ignore the waveform, else we classify it as
the JVP.

(5)

(6)

We find the absolute value of slopes at positive and negative
ZCs and store them in arrays Sp and SN , respectively, (7a) and
(7b). Let the maximum value of Sp be Mp and the maximum
value of SN be MN .
Sp = [s (p1 ) , s (p2 ) , s (p3 ) , . . .]

(7a)

SN = [s (n1 ) , s (n2 ) , s (n3 ) , . . .].

(7b)

SAHANI et al.: CAROTID AND JUGULAR CLASSIFICATION IN ARTSENS

445

Fig. 4. (a) Top figure shows the distension waveform (D) obtained from the CCA. The changes in mean level of distension owing to breathing and operator hand
motion can be clearly seen. (b) To illustrate the vessel identification algorithm, a 1.5-s window of data is shown in expanded view (bottom left). This window of
data is mean subtracted (D 0 ). The derivative of the distension waveform has been indicated within the window (in red). The positive and negative ZCs have been
indicated. Analyzing the slopes at ZCs, maximum absolute slope (M P ) is at the positive ZC, p 1 . Thus, we shall only extract a positive cycle from this window;
negative ZCs are not considered. Only p 1 and p 3 are accepted as valid ZCs as the amplitude of magnitude of slopes are greater than M P /2 for these points. (c)
We extract the positive cycle between p 1 and p 3 (bottom right). We draw a line S r from the beginning to maximum point of the cycle and S f from maximum to
the minimum point of the cycle. If magnitude of slope of S r is at least twice the magnitude of slope of S f , then we classify the cycle as CCP, else if the magnitude
of slope of S r is less than the magnitude of slope of S f , then we classify it as the JVP.

Fig. 5. (a) Top figure shows the distension waveform (D) obtained from the IJV (top). (b) To illustrate the vessel identification algorithm, a 1.5-s window of
data is shown in expanded view (bottom left). This window of data is mean subtracted (D 0 ). The derivative of the distension waveform has been indicated within
the window (in red). The positive and negative ZCs have been indicated. Analyzing the slopes at ZCs, we find that maximum absolute slope (M n ) is at the
negative ZC, n 1 . Thus, we will only extract a negative cycle from this window; positive ZCs are not considered. Only n 1 and n 2 are accepted as valid ZCs as
the magnitude of slope is greater than M N /2 at these locations. (c) We extract the negative cycle between n 1 and n 2 (bottom right). We draw a line S f from the
beginning to minimum point of the cycle and S r from minimum to the maximum point of the cycle. If the magnitude of slope of S r is less than the magnitude
of slope of S f , then we classify the cycle as JVP, else if magnitude of slope of S r is at least twice the magnitude of slope of S f , then we classify it as the
CCP.

If MP > MN , then, most probably, the window contains
distension cycles from the CCA and almost all positive ZCs
are at the systolic rise. Systolic rise is the longest straight
segment with minimal undulations (see Fig. 4); we can cut
the cycles more precisely in this region. In diastolic fall region, there might be another positive ZC at the dicrotic notch.

We remove that by deleting any positive ZCs from P array,
which have a slope magnitude less than Mp /2. Finally, we
are left with only the ZCs due to the systolic rise. We slice
the waveform between the ZCs to get the full cardiac cycles. We call such wave forms as the positive cycles (see
Fig. 4).

446

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

If MN > MP , then, most probably, the window contains distension cycles from the IJV and most of the negative ZCs are
due to c to x descent, which is often the longest and steepest
straight segment in the distension waveform (see Fig. 5). We
can cut the cycles more precisely in this region. In v to y region,
there might be another negative ZC. We remove that by deleting
any negative ZCs from N, which have a slope magnitude less
than MN /2. Finally, we are left with only the ZCs due to the
c to x descent. We slice the waveform between the ZCs to get
the full cardiac cycle. We call such waveforms as the negative
cycles (see Fig. 5). Normally resting heart rate does not exceed
150 per min [15, p. 31]; any cycle with duration less than 0.4 s
are rejected.
Slope of y to h region sometimes might be little more than the
slope from c to x region; this can lead to extraction of positive
cycles from the IJV. Apart from that, cycle cutting is done on the
basis of single point derivative (6) that might have occasional
errors due to motion artifacts. A further analysis of the positive
and negative cycles, based on overall slope of waveform is
necessary to classify the vessel as IJV or the CCA.
B. Vessel Classification
Once the cardiac cycles are extracted, we make a final judgment about their being from the CCA or the IJV. On the positive
cycles, we draw two lines, Sr from beginning of cycle to maximum value and Sf from the maximum to the minimum value
of the cycle [see Fig. 5 (bottom right)]. For negative cycles, Sf
is placed from beginning of cycle to the minimum point and Sr
is from the minimum point to the maximum point [see Fig. 5
(bottom right)]. As per arguments provided in Sections IV-B
and IV-C, if magnitude of slope of Sr is at least twice that of
magnitude of slope of Sf , then we classify the cycle as CCP. If
magnitude of slope of Sf is less than magnitude of slope of Sr ,
then we classify the cycle as JVP.
Magnitude of slope of a to x fall is generally higher than
magnitude of slope of slope of x to a rise but, these magnitudes
are sometimes not as strikingly different as we see in case of
rising and falling slopes of the CCA. Thus, we can have good
confidence for the CCA classification but IJV identification has
weaker confidence in this method, which might lead to higher
false detections of the IJV. In wECG, we had a double-layer
check for avoiding mistakes in identification.
VI. VALIDATION OF THE ALGORITHM
A. Simulation Tests
To validate the performance of the algorithm, we generated
simulated distension waveforms of the IJV and CCA with various artifacts observed in practice. Distension waveforms for
both IJV and CCA were obtained from a volunteer. A subsequence with 16 distension cycles was selected from each of the
waveforms such that, all of them have minimal difference in
mean and amplitude (see Fig. 6). The performance of the algorithms was characterized on the basis of total correct detections
(CD), total undetected cycles (TU), and total false detections
(FD). CD are the cases where the waveforms are classified cor-

rectly. FD are the cases where a non CCA cycle is classified as
CCP or a non IJV cycle is detected as the JVP. TU is given by
TU = Total cycles (16 here) − CD − FD.

(8)

Higher values of TU deteriorate the speed and ease of measurement as it takes longer to reach convergence of ΔD. Higher
FD deteriorates both speed and accuracy of the system due to
admission of spurious values of ΔDi . However, higher value of
TU is preferred over higher value of FD.
To simulate thebreathing
artifact, we added a sinusoid of

a fixed frequency 17 Hz and different amplitudes to the base
distension waveforms (see Table II, row 1 and row 3). Operator
hand motion sometimes introduces sudden shift in the overall
mean of signal. This was simulated by adding a sequence of
step signals at different times to the distension waveforms (see
Table II, row 2 and row 4). An IJV can be compressed by applying pressure. Amplitude of its distension can change slowly
due to breathing and suddenly due to change in applied pressure
by operator (see Table II, row 5 and row 6). Finally, an operator
might switch from CCA to IJV or vice versa during the course of
probe movement; we simulate this case by concatenating both
the distension waveforms (see Table II, row 7).
Excellent performance of the wECg algorithm is immediately
apparent from Table II. There were no false detections and only
a single undetected cycle in case of very severe motion artifacts. nECG has relatively higher number of undetected cycles
but has very satisfactory performance and rare false detections
during severe breathing artifacts. These can be easily overcome
by ensuring normal relaxed breathing during the course of measurement.
B. Volunteer Trials
We evaluated the performance of the algorithm on data obtained from vessels of 16 human volunteers. None of them had
any prior history of cardiovascular morbidity. Study was done
in conformity with WMA declaration of Helsinki; written informed consents were obtained from all subjects.
We obtained long ultrasound frame sequences from both CCA
and IJV of all volunteers. Simultaneous ECG data were obtained
for each record. ECG was recorded only during the tracking
period after the successful wall detection (see Fig. 2). The maximum number of cardiac cycles cannot exceed the number of
R-peaks in the ECG during this period, we denote this as NT .
The software performs an automatic classification of CCPs and
JVPs. The decision of correctness or error in automatic classification is done by an experienced operator by manual observation of all classified cycles. Total number of correctly detected
CCPs are given by NC C and total number of correctly classified JVPs is given by NC J . Thus, total number of correctly
detected cycles is given by NT C = NC C + NC J . Number of
non CCA cycles that are falsely classified as CCPs is given by
NF C . Number of non IJV cycles that are falsely classified as
JVPs is given by NF J . Thus, total number of false detections
is given by NT F = NF C + NF J . False detections can include
valid cardiac cycles, which were incorrectly classified by the
algorithm as well as distorted cycles due to hand motion and

SAHANI et al.: CAROTID AND JUGULAR CLASSIFICATION IN ARTSENS

447

Fig. 6. (a) This figure shows the CCA distension subsequence, having 16 cycles, extracted from the distension waveform obtained from a volunteer. (b) This
figure shows the IJV distension subsequence, having 16 cycles, extracted from the distension waveform obtained from the same volunteer. These subsequences
are carefully chosen to have very small intercycle mean and amplitude variation. These are used for generating simulated waveforms enlisted in Table II.
TABLE II
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF SIMULATION STUDIES

breathing. There might be cases where the algorithm is not able
to classify the cycles as belonging to either of the vessels. These
undetected cycles are not displayed to the operator. Total number of undetected cycles is given by NU = NT − NT C − NT F .
We obtain AS by using the median of ΔD obtained from all detected CCA cycles. As discussed in Section IV-A, higher NU
and NT F might lead to lower convergence rate and may require
longer time to obtain accurate readings. Percentage values for
correct, false, and undetected cycles are given by PT C , PT F ,
and PT U , respectively, (9a). Percentage error in CCP classification is given by PF C and percentage error in JVP classification
is given by PF J , (9b).

PT C =

NT C × 100
NT

PT F =

NT F × 100
NU × 100
, PT U =
NT
NT

(9a)

PF C =

NF C
× 100
NC C + N F C

PF J =

NF J
× 100.
NC J + N F J

(9b)

Fig. 7. Illustrates the performance of both wECG and nECg
methods on each volunteer dataset. Overall performance across
all datasets is listed in Table III. Both wECG and nECg classify
more than 78% of the waveforms correctly. Each dataset had
many regions of operator hand motion and breathing artifacts
where even manual classification of cycles were difficult; these
were however included while counting NT . Thus, more than
78% correct detection rate is very satisfactory performance.
The cardinal detrimental factor in accurate measurement of AS,
PT F , is less than 8% in both methods. As expected, wECG
has much lower PT F compared to nECG due to double-layered
checking. False detections of JVP is higher compared to false
detections of CCP in both methods. This was expected as JVP
has a weaker condition of classification, owing to relatively

448

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 7. This figure compares the relative performance of wECG and nECG for data obtained from 16 Volunteers. All datasets have more than 200 cycles per
measurement. High correct detection rates for both nECG and wECG is immediately apparent. wECG has lower false rate than nECG in most cases.
TABLE III
OVERALL PERFORMANCE OF WECG AND NECG

nECG
wECG

PT C

PT F

PT U

PF C

PF J

78.1
83.3

7.8
3.7

14.0
13.0

7.7
2.6

11.1
6.3

X̄ = m ean value of Xfor all volunteer datasets.

correctly detect the CCP even in morbid cases. Certain abnormalities such as tricuspid regurgitation characterized by prominent v-waves, and tricuspid stenosis producing giant a-waves
[13, p. 278] might confound wECG and nECG to reject the JVP.
D is always displayed to the operator along with ECG (if available) where he/she can manually observe the JVP cycles, even
if algorithm is unable to classify them automatically.
We had earlier demonstrated a method for automatic measurement of the diameter of the CCA in ARTSENS [27]. The
same method works without any issues to estimate the diameter
of the IJV. Donahue et al. had shown that IJV diameter can
be used to predict central venous pressure (CVP) [28]. Diameter measurement coupled with vessel classification algorithms
discussed in this paper might enable ARTSENS to make approximate estimate of CVP.
VII. CONCLUSION

Fig. 8. This figure shows the diameter distension waveforms recorded from
the IJV of one volunteer. (a) Top figure shows the classification done by nECG
and (b) bottom figure shows the classification done by wECG. CCPs and JVPs
identified by the algorithms are indicated by different shades while unidentified
regions are left unshaded. There is a severe motion artifact between 7000 and
12500 ms, which were successfully rejected by both the algorithms. nECG
made one mistake at the onset of the hand motion at 7000 ms, when it wrongly
classified a JVP as a CCP.

smaller difference in magnitude of rising and falling slopes,
compared to CCP. Fig. 8 shows a short time segment of a typical
distension waveform obtained from CCA of a volunteer and the
visual output of automatic classification performed by wECG
and nECG.
In almost all cases, including pathological, the carotid pulse
has brisk upstroke and gradual down stroke [14, Ch. 20]. Hence,
assumptions made for wECG and nECG [see Table I, argument
(c)] hold true for all expected CCPs, thus they should be able to

In this paper, we illustrated two methods, wECG and nECG,
to enable ARTSENS to distinguish CCA from the IJV. We developed an algorithm—wECG that works with the upgraded
hardware of ARTSENS, extended to include an integrated ECG;
it could correctly classify the vessels with a false detection rate
of less than 4%. To enable ARTSENS to perform AS measurement without ECG, we presented another algorithm, nECG,
which could classify the vessels by analyzing the distension
waveforms sans ECG. wECG and nECG have comparative correct detection rates but false detection rate is relatively higher for
nECG. Both methods are resistant to motion and breathing artifacts, which was confirmed by appropriate simulation studies.
These classification methodologies will now enable ARTSENS
to accurately measure AS, fully automatically, in both sitting and
supine position of the patient. Additionally, the vessel classification algorithms now enable ARTSENS to noninvasively acquire
accurate JVP, which can be employed to predict morbidities of
right side of the heart. This makes ARTSENS a unique noninvasive tool for monitoring cardiovascular health, completely
automatic in its operation. Although the methods reported in this
study are specifically designed for ARTSENS, we believe that
with few modifications, these can be ported to the conventional
B-Mode image-based AS measurement systems, which process
the RF signals [29].

SAHANI et al.: CAROTID AND JUGULAR CLASSIFICATION IN ARTSENS

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. S. Suresh of MediScan Systems, Chennai, India, for providing authors access to
the ultrasound facilities at his hospital, which helped them in
identification of this problem and Dr. S. Gnanasambandam, Associate Professor of pediatric cardiology, Madras Medical College, Chennai, India, for his valuable inputs on physiology of
the IJV.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Mendis, P. Puska, and B. Norrving, “Global atlas on cardiovascular disease prevention and control,” World Heart Federation, Geneva, Switzerland, 2011.
[2] D. K. Arnett, G. W. Evans, and W. A. Riley, “Arterial stiffness:
Anew cardiovascular risk factor?” Amer. J. Epidemiol., vol. 140, no. 8,
pp. 669–682, 1994.
[3] N. M. van Popele, D. E. Grobbee, M. L. Bots, R. Asmar, J. Topouchian,
R. S. Reneman, A. P. G. Hoeks, D. A. M. van der Kuip, A. Hofman, and
J. C. M. Witteman, “Association between arterial stiffness and atherosclerosis: The rotterdam study,” Stroke, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 454–460, Feb.
2001.
[4] D. Liao, D. K. Arnett, H. A. Tyroler, W. A. Riley, L. E. Chambless,
M. Szklo, and G. Heiss, “Arterial stiffness and the development of hypertension: The ARIC study,” Hypertension, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 201–206,
Aug. 1999.
[5] J. Joseph and V. Jayashankar, “A virtual instrument for automated
measurement of arterial compliance,” J. Med. Devices, vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 45004-1–45004-13, 2010.
[6] R. Gupta, A. Misra, P. Pais, P. Rastogi, and V. P. Gupta, “Correlation
of regional cardiovascular disease mortality in India with lifestyle and
nutritional factors,” Int. J. Cardiol., vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 291–300, Apr.
2006.
[7] J. Joseph, E. A. Thomas, M. Sivaprakasam, and S. Suresh, “ARTSENSAn image-free system for noninvasive evaluation of arterial compliance,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 4054–4057.
[8] S. Laurent, J. Cockcroft, L. Van Bortel, P. Boutouyrie, C. Giannattasio,
D. Hayoz, B. Pannier, C. Vlachopoulos, I. Wilkinson, and H. StruijkerBoudier, “Expert consensus document on arterial stiffness: methodological issues and clinical applications,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 27, no. 21,
pp. 2588–2605, 2006.
[9] A. K. Sahani, J. Joseph, and S. Mohanasankar, “Evaluation of the algorithm for automatic identification of the common carotid artery in ARTSENS,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 35, no. 7, p. 1299, 2014.
[10] L. M. Van Bortel, D. Duprez, M. J. Starmans-Kool, M. E. Safar, C. Giannattasio, J. Cockcroft, D. R. Kaiser, and C. Thuillez, “Clinical applications of
arterial stiffness, Task Force III: Recommendations for user procedures,”
Amer. J. Hypertens., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 445–452, 2002.
[11] D. Wang, R. Klatzky, and B. Wu, “Fully automated common carotid
artery and internal jugular vein identification and tracking using B-mode
ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1691–1699,
Jun. 2009.
[12] K. Chatterjee, C. M. Otto, and S. B. Yeon, “Examination of the jugular
venous pulse,” UpToDate, vol. 17, p. 2, 2009.

449

[13] B. N. V. R. Rao, Clinical Examination in Cardiology, 1st ed. Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2007.
[14] H. K. Walker, W. Hall, and J. Hurst, Clinical Methods: The History,
Physical, and Laboratory Examinations, 3rd ed. Boston, MA, USA: Butterworths, 1990.
[15] J. T. Willerson, J. N. Cohn, H. J. J. Wellens, and D. R. Holmes, Cardiovascular Medicine, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2000.
[16] T. Jang, C. Aubin, R. Naunheim, and D. Char, “Ultrasonography of the
internal jugular vein in patients with dyspnea without jugular venous
distention on physical examination,” Ann. Emerg. Med., vol. 44, no. 2,
pp. 160–168, 2004.
[17] I. T. Gabe, J. H. Gault, J. Ross, D. T. Mason, C. J. Mills, J. P. Schillingford,
and E. Braunwald, “Measurement of instantaneous blood flow velocity and
pressure in conscious man with a catheter-tip velocity probe,” Circulation,
vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 603–614, 1969.
[18] G. A. Brecher, “Cardiac variations in venous return studied with a new
bristle flowmeter,” Amer. J. Physiol. Content, vol. 176, no. 3, pp. 423–430,
1954.
[19] V. Sivaciyan and N. Ranganathan, “Transcutaneous doppler jugular venous flow velocity recording,” Circulation, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 930–939,
1978.
[20] H. Gray, Anatomy of the Human Body, 20th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Lea & Febiger, 1918.
[21] R. Stadler, J. A. Taylor, and R. Lees, “Comparison of B-mode, M-mode
and echo-tracking methods for measurement of the arterial distension
waveform,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 879–887, 1997.
[22] M. Karamanoglu, “An analysis of the relationship between central aortic
and peripheral upper limb pressure waves in man,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 14,
pp. 160–167, 1993.
[23] C.-H. Chen, C.-T. Ting, A. Nussbacher, E. Nevo, D. A. Kass, P. Pak,
S.-P. Wang, M.-S. Chang, and F. C. P. Yin, “Validation of carotid artery
tonometry as a means of estimating augmentation index of ascending
aortic pressure,” Hypertension, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 168–175, Feb. 1996.
[24] J. Oliver and D. Webb, “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness and
risk of atherosclerotic events,” Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 554–566, 2003.
[25] A. K. Sahani, J. Joseph, and M. Sivaprakasam, “Automated system for
imageless evaluation of arterial compliance,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 227–231.
[26] M. S. Manikandan and K. P. Soman, “A novel method for detecting
R-peaks in electrocardiogram (ECG) signal,” Biomed. Signal Process.
Control, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 118–128, 2012.
[27] A. K. Sahani, J. Joseph, and M. Sivaprakasam, “Automatic measurement
of lumen diameter of carotid artery in A-Mode ultrasound,” in Proc. IEEE
35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 3873–3876.
[28] S. P. Donahue, J. P. Wood, B. M. Patel, and J. V Quinn, “Correlation of
sonographic measurements of the internal jugular vein with central venous
pressure,” Amer. J. Emerg. Med., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 851–855, 2009.
[29] P. J. Brands, A. P. G. Hoeks, J. Willigers, C. Willekes, and R. S. Reneman,
“An integrated system for the non-invasive assessment of vessel wall and
hemodynamic properties of large arteries by means of ultrasound,” Eur. J.
Ultrasound, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 257–266, 1999.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

