1246

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

We Feel: Mapping Emotion on Twitter
Mark E. Larsen, Tjeerd W. Boonstra, Philip J. Batterham, Bridianne O’Dea, Cecile Paris, and Helen Christensen

Abstract—Research data on predisposition to mental health
problems, and the fluctuations and regulation of emotions,
thoughts, and behaviors are traditionally collected through surveys, which cannot provide a real-time insight into the emotional
state of individuals or communities. Large datasets such as World
Health Organization (WHO) statistics are collected less than once
per year, whereas social network platforms, such as Twitter, offer the opportunity for real-time analysis of expressed mood. Such
patterns are valuable to the mental health research community,
to help understand the periods and locations of greatest demand
and unmet need. We describe the “We Feel” system for analyzing
global and regional variations in emotional expression, and report
the results of validation against known patterns of variation in
mood. 2.73 × 109 emotional tweets were collected over a 12-week
period, and automatically annotated for emotion, geographic location, and gender. Principal component analysis (PCA) of the data
illustrated a dominant in-phase pattern across all emotions, modulated by antiphase patterns for “positive” and “negative” emotions.
The first three principal components accounted for over 90% of the
variation in the data. PCA was also used to remove the dominant
diurnal and weekly variations allowing identification of significant
events within the data, with z-scores showing expression of emotions over 80 standard deviations from the mean. We also correlate
emotional expression with WHO data at a national level and although no correlations were observed for the burden of depression,
the burden of anxiety and suicide rates appeared to correlate with
expression of particular emotions.
Index Terms—Mental health, sentiment analysis, twitter.

I. INTRODUCTION
VERY year, a wealth of information is published by the
academic community on mental health and wellbeing,
including key research questions on predisposition to mental
health problems based on various individual and demographic

E

Manuscript received September 28, 2014; revised November 28, 2014; accepted February 6, 2015. Date of publication February 13, 2015; date of current
version July 23, 2015. This work was supported in part by the NSW Mental
Health Commissioner, Mr. J. Feneley, by CSIRO, and by the Black Dog Institute. The work of M. E. Larsen was supported by the NHMRC Centre of
Research Excellence in Suicide Prevention 1042580.The work of T. W. Boonstra was supported by NWO Fellowship 45110030. The work of P. J. Batterham
was supported by NHMRC Fellowship 1035262. The work of H. Christensen
was supported by NHMRC Fellowship 1056964.
M. E. Larsen, B. O’Dea, and H. Christensen are with the Black Dog Institute,
Randwick NSW 2031, Australia, and also with the University of New South
Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail: mark.larsen@blackdog.org.au;
b.odea@blackdog.org.au; h.christensen@blackdog.org.au).
T. W. Boonstra is with the Black Dog Institute, Hospital Road, Randwick
NSW 2031, Australia, and also with the University of New South Wales, Sydney
NSW 2052, Australia and with the MOVE Research Institute, VU University,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands (e-mail: t.boonstra@unsw.edu.au).
P. J. Batterham is with the National Institute for Mental Health Research,
The Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200, Australia (e-mail:
philip.batterham@anu.edu.au).
C. Paris is with the CSIRO, Marsfield NSW 2122, Australia (e-mail:
cecile.paris@csiro.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2403839

factors (such as age, gender, area of residence, and profession)
and the fluctuations and regulation of emotions, thoughts, and
behaviors. Traditionally these data are collected through surveys, which cannot provide a real-time insight into the emotional state of individuals, communities or the global community. Sources of data such as the World Health Organization
(WHO; Geneva, Switzerland) Global Health Estimates [1] offer
well defined, high quality, qualitative measures of the incidence
and burden associated with a range of physical and mental health
conditions [2], with depression often the leading cause of burden in developed countries [3], [4]. However, with a sampling
frequency of less than once per year, there is a great degree of
loss of temporal variation.
Online social network platforms, with their large-scale repositories of user-generated content, can provide unique opportunities to gain insights into the emotional “pulse of the nation”
[5], and indeed the global community. Twitter (San Francisco,
CA, USA) offers the opportunity for the analysis of expressed
mood, and previous studies have shown that geographical, diurnal, weekly, and seasonal patterns of positive and negative affect
can be observed [6], [7]. Studies have also examined the sentiment expressed on Twitter during specific sporting events [8],
[9], and to measure levels of happiness of cities within specific
countries [10], [11]. Happiness was found to be correlated with
demographic features as well as general well being [11]. The
potential of Twitter to detect depression has also been explored
[12]. Further detection of emotional patterns relating specifically to mental health variables are particularly valuable to the
mental health research community, to help understand the periods and locations of greatest demand (and unmet need) and to
allow effective allocation of resources to meet these needs [13].
“We Feel” [14] is a system for the real-time analysis of global
and regional variations in emotional expression through Twitter.
The system is currently open to the research community, with
data accessible through an API for noncommercial use. We describe the system architecture and data processing algorithms
and, because of its potential to provide new and evolving information about the mental health of the community, our aim
is to validate the data against known patterns of variation in
mood. We attempt to do this in three ways. First, we present
information on diurnal variations in mood; second, we link data
with prevalence data from countries globally to determine if
patterns are consistent with these rates; and finally, we investigate if “events of significance” are associated with changes in
expressed emotion. Applications for this system as a tool to the
wider research and mental health community are then discussed.
A. Data Collection

II. SYSTEM DESIGN

The We Feel system is built as a tool for analysis, in real
time, of the emotional sentiment expressed on Twitter, an online

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LARSEN et al.: WE FEEL: MAPPING EMOTION ON TWITTER

microblogging service that enables users to post and read short
140-character text messages (tweets). Approximately 19% [15]
of online adults use this service. The large majority of Twitter accounts are publicly available, allowing any registered or
unregistered user to view posted tweets. This contrasts with
other social network platforms, which have different privacy
settings.
Twitter offers a public API, which enables programmatic consumption of published tweets as they occur, filtered by specific
criteria such as a list of keywords. The standard Twitter feed
provides a 1% random sample of all posted tweets. For development and demonstration purposes, a 10% feed was made
available for a period of one month by GNIP (Boulder, CO,
USA). The default data source for the We Feel system is a custom stream (the “emohose”) created using the Twitter query
interface to return all English language tweets containing a custom vocabulary of emotional words. The emohose provides a
stream of up to 45 000 tweets per minute.
Due to the volume of data collected, Amazon Web Service
(Sydney, Australia) infrastructure is used to process the tweet
data. Multiple elastic compute cloud (EC2) instances are used
to receive the emohose stream and perform classification based
on location, gender, and emotional content (see Section II-B)—
this allows the processing infrastructure to easily rescale. The
summary data are then stored in DynamoDB tables for access
from the web interface and API.
B. Data Classification
To identify potential emotional tweets, a large vocabulary of
emotion terms was compiled from multiple sources, including
the Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) [16] and the
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) [17]. ANEW provides a set of normative emotional ratings for a set of 1034
English words and LIWC is text analysis software that calculates the degree to which people use different categories of words
across a wide array of texts. Validation studies reveal that LIWC
successfully measures positive and negative emotions [18]. A
crowdsourcing task was conducted to organize the combined
emotional vocabulary against Parrott’s hierarchy of emotions
[19] and Shaver et al.’s emotion tree [20]. Each emotional word
was classified into six “primary emotion” categories of love, joy,
surprise, anger, sadness, and fear, with 25 subgroups of “secondary emotions”—see Table I for a sample of the hierarchical
structure.
In addition to the emotional categorization, the We Feel system attempts to classify tweets based on the location and gender
of the user. Twitter allows users to enter a location within their
profile, however, determining a physical location from this freetext entry is challenging. Also, Twitter allows a user to geotag
their tweets with a precise location; however, this is not commonly used. To maximize the availability of location data, the
time zone specified in a user profile was selected as a proxy
marker for their physical location. The spatial resolution of
this method varies considerably with some countries spanning
multiple time zones, and similarly, some time zones spanning
multiple countries.

1247

TABLE I
CATEGORIZATION OF EMOTIONAL WORDS INTO PRIMARY, SECONDARY, AND
TERTIARY CATEGORIES (ALL THREE LEVELS SHOWN FOR THE PRIMARY
EMOTION “LOVE” AS AN ILLUSTRATION, TERTIARY EMOTIONS ARE NOT
SHOWN FOR THE OTHER PRIMARY EMOTIONS), AND DISTRIBUTION OF
EMOTIONS AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL TWEETS CAPTURED
Primary emotion
love (5.8%)

Secondary emotion

Tertiary emotion

affection (4.0%)

passionate, generous,
loved, loving, treasured,
romantic, beloved,
attracted, faithful,
affectionate,
compassionate, liked,
sweet, accepted, devoted,
lovely, blessed, loyal,
supporting, kind,
considerate, supportive,
gentle, gracious, caring,
sympathetic, tender,
delicate, fond
naughty, horny, flirty,
romantic, attracted, hot,
slutty
nostalgic

lust (1.8%)

longing (< 0.1%)
Primary emotion
joy (53.0%)

surprise (3.6%)
anger (4.0%)
sadness (17.1%)

fear (2.9%)
other (13.6%)

Secondary emotions
cheerfulness (18.5%), zest (4.9%), contentment
(13.3%), pride (6.0%), optimism (3.3%), enthrallment
(< 0.1%), relief (2.9%)
surprise (3.6%)
irritability (0.7%), exasperation (0.6%), rage (1.6%),
disgust (0.5%), envy (0.4%), torment (< 0.1%)
suffering (0.7%), sadness (3.8%), disappointment
(2.2%), shame (4.2%), neglect (1.2%), sympathy
(1.3%)
horror (0.7%), nervousness (2.3%)

The gender of a tweet poster was estimated by comparing the
username of an individual’s profile with a large list of male and
female names obtained from the BabyNameMap project [21].
However, as it was only possible to categorize approximately
one quarter of names, further analysis based on gender was not
pursued.
C. Data Visualization
In addition to the We Feel data API, the web interface provides
a range of data visualization options. An interactive map allows
an area of interest to be selected from the global, continental,
or country/time zone level. Time series and circumplex models
of emotional tweet counts, refined by geography, time interval,
and emotion of interest, can be plotted, as shown in Fig. 1.
A circumplex model projects emotional words onto orthogonal
axes of valence (pleasantness of a stimulus) and arousal (the
strength of the response to the stimulus). A third dimension,
dominance (the degree of control exerted by the stimulus) is
not included in the We Feel visualizations. Coordinates for the
vocabulary of emotional words were obtained from a dataset of
affective norms [22].
D. Ethical Considerations
The data collected by the We Feel system is publically available through the Twitter API. Potentially identifiable information, specifically the tweet content and profile username, are

1248

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the We Feel web interface and data visualizations. The
circumplex model and emotion filter is on the left-hand side, with the time series
in the centre, and the geographical area of interest on the right-hand side.

automatically coded for emotional content and gender, respectively, upon acquisition. Data are analyzed in anonymized, aggregated form only. Individual consent from users was, therefore, not required. This project was approved by the CSIRO
Social Science Human Research Ethics Committee.
III. RESULTS
Data were collected via the We Feel API using the emohose
for the period 12 May to 31 August 2014 at 5-min intervals for all
time zones (n = 143), primary emotions (n = 7), and secondary
emotions (n = 31). Data for individual tertiary emotions (n =
676) were not collected. Data were split into 16 week-long
sections, and divided into a training group and testing group for
comparison. Due to missing samples at the start of the 1st week
(n = 11) and at the end of the 16th week (n = 1), these periods
were allocated to the test groups. Significant events were known
to have occurred in the 1st and 14th weeks (see Section III-C),
so the 14th and 15th weeks were also assigned to the test group.
This resulted in a continuous period of 12 weeks of training
data.
In total, 2.73 × 109 tweets were collected and automatically
coded over the 12-week training period. The geographic distribution of the source of tweets is skewed with the majority
originating in North America (60%), followed by Europe (16%),
Asia (11%), South America (7.6%), Africa (2.9%), and Oceania
(1.7%). The distribution of the emotional content of tweets is
presented in Table I, and shows that the majority were classified
as joy (53%), followed by sadness (17%). The other primary
emotions were each identified in less than 6% of the tweets.
A. Diurnal and Weekly Variations
We investigated the pattern of emotional tweets from the
Eastern Standard Time (EST) zone in more detail. This region
comprises of the east coast of the USA and Canada, and generates the largest number of tweets of all time zones with 17%
of total number of tweets recorded. Fig. 2(a) shows a breakdown of the secondary emotions within this region, showing the
most common emotions classified are cheerfulness followed by

Fig. 2. Number of emotional tweets from the EST zone (USA and Canada).
Panel (a) shows the total number of secondary emotion tweets during the
12-week training period, (b) shows the fluctuation in primary emotions over
an average day, and (c) shows the day-to-day fluctuation in the number of
primary emotion tweets over the 12-week period.

contentment. The diurnal pattern was assessed by averaging the
number of tweets across the 84-day period at the 5-min sampling
period [see Fig. 2(b)]. The profile shows a minimum at approximately 4 AM, rising to a constant level during office hours,
followed by an evening peak at approximately 10 PM, and then,
descending to the following morning’s minimum. This agrees
with previous reports [6, Supporting Information]. Aggregating
the number of emotional tweets on a daily basis [see Fig. 2(c)]
shows a reduction in the number of tweets on Saturday and
Sunday compared with the working week.
We used principal component analysis (PCA) as a data-driven
approach to examine correlations between the temporal fluctuations of different emotions. PCA is a multivariate statistical
procedure that decomposes a set of observations into a set of
linearly uncorrelated variables, or principal components (PCs)
[23]. The PCs are ordered based on the degree of variation in
the data which they account for, and hence, PCA is often used
as an unbiased means for reducing high-dimensional datasets
to a small number of components. Applying PCA to the training data, the first components will capture common repeating
diurnal patterns in the data, while the higher components will
capture uncorrelated fluctuations in emotions.
We performed PCA on the time-series count data to characterize the diurnal weekly pattern in the fluctuation of emotional content. As an illustrative example, we examine three
geographic areas: the east coast of the USA and Canada (EST),
the United Kingdom, and the east coast of Australia (combining
the Brisbane, Melbourne, and Sydney time zones). The time series across regions are concatenated, and decomposed into PCs
and the corresponding weightings.
Fig. 3 shows the first three PCs, which together explain over
90% of the variance (λ) of the original time-series data. The
first PC explains λ = 87% of the variance and captures the
temporal pattern common across all secondary emotions, as
shown by the consistent positive weightings. The total number
of tweets is at a minimum at approximately 4 AM and peaks
at approximately 10 PM, closely mirroring the average pattern
in Fig. 2. The second PC (λ = 2.5%) reflects a modulation of

LARSEN et al.: WE FEEL: MAPPING EMOTION ON TWITTER

1249

TABLE II
CORRELATIONS (PEARSON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT, r) BETWEEN WHO
MENTAL HEALTH INDICES AND SECONDARY EMOTION TWEETS ACROSS
83 COUNTRIES

Fig. 3. PCA of secondary emotion time series of 12-week training data from
three geographic regions (east coast USA and Canada, the U.K., and east coast
Australia). The first three PCs (rows) explain 87%, 2.5%, and 1.5% of the total
variance (λ), respectively. The PCs are averaged across the 84 days (left column)
and the weightings (right column) show the contribution of each secondary
emotion to this PC.

the first PC with a clear separation in the loading of “positive”
(love, joy, and surprise) and “negative” (anger, sadness, and fear)
emotions. The PC reveals diurnal fluctuations that are similar
across the week showing a peak during the morning between 8–
10 AM (more positive and fewer negative emotions) and declines
steadily during the day to a minimum in the evening around
11 PM (more negative and fewer positive emotions). This pattern
is very similar to fluctuations observed in the average happiness
level obtained from the “Hedonometer” [7]. The third PC (λ =
1.5%) reveals a distinction between secondary emotions that
does not follow the positive/negative primary emotion pattern of
the second PC. Positive weighting is observed for lust, disgust,
horror, envy, and nervousness, which peak toward the end of the
evening and overnight. We use the results of this PCA in Section
III-C to detect events within the time-series data.
B. Indices of Mental Health
The previous section illustrated temporal variations in emotional tweets, which are consistent with external reports. To
investigate whether emotional tweets correlate with indices of
mental health in the population, we examined the correlation between rates of secondary emotion tweets with country-level data
on the burden of depression and anxiety, and national suicide
incidence rates. Mental health data were obtained from WHO
Global Health Estimates 2014 Summary Tables [1], which consist of disability adjusted life year estimates for 172 member
states. From these data, we extracted the percentage of dis-

Depression burden

Anxiety burden

Suicide rate

0.049
−0.131
−0.082
0.034
−0.066
0.120
0.031
−0.145
−0.151
0.131
0.056
0.009
−0.121
0.015
−0.114
0.190
0.057
0.008
0.160
0.191
0.166
0.145
0.075
0.151
0.073

0.057
–0.112
–0.028
0.032
–0.002
0.111
0.009
−0.218
−0.125
0.147
0.109
0.057
–0.087
0.114
–0.096
0.231∗
0.097
0.073
0.249∗
0.208
0.259∗
0.157
0.077
0.204
0.127

−0.235∗
0.024
0.043
0.267∗
0.005
0.084
0.013
0.021
0.005
−0.210
−0.045
−0.146
−0.030
−0.337∗
0.041
−0.158
−0.154
−0.166
−0.038
−0.183
−0.119
−0.252∗
−0.011
−0.069
−0.110

Affection
Lust
Longing
Cheerfulness
Zest
Contentment
Pride
Optimism
Enthrallment
Relief
Surprise
Irritability
Exasperation
Rage
Disgust
Envy
Torment
Suffering
Sadness
Disappointment
Shame
Neglect
Sympathy
Horror
Nervousness
∗

Denotes p < 0.05.

ease burden attributable to unipolar depressive disorders and to
anxiety disorders. Suicide rates were also based on WHO
statistics [24].
Due to the irregular mapping between time zones and countries, only 93 countries could be directly identified from the
time zone data, of which 83 also had WHO data available.
Tweets and mental health data from the USA and Canada were
combined as the time zones for these nations overlapped completely. Correlations between proportions of secondary emotion
tweets with the mental health indices within the 83 countries
are shown in Table II. None of the secondary emotions were
significantly associated with depression burden. Countries with
a larger proportion of tweets expressing envy, sadness, or shame
had significantly higher burdens of anxiety. Countries with lower
proportions of affection, rage or neglect tweets, or higher proportions of cheerfulness tweets had significantly higher suicide
rates.
To correct for multiple comparisons, we adjusted the significance threshold using a false discovery approach that accounts
for the number of comparisons and includes a correction for
the correlation between variables [25]. The corrected threshold is p < 0.0047 and after applying this correction only the
correlation between rage and suicide rate remained significant
(p = 0.0016). Although the correlation coefficients are relatively low, they show the potential for identifying burden or
incidence of mental health problems from emotion expressed
on Twitter at a regional or national level.

1250

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

data demonstrated isolated spikes in fear, peaking at a z-score
of approximately 10.
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 4. Effect of significant events on the emotional response on Twitter.
Panel (a) shows the PCA reconstruction for joy and anger within the EST zone,
superimposed over the 12 weeks of training data. Panel (b) shows the normalized
residual between the training data and the PCA reconstruction within the training
data. Panel (c) shows the normalized residual for the week of the reading of
the Australian Federal Budget and (d) for the week of Mr. Williams’ death.
The announcements of these events are shown as vertical dashed lines, with
horizontal dashed lines showing a z-score of three standard deviations from the
mean.

C. Event Detection
Having examined the usual diurnal and weekly patterns, and
possible correlations with mental health indices, we examined
the feasibility of characterizing changes in expressed content in
response to significant events. The approximately three-week
period of testing data contained two known a priori significant
events, which would be expected to cause an observable effect:
on 13 May 2014, the Australian Federal budget was read, and
on 11 August 2014, the death of actor Robin Williams was
announced.
To examine the emotional response to these events, the PCA
from Section III-A was performed using only the primary emotion data, and the typical diurnal and weekly fluctuations were
recalculated. The variation captured by the first three PCs is illustrated in Fig. 4(a), showing that the PCA reconstruction provides a good representation of the training data. The first three
PCs captured the repeating diurnal variations, while responses
to individual events were captured by the higher components. To
characterize these responses, we calculated the residuals after
removing these three PCs and computed the mean and standard
deviations to normalize the residuals to z-scores [see Fig. 4(b)].
The normalized residuals for the weeks with significant events
were calculated across the EST, U.K., and Australian areas of
interest [see Fig. 4(c) and (d)]. An increase in the expression of
all emotions is observed within Australia at the reading of the
budget, which is dominated by large deviations from the normal
patterns with z-scores for anger exceeding 20 standard deviations from the mean. A global response is observed following
the death of Mr. Williams, with z-scores for sadness exceeding
80. Although not illustrated, the remaining two weeks of test

We analyzed 12 weeks of emotional tweets to investigate
whether information captured by the We Feel system can be
used to reflect global emotional expression on Twitter. We Feel
is a data processing system for analyzing global variations in
emotional expression through Twitter and provides information
in near real-time that is available to the research community
through a web interface or API for noncommercial purposes.
Over the 12-week training period, the system analyzed an average of 22 000 tweets per minute, generating a large-scale, global
dataset available to researchers.
The data collected to date has a number of limitations, which
may impact on the analyses. First, the period of data collection
has been relatively short, meaning it is not possible to identify
seasonal patterns and changes in baseline. With a longer period
of data collection, patterns associated with annual events on
fixed dates (such as July 4th in the USA) could be incorporated.
Classification errors are an inevitable challenge in sentiment
analysis, and it has not been possible here to quantify the accuracy of the coding algorithms. The reliability of individual
emotional tweets is, therefore, unknown, but the aggregate of
very large numbers of these data has the potential to give reliable
results.
With these considerations in mind, we first examined the emotional content of the tweets and performed PCA to characterize
the diurnal and weekly fluctuations in secondary emotions in
three geographic regions of the eastern USA and Canada, the
U.K., and eastern Australia. The PCs show a dominant pattern
across all emotions, with a second PC with antiphase components for “positive” and “negative” emotions, further modulated
by individual weightings for specific emotional terms. The patterns, obtained using a fully data-driven approach, are consistent
with the results reported elsewhere.
Identification of these typical variations also allowed retrospective identification of extreme patterns associated with significant events, where values over 80 standard deviations from
the mean were observed. Although these results appear highly
significant, large z-scores were repeatedly observed in time periods without such major events; therefore, additional analysis
is required to ensure statistical robustness, such as accounting
for nonindependence of sequential samples from the time series.
Supervised machine learning algorithms for novelty detection
are likely to provide better identification, in real time, of significant events, supported by identification and labeling of events
within the training data.
Relationships between emotional tweets and indices of mental health were also investigated, and although no secondary
emotions were significantly correlated with depression burden, significant positive correlations between envy, sadness, and
shame tweets and the burden of anxiety were found—although
it is not clear that these are directly associated with the nature
of the emotions, thoughts, and behaviors associated with anxiety disorders. Suicide rates showed a positive correlation with

LARSEN et al.: WE FEEL: MAPPING EMOTION ON TWITTER

cheerfulness and negative correlations with affection, rage, and
neglect. The association with affection is perhaps not surprising, and the association with rage may be influenced by coping
strategies, however, the relationships with cheerfulness and neglect are unexpected. Interpretation of these results is limited by
a number of factors. First, there is a risk of spurious correlations
being identified and with 75 tests at the 5% level, we would expect to find four potentially significant results by chance alone,
compared with the seven identified in Table II. After correcting
for multiple comparisons, only the correlation between rage and
suicide rate remained significant. The indices of burden due to
mental health conditions also suffer from a low degree of variance, and suicide incidence statistics can be difficult to compare
across countries, both of which may reduce the ability to detect
correlations within the data. Also, the data from the burden of
disease study were not captured in the same time period as the
tweets, and disease may have changed. The inclusion of only
English language tweets in an international comparison may
also reduce this power. Future implementations of the system
could also incorporate data feeds from other social media services, which are prevalent in different settings. It should also
be noted that only a small proportion of the population in each
country are active Twitter users, at only approximately 0.5% of
the population of the USA or U.K. [26]. This is a small fraction,
but represents an appreciable number of individuals within these
countries. The usage also varies by country, and thus, could be
included as a variable in correlation analysis. Nevertheless, the
sentiment analysis may capture aspects of emotions connected
to suicide that have not previously been examined in longitudinal datasets, and thus, indicate potential areas of research.
Despite these possible limitations, there is potential for the
We Feel system to detect changes in emotional expression on
Twitter. Given the difficulty in associating these transient events
with prevalence and burden of mental health problems, further data on localized prevalence, antidepressant prescriptions,
and health service utilization could be used to provide a better reflection of the dynamics of a community’s mental health.
Improved geographic localization of the source of tweets may
also improve the analysis. This may be particularly relevant for
identification of tweets associated with suicide, to identify or
intervene in potential suicide clusters.
Our analysis has so far been restricted to examining primary
or secondary emotional terms individually. It is possible that
specific tertiary emotional terms, or combinations of terms, may
be more informative. Other factors, such as the expression of
particular emotions at particular times of the day, may also be
relevant, so subgroup analysis of clusters within the data may
be beneficial.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented an overview of the We Feel system for
collecting and classifying emotional tweets on a global scale
in real time. Over a 12-week period, 2.73 × 109 tweets were
analyzed. A series of analyses were performed to demonstrate
potential uses of the data, identifying the typical diurnal and
weekly variations in emotional expression, and using these to

1251

detect significant events. Correlations between emotional tweets
and indices of anxiety and suicide were also observed, indicating the potential for the development of social media-based
measurements for population mental well being to complement
existing datasets. Improvements to the system and possible directions of future analysis have been suggested with the aim
of better understanding the emotional pulse of the global community and how this relates to communities’ mental health and
resources.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank N. Jackson for providing
them with the opportunity to work with Amazon Web Services
in this project, GNIP for their support in giving them access to
their data feed for a limited period to demonstrate the system,
and Dr. A. Calear, B. Jin, and Dr. S. Wan, and especially Dr. D.
Milne, the main designer and developer of the We Feel system.

REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization. (2014). Global Health Estimates
2014 Summary Tables. [Online]. Available: www.who.int/healthinfo/
global_burden_disease/en/
[2] R. C. Kessler and T. B. Ustun, “The world mental health (WMH) survey
initiative version of the world health organization (WHO) composite international diagnostic interview (CIDI),” Int. J. Methods Psychiatric Res.,
vol. 13, pp. 93–121, 2004.
[3] A. D. Lopez, C. D. Mathers, M. Ezzati, D. T. Jamison, and C. J. Murray,
“Global and regional burden of disease and risk factors, 2001: Systematic
analysis of population health data,” Lancet, vol. 367, pp. 1747–1757,
May 27, 2006.
[4] A. J. Ferrari, F. J. Charlson, R. E. Norman, S. B. Patten, G. Freedman, C.
J. Murray, T. Vos, and H.A. Whiteford, “Burden of depressive disorders
by country, sex, age, and year: Findings from the global burden of disease
study 2010,” PLoS Med., vol. 10, p. e1001547, Nov. 2013.
[5] A. Mislove, S. Lehmann, Y.-Y. Ahn, J.-P. Onnella, and J. N. Rosenquist. (2010). Pulse of the Nation: U.S. Mood Throughout the Day
Inferred from Twitter. [Online]. Available: http://www.ccs.neu.edu/
home/amislove/twittermood/
[6] S. A. Golder and M. W. Macy, “Diurnal and seasonal mood vary with
work, sleep, and daylength across diverse cultures,” Science, vol. 333,
pp. 1878–1881, Sep. 30, 2011.
[7] P. S. Dodds, K. D. Harris, I. M. Kloumann, C. A. Bliss, and C. M. Danforth, “Temporal patterns of happiness and information in a global social
network: Hedonometrics and twitter,” PLoS One, vol. 6, p. e26752, 2011.
[8] A. A. A. Esmin, R. L. de Oliveira Jr., and S. Matwin, “Hierarchical
classification approach to emotion recognition in Twitter,” in Proc. 11th
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl., Dec. 2012, pp. 381–385.
[9] M. Brooks, J. J. Robinson, M. K. Torkildson, S. Hong, and C. R. Aragon,
“Collaborative visual analysis of sentiment in Twitter events,” in Cooperative Design, Visualization, and Engineering (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science), vol. 8683. Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[10] L. Allisio, V. Mussa, C. Bosco, V. Patti, and G. Ruffo, “Felicitta: Visualizing and estimating happiness in Italian cities from geotagged tweets,”
in Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Emotion Sentiment Social Expressive Media,
Dec. 2013, pp. 95–106.
[11] L. Mitchell, M. R. Frank, K. D. Harris, P. S. Dodds, and C. M. Danforth,
“The geography of happiness: Connecting Twitter sentiment and expression, demographics, and objective characteristics of place,” PLoS One,
vol. 8, p. e64417, May 2013.
[12] M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, “Predicting
depression via social media,” presented at the Int. AAAI Conf. Weblogs
Social Media, Boston, MA, USA, Jun. 2013.
[13] M. J. Paul and M. Dredze, “Discovering health topics in social media
using topic models,” PLoS One, vol. 9, p. e103408, 2014.
[14] D. Milne, C. Paris, H. Christensen, P. Batterham, and B. O’Dea. (2014).
The We Feel Emotion Explorer. [Online]. Available: http://wefeel.csiro.au

1252

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

[15] Pew Internet Research. (2014). Social Networking Fact Sheet. [Online].
Available:
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/social-networkingfact-sheet/
[16] M. M. Bradley and P. J. Lang, “Affective norms for English words
(ANEW): Instruction manual and affective ratings,” The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA,
Tech. Rep. C-1, 1999.
[17] J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis, and R. J. Booth, Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count: LIWC 2001. Mahway, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, vol. 71, 2001.
[18] J. H. Kahn, R. M. Tobin, A. E. Massey, and J. A. Anderson, “Measuring
emotional expression with the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count,” Amer.
J. Psychol., vol. 120, pp. 263–286, Summer 2007.
[19] W. G. Parrott, Emotions in Social Psychology: Essential Readings.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Psychology Press, 2001.
[20] P. Shaver, J. Schwartz, D. Kirson, and C. O’Connor, “Emotion knowledge: Further exploration of a prototype approach,” J. Personality Social
Psychol., vol. 52, pp. 1061–1086, Jun. 1987.
[21] G. Davis. BabyNameMap. (2011). [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
guydavis/babynamemap

[22] A. B. Warriner, V. Kuperman, and M. Brysbaert, “Norms of valence,
arousal, and dominance for 13,915 English lemmas,” Behavior Res. Methods, vol. 45, pp. 1191–1207, Dec. 2013.
[23] I. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis. New York, NY, USA: Wiley
Online Library, 2005.
[24] World Health Organization. (2004). Suicide Rates by Country,
Year, and Sex. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/mental_health/
prevention/suicide/en/Figures_web0604_table.pdf
[25] A. J. Sankoh, M. F. Huque, and S. D. Dubey, “Some comments on frequently used multiple endpoint adjustment methods in clinical trials,”
Statist. Med., vol. 16, pp. 2529–2542, Nov. 1997.
[26] D. Mocanu, A. Baronchelli, N. Perra, B. Gonçalves, Q. Zhang, and A.
Vespignani, “The Twitter of babel: Mapping world languages through
microblogging platforms,” PLoS One, vol. 8, p. e61981, Apr. 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

