120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Close-Packed Silicon Microelectrodes for Scalable
Spatially Oversampled Neural Recording
Jörg Scholvin, Member, IEEE, Justin P. Kinney, Jacob G. Bernstein, Caroline Moore-Kochlacs, Nancy Kopell,
Clifton G. Fonstad, Fellow, IEEE, and Edward S. Boyden∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: Neural recording electrodes are important
tools for understanding neural codes and brain dynamics. Neural
electrodes that are closely packed, such as in tetrodes, enable spatial oversampling of neural activity, which facilitates data analysis.
Here we present the design and implementation of close-packed
silicon microelectrodes to enable spatially oversampled recording
of neural activity in a scalable fashion. Methods: Our probes are
fabricated in a hybrid lithography process, resulting in a dense
array of recording sites connected to submicron dimension wiring.
Results: We demonstrate an implementation of a probe comprising
1000 electrode pads, each 9 × 9 μm, at a pitch of 11 μm. We introduce design automation and packaging methods that allow us to
readily create a large variety of different designs. Significance: We
perform neural recordings with such probes in the live mammalian
brain that illustrate the spatial oversampling potential of closely
packed electrode sites.
Index Terms—Electrode array, microelectrodes, neural recording, silicon probe, spatial oversampling.

T

Fig. 1. Close-packed recording sites on a silicon shank, for spatially oversampled neural recording. SEM of the tip of a recording shank with two columns of
100 rows each. The close-packed recording sites of 9 × 9 μm have a pitch of
11 μm, and are visible as the light squares. Insulated metal routing runs along
the length of the shank, visible as dark lines flanking the rows of light squares.
The shank itself has a width of ∼50 μm in the region shown, and is 15-μm
thick.

Manuscript received December 13, 2014; revised February 2, 2015; accepted
February 14, 2015. Date of publication February 14, 2015; date of current version December 17, 2015. This work was supported by the Simons Center for
the Social Brain at MIT, the Paul Allen Family Foundation, NIH Director’s Pioneer Award DP1NS087724, NIH Grant R01NS067199, Grant 2R44NS07045303A1, and Grant R01DA029639, Cognitive Rhythms Collaborative NSF DMS
1042134, IET Harvey Prize, Google, New York Stem Cell Foundation, NSF
CBET 1053233, and DARPA Grant HR0011-14-2-0004. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J. Scholvin, J.P. Kinney, and J.G. Bernstein, are with the MIT Media Lab and
McGovern Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA.
C.G. Fonstad is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, MIT. C. Moore-Kochlacs and N. Kopell are with Boston University,
Boston MA.
∗ E. S. Boyden is with the MIT Media Lab and McGovern Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139 USA (e-mail:
esb@media.mit.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2406113

from a dense array [12]–[15]. In this paper, we demonstrate a
close-packed silicon microelectrode technology that enables a
tight continuum of recording sites along the length of the shank
(Fig. 1), rather than discrete arrangements of tetrode-style pads
or widely spaced sites. This arrangement, thus, enables tetrodelike spatial oversampling continuously running down the shank,
so that sorting of spikes recorded by such densely packed electrodes can be facilitated for all the sites of the probe simultaneously. We use advanced lithography tools to create these
close-packed arrangements in a scalable fashion, demonstrating
probes with 1000 electrode pads situated on five shanks with 200
recording sites per shank. A key challenge with the traditional
silicon electrode designs has been that wiring to the recording
sites occupied a large fraction of the available shank width. This
is problematic because scaling up the number of recording sites
forces the shank geometry to widen, placing an upper bound on
the number of sites practical for a single shank of a given width.
We here reduced the wire geometry and, thus, the overhead that
the wiring places on the shank width by creating submicron
wires with high-speed electron beam lithography (EBL). Contact mask lithography enables us to create feature sizes of 2 μm,
while in contrast, our EBL feature sizes are 200 nm. This gives
us an order of magnitude increase in the number of wires for a
given shank width. The accuracy of this technology also enables

I. INTRODUCTION
HE need for close-packed neural recording electrodes
arises from the desire to record the activity of a single
neuron from multiple points in space, which facilitates the data
analysis [1], [2]. Stereotrodes and tetrodes, which contain two
and four tightly twisted wires, respectively, are commonly used
in neuroscience and provide examples of the value that closepacked recordings can have, even when small scale: such spatial
oversampling helps greatly with the “spike sorting” problem,
in which recorded electrical events are attributed to individual
neurons [3], [4]. Silicon-based microelectrodes, developed over
the past few decades [5]–[8], have recently been designed to
include denser arrays of electrodes than in the past [9]–[11], including active probes with the ability to record a subset of points

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

SCHOLVIN et al.: CLOSE-PACKED SILICON MICROELECTRODES FOR SCALABLE SPATIALLY OVERSAMPLED NEURAL RECORDING

121

signals. In these probes, ambient room light can be present
without any changes in the noise amplitude.
B. Fabrication Steps: Metallization

Fig. 2. Top-down SEM view of a four-column shank of close-packed electrodes. The center columns are connected by wiring running in-between the
outer pads, and all columns are then collected and routed along the two sides.
The direction toward the shank tip is indicated by the arrow.

a ∼1.5-μm space between individual recording sites, resulting
in a close-packed design in a simple single-metal layer process
(examples in Figs. 1 and 2). The current study focuses on principles and fabrication strategies for scale, but does not focus
on critical steps that would be needed (for example, specialized
coatings) for long-term recording. Our probes may help achieve
tetrode-like recordings in large volumes of brain tissue, and
may also be useful for investigating the fundamental limits of
accuracy and yield of neural recording achievable by electrodes
in vivo.
II. PROCESS FLOW
A. Substrate Choice
The fabrication of our devices was carried out on 150-mm
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers (Ultrasil Corp., Hayward CA).
The top (“device”) layer thickness of the SOI wafer defines the
probe shank thickness, and therefore, a wide range of precise
thicknesses is possible. We chose a thickness of 15 μm, comparable to typical silicon-based electrodes [16]. The device layer
is low-resistivity silicon (<0.005 Ω·cm) to help reduce artifacts
associated with ambient light. Standard silicon wafers, typically
with a resistivity of 10 Ω·cm, have charge carrier lifetimes on
the order of 1 ms. Even though the wiring is insulated and not in
direct contact with the silicon substrate, signals may suffer indirectly from light artifacts caused by the interaction of charge
pairs generated in the silicon substrate with ions in the electrolyte around the shank (for probes from a 10-Ω·cm resistivity
wafer, > 100-μVrm s noise was observed even in ambient room
light). This artifact is likely caused by the unequal diffusion
coefficients for charge carriers, with resulting charge dipoles
arising in response to light. In contrast, carrier lifetimes for the
low-resistivity wafers we are using are on the order of 10 ns
[17]. The ultrashort lifetimes in low-resistivity silicon ensure
that carrier recombination occurs quickly and results in timeand diffusion length-scales irrelevant for an impact on neural

The process cross section and the process flow are shown in
Fig. 3. The process consists of two key parts: first, the formation of the insulated metal wiring and exposed metal pads, and
second, the deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) steps that define
the shape of the probe and the thin shanks.
Fabrication starts (see Fig. 3, Step 2) on the double-sided polished SOI wafers with the deposition of an insulating dielectric
(1 μm of plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD)
deposited SiO2 ). We then use EBL (Elionix ELS-F125, with a
125-kV acceleration voltage) to define the recording sites and
high-density metal wiring (see Figs. 3 and 4). Exposure and development of EBL resist (400 nm of polymethyl methacrylate
(PMMA) 495A8 from MicroChem Corp., developed with 1:3
MIBK:IPA) is followed by metal evaporation of a film stack
of 10 nm Ti, 150 nm Au, and 5 nm Ti, where the Au is the
conductor and the Ti serves as an adhesion layer to the SiO2
(see Fig 3, Step 3). After a liftoff procedure in acetone, a second
metallization step follows, using standard optical (UV) contact
lithography with a 2-μm feature size. This step (see Fig 3, Step
4) uses an image reversal resist (1.5 μm of AZ5214E), and metal
for liftoff is deposited by evaporating a 10-nm-Ti, 250-nm-Au,
and 5-nm-Ti film stack. Metal liftoff is again performed in acetone. To facilitate the acetone access beneath the photoresist in
liftoff, the mask pattern also contains dummy metal filler shapes
(visible in Fig. 7, as 50-μm squares at a 190-μm pitch) in areas
of the wafer that are not part of the devices. This helps to break
up large unexposed areas that would be more challenging to
liftoff.
We adapted a hybrid lithography method using EBL to write
the fine structures on the probes (for example, the finest wiring
along the implanted component), while using classical MEMS
fabrication techniques for larger structures (for example, the
wirebond pads, the nonfine wiring, and the cutout of the probes).
Hybrid lithography methods have been used in defining submicron electronic devices [18], [19]. Breaking the metallization
into these two steps allows us to utilize the submicron capability of EBL for dense wiring on the shanks, while maintaining the
high throughput of optical lithography to define the less dense
wiring outside of the shanks. This helps to minimize the EBL
write time needed. The highest wiring density is required when
routing alongside the recording sites because here the shank
needs to accommodate both the wiring as well as the recording sites, while remaining as narrow as possible to reduce brain
displacement or damage. Once the wiring leaves the shank and
enters the main body of the probe, significantly more space is
available and the wiring pitch can be relaxed and transitioned
to optical lithography (see Fig. 4). The EBL exposure itself is
broken up into two different write currents, a lower beam current for the smallest geometries on the shank (8 nA for 200-nm
wires), followed by a higher beam current for faster writing of
wider wires (40 nA for 500-nm wires) used for spreading out to
meet the optical lithography patterns. This concept is outlined

122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 3. Simplified process cross sections (not to scale) during key steps of the fabrication process: (a) metallization, using two different metal deposition steps,
(b) front- and (c) back-side DRIE etches that define the probe shape. The shank thickness is determined by the choice of SOI device layer thickness. The process
details are shown in the list on the right. The arrows indicate between which process steps the cross sections correspond to. Final devices and actual cross sections
are shown in Figs. 5 and 6.

Fig. 4. To route the high-density wiring from the recording sites (as shown in Fig. 1) to the large wirebond pads on the probe periphery, we use a combination of
EBL and contact (optical) lithography. The left drawing shows the 1000-channel probe’s routing scheme from the recording sites at the very top to the wirebond
pads on the bottom. EBL wiring on the probe shanks (yellow) connects to contact lithography wiring on the base of the probe (green). The center drawing shows
the transitions from 8 to 40 nA beam currents, as well as from the 40 nA EBL to contact lithography, with the two transitions marked by dashed lines. To be able
to handle alignment errors and possible wafer drift during long EBL writes, these transition regions consist of a larger landing pattern, as indicated by insets in the
microscope images on the right (lengths indicated numerically represent the trace widths). The white scale bars correspond to 25 μm.

in Fig. 4, along with the design schematic for a 1000-channel
probe. We will discuss the packaging in more detail later, but
for optimal packaging, the wirebond pads have been distributed
in a comb shape to minimize the size of the silicon chip. The
transition from EBL to optical lithography requires a landing

pad shown in Fig. 4 (we used a generously sized row of 8-μm
pads at a 12-μm pitch). This adds robustness against misalignment that could otherwise results in open circuits in the wiring.
Similarly, in transitioning from the 8 to 40 nA beam current
features, small landing pads (2.4-μm squares set at a 3.5-μm

SCHOLVIN et al.: CLOSE-PACKED SILICON MICROELECTRODES FOR SCALABLE SPATIALLY OVERSAMPLED NEURAL RECORDING

123

Fig. 5. SEM and cross-sectional images obtained by focused ion beam, showing the metallization and recording sites. (a) 11 μm recording site with high-density
wiring adjacent to it, in false color. The gold metal is shown as yellow, and comprises both the recording site and the wiring. The TEOS SiO2 , shown in cyan,
provides a smooth and void-free insulation layer. The silicon substrate is shown as dark blue. (b) Close up of the contact etch between two adjacent recording
sites. A mild lithography misalignment of around 150 nm is noted, and the layout was designed to be indifferent against such misalignments. (c) Close up of the
high-density wiring where wires are 200-nm wide, placed at a 400-nm pitch, and 150-nm thick. (d) SEM of the top view of a two-column recording shank showing
the close-packed recording sites and the wiring on the sides. The orientation of the cross sections in this figure is indicated by the dotted line. (e) 9 μm recording
site, after surface preparation by gold electroplating. False coloring used as previously in (a), but the additional electroplated gold layer (shown as orange) is visible
and its surface roughness helps to lower the electrode site impedance.

pitch) are used to protect against any position drift during the
EBL exposure. This is important since the EBL exposure writes
all shapes of one current level first before writing the remaining
shapes of the next current level and stitching errors between the
two current levels can, otherwise, cause open circuits. Overall, a
150-mm wafer required about 4 to 5 h of EBL tool time to complete, with approximately 6000 recording sites spread across
a variety of different probe styles of 64, 128, 256, and 1000
channels.
After the metal processing on the front side, an SiO2 layer is
deposited and patterned to expose only the recording sites while
insulating the wiring (see Fig 3, Step 5). We use PECVD SiO2
films from tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as a silicon source
for this step to obtain a void-free dielectric filling between the
high-density wires. To pattern the dielectric layer and to open up
the electrode and wirebond sites, we again use a combination
of EBL and optical lithography. We first pattern and etch open
the recording sites with precisely aligned EBL, while the large
wirebond pads are patterned and etched with optical lithography (see Fig 3, Steps 6 and 7, respectively). The reason for
using EBL for the recording site opening step is the ability

to have submicron alignment accuracy to the recording sites
and precise definition of the shapes. This allows us to achieve
very densely packed recording sites, with 1–2-μm spacing between them. The dielectric etch is performed in an oxide RIE
etcher (LAM-590 using a CF4 /CHF3 plasma, with a 5:3 gas
flow ratio, a pressure of 2.8 torr, and 600-W RF power), and we
again use PMMA exposed by EBL as mask material (800 nm of
PMMA 495A11 developed in 1:3 MIBK:IPA). While PMMA
is often not a suitable dry etching mask, we find that it holds
up sufficiently well in the CHF3 /CF4 plasma, showing around
50 nm/min degradation during a 250 nm/min dielectric etch.
The thin Ti adhesion layer on top of the Au pads is readily removed during the overetching step exposing the Au pad. The
larger wirebond pad openings are created using optical lithography and a positive photoresist (1.0 μm of SPR-700) as mask
material, and we use the same oxide RIE etch. Oxygen plasma
ashing is used to remove the PMMA as well as the SPR-700
resists after each respective etch step. A cross section of the
EBL wiring and recording sites is shown in Fig. 5, and a summary of the different metal wiring and pad types is listed in
Table I.

124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
LITHOGRAPHY AND DIMENSIONS
Wiring Element

Line Width

Line Pitch

Length Range

Lithography Details

Routing next to recording sites
Dense wiring up the shank
Distribution on the probe base
Routing to wirebond pads

0.2 μm
0.25 μm
0.5 μm
2–5 μm

0.4 μm
0.5 μm
1–12 μm
4–12 μm

0.1–1.2 mm
1–8 mm
0.6–5.9 mm
2–34 mm

PMMA, 125 kV, 8 nA
PMMA, 125 kV, 8 nA
PMMA, 125 kV, 40 nA
AZ5241E

Pad Element

Pad Size

Pad Pitch

Lithography Details

10.5–11.5 μm
250 μm

PMMA, 125kV, 8 nA
AZ5241E

Recording site
Wirebond pads

9 × 9 μm
250 × 125 μm

Summary of the lithography wiring and pad types, and their geometry. Wiring lengths depend on the probe
geometry and the position within the probe design (wiring on the outer edges can be much longer).

C. Fabrication Steps: Micromachining
After the metallization is complete [see Fig. 3(a)], we etch out
the probe shapes using two DRIE steps, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b)
and (c). This is done by using a Bosch process DRIE tool (SPTS
Rapier). We first pattern the wafer frontside with photoresist
(8 μm of AZ4620). Because of the presence of dielectrics on
the wafer surface, as well as the buried oxide from the SOI wafer,
we perform a sequence of three etches with this mask: we first
remove the surface dielectric films (2 μm) using the same oxide
RIE etch as before (LAM-590), followed by the DRIE etch of the
SOI wafer’s thin Si device layer (15 μm). The DRIE etch stops
on the SOI wafer’s buried oxide layer (0.8 μm). We then remove
the exposed buried oxide, again with an RIE etch (LAM-590).
This sequence of three different etches (see Fig 3, Step 8) is done
with a single photoresist as mask, and we subsequently remove
the photoresist mask in an oxygen plasma asher [see Fig. 3(b)].
To define the probe shape and obtain the thin shanks, we pattern
the wafer backside with thick photoresist (10 μm of AZ4620),
aligned to the frontside patterns. A backside DRIE etch of the
handle wafer (SPTS Rapier) is then carried out to etch through
the handle wafer (see Fig 3, Step 9). For this, we mount the wafer
with its front side onto a carrier wafer using AZ4620 photoresist.
The backside etch [see Fig. 3(c)], therefore, will stop either on
the buried oxide or on the previously etched frontside trenches,
where the photoresist from the carrier mounting is providing a
barrier. The wafer is released from the handle wafer in acetone,
and cleaned of photoresist residues by oxygen plasma ashing
(see Fig 3, Step 10). The dual-sided DRIE etching allows us
to create shanks of precisely defined thickness, as determined
by the SOI wafer, and also precisely defined shank outlines, as
determined by lithography. The parts of the probe that are not
going to be implanted can remain at the original wafer thickness,
which facilitates handling and packaging (as seen for example
in Fig. 6). Furthermore, the devices remain structurally attached
to the wafer through several small breakout beams of 100-μm
width (see Fig. 7). This allows us to complete all processing and
cleaning, and only after removing the wafers from fabrication,
we detach the devices from the wafer by breaking the beams
with tweezers.
An example of a probe fabricated in this manner is shown
in Fig. 6, showing a scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a
1000-channel probe, and illustrating the results of the dual-sided

Fig. 6. SEM view of a five shank, 1000-channel probe fabricated with the
process shown in Fig. 3. The 15-μm thin shanks and thicker support structures
are visible. The handle wafer thickness is 510 μm, and the device layer is
15 μm. The buried oxide is 0.8 μm, sufficiently thick to serve as a DRIE etch
stop during the through-wafer backside etch, but thin enough to remove easily
after the frontside etch. The shanks have a pitch of 500 μm. The tip portion of
one shank is shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 7. SEM view of the breakout beams that connect the side of the 1000channel probe (right half of the image) to the bulk of the wafer (left half of the
image). These beams, also visible in Fig. 8, are sufficiently strong to allow wafer
handling during the last process steps without accidental breakage (unless the
wafer receives a sharp shock), but weak enough to easily break with tweezers
or a needle point. A wide range of beam designs are sufficient for this, but we
used a U-shape bend to allow an easy access point for breaking the beams. Also
visible are metal filler structures on the left, outside the probe, to facilitate the
metal liftoff procedure.

SCHOLVIN et al.: CLOSE-PACKED SILICON MICROELECTRODES FOR SCALABLE SPATIALLY OVERSAMPLED NEURAL RECORDING

125

Fig. 8. Photographs of two wafers illustrating a large variety of designs, with probes ranging from 64 to 1000 channels. All of these devices were created
automatically by parameterized cells and arranged on the wafer algorithmically. The devices in the right wafer are aligned to have the shanks point toward the
wafer center, in order to avoid yield drops in the EBL that can occur close to the wafer edge. The close up on the far right shows a section of the wafer with four
64-channel test probes. Each of these probes has different characteristics, such as variations in the shank lengths or in recording site dimensions. A set of small
breakout beams hold the otherwise released probe in place on the wafer (seen as small notches, on the bottom of the probe as well as the left and right sides on the
top, identified by white arrows). Fig. 7 shows a breakout beam used in the 1000 channel design in more detail.

Fig. 9. Components of the design automation: Design parameters are entered by the user in a spreadsheet, exported along with default values for any unspecified
parameters, read in by a Cadence script, and automatically processed to generate all of the designs and arrange them on the wafer area.

DRIE process. The base of the probe remains at the original
wafer thickness (525 μm), and only the shanks are thinned
(15 μm). A portion of the shanks themselves can also remain
at full wafer thickness if those sections will not enter the brain.
This is optional, but can serve two purposes: first, it can act as
an additional spacer, providing a greater distance between the
probe body and the recording sites. This can help to reduce space
constraints during in vivo use and enable better visibility during
the probe insertion into the brain. Second, the thick portions can
help avoid unnecessarily long thinned shanks, which can bend
due to thin-film stress. While thin-film stresses can usually be
carefully balanced by using a combination of dielectric films
under compressive and tensile stress, avoiding the need to do
this balancing simplifies the processing. We have fabricated
shanks with lengths up to 7.5 mm (at a thickness of 15 μm), and
successfully used these without any difficulties. But we expect

more careful stress balancing is needed for shanks with a more
aggressive aspect ratio (either longer than 7.5 mm or thinner
than 15 μm).
III. DESIGN AUTOMATION
Many different probe designs can be fabricated in parallel on
the same wafer (see Fig. 8). To create a large variety of unique
designs, we automated not only the creation of individual designs, but also the compilation of them into the mask set for
an entire wafer. We generate all of the layout drawings with
the Cadence Virtuoso CAD design environment. The designs
are programmatically generated based on a list of input parameters, using the Cadence “SKILL” programming language to
calculate and draw the actual shapes. Fig. 9 shows the design
process flow. We have automated the drawing of the individual
probe designs (“cells”), but use an additional layer of abstraction

126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 10. Summary list (left) of the probe packaging steps, and images (center, right) of packaged probes. Electrical testing before die assembly verifies that
the probe shank wiring is intact, by measuring the roundtrip resistance between two wirebond pads short-circuited at the recording sites. Center: Example of a
64-channel probe with a 5-mm long shank, held inside a plastic box for transport, using nylon threaded standoffs and thumb nuts. The PCB is assembled with the
FFC connectors, and then the probe is attached and wirebonded. The photo is prior to encapsulating the probe wirebonds with an epoxy that insulates it against
liquids. Right: the 1000-channel probe follows the same principle, but uses a larger PCB with 32 FFC connectors. Encapsulation was done with a clear epoxy
(Loctite M-31CL).

by adding a wrapper cell that is able to interpret a set of instructions and generate specific probe designs from it. This wrapper
creates all of the different designs and automatically places them
into the wafer shape, adding relevant structures for processing
such as mask alignment marks or test structures to monitor
process performance. It achieves complete automation on the
Cadence CAD side, from taking a list of devices and their input
parameters, to creating and positioning them into a mask set.
The inputs to this automation are collected in a spreadsheet,
which administers the default parameters and how to modify
specific parameter subsets in order to create a range of designs.
This abstraction allows us to drive all the design decisions from
a single page because it contains only those parameters that are
modified from their default values. Because most design parameters rarely deviate from their defaults (for example, wire
width, wirebond pad dimensions, size of buffer regions, and so
on), only several key parameters are modified between different
devices (for example, the number of shanks, the shank length,
or the electrode site pitch). A script code in the spreadsheet then
generates and exports the instruction file, which lists the input
parameters for each device instance to be created. This instruction file is imported by the Cadence wrapper code, and used in
instantiating the different designs. Finally, to move the layout
toward fabrication, we perform a final step of layer generation,
inserting dummy fillers to help the metal liftoff mask, and export
the design from Cadence. The EBL files are generated with the
Genisys Beamer conversion software.
The design automation and ease of design entry provide a simple method to modify probe designs or create large varieties of
layouts customized to specific target applications. We used this
flexibility to create probes with channel counts ranging from 64
to 1000, and also to explore a number of different recording site
configurations, which we will analyze in the discussion section.

IV. DEVICE PACKAGING
To acquire neural signals recorded with the probes, we need
to package and connect the probes to electronic amplifiers and

digitizers, which are commonly referred to as “headstages.” A
variety of different systems exist for this task [20]. We utilized
headstages with Intan Technologies’ RHD2132 amplifiers connected to a recording system (to be described in an upcoming
paper). The purpose of the packaging is to provide the intermediary routing between the silicon probe and the headstages, and
to protect the fragile silicon shanks by providing a mechanical
body for handling. Both of these goals are achieved through the
use of printed circuit boards (PCBs). We recognize that alternative packaging approaches exist that can allow silicon probes to
be used, for example, in freely moving electrophysiology setups
as well [21]. Such approaches are compatible with our silicon
technology, and if needed can be implemented in the future.
We directly attach the probes onto a PCB and connect to
the probe’s wirebond pads using a gold ball bonder (Kulicke
and Soffa 4124). To allow wirebonding, the PCB has an electroless nickel immersion gold finish. Fig. 10 lists the packaging
steps and shows photographs of packaged 64- and 1000-channel
probes as examples. While the 1000-channel probe consists of
five shanks with 200 sites each, for layout simplicity, the wirebond pattern uses 1024 pads. Thus, 24 wirebond pads are unconnected to any recording site on the shanks. We used a multilayer
PCB to achieve a dense routing of the signals (ten layers, with
eight inner routing layers and 3-mils feature sizes, Advanced
Circuits, Aurora, CO, USA). These specifications allow us
to connect the very densely laid out wirebond pads on the 1000channel probe. However, for the PCB design, the bottleneck in
the layout is the diameter of the vias that connect the surface pads
to the individual routing layers (in our design, a 14 mil diameter
ring with a 4 mil via hole). These dimensions constrained our
wirebond pad pitch to 10 mils. Using a more aggressive (albeit
more expensive) PCB technology can help reduce this pitch as
needed, enabling either higher channel counts or reducing the
chip size. However, with our choice of dimensions, we find an
adequate tradeoff between PCB cost and the required probe size
for 1000 channels.
Because the metal we wirebond to on the probe is thin, with
only 250 nm of gold, and because it sits on top of a relatively thin

SCHOLVIN et al.: CLOSE-PACKED SILICON MICROELECTRODES FOR SCALABLE SPATIALLY OVERSAMPLED NEURAL RECORDING

127

Fig. 11. PCB design schematics for the 1000-channel probe. Instead of routing the wirebonds out in a two-column bar, as done in the 64-channel probe, we break
up the routing for the 1000-channel probe into a comb-shaped multifinger design, of eight fingers with 128 pads each (photograph of the probe after wirebonding
but before encapsulation). This allows us to maintain a better aspect ratio of the silicon, and then route the wiring on the PCB across eight inner layers to the
connectors seen at the top of the schematic.

layer of 1-μm SiO2 , choosing the right wirebonder settings is
important to avoid cratering through the oxide and short circuiting the pads. Typical chip pads in the semiconductor industry
often employ a much thicker metal and dielectric stack that is
more robust. However, by appropriately choosing the wirebonding conditions (in our case, power and time settings), we found
that we can reliably bond all 1000 channels without any pad
damage.
The detailed routing scheme of the 1024-channel PCB is
shown in Fig. 11. Rather than using a single silicon beam with
wirebond columns along its side, as we do for lower channel
count designs (as seen in Figs. 8 and 10), for the 1000-channel
design, we chose to use a multicolumn comb-shape layout. This
allows us to use a multicolumn grid of wirebond pads, reducing
the longest wire required on the silicon probe, and also maintaining a more even aspect ratio of the silicon, making it easier
to fit the design on the wafer. As the layout in Fig. 11 indicates
the wirebond pads are placed in the gaps of the silicon comb
structure, and then connect to the PCB routing layers through
vias. The routing across eight layers in the PCB then takes place
below the silicon chip. A photograph of a wirebonded 1000channel probe is shown in Fig. 11, as well as partially in Fig. 6.
While lower channel count probes do not require this many PCB
layers, we fabricated them on the same PCB run and, therefore,
benefit from the reduced amount of space needed for PCB routing. The 64-channel probe seen in Fig. 10 illustrates the small
form factor that can be achieved. Once the PCB wiring exits
the immediate area around the probe, the wiring density can be
relaxed as we route toward the flat flexible cable (FFC) connectors (Molex 5025983393) that attach to the amplifier headstages.
Headstage amplifier circuits can be directly attached to the PCB,
for example, as in [9] and [10], but we decided to use a modular
approach in this paper to facilitate the testing of different probe
and PCB designs, and to preserve the headstage amplifiers in
case of probe damage due to user error. We chose FFC connectors for this design because of the low cost and the ability to
use flexible cables that help to mechanically decouple the probe
from the headstages. But, many other high-density connector
types exist, and they can readily be substituted for the FFC
connectors. The additional space overhead is acceptable for the
acute, head-fixed in vivo experiments that we are targeting with

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF WIRING PARASITICS
Component
1000-Channel, PCB Parallel Wire Capacitance
1000-Channel, Probe Parallel Wire Capacitance
1000-Channel, Probe Line Resistance
64-Channel, PCB Parallel Wire Capacitance
64-Channel, Probe Parallel Wire Capacitance
64-Channel, Probe Line Resistance
FFC Cable, Parallel Wire Capacitance
FFC Connector, Parallel Pin Capacitance

Measured

Wire Length

7.2 pF
4.9 pF
8.7 kΩ
2.1 pF
2.4 pF
3.5 kΩ
3.8 pF
0.5 pF

127 mm
43 mm
43 mm
41 mm
14 mm
14 mm
100 mm
n/a

Comparison of the sources of worst-case parasitic capacitances and line resistances for 64- and 1000-channel probes as well as the corresponding PCBs. The
PCB has a 3-mil line and space, and 6.5-mil vertical pitch between different
layers.

this technology, for example, for mice in a head-fixed virtual
reality environment [22].
For a fully assembled 1000-channel probe, we have measured and listed the parasitic capacitances in Table II. These
are the values between adjacent wires, and we chose the worst
case of each of the different design components. However, it is
important to realize that adjacent wires on the probe do not necessarily also have to be adjacent on the PCB or the FFC cable.
On the PCB, we can, therefore, significantly reduce the parasitic capacitances, if needed, by periodically shifting the wiring
so that any two wires are never adjacent to each other for too
long. This could effectively distribute the parasitic capacitance
and reduces the worst-case value. Overall, the parasitic capacitances are small when compared to the electrode impedance
and the amplifier input capacitance (for example, 12 pF for the
Intan Technologies RHD2132 amplifier chips we are using for
the headstages).
We post all code, design files, mask layouts, PCB layouts, and
images for this paper at http://scalablephysiology.org/probes/.
V. RESULTS AND CHARACTERIZATION
To demonstrate the recording capability of the close-packed
sites, we have performed in vivo recordings in the sensory cortex
of an anesthetized mouse. In vivo experiments were done in
accordance with MIT Committee on Animal Care approved

128

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 12. In vivo recordings with a close-packed electrode array in the sensory cortex of a head-fixed mouse under light (0.5%) isoflurane anesthesia. Left:
Example of the recorded data for a single spike across 28 pads (2 columns of 14 rows) on a 64-channel probe. Our spatial oversampling design enables the spike
to be picked up by several nearby recording sites (9 × 9 μm pads, 10.5-μm pitch). The vertical scale bar is 200 μV. Right: Focusing on a single recording site
(marked with a star in the probe map on the left), four consecutive spikes (top) are then overlaid (bottom) to show the spikes in more detail.

protocols. An example of data collected with a single-shank
probe bearing 64 pads is shown in Fig. 12. The data illustrate the
ability of close-packed recording sites to spatially oversample
neural activity, and it shows how activity from the same neuron
is picked up by several neighboring sites in its vicinity.
The devices we fabricated have a standard recording site of
9 × 9 μm. We wanted to understand how the dimensions of a
recording site impact its electrical properties. For this, we characterized the electrode impedance and the electrical noise as a
function of recording site size. The data were collected from
single-shank 64-channel probes with electrode site dimensions
ranging from 2.4 to 9.6 μm. We gold electroplated each recording site with a constant current density protocol (60 pulses of
1 s at 0.1975 nA/μm2 ).
Fig. 13 shows the magnitude of the recording site impedance,
measured at 1 kHz in 0.9% saline. As the electrode dimensions
increase, the impedance decreases. We can think of the electrode
impedance as a parallel combination of unit impedances. This
would suggest that the impedance is inversely proportional to
the electrode site area, which we observe in the data of Fig. 13.
However, we expect mass transport limitations to eventually
impact this scaling behavior [23], [24] and, therefore, would
caution against extrapolating the data beyond what was measured, on the basis of area alone.
We also characterized the electrical noise of the recording
sites. For this, we inserted the probe into saline, and using a
wire in the saline as reference ground, recorded all 64 channels
in parallel. We calculated the root-mean-square (RMS) noise
voltage in the 50 Hz to 15 kHz frequency band. The noise spectrum was verified to be free from 60 Hz pickup or its harmonics.
We expect the noise to be depend on the electrical properties of

Fig. 13. Electrode site characterization as a function of electrode dimensions
for square pad sites. The electrode impedance into saline was measured at 1 kHz,
and the magnitude of the complex impedance is shown. The probes were gold
electroplated with a total charge of 11.85 μA·s/μm2 , spread out across 60 pulses
of 1 s duration each. As the pad size increases, the impedance drops. Even for
pads as small as 3 μm × 3 μm, the electrode impedance is 2 MΩ or less. For
the 9 μm × 9 μm standard recording sites used in the closely packed probes,
low impedances between 0.3 to 0.6 MΩ are observed.

the electrode site [25], [26]. Fig. 14 shows the measured RMS
noise as a function of the electrode site impedance.
From the data in both Figs. 13 and 14, we recognize that the
9 μm × 9 μm recording sites can, in principle, be reduced significantly to build probes with smaller form factors or even denser
arrangements of recording sites. For example, the data suggests
that even a 3 μm × 3 μm site has electrical characteristics com-

SCHOLVIN et al.: CLOSE-PACKED SILICON MICROELECTRODES FOR SCALABLE SPATIALLY OVERSAMPLED NEURAL RECORDING

129

ter for Nanoscale Systems, a Member of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network.
REFERENCES

Fig. 14. Electrical noise measurement as a function of electrode impedance
for the same sites as shown in Fig. 13. The contribution of input referred noise
from the amplifiers (2.4μV rm s ) was removed from the data.

patible with recording single unit activity, with impedances of
2 MΩ and a noise level of 8 μVrm s .
VI. CONCLUSION
We have introduced a platform to fabricate close-packed microelectrodes for neural recordings, and described the design,
fabrication, and packaging methods that allow us to create a
large range of scalable probe designs with close-packed recording sites. Although multisite silicon probes have been generated before, as noted in the introduction, the hybrid fabrication
method here enables us uniquely to pursue electrode spacings
far denser than in earlier implantable probes, thus enabling the
feature of spatial oversampling of the neurons. The in vivo experiment and quantitative electrode site impedance and noise
characterization demonstrated that by closely packing recording sites, we are able to spatially oversample and pick up unit
activity on several recording sites at a time, and that the size of
the recording sites can be reduced even lower than 9 μm. Our results suggest that close-packed electrodes may become not only
instrumental for neuroscience, but also for understanding the
basic principles of electrode design when scaling to large channel counts is required. We note that our current technologies
are not designed for long-term recording, which may benefit
from probes that are coated with alternative materials [27], as
well as thinner probes that may be more flexible [28]; our main
focus here was on the principles of scalability, as well as acute
recordings. Future work may enable such scalable devices to be
deployed in both chronic and acute settings, as well as allow
integration with other technologies such as 3-D light delivery
for optogenetics [29]–[31], and the ability to connect spatial
localization of neurons with detailed anatomical mapping via
high-resolution microscopy [32].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Devices were fabricated at MIT’s Microsystems Technology
Laboratories. DRIE etching was carried out at the Harvard Cen-

[1] D. A. Henze et al., “Intracellular features predicted by extracellular
recordings in the hippocampus In Vivo,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 84, no. 1,
pp. 390–400, Jul. 2000.
[2] C. Gold et al., “On the origin of the extracellular action potential waveform: A modeling study,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 95, no. 5, pp. 3113–3128,
May 2006.
[3] C. M. Gray et al., “Tetrodes markedly improve the reliability and yield
of multiple single-unit isolation from multi-unit recordings in cat striate
cortex,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 43–54, Dec. 1995.
[4] B. L. McNaughton et al., “The stereotrode: A new technique for simultaneous isolation of several single units in the central nervous system from
multiple unit records,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 391–397,
Aug. 1983.
[5] K. D. Wise et al., “An integrated-circuit approach to extracellular microelectrodes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 238–247, Jul.
1970.
[6] M. Hajj Hassan et al., “NeuroMEMS: Neural probe microtechnologies,”
Sensors, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 6704–6726, Oct. 2008.
[7] Q. Bai and K. D. Wise, “Single-unit neural recording with active microelectrode arrays,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 911–920,
Aug. 2001.
[8] P. K. Campbell et al., “A silicon-based, three-dimensional neural
interface: manufacturing processes for an intracortical electrode array,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 758–768, Aug.
1991.
[9] A. Berényi et al., “Large-scale, high-density (up to 512 channels) recording of local circuits in behaving animals,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 111,
no. 5, pp. 1132–1149, Mar. 2014.
[10] J. Du et al., “Multiplexed, high density electrophysiology with nanofabricated neural probes,” PLoS One, vol. 6., no. 10, p. e26204, Oct. 2011.
[11] T. J. Blanche et al., “Polytrodes: High-density silicon electrode arrays
for large-scale multiunit recording,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 93, no. 5,
pp. 2987–3000, May 2005.
[12] P. Ruther and O. Paul, “New approaches for CMOS-based devices for
large-scale neural recording,” Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., vol. 32, pp. 31–37,
Jun. 2015.
[13] K. Seidl et al., “CMOS-based high-density silicon microprobe arrays for
electronic depth control in intracortical neural recording-characterization
and application,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1426–1435,
2012.
[14] T. Torfs et al., “Two-dimensional multi-channel neural probes with electronic depth control,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 5,
pp. 403–412, Oct. 2011.
[15] C. M. Lopez et al., “An implantable 455-active-electrode 52-channel
CMOS neural probe,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 248–261, Jan. 2014.
[16] K. L. Drake et al., “Performance of planar multisite microprobes in recording extracellular single-unit intracortical activity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 719–732, Oct. 1988.
[17] S. E. Swirhun et al., “Measurement of electron lifetime, electron mobility
and band-gap narrowing in heavily doped p-type silicon,” in Proc. IEEE
Electron Devices Meet., Dec. 1986, pp. 24–27.
[18] J. C. Potosky et al., “An electron-beam/optical-hybrid lithography approach to submicrometer electronic devices,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 924–926, Nov. 1981.
[19] Y. Du et al., “Hybrid lithography optimization with E-Beam and immersion processes for 16nm 1D gridded design,” in Proc. Asia South Pacific
Des. Autom. Conf., Jan. 2012, pp. 707–712.
[20] T. Jochum et al., “Integrated circuit amplifiers for multi-electrode intracortical recording,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, p. 012001, Feb. 2009.
[21] J. F. Hetke et al., “Silicon ribbon cables for chronically implantable microelectrode arrays,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 314–321,
Apr. 1994.
[22] D. A. Dombeck et al., “Imaging large-scale neural activity with cellular
resolution in awake, mobile mice,” Neuron, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 43–57, Oct.
2007.
[23] A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd Ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
2001.

130

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

[24] D. R. Merrill et al., “Electrical stimulation of excitable tissue: Design
of efficacious and safe protocols,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 141, no. 2,
pp. 171–198, Feb. 2005.
[25] A. Hassibi et al., “Comprehensive study of noise processes in electrode
electrolyte interfaces,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 1074–1082, Jul.
2004.
[26] S. F. Lempka et al., “Theoretical analysis of intracortical microelectrode
recordings,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, p. 045006, Aug. 2011.
[27] T. Suzuki et al., “A 3D flexible parylene probe array for multichannel neural recording,” in Proc. IEEE EMBS Conf. Neural Eng., 2003,
pp. 154–156.
[28] A. Mercanzini et al., “Demonstration of cortical recording and reduced
inflammatory response using flexible polymer neural probes,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst., Jan. 2007, pp. 573–576.

[29] A. N. Zorzos et al., “Three-dimensional multiwaveguide probe array
for light delivery to distributed brain circuits,” Opt. Lett., vol. 37,
pp. 4841–4843, 2012.
[30] A. S. Chuong et al., “Noninvasive optical inhibition with a redshifted microbial rhodopsin,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 17, pp. 1123–1129,
2014.
[31] N. C. Klapoetke et al., “Independent optical excitation of distinct neural
populations,” Nature Methods, vol. 11, pp. 338–346, 2014.
[32] F. Chen et al., “Expansion microscopy,” Science, vol. 347, pp. 543–548,
2015.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

