IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1949

The Palm-Sized Cryoprobe System Based
on Refrigerant Expansion and Boiling and Its
Application to an Animal Model of Epilepsy
Tatsuji Tokiwa, Member, IEEE, Lev Zimin, Satoru Ishizuka, Takao Inoue, Masami Fujii, Hiroshi Ishiguro,
Hiroshi Kajigaya, Yuji Owada, Michiyasu Suzuki, and Takeshi Yamakawa∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: The purpose of this study is to propose the palmsized cryoprobe system based on a new concept and to suggest that
the freezing technique could be used for treatment of epilepsy.
Methods: We propose herein a cryoprobe system based on the boiling effect that uses a specific refrigerants with a boiling point higher
than that of liquid nitrogen yet low enough to result in cell necrosis. To evaluate and verify the effectiveness of the proposed system,
cooling characteristics are investigated in agar. In addition, the system is applied to a Wistar rat brain-model, in which the epileptic
activities are induced in advance by a potent epileptogenic substance. Results: The design concept yielded the following benefits:
1) the selected refrigerant promotes sealing in the tank; 2) the tank
can be made as compact as possible, limited only by the volume required for the refrigerant; 3) because the tank and probe units can
be separated by a nonconducting, flexible, and high-pressure tube,
the tank unit can be manipulated without disturbing the probe tip
with mechanical vibrations and electrical noise. Although the agar
experiments, we verified that the proposed system can uniquely
and reproducibly create an ice ball. Moreover, in the rat experiments in vivo, it was confirmed that penicillin G-induced epileptic
activities disappeared on freezing with the proposed system. Conclusions: The palm-sized system has desired characteristics and
can apply for an animal model of epilepsy. Significance: Results of
in vivo experiments suggest that cryosurgery may be an effective
treatment for epilepsy.
Index Terms—Animal model of epilepsy, cryoprobe,
cryotherapy, necrosis, palm-sized cryoprobe system, penicillin G,
refrigerant expansion and boiling, sealed refrigerant tank, wistar
rat.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

RYOSURGERY has long been accepted as an important
alternative surgical technique for resection and is mainly

Manuscript received October 30, 2014; revised January 28, 2015; accepted
February 14, 2015. Date of publication February 26, 2015; date of current version July 15, 2015. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Specially
Promoted Research under Project 20001008 granted by MEXT of Japan, and Hiroshima City University Grant for Special Academic Research (General Study).
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
T. Tokiwa was with the Kyushu Institute of Technology, and is now with the
Hiroshima City University.
L. Zimin, S. Ishizuka, and H. Ishiguro are with the Kyushu Institute of
Technology.
T. Inoue, M. Fujii, Y. Owada, and M. Suzuki are with the Yamaguchi University, Graduate School of Medicine.
H. Kajigaya is with the Nippon Veterinary and Life Science University.
∗ T. Yamakawa is with the Fuzzy Logic Systems Institute, Fukuoka 808-0196,
Japan (e-mail: yamakawa@flsi.or.jp).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2407692

applied to cancer and tumors [1]. Patients, who undergo modern cryosurgery instead of conventional surgical resection, benefit from several advantages, such as a less-invasive procedure,
lower morbidity, simple procedure, minimal bleeding, anesthetic effect, low-temperature vaccination effects, and low cost
[1]–[3].
Arnott [4] was the first to describe the benefits of local cooling, and numerous cryoprobe systems and techniques have been
presented since then, such as precooled metal blocks, precooled
needles, dry-ice applications, spray-pour freezing with compressed or liquefied gases [5], refrigeration systems, thermoelectric methods and cryogenic heat pipes, cryoneedles, the
Joule–Thomson effect [6], [7], and the boiling effect [3], [8], [9].
However, Rabin et al. concluded that, because of the extreme
cooling power usually needed for cryosurgery and especially
for the procedures involving internal organs, most cryosurgeons
prefer the boiling effect to the cooling technique [3].
To the best of our knowledge, three cryoprobe systems based
on the boiling effect have been proposed [3], [8], [9]. Such conventional cryoprobe systems are minimally invasive and create
a local frozen area because the probe tips are several millimeters
in size and the frozen area can be created only at the probe tips.
However, because these systems use liquid nitrogen (LN) with a
boiling point of −196 °C at atmospheric pressure as refrigerant,
bleeding valves are required to release naturally vaporized refrigerant. In other words, the tank unit in each conventional cryoprobe system cannot be sealed. Furthermore, each cryoprobe
system includes a cryoprobe, a refrigerant tank, pressure regulators, valves, etc., and, thus, is not a stand-alone system; the
probe is connected to the refrigerant tank that must remain stationary and be thermally isolated from the environment. These
constraints result in a large apparatus.
However, Cooper reported that a tissue temperature of −20 °C
held for 1 min is sufficient to produce tissue necrosis [10]. Moreover, Gage and Baust summarized that, considering the margin
of error in clinical applications, the safest temperature for cancer
therapy is −50 °C for all cancerous tissue or for other situations,
in which the tissue must be destroyed by freezing [11].
To overcome these apparatus-related problems, we propose
herein the palm-sized cryoprobe system based on the boiling
effect. It uses specific refrigerants with boiling points higher
than that of LN yet low enough to achieve cell necrosis [12].
The selected refrigerant leads to excellent sealing characteristics
for the tank because of a lower saturated vapor pressure at
room temperature and is thus suitable for storage. Therefore, the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

respectively. The numbering of labels in Fig. 1(b) determines the
numbering system used in this paper. The probe needle consists
of three coaxial cannulas (15)–(17). The remaining part of the
middle cannula (17) is protected from freezing by a layer of
ambient air (19) in the coaxial cavity. The coaxial cavity (19)
is located between the middle cannula (17) and outer coaxial
cannula (16) and serves as a thermal insulator.
In the first stage of design, vacuum was envisioned to provide
thermal isolation; however, experiments showed that ambient air
is sufficient for thermal isolation (see Rabin et al. [3]). Based on
our experimental results, a 0.1–mm-thick layer of ambient air
layer is sufficient for thermal insulation. Because of the thermal
insulation, the refrigerant emerging from the inner cannula (15)
evaporates at the tip and cools it. Thus, heat transfer between
the brain tissue and the evaporator is performed only at the tip
of the middle cannula (17), which is 2-mm long and 0.7-mm in
diameter. The vaporized gas is exhausted from the refrigerant
vent (13) through the middle tube (17). The important characteristic of the tricoaxial-tube cryogenic needle is a high contrast in
temperature, which freezes tissues deep inside the brain without
damaging healthy tissue.
Part (18) is a 1-mm-diameter silver cap. Silver is used for
this cap because it is a good heat conductor. The silver cap
is directly soldered onto the tip of the middle tube (17) and
provides effective heat transfer between the brain tissue and the
evaporator.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND METHODS
A. Experiment With Phantom
Fig. 1. (a) Photograph of the proposed cryoprobe system and (b) component
drawing. The cryoprobe system is palm sized and consists of a tank unit and a
probe unit connected by a high-pressure flexible tube. The labels indicate the
following: (1) stainless-steel screw, (2) mesh filter, (3) tank body, (4) O-ring,
(5) filler hole, (6) body of needle assembly, (7) charging valve, (8) blocking
pin, (9) flow-path adjustment needle, (10) refrigerant tank, (11) open-close and
adjusting valve, (12) fixed part of the flexible tube, (13) refrigerant vent, (14)
silver alloy, (15) inner coaxial tube, (16) outer coaxial tube, (17) middle coaxial
tube, (18) removable tip, (19) thermal-insulation space, (22) nonconducting,
flexible, and high-pressure tube. Parts (3), (6)–(8), (11), (15)–(17), and (20) are
made from SUS 304. Parts (9), (12), (14), (18), (21), and (22) are made of SUS
440, epoxy, silver alloy, silver, brass, and teflon, respectively. The probe needle
is 70-mm long and the diameter of the outer and middle tube is 1.0 and 0.7-mm,
respectively. The mass of the tank unit, probe unit, and entire system is 320, 16,
336 g, respectively.

tank can be made as compact as possible within the constraint
imposed by the volume of the refrigerant required for freezing.
In other words, the cryoprobe system is a stand-alone system.
To evaluate and verify the effectiveness of the proposed system, we investigate its cooling characteristics in agar and, then,
apply the system to a Wistar rat brain-model, in which epileptic
activities are induced in advance by applying a potent epileptogenic substance.
II. MAIN CONSTRUCTIONS OF THE PROPOSED
CRYOPROBE SYSTEM
The proposed cryoprobe system comprises a tank unit and a
probe unit. Fig. 1(a) and (b) shows a photograph of the apparatus
and a component drawing of the proposed cryoprobe system,

This study investigated the heat transfer characteristics of
the cryoprobe system when used on a phantom. The phantom
consisted of agar gel made from 0.8 wt% agar powder and
99.2 wt% water. The cryoprobe system was applied to the phantom inside an aluminum box. During cooling, the appearance
and size of the resulting ice ball and the temperature distribution
around the probe needle tip (PNT) were recorded as a function of
time.
The aluminum box was made of 10-mm in thickness aluminum plates and had inner dimensions of 94-mm in width
by 50-mm in length by 65-mm in height. The top of the box
remained open. The box was supported by two aluminum
legs of 96-mm in width × 10-mm in thickness × 85-mm
in height immersed in warm circulating water in a water
bath 260 mm × 260 mm × 100 mm (THERMO BOX A1-M50,
THERMONICS CO., LTD., Japan). The temperature of the
phantom test section was maintained at around 38 °C by heat
conducted through the aluminum legs and by controlling the
temperature of the warm water. In addition, the front face of the
box contained a transparent acrylic window 30-mm (width) ×
6-mm (thickness) × 33-mm (height) through which the ice ball
could be observed from outside.
1) Measurement of the Size of Ice Ball Around PNT: Two
probes with different diameters (φ = 0.7, 1.0-mm) and two refrigerants (HCFC-22 and R-410a with boiling points of −40.8
and −51.4 °C at atmospheric pressure, respectively) were used.
After agar solution was poured into the aluminum box, the
probe unit was inserted into the agar solution to 6.0-mm below

TOKIWA et al.: PALM-SIZED CRYOPROBE SYSTEM BASED ON REFRIGERANT EXPANSION AND BOILING AND ITS APPLICATION

1951

TABLE I
DISTANCE FROM CENTRAL AXIS OF PNT TO CENTRAL AXIS
OF THERMOCOUPLES
Distances from to the PNT central axis (mm)

Fig. 2. Arrangement of the cryoprobe and thermocouples to measure temperature. Tc4 is bonded directly on the PNT surface, and the probe needle
and thermocouples except Tc4 are fixed to the glass wire with epoxy resin.
Thermocouples, Type T (copper-constantan), have a 0.1-mm diameter and a
1.0–mm-long junction by spot welding. (a) Photo of cryoprobe and thermocouples (Front view). (b) Schemacic of the arrangement of thermocouples around
the PNT (Top view).

the surface and fixed at this position with an arm holder before
gelatinization. Next, the temperature of the test section in the
phantom was raised up to about 38 °C and maintained at this
temperature. The PNT was then cooled by supplying a refrigerant at 1.0 L/min, measured at the probe outlet through the
refrigerant vent (13). An ice ball grew around the PNT and was
imaged at the rate of four images per minute through the acrylic
window for 20 min. The size of the ice ball was measured from
the image by comparing its size with the known diameter of
the outer coaxial tube (16). To quantify the size of the ice ball,
the maximum horizontal distance between the opposite side of
the ice ball was determined and is defined as the ice-ball diameter (characteristic length).
2) Measurement of the Temperature Around PNT: A PNT of
0.7-mm in diameter and R-410a as refrigerant were selected because the experiment involved freezing a real brain. Before the
agar solution gelatinized as described in the previous section,
the probe unit and a six-element thermocouple array were positioned with an arm holder into the aluminum box. The central
parts of the 2.0-mm-long PNT and the 1.0-mm-long thermocouples were at the same height in the phantom. The temperature
of the test section in the phantom reached a steady state around
38 °C and then cooling was initialized by supplying the refrigerant at the predetermined flow rate of 1.0 L/min, measured at
the refrigerant vent (13) for the refrigerant gas.
The probe unit with the thermocouple array consists of the
probe unit and six thermocouples. Each thermocouple is a type
T thermocouples (copper-constantan; Inter Medical Co., Ltd,
Japan) and is a 0.1-mm diameter 1.0-mm-long spot weld including capsule. One thermocouple was bonded directly onto
the PNT surface, and the other five thermocouples and the
probe needle were bonded and fixed to a glass wire with an

TC1

Tc2

TC3

Tc4

TC5

Tc6

2.8

1.8

0.8

0.4

1.2

2.2

epoxy coating by using an epoxy resin adhesive with high thermal conductivity. Fig. 2 shows a photograph of the probe needle
and thermocouples and the distance between the PNT and the
thermocouples is given in Table I. Another thermocouple of
the same type was embedded 5.3-mm from the central axis
of the PNT and 4.3-mm below the surface of the phantom.
The temperatures around the PNT were measured from
10 min prior to cooling, during the 20 min cooling period,
and for 30 min after cooling at the rate of 2 Hz and with
an accuracy of 0.1 °C by using a data logger (Thermodac-F,
model: 5030A, Eto Denki Inc., Japan). Data were analyzed using
MATLAB.
B. Wistar Rat Experiments
Many animal models exist for epilepsy in vivo [13]. For this
research, a penicillin G-induced epileptic model was selected for
two reasons: 1) the model is one of the most popular methods to
study simple focal seizures and can induce epileptic activities
(discharge and seizure) within dozens of minutes after the injection of the epileptogenic substance [13]; 2) the epileptic source
does not spread but is localized within a few millimeters [14].
For practical applications involving living tissue, animal experiments were conducted. Wistar rats weighing 373 ± 56 g
were anesthetized with isoflurane (1–2%) via a nosepiece in order to maintain the anesthesia (n = 12). The rectal temperature
of the rats was held at 37 ± 0.5 °C by using a heating pad (ATC402, Unique Medical, Japan). The skull of the rat was fixed by
using a stereotactic apparatus (SR-6N Narishige, Tokyo, Japan)
and the skin on the skull was cut following the hypodermic injection of lidocaine (2.0%). The right parietal area of the skull
was exposed and a craniotomy was performed using a dental
drill. The craniotomy area was located between 4-mm rostral
and 3-mm caudal from the coronal suture and between 1 and
7-mm lateral from the sagittal suture.
To record electrocorticograms (ECoGs), two silver-ball electrodes (UL2-2020, UNIQUE MEDICAL CO., LTD, Japan) were
placed anteroposteriorly so as not to block the blood flow in
the craniotomy area and over the dura mater. The electrodes
were connected to a digital data-acquisition system (DIGIDATA
1322A, Axon Instruments, USA) via a differential ac amplifier
(DPA-2016, Dia-medical, Japan), and the ECoGs were digitized by a computer with a sampling rate of 10 kHz (low-pass
filter 300 Hz, 0.3-s time constant). A platinum wire located beneath the scalp was used as the negative pole of a recording
amplifier. An indifferent electrode was positioned in the left
hind leg. A T-type thermocouple (φ 0.1-mm, Physitemp Instruments, Inc., Ultrafine IT-Series Flexible Microprobe IT-24P)
and a thermometer (BAT-12, Physitemp Instruments Inc., USA)
were used to record the focal-brain temperature. Fig. 3 shows

1952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 3. Dorsal view of the Wistar rat skull showing the craniotomy location,
electrodes (Ch.1 and Ch.2), a T-type of thermocouple, and the insertion point of
the cannula. These electrodes and the thermocouple are located over the dura.
This figure is based on a schematic from [15].

a schema of the operation area with the positions of the two
silver-ball electrodes marked by open circles. It also shows the
position of the thermocouple and penicillin G injection.
To inject an epileptogenic substance into the brain, a part of
the dura was carefully incised, and a cannula was inserted in
without damaging the blood vessels on the brain surface. The
injection point was 2-mm deep in the right primary somatosensory and motor cortex. Penicillin G (Meiji Co., LTD., Penicillin
G potassium 200 000 units for injection, 400 IU/μl 4% NaCl
solution) was injected at 0.2 μl/min (WPI Co., LTD., SP100i
Syringe Pump) by an injection cannula (φ 0.3-mm, EiCOM
Co., LTD., Model: EIM-40) for 5 min. After stably inducing an
epileptic discharge and seizure, the cannula was removed and
replaced by the probe unit. The PNT was inserted 3.0-mm deep,
which was 0.5-mm deeper than the injection cannula. Considering the size of epileptogenic lesion induced by penicillin G
and the results of the phantom experiments: 1) the silver tip was
removed in rat experiment, 2) R-410a was used as refrigerant,
and 3) the freezing period was set to 20 min.
All of the experiments were performed under appropriate
conditions in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and
the Bioethical Standards of Animal Experiments at the Kyushu
Institute of Technology.
C. Histology
To examine the cell destruction within the frozen area, Hematoxylin and Eosin (H & E) staining was used. First, after the
freezing experiment, the rat brain was maintained for 3 h
under the anesthesia and then perfused with saline and 4%
paraformaldehyde. The saline and paraformaldehyde were used
to remove blood and perfusion fixation, respectively. After these
operations, the brain was excised and sliced in a 6-μm-thick
coronal section.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Results of Experiment With Phantom
1) Growth of Ice Ball Around PNT: Fig. 4 shows the diameter
of the ice ball around the PNT as a function of time after the onset
of cooling for two probes with different diameters (φ = 0.7, 1.0mm) and two types of refrigerant (HCFC-22 and R-410a). The
ice ball basically forms a body of rotation around the central axis
defined by the PNT. Its initial shape is nearly cylindrical, but it
grows rounder and becomes teardrop shaped during cooling.

Fig. 4. Size of the ice ball around PNT as a function of time after the onset
of cooling for two probes with different diameters (φ = 0.7, 1.0-mm) and two
types of refrigerant (HCFC-22 and R-410a). The size is defined as the maximum
horizontal distance between the ice-ball boundaries (i.e., the ice-ball diameter).
Data are shown with average (black dots) ± standard deviation (vertical bars)
(n = 4).

For all combinations of the PNT diameter and refrigerant,
the unsteady heat conduction together with the solidification of
water causes the ice ball to grow monotonically with a slowing
growth rate. As shown in Fig. 4, after the onset of cooling, the
ice-ball diameter increases rapidly for 2 to 3 min, then subsequently increases slowly until it asymptotically approaches a
constant. Fig. 4 also shows clearly the influence of the PNT
diameter and refrigerant on the size of ice ball: it is larger for
R-410a, which has a lower boiling point than HCFC-22 and is
larger for the large diameter probe (1.0-mm versus 0.7-mm).
20 min after the onset of cooling, the size of ice ball is nearly
stable. However, a great deal of refrigerant remains in the tank
after the cooling. For example, for the 0.7-mm probe with R410a, the residual mass of refrigerant was about 130 g after
20 min of cooling and the initial mass of refrigerant was about
180 g.
Fig. 4 shows that the ice ball sufficiently reaches a steady state
in 20 min. As described in the previous section, a penicillin Ginduced epileptic source is 2 or 3-mm in diameter. Therefore,
the 0.7-mm-diameter PNT and R-410a were selected for the rat
experiments and used a 20 min freezing period.
2) Heat Transfer Characteristics Around PNT: For the 0.7mm-diameter PNT with R-410a, Fig. 5 shows the transient
change in temperature around the PNT as a function of time
before, during, and after cooling, and Fig. 6 shows the transient
temperature distribution around the PNT during cooling. Before being cooled, the probe temperature and the surrounding
temperature were stable at around 38 °C.
Fig. 5 shows that the temperatures measured by the thermocouples vary as step functions on cooling (t = 0 min). The
temperatures initially decrease rapidly and then decrease monotonically with time because of the unsteady heat conduction of
the probe needle wall and the phantom. Subsequently, the decrease in temperature slows and the temperatures approach constant values at each thermocouple. Between t = 10 and 20 min,
the temperature around the PNT asymptotically approaches
the steady state. Near the PNT, the temperature changes more
rapidly and is lower than that at points father than the PNT at
the same time. In addition, the points nearer the PNT reach a
lower end temperature. For example, the end temperature was
nearly −18 °C for Tc4 and it was nearly 0 °C for Tc6. The end

TOKIWA et al.: PALM-SIZED CRYOPROBE SYSTEM BASED ON REFRIGERANT EXPANSION AND BOILING AND ITS APPLICATION

1953

Fig. 5. Transient change in temperatures as a function of time around the
PNT before, during, and after cooling. Refrigerant R-410a flowed at a constant
rate to cool the 0.7-mm-diameter PNT. The time origin (t = 0) corresponds to
the time at which the refrigerant began to flow. The cooling period was set to
20 min by opening and closing the valve (11) shown in Fig. 1. The temperature
of the boundary of the phantom (i.e., agar gel) was maintained constant at
approximately 38 °C by using a water bath with a thermostat. Tci (i = 1 − 6)
corresponds to thermocouple 1–6, respectively (see Fig. 2).
Fig. 7. Transient change in cooling rate as a function of time around PNT
after the onset of cooling. To avoid inaccuracies caused by noisy temperature
fluctuations, the cooling rats were determined from the temperature obtained
by calculating moving averages for 10-s wide. Data are plotted with a gray line
and a fit to a polynomial of degree 20 is shown by the black lines to make the
graph easier to read. Different panels correspond to the different thermocouples
as labeled, and the value in parentheses represents the distance from the central
axis of PNT to the given thermocouple, as given in Table I.

Fig. 6. Transient temperature distribution as a function of distance from PNT
during cooling. The time t is the time after the onset of cooling. Tci (i = 1 − 6)
corresponds to thermocouple 1–6 (see Fig. 2).

temperature at the surface of the PNT is −18 °C, which is greater
than the boiling point (−51.4 °C) of the refrigerant because of
the thermal resistance between the refrigerant and Tc4.
As shown in Fig. 6, the temperature distribution around the
PNT decreases overall from a uniform 38 °C and increases
monotonically with distance from the PNT. The distribution
nearly reaches the steady state after 10 or 20 min, as shown in
Fig. 5.
Fig. 5 also shows that the temperature recovers from the end
temperature after 20 min long cooling and increases to nearly
38 °C over several tens of minutes. This increase in temperature
around the PNT results from heat inflow from the regions of
higher temperature outside the frozen region and from the upper part of the probe unit through the unsteady heat conduction
together with the thawing of ice. The temperatures measured
by the thermocouples increase as step response and then return gradually almost all together to the initial temperature of
approximately 38 °C.
In cryosurgery, the destruction of biological tissues by freezing generally depends not only on the temperature but also on

the cooling rate in relation to the freezing behavior of tissues
[16], [17]. Therefore, in this study, the cooling rate around the
PNT was also investigated as basic cooling performance of the
cryoprobe system. To this end, Fig. 7 shows the cooling rate as
a function of time at the various thermocouples, as determined
from Fig. 5.
The cooling rates shown in Fig. 7 are defined as the absolute
value of the first derivative of temperature with respect to time.
Because temperature measurements are influenced by minute
(0.1 °C) fluctuations at 2 Hz (i.e., noise), the accuracy of the
calculated cooling rate declines. Therefore, in order to prevent
the decline in the accuracy, the moving average temperature as
a function of time was determined by averaging the temperature
in Fig. 5 over a 10-s window, i.e., 20 data were averaged in
the region where the temperature fluctuation was significantly
unfavorable. Next, the first-order differential coefficient is calculated by using the finite difference approximation at 0.5-s
intervals. Fig. 7 shows the derivatives (gray lines) and also a fit
to a polynomial of degree 20 (black lines) to make the graph
easier to read. Essentially, the cooling rate has a broad dynamic
range because temperature changes as a step function (which
is why the cooling rate as a function of time is plotted on a
semilogarithmic graph with a minimum of 1.0 °C /min).
Qualitatively, the cooling rate increases rapidly with time
near t = 0 min, reaches a maximum, and then decreases monotonically to approach zero asymptotically. With increasing distance from the PNT, the maximum cooling rate decreases, the
passage time of the maximum cooling rate is delayed, the subsequent decrease in cooling rate slows down (it takes longer
to reach 1.0 °C /min). For example, the cooling rate at Tc4
(on the surface of the PNT), which has a maximum of nearly

1954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 9. Coronal sections of the rat brain (H & E stain, 6-μm thick) at coronal
section: (a) overview, (b) nonfrozen region, (c) boundary region, and (d) frozen
region. Panels (b)–(d) show magnified zones of panel (a).

Fig. 8. Representative data acquired (a) before, during, and after the freezing
period and (b) 3.5 h after the freezing period. Vertical axis gives two channels of
ECoGs (top two) and temperature over the dura. Gray-colored sections indicate
the freezing period. Panel (a) contains three periods. 1) From 20 to 32.45 min,
epileptic discharges were induced by penicillin G. 2) From 32.45 to 52.45 min
was the freezing period (20-min long). 3) From 52.45 to 80 min was the after
freezing period. During the first period, the epileptic discharges in Chs. 1 and
2 were induced approximately every second. During the freezing period, these
epileptic discharges disappeared within one second. During the third period,
epileptic discharges did not occur and the temperature gradually recovered to
around 32 °C. During the postfreezing period, the epileptic discharges did not
relapse and the temperature remained constant.

2 × 103 °C/min, rises rapidly near t = 0 min and then falls
rapidly to 1.0 °C/min near t = 100 s. In contrast, the cooling
rate at Tc1, which is much farther from the PNT, has a maximum of nearly 30 °C/min and decreases to nearly 1.0 °C/min
near t = 6 min.
B. Application to Wistar Rat Brain
The epileptic discharges were gradually induced about 5 min
after the injection began. However, focal seizures in the left
forelimb were induced about 38 min after the injection began.
Fig. 8 shows ECoG (Ch.1), ECoG (Ch.2), and the temperature
over the dura at the cranial window. The gray-colored sections
in Fig. 8 indicate the freezing period. For the experiment, the
freezing period was 20 min.
As shown in Fig. 8(a), during the freezing period, epileptic
discharges gradually disappear within 1 min. In contrast, epileptic seizures disappear quite rapidly at the onset of freezing. During the freezing period, the temperature over the dura shifts from
33 to −20 °C. Some large-amplitude spike-like brainwaves occur during and after the freezing period, for example, at t = 33.8
and 65 min, because of the noise and sweat dripping on the tissue. As shown in Fig. 8(b), epileptic discharges do not induce
even 3.5 h after the freezing period. In addition, the extinct
seizure does not reoccur during this period.

These experimental results suggest that the penicillin Ginduced epileptiform activities disappeared on using the proposed cryoprobe system.
C. Histological Evaluations
Fig. 9 shows H & E stained coronal sections of the Wistar
rat brain. Notable physical destruction occurs around the probe
impact point, and the necrotic area spreads in a semicircular
pattern from this point. The boundary between the necrotic
area and normal area is relatively clear. A hypermic and/or
hemorrhage band appears along the boundary area. Almost all
nerve-cell nuclei in the necrotic area are smaller than normal
and have undergone pyknotic change. The number of nuclei of
the nerve cells in these areas decreases. Erythrocytes near the
probe-needle impact were hemolyzed, but the level of hemolysis gradually becomes normal with increasing distance from the
impact point, and hemolysis does not occur at the border of the
necrotic lesion. Histologically, a slight infiltration by leukocytes
occurs at the boundary area.
V. DISCUSSIONS
A. Constructive Features
Because the vapor pressure of the selected refrigerants is not
as high as that for LN, the tank unit can be sealed. In other
words, the refrigerant can be stored for years in the tank and
is not wasted, in contrast to the situation for the conventional
cryoprobe systems [3], [8], [9]. Moreover, to the best of our
knowledge, 2.4-mm is the smallest diameter size of probe tip
which is a commercial cryoprobe system based on refrigerant
expansion and boiling (LN2, IceSense3, IceCure Medical). The
proposed cryoprobe system thus has a compact and sealed tank
and can be readily available for transport and use at any moment.
Moreover, a nonconducting, flexible, and fatigue-resistant
high-pressure tube is connected to the tank unit to the probe

TOKIWA et al.: PALM-SIZED CRYOPROBE SYSTEM BASED ON REFRIGERANT EXPANSION AND BOILING AND ITS APPLICATION

unit, and a valve for opening, closing, and adjusting refrigerant
flow is attached not to the probe unit but to the tank unit. This
configuration brings the following benefits: 1) vibrations caused
by adjusting the valve on the tank unit are not conducted to the
probe unit; 2) during freezing period, opening, closing, adjusting, and refrigerant reaccumulation can be achieved without
introducing an electrical noise. Because the probe unit can be
fixed to the Stereotactic Frame (NARISHIGE, Japan) by using
an adapter clamped to the cylindrical surface of the probe unit,
the point at which the PNT is inserted can be tuned with submillimeter precision. These improvements simplify experimental
procedures.
A stable freezing temperature at the PNT is important because it determines the accuracy of the cryogenic surgery. For
cryoprobe systems based on the boiling effect, the temperature
is determined uniquely by the boiling point of the accumulated
refrigerant in the tank. Because of the features of the phase transition, a stable pressure in the inner tube (15) leads to a stable
freezing temperature. This phenomenon eliminates the need for
additional complicated devices to control the working temperature of the PNT, because controlling the gas pressure is quite
simple. Because the refrigerant in the tank (10) evaporates naturally even if the pressure is temporarily decreased, the pressure
in the tank is determined uniquely by the boiling point of the
refrigerant and the room temperature, which is almost constant
in an operating room. This phenomenon works unless the tank
becomes empty. Thus, the design of the sealed refrigerant tank
facilitates the control of the tank pressure.
B. Cooling Characteristics of the Cryoprobe System
in Phantom
The characteristics of cooling around the PNT are summarized below based on the results given in Figs. 4–7.
1) Formation and growth of the ice ball around the PNT is
caused by the extent of influence of temperature drop of
the probe from the surface of the PNT toward the father
region with the passage of time through the unsteady heat
conduction in the phantom. First, ice forms in the phantom
on the PNT wall surface because of some supercooling degrees. Subsequently, the ice grows larger with a decrease
in temperature due to the heat conduction together with
solidification of water including ejection of latent heat.
2) The decrease in temperature and the extent of the lowtemperature region correspond to the growth of the ice
ball. The asymptotic limit of the decreasing temperature
and the approach to steady-state temperature correspond
to the saturation size of the ice ball. During this sequence
of events, the temperature decreases rapidly at the early
stage and slows down with time.
3) With increasing distance from the PNT, temperature responses are delayed and become slower, and the decrease
in temperature becomes smaller because of unsteady heat
conduction in the phantom.
4) The end temperature on the PNT (near −18 °C) differs
from the boiling point (−51.4 °C) of the refrigerant because of the total thermal resistance between the refrigerant and thermocouple Tc4. This resistance consists of

1955

Fig. 10. Cooling rate as a function of temperature during cooling (i.e., phaseplane trajectory on temperature). These figures were produced on the basis of
the results shown in Figs. 5 and 7. Data are plotted with a gray line and a fit
by a polynomial of degree 20 (black line) to make the graph easier to read. The
six panels correspond to the six thermocouples, and the values in parentheses
indicate the distance from the central axis of PNT to the given thermocouple,
as given in Table I.

thermal resistance by boiling heat transfer of the refrigerant and that due to heat conduction in the probe wall
and between the probe wall surface and the thermocouple
Tc4.
The ice ball forms a body of rotation around the central axis of
the PNT. Actually, the probe needle is hemispherical at the PNT
and extended along the probe axis. The upper part of the cooling
section of the probe needle connects structurally to a metal wall
(made of SUS 304) along the probe axis. Therefore, the ice ball
is nearly cylindrical shape during the early stages of cooling
because the thermal boundary layer around the probe needle is
thin and develops roughly in a 1-D manner. However, the ice
ball becomes more roundish with time so that it is hemispherical
around the PNT and slender near the upper part of cooling
section due to the heat conduction along the axial direction of
the probe needle through the probe wall. For this reason, the ice
ball develops into a teardrop shape around the probe needle.
Considering the influence of the thermal parameters to the
growth of ice ball from the viewpoint of heat transfer, a refrigerant with a lower boiling point leads, not surprisingly, to an
increased rate of ice growth. Because silver has a higher thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity than water or ice, the
1.0-mm PNT cools better and produces a bigger ice ball than
the 0.7-mm PNT for the same refrigerant.
As a function of the unsteady heat conduction around the
PNT, the temperature and cooling rate dependently change over
time during cooling. In general, the characteristics of freezinginduced damage of biological tissue depend on thermal parameters (the cooling rate and end temperature). Thus, the coolingrate-temperature phase-plane trajectory is proposed in this study
(see Fig. 10) on the basis of Figs. 5 and 7 in order to investigate the relationship between these two parameters. Data are
shown over the entire range of measured temperature. The subzero temperatures are significant for freezing. As in Fig. 7, the
cooling rate is plotted on a logarithmic scale with a minimum
of 1.0 °C/min. Data are plotted with a gray line and are fit by

1956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

a polynomial of degree 20, which is shown by a black line to
make the graph easier to read. Moreover, the lower right panel
in Fig. 10 shows all data for the six thermocouples together with
isochrones.
In Fig. 10, the point at the lower right represents the point
at which the temperature starts to decrease (t = 0 min). The
trajectory then evolves counterclockwise with time so that the
lower left point represents the end temperature (i.e., nearly the
steady state). During the decrease in temperature from the initial
temperature near 38 °C, the cooling rate undergoes a maximum
and thereafter decreases (with the decrease in temperature slowing down). Subsequently, the temperature approaches the end
temperature, the cooling rate approaches zero, and the growth
of ice ball is saturated.
The results for the temperature drop and the attainable minimum temperature indicate that, near the PNT, the phase-plane
trajectory is larger and the temperature changes and cooling
rate are larger nearer the PNT. This result means that the region
nearer the PNT can be more easily controlled.
C. Experimental Results With Rats
These rat experiments are suitable for evaluating the proposed
system for the following reasons: 1) the experiment of freezing
the rat brain requires submillimeter accuracy to adjust the position at which the probe is inserted, so the palm-sized cryoprobe
system is preferable; 2) the experiment does not requires a large
refrigerant tank because the desired freezing zone spans only a
few millimeters; 3) to observe and evaluate the epileptic activity
during freezing, EEG must be measured without disturbing the
PNT or causing mechanical vibrations and electrical noise.
The tissue destruction found at the probe-impact point was
thought to be physical damage, but the cell death found in
the necrotic area seemed to result from freezing. Based on
the spreading pattern of the necrotic area, freezing progressed
concentrically from the impact point. The presence of normal
erythrocytes and leukocytes in the hypermic vessel and in the
hemorrhage area near the necrosis border suggests that this response results from an acute inflammatory reaction stimulated
by the freezing treatment or by tissue necrosis.
D. Freezing to Treat Epilepsy
Local freezing of brain tissue (e.g. brain tumors) as a treatment has a long history beginning with the report of Hass and
Taylor 1953 [16], [18]. However, since it was first introduced
by Openchowski in 1883, localized cortical freezing is known
to produce prompt and reliable epileptic effects [19], [20].
Some proposed methods of inducing epileptiform activities
by cortical freezing use a direct spray or application of refrigerants [21]–[28], and precooled metal rods or probes [19], [27],
[29]–[39]. Moreover, some studies combined drug stimulation
such as Metrazol [24], [25], electrical stimulation, or photic
stimulations [19], [24], [25] with the freezing methods in order
to induce prolonged epileptic activities. Freeze-induced epilepsy
is often considered to be a highly transient phenomenon, useful mainly for acute physiological studies [29]. Electrocorticographic evidence of epileptic discharge usually begins within

a few hours of cerebral cortex freezing and lasts up to several
days [19], [31], [32], [40], [41].
The lesion sites of the epileptic responses are mainly developed through the formation of acute edema [30], [31], [43],
gliosis [29], [30], extracellular fluid [25], [30], slowly developing chemical changes [27], and significant decreases in glutamic acid, glutamine, and glutathione [21]. In addition, Spencer
and Kandel reported that epileptogenic lesions destroy some inhibitory mechanism [42], and Bickford and Klass have similarly
suggested that “system failure” rather than an “epileptic neuron”
is instrumental in epileptogenesis [29], [44]. Nims et al. reported
that, two weeks after the freezing, actual tissue loss was revealed
by an excavation at the site of the lesion. Finally, as healthy brain
tissue was approached peripherally, the complete destruction of
cells and fibers gradually became less marked [27].
In our experiments, however, notable physical destruction occurred in the frozen area of the cortex and epileptic activities
were not provoked within 3 h after the freezing (n = 9). Our proposed method did not induce the activities most likely because
of the difference in freezing protocols (freezing speed, duration,
area, and temperature). However, for the reasons listed below,
it is impossible to confirm the difference in protocols between
previous methods and the proposed method.
First, in the method of the spray and application, freezing
temperature on the cortical surface is nuclear and, therefore,
the method is poorly reproducible. Moreover, the refrigerant
gases used such as ethyl chloride may contribute to altering
the relative electrolyte concentration in addition to freezing the
tissue [24]. For the method involving a precooled metal rod,
because the rods do not cause heat-insulating effects, they may
not be cooled to the boiling point of the refrigerant, and the
detailed measurement conditions or temperature change during
freezing were not clearly reported, even if a thermocouple was
mounted on the probe tip [37], [45].
Surgery is known to be essential for treating drug-resistant
epilepsy, the so-called intractable epilepsy. The purpose of the
present research is to propose a cryoprobe system based on a
new concept and to suggest that the freezing technique could be
used to treat epilepsy. In other research fields, focal cooling was
used to suppress the epileptiform activity [46], [47]. Moreover,
effective freezing protocols for cell necrosis or preservation
have been studied [1], [2], [48]–[50]. By considering the result
of these studies, effective protocols involving the proposed cryoprobe system may be designed in the future to surgically treat
intractable epilepsy.
VI. CONCLUSION
This study proposed the palm-sized cryoprobe system based
on refrigerant expansion and boiling with a new concept. The
design concept yielded the following benefits: 1) the selected
refrigerant allows the tank to be well sealed, thus making it suitable for storage; 2) consequently, the tank can be designed as
compact as possible (within the constraints imposed by the volume of refrigerant required for freezing); 3) because the tank unit
and the probe unit can be separated by a nonconducting, flexible,
and high-pressure tube, the tank unit can manipulated without
disturbing the PNT with mechanical vibrations and electrical
noise.

TOKIWA et al.: PALM-SIZED CRYOPROBE SYSTEM BASED ON REFRIGERANT EXPANSION AND BOILING AND ITS APPLICATION

Based on the agar experiment in vitro and rat experiments
in vivo, we found that the proposed cryoprobe system can
uniquely and reproducibly create an ice ball. Moreover, penicillin G-induced epileptic activities disappeared on freezing the
tissue with the proposed system. These results suggests that
cryosurgery may be an effective treatment for epilepsy.
REFERENCES
[1] N. N. Korpan, Basics of Cryosurgery. New York, NY, USA: Springer
2002.
[2] W. Yiu et al., “Cryosurgery: A review,” Int. J. Angiol., vol. 16, pp. 1–6,
2007.
[3] Y. Rabin et al., “A compact cryosurgical apparatus for minimally invasive
procedures,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 251–258, 1997.
[4] J. Arnott, “Practical illustrations of the remedial efficacy of a very low or
an esthetic temperature. I. In cancer,” Lancet, vol. 2, pp. 257–259, 1850.
[5] P. Kollner and E. Duczek, “Apparatus for cryosurgery,” U.S. Patent
3 794 039, 1974.
[6] R. P. Rzasa and R. M. Wallach, “Cryosurgical instrument,” U.S. Patent
4 377 168, 1983.
[7] J. P. Homasson et al., “The operation and efficacy of cryosurgical, nitrous
oxide-driven cryoprobe,” Cryobiology, vol. 31, pp. 290–304, 1994.
[8] I. S. Cooper and A. S. Lee, “Cryostatic congelation: A system for producing a limited, controlled region of cooling or freezing of biologic tissues,”
J. Nervous Mental Dis., vol. 133, pp. 259–263, 1961.
[9] Z. Chang et al., “Development of a high-performance multiprobe cryosurgical device,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 383–390,
1994.
[10] I. S. Cooper, “Cryobiology as viewed by the surgeon,” Cryobiology,
vol. 1, pp. 44–51, 1964.
[11] A. A. Gage and J. Baust, “Review mechanisms of tissue injury in
cryosurgery,” Cryobiology, vol. 37, pp. 171–186, 1998.
[12] T. Yamakawa et al., “Needle cryo-probe and freezing system,” PCT International Patent Application, PCT/JP2009/000639, 2009.
[13] R. S. Fisher, “Animal models of the epilepsies,” Brain Res. Rev., vol. 14,
pp. 245–278, 1989.
[14] J. L. Noebels and T. A. Pedley, “Anatomic localization of topically applied
[14 C] penicillin during experimental focal epilepsy in cat neocortex,” Brain
Res., vol. 125, pp. 293–303, 1977.
[15] G. Paxions and C. Watson, The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. New
York, NY, USA: Academic, 2007.
[16] A. A. Gage et al., “Experimental cryosurgery investigations in vivo,”
Cryobiology, vol. 59, pp. 229–243, 2009.
[17] H. Ishiguro and T. Horimizu, “Three-dimensional microscopic freezing
and thawing behavior of biological tissues revealed by real-time imaging
using confocal laser scanning microscopy,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transf.,
vol. 51, pp. 5642–5649, 2008.
[18] G. M. Hass and C. B. Taylor, “Quantitative studies of experimental productive and treatment of acute closed cerebral injury,” AMA Arch. Neurol.
Psychiatry, vol. 69, pp. 145–170, 1953.
[19] G. R. Hanna and R. M. Stalmaster, “Cortical epileptic lesions produced
by freezing,” Neurology, vol. 23, pp. 918–925, 1973.
[20] P. Openchowski, “Sur l’action localisée du froid, appliqué a la surface
de la région corticale du cerveau,” Compt. Rend. Soc. De Biol., vol. 35,
pp. 38–43, 1883.
[21] S. Berl et al., “Amino acid metabolism in epileptogenic and nonepileptogenic lesions of the neocortex (CAT),” J. Neurochem., vol. 4,
pp. 311–317, 1959.
[22] M. Hori et al., “Effect of anticonvulsants on spiking activity induced by
cortical freezing in cats,” Epilepsia, vol. 20, pp. 25–36, 1979.
[23] E. Lewin and A. McCrimmon, “ATPase activity in discharging cortical
lesions induced by freezing,” Arch. Neurol., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 321–325,
1967.
[24] F. Morrell, “Experimental focal epilepsy in animals,” AMA Arch. Neurol.,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 141–147, 1959.
[25] F. Morrell and A. Florenz, “Modification of the freezing technique for
producing experimental epileptogenic lesions,” Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 10, pp. 187–188, 1958.
[26] F. Morrell et al., “Effect of drugs on discharge characteristics of chronic
epileptogenic lesions,” Neurology, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 492–498, 1959.
[27] L. F. Nims et al., “Effect of local freezing on the electrical activity of the
cerebral cortex,” Yale J. Biol. Med., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 477–484, 1941.

1957

[28] A. Schneider and B. Epstein, “The effects of local freezing of the central nervous system of the cat,” Arch. Neurol. Psychiatry, vol. 25, no. 6,
pp. 1263–1270, 1931.
[29] R. M. Stalmaster and G. R. Hanna, “Epileptic phenomena of cortical
freezing in the cat: Persistent multifocal effects of discrete superficial
lesions,” Epilepsia, vol. 13, pp. 313–324, 1972.
[30] T. A. Pedley et al., “Focal gliosis and potassium movement in mammalian
cortex,” Exp. Neurol., vol. 50, pp. 346–361, 1976.
[31] H. Loiseau et al., “The early phase of cryogenic lesions: An experimental
models of seizures updated,” Epilepsia, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 251–258, 1987.
[32] E. S. Goldensohn and D. P. Purpura, “Intracellular potentials of cortical neurons during focal epileptogenic discharges,” Science, vol. 193,
pp. 840–842, 1963.
[33] AV. Escueta et al., “The freezing lesion 2. Potassium transport within
nerve terminals isolated from epileptogenic foci,” Brain Res., vol. 78,
pp. 223–237, 1974.
[34] T. Grisar et al., “Glial contribution to seizure: K+ activation of (Na+,
K+)-ATPase in bulk isolated glial cells and synaptosomes of epileptogenic
cortex,” Brain Res., vol. 261, pp. 75–84, 1983.
[35] H. M. Keith and R. G. Bickford, “Observations on the properties of an
electrical focus induced by freezing the animal cortex,” Amer. J. Physiol.,
vol. 179, pp. 650–651, 1954.
[36] R. A. Clasen et al., “The production by liquid nitrogen of acute closed
cerebral lesions,” Surge.,Gynecol. Obstetr., vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 605–616,
1953.
[37] M. Molnar and J. E. Skinner, “Generalized epilepsy evoked by freeze
lesions in the mesencephalon of the cat,” ACTA Neurobiol. Exp., vol. 43,
pp. 299–310, 1983.
[38] R. A. Clasen et al., “Experimental cerebral edema produced by focal
freezing,” J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 579–596, 1962.
[39] T. G. Smith and D. P. Purpura, “Electrophysiological studies on epileptogenic lesions of cat cortex,” Neurophysiology, vol. 12, pp. 59–82, 1960.
[40] A. D. Speransky, A Basis for the Theory of Medicine. New York, NY,
USA: International Publishers, 1943.
[41] F. Morrell, “Secondary epileptogenic lesions,” Epilepsia, vol. 1,
pp. 538–560, 1959.
[42] W. A. Spencer and E. R. Kandel, “Synaptic inhibition in seizures,” in
Basis Mechanisms of Epilepsies. Boston, MA, USA: Little, Brown, 1969,
pp. 575–603.
[43] E. Arrigoni et al., “Relationship between epileptic activity and edema
formation in the acute phase of cryogenic lesion,” Neurochem. Pathol.,
vol. 7, pp. 207–220, 1987.
[44] R. G. Bickford and D. W. Klass, “Sensory precipitation and reflex mechanisms,” in Basic Mechanisms Epilepsies. Boston, MA, USA: Little,
Brown, 1969, pp. 543–564.
[45] J. Baust et al., “Minimally invasive cryosurgery—Technological Advances,” Cryobiology, vol. 34, pp. 373–384, 1997.
[46] S. M. Rothman et al., “Focal cooling for epilepsy: An alternative therapy
that might actually work,” Epilepsy Behav., vol. 7, pp. 214–221, 2005.
[47] M. Fujii et al., “Cooling of the epileptic focus suppresses seizures with
minimal influence on neurologic functions,” Epilepsia, vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 485–493, 2012.
[48] P. Mazur, “Cryobiology: The freezing of biological systems,” Science,
vol. 168, pp. 939–949, 1970.
[49] P. Mazur, “The role of intracellular freezing in the death of cells cooled at
supraoptimal rates,” Cryobiology, vol. 14, pp. 251–272, 1977.
[50] N. E. Hoffmann and J. C. Bischof, “The cryobiology of cryosurgical
injury,” Urology, vol. 60, pp. 40–49, 2002.

Tatsuji Tokiwa (M’12) was born in Fukuoka, Japan,
in 1980. He received the B.Eng., M.Eng., and Ph.D.
degrees from the Kyushu Institute of Technology,
Fukuoka, Japan, in 2004, 2006, and 2009, respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department
of Brain Science and Engineering, Graduate School
of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu
Institute of Technology. He is currently an Assistant
Professor at Hiroshima City University, Hiroshima,
Japan. His research interests include signal processing, mathematical model of central pattern generator, multilegged robotics,
electroencephalography, and epilepsy.

1958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Lev Zimin was born in Grodno, Belarus, in 1946.
He received the M.Eng. degree in physics from Belarus State University, Minsk, Belarus, in 1970, and
the Ph.D. degree in physical and quantum electronics
from the Institute of Physics Academy of Science of
Belarus, Minsk, in 1978.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at the
Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka, Japan.
His research interests include optical engineering,
physics, and microelectromechanical systems.

Satoru Ishizuka was born in Nagoya, Japan, in 1953.
He received the B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Toyama,
Toyama, Japan, in 1975 and 1977, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree for his studies on neurophysiology
from Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, in 1996.
He was an Assistant Professor with Kyushu University from 1977 to 2000. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Kyushu Institute of Technology,
Fukuoka. His main research interests include neuronal physiology, fluctuation, and chaos.

Takao Inoue was born in Miyazaki, Japan, in 1979.
He received the B.Eng. degree from Miyazaki University, Miyazaki, Japan, in 2001, and the M.Eng. and
Ph.D. degrees from the Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka, Japan, in 2003 and 2008, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Yamaguchi, Japan. His research interests include primate
behavior and electrophysiology.

Masami Fujii was born in Yamaguchi, Japan, in
1957. He received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from
Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan, in 1983
and 1993, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the
Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, Yamaguchi University. His research interest includes functional neurosurgery.

Hiroshi Ishiguro was born in Toyama, Japan in 1957.
He received the B.Eng., M.Eng., and Dr. Eng. degrees
in mechanical sciences and engineering from the
Tokyo Institute of Technology (TIT), Tokyo, Japan,
in 1980, 1982, and 1985, respectively.
He was a Research Associate with TIT and an Associate Professor and a full Professor with the University of Tsukuba. He is currently a full Professor
at the Department of Biological Functions and Engineering, Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology,
Fukuoka, Japan.
His background is heat transfer, thermofluid dynamics, and mechanical engineering. His current research interests include bioheat transfer and biothermal
engineering, particularly cryobiology and cryotechnology.

Hiroshi Kajigaya received the Ph.D. and B. Veterinary Medical Science degrees from Nippon Veterinary and Zootechnical College, Tokyo, Japan, and
a Doctor of Veterinary and Medicine license from
the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries,
Tokyo.
He is currently a Professor at Nippon Veterinary
and Life Science University, Tokyo. He is a Specialist in veterinary pathology and his research interest
includes wildlife medicine, concerning sudden death
and traffic accident.
Yuji Owada was born in Fukushima, Japan, in 1963.
He received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from Tohoku University, Miyagi, Japan, in 1989 and 1996,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of
Organ Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan.
His research interests include neuroscience, lipid
biochemistry, and molecular/cellular biology.
Michiyasu Suzuki was born in Fukushima, Japan, in
1955. He received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from
Tohoku University, Miyagi, Japan, in 1979 and 1986,
respectively.
He was an Associate Professor with Iwate Medical University and is currently working as a Professor
and a Chairman at the Department of Neurosurgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University
School of Medicine, Yamaguchi, Japan. He is a Member of the Japan Neurosurgical Society, the Japan
Stroke Society, the Japan Society of Cerebral Blood
Flow and Metabolism, the Japan Society of Neurotaumatology, the Japanese
Congress for Brain Tumor Surgery, the Japanese Society on Cerebral Stroke,
the Conference on Neurosurgical Techniques and Tools, the Japanese Society
for Pediatric Neurosurgery, the Japan Academy of Neurosonology, the Japan
Clinical Health care and Welfare Association, the Japan Association of Neurosurgical Clinics, the Japan Coma Society, Japanese Headache Society, the Japan
Society of Neurosurgical Emergency, the Japan Brain Dock Society, the Japan
Society for Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery, the American Association of Neurological Surgeons, and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons
and Society for Neuroscience. He is a Member of the Editorial Board of Neurologia Medicochirurgical, Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Disease. His
research interests include cerebrovascular disease, neurotrauma, repair and regeneration of neuronal injury, blood-brain barrier, brain edema, drug delivery
system, inflammation (cytokine), and blood coagulation (thrombin).
Takeshi Yamakawa (F’09) received the B.Eng. degree in electronics engineering from the Kyushu Institute of Technology, Tobata, Japan, in 1969, and
the M.Eng. degree in electronics engineering and the
Ph.D. degree for his studies on electrochemical devices from Tohoku University, Miyagi, Japan, in 1971
and 1974, respectively.
He was an Associate Professor with Kumamoto
University. He joined the Faculty of Computer Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of
Technology (KIT), Wakamatsu, Kitakyushu, Japan,
as a full Professor in April 1989. He established a national foundation, Fuzzy
Logic Systems Institute (FLSI), Fukuoka, Japan, in 1990. He is currently the
Director of FLSI and also a Professor Emeritus of the Faculty of Life Science
and Systems Engineering, KIT. His main research interests include hardware
implementation of fuzzy systems, fuzzy neural networks, chaotic systems, and
self-organizing systems, as well as microdevices for biochemical analysis. He
holds 11 patents in U.S.A., four in Europe, one in Australia, and one in Taiwan,
and has also applied for more than 90 patents in Japan. He is a Member of the
Editorial Board and a regional Editor of ten international professional journals.
He contributed to more than 80 international conferences as an Organizer or a
Member of organizing/programming committee.
Dr. Yamakawa received fifteen awards, such as International MOISIL Prize
and the Gold Medal in 1994. He is a Fellow of the International Fuzzy Systems
Association and the Japan Society of Fuzzy Theory and Intelligent Informatics.

