2044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Sex and Smoking Status Effects on the Early
Detection of Early Lung Cancer in High-Risk
Smokers Using an Electronic Nose
Annette McWilliams, Parmida Beigi, Akhila Srinidhi, Stephen Lam, and Calum E. MacAulay∗

Abstract—Objective: Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath as measured by electronic nose (e-nose) have utility
as biomarkers to detect subjects at risk of having lung cancer in
a screening setting. We hypothesize that breath analysis using an
e-nose chemo-resistive sensor array could be used as a screening tool to discriminate patients diagnosed with lung cancer from
high-risk smokers. Methods: Breath samples from 191 subjects—
25 lung cancer patients and 166 high-risk smoker control subjects
without cancer—were analyzed. For clinical relevancy, subjects
in both groups were matched for age, sex, and smoking histories. Classification and regression trees and discriminant functions
classifiers were used to recognize VOC patterns in e-nose data.
Cross-validated results were used to assess classification accuracy.
Repeatability and reproducibility of e-nose data were assessed by
measuring subject-exhaled breath in parallel across two e-nose devices. Results: e-Nose measurements could distinguish lung cancer
patients from high-risk control subjects, with a better than 80%
classification accuracy. Subject sex and smoking status impacted
classification as area under the curve results (ex-smoker males
0.846, ex-smoker female 0.816, current smoker male 0.745, and current smoker female 0.725) demonstrated. Two e-nose systems could
be calibrated to give equivalent readings across subject-exhaled
breath measured in parallel. Conclusions: e-Nose technology may
have significant utility as a noninvasive screening tool for detecting
individuals at increased risk for lung cancer. Significance: The results presented further the case that VOC patterns could have real
clinical utility to screen for lung cancer in the important growing
ex-smoker population.
Index Terms—Breath analysis, electronic nose (e-nose), lung cancer, sensor array, pattern recognition, volatile organic compounds
(VOCs).

I. INTRODUCTION

L

UNG cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, with the number of deaths attributable to lung

Manuscript received June 9, 2014; revised October 17, 2014 and January
1, 2015; accepted February 18, 2015. Date of publication March 11, 2015;
date of current version July 15, 2015. This work was supported by the Canadian
Cancer Society under Grant #19246 and the Canadian Cancer Society—Ontario
Division under Grant #19805. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
A. McWilliams is with the Department of Respiratory Medicine, Sir Charles
Gairdner Hospital.
P. Beigi is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of British Columbia.
A. Srinidhi is with Point Grey Research.
S. Lam is with the Department of Integrative Oncology, BC Cancer Research
Centre.
∗ C. E. MacAulay is with the Department of Integrative Oncology, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada (e-mail: cmacaula@
bccrc.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2409092

malignancy increasing steadily for years [1]. Lung cancer is
usually diagnosed in its later stages and as a result its five-year
survival rates are very poor. Earlier clinical identification and
management of disease would greatly increase survival rates
[2]. Computed tomography (CT) is one of the most commonly
used imaging methods to diagnose lung cancer. The recently
published NLST study has shown that low dose CT (LDCT) reduces mortality from lung cancer when used for early detection.
CT, however, is relatively expensive, involves radiation, and is
associated with false-positive results that necessitate further CT
follow-up or invasive diagnostic procedures [3], [4]. There is an
identified need for inexpensive, reliable, and noninvasive methods capable of identifying individuals at risk of harboring lung
cancer. This type of targeted approach will improve the efficacy
of an early lung cancer detection program utilizing LDCT.
It has long been known that human breath provides useful
information on health conditions [2], [5]. Respiratory diseases
such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
and cystic fibrosis may be identified from the breath odor [6].
This is due to the existing equilibrium between compounds in
the alveolar air and pulmonary blood once gas exchange has
occurred in the lungs [7]. Recently, exhaled breath analysis has
been introduced as a possible diagnostic tool to identify the
presence of diseases such as lung cancer [8]–[12].
Exhaled breath contains mixtures of many volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) as identified by gas chromatography (GC)
and mass spectrometry (MS) [13]–[16]. It is known that several
diseases and altered metabolism may cause unique VOC signatures [17]–[19]. Many studies have sought useful chemical
mixtures in breath that characterize lung cancer: many VOCs
quantified by GC–MS have been identified in exhaled breath
samples, combinations of which can characterize lung malignancies [20]–[25]. However, GC–MS methods are complex,
expensive, time-consuming, require expert analysis, and do not
produce real-time results—all of which limit the utility of this
approach in clinical practice [21], [26]. A noninvasive tool to
monitor the olfactory signal and to recognize VOC patterns is
electronic nose (e-nose) technology [27], [28].
An e-nose is a VOC recognition device consisting of an array of sensors (chemo-resistive, acoustic, pyroelectric, optical,
etc.) with partially overlapping sensitivities that can produce
digital “smell-prints” of specific VOCs. The chemo-resistive
sensors used in this work can be highly sensitive to specific
VOCs in human breath; they detect effects of VOCs through
a chemical reaction and accordingly generate an electrical impulse. These sensors may be electrodes coated with reactive

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MCWILLIAMS et al.: SEX AND SMOKING STATUS EFFECTS ON THE EARLY DETECTION OF EARLY LUNG CANCER IN HIGH-RISK SMOKERS

compounds. Once these sensors are exposed to exhaled breath—
depending on the existing chemical constituents—the sensors’
electrical conductance characteristics change, causing a measurable resistance change. Data obtained from a sensor array
are then analyzed using pattern recognition techniques to obtain a unique response pattern corresponding to a specific odor.
The e-nose is capable of noninvasive measurement of breath
samples as well as real-time analysis of breath chemicals—both
of which make it attractive for wide application as a screening
technology.
The Cyranose 320 (Smiths Detection, Inc.), which was used
for this work, is one type of portable e-nose system consisting of 32 polymer composite sensors. Once a gas mixture
passes across the sensor array, its chemical components induce
reversible changes in the electrical resistance of the sensors.
Sensors are made cross-responsive, so that the detection of a
particular VOC is based on a 32-D response pattern of the array
rather than a single sensor. According to the chemical diversity
of the array material, resistance changes in the 32 sensors result
in a unique pattern of electrical resistance differences (“smellprints”). During the measurement process, the Cyranose 320
records its operational state (measuring subject air, measuring
control air, purging sample chamber, etc.) in addition to the outputs of the 32 sensors. The operational state is recorded as a flag
status variable.
Here, we hypothesize that breath profiling by e-nose is
capable of differentiating patients with early stage, potentially
curable lung cancer from matched high-risk control subjects
without lung cancer. Several recent studies have been conducted
on e-nose applications for detection of lung cancer [8]–[11].
Tran et al. [11] employed an e-nose system consisting of an
array of six-channel coated chip sensors to discriminate lung
cancer patients from control subjects consisting of smokers,
nonsmokers, and patients with respiratory disorders. Their results included response curves from each channel for parameters
such as rate to peak height, peak height, rate to recovery, and
area under the curve (AUC), with significant differences observed between test groups. Machado et al. [9] also applied the
Cyranose 320. They showed 71.4% sensitivity and 91.9% specificity for the identification of lung cancer patients, though their
comparison groups were not well matched as the control group
consisted of patients with several types of pulmonary diseases.
Dragonieri et al. [8] used the same e-nose system for the discrimination of nonsmall cell lung cancer, COPD patients, and
nonsmoker healthy controls. They reported 85% classification
accuracy for distinguishing lung cancer patients from COPD
patients and, analyzing two sets of measurements (to confirm
reproducibility), an average of 85% for the identification of lung
cancer patients from healthy controls, Mazzone et al. [10] used
colorimetric sensor array technology to discriminate lung cancer
patients from controls, with 73.3% sensitivity and 72.4% specificity. The authors also mentioned that if experiments focused
on one histological disease subtype only—e.g., lung squamous
cell carcinoma—then model accuracy would be improved. This
led them to conclude that patients with various lung cancer histologies could be distinguished accurately. Cheng et al. [29] also
investigated the use of Cyranose 320 to distinguish the exhaled

2045

breath of smokers and nonsmokers and reported a classification
accuracy of 95%.
Although studies have assessed e-nose potential for distinguishing lung cancer patients from controls, a well-matched
control group has generally not been used to facilitate comparisons and many of the included lung cancers were of more
advanced stage [8]–[11]. To address these issues, we included
stringent demographically matched sets in both control and lung
cancer groups—and only included patients with clinical Stage
I/II lung cancer. Also, to account for potential confounding effects due to smoking, we recruited current or former smoking
subjects only (i.e., excluding never smokers). A key novelty
of this study then is the comparison of a well-matched set of
high risk current/former smokers to lung cancer patients with
the same demographic risk indicators: age, sex, similar number of pack-years of smoking history, and smoking status. The
aims of this study were: 1) to test the proposed hypothesis
on well-matched patient groups and validate the classification
model; 2) to assess the effects of sex and smoking on e-nose
measurements; 3) to assess system reproducibility (in consideration of downstream clinical utility); 4) to evaluate if “time
of day” impacted e-nose responses; and 5) to study if changing
the equipment could introduce a systematic bias to the exhaled
breath data for a more accurate analysis. This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes study methods; Section III
describes experimental analyses; Section IV presents the experimental results and discussions; and Section V provides our
conclusions based on our work.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Study Population and Design
We applied a combined cross-sectional case-control study
design to delineate lung cancer patients from high-risk heavy
smokers without detected cancer. Control subjects were individuals at risk for lung cancer who were involved in a lung
cancer screening study and lung cancer patients were from local referrals, recruited from the BC Cancer Agency (BCCA) and
Vancouver General Hospital. The Review of Ethics Board of the
University of British Columbia approved this study. Informed
consent was obtained in all participants.
A total of 206 subjects participated in this study. Data for our
primary analysis were derived from 191 current/former smokers placed into two categories based on diagnosis at the time of
enrollment: lung cancer patients and noncancer control cases.
(Fifteen cases [206 – 191] were held in reserve as a test set.) Subjects ranged in age from 45 to 79 years, could be male or female,
and were restricted to current and ex-smokers with smoking histories of ࣙ20 pack-years. Clinical features of this population are
described in Table I (age and pack-years values are expressed
in the form of mean ± SD). No statistically significant differences were observed between the “High-risk Smoker” and
“Lung Cancer” groups in terms of sex, overall smoking status,
and pack-year histories. A significant difference in the age of
the patients was noted (p = 0.01, t-test); however, we also note
a high degree of overlap in the ages of these cohorts. There was
also a statistical difference in the distribution of COPD between

2046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

TABLE I
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION
Characteristics

High-risk smokers

Lung cancer

166
62.8 ± 6.7
86|80
87
79
45.6 ± 17.8
68 | 97
50
45
0
4
21
39
42
9

25
66.5 ± 6.0
12|13
9
16
47.5 ± 20.6
17 | 4
7
4
1
2
4
7
6
2

Patients (n)
Age(y) ± SD
Sex (M|F)
Current smokers (n)
Former smokers (n)
Pack-years (n) ± SD
COPD status (Y|N)
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Congestive heart failure
Transient ischemic attack
Asthma
Bronchitis
Pneumonia
Diabetic

learning set. After the model was constructed, blind analysis
was performed on the test set to validate the predicted model.
An addition dataset consisted of measurements from 15 healthy
nonsmokers subjects. Data from these cases were used to assess intersystem reproducibility and exhaled VOC sensitivity to
subject fasting.
B. Exhaled Breath Collection

TABLE II
COMPOSITION OF LUNG CANCER PATIENTS
Cancer type
Small cell lung carcinoma
Nonsmall cell lung carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma

Number

Mean tumor diameter

Sex (M|F)

1
2
20
2

20.0 mm
6.4 mm
20.0 mm
28 mm

1|0
0|2
11|9
2|0

the control and lung cancer cases (note COPD status for 4 of the
lung cancer cases were not available). No statistical differences
in scores were observed: 1) based on age differences or 2) based
on any combination of age/sex/smoking/COPD status variables.
The “High-risk Smokers” category contained 166 control subjects with high risk for lung cancer. These patients were recruited
as part of a LDCT-based early lung cancer detection program at
the BCCA. They showed no evidence of lung cancer on baseline CT or CT scan surveillance (mean follow-up time was 15.2
months). The second group contained 25 patients with a histologically confirmed diagnosis of lung cancer. Table II shows
the clinical characteristics of patients diagnosed with lung cancer with respect to their lung cancer histological subtypes. The
distribution of co-morbidities for these cancer patients and controls is shown in Table I. There were no statistically significant
differences in the co-morbidities between the controls and the
cancer patients. Four of the lung cancer patients had previous
cancers (lung, cervical, colon, and breast). All cancer diagnoses
were confirmed with cytology, biopsy, or surgical resection and
the reported staging is postsurgery for all but three patients and
all but one patient had a PET scans to further inform their staging. One patient had concurrent breast cancer for which they
had started chemotherapy; otherwise, all patients were sampled
prior to treatment.
For all the different classification training methodologies used
in this study, we divided these 191 subjects into at least two independent groups: a learning set and a test set. The classifier
we sought to define would distinguish lung cancer patients from
high-risk smokers based on a predictive relationship. The predictive relationship was defined by nonblind analysis of a defined

The breath collect for all cases was acquired in the same clinical setting at the BCCA. Subjects breathed humidified medical
air. Exhaled breath was collected in Mylar gas-sampling bags
(see Fig. 1). Briefly, patients first inhaled and exhaled medical air
for alveolar washout. Three deep (vital capacity) breaths were
taken, with exhaled air vented to the room. System valves were
next turned and all the exhaled air was collected in sampling
bags (with entire breath samples collected, not just an alveolar
fraction). Three to five exhaled breaths filled collection bags
sufficiently. The breathing circuit was closed and had no exposure to ambient air. Collected exhaled breath was sampled by
the e-nose five times (l = 1 . . . 5), with this process interspersed
with bursts of humidified medical air to flush the circuit. Humidified air was tested as the baseline against which VOCs
from each patient were measured. The pattern of sensor responses to the VOCs present was recorded during the five repeat
measurements.
C. Data Processing and Statistical Analysis
The typical raw signal obtained from an e-nose sensor as well
as the flag variables is shown in Fig. 2. Data are color coded
by the flag variable status, which determines the stage of the
experiment, at the time of the measurement. The raw signal
required correction for baseline drift. Baseline data points (time
points when the flag variable had values 1 and 7 and the system
was full of humidified medical air) were fitted using a fifthorder polynomial, which was then used to predict the baseline
during data measurements (time points when flag variable was
3), which were subtracted from the raw signal. After this, each
of the five baseline corrected e-nose data measurements was
fitted by a double exponential curve to extract the rise time and
amplitude of each sensor response to each of the five samplings
of exhaled breath.
Finally, the value predicted by the double exponential at the
midpoint of the measuring process was recorded for each of the
five samplings. Fig. 3 shows the full process used to fit each sensor’s data. All 32 sensor e-nose array responses (S1 , . . . , S32 )
were processed this way. After this correction, there was no
statistically significant difference between any of the five measurements and for the majority of analysis (unless specifically
stated otherwise) we averaged over the five measurements to determine the most representative sensor response for the breath
analysis. Our analysis differs from previous works [8]–[11] in
that we used resistance changes in combinations of two sensors rather than as individual sensors, as no correlation with
exhaled breath from cancer patients versus high risk controls
was observed in individual sensor data.

MCWILLIAMS et al.: SEX AND SMOKING STATUS EFFECTS ON THE EARLY DETECTION OF EARLY LUNG CANCER IN HIGH-RISK SMOKERS

Fig. 2.

2047

Typical raw sensor response, with highlighted flags.

Fig. 3. Data processing: an example of fully processed sensor data and the
five sensor responses measured.

For each combination of pairs of sensor data, a regression
line for only the measurements from the high-risk controls was
calculated. To make the regression analysis robust to outlier
data, we excluded the 5% most variable cases from the linear
fitting process. For each sensor pair, the data were projected
onto and along the linear regression line determined for that
pair using the following process: for each sensor pair Si Sj , we
let α and Ŝi be defined as follows:
α = −tan−1 (m)
Δ

Δ

Ŝi = Si − b

Fig. 1.

Schematic of system framework and sample collection.

(1)
(2)

where m and b are the slope and the intercept of Si Sj regression
line for the control samples onto which the data were projected.
The projection of the data onto this new axis was accomplished

2048

using the following equation:
 
 
xS i S j
cos(α)
=
yS i S j
sin(α)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

−sin(α)
cos(α)




×

Sj


.

(3)

Ŝi

Following the projection of all patient and control subject data
onto these regression lines, most transformed data (xS i S j , yS i S j )
showed some degree of separation between exhaled breath from
cancer patients versus high risk controls (this is represented in
later figures).
D. Classification and Model Validation
To classify data by cancer status, we used classification and
regression trees (CARTs) [30] as well as discriminant function
classifiers [31]. Prior to any classification methods being applied, we reduced the dimension of the feature space in two
ways: 1) a Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon (MWW) test was performed to extract the 25 most discriminant descriptors in the
transformed feature space; and 2) we visually assessed scatter
plots of the transformed pairs of sensor readings and selected
the 25 most discriminant pairings based on the visual perception
of two study authors (CM, PB).
1) CARTs: CART analysis is a nonparametric greedy technique for building predictive models from the data using decision trees (Statistica, Version 10, Stat Soft, Inc.). Where there
are numerous features in the data with complex nonlinear interactions, building a single global model is not an efficient choice.
In such cases, greedy algorithms using trees which combine the
locally optimal structures to build a global optimal model is
an appropriate solution. We used CART as a binary classifier
to categorize data into cancerous and noncancerous groups. To
increase the generalizability of the trees generated by CART,
we limited the number of nodes in the trees to ∼2–3 by altering
stopping conditions.
2) Discriminant Function Analysis (DFA): Forward stepping DFA (Statistica, Version 10, Stat Soft, Inc.) is another
statistical tool used to determine a set of predictors for building
a classification model. DFA creates discriminant functions corresponding to linear combinations of predictors which maximize
between-group differences relative to within-group differences
of the datasets to be separated. To assess analysis robustness and
the likely accuracy of the predicted model for subsequent data,
we partitioned data into training and test sets in multiple ways.
a) K-fold Cross Validation: In this approach, data were
randomly split into K groups. For each K-fold test, one group is
removed from the set and is considered as the test set, while the
remaining K–1 groups form the training set. The model is built
on the training set and is validated on the test set. This procedure
is repeated for each of the K folds and K results are finally
averaged to produce the K-fold estimate of the classification
accuracy.
b) Instrumentation Bias Corrections: During preliminary
analysis of the data, changes in instrumentation configuration
were observed to add a correctable systematic bias. More specifically, these changes were related to medical air supply sources
(was found to be minimal) and gas-sampling bags (which are
discussed in greater detail in Section II-H, below, but were

found to be large enough to affect results). To fully evaluate
the possible effects of this bias, we set the data collected in the
original configuration as the training set and the bias-adjusted
data collected using the alternate configuration as the test set,
thus intentionally maximizing the effect this bias (and our attempted corrections) might have on the generalizability of the
classification process.
c) Repeated Random Sampling Spanning Instrumentation Bias Groups: Here, the dataset was randomly split into a
2/3 training set and a 1/3 test set, making sure to equally distribute the bag biased data between the training and test sets.
Similar to the previous approaches (above), the model was predicted on the training set and was evaluated on the test set for
each split. We performed this random procedure ten times and
averaged the classification outcomes to estimate the overall accuracy the system was likely to achieve on a new dataset.
E. Discriminating Subject Breath Samples
To reduce the dimensionality of the data and to extract the
most discriminant features, we performed Mann–Whitney U
test as well as visual feature selections on relative distances.
The most discriminant features were then used as inputs to
several classification algorithms. CART was used as the first
approach to find the classification model where we limited the
number of nodes in the trees to 2–3 to minimize overtraining.
Tenfold global cross validation was done to estimate generalized
performance of the CART model on new data. For the DFA
models, the data were treated in three different ways:
1) Samples Containing All the Data (AD): A descriptive
model was predicted on a random 2/3 of the data and tested on
the remaining 1/3 of the data. This random sampling was done
nine additional times and in this way tenfold cross validation
was performed on the model obtained from the training set to
assess how well the model could be generalized.
2) Samples Containing Data From Bag I Training (B1T):
DFA was performed on the data collected using the first bag type
as the training set. After the classification model was computed
from the training set, its predictive accuracy was evaluated by
employing it on the independent test set (bias-adjusted data
collected using the second bag type.)
3) Samples Containing Randomly Selected Data (RSD): Repeated random sampling tests were performed on the data to
evaluate its robustness in differentiating cancer patients from
high-risk control subjects. The original dataset was divided ten
times into the training set (2/3 of each bag type) and the test
set (the remaining samples.) This differed from the AD analysis
insofar as RSD group would have an even distribution of bag
types in each set (whereas the AD group sampled data without consideration for bag type). After the classification model
was computed for the training set in each split, the model was
validated on the test set. The results were finally averaged to
produce a single estimation.
F. Reproducibility and Repeatability
For the e-nose to be of clinical utility for screening high risk
subjects, it must be possible to calibrate multiple e-nose systems

MCWILLIAMS et al.: SEX AND SMOKING STATUS EFFECTS ON THE EARLY DETECTION OF EARLY LUNG CANCER IN HIGH-RISK SMOKERS

Fig. 4.

2049

Schematic for reproducibility experiment (see also Fig. 1).

such that the measures made on one system are comparable to
those on another system. This will allow a classification methodology trained on one system to be applied to data acquired on
additional systems. We therefore must be able to duplicate the
systems behavior in different settings. To evaluate our ability
to calibrate multiple systems, we next compared the exhaled
breath results obtained from two e-nose devices that measured
the same exhaled breath at the same time. Fig. 4 shows the
schematic diagram of the experimental setup and results and
discussion of these results are provided in subsequent sections.
G. Evaluating the Pre- and Postprandial Analysis
To examine the possibility that the fasting state of the subject/patient could affect the concentrations of VOC present in
exhaled breath, we included a comparison of eight individuals’
e-nose responses from when they were in the pre- and postprandial states in order to study if that is a potential factor in
affecting the VOC patterns. For this study, preprandial was after a minimum of 8 h of fasting (the usual fasting of no food
from 12:00 A.M. till time of measurement). Postprandial indicated measurements within 2 h of food consumption (no dietary
restrictions were implemented).
H. Evaluating Possible Systematic Bias
Over the duration of this study, the system used to collect the
exhaled air from the subjects and patients unavoidably changed.
As the system was based upon the comparison of exhaled breath
against humidified control air (medical grade air, Air Liquide
Canada Inc., Quebec) over the duration of the study, eight different tanks of medical air were consumed. Thus, a systematic
bias associated with the different tanks used was possible. Further, with study recruitment ∼2/3 complete, we switched from
commercially produced air collection bags to in-house produced
air collection bags. This equipment alteration could also have
introduced a systematic bias to the exhaled breath data. Both of
these possible bias sources would have manifested as distinct
biases observable over time as the air tanks were replaced or as
in-house airbags were used.





Fig. 5. Two-dimensional plot of Y i j versus X i j for Sensor1 –Sensor6 smellprints, showing the discrimination of lung cancer patients (triangles) from highrisk smokers (squares).

1) Medical Air Supply Batch Effects: As standard operating
procedure, every day that subject/patient exhaled breath sample
was measured, a calibration sample was measured (humidified
medical air). We referred to these calibration measurements as
calibration controls and they were used to evaluate systematic
bias and system drift over the duration of the project. Over the
life-time of this project, the medical air tank was replaced seven
times (for a total of eight tanks being used). We plotted the
measurements obtained from the calibration controls over time
and compared them to the five-trial data measurements obtained
from 191 subjects to see if changing the medical air tank affected
the measurements.
2) Gas-Sampling Bag Effects: During this study, exhaled
breath collection bags were changed from commercially produced bags to bags produced in-house. To assess if this bag type
switch led to systematic biases in the data, we traced data obtained from subjects over time and highlighted measurements
obtained from each bag type.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
As discussed in Section II, in addition to the evaluation of
e-nose potential in discriminating lung cancers from control
subjects, this study contains several experiments regarding the
potentially effective factors in e-nose responses. The outcomes
of such experiments as well as the classification performance of
the e-nose system are provided next.
A. Results Discriminating Subject Breath Samples
We first assessed whether preprocessed data could distinguish
lung cancer patients from high-risk smokers. As noted, while
no single sensor differentiated cancer patients, by observing
combinations of sensors, patients with lung cancer could be


delineated. Fig. 5 shows the 2-D plot of Yij versus Xij for a
sensor combination as an example (i = 1 and j = 6).

2050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

TABLE III
CART APPROACH: PREDICTION ACCURACY OF E-NOSE SYSTEM IN LUNG
CANCER DETECTION
Number of features used
Specificity
Sensitivity
Validation set(s)

2

3

4

63.3%
96%
65%

81.3%
84%
80.6%

81.3%
88%
75.4%

TABLE IV
DFA APPROACH: PREDICTION ACCURACY OF E-NOSE SYSTEM IN LUNG
CANCER DETECTION
Approach
ROC AUC training
ROC AUC test

AD

B1T

RSD

0.838
0.766

0.836
0.797

0.836
0.803

Fig. 7. DFA receiver operating characteristic curves for the four demographic
subgroups using the RSD tenfold test set results.

Fig. 6. DFA receiver operating characteristic curves for three different
training-test set models.

CART was used as the first approach to generate a classification model. Classification results obtained by CART—
particularly specificity, sensitivity, and the tenfold global crossvalidation classification accuracy are summarized in Table III.
Table IV shows the AUC of the ROC for both the training and
test sets for the three different training test set splits. Fig. 6
shows the ROC curves for both the training and test sets for
the different set splits used to train the DFA models (AD, B1T,
RSD).
Not unexpectedly, the best classification prediction on the tenfold cross-validation test sets occurred using the RSD trainingtest set methodology. The DFA for each of the three training-test
set splits on average the forward stepping DFA selected between
three and four features from the 25 available. There were two


features (Y9,18 , Y6,20 ) in the intersection between the features
selected by the CART models and the 3–4 most frequently selected features across the tenfold cross-validation DFA models.
We selected these two features for a more detailed analysis
across the four demographically definable subsets within the
data (male, female, current smokers, and former smokers). To
avoid effects due to differences in cancer subject frequency, all
analyses were performed only for noncancer subjects. Also, due

to the smaller number of cases in the subgroups (1/2 to 1/4 of
the full set), we limited all group/subgroup analysis to the two
features selected earlier.
We found a statistically significant difference (p = 0.016,
MWW) between males and females subjects for one of the

features (Y9,18 ). When we examined this difference further, we
found while there was no difference between the subgroups
ex-smokers male versus ex smokers females (p = 0.78) there
was a statistically significant difference between the subgroups
of current smokers male versus current smokers females (p =

0.0075) for Y9,18 . When we examined if this difference would
affect a DFA model’s ability to correctly classify cases, we
observed the behavior in Fig. 7. The ability of a DFA model
to correctly predict sample classification in the RSD test set
appeared to depend to a small degree on the sex of the subject
(male ex-smoker AUC 0.846, male current smoker AUC 0.745
versus female ex-smoker AUC 0.816 and female current smoker
AUC 0.725). Also, the smoking status of the subjects appeared
to impact the sample classification prediction by the DFA model
to a larger degree: ex-smoker male AUC 0.846 and ex-smoker
female AUC 0.816 versus current smoker male AUC 0.745 and
current smoker female AUC 0.725 (see Fig. 7).
B. Evaluating Effects of COPD
For the 186 cases (165 controls and 21 cancers) with known
COPD status, we did not find any statistically significant correlation between the scores used to differentiate lung cancer cases
from controls across COPD status for the individual sensors
or combinations. We were able to use the e-nose sensor data
to train a DFA to differentiate between COPD and non-COPD
cases (P = 0.00004). This DFA had superior performance for
the recognition of COPD in current smokers compared to the
ex-smoker group results. However, this COPD DFA score was
not statistically significantly different between the controls and
the cancer cases (p = 0.07). These results indicate that while the
e-nose could differentiate between COPD and non-COPD cases
in agreement with the much more detailed analysis performed
by Fen et al. [19], [32], [33] the features or feature combinations

MCWILLIAMS et al.: SEX AND SMOKING STATUS EFFECTS ON THE EARLY DETECTION OF EARLY LUNG CANCER IN HIGH-RISK SMOKERS

2051

the COPD DFA used were different (and to some extent orthogonal to) the features and feature combinations used to differentiate
cancer cases from controls.
C. Evaluating Reproducibility and Repeatability
of e-Nose Systems
For this evaluation, we employed two e-nose systems and
obtained array responses for 15 samples on both systems. We
then used these data to generate a translation matrix based upon
sensor means for the 15 samples enable the adjustment of sensor
measurements made on the second system to be equivalent to
those that would have been recorded if the first system had been
used.
From an analysis of the five-series measurements from seven
nonsmoking subjects sampled in parallel by the two systems
(35 measurements in total), we observed that the two systems
could be made substantially equivalent with a sensor by sensor average linear correlation R value of 0.69 with a range of
0.11–0.96 across the 32 sensors. However, ∼10–12 sensors had
very low readings (nondetectable reactions to the VOC mixture
exhaled by nonsmokers) as seen in their very low signal to noise
ratios (<3) as defined as the average variance between individuals divided by the average variance within the five repeat
measurement instances for each individual. For those sensors
with a S/N > 3, 1) the average R value was 0.79; and 2) a plot
of the R value as a function of the sensors’ S/N demonstrated an
extremely strong correlation of larger R values with sensors that
had larger S/N ratios. This indicates that the e-nose measurements from different systems were strongly correlated but that
the level of VOCs in the exhaled breath of nonsmokers was at the
lower limit of detectability by these systems. The relationship
between sensors across both systems was the same, which is
within error of repeated measures. Systems could be calibrated
to record very similar values for the same sample. Comparisons
of the two e-nose system responses are shown in Fig. 8.

Fig. 8. Two-dimensional scatter plot of S 2 3 − S 1 2 : reproducibility test for
two devices. Open circles and squares are the average sensor measurements for
cancer subjects and the ever smokers. The solid triangles are the five repeat
measures for each nonsmoking subject measured by system 2 and the open
triangle are the same subjects measured by system 1.

D. Results Evaluating the Pre- and Postprandial Analysis
Fig. 9 shows the 2-D scatter plot of eight nonsmoker healthy
samples as well as the control subjects. In the plot, each arrow
line corresponds to the directional path from pre- to postprandial
measurements for each subject. Generally, postprandial samples
recorded readings that were closer to the high-risk subjects,
which all were analyzed in the postprandial state. It appears
that the fasting–nonfasting state can affect some combinations
of e-nose sensors (two states are significantly different for 37%
of sensor combinations); however, 99.94% of the combinations
were not significant when corrected for multiple comparisons.
For almost all the sensor pairs that were found to have some
ability to differentiate cancer subjects from high-risk smokers, the change between the pre- and postprandial state subject
measurements was in the opposite direction than that which
separated the high-risk smokers from the cancer subjects. This
suggests that some of the differences in VOCs between cancer
subjects and high-risk normal subjects may be associated with
metabolic activity associated with available energy. Essentially,
this observation is consistent with the energy model of cancer

Fig. 9. Plot evaluating the pre- and postprandial effects for the combination
of sensor 6 and 27 data. Each arrow depicts the data variation from preprandial
state to postprandial state.

cellular metabolism. Specifically cancer cells are constantly in
a metabolically challenged state (less energy and metabolites
available than optimal due to their programming for uncontrolled growth). Normal or smoke damaged lung cells in a fasting individual are likely to be closer to this state than the cells
in a nonfasting individual in which metabolites and energy are
more readily available.
E. Evaluation of Systematic Effects
Fig. 10 shows scatter plots of all the data for the sensor combination (6 and 28) from volunteers (no patients) and humidified
control air as a function of time. It shows the measurements obtained for 191 subjects (filled circles) as well as the humidified

2052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015



Fig. 11. Effect assessment of the use of different air bags: X 2 8 , 6 smell-prints
ordered by the time that they were measured.

Fig. 10. Assessment of systematic bias associated with different air tanks:


X i j (for Sensor6 –Sensor2 8 smell-prints) and Y i j measurements ordered by the
time that they were made.

control air data (open boxes). As seen in the scatter plots, the
e-nose system could detect subtle differences between medical
air supply batches (differences in the open boxes for the eight
air tanks); however, these differences were significantly smaller
than subject-to-subject differences.
In the scatter plots in Fig. 11, we can see the systematic
bias introduced by the different sample bags on the recorded

measurements. Fig. 11 shows this analysis for the X28,6 measurement combination in which there is an obvious bag bias. A


noticeable shift in both of X28,6 and Y28,6 measurements was
observed in Fig. 10 as well. Specifically, the data measured after the new batch of bags were installed (Bag II), deviates from
the data collected using the first bag type (Bag I). We conclude
that the new sampling bag type was the cause of the bias observed in the time trend. This bias was corrected by adjusting the
collected data from both types of bags to have statistically the
same average characteristics for the ever-smoker subject data
(see Fig. 12). The corrected data, after removing the additive
effects of bag type, were used for all the classification analyses.

Fig. 12. Correction of the bias introduced by a change of air collection bags
for eight sensor pair combinations. (A) Subject data prior to the bias correction.
(B) Same data after bias correction.

IV. DISCUSSION
Profiling to detect biomarker patterns in exhaled breath is an
emerging field in cancer research [8]–[11], [34], [35]. Multiple
studies mainly evaluating e-nose application to distinguish lung
cancer patients from control subjects have been conducted; however, appropriate control group selection has not always been
performed. Examples of this include the lack of current/former

MCWILLIAMS et al.: SEX AND SMOKING STATUS EFFECTS ON THE EARLY DETECTION OF EARLY LUNG CANCER IN HIGH-RISK SMOKERS

smoking controls, inappropriate control patients, and demographically mismatched test groups. The above referenced
studies–many of which included evaluation of the same e-nose
system we evaluate here—typically had control groups comprised of individuals with varied smoking statuses and other
respiratory disorders or pulmonary diseases (e.g., COPD). A
variety of e-nose sensor systems have been evaluated. One such
is the six sensor system (E-nose Mk2 and Mk3, E-nose Pty., Ltd)
described by Tran et al. [11], for the detection of lung cancer. In
their study on 33 nonsmokers, 11 ex-smokers, 18 smokers, 11
controls with respiratory disorders, and 16 lung cancers (stage
not described), they found no significant differences in their
breath measurements between the four noncancer groups. Further three of their measurement parameters were statistically
different between the cancers and the controls and while they
did not give any classification performance results visual inspection of their figures suggests at least a sensitivity of 56%
with a specificity of 78%. Peng et al. [34] evaluated a sensor
system based upon nine chemiresistors assembled from gold
nanoparticles and organic functionalities specifically designed
to be sensitive to VOCs detected to be different between controls
and lung cancer patients. They studied 56 healthy controls (39
nonsmokers, 17 smokers; average age 45 y) and 40 late stage
(3–4, smoking and average age unknown) lung cancer patients
and found complete separation between the two groups for two
PCA features and no differences with respect to sex, age or
smoking status.
The control-case classification performance reported here
falls between these two studies. However, the difference of the
results between these two studies and with the work presented
here highlights the difficulty with comparisons when different
definitions between the control and cancer groups are used and
when different technologies are evaluated.
Many groups have used GC–MS to identify lung cancer
VOCs. In a review of this VOC literature by Hakin et al. [35],
the possible mechanisms which give rise to these VOCs is discussed. This review also noted that the variance in control groups
in their reviewed clinical studies is an issue when comparing the
results of studies. Interestingly, this review suggested that induction of cytochrome p450 enzymes by smoking could lead to the
acceleration of catabolism of oxidative stress products modifying associated VOCs in the breath. Interestingly, our group has
found that the expression of these genes can be reversibly and
irreversibly modified [36] by smoking and may react differently
between the sexes [37]–[39]. Other pathways whose behavior could modify VOC in breath are carbohydrate metabolism,
and the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways. The known alterations in these pathways associated with cancer and their
associated effects on VOCs [35] would be consistent with the
pre–postprandial cancer noncancer results we observed. For this
work, we have used well-matched patient groups according to
demographic risk indicators: age, similar number of pack-years
of smoking, and smoking status. We have investigated the ability
of the e-nose to distinguish patients diagnosed with lung cancer
from high-risk smokers with benign or no lesions. While earlier studies evaluated lung cancer patients that were typically
older and possessed of longer smoking histories (compared

2053

to controls), we tested our hypothesis in a study cohort comprised of only current or former smokers with similar pack-year
consumption histories and negligible age differences between
cancer and control groups. Our data suggest that a subject’s
sex can impact the delineation of that individual’s cancer (or
noncancer) status—and that the smoking status of the subject
can make a large difference in the classification accuracy of
e-nose data. Our results suggest that an e-nose system is likely
to work better on ex-smokers than current smokers at least for
lung Adenocarcinomas. It would appear that the changes associated with active smoking to some degree mask the changes in
VOC associated with patients with cancer. Further, it appears
that these VOC changes are larger in males than in females.
This is not totally surprising in that other studies have shown
differences in the responses of males versus females to the carcinogens in cigarette smoke [37]–[39]. The majority of analyzed
cases were lung adenocarcinomas (see Table II), a fact that could
impact the utility of our findings to wider lung cancer populations. Also a larger cohort of lung cancer patients is needed to
facilitate a more robust analysis of VOC changes to disease. For
the e-nose system to be clinically useful, it must be possible
to calibrate multiple systems to respond in the same manner
(i.e., within the error of repeating a sample measurement on the
same system). We were able to generate substantially equivalent results for the same subject VOCs measured on two systems through bias removal normalization. In theory, this should
make possible the translation of a classification function from
one system to another without having to train the second system. However, in practice, this needs to be demonstrated on a
prospective sample population. In addition, we have assessed
the potential systematic bias on the sensor array response, introduced by the alterations in the equipment (medical air tank
and collection bag type) and found these to be systematic and
correctable.
In this study, we demonstrated that the e-nose, when used
as a screening tool, should be able to correctly differentiate
high-risk smokers/ex-smokers from subjects with lung cancer.
This can be done with accuracy between 75% and 85% (depending on the algorithm used). The concentration of the exhaled VOCs from the subjects in this work is at the edge of
the sensitivity of the current e-nose system: a study involving
a larger set of cancer patients using a more sensitive e-nose
system is needed to improve the accuracy of our analysis and
demonstrate the true screening potential of exhaled VOC readings, particularly across differences in subject sex and smoking
status.
V. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated the potential of e-nose technology to
distinguish lung cancer patients from matched high-risk smokers, adding to the evidence that measurements of exhaled VOCs
(as measured by an e-nose) can be used as a lung cancer screening tool. Smell-prints of high-risk smokers were significantly
distinct from those diagnosed with lung cancer and these differences seem to depend to some degree on subject sex and
smoking status. Further measurements on multiple devices can
be demonstrated to be repeatable and reproducible.

2054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge technical inputs by
M. McKinnon.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Lozano et al., “Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death
for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: A systematic analysis for the global
burden of disease study 2010,” Lancet, vol. 380, no. 9859, pp. 2095–2128,
Dec. 15, 2012.
[2] F. Di Francesco et al., “Breath analysis: Trends in techniques and clinical
applications,” Microchem. J., vol. 79, nos. 1/2, pp. 405–410, Jan. 2005.
[3] P. Batra et al., “Evaluation of intrathoracic extent of lung cancer by
plain chest radiography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance
imaging,” Amer. Rev. Respiratory Dis., vol. 137, no. 6, pp. 1456–1462,
Jun. 1988.
[4] S. J. Swensen et al., “Lung cancer screening with CT: Mayo Clinic
experience,” Radiology, vol. 226, no. 3, pp. 756–761, Mar. 2003.
[5] R. A. Dweik and A. Amann, “Exhaled breath analysis: The new frontier
in medical testing,” J. Breath Res., vol. 2, no. 3, Sep. 2008.
[6] M. Corradi et al., “Increased nitrosothiols in exhaled breath condensate
in inflammatory airway diseases,” Amer. J. Respiratory Crit. Care Med.,
vol. 163, no. 4, pp. 854–858, Mar. 2001.
[7] H. K. Wilson, “Breath analysis. Physiological basis and sampling techniques,” Scand. J. Work Environ. Health, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 174–192, Jun.
1986.
[8] S. Dragonieri et al., “An electronic nose in the discrimination of patients
with non-small cell lung cancer and COPD,” Lung Cancer, vol. 64, no. 2,
pp. 166–170, May 2009.
[9] R. F. Machado et al., “Detection of lung cancer by sensor array analyses
of exhaled breath,” Amer. J. Respiratory Crit. Care Med., vol. 171, no. 11,
pp. 1286–1291, Jun. 1, 2005.
[10] P. J. Mazzone et al., “Exhaled breath analysis with a colorimetric sensor
array for the identification and characterization of lung cancer,” J. Thoracic
Oncol., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 137–142, Jan. 2012.
[11] V. H. Tran et al., “Breath analysis of lung cancer patients using an
electronic nose detection system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 10, no. 9,
pp. 1514–1518, 2010.
[12] A. G. Dent et al., “Exhaled breath analysis for lung cancer,” J. Thoracic
Dis., vol. 5, no. Suppl. 5, pp. S540–S550, Oct. 2013.
[13] B. Moser et al., “Mass spectrometric profile of exhaled breath—Field
study by PTR-MS,” Respiratory Physiol. Neurobiol., vol. 145, nos. 2/3,
pp. 295–300, Feb. 15, 2005.
[14] L. Pauling et al., “Quantitative analysis of urine vapor and breath by
gas-liquid partition chromatography,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 68,
no. 10, pp. 2374–2376, Oct. 1971.
[15] M. Phillips, “Method for the collection and assay of volatile organic
compounds in breath,” Anal. Biochem., vol. 247, no. 2, pp. 272–278,
May 1, 1997.
[16] J. D. Pleil and A. B. Lindstrom, “Measurement of volatile organic compounds in exhaled breath as collected in evacuated electropolished canisters,” J. Chromatogr. B. Biomed. Appl., vol. 665, no. 2, pp. 271–279, Mar.
24, 1995.
[17] R. H. Brown and T. H. Risby, “Monitoring distant organ reperfusion injury
by volatile organic compounds,” in Disease Markers in Exhaled Breath,
N. Marczin, S. Kharitonov, M. Yacoub and P. Barnes, Eds. London, U.K.:
Marcel Dekker, 2002, pp. 258–280.
[18] B. Buszewski et al., “Human exhaled air analytics: Biomarkers of diseases,” Biomed. Chromatogr., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 553–566, Jun. 2007.
[19] N. Fens et al., “Exhaled breath profiling enables discrimination of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma,” Amer. J. Respiratory Crit.
Care Med., vol. 180, no. 11, pp. 1076–1082, Dec. 1, 2009.
[20] C. Belda-Iniesta et al., “New screening method for lung cancer by
detecting volatile organic compounds in breath,” Clin. Transl. Oncol.,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 364–368, Jun. 2007.
[21] S. M. Gordon et al., “Volatile organic compounds in exhaled air from
patients with lung cancer,” Clin. Chem., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 1278–1282,
Aug. 1985.
[22] M. Phillips et al., “Prediction of lung cancer using volatile biomarkers in
breath,” Cancer Biomark, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 95–109, 2007.
[23] M. Phillips et al., “Detection of lung cancer using weighted digital analysis
of breath biomarkers,” Clin. Chim. Acta, vol. 393, no. 2, pp. 76–84, Jul.
17, 2008.
[24] M. Phillips et al., “Detection of lung cancer with volatile markers in the
breath,” Chest, vol. 123, no. 6, pp. 2115–2123, Jun. 2003.

[25] M. Phillips et al., “Volatile organic compounds in breath as markers
of lung cancer: A cross-sectional study,” Lancet, vol. 353, no. 9168,
pp. 1930–1933, Jun. 5, 1999.
[26] A. Amann et al., “Applications of breath gas analysis in medicine,” Int.
J. Mass Spectrometry, vol. 239, nos. 2/3, pp. 227–233, Dec. 15, 2004.
[27] J. W. Gardner and P. N. Bartlett, Electronic Noses: Principles and Applications. New York, NY, USA: Oxford Univ. Press, 1999.
[28] E. R. Thaler and C. W. Hanson, “Medical applications of electronic nose
technology,” Expert Rev. Med. Devices, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 559–66, Sep.
2005.
[29] Z. J. Cheng et al., “An electronic nose in the discrimination of breath
from smokers and non-smokers: A model for toxin exposure,” J. Breath
Res., vol. 3, no. 3, Sep. 2009.
[30] L. Breiman et al., Classification and Regression Trees. Belmont, CA,
USA: Wadsworth & Brooks, 1984.
[31] R. A. Fisher, “The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems,”
Ann. Eugenics, vol. 7, pp. 179–188, Sep. 1936.
[32] N. Fens et al., “External validation of exhaled breath profiling using an
electronic nose in the discrimination of asthma with fixed airways obstruction and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” Clin. Exp. Allergy,
vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1371–1378, Oct. 2011.
[33] N. Fens et al., “Subphenotypes of mild-to-moderate COPD by factor and
cluster analysis of pulmonary function, CT imaging and breathomics in a
population-based survey,” COPD, vol. 10, pp. 277–285, 2013.
[34] G. Peng et al., “Diagnosing lung cancer in exhaled breath using gold
nanoparticles,” Nature Nanotechnol., vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 669–673, 2009.
[35] M. Hakim et al., “Volatile organic compounds of lung cancer and possible
biochemical pathways,” Chem. Rev., vol. 112, no. 11, pp. 5949–66, Nov.
14, 2012.
[36] R. Chari et al., “Effect of active smoking on the bronchial epithelium
transcriptome,” BMC Genomics, vol. 29, no. 8, p. 297, 2007.
[37] A. F. Gazdar and M. J. Thun, “Lung cancer, smoke exposure, and sex,” J.
Clin. Oncol., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 469–471, Feb. 10, 2007.
[38] M. P. Rivera, “Lung cancer in women: Differences in epidemiology, biology, histology, and treatment outcomes,” Semin. Respiratory Crit. Care
Med., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 792–801, Dec. 2013.
[39] H. A. Wakelee et al., “Lung cancer incidence in never smokers,” J. Clin.
Oncol., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 472–478, Feb. 10, 2007.

Annette McWilliams received the M.B.B.S. degree from the University of
Western Australia Medical School Bachelor of Medicine & Bachelor of Surgery.
She is a Respiratory Physician who was previously with the British Columbia
Cancer Agency and Vancouver General Hospital, focusing primarily on early
detection and treatment of lung cancer. She is currently with Sir Charles Gairdner
Hospital, Nedlands, W.A., Australia, and is the Head of Respiratory Medicine
at Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, W.A.
Parmida Beigi received the B.Sc. degree from the Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, and the M.A.Sc. degree from Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, Canada, in 2011, both in electrical engineering. She is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering at the University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Akhila Srinidhi received the B.Eng. degree from Visvesvaraya Technological
University, Bangalore, India, in 2010 and the M.Eng. degree in biomedical
engineering from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
in 2012. She is currently pursuing biomedical research in Melbourne, Australia.
Stephen Lam received the M.D. degree from the University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada. He completed his FRCPC training in Internal Medicine and Pulmonary Medicine from the University of British Columbia, where he is currently
a Professor of medicine. He currently chairs the Provincial Lung Tumor Group
and directs the MDS-Rix Early Lung Cancer Detection and Translational Research Program at the BC Cancer Agency.
Calum E. MacAulay received the B.Sc. degree in engineering physics and the
M.Sc. degree in physics both from Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, in
1982 and 1985, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University
of British Columbia (UBC), Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 1989.
He is currently the Head of the Department of Integrative Oncology, British
Columbia Cancer Agency. He is also an Associate Member of the Department
of Physics and Astronomy and an Associate Professor in the Department of
Pathology at UBC.

