2062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Field Reliability Estimation for Cochlear Implants
Liliane L. Tessa∗ , Bhanu P. Sood, Senior Member, IEEE, and Michael G. Pecht, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Cochlear implants are electronic devices used to provide useful hearing sensations to patients with severe to profound
hearing loss. Safety and reliability are considered by patients and
clinicians when selecting among the different models of cochlear
implants. However, comparing reliability estimates from different
manufacturers is difficult because of the lack of a standardized
approach for classifying and quantifying failure data. This paper develops a classification scheme for cochlear implant failures
wherein each failure report is categorized based on the failure
site, cause, mode, and mechanism obtained through failure modes,
mechanisms, and effects analysis. Failure parameters based on the
Weibull distribution are used to quantify the following reliability metrics: B1 , B5 , B1 0 , and B5 0 lives. The developed reporting scheme provides clear and quantitative information on failure
causes and failure sites for a given implant. This method provides
a consistent reporting format for communicating field reliability to
regulatory units, clinicians, and patients.
Index Terms—Cochlear implants, field failures, reliability.

I. INTRODUCTION
OCHLEAR implants are considered as one of the most
successful neural prostheses in modern medicine [1].
These implants were developed to treat patients with profound
sensorineural hearing loss in both ears and who do not derive
useful performance from hearing aids [2]. According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), an estimated 188 000 patients
worldwide had been fitted with cochlear implants as of 2013. In
the United States, more than 41 000 adults and nearly 26 000
children had a cochlear implant as of 2013 [3]. Fig. 1 shows an
illustration of a typical cochlear implant system [4].

C

A. Cochlear Implant Malfunctions
According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, a medical implant malfunction is defined as the failure of a device to
meet its performance specifications or otherwise perform as intended, where the performance specifications include all claims
made in the labeling of the device [5]. A cochlear implant can
fail to perform as intended because of a device failure or because
of a postoperative medical complication [6]. For example, Jain
and Mukherji [7] identified extrusion and malpositioning of
the electrode array as the most common medical causes of device malfunction. Other medical complications causing device
Manuscript received September 26, 2014; revised February 26, 2015 and
December 23, 2014; accepted February 27, 2015. Date of publication March
11, 2015; date of current version July 15, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ L. L. Tessa was with the Center for Advanced Life Cycle Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA. She is now with Covidien,
North Haven, CT 06473 USA (e-mail: ltessa@umd.edu)
B. P. Sood and M. G. Pecht are with the Center for Advanced Life Cycle
Engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2412127

Fig. 1.

Cochlear implant system [4].

malfunction include skin flap breakdown, wound infection,
meningitis, cholesteatoma, facial palsy, and eardrum perforation
[6]. Device failures that cause implant malfunctions include impact failures (e.g., case failures, antenna breakage, and cracked
hybrids), hermetic seal leakage, broken wires, electronic dysfunction, and electrode array anomalies (e.g., shorts and open
circuits) [7]–[9].
When a patient reports decreased auditory performance, an
auditory symptom (e.g., tinnitus, intermittent auditory function,
loud bursts of sound, or lack of sound perception), or a nonauditory symptom (e.g., pain over implant site on skull, shocking
sensations, vertigo, itching at implant site, facial twitching, or
shocking and burning sensations with device use), an investigation is initiated to determine whether the symptoms are due to
device failure or a medical complication [7], [10], [11]. Devices
that are removed are returned to the manufacturer for failure
analysis.
B. Objectives
This paper develops an approach for manufacturers to classify device failures based on failure modes, mechanisms, and
effects analysis (FMMEA), which enables a set of reliability
metrics for quantifying and reporting field failures. Section II
provides background on the current classification schemes and
reliability metrics, Section III presents the classification method,
and Section IV discusses various reliability reporting metrics.
In Section V, the reliability prediction methodology is assessed
based on the criteria set by IEEE 1413, “Standard Framework
for Reliability Prediction of Hardware.”

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

TESSA et al.: FIELD RELIABILITY ESTIMATION FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANTS

2063

II. FAILURE CLASSIFICATION AND FIELD
RELIABILITY ESTIMATION
Cochlear implant manufacturers are not required by law to
provide reliability estimates based on field returns. However,
manufacturers voluntarily provide the cumulative survival probability of their in-service products on their websites. These
reports are made based on ISO Standard 5841-2:2000 [12],
which was developed to report the clinical performance of cardiac pacemakers and later adopted for cochlear implants to ensure consistent reporting of device reliability in the medical
literature.
A. Failure Classification and Limitations
ISO 5841-2:2000 prescribes a classification scheme in which
explanted devices that are in-specification, damaged during removal surgery, or unclassifiable are not counted as failed. This
can lead to misclassification in some instances, as there is no
guideline to establish that the damage to an implant was due to
removal surgery, and not finding a fault in a returned implant
does not mean that there was no failure.
In order to provide a more useful failure classification scheme
applicable to cochlear implants, representatives from the U.S.,
Europe, Japan, and Australia formed a Consensus Group for
Cochlear Implant Reliability Reporting in 2005 [13]. They
developed a methodology similar to that prescribed by ISO
5841-2:2000, except that they counted devices damaged during removal surgery and unclassifiable devices as failed devices, which is a more conservative approach than the previously used ISO 5841-2:2000 method. In-specification devices
are not counted as failures, provided that replacement does not
yield a clinical improvement. The rationale is that if the cause
of malfunction is a faulty device, then a replacement should
yield a clinical improvement; but if the cause of malfunction
is medical, then replacement of the device would not yield any
improvement. It is not always practical to apply this criterion
because not all patients automatically get a replacement device
after explant, and a replacement can be with a different, later
model. Also, there is no predetermined threshold of clinical
improvement at which the malfunction can be attributed to a
medical or nonmedical reason. One reason for the lack of such
a threshold is that there are no functional performance requirements agreed upon by the various manufacturers or regulators
because of the wide range of hearing outcomes from one patient
to another [14]. For example, patients using exactly the same
implant system can have scores ranging from 0% to 100% for
speech perception tests [4].
The consensus group also defined six failure mode categories
for cochlear implants: impact failure, hermeticity failure, electronic failure, electrode array malfunction, others to specify,
and no cause determined [13]. However, these failure mode categories do not clearly distinguish between the failure cause, site,
and mode for failed devices. For example, both impact failure
and electronic failure are considered to be failure modes in this
classification scheme; but this is inconsistent with failure analysis practice in that an impact failure actually points to the cause
of the device failure, whereas an electronic failure indicates the

Fig. 2. Plot of cumulative survival probability against length of implant time
(Advanced Bionics’ HiRes 90K implant) [15].

site of the device failure. These distinctions are further discussed
in Section III.
B. Reliability Estimation and Limitations
Cochlear implant manufacturers report the reliability of their
devices on their websites in the form of a cumulative survival
probability, as prescribed in ISO 5841-2:2000. The survival
probability estimate is calculated using the actuarial method,
which has been extensively used in clinical studies. Fig. 2 shows
an example of cumulative survival plot reported by cochlear
implant manufacturer Advanced Bionics [15]. In order to extrapolate the cumulative survival probability when no patient
information exists, ISO 5841 recommends fitting a Weibull or a
log-normal distribution to the cumulative survival distribution.
One limitation of the cumulative survival estimates reported
by manufacturers for failed and explanted devices is that these
probability estimates do not provide information on the reliability of implants with regard to specific failure mechanisms.
For example, information on the reliability with regard to impact failures is not provided. Such information could help clinicians decide on the best implants for children, who experience
ten times more impact-related failures than adult patients [8].
Information on the reliability with regard to electrode array
malfunctions could help surgeons determine the best insertion
techniques to minimize contact forces at the most commonly
reported failure sites on the electrode array for each device
model. Information on the reliability with regard to all failure
mechanisms could help regulators determine a threshold value
for failure rate that is needed to establish safety claims for each
failure mechanism. Such a threshold can be determined by comparing the failure rates of recalled devices to the failure rates
for all other devices. Finally, information on the reliability with
regard to each failure mechanism could help manufacturers assess the impact of design changes on the safety of their devices
against life-cycle loads.
Another issue with the reliability estimation methods in ISO
5841 is the prediction of future reliability by applying a parametric model to each set of failure data. Within a single set
of field failure data, there may be several different statistical

2064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 3. Plot of hazard rate versus time. a) All failure data combined. b) Failure
data separated by failure mechanism [16].

distributions representing different failure causes and modes
[16]. Applying a parametric model to failure data with mixed
failure modes can lead to misleading predictions of future reliability if the perceived reliability prediction is actually a combination of different reliability distributions. This is illustrated in
Fig. 3 [16]. Fig. 3(a) shows that the hazard rate of an entire field
population over time appears to be constant. Fig. 3(b) shows
that this apparent hazard rate behavior is an artifact of the data,
and there are actually three different hazard rate curves for three
different populations of about the same size that fail by three
different failure modes and mechanisms [16].
III. FMMEA-BASED FAILURE CLASSIFICATION
FMMEA is a systematic procedure used to identify and report
the failure modes, mechanisms, and effects of a component or
system. The FMMEA procedure is outlined in [17] and [18]. The
process starts by defining the device of interest, its functions, and
its possible failure sites. A failure site is a location on the device
where a failure has occurred or is expected to occur. The location
of failure depends on the stresses applied, the geometry, and the
materials used to design a component or system. A failure site is
a weak link in the design where failure initially occurs when the
device is subjected to external stresses. For each failure site, a
failure mode is the effect by which a failure is observed to occur
[17]. For returned devices, the failure modes can be recorded
during failure analysis by inspection of the device. A failure
cause is defined as the specific process, design, and/or environmental conditions that initiate failure. Identifying the failure
cause requires knowledge of the design and life-cycle profile of
the product (including mission profile usage and misuse scenarios). Failure mechanisms are the physical, chemical, thermodynamic, or other processes that result in failure [17]. The failure
mechanisms are usually ranked depending on the frequency and
detectability of failure occurrences, and the severity of the failure
effects.
There is limited literature on FMMEA applied to medical
devices. Fechter and Barba [19] conducted a failure modes
and effects analysis (FMEA) to quantify the risk associated
with the use of infusion pumps. To maximize the efficiency
of the information gathering process, the authors performed
FMEA with a group of 15 individuals, including end users.
However, their investigation did not look into the causes of
failures, only the failure modes and their risk ranking. Also,

Fig. 4.

Failure site-mode-cause-mechanism structure [18].

FMEA does not address possible failure mechanisms, unlike
FMMEA.
Cheng et al. [18] recommended the use of FMMEA in the
broader context of medical device failure reporting to help manufacturers perform root cause analysis. They developed a failure site-mode-cause-mechanism structure for adverse event investigation, as shown in Fig. 4. This structure for guiding adverse event investigations, which is based on the FMMEA, provides a distinction between the failure site, mode, cause, and
mechanism while establishing the relationships among them.
Therefore, this structure will be the basis for our classification
scheme.
A. FMMEA for Cochlear Implants
An FMMEA for cochlear implant device failures (internal
subsystem only) is provided in Table I. The internal subsystem
of a cochlear implant is divided into four assemblies with global
functions: the antenna, the magnet, the receiver-stimulator unit,
and the electrode array. The failure modes can be identified
through several failure analysis methods. These include visual
inspection (e.g., microscope, X-ray) of the assemblies, fine and
gross leak tests, humidity measurement, and functional verification of the output current of the electrodes and/or feedthroughs.
To determine the failure cause, a description of the failure event
and the clinical history of the patient (when available) can help
assess if there was an instance of impact or an electrostatic discharge (ESD) event. Further analysis of the failure causes and
mechanisms can be conducted by reviewing the manufacturing
processes and investigating the estimated life-cycle profile of
the product.
The functional failure modes and the failure effects on patients
are not mentioned in the FMMEA because they are highly dependent on the device design and the patient. The diagnosis of a
device failure based on the patient’s symptoms (e.g., decreased
auditory performance, auditory and non-auditory symptoms) is
subjective in that the tolerance or sensitivity to such symptoms
is dependent on specific patients, and pediatric patients may not
be able to accurately articulate the symptoms they are experiencing. Such diagnosis is made in cases of “soft failures,” when
a device malfunction is suspected but cannot be proven using

TESSA et al.: FIELD RELIABILITY ESTIMATION FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANTS

2065

TABLE I
FMMEA FOR IMPLANTABLE SUBSYSTEM OF RETURNED COCHLEAR IMPLANT

currently available in vivo methods [10]. “Soft failures” are investigated in order to determine whether an implanted device
should be explanted or not. In this paper, the focus is on classifying failures for explanted devices, and using that information to
estimate field reliability. Manufacturers can decide to track the
effects of failure on their devices and patients. However, for the
purpose of a classification that can limit the influence of patient
symptoms in distinguishing failed devices, the effects of device

failure on patient outcomes and comfort are not addressed in
this paper.
B. Failure Classification for Cochlear Implants
Tables II and III compare the classification schemes based
on the consensus statement of 2005 [10], and the developed
classification scheme based on FMMEA. The FMMEA-based

2066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

TABLE II
FAILURE CLASSIFICATION FROM 2005 CONSENSUS [13]
Nonmedical malfunction (device failure)

Impact
failure

 Hermeticity
failure

 Electronic
failure

 Electrode
array malfunction

Out-of-specification

 Other
(specify)

Medical malfunction
 No cause
 Medical problem/no
determined and clinical
clinical benefit from
benefit after
replacement
replacement
In-specification

TABLE III
DEVELOPED FMMEA FAILURE CLASSIFICATION

classification scheme categorizes each failed device based on
the failure site, observed failure modes, potential failure causes,
and potential failure mechanisms.
Device malfunctions are first categorized based on whether a
failure site is or is not found in the device. If no failure site
or functional failure mode is found, a medical cause is assigned to the device malfunction. If a failure site is found, both
the mechanical and functional failure modes are recorded. The
functional failure modes are identified based on the manufacturer’s integrity checks in situ (e.g., electrical compound action

potential response, electrical stimulation artifact on the scalp)
and integrity checks after the implant is returned (e.g., electrode impedance measurement or electrical output waveform
from electrodes). The auditory and nonauditory symptoms of
patients are not considered to be functional failure modes, but
they can be recorded as the effects of device failure on patients.
Failure causes and mechanisms are identified based on the manufacturer’s failure analysis. When the failure cause is surgical
handling during device removal surgery, no failure mechanism
is applicable (e.g., an electrode array that is cut to facilitate

TESSA et al.: FIELD RELIABILITY ESTIMATION FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANTS

implant removal does not have a failure mechanism). For other
device failure causes, the failure mechanism can be listed as one
of the items in Table I or marked as “none determined.”
IV. RELIABILITY METRICS FOR FAILURE REPORTING
Many statistical distributions are used in reliability prediction, including binomial, exponential, gamma, lognormal, normal, Poisson, and Weibull distributions [16], [20]. Among these,
the Weibull distribution is often used to model the time to failure for many physical systems, because its parameters provide
flexibility in modeling systems with increasing, decreasing, and
constant failure rates [21]. The IEEE 1413.1 standard guide
for selecting and using the reliability predictions of hardware
products provides criteria for selecting candidate distributions
based on the type of data collected. For time-based data (time
to failure), the Weibull and exponential distributions are recommended as starting points [16]. The ISO 5841-2-2000 standard
also recommends fitting a Weibull distribution to the failure data
of cardiac pacemakers. Here, we recommend fitting the Weibull
distribution to the failure times of specific failure mechanisms
in the cochlear implant (as categorized in Section III).
The probability density and reliability functions of the
Weibull distribution are given by (1) and (2), respectively [20].
   
 β −1
β
t
t
β
·
(1)
· exp −
f (t; α, β) =
α
α
α
   
β
t
R (t; α, β) = exp −
(2)
α
where t is the failure time, α is the scale parameter, and β is the
shape parameter.
In order to obtain a failure estimate for the entire implant
subsystem, a relationship needs to be established between the
reliability of the implantable subsystem and the reliability of its
assemblies (antenna unit, magnet unit, receiver-stimulator unit,
and electrode array) with regard to all the failure mechanisms.
The implant can fail due to any of several failure mechanisms.
Assuming that each of these failure mechanisms acts independently, the implant fails when one of the “competing” failure
mechanisms leads to a component failure. This is called the
competing risk model. The competing risk model has two interpretations: the life of a system is subject to several competing
risks or the life of a system of several components ends as soon
as one of the components fails [22]. We assume both conditions
to be true for the case of the entire implant subsystem. For each
of the failure mechanisms in Table I, a Weibull distribution is
fitted. Let Ri (t; αi , βi ) be the Weibull reliability fit for failure
mechanism i, where i = 1 to 31. Based on the competing risk
model, the reliability of the implant is given by [22]
   
βi


t
Ri (t; αi , βi ) =
exp −
R (t) =
αi
i
i


	  t β i
= exp −
.
(3)
αi
i

2067

The Weibull fitting for each failure mechanism can be accomplished by maximum likelihood estimation or probability
plotting. Details on both methods can be found in [20]. The objective of the data analysis is to provide comparable reliability
estimates across manufacturers, as well as an early estimation
of device reliability so that decisions failure trends can be identified quickly. For this reason, we recommend using all data
points for estimating the parameters of the reliability function
so that no information is neglected. This means that devices that
are implanted and functioning are considered as censored data
points, devices that are failed due to the failure mechanism of
interest are considered as failed data points, and devices that are
failed due to other failure mechanisms are considered as censored data points. For a new device model sold and implanted
in patients, there might be a small number of data points when
the first failure occurs, which can negatively affect the accuracy
of the reliability metrics. For this reason, the authors recommend that 90% confidence intervals should be reported for all
estimated distribution parameters and reliability metrics. Such
confidence intervals will indicate the accuracy of the reliability
metrics for different manufacturers.
In case no failure mode (mechanical or functional) is observed
for a returned implant, the device is considered to have failed
due to an unknown failure mechanism. Such cases are taken into
account in the data analysis by adding a reliability function for
the unknown failure mechanism to the competing risk model.
A. Weibull Metrics: B1 , B5 , B10 , and B50 Lives
Consistent and comparable reporting of failure among all
manufacturers requires the use of the same failure classification
and the same reliability metrics. The failure metrics for reporting
implant malfunctions are the B1 , B5 , B10 , and B50 lives for the
implanted device. The Bx life is defined as the time until x% of
a device population will have experienced failure. The B5 life
is the time until 5% of the devices are expected to fail, whereas
the B50 or mean-time-to-failure is the time until 50% of the
population is expected to fail. Based on its definition, the Bx life
is related to the reliability function as
R(Bx ) = 1 −

x
.
100

(4)

By combining (3) and (4), the Bx life is found by solving


	  Bx β i
x
.
(5)
R(Bx ) = exp −
=1−
αi
100
i

Note that αi , and βi are the fitted Weibull parameters for the
failure mechanisms in Table I. The Bx life calculated using (5)
uses the estimated mean values of parameters αi and βi . In order to account for the statistical variability of these parameters,
a 90% confidence interval needs to be constructed for the reliability metrics. Because there is no closed-form equation for
calculating the confidence interval of these parameters, we use
bootstrapping of the data to build a frequency distribution of the
reliability metrics, and we use these distributions to determine
the 90% confidence intervals. A detailed explanation is provided
in the case study.

2068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

TABLE V
RELIABILITY METRICS FROM EXAMPLE DATASET
Parameter

Fig. 5.

Failure site-mode-cause-mechanism structure in case study.

TABLE IV
PARAMETER CALCULATIONS FROM EXAMPLE DATASET
Mechanism

Parameter

90% Lower bound

Mean

90% Upper bound

Fracture

α (months)
β
α (months)
β

137.31
0.30866
56.896
0.87722

7755.3
0.60109
181.45
1.5055

438010
1.1706
578.66
2.5837

Fatigue

B. Case Study
The following simple case study is presented based on a
hypothetical dataset for illustration purposes. Consider a device
model in its second year of implant, with 200 devices sold and
implanted, and 15 failures.
1) Step 1—Determine the Failure Sites, Modes, and Mechanisms: Suppose that after failure analysis on model 1, the failure
sites, modes, causes, and mechanisms were illustrated as shown
in Fig. 5. The failure times for brittle fracture in months are:
1, 2, 7, 7, 8, and 9. The failure times for mechanical fatigue in
months are: 9, 10, 11, 11, 12, 12, 13, 15, and 19. The remaining
185 devices are implanted.
2) Step 2—Calculate the Parameters of the Reliability Distribution for Each Failure Mechanism: Based on the classification, the two failure mechanisms observed in Fig. 5 were fracture
and mechanical fatigue. We used the maximum likelihood estimation in MATLAB to determine parameters α and β. When
estimating parameters for fracture, units failed in mechanical fatigue and units implanted were considered as censored, giving a
total of 194 censored units. The 90% confidence interval for parameters was calculated based on the Fisher information matrix.
Table IV provides a summary of the parameter estimates.
Step 3—Calculate the B1 , B5 , B10 , and B50 Lives for the
Entire Implant: The corresponding B1 , B5 , B10 , and B50 lives
for the entire implant are found by plugging the mean values of
parameters α and β (see Table IV) into (5) and solving for Bx .
The calculated reliability metrics for the implant in months are:
B1 = 2.68, B5 = 16.34, B10 = 30.82, and B50 = 130.29.
Step 4—Calculate the 90% Confidence Bounds of the B1 , B5 ,
B10 , and B50 Lives for the Entire Implant: The process for estimating the 90% confidence bounds was performed as follows.
First, we used the estimated means and standard deviations of
the distribution parameters α and β to make 300 bootstrap samples of the α and β values for brittle fracture, and 300 bootstrap
samples of the α and β values for mechanical fatigue. Second,
we repeated the previous step 300 times; for each repetition, we
calculated the mean value of the bootstrap samples of α and β

B1 (months)
B5 (months)
B1 0 (months)
B5 0 (months)

90% Lower bound

Mean

90% Upper bound

1.74
14.10
28.12
127.46

2.67
16.27
30.62
130.16

3.83
18.90
33.81
133.03

Third, we calculated, for each of the mean values of distribution parameters, the B1 , B5 , B10 , and B50 lives of the entire
implant. Finally, we found the 5th and 95th percentile of the
obtained frequency distributions of the B1 , B5 , B10 , and B50
lives. The authors used MATLAB to implement all the calculations in one code. Results are shown in Table V. Note that
the bootstrap means of the reliability estimates are within 0.7%
error from the estimated means in step 3, which validates the
bootstrap method for estimating the mean and 90% confidence
interval on the reliability estimates.
V. ASSESSMENT OF THE RELIABILITY PREDICTION METHOD
The reliability prediction method developed in this paper for
cochlear implants provides a different approach from what has
been used in the past for medical implant failures. Guidelines
from the IEEE 1413 standard were used to evaluate the soundness of the methodology. IEEE 1413 was developed in 2010
to establish a framework for the reliability prediction of hardware, the disclosure of reliability analysis methods, and for all
necessary information within a reliability prediction report [23].
The analysis of a prediction methodology, as described in IEEE
1413, consists of answering 13 questions that define how compliant the methodology is with the recommendations provided
in the standard. Table VI presents answers to these questions for
the methodology in this paper. Although it is not necessary for
all of the answers to be in the affirmative in order to be compliant with IEEE 1413, a higher number of affirmative answers
signifies greater compliance with the standard.
Potential sources of epistemic uncertainty for this reliability
prediction method are misclassification errors (if a manufacturer
cannot identify the failure mode or mechanism), and the assumption of a competing risk model for all failure mechanisms (which
does not take into account common cause failures). A potential
source of aleatory uncertainty is the bootstrap method used for
estimating the confidence intervals on reliability metrics.
VI. CONCLUSION
There is currently no formal method for classifying fieldreturned cochlear implants (malfunctions) in order to make reliability predictions. As a result, manufacturers have various
approaches that are neither consistent nor comparable. This paper presents a failure classification method that identifies, for
each malfunctioning cochlear implant, the failure site, mode,
cause, and mechanism. With this information, malfunction reports available to manufacturers from field failures can be used

TESSA et al.: FIELD RELIABILITY ESTIMATION FOR COCHLEAR IMPLANTS

TABLE VI
EVALUATION OF THE RELIABILITY PREDICTION METHOD
IEEE 1413 Question

Answer

Does the methodology identify the sources used
to develop the prediction methodology?
Are the sources used to develop the prediction
methodology available in the public domain or
upon request?
Does the methodology account for the
life-cycle environmental conditions?
Does the methodology account for materials,
geometry, and architectures of the parts and
assemblies?
Does the methodology account for part quality?
Does the methodology have the flexibility to
allow incorporation of new reliability data and
experience?
Are assumptions used to conduct the prediction
according to the methodology identified,
including those used for the unknown data?
Are sources of uncertainty in the prediction
results identified?
Are limitations of the prediction results
identified?
Are failure modes identified?
Are failure mechanisms identified?
Are failure causes identified?
Are statistical confidence levels and confidence
intervals for the prediction results identified?

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

to perform reliability analysis of cochlear implants. In this approach, the final determination of the most probable failure
cause and failure mechanism for each report is still left up to
the manufacturer based on their knowledge of the design and
life-cycle profile of their product. To determine the reliability of
implanted devices, a three-parameter Weibull analysis is used
for each failure mechanism. The results obtained can be used
to compare cochlear implant models based on the B1 , B5 , B10 ,
and B50 lives. This information can help clinicians select the
most appropriate implants for their patients and help regulators
track the safety of devices in the field.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Wilson and M. Dorman, “The surprising performance of present-day
cochlear implants,” in Proc. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 6, pp.
969–972, Jun. 2007.
[2] F.-G. Zeng et al., “Cochlear implants: System design, integration, and
evaluation,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, pp. 115–142, Jan. 2008.

2069

[3] NIH. (29 Mar. 2013). NIH fact sheets home: Cochlear implants.
[Online]. Available: http://report.nih.gov/nihfactsheets/ViewFactSheet.
aspx?csid=83.
[4] B. Wilson and M. Dorman, “Cochlear implants: current designs and future
possibilities,” J. Rehabil. Res. Develop., vol. 45, pp. 695–730, 2008.
[5] FDA. (Mar. 12, 2014). U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Medical Device Reporting. [Online]. Available: http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
Safety/ReportaProblem/default.htm
[6] F. Venail et al., “Reliability and complications of 500 consecutive cochlear
implantations,” JAMA Otolaryngol.—Head Neck Surg., vol. 134, pp.
1276–1281, 2008.
[7] R. Jain and S. Mukherji, “Cochlear implant failure: imaging evaluation of
the electrode course,” Clin. Radiol., vol. 58, pp. 288–293, 2003.
[8] R. Battmer et al., “A review of device failure in more than 23 Years of
clinical experience of a cochlear implant program with more than 3,400
implantees,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 30, pp. 455–463, 2005.
[9] J. Maurer, et al., “Reliability of cochlear implants,” JAMA Otolaryngol.,
vol. 132, pp. 746–750, 2005.
[10] T. Balkany et al., “Cochlear implant soft failures consensus development
conference statement,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 26, pp. 815–818, 2005.
[11] C. Buchman et al., “Revision cochlear implant surgery in adult patients
with suspected device malfunction,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 25, pp. 504–510,
2004.
[12] Implants for Surgery - Cardiac Pacemakers—Part 2: Reporting of Clinical
Performance of Populations of Pulse Generators or Leads, ISO 5841-2,
2000.
[13] R. Battmer et al., “International classification of reliability for implanted
cochlear implant receiver stimulators,” Otol. Neurotol., vol. 31, pp. 1190–
1193, 2010.
[14] L. Holden et al., “Factors affecting open-set word recognition in adults
with cochlear implants,” Ear Hearing, vol. 34, pp. 342–360, 2013.
[15] A. Bionics. (2013). 2013 Total System Reliability Update. [Online].
Available: https://www.advancedbionics.com/content/dam/ab/Global/en_
ce/documents/libraries/Professional%20Library/AB%20Technical%
20Reports/Reliability/AB_2013_Total_System_Reliability_Update.pdf
[16] IEEE Guide for Selecting and Using Reliability Prediction Based on IEEE
1413, IEEE Standard 1413.1, 2003.
[17] M. Pecht and J. Gu, “Physics-of-failure based prognostics of electronic
products,” Inst. Meas. Control, vol. 31, pp. 309–322, 2009.
[18] S. Cheng et al., “Using failure modes, mechanisms, and effects analysis
in medical device adverse event investigations,” presented at the Int. Conf.
Biomedical Ontology, Buffalo, NY, USA, 2011.
[19] R. Fechter and J. Barba, “Failure mode effect analysis applied to the use
of infusion pumps,” in 26th Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., San
Francisco, CA, USA, 2004, pp. 3496–3499.
[20] M. Modarres et al., Reliability Engineering and Risk Analysis. New York,
NY, USA: Marcel Dekker, 1999.
[21] D. Montgomery and G. Runger, Applied Statistics and Probability for
Engineers. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[22] M. Newby, “Why no additive hazards models?” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 43,
no. 3, pp. 484–488, Sep. 1994.
[23] IEEE Standard Framework for Reliability Prediction of Hardware, IEEE
Standard 1413, 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

