IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1981

EEG-Based Tonic Cold Pain Characterization Using
Wavelet Higher Order Spectral Features
Leontios J. Hadjileontiadis∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel approach in tonic cold pain characterization,
based on electroencephalograph (EEG) data analysis using wavelet
higher order spectral (WHOS) features, is presented here. The
proposed WHOS-based feature space extends the relative power
spectrum-based (phase blind) approaches reported so far a step
forward; this is realized via dynamic monitoring of the nonlinerities of the EEG brain response to tonic cold pain stimuli by capturing the change in the underlying quadratic phase coupling at
the bifrequency wavelet bispectrum/bicoherence domain due to
the change of the pain level. Three pain characterization scenarios were formed and experimentally tested involving WHOS-based
analysis of EEG data, acquired from 17 healthy volunteers that
were subjected to trials of tonic cold pain stimuli. The experimental and classification analysis results, based on four well-known
classifiers, have shown that the WHOS-based features successfully
discriminate relax from pain status, provide efficient identification
of the transition from relax to mild and/or severe pain status, and
translate the subjective perception of pain to an objective measure
of pain endurance. These findings seem quite promising and pave
the way for adopting WHOS-based approaches to pain characterization under other types of pain, e.g., chronic pain and various
clinical scenarios.
Index Terms—Dynamic pain characterization, electroencephalogram (EEG), pain endurance, quadratic phase coupling
(QPC), tonic cold pain, wavelet bispectrum (WBS)/bicoherence,
wavelet higher order spectral (WHOS) features.

I. INTRODUCTION
AIN characterization in an objective fashion is essential
and has long been desired for clinical pain assessment and
management. Nevertheless, subjective perception of the pain
feeling is quite hard to quantify [1], and, toward such endeavor,
different approaches have been explored so far. In particular,
the most commonly used pain intensity measures include visual
analog scales, numerical rating scales (NRSs) and verbal rating
scales [2]. These conventional measures are quite known, since
they exhibit adequate sensitivity to pain changes associated with
treatment across different populations and settings [3]. Nevertheless, they are characterized by intrinsic limitations, as they
require human intervention (e.g., by physicians or caregivers)
for the patient to perform the rating in an interview-like manner,
and, most importantly, they do not capture a time-dependent
dynamic change in pain perception; hence, they can only reflect

P

Manuscript received December 30, 2014; revised February 3, 2015 and February 17, 2015; accepted February 26, 2015. Date of publication March 5, 2015;
date of current version July 15, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
The author is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki GR-54124, Greece (e-mail:
leontios@auth.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2409133

an integrated perception of pain related to the accumulated pain
experiences.
Up today, different medical imaging techniques have been
applied as a means to investigate human pain by various exogenous noxious stimuli, including single-photon emission tomography [4], positron emission tomography, [5], and functional
magnetic resonance imaging [6]. These neuroimaging analyses
have identified that several cortical and subcortical areas are
involved in the central pain mechanisms [7], [8]. Nevertheless,
the way the brain processes tonic painful stimulation is still an
issue of interest.
Taking into consideration the high temporal resolution of the
electroencephalogram (EEG), efficient analysis of EEG data
may effectively reflect the dynamic changes of pain perception
via the capturing of the related dynamic changes in the brain
activity. Efforts in such direction include the peak-to-peak amplitude of the well-defined EEG N2 -P2 evoked potential (EP)
acquired at the vertex [9], which is correlated with both stimulus intensity and NRS [10]. Nevertheless, the EEG N2 -P2 EP
component is clearly related to phasic and short stimuli, as it is
measured as a distinct waveform up to several hundreds of milliseconds after the stimulus [9]. Brief stimuli, however, could
not adequately simulate natural and clinical painful experiences
even when considering acute pain [11]. On the contrary, it is
commonly believed that, unlike phasic pain models, the tonic
ones can better simulate clinical pain [12], [13]. One of the commonly used tonic pain physical stressor involves cold somatic
stimulation. Peripherally, perception of cold stimulation is mediated by different cutaneous thermoreceptors [14]. Innocuous
cold stimuli activate Aδ fibers [15], whereas warm, cold, and tactile stimulation causes respond from most dorsal horn neurons
in the spinal cord [16]. In the thalamus, the majority of sensory
relay neurons have multimodal properties [17]. In general, however, it is well known that human brain can perceive distinct
cold (or hot) somatic stimulation and discriminate its intensity
with different affective responses, featured by quantitative EEG
measurements [18].
So far, the tonic cold pain-related EEG signal is analyzed in
the frequency domain, focusing mainly on the power spectrum
peaks and/or coherence values at specific EEG frequency bands
[11]–[13], [18]–[20]. These approaches, however, neglect the
time variation of the pain-related EEG characteristics as their
features rely solely on the frequency content. Chang et al. [21]
have only attempted to examine the dynamic EEG changes during cold pressor testing in man based, however, again on power
spectral characteristics. None of the related works dealt with the
nonlinear interactions of the harmonic content of the EEG components. The latter is of great importance, since distinct EEG
spectral peaks could embed nonlinear characteristics related to

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

the underlined pain perception, expressed in their phase relation through quadratic phase coupling (QPC). Identification of
such nonlinearities in the EEG data could provide an alternative feature space that enhances further their value in the tonic
cold pain characterization problem. This involves the use of
higher order statistics/spectra (HOS) [22], which, unlike power
(second order) spectrum, preserve the phase information of the
signal and could be used to detect the nonlinearity and deviation from Gaussianity of the EEG signals. When combined with
continuous wavelet transform (CWT), which offers a time-scale
representation of a signal, a time axis is introduced in a natural way, assisting the dynamic identification of nonlinearities
across the duration of the EEG signal. Thus, nonlinearities of
EEG signals are revealed in the time–bifrequency domain, also
taking into account their nonstationarity.
The present study builds upon the concept of wavelet higher
order spectral (WHOS) domain introducing it as a potential field
for the formation of quantitative features that could dynamically
reflect the nonlinear behavior of EEG signals and be related to
tonic cold pain characterization. This could contribute to the
field of better understanding the way pain is perceived and reflected in the brain responses. Experimental results from the
WHOS-based analysis of EEG data, acquired from subjects
during cold somatic stimulation, justify the potential of the proposed feature space to establish an objective EEG-based pain
characterization domain.

the whole bifrequency plane can be based on its values in the
principal region Δ : ω1 , ω2 ≤ ω1 , ω1 + ω2 ≤ ωs . As the WBS
is a complex quantity, it consists of a wavelet biamplitude (WBSAmp) and a wavelet biphase (WBSPh).

II. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND

The involvement of CWT in the bispectral domain provides
dynamic monitoring of the evolution of QPC across time. Consequently, the IWBS can be defined as a time-dependent complex
quantity, i.e.,

A. Wavelet Bispectrum (WBS)
WBS combines CWT with bispectral analysis and, in an analogy to the definition of the bispectrum in Fourier terms [22] of
a signal x (t) ∈ L2 (R), it could be defined as [23]

W Bx (a1 , a2 ) =
Wx∗ (a, τ ) Wx (a1 , τ ) Wx (a2 , τ ) dτ (1)
T

where the integration is done over a finite time interval T : τ0 ≤
τ ≤ τ1 , and a, a1 , a2 satisfy the following rule:
1
1
1
=
+
α
α1
α2
while the CWT Wx (a, b) in (1) is given by [24]


 +∞
t−b
1
Wx (a, b) = √
x (t) ψ ∗
dt
a
a −∞

(2)

B. Wavelet Bicoherence (WBC)/Summed WBC (SWBC)
The notion of normalized Fourier-based bispectrum, the socalled bicoherence [22], is extended to the WHOS space via the
definition of the WBC as the normalized WBS [23], [26], i.e.,
wbx (a1 , a2 ) =

T

W Bx (a1 , a2 )

	1/2
|Wx (a1 , τ ) Wx (a2 , τ )|2 dτ T |Wx (α, τ )|2 dτ
(4)

with its magnitude, |wbx (a1 , a2 )|, attaining values between 0
and 1, corresponding to absence (0 value) and strong existence
(1 value) of QPC, respectively. The SWBC is defined as


swb2x (a) =
wb2x (a1 , a2 ).
(5)
Δ

Both (4) and (5) could equivalently be expressed at the bifrequency domain.
C. Instantaneous WBS (IWBS)

IWBx (a1 , a2 , t) = |IWBx (a1 , a2 , t)| ej∠IW B x (a 1 ,a 2 ,t)
= Ax ej ϕ x

(6)

incorporating the instantaneous WBSAmp (IWBSAmp)
Ax (a1 , a2 , t) and instantaneous WBSPh (IWBSPh)
ϕx (a1 , a2 , t), given by
Ax (a1 , a2 , t) = |IWBx (a1 , a2 , t)|

(7)

ϕx (a1 , a2 , t) = ∠IWBx (a1 , a2 , t)
= ϕx (a1 , t) + ϕx (a2 , t) − ϕx (a, t) . (8)
(3)

where ∗ is the complex conjugate, and ψ (t) is the mother wavelet
scaled by a factor a, a > 0, and dilated by a factor b; in CWT,
(a, b) are continuous.
What WBS actually expresses is the amount of QPC in the
interval T, which occurs between wavelet components of scale
lengths a1 , a2 and a of x (t), such that the sum rule of (2) is satisfied. From the interpretation of the scales as inverse frequencies,
i.e., ω = 2π/α or f = 1/α, the nonlinear coupling reflected at
the WBS can be transferred between wavelets of frequencies
that satisfy ω = ω1 + ω2 within the frequency resolution. Due
to the symmetries in the definition and the limitation set by the
Nyquist sampling frequency ωs [25], the estimation of WBS in

The WBS defined in (1) refers to a certain time interval
T , and its value is corresponded to the center of this interval, i.e., t0 = T /2; hence, the estimation of (6)–(8) is realized for t = t0 + kΔT1 , k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .; 2π/ωs ≤ ΔT1 ∧
kΔT1 ≤ Ttotal − 2t0 , where Ttotal is the total time duration of
the analyzed signal x (t) and the ΔT1 parameter controls the
time resolution. As previously, (6)–(8) could equivalently be
expressed at the bifrequency domain.
The above presented WHOS-based parameters clearly extend
the notion of the spectral analysis toward a more dynamic representation, taking into account the nonstationarity of the signal
under consideration, along with the nonlinearities of the related
system, as expressed at the enriched bifrequency domain of
WHOS.

HADJILEONTIADIS: EEG-BASED TONIC COLD PAIN CHARACTERIZATION USING WAVELET HIGHER ORDER SPECTRAL FEATURES

III. PROPOSED APPROACH
A. Adopted Pain Characterization Scenarios (PCSs)
The pain characterization problem is approached here by the
exploration of the following three PCSs:
1) PCS#1—Relax Versus Pain: In this scenario, the problem of identifying the two different states of the subject,
i.e., when she/he is relaxed or in pain, from an average
perspective, is addressed.
2) PCS#2—Relax to Pain: Here, the identification of the
transition from relax to pain (mild and severe) state of the
subject is explored, resulting in a dynamic monitoring of
the severity of the pain perception with time.
3) PCS#3—Subject’s Pain Endurance: As pain perception
is subjective in this scenario, the identification of each
subject’s endurance to pain is examined.
For successfully addressing the aforementioned PCSs, the
EEG WHOS-based feature set and classification processes that
are described in the succeeding two sections, respectively, are
adopted.
B. Feature Set Construction
The feature set proposed here consists of WHOS space parameters defined in Section II, and it is adapted to the characteristics of each of the aforementioned PCSs. In particular, for the
PCS#1, the features of WBSAmp [see (1)], WBSPh [see (1)],
SWBC [see (5)], and the number of WBSAmp Local Maxima
(WBSAmpLM# ) were used. For the latter, the WBSAmp [see
(1)] was initially thresholded to its fourth quartile, i.e.,
|W Bx (ω1 , ω2 ) | > 0.75 × max{|W Bx (ω1 , ω2 ) |}

(9)

and then subjected to local maxima detection [27]; the resulting
number of local maxima (WBSAmpLM# ) actually expresses the
multiplicity of the main QPC pairs in the bifrequency domain.
As the PCS#2 tackles the dynamic transition from relax to
pain state, the corresponding feature set was constructed by
the IWBSAmp and/or IWBSPh parameters (see (7) and (8),
respectively).
Finally, for the PCS#3, the pain endurance feature used (PE)
was defined as the estimated pain tolerance time Ttol normalized
to the TP = (tend − tclick1 ), i.e.,
PE =
where
Ttol =




Ttol
,
TP

(0 ≤ PE ≤ 1)

ti , {ti : Ax (ω1 , ω2 , ti ) > thrP }

(10)

(11)

i,t i ∈T P ,

and thrP is a statistically defined threshold (see Section V-B).
Since the proposed approach is based on the EEG data analysis, their frequency characteristics have also to be taken into
consideration for the estimation of the corresponding features.
In this vein, the focus was placed upon the five EEG frequency
bands, i.e., delta (1–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta
(13–30 Hz), and gamma (30–49 Hz); thus, the average values of
the aforementioned features were separately estimated for each

1983

of these frequency bands transferred to the principal area of the
bifrequency domain (Δ). In addition, the concept of referencing
was involved for the handling of features. In particular, for the
case of a reference state (RS) employment, each of the above
described features was reshaped to a new F form, computed as
P −R
(12)
R
where P represents the quantity (feature) estimated during the
pain state period and R represents the quantity (feature) estimated during the relax state used as a RS (see Section IV for
the selection of the time duration of P and R states). For the
sake of completion, the case of no referencing (NoR) was also
considered.
The feature set described so far was formed without taking
into consideration any asymmetric activations that might occur
in the brain during the pain state (NoAs case) [21]. In order to
take into account such possible activations, and considering the
14-channel (10–20 setting) EEG data acquisition system used
here (see Section IV), two cases of feature set construction were
considered.
1) Differential Asymmetry (DAs) Case: Realized by subtracting the estimated features F for each of the seven symmetric channel pairs, i.e., AF3-AF4, F7-F8, F3-F4, FC5-FC6,
T7-T8, P7-P8, and O1-O2.
2) Rational Asymmetry (RAs) Case: Realized by the division
of the estimated features F for each of the symmetric
channel pairs (see above).
The different forms of the constructed feature vector were
subjected (where applicable) to a classification procedure described next.
F =

C. Classification Procedure
For the realization of the classification procedure, four widely
used classifiers were employed, i.e., quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) [28], mahalanobis (MAH) [29], k-nearest neighbors
(k-NN) (Euclidian distance metric; number of nearest neighbors equals to 4 (=k), after testing) [30], and support vector machines (SVM) (Gaussian radial basis function kernel, rather than
polynomial-based one, after testing; soft margin parameter and
the scaling factor of the kernel selection using cross-validation
checking) [31].
In order to use the entire dataset for training and testing the
classifiers, a tenfold cross-validation scheme was adopted [32].
Here, each cross-validation scheme was repeated ten times, i.e.,
100 repetitions of classification, in order to acquire more robust
classification results. Classification performance was evaluated
through the classification accuracy (CA) rate, i.e., the percentage of correctly classified test feature vectors over the total
number of test feature vectors. In particular, the average CA,
(CA), and the standard deviation (SD) of CA were estimated
over ten runs of tenfold cross validation for each set of feature
vector and each classifier.
The proposed approach presented here tackles the problem of
the tonic cold pain characterization in a multifaceted way, exploring the potentialities of the defined features under different

1984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

scenarios and settings, in an effort to extensively evaluate their
classification power.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
The experimental subject group consisted of 17 right-handed
healthy volunteers (nine males and eight females) of 23.22 ±
1.72 years old. Each subject was comfortably seated in an upright chair with a distance of 1 m from a computer screen displaying a centered white cross in a black background, in a sound
attenuated, temperature controlled (24–26 °C) laboratory environment, under dim lighting conditions (to avoid any visual
nuisance), and participated with eyes open in a tonic pain stimulation condition. More specifically, each subject was asked just
to hold with his/her dominant hand a 0.5l plastic bottle (placed
on a table support to minimize the variability in the subject’s
grip strength) with iced water (−1 ◦ C ± 0.5 ◦ C) and simultaneously mouse-click (click0) with his/her nondominant hand to
initiate the experimental trial. At the moment she/he felt the
tiny uncomfortable feeling, she/he mouse-clicked (click1) with
his/her nondominant hand to denote the end of relax state and
the beginning of the pain state. Then, she/he continued to hold
the bottle until the pain became unbearable and, thus, she/he
let the bottle at her/his will (end of experiment trial). The subject was then asked to rate the perceived pain intensity via a
NRS, ranging from 0 (no pain) to 10 (maximum pain tolerable). In this vein, she/he was instructed to reflect in her/his
NRS value, the overall perception of the pain intensity across
the whole experiment and not just the one at its end where the
pain is always maximized. The experiment was repeated three
more times (four trials in total) with a reset-like procedure in
between, lasting more than 5 min. In the latter, the subject was
instructed to hold with his/her dominant hand a cup of warm
water (40 °C) and count backwards in 3 s from a randomly
determined four-digit number throughout the reset condition.
The latter was attempted to minimize the variability in arousal,
attention and vigilance both between and within subjects by the
arithmetic task, and controlled for harmless pressure sensation
associated with the warm water cup hand holding [20]. The total
duration of each trial (pain stimulation and reset conditions) per
subject was maximum 10 min. The study was approved by the
institutional ethics committee and all volunteers gave written
informed consent prior to the realization of the experiments.
EEG recordings (timestamped with the tonic pain stimulation condition events via the subjects’ mouse clicking) were
conducted using the Emotiv EPOC 14-channel EEG wireless
recording headset (Emotiv Systems Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA). The electrode scheme was arranged according to the international 10–20 system and included active electrodes at AF3,
F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, and AF4 positions, referenced to the common mode sense (CMS-left mastoid)/driven right leg (DRL-right mastoid) ground. EEG data
are acquired with an internal sampling frequency of 2048 Hz by
the recording device, and, subsequently, bandpass filtered in the
range of 0.16–85 Hz using hardware filters. Two digital notch
filters at 50 and 60 Hz are further applied, and the output data
are downsampled to 128 Hz. After the completion of data ac-

quisition, all EEG signals were filtered offline in the frequency
range of 1–49 Hz (IIR Butterworth sixth-order filter with zerophase shift). As there was no EEG electrode cap used, special
care was taken in order for the device to be adapted in an appropriate manner on each subject’s head. All subjects were instructed to remain as still as possible and to focus their sight
on the cross displayed on the computer screen in order to minimize muscular and occipital artifacts, respectively, at the EEG
recordings.
The complex Morlet wavelet was used for the estimation of
the WHOS parameters, given by [24]
ψ (t) = √

1
2
e−t /f b ej 2π f c t
πfb

(13)

where fb is a bandwidth parameter and fc is the wavelet center frequency. The complex Morlet wavelet adopted here is a
Gaussian-windowed complex sinusoid; hence, its second-order
exponential decay results in very good time localization during
the wavelet transform [24]. Additionally, the complex Morlet
wavelet function provides information about both amplitude
and phase, and it is better adapted for capturing coherence between harmonic frequencies [24]. The bandwidth parameter fb
and the wavelet center frequency fc were set to 64 and 1 Hz,
respectively.
For the PCS#1, the estimation of the WHOS-based features
was initially carried out at every T = 0.5 s (ΔT1 = 0.5 s) within
two EEG data segments of 6 s, drawn from a time window
just before the click1 (R state) and just before the end of the
experimental trial (P state), respectively. Moreover, the EEG
data segment length of 15 s with WHOS-based features estimation at every T = 1, 3, and 5 s (ΔT1 = 0.5 T) was also
examined. Moreover, for PCS#2 and PCS#3, the WHOS-based
features were estimated at every T = 3 s (ΔT1 = 1.5 s)—as
deduced from the best experimental results of the PCS#1 (see
Section V-A)—across the whole duration of each experiment.
The experimental protocol was developed using Microsoft
Visual Studio 2010 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA,
USA), whereas the data analysis and subsequent classification
were conducted using MATLAB R2014 (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA).
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 1 depicts an example of EEG recordings from one experimental trial from channel P7 [see Fig. 1(a)], along with its
WBSAmp [see Fig. 1(b)] and WBCAmp [see Fig. 1(c)], both averaged across the time duration of the EEG segment of Fig. 1(a).
Moreover, the corresponding IWBSAmp is shown in Fig. 1(d)
in an isosurface fashion (the isosurface value was selected as
the 40% of the global maximum), displaying the evolution of
the main bifrequency peaks before (red) and after (black) the
occurrence of the click1 at the 7.9 s [denoted also with a vertical
dash-dotted line in Fig. 1(a)]. From the inspection of Fig. 1, it
can be deduced that the specific experimental trial is characterized by QPC peaks that mainly lie at the range of theta up to
beta bands. The transition between the latter seems to be affected by the initiation of the pain perception as the QPC peaks

HADJILEONTIADIS: EEG-BASED TONIC COLD PAIN CHARACTERIZATION USING WAVELET HIGHER ORDER SPECTRAL FEATURES

1985

Fig. 1. Characteristic example of (a) EEG data from an experimental trial (channel P7), (b) the corresponding average WBSAmp, (c) the corresponding
WBCAmp, and (d) the corresponding IWBSAmp across the time duration of the EEG recording in a isosurface fashion (isosurface value equals to 0.03). The
timestamp of click1 appears at 7.9 s of the experiment and it is denoted as the vertical dash-dotted line in (a). Moreover, relax and pain periods defined before and
after the borderline of click1, respectively, are colored coded in (d), where the dynamic change at the bifrequency domain with time is evident.

are starting to be less in number as we move from click1 toward
the end of the experimental trial [see Fig. 1(d)].
In the sections that follow, the results are presented and discussed for each of the PCSs defined in Section III-A.
A. PCS#1-Related Results
1) Classification Performance: For the PCS#1 case, all features described in Section III-B were tested for their classification power. The bar plots of Fig. 2 exemplify the estimated
CA (along with the corresponding standard deviation (std) values as vertical small lines), when independently testing the
SWBC and WBSAmp features, for all referencing (NoR (a–
c) and RS (d–f)) and asymmetry (NoAS (a, d), DAs (b, e), and
RAs (c, f)) cases, for each classifier and each EEG frequency
band. The maximum CA value from all the ones depicted in
Fig. 2 equals to 75.21 ± 2.66% and corresponds to the case
of {WBSAmp|RS,k −NN,delta } (denoted with a black arrow in

Fig. 2(d), second row). Very similar performance to the latter
corresponds to the case of {WBSAmp|NoR,k −NN,delta }, with
CA = 75.0 ± 2.8% [see Fig. 2(a), second row]. When comparing the RS with NoR columns of Fig. 2, it is apparent that both
approaches exhibit similar performance for the two examined
features, i.e., SWBC and WBSAmp. Moreover, when comparing the CA values from the NoAs with those of DAs and RAs, a
clear reduction is noticed with the CA values lying around 60%
when the asymmetry (either Das or RAs) is taken into account.
From all combinatory CA results, taking combinations into
account both at the features space, EEG frequency bands, and
type of reference, the best cases of the estimated CA were
extracted and summarized in Table I. In all cases, the additional consideration of the asymmetry factor deteriorated the
estimated CA values, similarly to the findings of Fig. 2; thus,
it was omitted from the results tabulated in Table I. From the
results of the latter, it is evident that the highest CA, equal to
84.12(±2.61)%, denoted with bold in Table I, is achieved when

1986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 2. Estimated C A (along with the corresponding standard deviation (std) values as vertical small lines), when independently testing the SWBC and WBSAmp
features, for all referencing (NoR (a–c) and RS (d–f)) and asymmetry [NoAS (a, d), DAs (b, e), and RAs (c, f)] cases, for each classifier (QDA: Quadratic discriminant
analysis [28], MAH: Mahalanobis [29], k-NN: k-Nearest Neighbors [30], SVM: Suport vector machines [31]), and each EEG frequency band (delta, theta, alpha,
beta, gamma). The maximum C A value from all depicted cases equals to 75.21 ± 2.66% corresponds to the case of {WBSAmp|R S , k −N N , d e lta }, and it is denoted
with a black arrow in Fig. 2(d), second row.
TABLE I
BEST CASES OF C A FOR PCS#1 (DATA SEGMENT LENGTH OF 6 S)
Frequency Band(s)

C A ± std(%)

Feature(s)

Classifier

Type of Reference

delta
theta
alpha
beta
gamma
delta
theta
alpha
beta
gamma
{delta, beta}
{delta, gamma}
All-FB

75.21 ± 2.66
68.24 ± 3.91
67.85 ± 3.05
69.72 ± 2.66
68.81 ± 1.69
83.04 ± 2.26
72.45 ± 3.11
71.37 ± 2.84
73.23 ± 3.36
72.15 ± 1.97
84.12 ± 2.61
82.84 ± 4.08
82.65 ± 2.26

WBSAmp
WBSAmp
WBSAmp
SWBC
SWBC
All-FS
All-FS
All-FS
All-FS
All-FS
All-FS
All-FS
All-FS

k-NN
k-NN
k-NN
QDA
k-NN
MAH
MAH
MAH
MAH
MAH
MAH
MAH
MAH

RS
NoR
RS
NoR
RS
RS
NoR
RS
NoR
RS
NoR
NoR
RS

All-FB: {delta, theta, alpha, beta, gamma}; All FS: {WBSAmp, SWBC, WBSPh,
WBSAmpLM# }; QDA: Quadratic Discriminant Analysis [28], MAH: Mahalanobis [29],
k-NN: k-Nearest Neighbors [30]; RS: Reference State, NoR: No Referencing. Boldface
indicates the highest C A value.

delta and beta bands are both considered, all features of PCS#1,
i.e., {WBSAm, SWBC, WBSPh, WBSAmpLM# }, are used, the
MAH classifier is employed, and the NoR type of referencing is
considered. Notably, these results are better than when using all
EEG frequency bands and adopting the RS case, which results
in CA = 82.65 ± 2.26%.
The results tabulated in Table I refer to the analysis of EEG
segments of 6 s [T = 0.5 s (ΔT1 = 0.5 s)] in relax and pain
conditions. Nevertheless, as it was mentioned in Section IV, the
effect of the window size was examined by analyzing EEG segments of 15 s [T = 1, 3, and 5 s (ΔT1 = 0.5 T)] per condition
(applicable to the 85% of the database). This resulted in a number of windows Nw of 29 (for T = 1 s), 9 (for T = 3 s), and
5 (for T = 5 s), respectively. The estimated CA ± std per Nw ,
when using (based on the findings of Table I): {delta, beta}
EEG frequency bands, the MAH (solid line) and k-NN (dashed
line) classifiers, and the NoR case are depicted in Fig. 3, with
Fig. 3(a)–(c) corresponding to T = 1, 3, and 5 s, respectively.

HADJILEONTIADIS: EEG-BASED TONIC COLD PAIN CHARACTERIZATION USING WAVELET HIGHER ORDER SPECTRAL FEATURES

Fig. 3. Estimated C A ± std per N w when using {delta, beta} EEG frequency bands, the MAH: Mahalanobis [29] (solid line), and k-NN: k-Nearest
Neighbors [30] (dashed line) classifiers, and the NoR: No Referencing case.
(a)–(c) correspond to T = 1, 3, and 5 s, respectively.

TABLE II
MAXIMUM VALUES OF C A FOR PCS#1 (EEG DATA SEGMENT LENGTH
OF 15 S)

Frequency
Bands
{delta,
beta}
{delta,
beta}
{delta,
beta}

M ax

CA
±
std(%)

Features

89.23 ± 3.58

All-FS

MAH

NoR

1

14

90.25 ± 2.08

All-FS

MAH

NoR

3

9

85.91 ± 2.16

All-FS

MAH

NoR

5

3

Classifier Type of T (s)
Reference

N wM

All FS: {WBSAm, SWBC, WBSPh, WBSAmpLM# }; T: time-window resolution
of the estimation of the WHOS-based features; N wM : the N w window, where the
M ax

maximum value of C A , i.e., C A
, lies; MAH: Mahalanobis [29]; NoR: No
M ax
value.
Referencing. Boldface indicates the highest C A

M ax

The maximum CA values (CA
) of Fig. 3, along with the
corresponding setting, i.e., T and the Nw window where the
M ax
CA
lies (denoted as NwM ), are listed in Table II. As it can
be seen from Fig. 3, MAH overpasses the performance of kNN classifier, independently from the T value. Moreover, as
M ax
value (90.25%) correTable II indicates, the global CA
sponds to the setting of Fig. 3(b), that is, T = 3 s, NwM = 9. The
latter is placed at the last 3 s of the 15-s EEG segment implying
that the interval of 12–15 s is the best candidate for achieving the
highest CA. This seems quite natural, as at the end of the P state,
the subject perceives pain at its maximum intensity; hence, the

1987

Fig. 4. Topographical plot of the average WBSAmp across trials with respect
to each electrode site for: the R (first panel) and P (second panel) states, the
(P – R)/R difference (third panel), and the C C between states and features of
all trials of each electrode (fourth panel), at delta (left column) and beta (right
column) EEG frequency bands.

distance at the feature space between R and P states is expected
to increase. In general, the derived CA values, based on MAH
classifier, vary between ∼80% and ∼90% independently from
the T value indicating a quite robust classification performance
of the adopted feature set.
2) Topographic Distribution: In order to examine the topographic distribution of the feature set within the delta and beta
EEG frequency bands, the average WBSAmp across trials is
topographically plotted with respect to each electrode site in
Fig. 4, for the R and P states, corresponding to the two top
panels, respectively. Additionally, the (P – R)/R difference is
depicted in the third panel of Fig. 4, whereas correlation coefficients (CC) between states and features of all trials of each
electrode site are also topographically depicted in Fig. 4 (lower
panel). From Fig. 4, three top panels, an increase in the average
WBSAmp during the P state as compared to R state is observed
in the right prefrontal (AF4), in the right fronto-central (F4), in
the left lateral frontal (F7), and in the left lateral parietal (P7)
areas for delta frequency band, and in the left fronto-central (F3)
area for the beta frequency band. Moreover, a decrease in the
average WBSAmp is observed in left parietal (P7) in the beta
frequency band during the P state. These findings are also justified by the estimated CCs (p < 0.05), displayed in Fig. 4, lower
panel, as positive and negative correlations to the corresponding
areas of average WBSAmp increase and decrease, respectively.
Neuroanatomically, the frontal lobe is associated with emotional

1988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 5. Boxplots of the estimated mean WBSAmp from the EEG segments
from all trials before the click1 (no pain-R state), after the click1 (mild pain-M
state) and before the end of the experiment (severe pain-P state) acquired from
P7 channel at beta EEG frequency band.

responses [33], while the parietal lobe plays important roles in
integrating sensory information from various parts of the body,
and its function includes processing information relating to the
sense of touch [34]. The latter is clearly affected by the increase
of the tonic cold pain intensity, leading to the reduction of the
sense of touch; thus, the decrease of the average WBSAmp
noticed at the P7 channel in the beta frequency band. Consequently, it seems that, during pain stimulation, brain areas with
different functionalities are recruited, possibly, in a combinatory
way.
B. PCS#2-Related Results
Motivated by the findings of the previous section, and in order
to create a dynamic pain characterization metric, the WBSAmp
and the corresponding IWBSAmp/IWBSPh features from channel P7, averaged for the beta band (especially the 13–18 Hz
where most of the WBS peaks lie, see Fig. 1), were drawn from
EEG segments from all trials before the click1 (no pain-R state),
after the click1 (mild pain-M state), and before the end of the
experiment (severe pain-P state). As IWBSAmp/IWBSPh are
time-dependent features, their time variation could reveal transitions from R to P states, including also the transition through
the M state as a means of increased pain characterization resolution. To quantify such variation, the mean WBSAmp from
the aforementioned EEG segments was initially estimated and
categorized, according to the R/M/P states, as shown in the
boxplots of Fig. 5. The estimated median values/interquartile
ranges, corresponding to the R/M/P states, were found equal to
{R: 0.0267/0.0088; M: 0.0122/0.0063; P: 0.0021/0.0023}, respectively. From the latter and the boxplots of Fig. 5, it is clear
that since there is no overlap between the estimated groups,
some distinct thresholds could be set as borderlines between
the R/M/P states, corresponding to thrR = 0.021, for distinguishing between R and M states, and thrP = 0.006, for distinguishing between M and P states, accordingly. Applying such

Fig. 6. Estimated IWBSAmp [(a) and (b), upper panel] and IWBSPh [(a) and
(b), lower panel] of EEG data acquired from channel P7 at beta frequency band
from two subjects, respectively, along with the thrR , P defining the regions that
correspond to the R/M/P states. The timestamp of click1 (within the time range
of click0-trial end) is pointed out as a dashed vertical line.

thresholds to the time evolution of the IWBSAmp, the transition
amongst the subject’s status states could become feasible. The
latter could be complementary supported by the estimation of
the corresponding IWBSPh, which could justify the changes in
the IWBSAmp by the level of IWBSPh variability. This is known
from the fact that when the QPC effect is high, the IWBSAmp
is increased while the variability in the IWBSPh is decreased
and vice versa [23]. Two characteristic examples are given in
Fig. 6(a) and (b), where the estimated IWBSAmp [(a),(b), upper panel] and IWBSPh [(a) and (b), lower panel] are depicted,
along with the thrR ,P defining the regions that correspond to
the R/M/P states. In addition, the timestamp of click1 (within the
time range of click0-trial end) is pointed out as a dashed vertical
line. From the IWBSAmp graph of Fig. 6(a), upper panel, it is
clear that the subject activated click1 when he felt the first pain
sensation (∼12 s), and then he tried to compensate that feeling
up to ∼36 s, where he felt more pain, yet mild, sustaining his

HADJILEONTIADIS: EEG-BASED TONIC COLD PAIN CHARACTERIZATION USING WAVELET HIGHER ORDER SPECTRAL FEATURES

motivation to withstand pain up to ∼72 s (with a climax of his
effort at ∼70 s), where he gradually started feeling more severe pain up to ∼79 s, which is sustained until the end of the
trial. From the graph of Fig. 6(a), lower panel, the change in the
variability of the estimated IWBSPh can be seen, with lower values (std ∼ π/18) when IWBSAmp > thrR , and higher ones
(std ∼ π/2) when IWBSAmp > thrP . These changes in the
IWBSPh variability, however, indicate a more qualitative than a
quantitative measure, which supports the changes of the IWBSAmp. Moving to the estimated IWBSAmp of Fig. 6(b), upper
panel, the difference in the behavior of this subject, compared
to the one corresponding to the results of Fig. 6(a), upper panel,
is evident. Here, the subject activated click1 when he felt the
first pain sensation (∼4 s), which was gradually perceived as
a severe pain up to ∼9 s, and from there, he started a withstand pain effort with transitions within the R and M states up
to ∼36 s, where the severe pain sensation was more evident
until the end of the trial, with an ultimate effort at 40–41.7 s.
Similarly to the case of Fig. 6(a), lower panel, the estimated
IWBSPh of Fig. 6(b), lower panel, supports the changes in the
corresponding IWBSAmp yet in a more qualitative way.
From the results depicted in Fig. 6, the difference in the subjects’ pain management attitude could be identified. Apparently,
the first subject [see Fig. 6(a)] exhibits a more controlled pain
management effort, reflected also to his very low NRS value
(=1), and to the extended total duration of his trial (∼105 s).
On the contrary, the second subject [see Fig. 6(b)] seems more
anxious and affected by the pain, as his click1 (∼4 s) was quite
early, exhibited two entrances to the P state (the first at ∼9 s
(very early compared to the duration of the trial) and the second
at ∼36 s), his NRS rating was 9 and the total duration of his
trial was ∼42 s, corresponding to the 40% of the one of the
first subject. Apparently, these differences add to the value of
IWBSAmp as a feature that could characterize, in a dynamic
way, the subject’s pain perception and reaction to it.
C. PCS#3-Related Results
For all experimental trials, the median/interquartile range of
the pain threshold (click1) and pain tolerance threshold (trial
end-click1) were found equal to 10.67/3.4 s and 20.97/15.56 s,
respectively. The subject’s pain endurance was quantified by
the feature PE defined in (10), (11) (using in the latter, the settings of the previous Section V-B for the estimation of the Ttol
as the sum of the time instances where the averaged values of
IWBSAMp within the beta band overpass thrP = 0.006). Apparently, the closer to 1, the PE gets the higher the subject’s pain
endurance should become, as the R and M states are prolonged
after the click1, compared to the P state. To justify this, a comparison of PE with the subjects’ Ttotal and NRS data (for all
experimental trials, corresponding to median/interquartile range
of {Ttotal : 28.13/8.24 s; NRS: 6/3}, respectively) was carried
out and the results are illustrated in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. In both figures, the experimental data (dots) were nonlinear least squares fitted with a linear and exponential function
(solid lines), respectively, with resulting coefficient of determination R2 > 0.9 and mean fitting error less than 1%. Moreover,

1989

Fig. 7. Comparison of PE with the subjects’ (a) T to ta l and (b) NRS data
(for all experimental trials). In both figures, the experimental data (dots) and
the nonlinear least squares fitting with a linear and exponential function (solid
lines), respectively, with resulting coefficient of determination R 2 > 0.9, are
depicted; the curves that correspond to the 95% confidence bounds are also
illustrated with dashed lines.

the curves that correspond to the 95% confidence bounds are also
depicted with dashed lines. As it can be seen from Fig. 7(a),
there is a strong linear relationship between PE and Ttotal
(Ttotal = 157.8PE + 1.42) showing that when the estimated
PE increases, the Ttotal also, analogously, increases. This seems
quite natural, as the higher the subject’s pain endurance, the
longer the total duration of the experimental trial is expected to
be. From Fig. 7(b), it seems that there is an exponential relationship between PE and NRS (NRS = 10.96e−3.3PE − 0.39)
reflecting an inverse analogy between PE and NRS; the latter
again seems logical, as the lower the subject’s PE is, the higher
the intensity of the perceived pain becomes; hence, the higher
the marked NRS. These results indicate that the subjective judgment of pain intensity of each participant could be reflected in
the WHOS-based PE feature, as a means of objective quantification of such judgment.
D. Overall Perspective
The WHOS-based feature space introduced here clearly differs from the EEG-based tonic cold pain characterization approaches proposed so far. In particular, all of the related works
(see [11]–[13], [18]–[21]) draw their conclusions from the
power spectrum domain at specific frequency bands of the
EEG signal, though losing its phase information. The proposed
WHOS-based feature space, unlike the previous approaches,
preserves the phase information by revealing the underlying
QPC in a dynamic way and builds upon the latter efficient features that could more pragmatically reflect the EEG-based brain
response and subjective pain characterization to the tonic cold
pain stimulation. This is exemplified by the fact that the best
classification results in PCS#1 are based on a combination of
WHOS-based features at delta and beta EEG frequency bands
(see Section IV-A, Tables I and II), whereas most of the power

1990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

spectrum-based approaches are focused on the alpha band. Similar to [21] and [35], the employment of the delta band, however,
connects with primitive defensive behaviors associated with periaqueductal gray (PAG) activity, which results in an increase of
delta oscillations [36]. In PAG region, it appears to be a specialization for painful input with different sets of cells responding
predominantly to cutaneous pain (lateral PAG) and to deep pain
from the joints and viscera (ventrolateral PAG) [36]. Apparently,
the WHOS-based features are sensitive to such PAG activity,
which rises when the more advanced systems lose their priority, such as in the case of pain stimulation. Functionally, delta
oscillations appear to be implicated in synchronization of brain
activity with autonomic functions, in motivational processes associated both with reward and atavistic defensive mechanisms,
and in cognitive processes mostly related to attention and the
detection of motivationally salient stimuli in the environment
[36]. In a combination to the latter, in [37], it was found that the
beta oscillations could be interpreted as a hyperarousal during
the tonic pain; they can also be related to the motivational modulation of the brain [21]. These observations clearly connect to
the pain characterization efficiency of the WHOS-based features
exhibited within the delta and beta EEG frequency bands.
The concept of incorporating the white cross in a black background, dim lighting conditions and still position with focused
sight on the cross (see Section IV), was adopted to minimize the
muscular and occipital artifacts and to create a kind of “neutralization” to the subjects’ cognitive status during the experiments,
as no parallel cognitive distraction process was involved in the
experimental protocol. Nevertheless, this neutral cognitive status might be influenced by a task-related brain activity (e.g.,
building the perception of establishing or losing the control
over the situation). Most of this, however, could be reflected at
the frontal lobe as emotional responses (sense of domination
or loss [33]). The differences seen in Figs. 5 and 6 between
the R/M/P states relate to P7 channel located at the parietal
lobe that relates to integration of sensorial information (sense of
touch [34]). However, the possibility that the acquired EEG signal reflects some task-related activity not directly related to pain
intensity should further be examined. Possibly, combination of
EEG data analysis with the characteristics of the corresponding
electrostatic field inside the brain, derived by the newly introduced dense EEG (dEEG)-based 3-D-vector field tomography
(3D-VFT) [38], could shed more light upon the activated regions during the experimental scenarios. With the combined
use of dEEG and 3D-VFT data, a thorough analysis of the brain
responses (both on the surface and internal) during tonic cold
pain experimental scenarios that explicitly provoke task-related
brain responses (e.g., by instructing participants to continuously
think about the process itself across the whole experiment) could
be achieved. This could further assist the discrimination between
pain- and task-related brain responses.
The observed changes in brain EEG response captured by
the WHOS-based features during the evolution of the tonic cold
pain further suggest that these features may be useful to explore
brain dynamics associated with more pain types, such as chronic
pain [39], and pain-related sensory and emotional processing in
clinical populations. The latter could also include patients who

are unable to verbally communicate; for example, sedated patients in the intensive care unit recovering from trauma and major surgery, as well as infant patients [40], [41]. Finally, possible
applications of the proposed analysis on EEG signals, evoked
by different sensorial modalities, even not painful, such as somatosensory, auditory or visually EPs, could also be explored.
VI. CONCLUSION
A new approach in tonic cold pain characterization, based
on EEG WHOS-based features, has been proposed in this paper. In particular, by combining the CWT with HOS, a new
feature space was formed, exhibiting an efficient classification
performance under various PCSs. The promising experimental
results found here reveal the potentiality of the WHOS-based
features to dynamically capture the transition between relax and
pain status. Apparently, more extended, large-scale experiments,
including various clinical cases related to pain, are needed to
further justify the findings. Nevertheless, the proposed approach
contributes with an alternative way to the endeavor toward objective quantification of the subjective characterization of pain,
taking into account the nonstationarity and nonlinearity of the
EEG-based brain responses to pain stimuli.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the 17 volunteers for their
participation in the experimental protocol. Moreover, he would
also like to thank Dr. S. Hadjidimitriou, S. Eleutheriadis, D.
Tzionas, S. Georgoulis, and K. Vrenas for their assistance in the
EEG data acquisition setting, and K. Petkos and P. Tsakonas for
their preliminary data handling.
REFERENCES
[1] T. D. Walsh, “Practical problems in pain measurements,” Pain, vol. 19,
pp. 96–98, 1984.
[2] J. S. Shieh et al., “A novel fuzzy pain demand index derived from patientcontrolled analgesia for postoperative pain,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2123–2132, Dec. 2007.
[3] A. Williamson and B. Hoggart, “Pain: A review of three commonly used
pain rating scales,” J. Clin. Nursing, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 798–804, 2005.
[4] V. De Piero et al., “A cerebral blood flow study on tonic pain activation
in man,” Pain, vol. 56, pp. 167–173, 1994.
[5] P. Petrovic et al., “Pain-related cerebral activation is altered by a distracting
cognitive task,” Pain, vol. 85, pp. 19–30, 2000.
[6] M. Ingvar, “Pain and functional imaging,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.
Biol. Sci., vol. 354, pp. 1347–1358, 1999.
[7] R. D. Treede et al., “The cortical representation of pain,” Pain, vol. 79,
pp. 105–111, 1999.
[8] D. D. Price, “Psychological and neural mechanisms of the affective dimension of pain,” Science, vol. 288, pp. 1769–1772, 2000.
[9] J. Lorenz and L. Garcia-Larrea, “Contribution of attentional and cognitive factors to laser evoked brain potentials,” Neurophysiol Clin., vol. 33,
pp. 293–301, 2003.
[10] R. R. Nir et al., “Neurophysiology of the cortical pain network: Revisiting the role of S1 in subjective pain perception via standardized lowresolution brain electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA),” Pain, vol. 9,
pp. 1058–1069, 2008.
[11] R. R. Nir et al., “Tonic pain and continuous EEG: Prediction of subjective
pain perception by alpha-1 power during stimulation and at rest,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 123, no. 3, pp. 605–612, 2012.
[12] A. C. N. Chen, “Human brain measures of clinical pain: A review I.
Topographic mappings,” Pain, vol. 54, pp. 115–132, 1993.
[13] R. R. Nir et al., “Pain assessment by continuous EEG: Association between subjective perception of tonic pain and peak frequency of alpha

HADJILEONTIADIS: EEG-BASED TONIC COLD PAIN CHARACTERIZATION USING WAVELET HIGHER ORDER SPECTRAL FEATURES

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]

oscillations during stimulation and at rest,” Brain Res, vol. 1344, pp. 77–
86, 2010.
R. K. Adair, “A model of the detection of warmth and cold by cutaneous
sensors through effects on voltage-gated membrane channels,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 96, pp. 11825–11829, 1999.
R. W. Dykes, “Coding of steady and transient temperatures by cutaneous ‘cold’ fibers serving the hand of monkeys,” Brain Res., vol. 98,
pp. 485–500, 1975.
D. R. Kenshalo Jr. et al., “Facilitation of the responses of primate spinothalamic cells to cold and to tactile stimuli by noxious heating of the skin,”
Pain, vol. 12, pp. 141–152, 1982.
J. Lee et al., “Responses of neurons in the region of human thalamic principal somatic sensory nucleus to mechanical and thermal stimuli graded
into the painful range,” J. Comput. Neurol., vol. 410, pp. 541–555, 1999.
P. F. Chang et al., “Comparative cerebral responses to non-painful warm
vs. cold stimuli in man: EEG power spectra and coherence,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 55, pp. 73–83, 2005.
D. Rissacher et al., “Identifying frequency-domain features for an EEGbased pain measurement system,” in Proc. IEEE 33rd Annu. Northeast
Bioeng. Conf., 2007, pp. 114–115.
S. Shao et al., “Frequency-domain EEG source analysis for acute tonic
cold pain perception,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 123, pp. 2042–2049, 2012.
P. F. Chang et al., “Dynamic changes and spatial correlation of EEG
activities during cold pressor test in man,” Brain Res. Bull., vol. 57, no. 5,
pp. 667–675, 2002.
C. L. Nikias and A. P. Petropulu, Higher-Order Spectra Analysis: A Nonlinear Signal Processing Framework. New Jersey, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall,
1993.
J. Jamšek et al., “Wavelet bispectral analysis for the study of interactions
among oscillators whose basic frequencies are significantly time variable,”
Phys. Rev. E, vol. 76, pp. 046221/1–016201/11, 2007.
P. S. Addison, The Illustrated Wavelet Transform Handbook: Introductory
Theory and Applications in Science, Engineering, Medicine and Finance.
Bristol, U.K.: Inst. Phys., 2002.
Y. C. Kim and E. J. Powers, “Digital bispectral analysis of self-excited
fluctuation spectra,” Phys. Fluids, vol. 21, pp. 1452–1453, 1978.
B. P. Van Milligen et al., “Nonlinear phenomena and intermittency in
plasma turbulence,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 395–398, 1995.
K. I. Panoulas et al., “Enhancement of R-wave detection in ECG data
analysis using higher-order statistics,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2001, vol. 1, pp. 344–347.
G. J. McLachlan, Discriminant Analysis and Statistical Pattern Recognition. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1992.
P. C. Mahalanobis, “On the generalized distance in statistics,” Proc. Nat.
Inst. Sci. India, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 49–55, 1936.
T. M. Cover and P. E. Hart, “Nearest neighbor pattern classification,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 21–27, Jan. 1967.
N. Cristianini and J. Shawe-Taylor, An Introduction to Support Vector
Machines and Other Kernel-Based Learning Methods. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000.
R. Kohavi, “A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell., Montreal,
Canada, 1995, pp. 1137–1143.
L. I. Aftanas et al., “Analysis of evoked EEG synchronization and desynchronization in conditions of emotional activation in humans: Temporal
and topographic characteristics,” Neurosci. Behav. Physiol., vol. 34, no. 8,
pp. 859–867, 2004.
W. Penfield and T. Rasmussen, The Cerebral Cortex of a Man: A Clinical
Study of Localization of Function. New York, NY, USA: Macmillan, 1950.
A. Stevens et al., “Both pain and EEG response to cold pressor stimulation
occurs faster in fibromyalgia patients than in control subjects,” Psychiatry
Res., vol. 97, pp. 237–247, 2000.

1991

[36] G. G. Knyazev, “EEG delta oscillations as a correlate of basic homeostatic
and motivational processes,” Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 677–695, 2012.
[37] A. Reinert et al., “The pain inhibiting pain effect: An electrophysiological
study in humans,” Brain Res., vol. 862, pp. 103–110, 2000.
[38] C. D. Papadaniil and L. J. Hadjileontiadis, “Tomographic reconstruction
of 3-D irrotational vector fields via a discretized Ray transform,” J. Math.
Imag. Vis., pp. 1–18, 2015, doi: 10.1007/s108510150559y.
[39] C. Sitges et al., “Linear and nonlinear analyses of EEG dynamics during
non-painful somatosensory processing in chronic pain patients,” Int. J.
Psychophysiol., vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 176–183, 2010.
[40] C. Gelinas et al., “Pain assessment and management in critically ill intubated patients: A retrospective study,” Amer. J. Crit. Care, vol. 13,
pp. 126–134, 2004.
[41] Y. Aissaoui et al., “Validation of a behavioral pain scale in critically
ill, sedated, and mechanically ventilated patients,” Anesthesia Analgesia.,
vol. 101, pp. 1470–1476, 2005.

Leontios J. Hadjileontiadis (S’87–M’98–SM’11)
was born in Kastoria, Greece, in π-1966. He received
the Diploma degree in electrical engineering in 1989
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering in 1997, both from the Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki (AUTH), Thessaloniki, Greece. He also
received a Diploma degree in musicology, AUTH,
in 2011, and the Ph.D. degree in music composition
from the University of York, York, U.K., in 2004.
In December 1999, he joined the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, AUTH, as a
Faculty Member, where he is currently a Full Professor, working on lung sounds,
heart sounds, bowel sounds, ECG data compression, EEG-based affective computing, seismic data analysis, educational data modeling, and crack detection
in the Signal Processing and Biomedical Technology Unit of the Telecommunications Laboratory. He is currently a Professor in music composition at the
State Conservatory of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki. His research interests include
higher order statistics, alpha-stable distributions, higher order zero crossings,
swarm modeling, wavelets, polyspectra, fractals, dense EEG-based 3-D vector
field tomography, and neurofuzzy modeling for medical, mobile, and digital
signal processing applications.
Prof. Hadjileontiadis is a Member of the Technical Chamber of Greece, the
Higher Order Statistics Society, the International Lung Sounds Association, and
the American College of Chest Physicians. He received the Second Award at
the Best Paper Competition of the Nineth Panhellenic Medical Conference on
Thorax Diseases, in 1997, Thessaloniki. He was also an Open Finalist at the
Student Paper Competition (Whitaker Foundation) of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) in 1997, Chicago, IL, USA, a Finalist at
the Student Paper Competition (in memory of Dick Poortvliet) of the Mediterranean Conference on Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing in
1998, Lemesos, Cyprus, and received the Young Scientist Award of the 24th
International Lung Sounds Conference in 1999, Marburg, Germany. He organized and served as a Mentor to four-student teams awarded at the Imagine Cup
Competition, Microsoft, Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 2004; Yokohama, Japan, in 2005;
Seoul, Korea, in 2007; New York, NY, USA, in 2011; Sydney, Australia, in
2012, with projects involving technology-based solutions for people with disabilities and pain management. In this framework, he received the Champions
Faculty Award 2012 in Sydney, Australia. Since 2012, he serves as an IEEE
Student Branch and an IEEE EMBS Branch Chancellor, and in August 2013,
he and his student team Symbiosis were awarded the IEEE Student Enterprise
Award 2013.

