2602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Focused Magnetic Resonance Coupling Coils
for Electromagnetic Therapy Applications
Sai Ho Yeung∗ , Raunaq Pradhan, Xiaohua Feng, and Yuanjin Zheng, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents the design and construction of a
pair of figure-of-eight coils, coupled by magnetic resonance coupling (MRC), which could generate (150 V/m per Ampere) electric field at the focal points for electromagnetic therapy related
applications. The E field generated at the targeted site would be
significantly enhanced under the same amount of current flowing
through the MRC figure-of-eight coils compared to normal coils,
due to the superposition of E field contributed by the coils. Furthermore, the MRC figure-of-eight coil is designed and the results
are verified in theory, simulation, and experiments. In the ex vivo
tissue measurement, 35% current and 82% ohmic power improvements were observed. Since it can enhance the current and ohmic
power, the MRC figure-of-eight coils are promising solutions for
electromagnetic therapy applications. The potential applications
of the coils include noninvasive radio frequency (RF) stimulation,
thermoacoustic imaging, electromagnetic field therapies, and RF
ablation, etc.
Index Terms—Coil design, magnetic resonance coupling (MRC),
stimulation, thermoacoustic imaging.

I. INTRODUCTION
OILS are widely used for generating the electric and
magnetic field to induce the electric current at the
focus in many electromagnetic therapy related applications
such as thermoacoustic imaging [1]–[3], magnetic stimulation
[4]–[6], pulsed electromagnetic field therapies [7]–[9], and radio
frequency (RF) ablation [10] – [12]. An electric field E induced
in an object with conductivity σ generates a current where the
current density J is given by

C

J = σE.

(1)

Under the conduction of the current, its ohmic power density
Pσ is given by
|J|2
= σ |E|2 .
(2)
σ
Both parameters are important for the electromagnetic therapy related applications. For instance, the induced current would
Pσ =

Manuscript received November 8, 2014; accepted February 24, 2015. Date
of publication March 4, 2015; date of current version October 16, 2015. This
work was supported by the Singapore National Research Foundation under
Exploratory/Developmental Grant NMRC/EDG/1061/2012 and administered
by the Singapore Ministry of Health’s National Medical Research Council.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ S. H. Yeung is with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang Avenue, Singapore (e-mail:
shyeung@ntu.edu.sg).
R. Pradhan, X. Feng, and Y. Zheng are with the School of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2408432

be useful in stimulation, while the ohmic power density is usually useful for heating as in RF ablation and thermoacoustic
applications. Several factors need to be considered during coil
design to induce the current at the target. First, the electric field
must be focused at the target while minimizing the E field at
other areas. Note that the focus of the electric field is not just
a point, but rather a line perpendicular to the orientation of the
coil. Second, the ratio or gain of the induced E field at the focus
divided by the current conducting the coils should be maximized
for the sake of using a smaller current to prevent heating up the
coil. Third, a very large coil should not be used which is too
bulky and affects the actual implementation of the applications.
The second and the third criteria involve a tradeoff because the
larger the coil radius, the larger is the gain. This tradeoff is
derived from the electromagnetic formulas in the next section
considering a quasi-static frequency in the condition that the
wavelength (which is 666.7 m at 450 kHz) is much longer than
the distance between the desired observation point and the coil.
This paper is aimed at proposing a new figure-of-eight [5] coil
configuration which improves the coil design with respect to the
previously mentioned design criteria. The new coil configuration applies the concept of magnetic resonance coupling (MRC)
[13] – [15], which is composed of one active driven primary coil
and a passive secondary coil coupled with each other, involving
transfer of energy, when they are in resonance. Although there
are two coils, only one source is required because the secondary
coil is driven by the magnetic field radiated from the primary
coil. Under MRC, the primary coil and the secondary coil would
conduct the same or similar magnitude of the current at the resonant frequency. Hence, both coils induce the electromagnetic
field and hence the electromotive force at the target, thereby
doubling the current density induced at the target. The proposed
configuration drives two coils with a single-port drive through
MRC without the need of using two independent sources. It
results that the equipment cost which include a signal generator
and a power amplifier as well as the space can be saved. On
the other hand, the figure-of-eight coil [5] configuration, which
is popular in the literature to focus the magnetic field, could
also double the current density induced at the tissue. This paper will present the combination of figure-of-eight coil [5] and
MRC [13]–[15], thereby further increasing the current density
and ohmic power density induced at the tissue.
This paper is organized as follows: in Section II, the design
theory of the MRC figure-of-eight coils will be introduced. In
Section III, the simulation results of electromagnetic field distribution of the coils will be presented. In Section IV, the design,
fabrication, and measurement of the MRC coil will be discussed.
In Section V, the biomedical ex vivo experiments to demonstrate
the current and heat induced at the pig muscle tissue (pork)

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

YEUNG et al.: FOCUSED MAGNETIC RESONANCE COUPLING COILS FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC THERAPY APPLICATIONS

2603

Fig. 1. Configuration of a magnetic coil: (a) circular coil and (b) figure-ofeight coil.

Fig. 3.
coil.

Three-dimensional modeling illustration of the MRC figure-of-eight

B. Electromagnetic Field Distribution

Fig. 2.

Configuration of the MRC figure-of-eight coil.

using the focused MRC figure-of-eight coil will be performed.
Finally, the conclusion will be given in Section VI.
II. DESIGN THEORY: MRC FIGURE-OF-EIGHT COIL
In this section, the theories for the design of MRC figure-ofeight coil are introduced. These include the configurations of
different coil designs, electromagnetic field distribution, selfinductance, mutual inductance, MRC, and its equivalent circuit
models.
A. Configurations of the Coil Designs
In this paper, three types of coils are considered. First, it is
the circular coil as depicted in Fig. 1(a). The coil consists of N
turns of radius r along the same x-y coordinates and a current
of magnitude I flows through the coil. Second, it is the figureof-eight coil as depicted in Fig. 1(b), which is composed of
two coil elements with radius r, where both of them consist of
N turns but the current I flowing through the two coils are in
opposite directions to each other (clockwise and anticlockwise).
This opposition is designed to enforce superposition of E field
of the two coil elements at the focus point. Third, it is the MRC
figure-of-eight coil proposed in this paper as depicted in Fig. 2.
It is composed of two figure-of-eight oriented in the xy plane
separated by the distance D along the z-axis. The primary coil
couples and transfers energy to the secondary coil, and both
of them would conduct the same or similar magnitude of the
current at the resonant frequency under MRC. The actual threedimensional model of the coil is shown in Fig. 3.

Consider a circular coil of N turns with negligible thickness
as given in Fig. 1(a), the magnetic flux density B generated by it
can be computed using the Bio–Savart Law [16] by integrating
along the whole current path C of the coil

μ0 N I
d1 × (r − r )
B (r) =
,
(3)
4π
|r − r |3
C
where μ0 is the permeability, N is the number of turns of the coil,
I is the magnitude of the current flowing through the coil, d1 is
the differential coil element, and r and r are the position vectors
of the observation point and that of the differential element
d1 , respectively. Since the factor of N is already presented in
the equation, it negates the need to integrate the path for each
turn. Although the assumptions such as negligible thickness and
quasi-static conditions [16] could introduce errors, the actual
value of the E field strength can be further obtained from a
more accurate electromagnetic simulation.
Meanwhile, the vector magnetic potential A [16] is related to
B by
B=∇×A

(4)

where B is the magnetic flux density. Then, A can be
computed by

d1
μ0 N I
.
(5)
A (r) =

4π
C |r − r |
The electric field E generated by the magnetic coils is then
calculated as the derivate of the vector magnetic potential A,
which results as

μ0 ωN I
dl
(6)
E (r) =

4π
C |r − r |
where ω is the angular frequency of the current. From (6), we
know that higher the frequency, the larger is the E field. Moreover, since the assumption is quasi-static, the distance of the coil

2604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

to the observation point |r − r | should be negligible compared
to the wavelength used here. For instance, the wavelength of a
450-kHz radio wave in free space is 666.7 m, which is much
longer than the distance involved in imaging, stimulation, and
therapy application, usually less than a few meters.
Furthermore, the computation of E and B field of the figureof-eight coil, as depicted in Fig. 1(b), could be performed based
on the superposition of the E and B field contribution of the two
coil elements, but the opposition of current directions between
the two coils should be taken into account. Similarly, the E and
B field of the MRC figure-of-eight coils, as depicted in Fig. 2,
can be computed by the superposition of the field contributed
by the primary and the secondary coils. Hence, the total E field
will be enhanced at the focus.

Fig. 4.

Equivalent circuit of the two coils in magnetic coupling.

Fig. 5.

Equivalent T-type coupling model of the MRC coil.

C. Self-Inductance
The self-inductance is calculated as the magnetic flux linkage
per unit current in the coil itself. For a regular circular coil design
as depicted in Fig. 1(a), the self-inductance L can be calculated
as [17]
  

8r
−2
(7)
L = N 2 rμ0 ln
a
where r is the radius of the coil and a is the radius of the wire.
Then, the self-inductance of a figure-of-eight coil, which can
be considered as two coils located adjacent to each other as
depicted in Fig. 1(b), can be approximated as the double of
the value calculated using (7), neglecting the mutual coupling
between the two coil elements.
D. Mutual Inductance
Consider two coils separated by distance d coupled to each
other, the mutual inductance can be calculated by Neumann
formula
 
dl1 · dl2
μ0
Lm =
(8)
4π C 1 C 2
R
where dl1 and dl2 are the differential coil elements of the two
coils coupling to each other, respectively, and R is the distance
between the differential elements.
E. MRC and the Equivalent Circuit Models
The MRC coil consists of one active driving primary coil
and a passive secondary coil coupled with each other involving
transfer of energy at their resonant frequency. Capacitors C
should be cascaded to both coils for resonance to occur. Coil
resistance R and the input source characterized by impedance Rs
and voltage Vs are also included resulting in the circuit diagram
as shown in Fig. 4. Before considering the mutual coupling
between the coils, the self-resonance angular frequency ω 0 of
the RLC resonator is given by
1
ω0 = √ .
LC

(9)

Then, the coupling between the two coils is characterized by
its coupling coefficient, which can be calculated by the ratio

between the mutual inductance and self-inductance [13]
k=

Lm
.
L

(10)

With the consideration of the mutual coupling, the equivalent T-type coupling circuit is given in Fig. 5, which makes it
convenient for the circuit design and analysis [13]. The resonant frequency of MRC coils occurs at two frequencies ωe
and ωm (where ωe > ωm ) adjacent to the self-resonance angular frequency ω 0, where the distance between the two resonant
frequencies can be computed using the coupling coefficient k
k=

2
ωe2 − ωm
.
2
2
ωe + ωm

(11)

From (8), when the distance D between the coils increases, the
mutual inductance between the two coils decreases, and hence
the coupling coefficient k. Moreover, the distance D will affect
the coupling efficiency in delivering the power to the secondary
coil. The longer the distance, the smaller is the efficiency as
demonstrated in [13].
F. Input Impedance and Q-Factor
With the circuit model of Fig. 5, the input impedance Z and
hence the Q-factor of the MRC figure-of-eight coil, together
with the RLC resonators formed by the figure-of-eight coil and
circular coil cascaded with capacitors can be analyzed. (The
parameters of the MRC coil will be shown in Section IV.) The
magnitudes of the input impedance |Z| of the resonators are
shown in Fig. 6, where all of them are designed to have the
same resonant frequency. Then, the Q factor of the resonators
can be calculated by using the formula
Q=

f0
2Δf

(12)

YEUNG et al.: FOCUSED MAGNETIC RESONANCE COUPLING COILS FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC THERAPY APPLICATIONS

Fig. 6.

Input impedance of the resonators with different coil configuration.

Fig. 8.

E field distribution of different coils along the y-axis.

Fig. 7.

E field distribution of different coils along the x-axis.

Fig. 9.

E field distribution of different coils along the z-axis.

2605

where f0 is the resonance frequency and Δf is the bandwidth of
the resonator. In MRC, both the primary and the secondary coils
resonate at the same frequency. The Q factors of the resonators
from the MRC coil, figure-of-eight coil, and circular coil are
calculated as 75.1, 65.8 and 62.6, respectively. Although both
the figure-of-eight coil and circular coil results a high Q factor as
the primary characteristics of RLC resonators, it also showed that
the MRC resonator has the highest Q factor in the comparison.
III. ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD SIMULATION
In this section, the theoretical results of B and E field are
calculated using (3) and (4), respectively. The calculation is
based on the coil radius r = 4.5 cm, s = 5.0 cm, number of
turns N = 20, and the assumption that the currents across the
both coils are in phase. The separation distance between the
two coils is D = 9.0 cm (a representative separation in most of
applications). The three coil types introduced in Section II, i.e.,
circular coil, figure-of-eight coil and MRC figure-of-eight coils,
are compared. The comparisons are based on the same amount
of current, i.e., one ampere (1 A), flowing through them so that
the heating effect for each coil element would be similar.
The E field distribution of the compared coils along the x-,
y-, and z-axis centered at the focus position in the penetration
depth D/2, which is equivalent to the central point of the MRC
figure-of-eight coil, is shown in Figs. 7–9, respectively. In the
figures, the origin of the xyz coordinates is selected as the central
point of the MRC figure-of-eight coil for a clearer comparison.
It can be clearly seen that the MRC figure-of-eight coil focuses
the E field as well as doubling the magnitude at the focus along
the x- and y-axis. Along the z-axis, the electric field attenuates

Fig. 10.

B field distribution of different coils along the x-axis.

when the observation point is moving away from the coils.
Meanwhile, in the MRC coil, since both coils contain the same
amount of the current, the magnitude of E decreases when the
observation point is moving away from either coils, and reaches
the minimum point at the center. In terms of spatial resolution,
a half power factor or an E field magnitude ratio of 0.707 is
used. From Figs. 7–9, the spatial resolution at the three axis
centered at (x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0) is given by 1) x-axis: –2.9 cm to
+2.9 cm, 2) y-axis: –4.2 cm to +4.2 cm, and 3) z-axis: –2.4 cm
to +2.4 cm.
The comparison of B field distribution of the coils along
the x-axis is shown in Fig. 10. Different from the E field, the
magnitude of the B field at the focus point is minimal. However,
the B field does not have any contribution in (1) and (2) for the
magnitude of the electric current or ohmic power density. Also
for this reason, the B field distribution of the coils along the
y- and z- directions is not included here.

2606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 11. Contour color map of E field distribution of the MRC figure-of-eight
coil in the yz plane (x = 0).
Fig. 13. Contour color map of E field distribution of the MRC figure-of-eight
coil in the yz plane (z = 0).

Fig. 12. Contour color map of E field distribution of the MRC figure-of-eight
coil in the xz plane (y = 0).

Moreover, the two-dimensional electric and magnetic field
distribution surrounding the coils might be of significant interest, e.g., for the analysis of electromagnetic compatibility
issues. In this case, it would be more effective to generate the
results using the electromagnetic software (e.g., CST). To obtain
a contour color map which compares the magnitudes at different locations, the field magnitude is normalized to the maximum
value and compared in decibel (dB).
The E field distribution of the coil in the planes x = 0, y = 0,
and z = 0 are shown in Figs. 11–13, respectively. From the
figures, it can be observed that the field distribution is strongest
near the coil, and remains strong between the two coils, but
decays out fast out behind the coils. The E field is strongest in
the line y = 0 (see Fig. 10), similar to the result in Fig. 7. From
Figs. 12 and 13, the E field is strongest at the line x = 0, similar
to the result in Fig. 6.
The B field distribution of the coil is also important because
the varying B field is the source of electromagnetic induction
which generates E field across the biological medium. The mathematical relationship is given by
∇×E=−

∂B
.
∂t

(13)

Fig. 14. Contour color map of B field distribution of the MRC figure-of-eight
coil in the xz plane (y = 0).

The B field distribution of the coil in the plane y = 0 is shown
in Fig. 14. From the figure, there is a null (in blue color) at the
location x = 0, z = 0, which matches exactly with the null at
the center of Fig. 9. At resonance, the magnetic field coupled
from the primary coil to the secondary coil induces the current
at the secondary coil and results similar field distribution around
the two coils.
Since the stimulation is taking part in the biological medium,
the electrical property of the medium is suggested to be considered to find out if the magnetic flux B can penetrate it into the
simulation area for electromagnetic induction. Two more cases
are considered: 1) a small piece muscle tissue of size 1.0 cm ×
2.5 cm × 3.5 cm and 2) a large piece of muscle tissue of size
2.0 cm × 15 cm × 25 cm are sandwiched by two layers of
bone tissue of the same size. The muscle tissue is modeled
with the conductivity of σ = 0.8 S/m and dielectric constant
of εr = 56.8, whereas the bone tissue is modeled with σ =
0.1 S/m and εr = 100 (the tissue data in [3], [5], [18], [19] are

YEUNG et al.: FOCUSED MAGNETIC RESONANCE COUPLING COILS FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC THERAPY APPLICATIONS

2607

TABLE I
MRC COILS DESIGN PARAMETERS
Specification / Parameters
Separation Distance D of the two Coils
Radius of Coil r
Number of Turns N
Distance between the Coil Centers s
Penetration Depth D/2
E-field Magnitude for each Ampere Coil Current∗
Current needed to induce an E-field of 150 V/m∗
Measured Self Inductance L
Calculated Mutual Inductance L m
Capacitor Needed C = 1/(ω 2 L)
Measured Resistance of Coil R C
∗

Values
9.0 cm
4.5 cm
20
5.0 cm
4.5 cm
18.03 V/m
8.32 A
106 μH
4.31 μH
1.175 nF
2.29 Ω

Values are calculated at the penetration depth.

A. Design Implementation
Fig. 15. Contour color map of B field distribution of the MRC figure-of-eight
coil in the xz plane (y = 0) with a muscle tissue of the size 1.0 cm × 2.5 cm ×
3.5 cm.

Fig. 16. Contour color map of B field distribution of the MRC figure-of-eight
coil in the xz plane (y = 0) with a muscle tissue sandwiched by two layers of
bone tissue. The size of each layer is 2 cm × 15 cm × 25 cm.

taken into account). The B field distribution of the cases 1) and
2) are shown in Figs. 15 and 16, respectively. It is clearly shown
that the biological medium does not block the magnetic flux
which is essential for electromagnetic induction.
IV. DESIGN, FABRICATION, AND MEASUREMENT
In this section, the coils will be designed based on the theory
presented in Section II. In this paper, the coils are designed at
450 kHz, which is in the mid frequency range of the pulsed
electromagnetic energy therapy [7, Table III]. However, the application frequency can be modified by using different values of
capacitors to adjust the resonating frequency. In our design, the
primary goal is to drive an E field intensity of 150 V/m which
is used in magnetic stimulation [20], [21].

The design parameters of the coils are given in Table I. The
separation distance of the coils D is kept at 9 cm, which is
sufficiently wide for most of the therapy applications [21]. The
diameter of the coil is designed to be same as D, which provides
enough mutual coupling for the MRC operation. The penetration
depth of the E field would then be defined as D/2 to consider
the depth of an object being put between the coils. Also, the
number of turns in the coil N is 20, which is selected such that
it is sufficiently enough to drive 150 V/m using less than 10 A
calculated from (6).
After the fabrication of the figure-of-eight coil, it is measured by the network analyzer to obtain its actual inductance,
which is L = 106 μH. Meanwhile, another fabricated circular
coil of the same number of turns and radius is measured Lc =
50.6 μH. Hence, if there is no mutual coupling, it is expected that
the figure-of-eight coil has the inductance of 2Lc = 100.2 μH.
It is suggested that the difference is caused by the mutual inductance between the loops of the figure-of-eight coil, which can
be calculated by Ll = L − 2Lc = 5.8 μH. Using the Neumann
formula equation (8) to calculate instead would result Ll =
6.79 μH, which are quite close to the measured one. Furthermore, the mutual coupling between the two figure-of-eight coils
for MRC is measured to be Lm = 2.18 μH by the measurement
result of the coupling coefficient k (will be shown later in the
section).
A capacitor is then cascaded with the coil which is calculated
from (9). A small resistor with high-power rating (0.11 Ω) is
also cascaded to the coil such that the current across the coil can
be measured with the voltage across the resistor.
After the MRC coil is built up with the capacitors cascaded
as depicted in Fig. 5, the input impedance is measured with a
network analyzer to determine the frequency response under different separation distances D, the result being given in Table II.
The lowest resonant frequency ωm and its input impedance were
observed and recorded. The higher resonant frequencies which
results in the opposition of current direction or minimal current
in the primary coil are ignored. When D decreases, the increase
in coupling coefficient results in the decrease of the lower resonant frequency ωm , which is well matched with the theory in
Section II. Meanwhile, when the secondary coil does not exist in

2608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

TABLE II
MEASURED RESONANT FREQUENCIES AGAINST SEPARATION DISTANCE
Separation Distance
D (cm)
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
Infinite

Lowest Resonant
Frequency ω m (kHz)

Input Resistance
R L (Ohm)

452.039
453.241
453.241
454.44
455.64
456.84

3.53
3.43
3.21
3.35
3.11
2.29

Fig. 19. Coupling coefficient k for different separation distance D evaluated
from the measurement result.

Fig. 17.

Complete MRC circuit with impedance matching.

Fig. 20. Simulated and the measured scattering parameter S1 1 of the complete
MRC circuit.

B. Measurement and Testing

Fig. 18.

Fabricated prototype of the complete MRC circuit.

the measurement, there exists only one resonance point which
is the self-resonant frequency defined in (7), f0 = 456.84 kHz.
Next, the circuit is matched to RS = 50 Ω so that it can be
driven using a commercial pulse amplifier (TOMCO RF pulse
amplifier BT00250-Gamma) and a signal generator (Tektronix
AFG 3252). The LC network is used for impedance matching
as depicted in Fig. 17. The values LX and CB can be calculated
by [22]

RL (RS − RL )
(14)
LX =
ωm

(RS − RL ) /RL
CB =
.
(15)
ωm R S
From the calculation and the availability of the components,
the finalized values are LX = 4.5 μH and CB = 26 nF. After
cascading the matching network, the completed experimental
prototype is shown in Fig. 18.

The completed prototype is then measured using a network
analyzer. From the measured lower and the higher resonant
frequencies (ωm and ωe ), the coupling coefficient k for different
separation distances can be estimated using (11), as shown in
Fig. 19. The simulated and the measured scattering parameter
S11 of the prototype at the nominal separation distance D =
9 cm and the case without the secondary coil is shown in Fig. 20.
The 10-dB return loss bandwidth at D = 9 cm and the one
without the secondary coil are 454.0–457.0 kHz and 456.5–
460.1 kHz, respectively.
Furthermore, the MRC coil is driven using a 50-Ω pulse
power amplifier. Since the ratio of the current flowing through
the two coils varies with the frequency, the frequency where the
two currents become similar is recorded, which is 455.5 kHz.
At this frequency, the MRC coil is driven with a pulse amplifier
with a pulse of 1-ms duration and an output voltage of 245 Vp eak ,
where the currents of both coils are recorded. The simulation
using LT spice [23] and the measurement results are shown
in Figs. 21 and 22, respectively, which are similar. A lower
frequency of 451.5 kHz is reached in the simulation because
the components used in implementation are not exactly as the
theoretical calculated values.
It can be noticed that both coils have a short transient response
to settle down completely. Then, in the steady state, the current
in the primary coil is similar to that of the secondary coil,
which is in between 8- and 9-A peak current in the measurement
result. Comparing to the requirement of 8.32-A peak current to

YEUNG et al.: FOCUSED MAGNETIC RESONANCE COUPLING COILS FOR ELECTROMAGNETIC THERAPY APPLICATIONS

2609

TABLE III
COMPARISON AMONG THE COIL DESIGNS
Maximum |E|
Maximum |B|
Measured Calculated current
at the penetration at the penetration
voltage
density across
depth for each
depth for each
across
the tissue
ampere conducting ampere conducting
the
based on
the coil
the coil
tissue
measurement

Fig. 21.

Simulated current of the primary and the secondary coils at 451.5 kHz.

Circular Coil
Figure-of-Eight
Coil
Proposed MRC
Figure-of-Eight
Coil

Fig. 22.

Measured current of the primary and the secondary coils at 454.5 kHz.

Fig. 24.

4.51 V/m
9.02 V/m

0.99 × 10−4 A/m
1.04 × 10−4 A/m

0.1926 V
0.2812 V

4.40 A/m2
6.43 A/m2

18.04 V/m

2.05 × 10−4 A/m

0.3796 V

8.68 A/m2

Measured voltage across the pig tissue (pork cut) when D = 9 cm.

can then be calculated by
V σA
(16)
l
where l = 3.5 cm is the length and A = 2.5 cm2 is the crosssectional area of the tissue. The magnitude of the current density
|J| across the tissue can be determined by
I=

I
.
(17)
A
Using the frequency of 455.5 kHz same as used in the previous section, the input voltage is adjusted such that the voltage
across the 0.11-Ω resistor in series with both the primary and
the secondary coils is approximately 0.6 V, resulting as 5.45 A.
When the separation distance of the MRC coil is D = 9 cm, the
voltage across the pork is shown in Fig. 24. The voltage when
the secondary coil is removed from the setup is also recorded
after slightly adjusting the frequency (to 548.2 kHz) and input
voltage such that the primary coil current remains unchanged
at approximately 5.45 A. The voltage-induced ratios across the
tissue in the case of MRC coil and figure-of-eight coil are 0.3796
Vp eak and 0.2812 Vp eak , respectively, giving the voltage or current ratio of 1.35 (i.e., 35% improvement) and ohmic power
ratio of 1.82 (i.e., 82% improvement). The voltage induced by
the traditional circular coil [see Fig. 1(a)] instead with the same
number of turns and radius is also included in the figure, giving
0.1926 Vp eak only. Since the electric field and magnetic field
are proportional to the current conducting the coil as given by
(3) and (6), the above comparisons are based on the same conduction current across the coils. According to (12) and (13),
the current I flowing through the tissue is 2.2 mA, where the
|J| =

Fig. 23.

Ex vivo experiment setup using pig tissue (pork cut).

drive 150 V/m as stated in Table I, the basic MRC coil design
requirement is fulfilled. Meanwhile, a higher voltage can be used
to drive the coil when a higher E field magnitude is required.
V. BIOMEDICAL Ex Vivo EXPERIMENTS
In this section, the MRC figure-of-eight coil is verified for
a current induction in a biological medium. In the experiment,
a piece of pig muscle tissue (pork) with the size of 1.0 cm ×
2.5 cm × 3.5 cm is placed in between the MRC coils to induce
the electromotive force on it as illustrated in Fig. 23. The voltage
V is then measured across the tissue using an oscilloscope. The
conductivity of pork approximated as σ = 0.8 S/m (the conductivity data of pork and muscle tissue as given in [18, Table III]
and [3] is taken into reference). The current across the tissue

2610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

magnitude of the current density |J| is 8.68 A/m2 . It is known
that the transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS) uses
a current density of 4 mA/in2 (i.e., 6.2 A/m2 ) at the stimulation
site for pain relief applications [24, Fig. 2]. The current setup
achieves magnitude of the same order (8.68 A/m2 ) being completely noninvasive. The induced voltage ratio is less than the
ideal ratio of two, because there is a phase difference between
the currents in the primary and the secondary coils, which is
recorded to be 65° when D = 9 cm.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the MRC figure-of-eight coil was designed and
presented targeted for electromagnetic therapy related applications. From the theoretical results as well as the experiment
results, the advantages of the proposed MRC figure-of-eight coil
are that it can generate a larger electric field and hence current
across the tissue compared with the circular coil and figure-ofeight coil when same conduction current is used. The summary
of the comparison is given in Table III. It is suggested that the
proposed design is more powerful or effective compared to the
circular coil and figure-of-eight coil. The improvement of the
current and ohmic power density are 35% and 82%, respectively,
compared to the case of using one figure-of-eight coil only under the same magnitude of current passing through them. In the
experimental result, the current density induced in the pig muscle tissue is 8.68 A/m2 , which is of the same order being TENS
for pain relief. In future work, the structure of the whole MRC
system will be improved such that the phase difference between
the currents conducting the primary coil and the secondary coil
becomes minimal, thereby further improving the current density
and ohmic power density. Another future work should customize
the MRC coils for real applications in noninvasive RF stimulation, thermoacoustic imaging, electromagnetic field therapies,
and/or radiofrequency ablation. Moreover, the tuning of E field
distribution from the coil setup can also be considered in the
future.
REFERENCES
[1] X. H. Feng et al., “Magnetically mediated thermoacoustic imaging toward
deeper penetration,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 103, no. 8, pp. 083704–1–
083704-4, Aug. 2013.
[2] A. T. Eckhart et al., “Ex vivo thermoacoustic imaging over large fields
of view with 108 MHz irradiation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 8, pp. 2238–2246, Aug. 2011.
[3] F. Gao et al., “Thermoacoustic resonance effect and circuit modelling
of biological tissue,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 102, no. 6, pp. 063702–1–
063702-4, Feb. 2013.

[4] K. Davey and C. M. Epstein, “Magnetic stimulation coil and circuit design,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 1493–1499, Nov.
2000.
[5] S. Tsuyama et al., “Effects of coil parameters on the stimulated area by
transcranial magnetic stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10,
pp. 4845–4848, Oct. 2009.
[6] V. W.-H. Lin et al., “Magnetic coil design considerations for functional magnetic stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 5,
pp. 600–610, May 2000.
[7] L. Guo et al., “Pulsed radio frequency energy (PRFE) use in human
medical applications,” Electromagn. Biol. Med., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 21–45,
2011.
[8] M. S. Markov, “Expanding use of pulsed electromagnetic field therapies,”
Electromagn. Biol. Med., vol. 26, pp. 257–274, 2007.
[9] H. S. Lee et al., “Effects of pulsed magnetic field stimulus on electroencephalogram alpha activity,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 10,
pp. 3060–3062, Oct. 2011.
[10] A. Furse et al., “Radio frequency coil for the creation of large ablations:
Ex vivo and in vivo testing,” J. Vasc. Interv. Radiol., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 1522–1528, Nov. 2012.
[11] I. D. McRury and D. E. Haines, “Efficacy of multiple ring and coil electrode radiofrequency ablation catheters for the creation of long linear
lesions in the atria,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 551–557, Nov.
1998.
[12] K. Shultz et al., “RF field visualization of RF ablation at the Larmor
frequency,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 938–947, Apr.
2012.
[13] T. Imura and Y. Hori, “Maximizing air gap and efficiency of magnetic
resonant coupling for wireless power transfer using equivalent circuit and
Neumann formula,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 4746–
4752, Oct. 2011.
[14] A. Kurs et al., “Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic
resonances,” Science, vol. 317, no. 5834, pp. 83–86, 2007.
[15] R. Pradhan et al., “A non-invasive magnetic resonance biomedical system,” in Proc. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Workshop Series RF Wireless
Technol. Biomed. Healthcare Appl., 2014, pp. 1–3.
[16] D. K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics, 2nd ed. Noida, India:
Pearson Education, 1989.
[17] X. H. Feng et al., “Magnetically mediated thermoacoustic imaging and
technical considerations on its coil design,” presented at the IEEE MTT-S
Int. Microw. Workshop Series RF Wireless Technol. Biomed. Healthcare
Appl., Singapore, Dec. 9–11, 2013.
[18] N. Shirsat et al., “Ohmic processing: electrical conductivities of pork
cuts,” Meat Sci., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 507–514, Jul. 2004.
[19] G. N. Reddy and S. Saha, “Electrical and dielectric properties of wet bone
as a function of frequency,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-31,
no. 3, pp. 296–303, Mar. 1984.
[20] L. Gomez et al., “Numerical analysis and design of single-source multicoil
TMS for deep and focused brain stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2771–2782, Oct. 2013.
[21] S. D. March et al., “Focused and deep brain magnetic stimulation using
new coil design in mice,” in Proc. IEEE EMBS 6th Int. Conf. Neural Eng.,
San Diego, CA, USA, Nov. 6–8, 2013, pp. 125–128.
[22] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2005.
[23] LTspice IV is a trademark of Linear Technology Corporation.
[24] M. Linzer and D. M. Long, “Transcutaneous neural stimulation for relief
of pain,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-23, no. 4, pp. 341–345,
Jul. 1976.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

