IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

699

A Conjugate Exponential Model for Cancer
Tissue Heterogeneity
Anwoy Kumar Mohanty, Student Member, IEEE, Aniruddha Datta, Fellow, IEEE, and Vijayanagaram Venkatraj

Abstract—The diagnosis and treatment of cancer is made difficult by the heterogeneous nature of the cell population. Determining its compositional breakup from measurements of various
measurable traits (such as gene expression measurements) is an
important problem in the field of cancer diagnosis and treatment.
In addition, the computational aspect of the problem also needs
attention. The processing of the collected data must be done as
efficiently as possible in terms of computational speed and memory requirements. The use of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
is time consuming, and hence, other methods need to be used for
the analysis. In this paper, we develop a model for heterogeneous
cancer tissue, which uses quantitative polymerase chain reaction
gene expression data to determine the compositional breakup of
cell populations in the heterogeneous tissue. We develop a fast algorithm for the model using variational methods and demonstrate
its use on synthetic and real-world gene expression data collected
from fibroblasts and compare the performance of the algorithm
with other methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo and expectation maximization.
Index Terms—Bayesian methods, heterogeneity, Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC), variational methods.

I. INTRODUCTION
WELL-ACCEPTED paradigm explaining cancer development is that of clonal evolution of tumor cell populations [1], [2]. The cells that have a proliferative advantage
become the majority of the cells making up the neoplastic tissue. The stepwise accumulation of mutations in cancer tissues
causes the appearance of variant subpopulations, which makes
the cancer tissue heterogeneous. Other theories attempting to
explain the cancer development include the cancer stem cell
theory [3]–[6], which suggests that the behavior of cancers is
mostly dictated by small subpopulations of cancer stem cells.
All these theories point to the heterogeneous nature of cancer
tissues, which makes the treatment more difficult. A certain
therapy that may be effective in one case of a particular kind of
cancer may not work for other cases. Determining the proportion
wise breakup of a given cancerous tissue is hence an important
problem in the context of cancer therapy. Once the dominant

A

Manuscript received September 25, 2014; revised December 18, 2014 and
February 7, 2015; accepted February 25, 2015. Date of publication March 5,
2015; date of current version March 3, 2016. This work was supported in part
by the National Science Foundation under Grant ECCS-1068628 and in part by
Texas A&M Engineering Genomics and Bioinformatics Seed Grant.
A. K. Mohanty and A. Datta are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843
USA (e-mail: anwoy_kgp_123@neo.tamu.edu; datta@ece.tamu.edu).
V. Venkatraj is with the Department of Veterinary Integrated Biosciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77845 USA (e-mail: jvenkatraj@cvm.tamu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2410279

subpopulations have been identified, the appropriate decisions
regarding therapy can be taken such as which subpopulation to
target and how much of therapy should be administered to the
patient. Mathematical models of the regulatory networks of cancerous tissues must be made taking this heterogeneous nature
of cancer tissues into consideration. These models can provide
much needed insight into how to go about effectively treating
the cancer.
An attempt was made in [7] to model cancer tissue heterogeneity. In that paper, the authors used a collection of Boolean
networks to model the various subpopulations in a given tissue.
A multilevel hierarchical model was used to model the extent to
which each Boolean network affects the behavior of each of the
observed gene expressions. The authors demonstrated the use of
this model by applying it to gene expression measurements from
healthy fibroblasts when they were exposed to various stimuli.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods were used to
estimate the posterior probability distributions of the unknown
parameters, which would indicate the proportion wise breakup
of the tissue under study. In this paper, we make certain approximations to the model that would allow us to employ faster
(variational) methods to carry out the same estimation.
II. MOTIVATION
Modeling cellular behavior is the first step toward a unified
understanding of the multivariate interactions among various
genes. Gene regulatory networks provide a means to model
and predict cellular behavior. Using such models could facilitate the development of better therapies that could shift the
state of the cancer tissues toward more desirable ones. Various methods to model gene regulatory networks have been
developed, such as differential equations [8], deterministic and
probabilistic Boolean networks [9], [10], and Bayesian and dynamic Bayesian networks [11], [12]. Some methods are based
on the assumption that the transition probabilities are already
provided. Such assumptions are, however, unrealistic from a
practical standpoint since the large amount of data needed to
reliably determine these transition probabilities is difficult to
collect. Some methods such as the REVEAL algorithm [13]
learn deterministic Boolean networks from discretized timedomain data. Many of these methods rely on the discretization
of continuous valued data, which may result in the loss of information. The ARACNE method [14] is an approach to determine
regulatory interactions from continuous valued measurements.
In [15], the authors described a Bayesian method for inferring
pathway structures from high throughput quantitative genetic
interaction measurements. In [16], the authors reported an integrated whole-cell computational model of the life cycle of the

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

700

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

human pathogen Mycoplasma genitalium that includes all of its
molecular components and their interactions. However, such a
model is dependent upon in-depth knowledge about the various
cellular dynamics of the system being modeled and can be applied to the simplest of systems (Mycoplasma genitalium has
only 525 genes [16]). It is difficult to apply the same approach
to model a complex system such as a cancerous tissue.
Prior knowledge about regulatory interactions can be used
to reduce the dependence on large volumes of data. Such prior
knowledge can be garnered from the biological literature, which
contains a lot of information regarding such regulatory interactions between the various biological molecules. Such prior
knowledge can be used to develop models of regulatory networks, which describe cellular behavior more accurately.
A method to take advantage of prior knowledge is presented
in [17], where the authors used Karnaugh maps to systematically
generate Boolean networks from marginal pathway knowledge.
In [18], the authors used this technique to generate a Boolean
network of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal
transduction network, which is a broadly accepted signaling network. This network is shown in Fig. 1. The figure also includes
the targets of a few highly specific kinase inhibitory drugs.
This Boolean network is an abstraction of the interactions
between the various genes and/or proteins involved in the signal
transduction network. A lot of the biological entities involved
in the transduction network have a binary state associated with
them. For example, a protein may have two states, a phosphorylated state and an unphosphorylated state, which may be
represented as one or zero. Hence, a Boolean network with
logic gates like AND, OR, and NOT may be used to accurately
represent their interactions. For an in-depth treatment of the correspondence between the Boolean network elements and their
corresponding biological entities, the reader is referred to [17]
and [18].
In [18], the authors represented a “stuck-at” fault model of
cancer causing mutations. A stuck-at-one fault corresponds to
a variable permanently being in an activated state irrespective
of the states of the variables upstream of it. Similarly a stuckat-zero fault would mean a variable has a permanently downregulated state irrespective of the states of the other upstream
variables. This allows the well-developed techniques of digital
circuit testing to be applied in the analysis of signal transduction networks, which can then be used to design combination
therapies for a given type of cancer tissue. In [7], the authors
used an ensemble of Boolean networks to represent a given cancer tissue. In this model, the subpopulations or networks in the
collection of chosen networks exert their effect on the observable variables (the gene expression ratios) in a weighted average
fashion. The objective was to find these weights associated with
each subpopulation or network in the ensemble. This problem
was solved using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. In this paper, we will address this problem of finding out
these weights in a variational Bayes framework resulting in a
significant speed-up of the computational time.
Prior knowledge about the qualitative location of faults in the
network can be used to determine the initial model and which
networks to choose in the ensemble. For instance, in 30% of

Fig. 1. Boolean network model of the MAPK signal transduction network
with target locations of inhibitory drugs shown.

human breast cancers, we see an over expression of the ERBB2
gene [2]. This can be interpreted as a stuck-at-one fault at the
variable corresponding to ERBB2 in the Boolean network in
Fig. 1. Another example is that of the pancreatic cancer, where
90% of the cases show a mutated Ras gene [2] translating to a
stuck-at-one fault in the corresponding location in the Boolean
network. Using prior knowledge such as the possible locations
of faults as described earlier, and other factors, such as the origin
of the cancer tissue, it is possible to decide which networks to
include in the ensemble.
III. METHODS
Once the networks to be included in the ensemble have been
chosen based on prior knowledge, the problem is to estimate
the weights associated with each of the networks from collected
data. The observable variables can be anything in principle. We
will develop our methods based on normalized gene expression
ratios. These are real-valued readings for each gene. Livak and
Schmittgen [19] discussed the method to measure normalized

MOHANTY et al.: CONJUGATE EXPONENTIAL MODEL FOR CANCER TISSUE HETEROGENEITY

gene-expression ratios using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR). When exposed to a certain stimulus (like a
particular combination of kinase inhibitory drugs), some of the
output variables, as shown at the bottom of Fig. 1 using arrows, will be upregulated or one for some of the Boolean networks in the ensemble, and some of the output variables will
be downregulated or zero for some of the other networks in the
ensemble. For example, let us consider an example where we
have three networks in the ensemble. Let the first subpopulation
be modeled by a Boolean network with a stuck-at-one fault at
ERK1/2, let the second subpopulation have two stuck-at-one
faults at ERBB2/3 and Raf, and let the final subpopulation have
a stuck-at-zero fault at PTEN. The different fault locations corresponding to the different subpopulations are shown as shaded
squares in the single Boolean network in Fig. 1. Suppose we expose the cell culture to the drug U0126. This is a kinase inhibitor
that targets MEK1 as shown in Fig. 1. (All the drugs used in
this example are kinase inhibitors whose molecular targets are
shown in Fig. 1.) Let us also assume that the serum, as typically
used in tissue cultures, has EGF, HBEGF, IGF, and NRG1 in it.
Hence, in other words, the corresponding variables represented
at the top of Fig. 1 are all one or upregulated. If we observe the
behavior of the transcription factor SP1 (shown at the bottom of
the Boolean network in Fig. 1 with an arrow), the first network
has SP1 upregulated, while in the second and third networks,
SP1 will be downregulated. If we are observing the expression
for a gene that has the SP1 response element (such as cMYC),
then that gene will be influenced by just the first network to an
extent determined by the weight assigned to that network.
We can represent the activities of the different Boolean networks with relation to the ith gene (the three Boolean networks
with relation to cMYC in the aforementioned example) using

T
a vector di = 1 0 0 , where the subscript i stands for
the ith gene. We define this vector as the “expression profile”
[7]. This expression profile will depend on the stimulus given
to the tissue (the combination of the kinase inhibitor drugs for
example) and the networks included in the ensemble. These expression profiles will be provided along with the data. Let the
weights associated with the three networks with relation to the
T

ith gene be represented by a vector αi = αi,1 αi,2 αi,3 .
Then, if we are considering a model that combines the networks
in a weighted average fashion, then the gene expression for the
ith gene in the overall model could be quantified by the dot product dTi αi . Assuming the weights associated with each network
to be the same with relation to all the genes being observed is a
strong assumption. That is, assuming all the αi weight vectors
to be the same would imply that the Boolean networks affect all
the genes with exactly the same ratio. The model should allow
for the weights associated with each network to be different for
the various gene expression measured and yet allow them to be
somewhat related to each other. This hints toward the use of
Hierarchical modeling of the weight vectors αi ’s.
A. Short Summary of Previous Work
Here, we present a short summary of the previous work done
in [7]. The reader may skip directly to the next section for a
description of the conjugate exponential model approach.

Fig. 2.

701

Bayesian network representing the probability model used in [7].

In [7], the normalized gene expression ratios were modeled
as a ratio of two normal random variables. This method was
an extension of the model described in [20]. Let us say that
several measurements of the ith gene were made. Let di,j be the
“expression profile” for the jth measurement of the ith gene.
di,j will depend on the drugs to which the tissue was exposed
and on the faulty Boolean networks included in the ensemble.
Let ri,j be the corresponding measured gene expression ratio
for the ith gene. Then, [7] derived P (ri,j /αi , di,j , c) as
mi,j (ri,j + mi,j )
P (ri,j /αi , di,j , c) = √
2 + m2 ) 32
2πc(ri,j
i,j


1 (ri,j − mi,j )2
(1)
× exp − 2 2
2c (ri,j + m2i,j )
where mi,j = dTi,j αi . The parameter c is the coefficient of variation used to account for the uncertainty in the data. For a detailed
derivation of (1), the reader is referred to [7].
Such a distribution has a mode close to around mi,j . A multilevel hierarchical model was used, where each of the weight
vectors αi associated with the ith gene is different from the
weight vectors associated with the other genes, but they all are
derived from an underlying distribution, which is an average of
all the weight vectors. A schematic diagram of the Bayesian
network of the probability model used in [7] is shown in Fig. 2.
The parameter K governs the topmost level of the model.
Assuming that there are V different observable variables or
genes being measured, and each gene i has ni observations associated with it (which may come from different experiments),
the variables r1,1 through rV ,n V in Fig. 2 indicate the observed
gene-expression data. The expression profile associated with
each observation indicates how each network is affecting the
output variable. These expression profiles are not shown in the
diagram. The variables α1 through αV indicate the weight vectors associated with each of the genes being observed. In [7],
the authors constrained all the components of each αi vector to
be nonnegative and their sum to one. The logical choice was to
make all the αi ’s to be sampled from an underlying Dirichlet
distribution with a parameter vector K. The larger the values
of the elements of K, the closer all the αi ’s are to each other.
Learning this unknown parameter K from the collected data
would indicate the proportion wise breakup of the tissue.
The model parameters were learned in [7] using the
Metropolis–Hastings algorithm, which is a MCMC-based
method. The problem with such a method is that it is very
computationally intensive. There are problems of convergence,
especially since it may be difficult to judge if the Markov chain

702

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Since we are concerned with the ratio with which the different
networks affect the observed gene expressions, we can reduce
redundancy by constraining the elements of each weight vector
αi to sum to 1, as was done in [7]. That is
N


αi,q = 1

(2)

q =1

Fig. 3.
model.

Bayesian network representing the conditional dependencies in our

has reached stationarity. In addition, the mixing may be poor
that will require us to use thinning to get a decent effective
sample size, which further increases computation time.
To get around the use of MCMC methods, in this paper, we
have resorted to the use of variational methods to estimate the
posterior distributions of the unknown parameters. These methods involve assuming the distribution to have a certain factorized form and iteratively refining these factors. The variational
method can be conveniently applied to the conjugate exponential family of models [21]. Hence, we approximate the model for
heterogeneous cancer tissue presented in [7] in the form of such
a conjugate exponential model and derive the corresponding
iterative update equations.

where N is the number of 
networks in the ensemble. There−1
fore, we have αi,N = 1 − N
i=1 αi,q . For convenience, we
are not constraining the elements of the weight vectors to be
nonnegative. As we will see from simulations and from applications to real data, the posterior distributions of these elements will have very little probabilities in the regions where
any element is negative. The probability distribution of any
gene-expression reading is defined to be normally distributed
with a mean of dTi,j αi and a precision of ρ (inverse of variance). We are considering all the measured gene-expression
ratios to have the same precision, although it is possible to
have a hierarchicalstructure for the precision too. From (2),
−1
we have dTi,j αi = N
q =1 αi,q (di,j,q − di,j,N ) + di,j,N , where
di,j,q ’s are the elements of the expression profile di,j .
Define μi,j = di,j,N , Di,j = (di,j,1 − di,j,N , di,j,2 − di,j,N ,
..., di,j,N −1 − di,j,N )T , and βi = (αi,1 , αi,2 , ..., αi,N −1 )T .
Then, we have


T
βi + μi,j , ρ−1 .
P (ri,j /βi , ρ, di,j ) = N ri,j |Di,j

B. Conjugate Exponential Model for Cancer Tissue
Heterogeneity
The Bayesian network of the model is shown in Fig. 3. Let
the number of genes whose expression levels were measured be
V . Then, there would be V different weight vectors αi ’s, each
vector being associated with a particular gene. The number of
elements in each weight vector αi is the same and equal to the
number of Boolean networks in the ensemble. Let the number
of observations made for the ith gene be ni . Let us represent
the jth observation of the ith gene by ri,j . Hence, each ri,j runs
from ri,1 through ri,n i as shown in Fig. 3. Each observation ri,j
is made to be Normally distributed with a mean of dTi,j αi and a
precision of ρ (variance of ρ−1 ), where di,j is the “expression
profile” associated with the observation ri,j . The expression
profile depends on the behavior of the networks included in the
ensemble and the stimulus provided to the tissue in the form
of kinase inhibitory drug combinations and is provided along
with the observed data. All the αi ’s come from an underlying
Gaussian distribution with a mean of K and a precision matrix of
Λ (a covariance matrix of Λ−1 ). The variables Λ, K, and ρ are the
unknown parameters that need to be determined. The parameter
K is of interest since this indicates the weights associated with
the different Boolean networks in the ensemble. The individual
weight vectors αi ’s indicate the effect exerted by each network
in the ensemble on the expression values measured for each gene
and will vary from gene to gene and will depend on the data
collected, and hence, are not interchangeable among the various
genes. In other words, the weight vectors are identifiable. The
parameter K will give an averaged bird’s eye view of the effect
of each network in the ensemble.

(3)

The probability distribution of βi is defined to be normally
distributed with a mean of K and a precision matrix of Λ, where

T
K = K1 K2 ... KN −1
and Λ is an (N − 1) × (N −
1) positive definite matrix. Hence, we have
P (βi /K, Λ) = N (βi |K, Λ−1 ).

(4)

Hence, the unknown parameters are ρ, K, and Λ, which in the
Bayesian framework are simply unobserved variables (along
with all the βi ’s). K could be interpreted as
the−1weights associated with the first N − 1 networks. 1 − N
q =1 Kq could be
interpreted as the weight associated with the N th network.
The Bayesian approach needs us to define certain priors over
the unknown parameters. Thus, we define the prior over ρ to be
a gamma distribution with a shape and inverse scale parameter
to be ao and bo , respectively. The prior over K and Λ was taken
as the normal-Wishart distribution. Thus, we have
P (ρ) = Gamma (ρ|ao , bo )

	
P (K/Λ) = N K|Ko , (qo Λ)−1

(5)
(6)

and


P (Λ) = Wish Λ|no , Λ−1
o
where Ko , qo , no , and Λo are constants.

(7)

MOHANTY et al.: CONJUGATE EXPONENTIAL MODEL FOR CANCER TISSUE HETEROGENEITY

The joint posterior distribution of the unknown variables is
P (ρ, β, K, Λ/r) ∝ P (Λ)P (K/Λ)P (ρ)×
⎛⎡
⎤
⎞
ni
V




⎝⎣
P (ri,j /βi , ρ, di,j )⎦ P (βi /K, Λ)⎠
i=1

(8)

j =1

where β is the set of all the βi ’s and r is the set of all the
observed data. Our model belongs to the conjugate exponential family. Conjugate exponential models are those where the
conditional distributions involved in the model belong to the
exponential family and are conjugate with respect to the parent
variables [21]. The hierarchical model described before falls in
this category. In the following section, we will approximate the
joint posterior distribution of the unknown variables using the
variational approach. This would in turn simplify the derivation
of the marginal distributions of the variables of interest (such
as K, which would indicate the proportion wise breakup of the
tissue).
Variational methods in Bayesian inference proceed by assuming a certain factorized form of the joint posterior distribution of
the unobserved variables [22]. This factorization is done by first
partitioning the unobserved variables into disjoint groups. For
example, let us say that we have a set of unobserved variables Z
and we want to find an approximation of P (Z/D), which is the
posterior distribution of the unobserved elements conditional on
the observed data D. We approximate this by Q (Z), where
Q (Z) =

M



Qi (Zi ) .

parameters that describe each distribution Qj (Zj ) to appropriate
values and cycling through the equations and replacing the old
values with the corresponding updates. The variational method
can be applied in a straightforward manner to the class of conjugate exponential models. Therefore, we can use the variational
framework to estimate the proportion wise breakup of the tissue
under study.
C. Derivation of the Variational Update Equations
The approximation Q (ρ, β, K, Λ) of the posterior
P (ρ, β, K, Λ/r) is assumed to factorize in the following form:
Q (ρ, β, K, Λ) = Qρ (ρ)Qβ (β)QK ,Λ (K, Λ).

ln Qρ (ρ) = E= ρ [ln P (ρ, β, K, Λ/r)] + constants

E= ρ [ln P (ρ, β, K, Λ/r)] =

[ln P (ρ, β, K, Λ/r)] Qβ (β)QK ,Λ (K, Λ)dβdKdΛ.

LQ (D) =

ln

The terms that are not dependent on ρ can be absorbed into the
constants. Thus, we get
ln Qρ (ρ) =
⎡
E= ρ ⎣ln P (ρ) +

ni
V 


⎤
ln P (ri,j /βi , ρ, di,j )⎦

P (Z, D)
Q(Z)

+ constants.
ln Qρ (ρ) = aρ ln(ρ) − bρ ρ + constants




(17)

where


Q(Z)dZ.

1
ni
2 i=1
V

(11)

aρ = ao +

Qi (Zi )dZi + constant

(12)

i= j

for each j, from 1 through M . The constant term can be adjusted
to make sure that Qj (Zj ) is a proper probability distribution,
that is it integrates to 1. For a detailed derivation of (12), the
reader is referred to [22]. Equation (12) shows that the optimum Qj (Zj ) depends on the other factors Qi (Zi ) for i = j.
Hence, the equations are solved iteratively by first initializing the

(18)

and
bρ = b o +
i
1 
T
{(ri,j − μi,j )2 − 2(ri,j − μi,j )Di,j
E[βi ]
2 i=1 j =1

V

n

T
+ Di,j
(E[βi βiT ])Di,j }

ln P (Z, D)

(16)

Upon simplifying, we get

(10)

A derivation of (10) can be found in [22].
As the KL divergence is minimized, the lower bound LQ (D)
increases monotonically. This can be used to check if the minimization algorithm has achieved convergence. Also the maximum achieved lower bound can be used for the model selection.
The KL divergence is minimized using the following update
equation:
ln Qj (Zj ) =


(15)

i=1 j =1

ln P (D) = KL (Q(Z)||P (Z/D)) + LQ (D)


(14)

where

(9)

Z1 through ZM are disjointed partitions of the set Z [22]. Then,
the method proceeds to minimize the KullbackLeibler (KL)
divergence KL (Q(Z)||P (Z/D)). It should be noted that



(13)

We then use (12) to derive the update equations for each of the
factors. First, we apply (12) to Qρ (ρ). As per (12), we have

i=1

where

703

(19)

and constants are all those terms that do not depend on ρ. Looking at the form of (19), we can deduce Qρ (ρ) to be gamma
distributed with aρ as the shape parameter and bρ to be the
inverse scale parameter. That is
Qρ (ρ) = Gamma (ρ|aρ , bρ ) .

(20)

E[βi ] and E[βi βiT ] depend on Qβ (β).
Using similar steps, we get the result Qβ (β) =
V
i=1 Qβ i (βi ). This factorization is not implicitly assumed, but

704

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

comes as a result of applying (12) to derive the update equations
for Qβ (β). Upon inspection, Qβ i (βi ) comes out to be normally
distributed as follows:
Qβ i (βi ) = N (βi |μβ i , Λ−1
βi )

(21)

where Λβ i is a (N − 1) × (N − 1) positive semidefinite precision matrix and μβ i is the mean vector of length N − 1, which
are defined as
ni

T
Λβ i = E[Λ] + E[ρ]
Di,j Di,j
(22)
j =1

and
μβ i = Λ−1
β i {E[ΛK] + E[ρ]

ni


Di,j (ri,j − μi,j )}.

(23)

j =1

All the expectations in (22) and (23) are done with respect
to Qρ (ρ)QK ,Λ (K, Λ). Following similar steps, QK ,Λ (K, Λ)
comes out to be factorizable as QK ,Λ (K/Λ)QK ,Λ (Λ), which
are defined as follows:


(24)
QK ,Λ (K/Λ) = N K|KoK , [(qo + V )Λ]−1


QK ,Λ (Λ) = Wish Λ|no + V, Λ−1
oΛ
where KoK and Λ−1
oΛ are defined as
V
E[βi ] + qo Ko
KoK = i=1
V + qo

Λ−1
oΛ

=

Λ−1
o

+

V


(25)

(26)

E[βi βiT ]

applications to real-world data, we will show how convergence
is judged using the lower bound.
D. Simulation Experiments
To demonstrate the algorithm, we ran simulations on synthetic
data. First, the synthetic data were generated from the following
example. Three different Boolean networks with stuck-at faults
were taken in the ensemble. The first network was chosen to have
a stuck-at one fault at Ras. The second network was chosen
to have a stuck-a-zero fault at PTEN. The third network was
chosen to have a stuck-at-one fault at RAF. Hence, N = 3.
The three locations are shown as shaded squares in a single
Boolean network in Fig. 1. The activity of the four transcription
factors shown at the bottom of Fig. 1 would be different in
the three networks for any given drug combination. A total of
63 different drug combinations were chosen as the stimulus.
The location of the targets of these kinase inhibitory drugs is
shown in Fig. 1. Since there are six different drugs, there would
be 63 different possible combinations excluding the case of no
drug exposure. It was assumed that five genes per transcription
factor were measured, hence, a total of 20 different observable
variables were assumed in the simulation. Hence, V = 20. Each
experiment was repeated ten times in the simulation. This would
result in each observable being observed ten times. Hence, ni =
10 for all i’s ranging from 1 to 20. Since the number of networks
is three,
 hence, the
 length of the vector K is two. K was set
to be 0.1 0.3 . Hence, the first network has a weight of
0.1 associated with it, the second network has a weight of 0.3
associated with it, and the third network has a weight of 0.6
associated with it. ρ was set to be 100 and Λ was set to be

−1
0.01 0.005
.
Λ=
0.005 0.008

i=1
T
+ qo Ko KoT − (qo + V )KoK KoK
. (27)

KoK and ΛoΛ are of length N − 1 and of dimension (N − 1) ×
(N − 1), respectively.
Now that the optimal form of each factor in the approximation
is known, the expectations can be easily computed. Thus, we
get
E[βi ] = μβ i

(28)
Λ−1
βi

(29)

E[Λ] = (no + V )ΛoΛ
aρ
E[ρ] =
bρ

(30)

E[K] = KoK

(32)

E[βi βiT

]=

μβ i μTβ i

+

E[ΛK] = (no + V )ΛoΛ KoK .

(31)

(33)

The constants aρ , bρ , Λβ i , μβ i , KoK , and ΛoΛ are all initialized
to appropriate values, and then, iteratively updated by cycling
through the update equations (18), (19), (22), (23), (26), and
(27) using the values of the expectations shown in (28) through
(33). Equation (11) is used to calculate the lower bound at
each iteration. In the interest of space, the exact equation of the
lower bound is not shown here. However, in our simulations and

For the purposes of demonstration, the parameters for the
prior distributions of the parameters were chosen as follows. ao
and bo for the prior over ρ were both chosen to be 0.5. This
would make the prior over ρ to have a mean of 1. Ko was

T
chosen to be 1/3 1/3
and qo was chosen to be 0.001.
Hence, the prior belief assigns equal weights to all the three
networks. The small value of qo means that the prior is spread
out and noninformative. As for the prior over Λ, no was chosen
to be 1.1 and Λo was chosen as

−1
0.01 0.005
Λo =
.
0.005 0.008
aρ and bρ were initialized to ao and bo , respectively. μβ i ’s

T
and KoK were initialized to 1/3 1/3 . Λβ i ’s and ΛoΛ were
initialized to the value of Λo .
For comparison purposes, we also did the posterior inference
using Gibbs sampling and found point estimates of the unknown
parameters using an expectation maximization algorithm. The
full conditionals of the unobserved variables in the Gibbs sampling algorithm are listed below. (Some of the notations used
here are similar to those used in the derivation of the variational
update equations. The reader is advised to keep in mind that the
full conditionals are derived independent of the derivations in
the previous subsection.)

MOHANTY et al.: CONJUGATE EXPONENTIAL MODEL FOR CANCER TISSUE HETEROGENEITY

The full conditional of Λ is

(n )



(n )

Σi , Mi


−1

P (Λ/...) = Wish Λ|nΛ , ΛΛ

(34)
(n )
Σi

705

(n )

, and Si
⎡

to be

= ⎣Λ(n ) + ρ(n )

where

ni


⎤−1
T ⎦
Di,j Di,j

(44)

j =1

⎡
nΛ = no + V + 1
Λ−1
Λ

=

Λ−1
o
+

(35)

+ qo (K − Ko )(K − Ko )

V


T

(βi − K)(βi − K)T .

(36)

P (ρ/...) = Gamma (ρ|aρ , bρ )

=

ni


Di,j (ri,j − μi,j )⎦(45)

(n )

T
{(ri,j − μi,j )2 − 2(ri,j − μi,j )Di,j
Mi
(n )

(37)

(38)

where
1
ni
2 i=1
V

aρ = ao +

(39)

and
i
1 
T
{(ri,j − μi,j − Di,j
βi )2
2 i=1 j =1

n

T
T
(ri,j − μi,j )2 − 2(ri,j − μi,j )Di,j
βi + (Di,j
βi )2 }.

(40)

The full conditionals of each of the βi ’s are
	

P (βi /...) = N βi |μβ i , Λ−1
βi

(41)

where
Λβ i = Λ + ρ

ni


T
Di,j Di,j

(42)

j =1

and
⎝ΛK + ρ
μβ i = Λ−1
βi

(n )

Si

T
+Di,j
(Mi

The full conditional of ρ is

⎛

⎣Λ(n ) K (n ) + ρ(n )

j =1

The full conditional of K is



qo Ko + Vi=1 βi
P (K/...) = N K|
, (qo + V )Λ .
qo + V

V

(n )

= Σi

⎤

j =1

i=1

bρ = b o +

(n )

Mi

ni


ni


⎞
(ri,j − μi,j )Di,j ⎠ .

(43)

j =1

The expectation maximization algorithm can also be used to
find a maximum likelihood estimate of the unknown parameters
ρ, K, and Λ. The hidden variables that are not observed are
simply all the βi ’s for i ranging from 1 through V . The derivation
is skipped in the interest of space. The expectation maximization
update equations are as follows. Define ρ(n ) , K (n ) , and Λ(n ) to
be the estimates of the parameters in the nth iteration. Define

(n )T

Mi

(n )

+ Σi )Di,j }.

Then, the update equations are
V
ni
ρ(n +1) = V i=1 (n )
i=1 Si
V
(n )
i=1 Mi
K (n +1) =
V
V

−1
	
1   (n ) (n )T
(n )
Λ(n +1)
Mi Mi
=
+ Σi
V i=1
−K (n +1) K (n +1)T

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

where ρ(n +1) , K (n +1) , and Λ(n +1) are the updated values of
the parameters.
In the Bayesian framework, we get the posterior distribution of the unknown parameters from which we can get point
estimates as well, whereas the maximum likelihood estimate obtained using expectation maximization algorithms provide only
point estimates. The posterior distributions can be used to judge
the reliability of the data in estimating the unknown parameters, since if the posterior distribution is too spread out beyond
what would be considered acceptable in that particular application, then we may consider the estimates to be unreliable and
would be inclined to collect more data. This makes variational
Bayesian approach advantageous over the maximum likelihood
approach. The Bayesian method also allows us to incorporate
any prior knowledge about the weights into the prior distributions.
In general, MCMC methods take orders of magnitude more
time than iterative Bayesian methods such as variational Bayes,
belief propagation, expectation propagation, etc. This was also
true in our case. In the simulation example, the variational algorithm converged in less than 30 s, where as the MCMC algorithm had to be run for more than 30 min to get effective
sample sizes on a computer with a 64 bit 2.53 GHz CPU. Since
variational Bayesian method provides posterior distribution of
the unknown parameters while EM simply provides point estimates, both these methods can not be compared since their
purposes are different. However, both these methods took about
the same amount of time to converge.
Fig. 4 shows the posterior marginal distributions of the elements of K derived using both the Gibbs sampling method
as well as the variational Bayesian method. The third graph in

706

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 7. Increase of data log likelihood with the iterations of the expectation
maximization algorithm for synthetic data.

Fig. 4.
data.

Posterior marginal distributions of the elements of K for synthetic

Fig. 8. Maximum attained log of the lower bound for five different random
values of the prior parameter K o .
Fig. 5.

Posterior marginal distribution of ρ for synthetic data.

Fig. 6. Increase of the log of the lower bound with iterations of the variational
Bayes algorithm for synthetic data.

Fig. 4 is simply the marginal posterior density of 1 − K1 − K2 .
As we can see, the distributions computed using both the methods are almost identical. It is our observation that as the number
of data points increases, the distributions given by the variational method and the MCMC method tend to agree with each
other more and more. Hence, more the number of data points,
more reliable the variational methods become. Same is true for
the posterior distribution of ρ, which is shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 6
shows how the lower bound stops improving after 80 iterations
of the variational algorithm thereby indicating convergence. The
lower bound can be used to judge convergence by various ways.
In our example, when the change in the lower bound with increasing iteration number fell below a certain threshold, the
variational Bayes algorithm was terminated. The iterative variational algorithm is guaranteed to converge to a local maxima
[21]. The mean of the posterior distribution of K comes out
to be (0.1044, 0.3015)T and (0.1042, 0.3011)T from the variational method and the Gibbs sampling method, respectively. The

maximum likelihood estimate of K using the expectation maximization algorithm comes out to be (0.1042, 0.3015)T . Fig. 7
shows that the log likelihood function shows no significant improvement after 100 iterations of the expectation maximization
algorithm, thereby indicating convergence. All three estimates
are close to the actual value of (0.1, 0.3)T thereby showing the
correctness of the algorithms.
From Fig. 4, we can see that the marginal posterior distributions of the elements of K lie mostly within the interval (0, 1).

The marginal posterior distribution of 1 − N
q =1 Kq (the third
graph in Fig. 4) also lies within the interval (0, 1). Hence, the
bulk of the probability distributions of all the elements of K lie
in the valid region (nonnegative and lesser than 1).
Random restarts of the variational algorithm were attempted
with various initializations of KoK . The log lower bound always
converged to the value of 7253.79076. The variational algorithm
was also run with various values of the prior parameter Ko . Since
the prior chosen was weak owing to the small value of qo , the
posterior distribution was not strongly affected by the prior. A
small effect on the log lower bound was observed. These values
are shown for five such random values of Ko in Fig. 8.
To judge the accuracy of the three methods, we generated random K vectors from the first two elements of a 3-D Dirichlet
distribution with parameter vector (1, 1, 1)T and computed the
Euclidian distance of the point estimates generated by the three
methods from the actual value of K for ten different such random values of K. The average Euclidean distance errors came
out to be 0.00449, 0.00454, and 0.00446 for the variational
method, the MCMC method and the expectation maximization
method, respectively, indicating that the methods give similar
performance in accuracy.

MOHANTY et al.: CONJUGATE EXPONENTIAL MODEL FOR CANCER TISSUE HETEROGENEITY

707

TABLE I
TABLE SHOWING THE GENE EXPRESSION MEASUREMENTS, THEIR
“EXPRESSION PROFILES,” AND THEIR REFERENCE SEQUENCE (REFSEQ)
NUMBERS
Gene

RefSeq

Group 1
Expression
Profile

EGR1

NM_001964.2

111

JUN

NM_002228.3

111

BIRC5

NM_001168.2

111

CMYC

NM_002467.4

111

NM_133505.2
NM_133507.2
Decorin

IRF3

VEGFA

NM_133504.2
NM_133503.2

NM_001571.5

NM_003376.5

111

111

111

Group 2

Gene
Expression

Expression
Profile

Gene
Expression

0.5987
0.7320
0.5586
0.6199

011

0.4796
0.2892
0.2535
0.2698

0.4931
0.6736
0.6598
0.7792

010

0.1550
0.2793
0.3015
0.3415

0.5799

010

0.3842

0.3209
0.2852

010

0.2570
0.2059

0.3439
0.2994
0.0819
0.0728
0.3345
0.4353
0.4601
0.4147
0.4323
0.5176
0.4204
0.3560
0.3345
0.4444
0.4989
0.5176
0.5105

010

010

010

0.2717
0.2679
0.0087
0.0242
0.1661

Fig. 9. Posterior marginal distributions of the elements of K for data collected
from fibroblasts.

Fig. 10.

Posterior marginal distribution of ρ for data collected from fibroblasts.

0.2793
0.3789
0.3737
0.3536
0.2624
0.2553
0.2253
0.2031
0.3164
0.4623
0.4633
0.3660

E. Verification Using Experimental Data
In order to test the model, we need to collect data from a
tissue where the dominant population or the dominant network
is already known. In a cancerous cell line, one cannot be sure
which network is dominant. But in a normal cell line, such as
adult fibroblasts, it is fair to assume that a network modeling a
faultless MAPK signal transduction network would be the most
dominant one, no matter what other networks are included in the
ensemble. Hence, we performed a simple experiment on adult
fibroblasts to demonstrate the approach. For a detailed description of the wet lab procedures, the authors are referred to [7].
The experiments were performed on three groups of cell cultures. The first group was not exposed to any kinase inhibitory
drugs and served as the control. The second and third groups
were exposed to the drugs LY294002 and a combination of
LY294002 and U0126, respectively. Their target locations are
shown in Fig. 1. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
was used as the reference gene. Genes having the SP1 or the
SRF-ELK response elements in their promoters were quantified
through real-time PCR and the delta–delta method [19]. A total
of ten different genes (including alternative transcripts) were
quantified [7]. Hence, V = 10. Their measured expression values are shown in Table I. Generally regulatory network studies

Fig. 11. Increase of the log of the lower bound with iterations of the variational
Bayes algorithm for data collected from fibroblasts.

work with hundreds if not thousands of genes, such as in [11],
[14], and[20], which use microarray data. Here, we are working
with ten genes. Addition of more data would only improve the
reliability of the posterior estimates.
For the sake of demonstration, we assumed three networks to
be in the ensemble. Hence, N = 3. Network 1 has no mutations,
i.e., no stuck-at faults. This network models the normally behaving fibroblasts. Network 2 is assumed to have a stuck-at-one
fault at ERK1/2 and network 3 is assumed to have stuck-at-one
faults at SRF-ELK1 and SRF-ELK4. The “expression profiles”
for all the genes for the experimental conditions of the second
and third groups are known (can be easily derived from Fig. 1)
and depend on the behavior of the three networks included in
the ensemble. These are shown in Table I.
The marginal posterior distributions of the elements of K
are computed using the variational approach and are shown in
Fig. 9. The lower bound stops improving after 300 iterations as
can be seen in Fig. 11, thereby indicating convergence. Only
the results of the variational computations are shown since the
MCMC approach could not produce decent effective sample
sizes. As we can see, most of the probability mass lies in the
valid region. Specifically, most of the posterior marginal probabilities associated with the elements of K are within 0 and 1.

708

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 12. Increase of data log likelihood with the iterations of the expectation
maximization algorithm for data collected from fibroblasts.

Hence, we get meaningful interpretations of the inferred value of
K. The mean of the posterior distribution of K comes out to be

T
0.6716, 0.2740
. As expected, the first faultless network
representing normal fibroblasts has the maximum influence on
the behavior of the observables, close to 67%. The other two
networks have influences of 27% and 6%, respectively. The au
T
thors in [7] reported values of 0.6453 0.2255 0.1292 ,
which are very close to those calculated in this paper. The posterior distributions are tightly distributed relative to the domain
(0, 1), and hence, the point estimates can be considered reliable.
Collecting more data would only result in sharper posterior distributions, and hence, more reliable estimates of the unknown
parameters. Such a judgment about the reliability of the point
estimates is straightforward in a Bayesian approach.
The marginal posterior distribution of ρ computed using variational algorithm is plotted in Fig. 10.
The expectation maximization algorithm also gives very close

T
values of 0.6764 0.2745 0.0490 . The log likelihood
stops improving after 250 iterations of the expectation maximization algorithm as can be seen in Fig. 12, thereby indicating
convergence. This simple experiment shows how this model can
be used to determine the proportional breakup of the subpopulations in a heterogeneous tissue.
In the case of larger models, to ensure that the variational
algorithm does not get stuck at a local maxima, random starts
with different initializations could be attempted and the solution
with the maximum steady-state lower bound could be selected.
In our case, the variational algorithms converged to posterior
distributions, which were to be expected (the results agreed with
results from previous work in [7]). Hence, random initializations
were not attempted.
The effect exerted by the Boolean network corresponding to
the healthy tissue comes out to be around 67%. This is almost
two and a half times the weight assigned to the second most
dominant network. Acquiring more data might result in more
weight being assigned to the faultless network.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the problem of heterogeneity in cancer tissue
cell populations was addressed and a model was developed that
uses a collection of different Boolean networks to model the
various subpopulations in the tissue. It was demonstrated using
both synthetic and real-world data collected from fibroblasts,
how this model can be used to find out the relative abundance
of the various subpopulations in a given tissue under study

using QPCR gene expression data. This paper is an extension
of the previous work in [7]. The novelty of this study is in the
improvement in the computation time. A hierarchical conjugate
exponential model was used in this paper, which allowed the
use of variational methods for Bayesian estimation of the relative abundances of the various subpopulations. The efficacy of
the variational methods was verified by comparing the results
obtained to those obtained using MCMC (Gibbs sampling) and
maximum likelihood (expectation maximization) methods. Determining the relative abundance of the various subpopulations
in an individual patient could be used to come up with customized combination therapies that are tailored to the patient so
as to improve the efficacy and reduce side effects (for example,
we may want to target the dominant subpopulation(s) using the
minimal amount of drugs so as to reduce side effects).
Variational methods are becoming increasingly important as
Bayesian methods are gaining interest since these methods allow
for speedy computation of posterior distributions of variables of
interest. Moreover, the lower bound, which is easily computed
in variational methods, provides for an effective proxy for the
likelihood of the data that can be used for model selection. Prior
probabilities could also be assigned to these models, which when
combined with the maximum achieved lower bound would provide a given search algorithm a metric to compare different
ensembles of Boolean networks. The design of this search algorithm is an open problem that needs to be addressed in a separate
work. Such a search algorithm will likely be a heuristic, which
searches through the space of ensembles comparing them to
converge on one that best fits the data. Hence, this approach
can also be extended to solving the problem of determining
how many Boolean networks to include in the ensemble as well
as determining which Boolean networks to include in the ensemble. Besides variational methods, other methods, such as
expectation propagation may also be used to solve the problem
of determining the dominant subpopulations in a heterogeneous
cancer tissue in a Bayesian framework with reduced computational requirements.
The model in this paper was developed keeping QPCR geneexpression data in mind. However, similar methods can be developed that use data from more state of the art technologies
such as next generation sequencing and flow cytometry. Ensembles of Boolean networks are an example with which this paper
has explored the idea of hierarchically modeling weights. This
idea may be extended to developing models that consist of ensembles of differential equations, dynamic Bayesian networks
or other similar models, which are better suited to taking into
account cell dynamics.
AVAILABILITY OF CODES
The MATLAB codes can be obtained from https://www.
dropbox.com/sh/scs7lk5vr7y0xhc/AADJi4BACcTgf220Fvwr
07wwa?dl=0 or by sending an email to anwoy.rkl@gmail.com.
REFERENCES
[1] P. C. Nowel, “The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations,” Science,
vol. 194, no. 4260, pp. 23–28, 1976.
[2] R. A. Weinberg, The Biology of Cancer, 1st ed. Princeton, NJ, USA:
Garland Science, 2006.

MOHANTY et al.: CONJUGATE EXPONENTIAL MODEL FOR CANCER TISSUE HETEROGENEITY

[3] T. Reya, S. J. Morrison, M. F. Clarke, and I. L. Weissman, “Stem cells,
cancer, and cancer stem cells,” Nature, vol. 414, no. 6859, pp. 105–111,
2001.
[4] F. Barabe, J. A. Kennady, K. J. Hope, and J. E. Dick, “Modeling the
initiation and progression of human acute leukemia in mice,” Science,
vol. 316, no. 5824, pp. 600–604, 2007.
[5] J. C. Wang and J. E. Dick, “Cancer stem cells: Lessons from leukemia,”
Trends Cell. Biol., vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 494–501, 2005.
[6] L. L. Campbell and K. Polyak, “Breast tumor heterogeneity: Cancer stem
cells or clonal evolution?” Cell Cycle, vol. 6, no. 19, pp. 2332–2338, 2007.
[7] A. K. Mohanty, A. Datta, and V. Venkatraj, “A model for cancer tissue
heterogeneity,” IEEE trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 966–974,
Mar. 2014.
[8] J. M. Bower and H. Bolouri, Computational Modeling of Genetic and
Biochemical Networks, 1st ed. Boston, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2001.
[9] I. Shmulevich, E. R. Dougherty, S. Kim, and W. Zhang, “Probabilistic
Boolean networks: A rule-based uncertainty model for gene regulatory
networks,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 261–274, 2002.
[10] A. Datta and E. Dougherty, Introduction to Genomic Signal Processing
with Control. New York, NY, USA: CRC Press, 2007.
[11] N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er, “Using Bayesian
networks to analyze expression data,” J. Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 3–4,
pp. 601–620, 2000.
[12] M. Zou and S. D. Conzen, “A new dynamic Bayesian network (DBN)
approach for identifying gene regulatory networks from time course microarray data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 71–79, 2005.
[13] S. Liang, S. Fuhrman, and R. Somogyi, “Reveal, a general reverse engineering algorithm for inference of genetic network architectures,” in Proc.
Pacific Symp. Biocomput., 1998, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 18–29.
[14] A. A. margolin, I. Nemenman, K. Basso, C. Wiggins, G. Stolovitzky, R.
D. Favera, and A. Califano, “Aracne: An algorithm for the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a mammalian cellular context,” BMC
Bioinformat., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2006.
[15] A. Battle, M. Jonikas, P. Walter, J. Weissman, and D. Koller, “Automated identification of pathways from quantitative genetic interaction
data,” Molecular Syst. Biol., vol. 6, art. no. 379, pp. 1–13, Jun. 2010.
[16] J. R. Karr, J. C. Sanghvi, D. N. Macklin, M. V. Gutschow, J. M. Jacobs, B.
J. Bolival, N. Assad-Garcia, J. I. Glass, and M. W. Covert, “A whole-cell
computational model predicts phenotype from genotype,” Cell, vol. 150,
no. 2, pp. 389–401, Jul. 2012.
[17] R. K. Layek, A. Datta, and E. R. Dougherty, “From biological pathways
to regulatory networks,” Mol. BioSyst., vol. 7, pp. 843–851, 2011.
[18] R. K. Layek, A. Datta, M. Bittner, and E. R. Dougherty, “Cancer therapy
design based on pathway logic,” Bioinformatics, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 548–
555, 2011.
[19] K. J. Livak and T. D. Schmittgen, “Analysis of relative gene expression
data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2−Δ Δ C t method,” Methods,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 402–408, 2001.
[20] Y. Chen, E. R. Dougherty, and M. L. Bittner, “Ratio-based decisions and
the quantitative analysis of cDNA microarray images,” J. Biomed. Opt.,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 364–374, 1997.
[21] J. M. Winn and C. M. Bishop, “Variational message passing,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 6, pp. 661–694, 2005.
[22] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Singapore:
Springer, 2006.

Anwoy Kumar Mohanty (S’13) received the B.
Tech. and M. Tech degrees in electronics and electrical communication engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India,
in 2010, as part of a five year integrated program. He
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the
Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M
University College Station, TX, USA.
He is a Research Assistant at the Department of
Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University College Station. His research interests include statistical/predictive modeling, machine learning, signal processing, stochastic systems, and bioinformatics.

709

Aniruddha Datta (F’09) received the B. Tech. degree in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute
of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India, in 1985,
the M.S.E.E. degree from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL, USA, in 1987, and the M.S.
(applied mathematics) and Ph.D. degrees from the
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA, in 1991.
In August 1991, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA, where he is currently the J. W. Runyon, Jr. 35 Professor II and the Director of the Center
for Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering. His research interest
include adaptive control, robust control, PID control, and genomic signal processing. He has authored or coauthored five books and more than 100 journal
and conference papers on these topics.
Dr. Datta has served as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
AUTOMATIC CONTROL (2001–2003), the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS,
MAN AND CYBERNETICS-PART B (2005–2006) and is currently serving as an Associate Editor of the EURASIP Journal on Bioinformatics and Systems Biology,
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, the IEEE JOURNAL
OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS and IEEE ACCESS.

Vijayanagaram Venkatraj received the B.V.Sc. degree in veterinary medicine from Madras Veterinary
College, Chennai, India, in 1979, and the Masters in
Science and Ph.D. degrees from New York University, New York, NY, USA, in 1987 and 1992, respectively.
The laboratory experiments for his thesis “Molecular Studies in Fanconi’s Anemia” were accomplished at Rockefeller University Hospital, New
York. He was a Clinical Fellow in human genetics
and underwent clinical training for Board Certification in Human Clinical Molecular and Cytogenetic diagnosis and counseling
at the Department of Medical Genetics, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, from 1993 to 1996. During this time, he was
also a Project Member of the First NIH Funded Human Genome Project to
Map and Sequence Human Chromosome 13 at the Department of Genetics and
Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University. He
has been a Diplomat of the American Board of Medical Genetics since 2000
and is currently a Genetics and Genomic Division faculty in the Department of
Veterinary Integrated Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&
M University,College Station, TX, USA. His research interest include genomic
basis of cancer development and resistance to chemotherapy, specifically in
breast cancer.

