IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

949

Wireless Gigabit Data Telemetry for Large-Scale
Neural Recording
Yen-Cheng Kuan, Yi-Kai Lo, Yanghyo Kim, Mau-Chung Frank Chang, Fellow, IEEE, and Wentai Liu

Abstract—Implantable wireless neural recording from a large
ensemble of simultaneously acting neurons is a critical component
to thoroughly investigate neural interactions and brain dynamics
from freely moving animals. Recent researches have shown the feasibility of simultaneously recording from hundreds of neurons and
suggested that the ability of recording a larger number of neurons
results in better signal quality. This massive recording inevitably
demands a large amount of data transfer. For example, recording
2000 neurons while keeping the signal fidelity (> 12 bit, > 40 KS/s
per neuron) needs approximately a 1-Gb/s data link. Designing a
wireless data telemetry system to support such (or higher) data rate
while aiming to lower the power consumption of an implantable
device imposes a grand challenge on neuroscience community. In
this paper, we present a wireless gigabit data telemetry for future
large-scale neural recording interface. This telemetry comprises
of a pair of low-power gigabit transmitter and receiver operating at 60 GHz, and establishes a short-distance wireless link to
transfer the massive amount of neural signals outward from the
implanted device. The transmission distance of the received neural
signal can be further extended by an externally rendezvous wireless transceiver, which is less power/heat-constraint since it is not
at the immediate proximity of the cortex and its radiated signal is
not seriously attenuated by the lossy tissue. The gigabit data link
has been demonstrated to achieve a high data rate of 6 Gb/s with
a bit-error-rate of 10−12 at a transmission distance of 6 mm, an
applicable separation between transmitter and receiver. This high
data rate is able to support thousands of recording channels while
ensuring a low energy cost per bit of 2.08 pJ/b.
Index Terms—Brain–machine interface, data telemetry, implant, large-scale, neural interface, prosthetics, transceiver, wireless neural recording.

I. INTRODUCTION
NVESTIGATING and studying the complex neural dynamics of the brain has spurred rapid technological advancements in the field of electrode, recording electronics design,
and packaging technology during the past few decades [1]–[5].
BRAIN initiative’s call for new technologies to simultaneously
record a large ensemble of neurons further stimulates the brain-

I

Manuscript received December 3, 2014; revised February 9, 2015; accepted
March 14, 2015. Date of publication March 24, 2015; date of current version
May 7, 2015. This work was supported in part by grants from UC Lab Fee
Program, and California Capital Equity LLC. Yi-Kai Lo and Yen-Cheng Kuan
has equally contributed to this work. (Corresponding authors: Yi-Kai Lo.)
Y.-C. Kuan, Y. Kim, and M.-C. F. Chang are with the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail:
yckuan@ucla.edu; yanghyokim@ucla.edu; mfchang@ee.ucla.edu).
Y.-K. Lo is with the Department of Bioengineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: yikai.lo@ucla.edu).
W. Liu is with the Department of Bioengineering, Electrical Engineering,
and California NanoSystem Institute, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA 90095 USA (e-mail: wentai@ucla.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2416202

Fig. 1.

Conceptual illustration of multisite cortical recording.

storming of novel recording approaches [6]. Current trend for
neural recording leaped from wired to wireless multichannel
recording. Recording of cortical neurons is also no longer confined to one specific region of the brain as wirelessly simultaneous multisite multichannel recording from different cortical
regions potentially provides more insights to understand the
brain working mechanisms and dynamics for free-moving subjects and also serves as a better methodology for brain–machine
interface (BMI) [7]. A conceptual realization of such a multisite
multichannel neural recording is shown in Fig. 1. Multichannel
recording units (RU) can be distributed to different cortical regions/sites while a central unit (CU) administrates each RU and
process the neural signal for wireless transmission. However,
one of major obstacles to realize such system is a wireless link
with a very high data rate and low power consumption as the demanded number of wirelessly recordable channels is increased
from hundreds to thousands.
Up to date, many wireless recording systems based on both
off-the-shelf components and integrated circuits (IC) have been
published [7]–[13]. A 32-channel wireless recording system was
reported to transmit 24 Mb/s at a distance of 20 m [8]. However,
besides the footprint of the system, high power consumption of
142 mW and limited data rate impede its application on highdensity recording. A chronic multichannel implant has been
presented to wirelessly record nonhuman primates to construct
a BMI [7]. This system demonstrated the feasibility of recording
up-to 500 neurons simultaneously. Nonetheless, neural data are
reduced through MPEG video-based compression executed by
a power demanding signal processor in order to meet the limited
data rate (2 Mb/s) provided by the off-the-shelf transceiver. Onsite data compression inevitably results in heat deposit at the

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

950

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

close proximity of the cortex. An implantable wireless neural
interface for cortical recording of moving primates has also been
presented [12]. This implant is composed of application specific
IC to perform 100-channel recording at a wireless data rate of 24
Mb/s, but a high power consumption (50 mW) dissipated by its
FSK transmitter imposes challenges to expand its application for
hundreds of channel recording. Despite wireless data telemetry
for neural recording has emerged as a popular research topic
during the past decade, few work has achieved very high data
rate at low power consumption [9]–[11], [13]–[19]. Therefore, a
new paradigm for the wireless data link is desperately necessary.
In this paper, we present a wireless gigabit data telemetry
for high-density neural recording. This telemetry consists of: 1)
a low-power mm wave transmitter that utilizes the large available signal bandwidth to transmit the recorded signals outward
from the implanted recording device; 2) a corresponding receiver that retrieves the transmitted data at a close distance. We
chose 60 GHz as the carrier frequency of the transceiver as a
design example to achieve a high data rate while the carrier
frequency can be varied for different experimental scenarios.
This transceiver pair establishes a data link of up-to 6 Gb/s at
6 mm with a transmission energy efficiency of 2.08 pJ/b, which
outperforms all of the existing wireless neural recording systems. By using an external relay wireless device, the recorded
data carried by this link can be further delivered to longer
distance.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the design considerations of the wireless data link.
Section III presents a system architecture for large-scale neural
recording. Section IV describes the gigabit wireless data link.
Measurement results are given in Section V, and conclusions are
drawn in Section VI.
II. DESIGN CONSIDERATION
Design detail and methodologies for multichannel neural
recording system has been intensively discussed in previous
works [4], [20]–[23]. However, the design consideration for a
wireless high data-rate recording has not been thoroughly discussed while it has always been deemed as a bottleneck to be
overcome. In this section, we discuss several design aspects in
terms of data rate requirement, power constraint, transmission
distance, and carrier frequency.
A. Bandwidth/Data Rate Requirement
Recording from a large ensemble of neurons facilitates the investigation and development of complex brain dynamics, brainmapping, and clinical translation of BMI. The paper [7] has
demonstrated the feasibility of simultaneous recording from
∼500 channels using microwire electrodes in freely moving
animals and further postulates that recording 5000 to 10 000
neurons are necessary for a BMI to restore the limb movement while 100 000 neurons required to control whole body
movement. Using a sampling rate of 32 Kb/s per channel and
16-bit resolution to digitize the neural signal, the amount of raw
data would be as high as 0.512 Gb/s for 1000 channels, 5.12
Gb/s for 10 000 channels, and 51.2 Gb/s for 100 000 channels, respectively. This massive amount of data needs to be
either compressed in the BMI/implantable device before being

Fig. 2. Energy cost and specification of functional bocks in a multichannel
recording system [17].

transmitted over-the-air or transmitted to the external processing
unit directly.
B. Power Constraint for High-Density Recording Implant
Fig. 2 shows the conventionally used circuit blocks in a multichannel recording system [17]. The power consumption and
the sampling rate of each block are specified for the operation
of one recording channel. Using the estimated raw data rate of
512 Mb/s for 1000-ch recording, the estimated power consumption for the transmitter is ∼ 1.5 W if the energy cost per bit of
3 nJ/b for data transmission, which is infeasible to be adopted
by such an implant. A widely adopted approach of the transmitter power reduction is to reduce the amount of data throughput
either by employing data compression before data transmission
or by moving the power-consuming component to the external
data receiver. A recording system based on compressed sensing is reported [17], which performs a moderate compression
ratio of 10x at a power consumption of 1.9 μW/per channel.
Notwithstanding 10x data reduction, the power consumption of
the TX can be reduced to ∼ 150 mW, which is still too high for
a chronic implant.
Thus, it is worth of estimating the upper limit of the energy
cost per bit for a high-data rate wireless transmitter. This limit
can be calculated using Fig. 2 and the common guideline that
power consumption of the implant should be kept below 40 mW
in order to ensure the increase of tissue temperature is less than
∼ 2 °C [23], [24]. Based on the energy specified in Fig. 2, each
channel, exclusive of the transmitter, dissipates 11.6 μW/ch. For
a 1000-ch system, the power budget for the transmitter is thus
28.4 mW. Assuming data compression is applied and the data
rate after compression is 51.2 Mb/s for a 1000-ch recording, a
conservative estimation of the energy cost per bit for the data
transmission is 0.55 nJ/b. For a 3000-ch recording system, the
energy per bit at < 34 pJ/b is further required, and thus imposing
a great challenge in the design of wireless link. Note that the
power limit of 40 mW is underestimated as the radiated power
absorbed by the tissue is not included. Adverse biological effect
may be induced by strong radiated power. The radiated power
at the frequency range of 0.3–6 GHz should comply with the
IEEE standard 1528-2013. Recent works have also investigated
the biological effects of low-intensity mm waves exposing upon
human skin cells [25], [26]. Taking the radiated power limit
and the low-power requirements of the implant electronics into
consideration would impose a great challenge in the design of
wireless link.
C. Transmission Distance
Transmission distance is another critical factor that has to
be addressed for the wireless link. This distance depends on

KUAN et al.: WIRELESS GIGABIT DATA TELEMETRY FOR LARGE-SCALE NEURAL RECORDING

Fig. 3. Possible location for the transmitter antenna inside the brain: (a) underneath the bone, (b) underneath the skin, and (c) uncovered by the skin.

the signal path/reflection loss, the transmitted power, and the
receiver sensitivity. Based on the discussion in the previous
section, the emitted power from the transmitter antenna and
power consumed by the transmitter need to be low to achieve a
low energy cost per bit for data transmission. At the receiver side,
its sensitivity becomes worse as the signal bandwidth increases
due to the increased noise floor. Signal loss depends on the
characteristic of the tissue, position of the antenna, as well as
signal frequency. The loss includes: 1) signal path loss as it
travels through a lossy medium (i.e., skin, bone, and fat tissue);
2) the reflection loss when the signal passes through the interface
of two different materials.
Received signal intensity can be calculated according to different antenna location inside the brain. Fig. 3 shows several
possible placements for the transmitter antenna of the implant:
1) underneath the skull, 2) underneath the skin, and 3) uncovered by the skin. According to Beer–Lambert law [27], the
intensity of an electromagnetic (EM) signal inside a material
decays exponentially from the surface of it source. If the transmitted power from the antenna is Pt , the power at a distance z
from the antenna Pz within the same material can be expressed
as
Pz = Pt ∗ e−z /δ

(1)

where δ is the penetration depth of the material and can be
obtained for different tissues at various frequency [28]. The reflection loss can also be calculated based on the refractive index
of the materials. For simplification, we assume the incident EM
wave is perpendicular to the skin–air boundary with an incident angle of 0° and antenna gain is unity. According to Fresnel
equations [27] the reflection coefficient is

2
1−β
Preﬂective
=
=R
(2)
Pincident
1+β
where β is the ratio of the refractive index of the material at the
incident and emergent side. Based on (1) and (2), the intensity
of the EM signal at the external receiver in the air is


z
− 1
Preceived,dB = 20 ∗ logPt + 20 ∗ log e δ b o n e + 20 ∗


z
− 2
log (1 − Rb one−skin ) + 20 ∗ log e δ s k i n + 20 ∗


4πd
log (1 − Rskin−air ) + 20 ∗ log
(3)
+ GT + GR ,
λ

951

where z1 and z2 are the thickness of the cortex bone and skin,
respectively; δb one and δskin are the penetration depth of bone
and skin at the frequency of the EM signal; Rb one−skin and
Rskin−air are the reflection coefficients at the bone–skin interface and skin–air interface, respectively; d is the distance
between the receiver and signal source exiting the skin in free
space; λ is the free space wave length of the EM signal; GT and
GR are the antenna gain at the transmitter and receiver. It should
be noted that between skin and the bone there are also layers of
connective tissues. These layers are neglected in our calculation
for simplicity. On the other hand, the sensitivity of the receiver
must also be taken into consideration. The receiver sensitivity can be calculated based on the desired signal to noise ratio
(SNR) at a certain bit-error-rate (BER), receiver noise figure
(NF), and the total thermal noise as
Sensitivity = 10 ∗ log (K ∗ T ∗ BW) + NF + SNR (4)
where K is the Boltzman’s constant, T is the absolute temperature, and BW is the signal bandwidth. For a certain BER to
achieve, the received signal power intensity must meet its corresponding SNR requirement based on the modulation scheme
adopted and the SNR is difference between the received signal
intensity and the receiver sensitivity.
If the transmitter antenna is placed at location a, its transmitted power needs be strong enough to bear the attenuation loss
and reflection loss at the bone–skin and skin–air interface. As an
alternative, for the low power purpose, position b and c seems
to be better options. As an example, we used IR-UWB transmitter and receiver with a 2-GHz bandwidth (center frequency is
4 GHz) as reported in [29] to estimate the achievable transmission distance from the brain implant to the external receiver at
locations b and c. This transmitter is capable of transmitting 10
Mb/s at low power consumption of 100 μW. The average transmitted power can be calculated as −32 dBm from its measured
output power spectrum. The receiver sensitivity is reported as
−79 dBm to achieve a BER of 10−3 . Skin loss and reflection loss
can be estimated as −11.5 dB based on the scalp skin of 8 mm
thickness [30]. The transmission distance (d) can be calculated
based on the power delivered from the scalp (PT ), the received
signal intensity (PR ), and the free space path loss based on (3)
and (4).
λ
∗ 10(P T −P R )/20
(5)
4π
d is estimated as ∼ 0.3 and ∼ 0.74 m for antenna location b
and c, respectively. The distance would be even shorter if a
higher carrier frequency or large bandwidth is used in order
to support higher data rate. Moreover, the < 1 m transmission
distance might only be suitable for small animal recording inside a cage. Regarding high-density neural recording from freemoving primates under a strict power constraint for the implant
and the requirement of long recording distance, a data relay
station close-by the implant might be necessary to elongate the
transmission distance and thus shift the power burden to the
external relay station for safety concern.
d=

D. Carrier Frequency of the Wireless Link
Under the strict power constraint of the implant, simple modulation scheme such as OOK or FSK have shown its practicality

952

Fig. 4.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Proposed high-density gigabit wireless neural recording system.

in wireless data link for neural recording [8], [19], [31].
Nonetheless, these simple modulation schemes are prone to
low spectral efficiency. On the other hand, the existing OOK
transmitter/transceiver designs empirically show that the ratio
of the signal bandwidth over carrier frequency for a reliable link
is around 0.05 to 0.1 [32]. To achieve a 1 + Gb/s data link,
10 + GHz carrier frequency is thus required and a relay device
can resolve the issue of short transmission distance and keep the
power consumption of transmitter at the implanted device low.

the 60-GHz receiver output to support longer transmission distance for requirements of various experiments.
The advantages of the proposed system configuration are multifold, including: 1) miniaturized implant size, as antenna can
be made relatively small using a high carrier frequency, 2) high
raw data rate for recording large-ensemble of neurons without
using data compression, 3) no excessive power consuming device exists in the implant and thus reduces the heat complication
accordingly.

III. PROPOSED SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE FOR LARGE-SCALE
WIRELESS NEURAL RECORDING

IV. GIGABIT WIRELESS DATA LINK

Based on the above considerations, we propose a system architecture suitable for future multisite, large-scale neural recording (see Fig. 4). In order to record from thousands of channels
simultaneously, we choose 60 GHz as the carrier frequency. It
is envisioned that this carrier frequency can sustain a data rate
of 6 Gb/s based on the aforementioned empirical ratio of 1/10
for the signal bandwidth over the carrier frequency. However,
the major concern here is the penetration depth that determines
the position of the antenna. Based on the skin penetration depth
of 478 μm at 60 GHz [28] and a transmitted power of 0 dBm
emitted from the antenna at position b (see Fig. 3), the loss as
the signal travels through the ∼ 8 mm scalp can be estimated
as ∼ 145 dB. This large loss dictates the corresponding receiver
design. Therefore, a proper solution is to place the antenna on
top of the skin to avoid large signal path loss inside the lossy
medium.
The configuration of the proposed system is partitioned into
two parts (the implant and the cap). In the implant, multichannel RU are hermetically sealed and inserted through a small
skull opening and placed on the cortical region of interests. A
central control unit (CU) and the 60-GHz wireless transmitter
does process and transmit the neural response, respectively. The
transmitter antenna is placed on top of the hermetic package.
The small skull opening is sealed by the biocompatible implant.
In the cap, a corresponding 60-GHz receiver is positioned coaxially on top of the implant while the relay device further extends

Fig. 5 depicts the block diagram of the wireless recording system to explain the context of the wireless gigabit data telemetry.
The system comprises: 1) an implantable gigabit recording-andtransmitting module, 2) a wearable receiving-and-forwarding
module, and 3) a mobile postprocessing module. In real applications, both modules 2) and 3) are away from the cortex
area and thus the complication of heat dissipation is reduced
significantly.
After neural signal is processed and digitized by the neural
recorder, a 60-GHz transmitter (TX) upconverts the serialized
recorded data (and the packet preamble/header) through OnOff-key (OOK) modulation, and sends the data to both the air
and biocompatible implant through an antenna (ANT).
In the wearable module, a reciprocal antenna (R-ANT) captures the transmitted signal, which is then fed to the 60-GHz
receiver (RX). The RX then downconverts and demodulates the
signal to a single-bit data stream. Furthermore, a USB 3.0 wire
interface adapter (USB-I/F) translates the data stream into USB
3.0 SuperSpeed-compliant signals.
The mobile module, usually it is very away from the cortex, is
equipped with a USB 3.0 wire interface, an 802.11 a/c wireless
interface, and an application processor (AP). A USB 3.0 cable
connects the mobile and wearable modules. The customized
application (APP) software running on the AP controls the USB
3.0 and 802.11a/c interfaces to first receive the data from the
wearable module, and then send them to a remote terminal or
paring devices. The choice of USB and 802.11 as the interfaces

KUAN et al.: WIRELESS GIGABIT DATA TELEMETRY FOR LARGE-SCALE NEURAL RECORDING

Fig. 5.

953

Block diagram of the proposed gigait telemetry.

to extend the transmission range of the short-distance gigabit
data link lies on the popularity and continuing development of
these two interfaces. Up to date, USB 3.0 and 802.11a/c can
support physically 5 Gb/s (in SuperSpeed mode) and 6.8 Gb/s
(with 8 × 8 MIMO) data rates, respectively, based on their latest
standard developments [33], [34]. It is important to note that high
power dissipation for this mobile module is not problematic
since it is not at the very proximity of the cortex. Together,
these capabilities motivate the choice of 60 GHz as the carrier
frequency.
Both the power telemetry transmitter (PTT) and the power
telemetry regulator (PTR) reside in the wearable and implantable modules, respectively. The PTT draws the power from
the mobile platform through the VBUS pin of the USB 3.0 cable, and provides the dc powers to RX and USB-I/F. A class-E
power amplifier in PTT is used to deliver the power wirelessly to
PTR through an inductive link. The PTR is based on the fully integrated multivoltage power converter developed by the authors
[35]. The PTR can not only provide the dc power required by
the TX, serializer, and recorder of the implantable module, but
also support high dc voltage if functional electrical stimulation
is to be embedded in the implant. Details of the wireless power
link can be found in [35].
In this study, we focus on the realization of the wireless
gigabit data link, where both 60-GHz TX and RX are critical
in the realization of a high data rate transmission. The TX and
RX are modified from our previous design that is originally
targeted at wire-line communication [36]. Fig. 6(a) shows circuit
schematic of the TX and RX. The TX consists of an On-Offkey modulator (OOK-MOD), a 60-GHz crossed-couple voltagecontrol oscillator (VCO). The VCO is an LC based differential
cross-coupled resonator. It uses a transformer to drive the current
generating transistors (M1 and M2). The serialized data input

Fig. 6.

Circuit schematics of the 60-GHz transmitter and receiver.

controls the switching transistors (M3 and M4) to turn on/off
the current flow for accomplishing the OOK modulation.
A corresponding receiver [36] amplifies and demodulates the
signal captured by R-ANT. The incoming signal is self-mixed to
cancel the carrier, and extract the envelope of the signal by the
OOK demodulation. At the RX, a transformer couples the signal
from the antenna to the 60-GHz differential amplifier (M5-M8).
A second transformer takes the amplifier output and drives a

954

Fig. 7.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Die photos of the 60-GHz transmitter and receiver.

Fig. 9.

Fig. 8.

(a) Simulated return loss, (b) simulated radiation pattern from HFSS.

Illustration of the antenna and TX/RX packaged module.

self-mixer (M9 and M10) to down convert the 60-GHz signal to
baseband data. Lastly, the demodulated data is further amplified
to drive the following stage.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX) are being fabricated at
65-nm generic CMOS technology. Fig. 7 shows the die photo of
TX and RX. The TX and RX occupy a core area of 0.25 × 0.43
and 0.24 × 0.32 mm2 , respectively. Molded package technology is adopted to encapsulate the TX and RX chips in two separate modules with the same dimension of 0.4 × 0.4 × 0.1 mm3
(width × length × height). In each module, a folded-dipole antenna is designed and placed inside a standard plastic substrate.
The chip and antenna are connected via bonding wires within
the same substrate (see Fig. 8). Since the TX and RX modules reciprocal, their antenna interfaces are the same. Through
HFSS simulation, the return loss is < −25 dB at 60 GHz, and
the antenna gain is 7.4 dBi (see Fig. 9).
Two testing PCBs that carry the ICs of the fabricated 60GHz transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX) [30], respectively, are
designed and implemented to characterize and mimic the gigabit

Fig. 10.

Testing PCBs of 60-GHz transmitter and receiver.

data link for future large-scale neural recording (see Fig. 10).
In our experiment, batteries are used to power the transceiver
pair. The TX data input is routed to a differential pair of SMA
connectors on the TX testing PCB for receiving the test data
provided by an external pattern generator. Similar to TX, the
RX data output is connected to an extern signal analyzer via
the SMA connectors on the RX testing PCB. LEDs are placed
on these two PCBs to allow users visually check the status of
the data link. Lighting of the LED on the TX PCBs indicates

KUAN et al.: WIRELESS GIGABIT DATA TELEMETRY FOR LARGE-SCALE NEURAL RECORDING

Fig. 11.

Fig. 12.

Measured eye-diagram of RX output at 6 Gb/s.

Fig. 13.

Measured BER versus different TX-RX distance.

Fig. 14.

Measured BER versus different TX-RX offset.

955

BER measurement setup.

the data are transmitted while lighting of the LED on the RX
PCB indicates the data are correctly received and demodulated.
Note that the board size can be greatly reduced as many of
the components on the board are used for testing purpose only.
SMA connector can be further replaced by impedance matched
transmission line.
An over-the-air (OTA) BER experiment is conducted to characterize the data transfer between the TX and RX ICs. Fig. 11
shows the experiment setup. Two PCBs are vertically placed
and hold by using carriers and a sliding rail. The TX and RX
are first aligned coaxially, and the output power of the TX is
set to 0 dBm. A plastic cover made by 3-D-printer (Replicator
2, Makerbot, Inc., NY) was designed to mimic the cover of the
implant. The BER tester (BERT) Agilent 70843C injects 215 –1
psuedorandom bit-sequence (PRBS) to the TX data input, and
receives the RX data output to calculate the BER over a period
of time. The signal generator HP83640A connects to the clock
source of BERT and determines the data rate of PRBS.
Fig. 12 shows the measured eye-diagram of the RX data
output at 6 Gb/s. It can be seen that the inserted plastic cover
between the TX and RX does not affected the data link. This link
can also be checked by the lighting of the LED (see Fig. 11).
The TX and RX consume 12.5 and 15 mW, respectively. The
TX power consumption is almost constant for various data rates
as the VCO is always on. Note that activation of the VCO can
be modulated by the incoming data for power saving, but the
start-up time of the VCO would limit the maximal achievable
data rate.

The 60-GHz RX in our proposed system is mounted in the
cap. It is likely misaligned with the implanted transmitter when
the subject is moving, influencing the performance of the wireless link. Thus, in order to demonstrate the feasibility of the
proposed gigabit wireless link for the system shown in Fig. 4,
BER measurement was performed based on different: 1) separation and 2) offset, between the transmitter and receiver.
It can be seen that when the separation between the antenna
pair is < 6 mm, BER for the data rate at 1 and 6 Gb/s are both
< 10−12 (see Fig. 13). The BER increases as the increasing
separation. A BER of 10−5 at 6 Gb/s is obtained at the separation
of 12 mm. Fig. 14 shows the BER versus offset between TX and
RX at a fixed separation of 8 mm. This measurement is to mimic
the situation that the transceiver pair is not placed coaxially.

956

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

TABLE I
COMPARISON WITH PRIOR WORKS

[8]
[9]
[12]
[14]
[15]
This study
∗

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Power@Transmitter
(mW)

Data rate
(Mb/s)

Freq.
(GHz)

Modulation
scheme

Energy/bit
(nJ/b)

20∗
6
50
5.88
3.67
12.5

24
90
24
50
8
6000

3.7/ 4.1
3–5
3.2/3.8
0,915
2.4
60

FSK
IR
FSK
OPSK/O-QPSK
BPSK
OOK

0.83
0.067
2.08
0.12
0.46
0.002

Estimated based on the VCO power consumption.

For data rate at 1 Gb/s, BER is < 10−12 within the offset of
< 4 mm. Even with 8-mm offset, BER of ∼ 10−4 is achievable.
On the other hand, for the data rate at 6 Gb/s, the allowed offset
is limited to ∼4–6 mm. In both cases, even though the offset is
larger than the size of the transmitter and receiver (4 mm), the
operation of the wireless is still functioning at a reasonable BER.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we address the design issues of the high datarate bio-telemetry, present a wireless gigabit data link for highdensity neural recording, and propose a system architecture
for future large-scale recording interface. Carrier frequency of
60 GHz is adopted in order to support up-to a data rate of 6 Gb/s
by using OOK data modulation. This high data rate enables the
neural data transmission from >10 000 channel without data
compression. While with data compression, wireless data transfer for > 100000 recording channel can be achieved to facilitate
the BMI for whole body movement [7]. Our presented 60-GHz
data link reports the lowest energy cost per bit (2.08 pJ/b) for
neural data transmission and the highest data rate achieved (see
Table I). The recording system based on the 60-GHz data link
offers the advantage of small footprint with the aid of the small
antenna size at this carrier frequency for the implant. The high
data rate link makes power consuming devices feasible to be
set outside the subject to avoid undesired tissue temperature
elevation resulting from high power dissipation of the implant.
This configuration further allows the flexible implementation
of sophisticated signal processing algorithm using off-the-shelf
components. For instance, a DSP can be utilized to further compress ∼ 6 Gb/s neural data and consequently the 802.11 a/c
WIFI, with a true throughput of ∼ 800 Mb/s considering protocol overhead, can serve as a data relay device. Moreover we
envision a design paradigm for neural data acquisition system is
shifting. As a solution for future high-data rate, low-power wireless data link for neural recording is presented and demonstrated,
the bottleneck for the implantable electronics design of largescale neural recording will shift from wireless transceiver to the
analog recording front-end, which likely consumes more power
at the current designs in the literatures. Based on our discussion
in Section II that the reported conventional power consumption
of one recording channel is 11.6 μW, 10 000 channel would dissipate > 100 mW, which is significantly larger than the power
dissipated by wireless link. A drastic design improvement for
the recording front-end design is needed in order to take the advantage of the presented high data rate, low power wireless link.

The authors would like to thank Y.-C. K. Liu for her artwork,
and I. Cassar for his assistance in the plastic cap design.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Panescu, “Emerging Technologies,” IEEE Eng. Med. Bio. Mag.,
vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 100–113, Sep./Oct. 2008.
[2] S. F. Cogan, “Neural stimulation and recording electrodes,” Annu. Review
Biomed. Eng., vol. 10, pp. 275–309, 2008.
[3] D. D. Z. A. E. Greenbaum, Biological and Medical Physics, Biomedical
Engineering. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2010.
[4] B. Gosselin, “Recent advances in neural recording microsystems,” Sensors, vol. 11, pp. 4572–4597, May 2011.
[5] C.-W. Chang, P.-T. Huang, L.-C. Chou, S.-L. Wu, S.-W. Lee, C.-T. Chuang,
K.-N. Chen, J.-C. Chiou, W. Hwang, Y.-C. Lee, C.-H. Wu, K.-H. Chen,
C.-T. Chiu, and H.-M. Tong, “Through-silicon-via-based double-side integrated microsystem for neural sensing applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2013, pp. 102–103.
[6] Brain initiatives. (2014). [Online]. Available: http://www.braininitiative.
nih.gov/index.htm
[7] D. A. Schwarz, M. A. Lebedev, T. L. Hanson, D. F. Dimitrov, G. Lehew, J.
Meloy, S. Rajangam, V. Subramanian, P. J. Ifft, Z. Li, A. Ramakrishnan, A.
Tate, K. Z.. Zhuang, and M. A. L. Nicolelis, “Chronic, wireless recordings
of large-scale brain activity in freely moving rhesus monkeys,” Nature
Methods, vol. 11, pp. 670–676, Jun. 2014.
[8] H. Miranda, V. Gilja, C. A. Chestek, K. V. Shenoy, and T. H. Meng, “HermesD: A high-rate long-range wireless transmission system for simultaneous multichannel neural recording applications,” IEEE Trans Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 181–191, Jun. 2010.
[9] M. S. Chae, Z. Yang, M. R. Yuce, L. Hoang, and W. T. Liu, “A 128channel 6 mW wireless neural recording IC with spike feature extraction
and UWB transmitter,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 312–321, Aug. 2009.
[10] S. Solda, M. Caruso, A. Bevilacqua, A. Gerosa, D. Vogrig, and A. Neviani,
“A 5 Mb/s UWB-IR transceiver front-end for wireless sensor networks
in 0.13 mu m CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 7,
pp. 1636–1647, Jul. 2011.
[11] T. A. Szuts, V. Fadeyev, S. Kachiguine, A. Sher, M.V. Grivich, M.
Agrochão, P. Hottowy, W. Dabrowski, E. V. Lubenov, A. G. Siapas, N.
Uchida, A. M. Litke, and M. Meister, “A wireless multi-channel neural
amplifier for freely moving animals,” Nature Neuroscience, vol. 14, pp.
263–U363, Feb. 2011.
[12] M. Yin, D. A. Borton, J. Aceros, W. R. Patterson, and A. V. Nurmikko, “A
100-channel hermetically sealed implantable device for chronic wireless
neurosensing applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 115–128, Apr. 2013.
[13] T. Morrison, M. Nagaraju, B. Winslow, A. Bernard, and B. P. Otis, “A
0.5 cm(3) four-channel 1.1 mW wireless biosignal interface with 20 m
range,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 138–147,
Feb. 2014.
[14] S. X. Diao, Y. J. Zheng, Y. Gao, S. J. Cheng, X. J. Yuan, M. Y. Je, and
C.-H. Heng, “A 50-Mb/s CMOS QPSK/O-QPSK transmitter employing
injection locking for direct modulation,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 120–130, Jan. 2012.
[15] J. Tan, W.-S. Liew, C.-H. Heng, and Y. Lian, “A 2.4 GHz ULP reconfigurable asymmetric transceiver for single-chip wireless neural recording
IC,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 497–509, Aug.
2014.
[16] Y. Gao, Y. J. Zheng, S. X. Diao, W.-D. Toh, C.-W. Ang, M. Y. Je, and
C.-H. Heng, “Low-power ultrawideband wireless telemetry transceiver for
medical sensor applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3,
pp. 768–772, Mar. 2011.
[17] F. Chen, A. P. Chandrakasan, and V. M. Stojanovic, “Design and analysis of
a hardware-efficient compressed sensing architecture for data compression
in wireless sensors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 744–
756, Mar. 2012.
[18] E. Greenwald, M. Mollazadeh, C. Hu, W. Tang, E. Culurciello, and
N. V. Thakor, “A VLSI neural monitoring system with ultra-wideband
telemetry for awake behaving subjects,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 112–119, Apr. 2011.
[19] J. L. Bohorquez, A. P. Chandrakasan, and J. L. Dawson, “A 350 mu W
CMOS MSK transmitter and 400 mu W OOK super-regenerative receiver

KUAN et al.: WIRELESS GIGABIT DATA TELEMETRY FOR LARGE-SCALE NEURAL RECORDING

[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]

for medical implant communications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol.
44, no. 4, pp. 1248–1259, Apr. 2009.
B. Gosselin and M. Sawan, “Circuits techniques and microsystems assembly for intracortical multichannel ENG recording,” in Proc. IEEE Custom
Integr. Circuits Conf., 2009, pp. 97–104.
M. S. Chae, W. T. Liu, and M. Sivaprakasam, “Design optimization
for integrated neural recording systems,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 1931–1939, Sep. 2008.
W. Wattanapanitch and R. Sarpeshkar, “A low-power 32-channel digitally
programmable neural recording integrated circuit,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 592–602, Dec. 2011.
A. H. Marblestone, B. M. Zamft, Y. G. Maguire, M. G. Shapiro, T. R.
Cybulski, J. I. Glaser, D. Amodei, P. B. Stranges, R. Kalhor, D. A.
Dalrymple, D. Seo, E. Alon, M. M. Maharbiz, J. M. Carmena, J. M.
Rabaey, E. S. Boyden, G. M. Church, and K. P. Kording, “Physical principles for scalable neural recording,” Frontiers Comput. Neurosci., vol. 7,
art. no. 137, Oct. 2013.
G. Lazzi, “Thermal effects of bioimplants,” IEEE Eng. Med. Bio. Mag.,
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 75–81, Sep./Oct. 2005.
M. Zhadobov, C. N. Nicolaz, R. Sauleau, F. Desmots, D. Thouroude, D.
Michel, and Y. L. Drean, “Evaluation of the potential biological effects of
the 60-GHz millimeter waves upon human cells,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propagation, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2949–2956, Oct. 2009.
N. Chahat, M. Zhadobov, L. Le Coq, S. I. Alekseev, and R. Sauleau,
“Characterization of the interactions between a 60-GHz antenna and the
human body in an off-body scenario,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagation,
vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 5958–5965, Dec. 2012.
R. P. Feynman, The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Reading, MA, USA:
Addison-Wesley, 2005.
N. Carrara. Calculation of the dielectric properties of body tissues in
the frequency range 10Hz - 100 GHz. (1997–2012). [Online]. Available:
http://niremf.ifac.cnr.it/tissprop/htmlclie/htmlclie.htm
Z. Zou, “Impulse radio UWB for the internet-of-things: A study on
UHF/UWB hybrid solution,” Ph.D. dissertation, Doctoral School Inform.
Commun. Technol., KTH Royal Inst. Technol., Stockholm, Sweden, 2011.
G. E. Seery, “Surgical anatomy of the scalp,” Dermatologic Surg., vol. 28,
pp. 581–587, Jul. 2002.
D. A. Borton, M. Yin, J. Aceros, and A. Nurmikko, “An implantable
wireless neural interface for recording cortical circuit dynamics in moving
primates,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, art. no. 026010, Apr. 2013.
A. T. Phan, J. Lee, V. Krizhanovskii, Q. Le, S. K. Han, and S. G. Lee,
“Energy-efficient low-complexity CMOS pulse generator for multiband
UWB impulse radio,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 55, no. 11, pp.
3552–3563, Dec. 2008.
USB 3.0 specification. (2013). [Online]. Available: http://www.usb.org/
developers/docs/
IEEE 802.11ac standard. (2014). [Online]. Available: http://standards.
ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11ac-2013.pdf
Y.-K. Lo, K. Chen, P. Gad, and W. Liu, “An on-chip multi-voltage power
converter with leakage current prevention using 0.18 μm high-voltage
CMOS process,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., no. 99, Jan. 2015.
Y. Kim, L. Nan, J. Cong, and M. C. F. Chang, “High-speed mm-wave datalink based on hollow plastic cable and CMOS transceiver,” IEEE Micro.
Wireless Component Lett., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 674–676, Dec. 2013.

Yen-Cheng Kuan received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
From 2004 to 2007, he was a System Engineer at
Realtek Semiconductor Corp., Irvine, USA, where he
contributed to the design of ultra-wideband systemon-a-chip. Since 2009, he has been with Hughes
Research Laboratories, Malibu, CA, USA, working
on software-defined radios, compressed-sensing receivers, multirate signal processing for high-speed ADCs, and image processors. His research interests include low-power architecture design for wireless communication/biomedical systems, physical-layer modeling and systemlevel design for millimeter-wave/60-GHz communication, SW-HW codesign
for biomedical applications, and communication standardizations.

957

Yi-Kai Lo received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from
the Department of Electronics Engineering, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, and the
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
in 2004, 2006, and 2014, respectively.
His research interests include bioelectronic circuits and system design, neural interface, chronic
medical device, and neuroprosthetic devices.
Dr. Lo received the Outstanding Ph.D. Award from
the Bioengineering Department in 2014.

Yanghyo Kim received B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Mississippi and M.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of California, Los Angeles. He is currently pursuing
Ph.D degree in electrical engineering from the same
university.

Mau-Chung Frank Chang (M’79–SM’84–F’96) received the B.S. degree in Physics from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, the M.S. degree in
Material Science from National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. He is currently the Department
Chairman and the Wintek Distinguished Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering at UCLA. Throughout his career, his research has focused on the development of high-speed semiconductor devices and
high frequency integrated circuits for communication, radar and imaging systems.
Dr. Chang is a Member of the US National Academy of Engineering and
an Academician of Academia Sinica in Taiwan. He received the IEEE David
Sarnoff Award in 2006 for developing and commercializing HBT power amplifiers for modern mobile phones.

Wentai Liu received the B.S. degree from National
Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, the M.S.
degree from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
In 1983, he joined North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, where he held the Alcoa Chair Professorship in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. Since 2003, he has been Professor at
the Electrical Engineering Department, University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, where he is Campus Director of the NSF Engineering Research Center on Biomimetic Microelectronic Systems. He is currently a Distinguished Professor at the Departments
of Bioengineering, Electrical Engineering (2013), and CNSI in the University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. His research interests include visual prosthesis, implantable electronics, high-speed transceiver design (wired and wireless),
molecular electronics, microelectronic sensors, timing/clock optimization, onchip interconnects and computer vision/image processing. Since its early stages,
he has been leading the engineering efforts of the retinal prosthesis to restore
vision, finally leading to successful preliminary implant tests in blind patients.
He has published more than 180 technical papers.
Dr. Liu has received an IEEE Outstanding Paper Award, Alcoa Foundation’s Distinguished Engineering Research Award, and the Outstanding
Alumnus Award from National Chiao-Tung University. He is a University
System of Taiwan Master Lecturer and Chair Professor of National Chiao-Tung
University.

