910

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

An Implantable RFID Sensor Tag toward Continuous
Glucose Monitoring
Zhibin Xiao, Xi Tan, Xianliang Chen, Sizheng Chen, Zijian Zhang, Hualei Zhang, Junyu Wang, Yue Huang,
Peng Zhang, Lirong Zheng, and Hao Min

Abstract—This paper presents a wirelessly powered implantable
electrochemical sensor tag for continuous blood glucose monitoring. The system is remotely powered by a 13.56-MHz inductive link
and utilizes an ISO 15693 radio frequency identification (RFID)
standard for communication. This paper provides reliable and accurate measurement for changing glucose level. The sensor tag
employs a long-term glucose sensor, a winding ferrite antenna,
an RFID front-end, a potentiostat, a 10-bit sigma-delta analog to
digital converter, an on-chip temperature sensor, and a digital baseband for protocol processing and control. A high-frequency external reader is used to power, command, and configure the sensor
tag. The only off-chip support circuitry required is a tuned antenna
and a glucose microsensor. The integrated chip fabricated in SMIC
0.13-μm CMOS process occupies an area of 1.2 mm×2 mm and
consumes 50 μW. The power sensitivity of the whole system is −4
dBm. The sensor tag achieves a measured glucose range of 0–30
mM with a sensitivity of 0.75 nA/mM.
Index Terms—13.56 MHz, electrochemical sensor, glucose monitoring, implantable, potentiostat, radio frequency identification
(RFID), sensor tag, sigma-delta analog to digital converter (sigmadelta ADC), wireless.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE overall number of diabetic patients is currently about
200 million and it is estimated that this number will reach
330 million by 2025 [1]. A number of complications caused
by diabetes will bring serious damages to human beings. Long
periods of hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia represent a major
issue in diabetes therapy since they can cause sudden coma
and brain damage [2]. Such complications can be prevented or
retarded by controlling the glucose level. Due to the fact that
glucose levels in blood can change rapidly (0.125 mM/min),

T

Manuscript received November 1, 2014; revised February 4, 2015; accepted
March 16, 2015. Date of publication March 23, 2015; date of current version
May 7, 2015. This work was supported in parts by the National Science &
Technology Pillar Program of China (2015BAK36B01), the National Natural
Science Funds of China (61076022, 61211140046) and the Shanghai Pujiang
Program. (Corresponding author: J. Wang).
Z. Xiao, X. Tan, X. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Wang, L.
Zheng, and H. Min are with the State Key Laboratory of ASIC & System, Fudan University, 200433 Shanghai, China (e-mail: 13110720059@fudan.edu.cn;
tanxi@fudan.edu.cn; 12210720120@fudan.edu.cn; 13210720132@fudan.edu.
cn; 12210720166@fudan.edu.cn; 12210720161@fudan.edu.cn; junyuwang@
fudan.edu.cn; lrzheng@fudan.edu.cn; hmin@fudan.edu.cn).
Y. Huang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA (e-mail:
huangyue@msu.edu).
P. Zhang is with the Center for Medical Research and Innovation, Shanghai Pudong Hospital and Fudan University Pudong Medical Center, 201399,
Shanghai China (e-mail: zhangpg@yahoo.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2415836

the enzyme-based finger-picking tests often fail to detect all
hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic events. Compared with the
conventional point-in-time glucose measurements, automated
and continuous glucose monitoring can obtain reliable and detailed information about the changing glucose level of diabetic
patients. This way, it can help make the early diagnosis and
assist in making the best treatment decisions [3].
The integration of sensors into passive RFID tags has recently
caused extensive interest among the RFID community. RFID
systems are wireless identification systems containing readers
and tags. Different from active tags, passive tags can wirelessly
communicate with a reader without a battery. The reader powers the tag by transmitting electromagnetic waves and enables
it to send back information stored on the chip. Sensor tags have
been used in a wide range of applications, from environmental
monitoring to personal biomedical uses, such as temperature
detection and health monitoring [4]. Due to the problems associated with a battery in sensor tags [5], passive RFID is used
for power and data transmission between an implantable passive
sensor tag and an external reader. The combination of integrated
circuit chips, telecommunications, and micromachined sensors
makes it possible to develop a small-size wireless implantable
system.
In wireless power transmission, two coils that are inductively
or magnetically coupled are used. One is connected to an external reader and the other is connected to the implantable sensor
tag. The near-field coils transmit an radio-frequency (RF) signal to provide the required power for the sensor tag system.
The frequency ranges of RFID in international standards are
from 135 kHz to 2.45 GHz [6]. On one hand, higher carrier
frequency can provide high data transmission rates. However,
in an implantable system, the tissue absorption coefficient increases for higher frequencies, causing most of the transmitted power to be absorbed by the tissue. On the other hand,
the carrier frequency cannot be too low. Otherwise, the tag
coil would have to be quite large and also RF burn in the tissue could be a concern. Therefore, a carrier frequency operating at Industrial Scientific and Medical band of 13.56 MHz is
selected.
The research for developing a continuous blood glucose monitoring system was started in the early 1960s [7]. A reliable glucose sensor is a main challenge for glucose detection in the previous implantable systems [8]–[12]. The performance of a glucose
sensor includes accuracy, sensitivity, response time, and chemical stability (long-life) in vivo. In an implantable passive sensor
system, it is also a challenge to perform glucose measurement
in relevant in vivo conditions for needed periods of time. Various

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XIAO et al.: IMPLANTABLE RFID SENSOR TAG TOWARD CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING

Fig. 1. Wireless powered implantable sensor tag for continuous glucose monitoring. The microsystem includes a ferrite antenna, a system-on-chip (SoC),
and an electrochemical glucose sensor.

kinds of glucose sensor systems were successful by using micro/nanotechnologies. On one hand, some of them are based on
optical techniques such as near-infrared spectroscopy or light
scattering [8], [10]. On the other hand, some methods try to
achieve reliable measurements based on electrochemical glucose sensors, which measure the glucose concentration of the
interstitial fluid of the skin or other sites. An electrochemical
glucose sensor is integrated on chip and the wireless glucose
monitoring system consumes about 110 μA [11]. A contact-lens
mounted glucose sensor was reported to measure tear glucose.
However, time delay and correlation between tear and blood
glucose is uncertain [9]. The smallest size microsystem for continuous glucose monitoring is designed and consumes about 6
μW. However, the efficiency of on-chip antenna is much lower
and glucose sensors are not sufficiently accurate using a conventional CMOS microfabrication process [12]. Compared with
the method that analyzes the various light reflections to measure
the glucose level, electrochemical sensors have advantages including avoiding optical interference and can measure electrical
signal directly with no large area optical device.
In this paper, we present a wireless powered, long-term implantable sensor microsystem based on RFID for real-time glucose monitoring (see Fig. 1). The microsystem includes an electrochemical glucose sensor, a ferrite antenna, a high-frequency
(HF) front end, a digital baseband, and a sensor interface circuit. The sensor tag can detect the glucose level and wirelessly
transmit the sensor data to an external reader. This sensor tag
system can be seen as a low-cost long-term glucose monitoring
device.
In the following sections, the design considerations and the
system architecture are described in Section II. Then, the circuit
design and implementation are presented in Section III. In Section IV, the experimental results of the sensor tag system are
shown, followed by the conclusion in Section V.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
A. Design Consideration
An implantable glucose sensor tag system including an antenna, a glucose sensor and its interface circuits can be implanted
underneath the skin. The implantation site is targeted to be about
3 mm in the subcutaneous tissue where the sensor tag can be
in contact with interstitial fluid. The glucose content can have a
good correlation with the blood glucose concentration [13]. The
communication distance between the sensor tag and a reader
is typically 1 cm. The distance is determined by the coupling
efficiency of near-field coils, the power conversion efficiency

911

of the HF front end, and the power consumption of the sensor
tag system. There are several practical challenges, which should
be considered. First, the system uses a 13.56-MHz carrier frequency for RF inductive power. The challenges in an integrated
RF energy harvesting system include designing an efficiency
rectifier, a low-power regulator, and a large on-chip storage capacitor. Second, normal glucose level in human blood level is 4
mM to 7 mM. In the design, the electrochemical sensor generates current in the order of nA in a reasonable range of 0–30 mM
glucose levels for all hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic events.
The weak current is easily interfered by different noise sources,
such as the supply noise and environment noise. Therefore, accurate detection of a weak current signal requires a stable supply
voltage, a reference voltage, and a low noise sensor interface circuit. Third, the size of sensor tag is a key issue in the success of
the implantable monitoring system. A small-size system can be
packaged and be implanted by invasive surgery. Therefore, for
cheaper cost and a longer in vivo monitoring lifetime, it becomes
more important to reduce off-chip components and minimize the
active area of the integrated interface chip. Finally, when a sensor system is to be implanted in body, some other issues should
be taken into account, such as biocompatible package material
and the effects of the body’s immune system and so on. More
details about the implantable issues can be found in [11].
B. System Architecture
Fig. 2 shows the overall architecture of wireless powered,
long-term implantable sensor microsystem based on RFID technology. The sensor tag integrates an RF front end, a digital
baseband, glucose, and temperature sensors readout circuits. In
wireless power transmission, two coils that are inductively coupled are used. One is connected to an external reader and the
other is connected to the implantable sensor tag.
The front end is mainly responsible for wireless energy harvesting and data transceiver. It receives external RF power
through a tuned LC matching circuit, followed by a voltage
rectifier to generate a dc supply voltage for the whole system.
The sensor readout circuit is designed based on switchedcapacitor circuit technology. Through digital switches and selection, the sensor readout circuit can be reconfigured by reader
commands to convert different types of signals including glucose sensor and temperature sensor to voltage output. The output
voltage is digitalized by 10-bit sigma-delta analog to digital converter (ADC). The signals from two sensors are processed by
the same readout circuits to minimize the power and size.
The digital baseband decodes the commands from a reader
and manages the operation of the microsystem.
III. CIRCUIT DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
A. Near-Field Antenna Design
Implantable applications require small coils for wireless
power and data transmission. Since the coil structure affects
quality factor (Q), coupling coefficient (K), and inductance, it
must be carefully picked to suit the implanted devices. Typical
dimension for cylinder coils are d × l = 5 × 0.75 mm. The

912

Fig. 2.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Block diagram of the wireless sensor tag architecture.

mutual inductance that is decisive for the power supply of
the transponder falls sharply due to its proportionality with the
cross-sectional area of the coil. For an implantable sensor tag,
a ferrite antenna is used for the near-field inductive link. By
inserting a ferrite material with a high permeability μ into the
coil, the mutual inductance can be significantly increased, thus
compensating for the small cross-sectional area of the coil. The
quality factor and coupling coefficient of the sensor tag and
external reader coils are optimized to achieve the maximum
power transfer efficiency so that sufficient energy is powered to
the microsystem. The inductance of a ferrite antenna [14] can
be calculated according to following equation:
L=

μ0 μe A · N 2
l

(1)

where μ0 is the permeability of vacuum, μe is relative permeability of ferrite material, N is turns of coil, A is the effective
cross-sectional area of ferrite material, l is the effective magnetic path length of ferrite material, and L is the inductance of
antenna coil with ferrite material.
B. Energy Harvesting and Load Modulation
In the wireless passive sensor tag, a rectifier is designed to
rectify the received RF signal and to charge up a storage capacitor to an unregulated dc supply voltage. A three-stage highefficiency differential CMOS rectifier with an active threshold
voltage (Vth ) cancellation technique [15] is designed for RF energy harvesting. Power conversion efficiency (PCE) is important
for wirelessly powered implantable application, considering the
power loss in the human tissue. Experimental tissue attenuation
can be obtain from [16]. The attenuation of 13.56-MHz electromagnetic wave in tissue is about 10% when the thickness of
tissue is assumed to be 5 mm.
The rectifier can automatically minimize the effective Vth of
diode-connected MOS transistors in a forward bias condition
and increase it in a reverse bias condition by a cross-coupled
differential circuit configuration. The differential rectifier reduces both the effective ON-resistance and the reverse-leakage
current, and simultaneously, achieves a high PCE, especially

Fig. 3.

Schematic diagram of the on-chip regulator.

under small RF input power. A peak power efficiency of the
rectifier is approximately 45% with 30 kΩ load. At the same
time, a limiter [17] is employed to clamp the input power and
keeps the rectifier output voltage below 1.8 V in case that the
tag is exposed to a high strength field.
Load shift key (LSK) is used to transmit the sensor data back
to the reader. Modulated reflection is achieved by varying the
load impedance of the passive wireless link, which is equivalent
to the RF front end input impedance of the sensor tag system.
The reader may use the variation of the voltage to decode the
backward link signals.
C. Voltage Regulator
The voltage regulator is an important circuit in wireless implantable application. The regulator should produce a clean and
stable supply voltage. Since the power received by the sensor tag is limited, a low-power low-dropout regulator (LDO)
is required. Fig. 3 shows the schematic of the regulator. Stability enhanced low-dropout regulators are design to adapt
varying load current in different work status. To minimize the
interference from digital circuits into analog circuits, ALDO and

XIAO et al.: IMPLANTABLE RFID SENSOR TAG TOWARD CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING

Fig. 6.

Schematic diagram of the clock extractor.

Fig. 7.

Schematic diagram of the POR.

913

Fig. 4. Measured output voltage of rectifier and regulator versus different
input power (a limiter clamps the voltage below 1.8 V).

Fig. 5.

Block diagram of the demodulation circuit.

DLDO are designed for analog and digital circuits, respectively.
Separated regulators provides 40-dB isolation between analog
and digital circuits. The supply voltage for digital circuits is set
to 1 V, which reduces dynamic power by 30% compared with
1.2 V. The LDOs use a flipped voltage follower [18] as an output stage to improve load regulation and avoid requiring a large
decoupling capacitor. Fig. 4 shows the measured output voltage
of rectifier and regulator versus different input RF power.
D. Demodulation
An ASK demodulator [19] is commonly used to demodulate
the commands data from an external reader at low data rate.
As shown in Fig. 5, it is composed of a voltage rectifier, a
diode envelope detector, a low-pass filter, an average detector,
and a comparator. As the received signal strength may vary
when the distance between the reader and the sensor tag, a
dynamic reference threshold for comparison is required. The
dynamic threshold is given by the average value of the envelope.
Average generation is obtained with an integrated RC filter. The
demodulator can demodulate a minimum input signal level of
100 mV at a data rate of 26.5 kbps and a modulation depth from
10% to 100%.
E. Clock Extraction and POR Generation
For an HF tag system, it is easy to extract the clock from
the carrier wave. The reason is that the data rate compared to
the carrier frequency is not small in the HF system. When the
circuit is implemented, two problems must be considered. First,
since the input of the clock extraction is an antenna, the ASK
modulation will cause the amplitude to drop very low. Second,

during the load backward modulation, the antenna amplitude
will also be dragged to low, so it is important to maintain the
clock extraction output for small RF signal level. Fig. 6 shows
the clock extraction circuit, which consists of a high bandwidth
differential comparator and following inverters. The 13.56-MHz
clock is extracted from the carrier and directly fed into the digital
baseband. The circuit can extract the clock from a minimum of
50-mV amplitude signal from the antenna.
Power on reset (POR) has two major functions. One is to generate the whole chip reset signal when the sensor tag is powered
up by HF electronic magnetic field. The other is to protect the
chip circuit from malfunction when the supply voltage drops
under a certain level. The critical problem is the power consumption of the POR circuit itself. Fig. 7 shows a low power
POR circuit. The quiescent current is less than 100 nA. MP2
and C0 form the delay circuit to generate the delay time needed
to ensure a reliable stable supply.
F. Potentiostat
Amperometric electrochemical sensors are able to generate a
current linearly proportional to glucose concentration and typically consist of three electrodes namely the working, reference,
and counter electrodes (WE, RE, and CE, accordingly). The
active area of glucose sensor in this system is 0.15 mm2 and
the sensor sensitivity is 0.01 μA · mm−2 · mM−1 when the glucose concentration is in the range of 0 ∼ 30 mM. The needed
sensitivity for practical in vivo applications depends on application requirements and the features of sensor systems. Glucose
oxidase (GOD) enzyme and glucose permeable membrane are

914

Fig. 8.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Schematic diagram of the current mirror-based potentiostat.

used to create a glucose sensitive layer on the WE area. This glucose sensitive layer rejects water molecules through a semipermeable membrane and allows glucose molecules through it. The
ratio of glucose molecules versus water molecules is about 50:1.
The number of sensing electrons is effectively reduced in the
entire redox process, greatly reducing the required potentiostat
operating voltage. More importantly, it improves the lifetime of
the electrochemical sensor. In this design, the sensing current
accuracy is 0.1 nA. The 0.01 μA · mm−2 · mM−1 sensitivity glucose sensor generates current around 0–20 nA in a reasonable
range of 0–30 mM glucose levels. The narrow dynamic current
range reduces complexity of the sensor interface circuits including the potentiostat and the ADC to minimize the power and size.
From an electronic standpoint, an electrochemical sensor can be
regarded as a network of impedances and active elements. Fig. 8
shows the small signal equivalent circuit of an electrochemical
sensor [20].
A current mirror-based potentiostat is designed (see Fig. 8). It
is composed of two main subcircuit. The conventional potential
control loop guarantees a fixed potential between the WE and
RE (Vcell, 200 mV in this design). In order to maximize the
stability of the potential-control loop, A1 should be a singlestage amplifier that introduces only one low-frequency pole
into the loop. The double-layer capacitance of the electrode
interface is very large, which is the dominant pole of this loop
[21]. To achieve good loop stability, the first nondominant pole
is pushed to high frequencies (the pole of A1, in this design). A
current mirror with a high gain error cancellation is designed, by
adding the operation amplifier A2 to mirror the sensor output
current IF to IF1 accurately. The current mirror isolates the
potentiostat and the measurement circuits that release design
constrains for both sides. The copied current IF1 is translated
into differential current Ip and In to resist the common mode
interference.
To measure the accuracy of the on-chip potentiostat, a commercial potentiostat is used to measure and calibrate the output
current of the glucose sensor at the same time. Fig. 9 shows the
measured differential output current of the current mirror versus
the calibrated sensor output. The liner correlation coefficient is
0.999936.

Fig. 9.

Fig. 10.

Measured potentiostat differential output current versus sensor current.

Schematic diagram of the on-chip temperature sensor.

G. Temperature Sensor
The glucose sensor in this study has a temperature coefficient around 1 nA/ ◦ C, so a bipolar junction transistor (BJT)based temperature sensor is integrated to provide real-time
temperature data for reference, as shown in Fig. 10. For body
temperature sensing from 32 ◦ C to 42 ◦ C, necessary dynamic

XIAO et al.: IMPLANTABLE RFID SENSOR TAG TOWARD CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING

Fig. 11.

Fig. 12.

Schematic diagram of the inverter-based OTA.

Fig. 13.

Measured the 10-bit sigma-delta ADC static characteristic.

915

Schematic diagram of the sigma delta ADC.

range of the ADC is about 7-bit to reach 0.1 ◦ C resolution.
The temperature sensor can also be used outside the body.
Therefore, for a reasonable temperature range from 20 ◦ C to
50 ◦ C, the ADC should have at least a 9-bit dynamic range to
achieve 0.1 ◦ C resolution. From the temperature-dependent ratio of bipolar transistors: where VBE is the base-emitter voltage
and ΔVBE is the VBE difference between two transistors (in this
design, k varies from 11 to 13 over temperature range from
20 ◦ C to 50 ◦ C), a linear temperature coefficient can be used to
indicate the temperature
α
α · ΔVBE
α
=
μ=
=
VBE + αΔVBE VBE /ΔVBE + α
K +α

(2)

where α is a gain factor, which can be trimmed to compensate
for ΔVBE spread [22]. Chopping and dynamic element matching technology [23] is used to suppress mismatch and process
variations.
H. Sigma-Delta ADC
A 10-bit differential low-voltage low-power incremental
sigma-delta ADC (see Fig. 11) is designed to digitize the output of both the glucose sensor and the temperature sensor (in
time division, configured by reader commands). The differential structure provides both rejection to common mode interference, suppression to clock feed, and charge injection. Pseudodifferential inverter-based integrators [24] are used in the ADC,
achieving a minimum operation supply voltage of 0.85 V and
3 μW-power consumption at 214-kHz switching frequency. Unfortunately this integrator is of the sensitive PVT variation and
suffers from bad 1/f noise and offset performance. Dynamic
current biasing and autozeroing techniques are introduced to
overcome these drawbacks.
Fig. 12 shows the inverter-based amplifier, which draws
400 nA and has a dc gain of 80 dB. Fig. 13 shows the 10bit ADC static characteristic, achieved with 0.6-LSB INL and
0.8-LSB DNL at 214-kHz switching frequency.

I. Digital Baseband
The digital baseband (see Fig. 14) realizes signal processing,
as well as generating the clocks and control signals for the sensor
interface circuit and sigma-delta ADC. The digital baseband
is mainly divided into eight modules: 1) the clock generator
module (CGM) is to divide clocks from 13.56 MHz; 2) the
demodulator module is to demodulate commands; 3) the control
unit (CU) is to decode commands from the reader; 4) the fist
input fist output (FIFO) is to store data from the sigma-delta
ADC for sending out when data ready register is set; 5) the
sensor control (SC) is to generate control signals for the system;
6) the cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is to detect error and
guarantee the data integrity; 7) the modulation module (MOD)
is to send sensor data to a reader by load modulation; and 8) the
power management module (PMW) is to manage the power and
distribute the clocks of the system.
The operation of the sensor tag is able to be controlled between different states by user commands. The air interface is
complied with the ISO 15693 standard. The tag supports inventory, and write and read commands. The sensor tags are uniquely
identified by a 64-bit Unique Identifier (UID). The UID is used
to address each sensor tag uniquely and individually, during the
anticollision loop and for one-to-one exchange between a sensor
tag and the reader. The external reader can write configuration

916

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 16.

Fig. 14.

Chip microphotograph of the proposed circuits.

Block diagram of the digital baseband.

Fig. 17. Measured waveforms of the demodulated command, backscattered
sensor data by load modulation, and voltage of reader antenna.

back to reader. After the sensor tag is uniquely identified by the
UID, the reader can send operation instructions and configuration information by a write command. Various clocks and control signals are generated to control the sensor interface and the
sigma-delta ADC. The sensor tag then goes to the processing
state. After the ADC completes data conversion, the sampled
sensor data are written to 32-bit registers and the sensor tag
goes to the transmission state. Finally, the reader gets the sensor
data by sending a read request command. Data transmission is
encoded through a CRC to guarantee the data integrity.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Fig. 15. (a) Measurement setup of the sensor tag and wirelessly measured
glucose readout data in-vitro experiment. (b) Photograph of the packaged device
for long-term implantable glucose monitoring and external HF reader.

information to the sensor tags. Such information can provide
maximum flexibility for the sensor to work and for the reader to
obtain data from the sensor tag.
The operation states of the sensor tag system mainly include
receiving, processing, and transmitting. The state machine controls the operations of the sensor tag system. When it receives
the carrier signal, the sensor tag goes to the receive state after the
baseband is reset by a POR signal and the clock is generated.
After the inventory request command, an UID is transmitted

The proposed circuits for 13.56-MHz sensor tag has been fabricated in the SMIC 0.13-μm 1P8M CMOS technology. Fig. 16
shows the chip microphotograph of the proposed circuits. The
chip area including on-chip storage capacitor is only 1.2 mm × 2
mm and has a power consumption of 50 μW.
In the system testing, a PCB-based tag prototype consisting
of an antenna and the fully integrated sensor tag chip, as shown
in Fig. 15(b), is connected to the three electrodes of the glucose sensor. The air interface is complied with the ISO15693
standard. In Fig. 15(b), an HF RFID reader is used to communicate with the sensor tag. The potentiostat and the ADC can
be separately controlled by writing respective control word to
the tag. The energy coupled to the ferrite antenna is converted
to dc to supply power to the microsystem. The commands from
the reader are demodulated for the system configuration. The

XIAO et al.: IMPLANTABLE RFID SENSOR TAG TOWARD CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING

917

TABLE II
COMPARISON WITH PRIOR ARTS

Carrier Frequency
Protocol
Modulation scheme
Noise Cancellation

Glucose level

Fig. 18.

Measured sensor current versus glucose concentration.

TABLE I
MEASUREMENT PERFORMANCE
Parameter

Performance

Technology
Supply

analog
digital

Carrier frequency
Protocol
Demodulation scheme
Modulation scheme
Active area
Power
Total
HF Frontend
ADC
Potentiostat
Digital baseband
Efficiency
rectifier
regulator
Glucose sensor
Area
Sensitivity
Glucose level
Current range
10-bit ΣΔ ADC
Current range
ENOB
INL/DNL
Potentiostat
Linearity (R 2 )
Temperature Sensor
Type
Range
Accuracy
Implant coil
Ferrite material
Diameter

SMIC 1P8M 0.13-μm CMOS
1.2 V
1.0 V
13.56 MHz
ISO 15693 RFID standard
ASK(modulation depth is 10% or 100%)
LSK
1.2 mm × 2 mm
50 μW
28 μW
3 μW
4 μW
15 μW
45%(max)
90%
0.15 mm2
0.01 μA · mm2 · mM−1
0–30 mM
20 nA
0–40 nA
9.3 bit
±0.6 LSB/±0.8 LSB
0.999936
BJT
20 ◦ C − 50 ◦ C
0.5 ◦ C
NiZn
1.2 mm

clock is extracted from the carrier wave to provide clock to the
baseband and divided into a particular clock for the sigma-delta
ADC. The demodulator supports a modulation depth of 10% to
100%. The digitized sensor data are sent back by load modulation. The glucose sensor tag can be powered over 3 cm from
the external HF reader with an effective isotropically radiated
power of 20 dBm at 13.56 MHz in free space. Theoretically, the
sensor tag can receive power larger than −4 dBm to power the
sensor tag in a distance of about 2.5 cm in vivo.
The efficiencies of the rectifier and LDO regulator are measured as 45% and 90%, respectively. The pseudodifferential
inverter-based ADC achieves a minimum operation supply voltage of 0.85 V and 3-μW power consumption with less than
0.6-LSB INL and 0.8-LSB DNL at 214-kHz switching frequency.

Sensing area (mm2 )
Glucose sensitivity
(μA · mm−2 · mM−1 )
Measure current range
Temperature Sensor
Energy sensitivity
Power (μW)
Chip size (mm2 )
Storage capacitor
on-chip

Fig. 19.

This Study

[10]

[9]

[12]

13.56 MHz
ISO 15693
LSK
Auto-zero
and
chopper
0–30
mM(blood)

13.56 MHz
ISO 15693
LSK
N/A

2.4 GHz
N/A
LSK
N/A

900 MHz
N/A
LSK
N/A

0–40
mM(blood)

0–2
mM(tear)

0.15
0.01

1.488
N/A

0.22
1.65

0–20
mM(tissue
fluid)
0.24
N/A

40 nA
Yes
−4 dBm
50
2.4
Yes

1.16 μA
Yes
N/A
250
9.98
No

750 nA
No
0 dBm
3
0.5
Yes

45 nA
No
N/A
6
1.96
Yes

IPGTT in rats.

In order to test the performance of the proposed sensor tag
monitoring system in measuring glucose concentration, a Sigma
P-3813 phosphate buffered solution (pH 7.4) with 330-mM
NaCl was used. In the human body, normal glucose level is
4–7 mM. This range for diabetic patient, such as hypoglycemic
(0–2 mM) and hyperglycemic (10–30 mM), is narrow. Therefore, in our experiment, we increased the glucose concentration
of the solution from 0 to 30 mM, by gradually adding glucose to
the solution. After settling the sensor current to its final value (in
approximately 2 min), the glucose sensor data were measured
using the wireless sensor monitoring system.
The measured waveforms of the demodulated command,
backscattered sensor data by load modulation, and voltage of
the reader antenna are shown in Fig. 17. Fig. 18 shows measured
sensor current versus glucose concentration using the wireless
sensor tag monitoring system.
Table I summarizes the measured performance of the sensor
tag and Table II compares this study with the state-of-art device
for continuous glucose monitoring.
A continuous in vivo measurement in an animal has already
been completed. Three-month old male Wistar rats are employed
in this test. An intra-peritoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT)

918

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

[25] was carried out after a 12-h fasting period. Then, the sensor tag is used for continuous glucose monitoring which lasted
for about 4 h. The measured result is shown in Fig. 19. After the intraperitoneal injection of 50% glucose (1 g/kg body
weight) at the point of 30 min, the value of blood glucose in
rats rises up to 25 mM rapidly. Then, it drops gradually. For
the purpose of verification, the blood glucose level is also simultaneously tested by a commercial glucometer at the points
of 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2.5, and 3 h. Both glucose excursion match
well.
V. CONCLUSION
Automated and continuous glucose monitoring technical is
required both by clinical and patient care. This paper presents
an electrochemical-sensor-based, wireless powered implantable
microsystem for real-time glucose monitoring. The sensor tag
employs an electrochemical sensor, a winding ferrite core antenna, a 13.56-MHz RFID front end, a potentiostat, a 10-bit
sigma-delta ADC, an on-chip temperature sensor, and a digital
baseband for protocol processing and control. The air interface is complied with the ISO15693 standard. The integrated
chip fabricated in SMIC 0.13-μm CMOS process occupies a
die area of 1.2 mm × 2 mm and consumes 50 μW. The highly
integrated, low power, simple sensor tag is a low-cost solution
for implantable glucose monitoring applications, which are realtime, direct, and accurate. Note that the glucose sensor tag works
well in both phosphate buffered solution with added glucose and
the animal body. Our future work includes improvement of the
system-on-chip performance and clinical tests.
REFERENCES
[1] International diabetic federation. (2006, Dec.). [Online]. Available:
http://www.idf.org/
[2] S. Zimmermann, D. Fienbork, B. Stoeber, A. W. Flounders, and D. Liepmann, “A microneedle-based glucose monitor: fabricated on a waferlevel using in-device enzyme immobilization,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf.
TRANSDUCERS, Solid-State Sens., Actuators Microsyst., 2003, vol. 1,
pp. 99–102.
[3] F. Ricci, D. Moscone, and G. Palleschi, “Ex vivo continuous glucose
monitoring with microdialysis technique: The example of glucoday,” IEEE
Sens. J., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 63–70, Jan. 2008.
[4] A. Vaz, A. Ubarretxena, I. Zalbide, D. Pardo, H. Solar, A. Garcia-Alonso,
and R. Berenguer, “Full passive UHF tag with a temperature sensor suitable for human body temperature monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 95–99, Feb. 2010.
[5] T. Akin, K. Najafi, and R. M. Bradley, “A wireless implantable multichannel digital neural recording system for a micromachined sieve electrode,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 109–118, Jan. 1998.
[6] IEEE/ISO/IEC Draft Standard for Information Technology—Smart Transducer Interface for Sensors and Actuators—Transducers to Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Systems Communication Protocols and
Transducer Electronic Data Sheet Formats, P21451-7, pp. 1–91, 2011.
[7] A. Heller, “Implanted electrochemical glucose sensors for the management of diabetes,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 153–175,
1999.
[8] S. Kiseok, H. Unsoo, P. Seongwook, and Y. Hoi-Jun, “An impedance and
multi-wavelength near-infrared spectroscopy ic for non-invasive blood
glucose estimation,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Circuits Digest Tech. Papers,
2014, pp. 1–2.
[9] L. Yu-Te, Y. Huanfen, B. Parviz, and B. Otis, “A 3 uw wirelessly powered
CMOS glucose sensor for an active contact lens,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. Digest Tech. Papers, 2011, pp. 38–40.
[10] A. D. Dehennis, M. Mailand, D. Grice, S. Getzlaff, and A. E. Colvin, “A
near-field-communication (NFC) enabled wireless fluorimeter for fully

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

implantable biosensing applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Digest Tech. Papers, 2013, pp. 298–299.
M. M. Ahmadi and G. A. Jullien, “A wireless-implantable microsystem
for continuous blood glucose monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 169–180, Jun. 2009.
M. H. Nazari, M. Mujeeb-U-Rahman, and A. Scherer, “An implantable
continuous glucose monitoring microsystem in 0.18um CMOS,” in Proc.
Symp. VLSI Circuits Digest Tech. Papers, 2014, pp. 1–2.
E. Kulcu, J. A. Tamada, G. Reach, R. O. Potts, and M. J. Lesho, “Physiological differences between interstitial glucose and blood glucose measured
in human subjects,” Diabetes Care, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 2405–2409, 2003.
F. Klaus, ‘RFID handbook: Fundamentals and applications in contactless
smart cards, radio frequency identification and near-field communication,”
2010.
K. Kotani, A. Sasaki, and T. Ito, “High-efficiency differential-drive CMOS
rectifier for UHF RFIDs,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 11,
pp. 3011–3018, Nov. 2009.
H. Yu, “A wireless microsystem for multichannel neural recording microprobes,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA, 2004.
G. K. Balachandran and R. E. Barnett, “A 110 nA voltage regulator system
with dynamic bandwidth boosting for RFID systems,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 2019–2028, Sep. 2006.
P. Hazucha, T. Karnik, B. A. Bloechel, C. Parsons, D. Finan, and S. Borkar,
“Area-efficient linear regulator with ultra-fast load regulation,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 933–940, Apr. 2005.
N. Gay and W. Fischer, “A compact rf / analog front-end for microwave
RFID transponders,” in Proc. Semicond. Conf. Dresden, 2011, pp. 1–4.
M. M. Ahmadi and G. A. Jullien, “A very low power CMOS potentiostat
for bioimplantable applications,” in Proc. 5th Int. Workshop System-onChip Real-Time Appl., 2005, pp. 184–189.
M. M. Ahmadi and G. A. Jullien, “Current-mirror-based potentiostats
for three-electrode amperometric electrochemical sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1339–1348, Jul. 2009.
K. Souri, C. Youngcheol, and K. A. A. Makinwa, “A CMOS temperature
sensor with a voltage calibrated inaccuracy of 0.15 ºC (3) from -55 ºC to
125 ºC ,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 292–301, Jan
2013.
G. C. M. Meijer, W. Guijie, and F. Fruett, “Temperature sensors and
voltage references implemented in CMOS technology,” IEEE Sens. J.,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 225–234, Oct. 2001.
C. Youngcheol, K. Souri, and K. A. A. Makinwa, “A 6.3 uw 20-bit incremental zoom-ADC with 6 ppm INL and 1 uv offset,” IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3019–3027, Dec. 2013.
L. C. Solberg, W. Valdar, D. Gauguier, G. Nunez, A. Taylor, S. Burnett,
C. Arboledas-Hita, P. Hernandez-Pliego, S. Davidson, and P. Burns, “A
protocol for high-throughput phenotyping, suitable for quantitative trait
analysis in mice,” Mammalian Genome, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 129–146, 2006.
Zhibin Xiao (S’15) was born in Fujian, China, in
1987. He received the B.S. degree in electronic science and technology from National Huaqiao University, Xiamen, China, in 2011, and the M.S. degree
in integrated circuit engineering from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 2013, where he is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics.
His research interests include low power analog
and mixed signal integrated circuit design for wireless implantable sensing applications.

Xi Tan was born Changzhou, China, in 1978. He received the B.S. degree in physics from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2000, the M.S. degree in
microelectronics from the Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands, in 2005, and the Ph.D
degree in microelectronics from Fudan University,
Shanghai, China, in 2008.
From 2008, he served as an Assistant Researcher
of ASIC & Systems State Key Laboratory, and an Associate Director of Auto-ID Lab, Fudan University.
He is currently working on the CMOS RF transceiver
and system-on-chip for personal communication and UHF band RFID. His research interests include CMOS RF and mixed signal integrated circuit design
and wireless communications.

XIAO et al.: IMPLANTABLE RFID SENSOR TAG TOWARD CONTINUOUS GLUCOSE MONITORING

Xianliang Chen received the M.S. degree from the
Department of Microeconomics, Xidian University,
Xi’an, China, in 2012. He is currently working toward
the M.S. degree in the Microelectronics Department,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include sensors interface circuits, precision analog and sigma delta ADC.

Sizheng Chen was born in Jiangxi, China, in 1991.
He received the B.S. degree in electrical science and
technology from National Henu University, Henan,
China, in 2013. He is currently working toward the
M.S. degree in integrated circuit engineering at Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include low power analog
and potentiostat design for wireless implantable sensing applications.

Zijian Zhang was born in Zibo, China. in 1990. He
received the B.S. degree from Shangdong University in 2012. He is currently working toward the M.S.
degree in the School of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include on digital basband
design for HF reader and tag.

Hualei Zhang was born in Shanxi, China, in 1989.
He received the B.S. degree in integrated circuit design and integrated system from the Xi’an University
of Post and Telecommunications, Xi’an, China, in
2012, and the M.S. degree in integrated circuit engineering from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in
2014, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree in microelectronics.
His research interests include low power analog
and RF circuit design for RFID tags application.

Junyu Wang (M’09) was born in Xiangtan, China,
on August 14, 1973. He received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, China, in 2002.
During 2003–2005, he was a Postdoctoral in Fudan
University, Shanghai, China, doing research on anticounterfeit solutions based on RFID technology. During 2008–2009, he was a Visiting Associate Professor of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, doing research on the security
issues and solutions of Internet of Things. He is currently the Associate Director of Auto-ID Lab and an Associate Professor in
Fudan University. His research interests include RFID reader and tag design,
RFID anticollision algorithm, RFID security, RFID sensor tag, and Internet of
Things for food/drug safety.

919

Yue Huang (S’07) received the B.S. degree in transportation engineering from Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 1996, and the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering in 2007 and Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering in 2011, both from Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
His research interests include several aspects of
enzyme-based integrated biosensors, including digital/analog integrated circuits, biochemistry, electrochemistry, microfabrication, microfluidics, and microelectromechanical systems.
Dr. Huang is currently a Senior Research Associate, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA, since 2013.
Peng Zhang was born in Xian, China, on October 20,
1972. He received the M.D. degree and diploma from
the Xi’an Jiaotong University College of Medicine,
Xi’an, China, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in surgery
from the Fudan University College of Medicine,
Shanghai, China, in 1999.
He was a Postdoctoral fellow in the Department
of Surgery at the University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY, USA, from 1999 to 2001 and in the Department
of Surgery at the University of California at San Francisco, CA, USA, from 2001 to 2002. He is currently
a Professor and a Vice Chair of Surgery, the Founding Director of the Center
for Medical Research and Innovation at Shanghai Pudong Hospital and Fudan
University Pudong Medical Center, Shanghai. Besides his clinical practice in
bariatric surgery, his research interests include etiology, mechanism, diagnosis,
and innovative treatment of diabetes and obesity.
Lirong Zheng (M’01) received the Ph.D. degree in
electronic systems design from the Royal Institute of
Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, in 2001.
He is a Professor Chair in media electronics with
the KTH, a Founder and the Director of iPack VINN
Excellence Center, and a Senior Specialist of Ericsson Networks, Stockholm. Since then, he was at KTH
as a Research Fellow and a Project Leader with the
Laboratory of Electronics and Computer Systems. He
became an Associate Professor in electronic systems
design in 2003 and a Full Professor in media electronics at KTH in 2006. He has been a Guest Professor with the State Key
Laboratory of ASICs and Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, since
2008, and a distinguished Professor of Fudan University since 2010. He has
authored or coauthored more than 200 international reviewed publications, covering areas from electronic devices and thin film technologies, VLSI circuit and
system design, to electronic systems and wireless sensors.
His current research interests include electronic circuits and systems for
ambient intelligence and media applications, wireless SoC/SiP for sensing and
identification, and signal integrity issues in electronic systems.
Hao Min (M’09) was born in Kunshan, China, on
July 7, 1965. He received the Ph.D. degree from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 1991.
During 1995–1998, he was a Visiting Associate Professor at Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA, focusing on CMOS image sensors technologies. Meanwhile, he was a Consultant at a number of
IC design companies in Silicon Valley. From 1998 to
2005, he served as the Director of the State Key Laboratory of ASIC & System, Fudan University, where
he is currently the Director of the Auto-ID Lab. He
was General Manager of Shanghai Huahong Integrated Circuits Co., Ltd. during 1998–2006, where his team developed the first contact-less smart card chip,
which was successfully applied to the Shanghai Public Transportation System
and designed the chip for the second generation ID cards of China. He is the
Cofounder of Shanghai Quanray Electronics.
His research interests include SoC Architecture, software-defined technologies, integrated transceiver design, such as RFID, Zigbee, GSM/TDS-CDMA,
RF/analog mixed signal integrated circuits design, nonvolatile memory design,
digital signal processing, and Image processing. He has contributed more than
80 papers and more than 20 patents authorized or pending.

