920

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

A 0.33 nJ/bit IEEE802.15.6/Proprietary MICS/ISM
Wireless Transceiver With Scalable Data Rate
for Medical Implantable Applications
Ao Ba, Maja Vidojkovic, Kouichi Kanda, Nauman F. Kiyani, Maarten Lont, Xiongchuan Huang,
Xiaoyan Wang, Cui Zhou, Yao-Hong Liu, Ming Ding, Benjamin Büsze, Shoichi Masui,
Makoto Hamaminato, Hiroyuki Sato, Kathleen Philips, and Harmke de Groot

Abstract—This paper presents an ultra-low power wireless
transceiver specialized for but not limited to medical implantable
applications. It operates at the 402–405-MHz medical implant communication service band, and also supports the 420–450-MHz industrial, scientific, and medical band. Being IEEE 802.15.6 standard compliant with additional proprietary modes, this highly configurable transceiver achieves date rates from 11 kb/s to 4.5 Mb/s,
which covers the requirements of conventional implantable applications. The phase-locked loop-based transmitter architecture
is adopted to support various modulation schemes with limited
power budget. The zero-IF receiver has programmable gain and
bandwidth to accommodate different operation modes. Fabricated
in 40-nm CMOS technology with 1-V supply, this transceiver only
consumes 1.78 mW for transmission and 1.49 mW for reception.
The ultra-low power consumption together with the 15.6-compliant
performance in term of modulation accuracy, sensitivity, and interference robustness make this transceiver competent for various
implantable applications.
Index Terms—Biomedical communication, IEEE 802.15.6, implantable medical devices, low-power electronics, medical implant
communication service (MICS), transceivers.

I. INTRODUCTION
IRELESS communication technologies have found
great success on the market of personal mobile and
consumer electronics, which inspirits researchers to explore
new opportunities on different fields. Thanks to the Moore’s

W

Law, size and cost of wireless devices continually decrease,
whereas the capability is improving. Such technology trend will
enable fruitful new applications on biomedicine and healthcare.
The wireless implantable device is one of the most challenging
topics.
The main advantage of wireless implantable devices is the
flexibility. Unlike the inductive technologies which require additional bulk equipment to touch the skin of the patient, wireless
implantable technologies relax the restriction of space and time.
In hospital, patient’s movement will not be limited by wires, and
staff can focus on medical treatments without the disturbance
of additional instrument operations. The possibility of hospitalacquired infections is also reduced [1]. Furthermore, wireless
implantable devices will make the home healthcare feasible.
Medical monitoring can be remotely controlled and operated.
For example, an implant wireless sensor node can send the 24-h
heart rate or blood pressure data to the patient’s doctor via
a wearable hub or even his smartphone. With the wireless implantable technologies, patients’ quality of life will be enhanced,
and the cost reduction of medical monitoring is estimated over
$10 billion per year according to FCC [2].
Although the future is promising, there are several design
challenges for wireless implantable devices, which are discussed
below.
A. Low Power Consumption

Manuscript received November 4, 2014; revised February 3, 2015; accepted
March 10, 2015. Date of publication March 19, 2015; date of current version
May 7, 2015.
A. Ba, M. Vidojkovic, X. Wang, C. Zhou, Y.-H. Liu, M. Ding, B. Büsze, K.
Philips, and H. de Groot are with the Holst Centre/IMEC 5656 AE, Eindhoven
The Netherlands (e-mail: Ao.Ba@imec-nl.nl; Maja.Vidojkovic@imec-nl.nl;
XiaoYan.Wang@imec-nl.nl; Cui.Zhou@imec-nl.nl; Yao-hong.Liu@imec-nl.
nl; Ming.Ding@imec-nl.nl; Ben.Busze@imec-nl.nl; Kathleen.Philips@imecnl.nl; Harmke.deGroot@imec-nl.nl).
K. Kanda, S. Masui, M. Hamaminato, and H. Sato are with the Ubiquitous Platform Laboratories, Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Kawasaki 211-8588
Japan (e-mail: kouichi.kanda@jp.fujitsu.com; masui.shoichi@jp.fujitsu.com;
hamaminato.makoto@jp.fujitsu.com; sato.hiroyuki@jp.fujitsu.com).
N. F. Kiyani is with Catena Radio Design 5692 GA, Son en Breugel The
Netherlands (e-mail: nkiyani@catena.nl).
M. Lont is with NXP Semiconductors 5656 AE, Eindhoven The Netherlands (e-mail: maartenlont@gmail.com).
X. Huang is with Broadcom Corporation, San Diego, CA 92127 USA (e-mail:
coby.x.huang@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2414298

Table I [3] shows the power breakdown of a typical wireless medical sensor node. The wireless transceiver dominates
the overall power consumption. Improving the power efficiency of the wireless transceiver will dramatically increase
the battery life time for medical applications. Ultra-Low power
(ULP) wireless transceivers can even eliminate the bulk battery, and let the device self-sustaining with energy harvesting
technologies.
B. Variable Data Rate
Implantable devices require different data rates to communicate with the external world, due to various application scenarios. Multichannel electroencephalogram sensors or capsule
endoscopes need high data rate up to 1.5 Mb/s. The requirement
for blood pressure, saturation of peripheral oxygen (SpO2), or
electrocardiogram, on the other hand, is estimated to be less than
100 kb/s [4]. Dedicated transceiver design and optimization for

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BA et al.: 0.33 nJ/bit IEEE802.15.6/PROPRIETARY MICS/ISM WIRELESS TRANSCEIVER WITH SCALABLE DATA RATE

TABLE I
POWER BREAKDOWN OF A TYPICAL SENSOR NODE
Module
Sensor and readout
Analog-to-digital converter (ADC)
Microcontroller
Wireless transceiver
Power management

Portion of power consumption
7%
2%
2%
50%
39%

different applications will increase the development cost and
time-to-market. Therefore, wireless transceivers for implantable
medical applications shall be configurable for variable data rates
to fulfill multiple tasks.
C. Reliability and Security
The wireless communication in/around the human body encounters a complicated propagation environment. Human tissues have different dielectric constants, thickness, and characteristic impedance. The human body will reflect and absorb
electromagnetic waves, which causes different kinds of fading, like attenuation, delay, and phase shift. The movement of
human body also makes the wireless communication channel
time varying. Furthermore, the existing wireless communications around the human body are very crowed. Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and GSM signals act as strong interference for wireless
implantable transceivers. Under such circumstances, reliable
data transmission is vital as it directly affects doctor’s diagnosis
and patent’s health. The data security of wireless implantable
devices also raises many concerns as hackers may remotely control the device and gain access to patents’ health information.
Things can be even worse if the emergency medical response
is hindered by unauthorized users. A set of mandatory privacy
rules has been specified by the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 [5]. To protect patents’ privacy and
acquire public acceptance of wireless implantable technologies,
data security shall be considered as a basic design requirement,
even for the physical layer of a wireless implantable communication protocol.
As early as 1999, FCC has already created the medical implant communication service (MICS) band in the range of 402–
405-MHz. The maximum output power is limited to −16 dBm,
with the purpose of eliminating possible interference in the same
band and protecting human bodies. Each channel bandwidth is
set to 300 kHz for low data (LD) rate transmission. Most of
the state-of-the-art wireless implantable transceivers work at
this frequency band. These transceivers [6], [7] typically apply simple modulation schemes like amplitude-shift keying or
frequency-shift keying (FSK). Since the energy-detection architecture is chosen for signal demodulation, low power consumption is achieved at the cost of poor sensitivity and interference
robustness. Working in the proprietary mode without specific
security rules, these transceivers are exposed to unknown risks.
Due to the growing popularity of wireless medical devices,
FCC expanded the amount of spectrum in medical device radiocommunications Service to allow additional four 6-MHz channels from 413 to 457-MHz. Its technical term is medical micropower network (MMN). Because MMN devices will operate

921

on a secondary basis, they may not cause interference to and
must accept interference from primary users of these frequency
bands [8]. This restriction poses a challenge to wireless medical
devices to handle strong in-band interferences if they operates
in these frequency bands. Compared to the MICS band, the
wideband feature of MMN offers the possibility of increasing
data rate or using spread spectrum techniques for better security.
However, the transceiver architecture of MMN devices may be
different from MICS devices due to the discrepancy in bandwidth.
In 2012, IEEE 802.15.6 standard [9] was published as a standard for short range, wireless communications in the vicinity
of, or inside, a human body. It supports 402–405-MHz MICS
band and also 420–450-MHz industrial, scientific, and medical
(ISM) band used in Japan for wireless medical telemetry service.
Compared to personal area network standards like Bluetooth or
ZigBee, it is the first wireless body area network standard, so
the transmission power is limited to minimize the specific absorption rate (SAR) into human bodies. It also supports quality
of service, for example, to provide emergency messaging. The
security is also emphasized as a separate section in the standard.
In this study, a 15.6-compliant wireless implantable
transceiver with enhanced performance is proposed. First, a
best-in-class energy efficiency of 0.33 nJ/bit is achieved in the
proprietary high data rate mode, and the receiver power consumption is further optimized for lower data rate operation.
Second, to support medical applications that require higher data
rate, the maximum speed is extended to beyond the 15.6 standard. This transceiver has a configurable data rate from 11 kb/s to
4.5 Mb/s, covering most of the implantable medical applications.
Third, to accommodate extra path loss due to the shadowing effects from human bodies, the sensitivity is 5 to 10 dB better than
the 15.6 standard specification. The interference rejection performance is also optimized. Covering both the 402–405-MHz
MICS and 420–450-MHz ISM bands, this highly configurable
wireless transceiver achieves good performance with low power
consumption, which makes it qualified for demanding medical
implantable applications.
A preliminary version of this study has been reported in [10].
In this paper, more details are discussed, which are organized
as follows. The radio specification is analyzed and defined in
Section II. Section III describes the architecture selection of
the transceiver. Section IV explains the implementation of the
phase-locked loop (PLL)-based transmitter (TX) and the zero-IF
receiver (RX) in detail. Section V summarizes the measurement
results. Finally, Sections VI concludes the paper.

II. LINK BUDGET AND DESIGN SPECIFICATION
A. Link Budget Analysis
A top-level link budget analysis is crucial for the feasibility
study of a wireless implantable transceiver. Based on which,
design specifications and the system architecture are tradeoff
between efficiency and performance. The first step is to calculate
the path loss of the wireless communication channel in/around
human bodies. A typical implantable application scenario shown
in Fig. 1 has an implant depth of 1 cm with a hub-to-surface

922

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Application scenario of an implantable application.

Fig. 3. Minimum E b /N 0 requirements for modulation schemes defined in
IEEE 15.6.

implementation loss. For the proprietary LD rate mode, as the
SNR requirement is 4 dB lower, the NF can be relaxed to 10 dB.
Fig. 2.

Link budget analysis of an implantable transceiver.

B. Design Specification

distance of 1 m. The total path loss is estimated as 65.4 dB from
the fitting model in [11].
The MICS band allows at most −16-dBm effective isotropic
radiated power on the transmitter side. So the maximum received
power PR can be calculated as
PR = PEIPR − PPL + GR .

(1)

GR is the receiver antenna gain. An air-based halve-wave
dipole antenna is used in [10], and the measured gain is 2.1
dBi. To simplify the calculation and highlight the impact of the
receiver performance, GR is assumed to be 0 dBi. PPL represents the path loss and fading margin which are related to radio
channels. To successfully demodulate the data, the maximum
received power has to be larger than the sensitivity level, which
is determined by
Sensitivity = −174 + 10∗ log (BW) + SNR + NF + Loss.
(2)
The complete link budget analysis is shown in Fig. 2.
The minimum required signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio in (2) is
defined by
SNR =

DR
Eb
.
×
N0
BW

(3)

Eb /N0 is the ratio of energy-per-bit over noise spectral density, and DR/BW is the ratio of data rate and bandwidth. The
minimum Eb /N0 requirements for different modulation types
employed in IEEE 15.6 are shown in Fig. 3.
IEEE 15.6 standard defines the minimum sensitivity for different data rate modes. Based on the SNR requirements for
different modes, the noise figure (NF) of the receiver front-end
can be calculated from (2) to be at most 6 dB, assuming 6-dB

As discussed above, the wireless implantable transceiver
works in complicated environments. Besides the operation
modes defined in IEEE 15.6 standard, this transceiver also supports two proprietary modes dedicated for specific implantable
applications. To fulfill the demanding design requirements for
different application scenarios with a single transceiver, all the
design specifications must be carefully managed. The main parameters are summarized in Table II and explained as follows.
The IEEE 15.6 standard has different operation modes in the
402–405-MHz and 420–450-MHz bands. The 402–405-MHz
MICS band chooses differential phase-shift keying as modulation pattern, and the data rate varies from 75.9 to 455.4 kb/s. The
420–450-MHz ISM band uses the Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK) modulation scheme and supports a data rate from
75.9 to 187.5 kb/s. These two bands have a bandwidth of 300
and 320 kHz, respectively. Apart from the standard compliant
modes, two proprietary modes are included. By increasing the
spreading factor from 1 to 16, a LD rate mode is derived from
the 15.6 standard. Higher data rate is limited by the frequency
bandwidth. So 8 channels are combined into one 2.4-MHz band
for high date (HD) rate operation which can go up to 4.5 Mb/s.
In summary, a typical wireless implantable transceiver shall
tolerance a path loss of at least 64.5 dB. To successfully demodulate the data and fulfill the sensitivity requirements of IEEE
15.6 standard, the receiver requires at most 6-dB NF. Two proprietary modes are supported to extend the data rates for different
application scenarios.
III. TRANSCEIVER ARCHITECTURE
To cover all the design specifications listed in Table II, the
transceiver must be highly configurable for different modulation

BA et al.: 0.33 nJ/bit IEEE802.15.6/PROPRIETARY MICS/ISM WIRELESS TRANSCEIVER WITH SCALABLE DATA RATE

923

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE TRANSCEIVER DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Mode
Frequency (MHz)
Bandwidth (kHz)
Modulation
Data rate (kb/s)
Spreading factor
Tx transmitted power (dBm)
Rx sensitivity (dBm)
Rx NF (dB)

IEEE 15.6 compliant

300
DBPSK
75.9/151.8
2/1
< –16
−95/−92
6

402–405
300
DQPSK
303.6
1
< –16
−89
6

300
D8PSK
455.4
1
< –16
−83
6

Fig. 5.
Fig. 4.

Illustration of mixer-based and PLL-based transmitters.

schemes, data rates, and bandwidths. The transceiver architecture has to be chosen carefully, a balance needs to be found
between performance and power consumption. The first part of
this section discusses the transmitter architecture, and then the
receiver architecture is introduced.
A. Transmitter Architecture
Conventional phase/frequency modulation transmitters can
be realized in either mixer-based or PLL-based architectures
[12]. The mixer-based architecture is shown in Fig. 4(a). The
waveform is generated by the digital baseband (DBB) and then
converted to analog domain. After the analog low-pass filters
(LPFs), it is up-converted to radio frequency (RF) by a quadrature mixer and then amplified by a linear power amplifier (PA).
Although this architecture is popular due to its universality, it
is more susceptible to various analog imperfections, such as the
noise, nonlinearity, mismatch, and process/voltage/temperature
variations. The performance also highly depends on the I/Q accuracy of the quadrature local oscillator (LO). Complex design
techniques and higher power consumption are often required
to guarantee the signal quality. Extra calibration circuits which
are needed to compensate various non-ideal effects increase the
silicon area and system complexity.

420–450
320
GMSK
75.9/151.8/187.5
2/1/1
–10
−90/−87/−84
6

LD rate

HD rate

402–405
300
DBPSK
11
16
< –16
−95
10

402–405
2400
D8PSK
4500
1
< –16
−83
6

Illustration of low-IF and zero-IF receivers.

On the other hand, the PLL-based architecture is more suitable for narrow-band low-power systems due to its excellent
hardware/power efficiency. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the baseband
I/Q data is first converted to amplitude (AM) and phase (PM)
in digital domain. Amplitude information is directly applied to
the PA, whereas the phase information relies on two-point modulation through the PLL and an extra frequency-modulation
digital-to-analog converter (FM-DAC), respectively. The bandwidth of the first path is limited by the PLL bandwidth. To
support higher data rate, the second high-pass path directly modulates the voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) frequency via the
FM-DAC. Getting rid of the demanding analog/RF blocks like
filters and mixers, the PLL-based architecture is insensitive to
many nonideal effects. No quadrature RF carriers are needed,
so the power consumption is also reduced. Different modulation
schemes and data rates are fully supported as the modulation
data is purely generated in digital domain.
B. Receiver Architecture
To demodulate PSK signals, there are two types of receiver
architectures, heterodyne low-IF and homodyne zero-IF. Both
of them have advantages and disadvantages. Fig. 5(a) shows the
low-IF receiver architecture with a sliding-IF frequency plan as
an example. Since the quadrature signals are generated at a lower
frequency by the divider, the power consumption of the LO is

924

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 7.

Fig. 6.

Block diagram of the analog front end.

reduced. The RF signals are not directly down converted to dc,
so the dynamic dc offset caused by LO reradiation is alleviated
[13]. The main disadvantage is the image rejection problem.
Although an external high-Q band-pass filter can be inserted
before the frequency down conversion, this approach will raise
the overall power consumption, cost, and the form factor, which
are all important for implantable devices. Another approach
is to implement a polyphase complex filter after the mixer to
remove image signals. However, poly-phase filters [14], [15]
are quite power-hungry and area-consuming, not to mention the
complicated calibration algorithm for mismatch.
Fig. 5(b) shows a simplified block diagram of the zero-IF
architecture. This architecture directly down converts the RF
signal to dc, so it is free from image interference. One of the
disadvantages is that quadrature LO signals are directly generated at the RF frequency. So the power consumption of the
LO generation is higher. Fortunately, the targeted 400-MHz operation is relatively low frequency, so the power consumption
of the quadrature-phase LO generation mentioned above is acceptable. The dc offset, especially the dynamic offset caused
by the LO reradiation, is another design challenge. There are
two approaches to tackle it. First, the ADC dynamic range is
enhanced to tolerance large dc offset. Second, an offset cancellation DAC is implemented inside the LPF to compensate the dc
offset through automatic calibration. Since the data is directly
down converted to dc, the flicker noise from MOS transistors
will accumulate and degrade the NF. This is unavoidable for
choosing zero-IF architecture for lowest power consumption.
Careful circuit design is needed to minimize its degradation.
The overall transceiver architecture is illustrated in Fig. 6. The
complete transceiver consists of a PLL-based transmitter and a
zero-IF receiver. The DBB provides the AM and PM data to the
PA and the two-point modulation PLL. A sigma–delta modulator
(SDM) is inserted in the low-frequency PM path to reshape the
quantization noise. To guarantee the oscillator’s phase noise and
startup time, a swing calibration is implemented to regulate the
oscillator performance. Two successive-approximation-register
ADCs similar as [16] convert the analog demodulated signal

LC oscillator with a ¼ frequency divider.

to the DBB. A 24-MHz crystal oscillator (XO) provides the
reference clock for the PLL. A serial peripheral interface is
used to program the transceiver.
IV. CIRCUITS IMPLEMENTATION
A. Low-Power VCO and Frequency Plan
One of the VCO design challenges is to achieve the lowphase noise under the ULP condition. For the transmitter, poor
phase noise may violate the error vector magnitude (EVM) and
adjacent channel power ratio (ACPR) requirements. For the
receiver, adjacent channel rejection (ACR) will be degraded if
the phase noise is down converted to dc by a strong interference
signal. An LC-tank oscillator is implemented as compared to
ring oscillators due to its superior phase-noise performance with
the same power budget [17].
There are two frequency plans to provide the quadrature
RF clock needed for the zero-IF receiver. Either a quadraturecoupled oscillator is required or a higher frequency oscillator
is used and then the frequency is divided down. Quadraturecoupled oscillators need two spiral inductors, which are area
consuming. The I/Q phase mismatch is poor as it relies on passive LC matching. Although the frequency divider adds extra
power, the second solution consumes less power in total. This
can be explained by
R = QωL.

(4)

The effective parallel loss resistance in a LC tank depends
on the product of quality factor (Q), oscillation frequency (ω),
and the inductance value (L). Ideal LC tank has infinite parallel resistance. Spiral inductors in the CMOS technology are
lossy due to limited quality factor, and the inductance value is
constrained by area. Double or even quadruple oscillation frequency helps to maximum the resistance and, hence, reduces
the power consumption. However, generating higher oscillation
frequency with the same inductor limits the capacitance value
of the varactor, which restrains the frequency tuning range.
The power consumption cooptimization brings up a frequency
plan comprising a 1.6-GHz LC oscillator together with a ¼
frequency divider, as shown in Fig. 7. A sense-amplifier-based
divider is chosen due to its relaxed requirement on input voltage
swing, allowing to be directly connected to the VCO without

BA et al.: 0.33 nJ/bit IEEE802.15.6/PROPRIETARY MICS/ISM WIRELESS TRANSCEIVER WITH SCALABLE DATA RATE

Fig. 8.

Fig. 9.

925

Block diagram of the FM-DAC with dual-mode varactor.
Fig. 10.

Block diagram of the receiver chain.

Fig. 11.

Die photo of the transceiver.

Switching mode PA with digital control.

extra buffering. A conventional swing calibration loop senses
the LO swing and control the bias current of the oscillator.
Based on the chosen frequency plan, a fractional-N PLL is
implemented. The division ratio of the four-stage multimodulus fractional divider is controlled by a three-order multistage
noise shaping (MASH 1-1-1) SDM to achieve 100-kHz channel spacing. The bandwidth of the on-chip loop filter is set to
135 kHz, suppressing the high-frequency sigma–delta noise and
achieving 17-μs settling time.
B. High-Pass Frequency Modulation DAC
Appling phase modulation through the PLL loop limits the
data rate to the PLL bandwidth. To further extend the data rate,
a 9-bit FM-DAC as shown in Fig. 8 is inserted to directly modulate the LO frequency. The FM-DAC controlled by the DBB
generates the bias voltage of the varactor and, consequently,
changes the overall capacitance of the LC tank to vary the carrier frequency. The output voltage of the FM-DAC is differential
for better immunity to the common-mode noise.
The frequency tuning range of the FM-DAC depends on the
output voltage swing of the FM-DAC and the gain of the varactor
as
Fdev = VDAC × KVCO .

(5)

To support different data rates and modulation schemes, the
tuning range is highly programmable. There are two methods
combined to achieve a large dynamic range. For the 4.5-Mb/s
HD mode, a tuning range of ±6-MHz is derived from system
simulations. The bias current of the FM-DAC is set to 4 μA for
larger output voltage swing, and both of the varactor C1 and C2

are enabled. For the 15.6-compliant GMSK mode, as the tuning
range is only ±50 kHz, the bias current is reduced to 0.4 uA
and only C1 is used.
C. Digital Controlled PA
The AM data are directly applied to a digitally-controlled
switching-mode PA as shown in Fig. 9. To reduce the AM
quantization noise which may violate the ACPR requirement,
the AM data is up-sampled to 24-MHz and shaped by a twoorder MASH 1-1 SDM. Compared to linear class-A/AB PAs,
switching-mode PAs achieve better power efficiency. The railto-rail driving requirement is easily realized at 400-MHz with
the 40-nm technology. The PA consists of 16 unit cells. Each
unit cell is a pseudodifferential cascode NMOS pair, which is
controlled by an AND logic. Since the drain voltage varies from
0.25 to 1.75 V, a cascode transistor Mc is added to prevent the
gate-oxide breakdown. The output drain currents are summed
up to the external matching network. Since there is a long distance between and PLL and PA, the single-ended LO signal is
converted to differential by a two-stage edge aligner after the
long trace, which saves 40% of the buffer power consumption.
D. Highly Configurable Receiver Chain
The receiver consists of a low-noise amplifier (LNA), a
quadrature passive mixer, two LPFs and ADCs as shown in
Fig. 10. To achieve a wide input bandwidth covering 402–
405 and 420–450-MHz, the source-degeneration architecture

926

Fig. 12.

Fig. 13.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Spectrum and EVM of the transmitter.

Fig. 14.

Power breakdown of the transceiver.

Fig. 15.

System demonstration of the complete implant system.

Sensitivity and ACR of the receiver.

is adopted for the LNA. To cover impedance variation of an
implant antenna, the matching network is tunable by varying
the gate capacitor Cg . Since the spiral inductor at 400-MHz
has poor quality factor and small inductance value limited by
area, the LNA load is resistance to achieve higher voltage gain.
For the LD mode, the NF is relaxed, so the power consumption
of the LNA can be further improved. This is done by reducing
the bias current through transistor M1 . In this case, to compensate the impedance change, an extra resistor is added to maintain
conjugate input matching.
A passive mixer down converts the RF signals to analog
baseband. Lower flicker noise makes it popular for zero-IF
receivers. The 25% duty-cycle LO clock is used to drive the
passive switches, isolating the different signal paths and improving noise performance [18]. A Gm stage is added as a
transconductance amplifier to further boost the gain and reduce
the LO reradiation. The operational amplifier (OpAmp)-based
transimpedance amplifiers convert the signal back to voltage
domain and filter out higher order harmonics.
The LPF is located between the mixer and the ADC. It
suppresses the close-in interference, and provides the programmable gain for the automatic gain control loop. There are
three main types of time-continuous filters, namely active-RC,
source-follower-based and Gm – C. Since Gm – C filters do
not use feedback, the bandwidth is larger. However, the lack of

feedback decreases the linearity. In the frequency region of interest, the active-RC and source-follower based filters show the
best performance. Since the source-follower based filter cannot
have a voltage gain higher than 0 dB, the active-RC topology is
chosen.
To fulfill the ACR performance from the 15.6 standard, at
least three-order is needed to suppress out-of-band interferences.
The Butterworth filter type is chosen since it has a flat passband, which leads to minimal distortion to the wanted signal.
Additionally, the Butterworth filter is easy to tune in practical
implementations.
As depicted in Fig. 10, the single pole section is followed by
a two-pole two-Thomas biquad stage. The filter voltage gain has
to be tuned from 0 dB for large input signal to 36 dB for the
high-sensitivity mode. For ease of implementation and matching
quality, the filter voltage gain is tuned in 6-dB steps. The 6-dB
step is obtained by scaling the input resistors R1 and R2 by a
factor of 2, which is easier to match for process variations than
other scaling factors. For different modes, the bandwidth varies
from 150 kHz to 1.2-MHz. This is tuned by simultaneously
changing the three capacitors C1 , C2 , and C3 . By using this
tuning scheme, the quality factor of the filter does not change
and the Butterworth characteristics are kept.

BA et al.: 0.33 nJ/bit IEEE802.15.6/PROPRIETARY MICS/ISM WIRELESS TRANSCEIVER WITH SCALABLE DATA RATE

927

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS WITH PRIOR ARTS

Modulation
DR[kb/s]
Tech.
TX
RX

(∗1)
(∗2)

PD C [mW]
Po u t [dBm]
PD C [mW]
Ps e n s [dBm]

ADI ADF7021-V

Nordic nRF9E5

TI CC1101

B-CAS 06[19]

ISSCC 05[20]

4-FSK MSK
24
–
31
0
42
−114

GFSK
100
–
21
−10
23
−100

4-FSK OOK
600
–
23
−6
30
−95

FSK
800
CMOS 0.18
11
−4.5
11
−83(∗1)

FSK OOK
100
CMOS 0.18
27
10
2.1
−111

This work
π /2 DBPSK
11
2.28 (∗2)
−17
1.9(∗2)
−112

GMSK
187.5
CMOS 0.04
2.27 (∗2)
−10
2.2 (∗2)
−110

π /8 D8PSK
4500
2.28 (∗2)
−17
2.2 (∗2)
−83

Sensitivity in dBm calculated with 90 μV and 1.6 kΩ.
Simulated DBB power of 0.5 mW (TX) and 0.7 mW (RX) added to the measured AFE.

Since the OpAmps in the LPF are all dc coupled. The offset
voltage of each stage, therefore, gets accumulated and amplified. When the differential mode dc offset gets too large, it will
saturate the ADC. To overcome this effect, a current-steering
DAC is connected to the input of the second-stage OpAmp for
offset cancellation. The 8-bit DAC has a current resolution of
39 nA, leading to a maximal residual offset of 10 mV.
V. MEASUREMENT RESULTS
This transceiver is fabricated in 40-nm CMOS technology.
As shown in Fig. 11, the die occupies 1.8 mm × 1.7 mm. It is
assembled in a QFN68 package and mounted on an evaluation
PCB which comprises digital interface to FPGA, RF matching
network to antenna, and power management. The DBB is implemented in the FPGA to feed the transmitter and demodulate
the data from the receiver.
The fractional-N PLL provides precise LO signals for the
transceiver. It achieves an integrated phase error of 1° and a
phase noise of −123 dBc/Hz at 1-MHz offset. The PLL settling
time is 17 μs, which is within the channel switching time defined
in the 15.6 standard.
The transmitter performance is first evaluated. The signal
quality is defined by EVM. Both of the 15.6 D8PSK mode and
the HD mode are tested and shown in Fig. 12. The EVM is
only 3.5% and 7%, respectively. The ACPR is a measure of
the spectrum plurality. For the standard-compliant mode, the
ACPR is −27 dBc, which passes the standard requirement. The
eye diagram of the GMSK mode is also shown, the frequency
error is within the standard requirement.
For the receiver, The NF is measured as 5 dB. The input bandwidth (S11<−10 dB) covers the range from 340 to 510-MHz,
wide enough to tolerance any antenna impedance variations due
to human bodies. The bit error rate (BER) is tested for different
modes as shown in Fig. 13. The receiver sensitivity at 0.1%
BER for GMSK, D8PSK, and the HD mode are −110, −100,
and −87 dBm, respectively. The sensitivity is 5 to 10 dB better
than the 15.6 standard. The receiver selectivity is defined by
ACR, the measurement results are listed in the table.
The power consumption is summarized in Fig. 14. The transmitter and receiver are set to the continuity mode, respectively.
The supply voltage is 1 V, and the current consumption of
each RF/analog building block is individually measured from
its power pin. The PA in GMSK mode consumes 900 μW as the
output power is increased to −10 dBm. The PLL power con-

sumption in D8PSK mode is increased to 988 μW to eliminate
the pulling effect from the PA to the VCO. So the ACPR is
kept low. The receiver consumes 1.49 mW in both the 15.6 and
HD mode. The LNA is further reduced by 300 μW in the LD
mode. Although the HD mode consumes more power, thanks to
the superior data rate, the best energy efficiency is achieved as
0.33 nJ/b for reception and 0.4 nJ/b for transmission.
Fig. 15 demonstrates the complete implantable wireless system comprising a pair of transceiver, FPGA-based DBB, and
controlling MCUs. The measured BER under this scenario is
far below 0.1%. A 14-cm fluid-based halve-wave dipole antenna connected to the transmitter is inside the fluid body model
to emulate an implant-to-body wireless link. The receiver antenna is 31 cm. Both of them are made of 2.5 mm2 isolated
copper wire. The simulated DBB power dissipation is 0.5 mW
for transmitter and 0.7 mW for receiver, which are added to
the overall power consumption to compare this transceiver to
existing products and published works. The detail comparisons
are summarized in Table III. This study covers a data rate from
11 kb/s to 4.5 Mb/s with the best energy efficiency, and is fully
IEEE802.15.6 standard compliant.
VI. CONCLUSION
A MICS/ISM-band IEEE 802.15.6 standard-compliant
transceiver with extended data rate is reported for medical implantable applications. To achieve ULP consumption and support different data rates for various implantable applications, the
design specifications of this transceiver are carefully defined after an explicit link budget analysis. The PLL-based transmitter
architecture is chosen together with a zero-IF receiver to balance the performance and efficiency. Highly configurable circuit
building blocks are discussed in detail. Implemented in 40-nm
CMOS technology with 1-V supply, this study supports variable data rates from 11 kb/s to 4.5 Mb/s in the 402–405-MHz
MICS and 420–450-MHz ISM band. Being IEEE 15.6 standard compliant, the transceiver consumes 1.78 mW for TX and
1.59 mW for RX, which is 5–10 times lower power dissipation
compared to prior arts. The flexible data rate and standardcompliant robustness and security make it suitable for various
medical implantable applications.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Ida, T. Ninomiya, M. Katoh, K. Kasai, M. Yoshida, J. Takagi, and T.
Kikuzuki, “Realizing safe and reliable vital signs monitoring with wireless
body area networks,” in Proc. IEEE Region 10 Hum. Technol. Conf., 2013,
pp. 330–355.

928

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

[2] FCC document, No. DOC-314146A1. (2012) [Online]. Available:
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-314146A1.pdf.
[3] S. Masui, K. Kanda, M. Hamaminato, H. Satou, I. Ida, T. Ninomiya, M.
Vidojkovic, X. Huang, N. Kiyani, K. Philips, and H. de Groot, “Ultra-low
power wireless transceiver technology for body area network,” presented
at the 53rd Annu. Conf. Jpn. Soc. Med. Biol. Eng., Osaka, Japan, 2014,
Paper OS1-04-03.
[4] J. G. Webster, Medical Instrumentation Application and Design, 4th ed.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2009.
[5] The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule. (1996). [Online]. Available:
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/
[6] J. Pandey and B. Otis, “A 90 μW MICS/ISM band transmitter with 22%
global efficiency,” in Proc. IEEE Radio Freq. Integr. Symp., May 2010,
pp. 285–288.
[7] J. L. Bohorquez, A. P. Chandrakasan, and J. L. Dawson, “A 350 μW
CMOS MSK transmitter and 400 μW OOK super-regenerative receiver
for medical implant communications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol.
44, no. 4, pp. 1248–1259, Apr. 2009.
[8] FCC report, DA 12-737. (2011, Nov. 30). [Online]. Available: http://www.
fcc.gov/document/medical-micro-power-networks
[9] Body Area Network, IEEE Standard 802.15.6, Feb. 2012.
[10] M. Vidojkovic, X. Huang, X. Wang, C. Zhou, A Ba, M. Lont, Y.-H. Liu,
P. Harpe, M. Ding, B. Busze, N. Kiyani, K. Kanda, S. Masui, K. Philips,
and H. de Groot, “A 0.33nJ/b IEEE802.15.6/ proprietary MICS/ISM band
transceiver with scalable data-rate from 11kb/s to 4.5Mb/s for medical
applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech.
Papers, 2014, pp. 170–171.
[11] H. W. Pflug, H. J. Visser, N. F. Kiyani, G. Dolmans, K. Philips, K.
Kanda, M. Hamaminato, and S. Masui, “Radio channel characterization
for 400 MHz implanted devices,” in Proc. Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf.,
2014, pp. 293–298.
[12] Y.-H. Liu, X. Huang, M. Vidojkovic, G. Dolmans, and H. de Groot, “An
energy-efficient polar transmitter for IEEE 802.15.6 body area networks:
System requirements and circuit designs,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50,
no. 10, pp. 118–127, Oct. 2012.
[13] B. Razavi, “Design considerations for direct-conversion receivers,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 428–435, Jun. 1997.
[14] J. B. Hughes, A. Spencer, A. Worapishet, and R. Sitdhikorn, “1 mW CMOS
polyphase channel filter for bluetooth,” IEEE Proc. Circuits, Devices Syst.,
vol. 149, no. 56, pp. 348–354, Oct./Dec. 2002.
[15] R. Zanbaghi, M. Atarodi, and A. Tajalli, “An ultra-low power Gm-C
complex filter for low-IF wireless PAN applications,” in Proc. IEEE Region
10 Conf. TENCON, 2006, pp. 1–4.
[16] P. Harpe, C. Zhou, X. Wang, G. Dolmans, and H. de Groot, “A
12fJ/conversion-step 8bit 10MS/s asynchronous SAR ADC for low energy
radios,” in Proc. ESSCIRC, 2010, pp. 214–217.
[17] M. Lont, D. Milosevic, A. H. M. van Roermund, and G. Dolmans, “Requirement driven low-power LC and ring oscillator design,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2011, pp. 1129–1132.
[18] A. Mirzaei, H. Darabi, J. C. Leete, and Y. Chang, “Analysis and optimization of direct-conversion receivers with 25% duty-cycle current-driven
passive mixers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2353–
2366, Sep. 2010.
[19] P. D. Bradley, “An ultra-low power, high performance medical implant
communication system (MICS) transceiver for implantable devices,” in
Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circuit Syst. Conf., Dec. 2006, pp. 158–161.
[20] V. Peiris, C. Arm, S. Bories, S. Cserveny, F. Giroud, P. Graber, S. Gyger, E.
Le Roux, T. Melly, M. Moser, O. Nys, F. Pengg, P.-D. Pfister, N. Raemy,
A. Ribordy, P.-F. Ruedi, D. Ruffieux, L. Sumanen, S. Todeschin, and P.
Volet, “A 1V 433/868MHz 25kbps-FSK 2kbps-OOK RF transceiver SoC
in standard digital 0.18 μm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2005, pp. 258–259.

Ao Ba received the B.E. degree in microelectronics
from Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China, in
2009, and the M.S. degree (cum laude) in electrical
engineering from the Delft University of Technology,
Delft, The Netherlands, in 2011.
In 2011, he joined Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, as a Researcher. His technical research interests include ultra-low power RF and
mixed-signal IC design and digitally-assisted RF IC
design.

Maja Vidojkovic received the Ph.D. degree from
the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands.
In 2008, she joined the Wireless Research Group
at Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, where she is currently a Senior Researcher. Her main research interest
includes ultra-low power wireless transceivers.

Kouichi Kanda was born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1975.
He received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
electronic engineering from the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, in 1998, 2000, and 2003, respectively.
In 2003, he joined Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.,
Kawasaki, Japan, where he designed more than 10Gb/s CMOS wireline transceivers for server backplanes and optical modules, and a multiband CMOS
power amplifier for W-CDMA mobile handsets.
Since 2012, he has been with Fujitsu Component EU,
Hoofddorp, The Netherlands, and was involved in a
collaborative project with IMEC Holst Centre on low-power wireless transceiver
for body area networks. His research interests include CMOS IC design
for wireline and wireless communications and low-power low-voltage design
techniques.

Nauman F. Kiyani was born in Kohat, Pakistan.
He received the B.Sc. degree in electrical from the
National University of Sciences and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2001, and the M.Sc. degree in
electrical engineering from the University of Gavle,
Gavle, Sweden, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering from the Delft University of
Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, in 2009.
In 2008, he was a Visiting Scholar with the Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. He was
a Researcher with Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven,
in the field of signal processing and algorithm development from 2009 to
2014. Since September 2014, he has been affiliated with Catena Radio Design B.V./NXP, Son en Breugel, The Netherlands, as a Senior System Architect.
His main research interests include signal processing, synchronization, signal
diversity, and channel coding.
Maarten Lont was born in Steinheim, Germany, in
1983. He received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in
2008 and 2013, respectively.
He performed his Ph.D. research in close cooperation with Holst Centre/IMEC. Between 2012 and
2014, he was with Holst Centre/IMEC on low-power
short-range transceivers. He is currently with NXP,
Eindhoven, working on CMOS car radar applications.
Xiongchuan Huang received the B.Sc. degree in
microelectronics from Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, in 2005, and the M.Sc. (cum laude Hons.) and
Ph.D. (cum laude Hons.) degrees in microelectronics
from the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands, in 2008 and 2014, respectively.
In 2007, he was with Philips Research, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, as a Student Trainee. From 2008 to
2014, he was with Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven,
as a Senior Researcher. Between 2011 and 2014, he
was working part time with the Delft University of
Technology, as a Ph.D. Researcher. Since 2014, he has been with Broadcom
Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA, as a Senior Staff Engineer. His research interests include low-power circuit and system design for radio communications.

BA et al.: 0.33 nJ/bit IEEE802.15.6/PROPRIETARY MICS/ISM WIRELESS TRANSCEIVER WITH SCALABLE DATA RATE

Xiaoyan Wang received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from National University of Singapore, Singapore, and Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby,
Denmark, in 2001 and 2004, respectively.
She worked with the WLAN group in Infineon
Technology, Munich, Germany, in 2005. From 2006
to 2008, she worked with the Institute of Microelectronics, Singapore. She has been working on VCOs,
WLAN transceivers, and UWB receivers. Since 2009,
she has been with Holst Centre/IMEC, The Netherlands, as a Senior Researcher. Her current research
interests include RF transceiver designs and system analysis in UWB communication systems.
Cui Zhou was born in China in 1981. She received
the M.Sc. degree in microelectronics from TU Delft,
The Netherlands, and Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
In April 2006, she was with SystematIC as an Analog Designer. In September 2008, she joined Holst
Centre/imec, The Netherlands, as a Researcher working on baseband amplifiers and UWB receivers.

Yao-Hong Liu received the Ph.D. degree from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2009.
From 2002 to 2003, he was with Terax Communication, Taiwan, working on RFIC for Bluetooth.
Between 2003 and 2006, he was with VIA technology, Taiwan, where he was involved in GSM and
WCDMA transceiver products. In 2006, he joined
Mobile Devices, Taiwan, to work on OFDM-based
transceivers for WiFi and WiMAX. Since 2010,
he has been a Senior Researcher with Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, where his
research interests include the ultra-low power RF/analog circuits for wireless
healthcare and internet-of-things applications.
Ming Ding was born in China on October 1, 1986.
He received the B.S. degree from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2009,
and the M.S. degree(Hons.) from the Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands,
in 2011.
In 2011, he joined the Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, as a Researcher in the Radio
Group working on circuit design. His current research
interest includes ultra-low power ADC design.
Benjamin Büsze received the Dipl.Ing. degree in
electrical engineering and information technology
from the RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, in 2008.
In 2008, he joined the Holst Centre/IMEC, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, where he works on digitalbaseband design for wireless systems. He is currently
a Researcher with experience in digital-signal processing and digital circuit design.
Shoichi Masui received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan, and the
Ph.D. degree from the Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
He was a Visiting Scholar with Stanford University
and the University of Toronto. From 2007 to 2012, he
was a Professor with the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University. Since 2012,
he has been with Fujitsu Laboratories, Kawasaki,
Japan, where he is involved in low-power wireless
platform SoC design.
Dr. Masui received the commendation from the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, in Japan, in 2004.

929

Makoto Hamaminato received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees from Kobe University, Kobe, Japan, in 1994
and 1996, respectively.
In 1996, he joined Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.,
Kawasaki, Japan, where he designed DTV demodulator and digital microwave radio MODEM. From
2012, he is involved on low-power wireless platform
SoC design.

Hiroyuki Sato was born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1978.
He received the M.S. degree in electronic engineering from the Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo,
Japan, in 2002.
In 2002, he joined Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.,
Kawasaki, Japan, where he designed Wireless LAN
transceiver and Digital TV tuner. From 2012, he is
involved in low-power wireless platform SoC design.
His research interests include CMOS IC design for
wireless communications and low-power low-voltage
design techniques.

Kathleen Philips received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 2005.
She has 20 years of experience in the domain of
low-power mixed-signal, RF, and integrated system
design. She started her career at Philips Research, The
Netherlands, working an analog and mixed-signal circuits. In 2007, she joined the Holst Centre/IMEC,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands, where she is currently
leading a program on ultra-low power wireless, processing, and sensing systems. This is part of an openinnovation collaboration, together with local and international industry. The
research targets applications in the area of infrastructure and person-centric IoT
systems, with a focus on ultra-low power communication and sensing.

Harmke de Groot received the Master’s of Science degree in electrical and electronics engineering
from the University of Technology Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, in 1997, and the Master’s of
Business Administration degree from TIAS Business
School, Utrecht, Netherlands, in 2013.
She is currently the Senior Director at the IMEC
and Holst Centre for Perceptive Systems, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands. These heterogeneous connected
systems use their own sensors, as well as information
from the cloud to build a view of the world surrounding them and in such a way realize a natural and intuitive experience for the
end user. Her team is internationally recognized for their work in the field of
sensor networks, high-speed networks and sensors. IMEC contributes to the
“Internet of things” revolution by developing innovative algorithms, network,
radio, DSP and sensor solutions for person centric, infrastructure centric, and
vehicle centric perceptive systems, realizing that the traditional borders between
these applications domains are quickly fading. Together with a wide range of
industrial and academic partners this R&D program addresses the challenges
of limited autonomy, functionality, interoperability, ease of use, data fusion and
security to enable a wide range of new applications and a truly intuitive user
experience. She was with NXP, Philips Research, and Microsoft before joining
IMEC and Holst Centre in 2008. She is the (co-)author of more than 60 publications and a book on Embedded System Design (New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2003).

