IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2151

Assessment of Stroke Volume From Brachial Blood
Pressure Using Arterial Characteristics
Shing-Hong Liu, Tzu-Hsin Lin, Da-Chuan Cheng∗ , and Jia-Jung Wang

Abstract—Goal: The goal of this study is to present a modified
pulse contour method to estimate the stroke volume (SV) based
on an oscillometric sphygmomanometer. Methods: The pulse contour was extracted from the pulse signal of the cuff pressure. The
characteristics of the brachial artery, as well as the compliance
(Ca rte ry ) and time constant τ of the Windkessel model, could be
determined and used to estimate the SV once the apparatus finished the blood pressure measurement. Results: Assessments of
the SV by echocardiography and our method were carried out in
55 subjects. The change in the brachial arterial volume obtained
by our method was significantly correlated with that of the twodimensional ultrasound method (rv = 0.871). The estimated SV
values by our method for male and female groups, SVe stim a te ,
were also significantly correlated with the echocardiography results, SVre f (rm a le = 0.680, rfe m a le = 0.706). The Bland–
Altman plot showed agreement between SVre f and SVe stim a te ,
with all data points contained within the limits of agreement (± 2
SD). The mean difference and standard deviation (mean ± SD)
were 0.101 ± 14.880 ml and 0.650 ± 11.990 ml for the male and female groups, respectively. Conclusion: The blood pressure, SV, and
cardiac output were measured simultaneously, making our method
well suited for home use. Significance: Our method was embedded
in an oscillometric sphygmomanometer.
Index Terms— Brachial artery, oscillometry, pulse contour,
stroke volume (SV).

I. INTRODUCTION
N clinical diagnosis, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) and
the cardiac output are generally used to estimate the total peripheral resistance [1]. Many studies have shown that reduced
compliance leads to a higher risk for coronary artery diseases
[2], [3]. Therefore, it has been recommended that people with
high-risk factors for coronary artery diseases should measure
their blood pressure every day. However, the blood pressure
is only an output variable of the circulatory system and is related to the cardiac output and peripheral resistance. If high-risk
individuals not only measure their blood pressure but also measure their cardiac output daily, they can more clearly understand
their cardiovascular condition. However, all of the conventional

I

Manuscript received November 7, 2014; revised February 6, 2015; accepted
March 4, 2015. Date of publication March 19, 2015; date of current version
August 18, 2015. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and
Technology, Taiwan, under Grant NSC 102-2221-E-214-005-MY3 and Grant
MOST 103-2221-E-324-010. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S.-H. Liu is with the Chaoyang University of Technology.
T.-H. Lin is with Lin-Shin Hospital.
∗ D.-C. Cheng is with the Department of Biomedical Imaging and Radiological Science, China Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan (e-mail:
dccheng@mail.cmu.edu.tw).
J.-J. Wang is with the I-Shou University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2412136

cardiac output measurements have the complex operating procedures that belong to the minimally invasive/noninvasive measurements, and are expensive [4]. For example, the thermodilution method, which is used in most intensive care units and
surgical suites, requires pulmonary artery catheterization.
The pulse contour method, which measures cardiac output by
the Windkessel model, differs from the thermodilution method.
Wesseling et al. used a nonlinear three-element model to compute the stroke volume (SV) on a beat-to-beat basis [5]. In this
model, the authors used the arctangent model of aortic mechanics of Langewouters et al. [6] to estimate the aortic impedance
and compliance. The radial arterial pressure was used as the
input for this model. Similarly, Bogert et al. used the arterial
pressure of the finger to estimate the beat-to-beat SV using the
Windkessel model. However, this methodology was only able
to track the trend of SV during various types of postural stress
and exercise [7]. Romano and Pistolesi simplified the Windkessel model to estimate SV by computing the whole systolic
area of the arterial pressure curve and the arterial impedance [8].
Because the pressure contours vary between the aorta and peripheral arteries, the computation of arterial impedance required
modification according to the characteristics of the pressure contour. Mukkamala et al. identified an impulse response to represent the arterial tree, and they derived the time constant from
the exponentially decaying portion of the impulse response [9].
McDonald [10] used two pressure measurements in the aorta,
3–5 cm apart. These data were incorporated into the Wormersley equation [11] to calculate the aortic flow and SV. Welkowitz
et al. used the model of Welkowitz and Fich to estimate the SV
[12], [13]. Currently, there are three well-known commercial
devices on the market that use the pulse contour method to estimate the continuous SV, FloTRac/Vigileo [14], the PiCCOplus
[15], and the LiDCOplus [16]. However, Critchley et al. reviewed these devices and found that to obtain absolute values of
cardiac output, it is necessary to determine a calibration factor
by comparing the study result with an absolute cardiac output
measurement at least once for each patient [17].
According to the pulse contour method with the Windkessel
model, if the total peripheral resistance and arterial compliance are known, the SV can be estimated. Moreover, the time
constant τ in the Windkessel model exhibits a strong correlation with the total peripheral resistance and arterial compliance
[8]. However, the pulse contours of smaller arteries, such as
the radial artery or the finger artery, may appear as a nonevident exponential diastolic decay. Thus, SV estimation using
a peripheral artery has two problems. One is obtaining a good
pressure contour that has an evident exponential diastolic decay.
Peripheral blood pressure waveforms measured by a tonometer

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 1. Pulse contours extracted from the various cuff pressures. The solid lie
is 94-mm Hg, and the dashed line is 39-mm Hg. That particular patient was an
84-year-old male with blood pressure of 154/78-mm Hg.

are inherently corrupted by wave reflections. When the brachial
pressure waveform measured by the cuff has a more inherent
distortion due to the characteristics of the cuff, the higher cuff
pressure leads to a higher distortion of the pulse contour. Moreover, a lower cuff pressure leads to more artifacts in the pulse
contour. Fig. 1 shows two pulse contours with cuff pressures of
94-mm Hg (solid line) and 39-mmHg (dashed line). That particular patient was an 84-year-old male with blood pressure of
154/78-mm Hg. The pulse contour has a large distortion within
the diastolic duration and a shift within the systolic duration.
The motion artifact was coupled in the pulse contour when the
cuff pressure was 39-mm Hg, as shown in Fig. 1. Another problem is determining how to evaluate the arterial compliance from
the arterial tree.
In this study, the goal is to develop a novel method of estimating the SV based on an oscillometric sphygmomanometer.
Our target was to quickly estimate the SV using the pulse contour method after measuring the blood pressure. Thus, the first
step was to obtain a pure pulse contour. The pulse contour was
measured from the brachial artery by the cuff. The next step was
to determine the brachial arterial compliance according to the
method proposed by Liu et al. [18]. The SV was subsequently
estimated from the pulse contour and the compliance. A total
of 55 subjects participated in this study. The SV values estimated by our method were compared with those measured by
echocardiography.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Technique Background
In any vessel, volume changes occur mainly because of radial expansion in response to variations in pressure. This process
involves several physical variables, such as the force of blood
ejection by the left ventricle, arterial impedance, arterial compliance, and the resistance of the peripheral vessel. These variables
are tightly dependent and need to be simultaneously evaluated.
Therefore, if a variable R representing the relationship between
the pressure change and the volume change over time in the ves-

Fig. 2.
artery.

Definitions of pressure and time symbols on the waveform of brachial

sel is directly estimated, then R and the arterial pulse pressure
waveform can be used to estimate the SV.
According to this concept, Romano et al. proposed a pulse
contour method using finger pressure to estimate the SV
SV =

A (mmHg · sec)
Z (mmHg/ml × sec)

(1)

where A is the integrative area of the pressure waveform under
the systolic duration, Z represents the change in the pressure
waveform with time (mmHg/sec) multiplied by a factor k, related to the inverse of the instantaneous acceleration of the
vessel cross-sectional area (sec2 /cm·1/cm2 ) [8]. This factor k
was considered to be a variable of the MAP.
In the Romano method, the main challenge is determining
how to estimate the instantaneous acceleration of the vessel
cross-sectional area from the characteristics of the arterial tree
comprising the peripheral arteries. According to the Windkessel
model, the time constant τ is related to the characteristics and
is defined as
τ = RC

(2)

where R is the resistance of the peripheral arteries and C is the
compliance. Therefore, in this study, we modified the Romano
method to estimate SV
A
(3)
SV =
dP · R
P3
P2
Psys − Pdia
+
−
.
(4)
dP =
t1
T − t3
T − t2
Fig. 2 is a brachial pressure waveform extracted from the
cuff pressure when the mean cuff pressure was 82-mm Hg.
According to the notation in Fig. 2, Psys is the pressure occurring
at the time (t1 ) of the maximum value of the pressure waveform,
Pdia is the minimum value of the pressure waveform, P2 is the
pressure occurring at the time (t2 ) of the maximum value of
the second derivative of the pressure waveform between Psys
and P3 , and P3 is the pressure occurring at the time (t3 ) of the
dicrotic notch. T is the time of the cardiac cycle.

LIU et al.: ASSESSMENT OF STROKE VOLUME FROM BRACHIAL BLOOD PRESSURE USING ARTERIAL CHARACTERISTICS

B. Measurement System
Our measurement system was based on an oscillometric
sphygmomanometer. To quickly compute the SV after performing the blood pressure measurement, we needed to detect a
perfect pulse contour, with pure evident exponential diastolic
decay, when the cuff was deflating. However, the pulse contour
has a larger distortion when the cuff pressure exceeds the MAP
[19], [20]. When the cuff pressure drops below the MAP, we
detected a perfect pulse contour that had the most evident exponential diastolic decay by the curve fitting method. The best
pulse contour was calibrated using the blood pressure, and the
time constant of the exponential diastolic decay was then calculated. Liu et al. proposed a method to detect changes in arterial
vessels [18] from the cuff model. Thus, the compliance of the
brachial artery could be measured. The variable R is related to
the compliance and the time constant τ . Thus, the SV could be
detected.
1) Hardware: In the oscillometric sphygmomanometer used
here (i-BP 100, BIOSTAR Corp., Taiwan), the pressure sensor
is digital (MPM 100, range: 0–300-mm Hg, resolution: 16 bits,
Metrodyne Microsystem Corp., Taiwan), as is the flow sensor
(MFS 100, range: 0.3–2 l/min, resolution: 12 bits, Metrodyne
Microsystem Corp., Taiwan). A TI MSP 430 F6736IPZ is used
to perform the peripheral interface control and detect the blood
pressure, brachial arterial compliance, and SV. The sampling
rate is 125 Hz. The measured signals from the sensors are transmitted to a notebook computer by Bluetooth. This sphygmomanometer has a CE certificate (No: 3816-2013-CE-RGC-NA).
2) Brachial Arterial Compliance: Drzewiecki proposed a
simple oscillometric model that included an arterial model and
a cuff model [19]. Liu et al. used a pressure sensor and a flow
sensor to construct the cuff model, Ccuﬀ , during the inflating
cycle [18]. According to the cuff model, they proposed a method
to measure the brachial arterial compliance under the loading
condition. In the Liu method, the amplitude of the pulse pressure
ΔPam p was extracted from the pulse signal of the cuff pressure
in the deflating cycle when the cuff pressure was the diastolic
pressure. Then, the change in the arterial volume ΔVartery was
computed according to the equation below
ΔVartery = Ccuﬀ · ΔPam p .

(5)

Therefore, the brachial arterial compliance Cartery could be
computed
Cartery =

ΔVartery
PP

(6)

where PP is the pulse pressure.
3) Extracting a Good Pulse Contour: We defined a good
pulse contour as having a diastolic decay with an evident exponential decay. According to the notation in Fig. 1, a perfect
pulse contour happens not only at the condition of low cuff pressure but will also happen under conditions of high cuff pressure.
The pulse signal was filtered from the cuff pressure signal. The
order of the high-pass filter was 1, and its cutoff frequency was
0.1 Hz. The order of the low-pass filter was two, and its cutoff
frequency was 40 Hz. Because the memory of the MSP 430
F6736IPZ has a limit and the signal must be processed in real

2153

time, the search for a perfect pulse contour is performed beat
by beat. We began to search for a perfect pulse contour by the
curve fitting method when the maximum amplitude of the pulse
wave occurred during the deflation. The end time was same
as for oscillometry. If the correlation coefficient of the pulse
contour exceeded 0.95 and was higher than the value for the
previous pulse, then the new pulse contour waveform replaced
the recorded pulse contour.
4) Computing the Time Constant: The pulse contour was
calibrated using the blood pressure as the pressure waveform.
An exponential decay function Pcurve ﬁt was used to fit the
diastolic decay curve
Pcurve

ﬁt

= Aexp−B t

(7)

ln (Pcurve

ﬁt )

= ln (A) − Bt

(8)

Let ln (Pcurve

ﬁt )

= P̃ , ln (A) = Ã

(9)

P̃ = Ã − Bt.

(10)

We used the data of the pressure waveform (P̃n , tn ) to estimate the coefficients Ã and B by the inverse matrix method
⎤−1 ⎡
⎤
⎡
P̃1
1 −t1


Â
⎥
⎢
.. ⎥ ⎢ ..
= ⎣ ...
(11)
⎦
. ⎦ ⎣.
B
1 −tn
P̃n
1
B
where n is the number of data points.
τ =

(12)

C. Experimental Protocol
Assessments of the SV by echocardiography and the pulse
contour method were carried out in 55 subjects (26 men and 29
women), aged 67 ± 20 years (mean ± SD; range: 25–96 years),
who underwent routine cardiac disease diagnosis at Linshing
Hospital, Taiwan, between January 2013 and May 2014. This
experiment was approved by the Asia University Medical Research Ethics Committee. The brachial blood pressure was measured with the oscillometric sphygmomanometer (i-BP 100) in
the left arm of each patient. Then, the change of the brachial
arterial diameter was measured at the same position by a duplex ultrasound scan machine (SIEMENS Acuson X300) with
B mode, which can record 60 frames. The nurse adjusted the linear transducer (11.4 MHz) to obtain the clearest image possible,
such as that shown in Fig. 3(a). That particular patient was the
same as in Fig. 1. Each patient was measured three times. In the
next step, the nurse would measure the SV with the same machine [21]. She also adjusted the transducer (3.1 MHz) to obtain
the clearest image possible, such as that shown in Fig. 4. Based
on the ECG signal, she marked the maximum and minimum
diameters of the left ventricle during the systolic and diastolic
cycles. She also measured each patient three times.
We processed the images of the brachial artery to obtain
the change of the brachial arterial diameter using the method
proposed by Cheng and Jiang [22]. Because the arterial intima
in the image was not clear for all of the patients, we detected
the arterial adventitial layer to calculate the change of diameter.

2154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
BASELINE HEMODYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF 55 PATIENTS
Internal diameter of brachial artery (cm)

0.344 ± 0.079

Brachial blood flow velocity (cm/s)
Arterial compliance (10−3 cm4 /dyne)
MAP (mmHg)
SBP (mmHg)
DBP (mmHg)

80.5 ± 21.7
6.864 ± 2.645
92.3 ± 11.9
135.4 ± 23.6
67.5 ± 8.8

Data are the mean ± SD.

Fig. 3. Change of brachial arterial diameter was measured by ultrasound, (a)
image is the first frame, the white circle shows the mark point, yellow line, by
the manual method, (b) detected diameters in the 60 frames.
Fig. 5. Relation between ΔD 2 and ΔV a rte ry . The correlation coefficient,
rv = 0.871.

and had a larger difference compared to the other two, it was
deleted.
III. RESULTS

Fig. 4. SV was measured by ultrasound. According to the ECG, the nurse
determines the systolic cycle and diastolic cycle of the left ventricle and marks
the maximum and minimum diameters.

We manually marked the position of maximum diameter, shown
by the yellow line. The change in arterial diameter is shown in
Fig. 3(b). The change of arterial volume was defined according
to the equation below
 πl
πl 
 2
2
Dsys − Ddia
= ΔD2
(13)
4
4
where l is the length of the artery, Dsys is the maximum arterial
diameter during the systolic cycle, and Ddia is the minimum
arterial diameter during the diastolic cycle. The standard approach was to use the average of the three ΔD2 measurements,
but if one of the three ΔD2 values was both the smallest value
ΔVecho =

The baseline hemodynamic data of the important variables
for characterizing the patients are presented in Table I. The
relationship between ΔD2 and ΔVartery is shown in Fig. 5. The
correlation coefficient was rv = 0.871. Fig. 6 shows the Bland
and Altman plot for the differences and the mean between ΔD2
and ΔVartery . The mean and standard deviation (mean ± SD)
of the differences were 0.960 ± 0.782 (mm2 -ml). Fig. 7 shows
a pulse pressure waveform extracted from the same patient as in
Fig. 1. In the deflating cycle, the diastolic duration of this pulse
contour had the best evident exponential decay. The solid and
dashed curves describing the curve fitting results are the raw data
and curve fitting data, respectively. Notably, these two curves
were much closer during the diastolic cycle. The correlation
coefficient was rτ = 0.990.
The value of R will be different for every patient due to the
presence of physical phenomena that may affect the pressure
wave transmission. According to the study by Langewouters,
the arterial characteristics will be affected by gender [6]. Therefore, we separated the data to determine the relationship between
k and R for males and females. Fig. 8 shows the relation between
k and R, as well as the correlation coefficients, rm ale = 0.680,
rfem ale = 0.706. We used their linear regression equation to

LIU et al.: ASSESSMENT OF STROKE VOLUME FROM BRACHIAL BLOOD PRESSURE USING ARTERIAL CHARACTERISTICS

2155

Fig. 6. Bland and Altman plot of the differences between ΔD 2 and ΔV a rte ry ;
the mean and standard deviation (mean ± SD) are 0.960 ± 0.782 (mm2 -ml).

Fig. 8. Shows the relation between k and R, the correlation coefficients, (a)
male group, rm a le = 0.680, (b) female group, rfe m a le = 0.706.
TABLE II
STATISTICS RESULTS OF THE SV AND ΔD 2 FOR THE MALE AND FEMALE
GROUPS

SV r e f (ml)
SV e s t i m a t e (ml)
Ejection Fraction (%)
Δ D 2 (mm2 )

Fig. 7. Shows a pulse pressure waveform extracted from the same patient as
in Fig. 1. The solid and dashed curves describing the relationship are based
on the raw and curve-fitting data, respectively. The correlation coefficient is
rτ = 0.990.

calibrate the R values. The estimated SV values, SVestim ated ,
of the brachial arteries determined for the 55 patients are summarized in Table II. The ΔD2 , the ejection fraction, and the
reference SV values, SVref , are also shown in this table. We
compared differences in the parameters for the male and female
groups. Only ΔD2 was significantly different. A linear relationship between the SVref values and SVestim ate values for the
male and female groups is shown in Fig. 9, and the correlation
coefficients were rsv m a l e = 0.727 and rsv f e m a l e = 0.781. Fig. 10
shows the Bland and Altman plot for the differences and the
mean between SVref and SVestim ated . The mean and standard
deviation (mean ± SD) of the differences were 0.101 ± 14.880
and 0.650 ± 11.990 (ml) for the male and female groups, respectively. Moreover, the percent errors of the two groups were
15.7 ± 7.0% and 13.6 ± 9.8%. We found that the averages
of all values were close, and all data points were within the
limits of agreement, although one data point from the male

Male (n = 26)

Female (n = 29)

p

80.6 ± 17.7
80.4 ± 21.4
71.6 ± 8.0
3.33 ± 1.4

71.7 ± 17.8
71.0 ± 18.4
72.6 ± 6.9
2.52 ± 1.47

0.067
0.086
0.605
0.041∗

Data are the mean ± SD, ∗ indicates p < 0.05.

group fell outside of the limits of agreement, as shown in
Fig. 10(a).
IV. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION
The present study aimed to describe a SV measurement
method based on an oscillometric sphygmomanometer. According to the oscillometry, we not only measured the blood pressure
but also measured the brachial arterial compliance. Moreover,
we extracted a “good” pulse contour from the cuff pressure
during the deflating cycle by the curve fitting method. Therefore, when the sphygmomanometer finishes the blood pressure
measurement at approximately 35–40 s, one SV value was also
measured. The results indicate that SV values obtained by our
new approach were in good agreement with those measured by
echocardiography. Although we did not use an invasive method
to measure true reference SV values, we measured the SV
three times by two-dimensional echocardiography and calculated the mean of these measurements as the reference for each
patient. Christie et al. compared the correlation of SV measured

2156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 9. Linear relation between SV re f values and SV e stim a te values for the
male and female groups, (a) male group, rsv m a le = 0.727, SV r e f = 0.60
SV e stim a te d + 32.4, (b) female group, rsv fe m a le = 0.781, SV r e f = 0.75
SV e stim a te d + 18.2.

by the noninvasive method, two-dimensional echocardiography,
and invasive methods, thermodilution, and Fick oximetry [23].
The results showed that the correlation coefficients between
two-dimensional echocardiography and thermodilution, or Fick
oximetry were 0.72 or 0.81, respectively. However, the correlation coefficients of the cardiac output between two-dimensional
echocardiography and thermodilution, or Fick oximetry were
higher at 0.88 or 0.90, respectively. The cardiac output is derived by multiplying the SV and heart rate.
We have shown that the correlation between ΔVartery and
ΔD2 was acceptable. Because ΔVartery and ΔD2 could not
be measured simultaneously and the blood flow varies for each
heartbeat, there is some error between ΔVartery and ΔD2 . In
Fig. 6, we show a Bland and Altman plot of ΔVartery and
ΔD2 . Although the units of these two parameters are not the
same and the mean of their difference has an offset, the offset
could be adjusted close to zero when ΔD2 is multiplied by
the vessel length. Moreover, the difference between ΔVartery
and ΔD2 is below the mean when the blood flow is lower. The
phenomenon could be caused by the resolution of the ultrasound
scan machine.
In recent years, several studies based on the pulse contour
method have attempted to provide reliable, noninvasive, continuous estimation of CO from the arterial pressure. These
studies used empirical formulas [8], [24], nonlinear models
based on age and gender variables [5], [7], or lumped networks
[12] to establish a relationship between the blood pressure and

Fig. 10. Bland and Altman plot for the differences between SV re f and
SV e stim a te d for male and female groups, (a) the mean and standard deviation (mean ± SD) is 0.101 ± 14.880 ml for the male group, (b) the mean and
standard deviation is 0.650 ± 11.990 ml for the female group.

flow. Moreover, they would combine this information with the
approximate mechanical properties of the aorta to estimate
changes in the continuous SV. However, Romano et al. proposed that the estimation of SV by the pulse contour method
does not depend on fixed variables but rather on the description of shape changes within the time domain of the whole
pulse contour [8]. Their results confirmed this concept, but the
k variable in their formula was also a difficult problem. Liu
et al. presented a method to estimate the flow of the brachial
artery with a Cartery value using the Windkessel model [25]. For
this method, the characteristics of the brachial artery must be
different than those of the aorta. Thus, according to the Windkessel model, the R variable estimated by the characteristics of
the brachial artery, τ and Cartery , need to be calibrated to fit
the aorta. By performing a comparison with established techniques, our results showed that this approach accurately reflects the relationship between the artery blood pressure and
flow.
Langewouters et al. presented a model of the aorta for male
and female groups [6]. The mean cross-sectional area of the
aorta for the male group was larger than that of the female
group. As shown in Table II, the SVref and ΔD2 were greater
in the male group than in the female group. Thus, our results are
similar to those of Langewouters et al. However, in our study, the
correlation coefficient of the female group, rsv f e m a l e = 0.781,
was better than that of the male group, rsv m a l e = 0.727. The

LIU et al.: ASSESSMENT OF STROKE VOLUME FROM BRACHIAL BLOOD PRESSURE USING ARTERIAL CHARACTERISTICS

reason may be due to the difference in the diameter of the artery
between the genders.
The linear relationship between the SVref values and
SVestim ate values does not appear to be stronger than those
of previous studies [5], [7], [8]. In our study, the SVestim ate
values were estimated by the pulse contour and Cartery . The
SVref values were measured by two-dimensional echocardiography. Thus, there are three possible explanations. One, the
blood pressure measurement by oscillometry is guesstimated
[26]. ΔVartery was estimated by the cuff model and amplitude
of pulse contour. Therefore, Cartery has a higher tolerance. Second, the previous studies compared the estimated SV with the
synchronous invasive SV measurements. It is well known that
the SV of each heartbeat is different, just as the blood pressure
values are different for each heartbeat. In our study, we used
a noninvasive SV measurement, two-dimensional echocardiography, as the reference. Thus, SVestim ate and SVref are not
synchronous. Third, the pulse contours are highly variable under different cuff pressures, as shown in Fig. 1. Although we
defined a good pulse contour as having a best evident exponential decay within the diastolic duration, the status of a good pulse
contour as a standard pulse contour remained in question. This
is the same problem encountered when using the noninvasive
pulse contour to estimate the SV.
A commercial sphygmomanometer used at home can only
guesstimate one systolic and diastolic pressure at each measurement. No one measures the continuous blood pressure at home
because the blood pressure is used to evaluate daily changes.
The purpose of our study is also to design a SV-measuring
apparatus to evaluate daily changes at home. The structure of
this apparatus is based on an oscillometric sphygmomanometer
that can guesstimate the blood pressure, SV, and cardiac output
simultaneously.
REFERENCES
[1] G. P. Toorop et al., “Beat-to-beat estimation of peripheral resistance and
arterial compliance during pressure transients,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 252,
pp. H1275–H1283, 1987.
[2] I. Mackenzie et al., “Assessment of arterial stiffness in clinical practice,”
Q. J. Med., vol. 95, pp. 67–74, 2002.
[3] J. Oliver and D. Webb, “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness
and risk of atherosclerotic events,” Art. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., vol. 23,
pp. 554–566, 2003.
[4] K. C. Ehlers et al., “Cardiac output measurements. A review of current
techniques and research,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 14, pp. 219–239, 1986.
[5] K. H. Wesseling, J. C. Jansen, J. J. Settels, and J. J. Schreuder, “Computation of aortic flow from pressure in humans using a nonlinear three-element
model,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 74, pp. 2566–2573, 1993.
[6] G. J. Langewouters, K. H. Wesseling, and W. A. Goedhard, “The static
elastic properties of 45 human thoracic and 20 abdominal aortas in vitro
and the parameters of a new model,” J. Biomech., vol. 17, pp. 425–435,
1984.

2157

[7] L. W. J. Bogert and J. J. Lieshout, “Non-invasive pulsatile arterial pressure
and stroke volume changes from the human finger,” Exp. Physiol., vol. 90,
pp. 437–446, 2005.
[8] S. M. Romano and M. Pistolesi, “Assessment of cardiac output from
systemic arterial pressure in human,” Crit. Care. Med., vol. 30, pp. 1834–
1841, 2002.
[9] R. Mukkamala, A. J. Reisner, H. M. Hojman, R. G. Mark, and R. J.
Cohen, “Continuous cardiac output monitoring by peripheral blood pressure waveform analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 459–467, Mar. 2006.
[10] D. A. McDonald, Blood Flow in Arteries. London, U.K.: Edward Amold.,
1960.
[11] J. R. Womersley, “The mathematical analysis of the arterial circulation
in a state of oscillatory motion,” WADC, Dayton, OH, USA, Tech. Rep.
TR.56-614, 1957.
[12] W. Welkowitz et al., “Noninvasive estimation of cardiac output,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1100–1105, Nov. 1991.
[13] W. Welkowitz et al., “Cost function analysis applied to the determination
of aorta parameters,” J. Eng. Sci., vol. 10, pp. 1081–1091, 1972.
[14] (2015). [Online]. Available: http://www.edwards.com/products/mininvasive/
pages/flotracsensor.aspx
[15] (2015). [Online]. Available: http://www.healthcare.philips.com/main/products/
patient_monitoring/products/picco/.
[16] (2015). [Online]. Available: http://www.lidco.com/clinical/lidco_science/cardiac.
php.
[17] L. A. Critchley et al., “A critical review of ability of continuous cardiac
output monitors to measure trends in cardiac output,” Anesth. Analg.,
vol. 111, pp. 1180–1192, 2010.
[18] S. H. Liu et al., “A new oscillometry-based method for estimating the dynamic brachial artery compliance under loaded conditions,” IEEE. Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 2463–4270, Oct. 2008.
[19] G. Drzewiecki et al., “Theory of the oscillometric maximum and the
systolic and diastolic detection ratios,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 22,
pp. 88–96, 1994.
[20] M. Ursino and C. Cristalli, “Mathematical modeling of noninvasive blood
pressure estimation techniques—part I: Pressure transmission across the
arm tissue,” ASME J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 117, pp. 107–116, 1995.
[21] N. Schiller et al., “Left ventricular volume from paired bioplane twodimensional echocardiography,” Circulation, vol. 60, pp. 547–555, 1979.
[22] D. C. Cheng and X. Jiang, “Detections of arterial wall in sonographic artery
images using dual dynamic programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 792–799, Nov. 2008.
[23] J. Christie et al., “Determination of stroke volume and cardiac output during exercise: Comparison of two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography, Fick oximetry, and thermodilution,” Circulation, vol. 76, pp. 539–547,
1987.
[24] O. Gödje et al., “Reliability of a new algorithm for continuous cardiac
output determination by pulse-contour analysis during hemodynamic instability,” Crit. Care. Med., vol. 30, pp. 52–58, 2002.
[25] S. H. Liu et al., “Estimating the mean blood flow of arm based on Windkessel model,” Biomed. Eng.: Appl., Basis Commun., vol. 23, pp. 1–8,
2011.
[26] J. 1. Liu et al., “Error mechanisms of the oscillometric fixed-ratio blood
pressure measurement method,” Ann. Biomed. Eng. vol. 41, pp. 587–597,
2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

