IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

1253

Symmetrical Compression Distance for Arrhythmia
Discrimination in Cloud-Based Big-Data Services
J. M. Lillo-Castellano, I. Mora-Jiménez, R. Santiago-Mozos, F. Chavarrı́a-Asso, A. Cano-González,
A. Garcı́a-Alberola, and J. L. Rojo-Álvarez, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The current development of cloud computing is completely changing the paradigm of data knowledge extraction in
huge databases. An example of this technology in the cardiac arrhythmia field is the SCOOP platform, a national-level scientific
cloud-based big data service for implantable cardioverter defibrillators. In this scenario, we here propose a new methodology for
automatic classification of intracardiac electrograms (EGMs) in a
cloud computing system, designed for minimal signal preprocessing. A new compression-based similarity measure (CSM) is created
for low computational burden, so-called weighted fast compression
distance, which provides better performance when compared with
other CSMs in the literature. Using simple machine learning techniques, a set of 6848 EGMs extracted from SCOOP platform were
classified into seven cardiac arrhythmia classes and one noise class,
reaching near to 90% accuracy when previous patient arrhythmia
information was available and 63% otherwise, hence overcoming
in all cases the classification provided by the majority class. Results
show that this methodology can be used as a high-quality service
of cloud computing, providing support to physicians for improving
the knowledge on patient diagnosis.
Index Terms—Big data analytics, cardiac arrhythmia classification, implantable defibrillator, intracardiac electrogram, weighted
fast compression distance.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR diseases are the primary cause of
death worldwide, and they remain directly or indirectly responsible for more than 30% of reported deaths [1]. Arrhythmias

C

Manuscript received October 17, 2014; revised January 11, 2015 and March
4, 2015; accepted March 5, 2015. Date of publication March 24, 2015; date of
current version July 23, 2015. This work was supported in part by TEC201019263 and TEC2013-48439-C4-1-R Projects from Spanish Government, by
PRIN13_IYA12 Project from Rey Juan Carlos University, and by Prometeo
Project of the Secretariat for Higher Education, Science, Technology and Innovation of the Republic of Ecuador. The work of J. M. Lillo-Castellano was
supported under the Spanish FPU Grant FPU13/03134. The work of R. SantiagoMozos was supported by Juan de la Cierva Program of the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation (JCI-2011-11150).
J. M. Lillo-Castellano, I. Mora-Jiménez, and R. Santiago-Mozos are
with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, Telematics
and Computing, Rey Juan Carlos University, 28943 Fuenlabrada, Spain
(e-mail: josemaria.lillo@urjc.es; inmaculada.mora@urjc.es; ricardo.santiago.
mozos@urjc.es).
F. Chavarrı́a-Asso and A. Cano-González are with the Hospital Solutions,
Medtronic Ibérica S.A., 28050 Madrid, Spain (e-mail: fernando.chavarria@
medtronic.com; alicia.cano@medtronic.com).
A. Garcı́a-Alberola is with the Arrhythmia Unit, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, 20120 El Palmar, Spain (e-mail: arcadi@secardiologia.es).
J. L. Rojo-Álvarez is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, Telematics and Computing, Rey Juan Carlos University, 28943
Fuenlabrada, Spain, and also with the Prometeo Researcher with Electric and
Electronic Department, Universidad de las Fuerzas Armadas ESPE, Sangolqui
Ecuador (e-mail: joseluis.rojo@urjc.es).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2412175

are common cardiac conditions in which the contraction rate of
the heart is abnormally fast, slow or irregular, usually resulting in
an abnormal mechanical function of the heart. Typically, physicians classify arrhythmias into two classes, namely, supraventricular (with atrial origin and usually nonfatal), and ventricular
(severe arrhythmias originated at ventricles). Based on their
mechanisms and origin, fast arrhythmias are further classified
into monomorphic tachycardias (ventricular or supraventricular), flutter (either atrial or ventricular), and fibrillatory rhythms
(atrial and ventricular fibrillation) [2].
The usual treatment for patients with high risk of suffering
a severe arrhythmia is the implanted cardioverter defibrillator
(ICD) [3], which is a battery-powered device placed under the
skin that tracks the heart electrical signals by using thin wires
(leads) directly lodged in the apex (sometimes in the septum)
of the right ventricle. Though the ICD has limited memory and
computational resources, it is able to: 1) record the intracardiac
electrical signals, known as electrograms (EGM); 2) automatically detect arrhythmic episodes; and 3) provide with a therapy
depending on the severity of the detected arrhythmic episode,
such as pacing, cardioversion, or defibrillation [3]. Whenever the
ICD detects an arrhythmia, it records the EGM for subsequent
clinical inspection and future research, which allows to determine, during the follow-up, whether the treatment was adequate.
Thus, when the patient visits the physician, all these arrhythmic
episodes are downloaded into a database to be inspected and
analyzed.
To date, despite the huge amount of research, cardiac arrhythmia classification (CAC) is still an open and active research field
[4]. The design of CAC algorithms have to deal with: 1) EGMs
of different duration and absence of recorded signal in temporal
segments; 2) databases with a small number of records, which
hinders good generalization for CAC; 3) strong dependence of
the algorithm with the usual preprocessing and feature extraction stages, determined sometimes by a specific ICD; and 4)
lack of an appropriate gold standard in the arrhythmia episode
labeling, which requires expert consensus and involves high
economic effort.
Recently, the Spanish company Medtronic Ibérica S.A. has
developed the SCOOP platform, a pioneer scientific repository
system in the cloud involving 48 national hospitals and conveying around 12 000 EGM records of cardiac arrhythmia episodes
stored by ICDs and subsequently labeled by a scientific committee of expert physicians. The aim of this platform is to provide
researchers with a high number of intracardiac episodes, thus
planting the seed to generate new scientific knowledge in cardiac
electrophysiology. In the context of the SCOOP cloud platform,
we here propose a new big data based methodology for CAC,

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1254

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

characterized by: 1) minimal EGM preprocessing; 2) independence of the EGM duration; 3) integrable into a high-quality
cardiology cloud computing system. Specifically, the proposed
methodology classifies a new unlabeled EGM by using the similarities to the labeled EGMs available in the big data repository.
In order to provide with a system addressing the previous
requirements, we focus here on similarity measures based on
information theory. This kind of measures, such as normalized
[5] and fast [6] compression distance (NCD and FCD), provide the similarity between two signals based on their common
patterns by using concepts related to compression length and
dictionaries. In addition, they allow to design parameter-free
methodologies and to compare signals with different lengths,
even when temporal segments have no data or when signals
are sampled at different rates. However, neither NCD nor FCD
are symmetrical measures, and NCD requires a high computational burden [6]. To overcome both drawbacks, we define a
new similarity measure, so-called weighted fast compression
distance (WFCD), which is compared with NCD and FCD in
terms of classification performance and computational burden.
This new measure enables a fast arrhythmia episode classification in SCOOP, opening the road toward new advanced support
to diagnosis and clinical knowledge discovery.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the basis on data compression that is necessary to
describe the similarity measures based on the dictionary matching concept, later presented in Section III. Section IV describes
the SCOOP platform and the cardiac signals dataset. The proposed arrhythmia classification methodology and experiment
description are described in Section V. Results and discussion
are presented in Sections VI and VII, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND ON COMPRESSION-BASED SIMILARITY
Lossless data compression in information theory refers to
the reduction in the number of bits required to represent some
specific information without loss [7]. A compression-based similarity measure (CSM) is characterized by its ability to exploit
the amount of information shared by two elements [8]. To date,
many clustering and classification problems have been tackled
by different systems whose core was a CSM, hence allowing
to design parameter-free methodologies and to deal with data
of diverse nature, such as genomics and phylogeny, images,
biomedical signals, or text documents [6], [9]–[11].
Given a bit string x, the Kolmogorov complexity (denoted by
Kx ) is defined as the number of bits of the shortest computer
program of the fixed reference computing system capable of
producing x [12]. Hence, Kx can be seen as the ultimate compressed version of x from which x can be exactly recovered by
a decompression program. Intuitively, Kx corresponds to the
minimum amount of information required to generate x.
The information distance between two strings x and y, denoted by IDxy , is defined as the length of the shortest program
computing x from y [13]. It can be expressed by using the
Kolmogorov complexity as follows:
IDxy = Kxy − min{Kx , Ky }

(1)

TABLE I
DICTIONARY OBTAINED WITH LZW ALGORITHM ON x = 0110011001
Word

0

1

01

11

10

00

011

100

Code

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

where Kxy is the Kolmogorov complexity of string xy (concatenated pair x and y), and min{·, ·} denotes the minimum
operator. It can be proven that IDxy is actually a metric which
depends on the strings length [13]. As a consequence, if the
value of IDxy between two short strings is large with respect to
their lengths, then both strings are very different; however, if the
same value of IDxy is obtained for two long strings, then those
strings are very similar. Thus, a relative measure was defined
[5] to express similarity regardless of the string length, called
normalized information distance (NID) and given by
NIDxy =

IDxy
max{Kx , Ky }

(2)

where max{·, ·} denotes the maximum operator. Note that NID
is in the range from zero to one [5].
In practice, the Kolmogorov complexity cannot be computed
[12], hence data compressors are used to approximate the Kolmogorov complexities involved in (1) and (2). For a given compressor C, let us denote by Cx and Cxy the length, in bits, of the
compressed versions for strings x and xy, respectively. Using
this approximation in (2), the NCD can be defined [5] as
NCDxy =

Cxy − min{Cx , Cy }
.
max{Cx , Cy }

(3)

Ideally, NCD values close to zero (one) correspond to similar
(nonsimilar) strings. In practice and when real-world compressors are used, Cxy = Cyx and the symmetry property is not
fulfilled by the NCD [5]. In addition, NCD values can be occasionally slightly greater than one.
III. PROPOSED SIMILARITY MEASUREMENT
The working principle of a compressor consists of finding
repeated patterns in the data (known as words), assigning each
pattern to a description (known as code) of a size inversely
proportional to its occurrence frequency [14], and creating a
table (known as dictionary) with the word-code assignation.
The cardinality (denoted by | · | ) of a dictionary is the number
of words in it, and it depends on three factors: first, the string
lengths; second, the maximum word-size allowed; and third, the
compression algorithm used to find words in the string. Some of
the mostly used compressors are LZW, zip, Gzip, LZMA, and
PPMZ [7].
For a simple compression example using the LZW algorithm,
let us consider the bits string x = 0110011001. The result is a
string of codes xc = 0110242, whose dictionary is shown in
Table I (see [15]). The set of words Wx of this dictionary, with
|Wx | = 7, corresponds to the first row of Table I, and it gives
us an idea of the information in x.

LILLO-CASTELLANO et al.: SYMMETRICAL COMPRESSION DISTANCE FOR ARRHYTHMIA DISCRIMINATION IN CLOUD-BASED BIG-DATA

1255

maximum and minimum operators as follows:
mFCDxy = min{FCDxy , FCDyx }
=

(9)

min{|Wx |, |Wy |} − |Wx ∩ Wy |
min{|Wx |, |Wy |}

MFCDxy = max{FCDxy , FCDyx }
=

Fig. 1. Venn diagram illustrating the topological relationship among the words
of two dictionaries (W x and W y ). The intersection set is shown as a gray zone,
and black thicker line delimits the union set.

The relationship between two strings is determined by their
common patterns. Let us consider strings x and y, and their
associated sets of words Wx and Wy , extracted from their dictionaries. Topological relations between Wx and Wy can be
represented by a Venn diagram (see Fig. 1) which allows to easily visualize: 1) the total amount of information, i.e., Wx ∪ Wy ,
referring to the total number of dictionary words (area inside the
thick line); 2) the shared information, i.e., Wx ∩ Wy , referring
to the shared dictionary words (gray zone); and 3) the properties
always satisfied by their cardinalities, given by
min{|Wx |, |Wy |} = ps · max{|Wx |, |Wy |}

(4)

|Wx ∩ Wy | = pi · min{|Wx |, |Wy |}
= ps · pi · max{|Wx |, |Wy |}

(5)

|Wx ∪ Wy | = |Wx | + |Wy | − |Wx ∩ Wy |
= max{|Wx |, |Wy |} · (1 + ps − ps · pi )
(6)
where parameters ps , pi ∈ [0, 1] depend on the compression scenario. Last equations are the basics to understand the idea of
similarity based on dictionary matching.
Two well-known CSMs based on dictionary matching are the
normalized dictionary distance (NDD) [16] and the FCD [6].
The NDD is a similarity metric in the range [0, 1], defined as
NDDxy =

|Wx ∪ Wy | − min{|Wx |, |Wy |}
.
max{|Wx |, |Wy |}

(7)

Note that NDD and NCD have a formally similar equation, and
by comparing (3) and (7), it comes that Cx (Cy ) is approximated
by |Wx | (by |Wy |), whereas Cxy is approximated by |Wx ∪
Wy |. This means that NDDxy ≈ N CDxy . Regarding FCD, it
is defined as
FCDxy =

|Wx | − |Wx ∩ Wy |
|Wx |

(8)

where the cardinality of the intersection set |Wx ∩ Wy | is used.
Given that FCD does not fulfill the symmetry property, we
propose a simple way to convert it into a metric by using the

max{|Wx |, |Wy |} − |Wx ∩ Wy |
.
max{|Wx |, |Wy |}

(10)

Using (6) and (7), we get NDDxy = MFCDxy . Since NDD
just accounts for one FCD measure between x and y, it is reasonable to assume that NDD is disregarding some information
conveyed by mFCDxy that can be relevant for estimating the
similarity between x and y. We define then a new CSM, socalled WFCD, taking into account both FCDxy and FCDyx
and weighting them according to the relative cardinality of each
dictionary as follows:
WFCDxy =

|Wx | · FCDxy + |Wy | · FCDyx
.
|Wx | + |Wy |

(11)

For a better interpretation, and according to dictionary matching, (11) can be rewritten into
WFCDxy = 1 − 2 ·

|Wx ∩ Wy |
.
|Wx | + |Wy |

(12)

Note that WFCD is also in the range [0,1].
As it will be shown in Section VI, WFCD is the CSM providing the best CAC performance in our EGM database. In our
implementation, each EGM signal is coded as a string of bits
where each voltage value is associated to eight bits (one byte).
The length of each string depends on the number of signal samples. The LZW algorithm is then applied to each string to get a
set of dictionaries used to compute the WFCDs among EGMs.
IV. CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA DATABASE
SCOOP is a Spanish platform developed by Medtronic Ibérica
S.A. for supporting the cooperative knowledge generation in the
ICD field. It is technically based in the remote monitoring capabilities of current devices, which makes possible the automatic
transmission of their information and structured storage in a
remote server. This way, each remote follow-up for each ICD
patient is incorporated into a growing database, within an observational framework research study so-called UMBRELLA,
ensuring the legal, normative, and scientific data exploitation,
as well as privacy requirements [17]. UMBRELLA also complements the digitally stored information from the device with
clinical patient data and with their prognosis.
SCOOP started in 2011 and it has stored since then more
than 20 000 two channels-EGMs of cardiac arrhythmia episodes
from 50 hospitals, with an average follow-up around 2.5 years.
Any Spanish hospital can currently join at any time and propose scientific studies with the database, and it is likely that
SCOOP will expand to an international environment in the near
future. Nowadays, SCOOP platform supports more than 40 scientific running proposals, showing the viability and relevance
of a complementary model for knowledge generation. Besides

1256

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

TABLE II
RHYTHM TYPES DETERMINED BY THE COMMITTEE AND THEIR
RELATIVE OCCURRENCES
Occurrence

three-class

eight-class

Occurrence

34.19%

Atrial

64.06%

Ventricular

1.75%

Other

ST
AF
SVT
UST
SMVT
VF
TWO
NS

13.96%
11.73%
4.48%
4.02%
60.06%
4.00%
1.20%
0.55%

the unprecedented database size in ICD recordings, SCOOP has
a quality ensured by a systematic clinical evaluation process
of each episode by a scientific committee consisting of six expert cardiologist and arrhythmologist (i.e., reviewers) with large
knowledge and medical background on reviewing EGMs of ICD
stored arrhythmia episodes. The scientific committee defined a
set of labels (eight-class) with the following criteria.
First, atrial origin arrhythmias consisted of: sinus tachycardia
(ST), with regular P-R intervals, normal P and R-wave, and rate
between 100 and 180 bpm; atrial fibrillation (AF), with varying
P-R intervals, irregular P-P intervals, changing P-wave morphology, and atrial rate of 400 bpm or more; supraventricular
tachycardia or flutter (SVT), with regular P-P intervals, stable
P-wave morphology, ventricular rate may change and atrial rate
> 100 bpm (in atrial flutter, atrial impulses are conducted to the
ventricles in various ratios as 2:1 or 4:1, and atrial rate is usually between 250 and 400 bpm); and uncertain supraventricular
tachycardia (UST), given by fast arrhythmia whose origin can
not be determined with the information recorded in the EGM.
Second, ventricular origin arrhythmias consisted of: sustained
monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (SMVT), given by regular and sustained rhythms that meet ICD programmed criteria
and are finished by one therapy or they last more than 30 s; and
sustained polymorphic or ventricular fibrillation (VF), given by
episodes with variable morphology and chaotic rhythm, which
meet ICD programmed criteria and are finished by one therapy
or they last more than 30 s.
And third, other consisted of: T-wave oversensing (TWO),
given by an inappropriate detection of the T-wave by the device,
interpreting this T-wave as R-wave, and resulting in a double
counting during a normal sinus rhythm; and noise (NS), given
by an irregular and chaotic rhythm, with short duration and rate
> 500 bpm, which starts and finishes spontaneously.
If any episode is labeled as uncertain by any reviewer during
the classification process, it is again labelled by all six reviewers
in a final review.
For this study, EGMs recorded from January 2012 to December 2013 were selected and labeled, yielding 6848 EGMs from
629 patients. Table II shows the relative occurrence for each arrhythmia in this database, as well as the grouping of these labels
into three major sets (three-class), namely, atrial arrhythmias,
ventricular arrhythmias, and other. The episodes had lengths of
24.42± 16.64 s, with median 19.82 s and interquartile range

13.23 s. The number of episodes per patient was 10.8± 22.9,
median 4 and interquartile range 10. Both episode length and
the number of episodes per patient followed an asymmetric and
nongaussian distribution (confirmed by standard Kolmogorov–
Smirnov normality test [18]).
Due to the diversity of ICD models in the national scenario,
several lead configurations were present both for far-field and
near-field EGMs. The most usual configurations were pairs [19]
Can to HVB - Vtip to Vring (3334 episodes), Atip To Aring - Vtip
to Vring (2899), and Aring to HVB - Can to Vring (200). Note
that HVB denotes the can (coil) electrode, A(V)tip denotes atrial
(ventricular) tip of the sensing electrode, and similar notation
for the ring sensing electrode. Two simultaneously recorded
channels were available for each episode. All episodes were
sampled at 128 samples per second in the ±8 mV range with an
amplitude resolution of 0.063 mV (one byte of dynamic range).
For an overview of the signals recorded by the ICD, we present in
Fig. 2 eight EGM waveforms (one per class), randomly chosen
among those with the Vtip to Vring lead configuration. It is
interesting to remark the different episode durations and the
absence of recorded signal in several temporal intervals. Both
characteristics were dependent on the ICD programming criteria
by the clinician.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Let us consider a set E of N labeled EGM episodes or
instances E = {(epi , li )}N
i=1 from P different patients. Each
episode, represented by ep, is composed of the two channels
of the cardiac arrhythmia EGM signal. A label l (ST, AF, SVT,
UST, SMVT, VF, TWO, or NS) is associated to each episode
according to the experts committee. In order to design a cardiac
arrhythmia discriminator from dataset E, we propose a two
stages methodology (see Fig. 3). First, the CSM is computed for
each pair of episodes in E, obtaining a vector csm of N components per episode. Second, similarity vectors and labels are
used to design the CAC system by following a machine learning
approach.
A. Performance Evaluation
In this study, two different techniques based on resampling
are used for estimating the generalization performance. Both
techniques are based on the leave one out - cross validation
(LOOCV) [20] strategy and estimate performance by considering those episodes that are not used for designing the arrhythmia
discriminator.
In LOOCV, the original dataset is divided into N subsets (as
many subsets as available instances) and N statistical models
(here, machine learning classifiers) are constructed. Each model
is designed using a different subset of N − 1 instances, evaluating the performance on the remaining instance (validation
subset). The model performance is estimated as the average
performance on the N validation subsets. LOOCV has been
shown to give an almost unbiased estimator of the performance
in machine learning schemes, hence it provides with a reasonable criterion for model selection and comparison.

LILLO-CASTELLANO et al.: SYMMETRICAL COMPRESSION DISTANCE FOR ARRHYTHMIA DISCRIMINATION IN CLOUD-BASED BIG-DATA

Fig. 2.
class.

1257

Overview of the EGM waveforms recorded by the Vtip to Vring ICD lead configuration. Each panel shows a random episode among those of the same

B. Input Space for CSM Featuring

Fig. 3. Diagram of the proposed methodology to classify cardiac arrhythmia
episodes in the SCOOP platform. This study focuses on the CSM, working with
a subsequent simple machine learning classifier.

In our context, the LOOCV strategy can be applied in two
different ways. The first one, by setting the equivalence between instance and episode, what leads to the leave one episode
out - cross validation (LOEOCV) technique. The second one
considers the equivalence instance-patient and separates the
original dataset E into P different subsets, where each subset contains the episodes of just one patient. We have called this
technique leave one patient out - cross validation (LOPOCV),
and it estimates the classification performance on episodes of
those patients not considered during the classifier design. Note
the difference between LOPOCV and LOEOCV techniques. In
LOEOCV, the model can be designed with episodes from the
same patient considered in the validation subset (same patient,
but not same episode). In LOPOCV, the model is designed with
episodes from patients who were not considered in the validation subset (so, every validation subset will have a different
number of episodes).
In order to evaluate the ability of CSMs presented in preceding sections for cardiac arrhythmias discrimination, three
kinds of experiments were performed with the same machine
classification scheme. Each experiment was differenced by the
CSM input space (see below) and the number of classes to discriminate (eight-class and three-class cases). Performance was
evaluated using both LOEOCV and LOPOCV techniques.

Each arrhythmic episode consisted of two registers, i.e., two
EGM channels denoted as ch1 and ch2 . Both channels were
simultaneously recorded from different lead configurations and
have the same number of samples per episode, whereas different
episodes usually have different number of samples. There are
several possibilities for processing data from both channels.
Though the most direct way is to concatenate both channels
to have a signal of twice samples, another option is to convert
each episode epi into a complex signal ci = ch1,i + j · ch2,i ,
where j is the imaginary unit. The second possibility, inspired
on phase portraits [21], allows to work with the magnitude and
phase signals. Previous studies have shown the usefulness of
phase portraits for discriminating SVT versus VT [22].
In our methodology, the use of the phase signal can provide a
reasonable performance while reducing the computational burden of the whole classification process. Thus, we used four
different input spaces for CSM featuring, namely, concatenated
channels (Ccat), just modulus (Mod), just phase (Pha), and concatenated modulus-phase (Xcat). Note that the number of samples corresponding to Ccat and Xcat is twice that of Mod and
Pha spaces. Fig. 4 shows the original waveforms (channels 1 and
2) for the TWO episode (located at third row, second column in
Fig. 2), as well as the subsequent signals for CSM featuring.
C. k-Nearest Neighbors Classification Algorithm
In this paper we focus on a methodology using different CSMs
for classifying an heterogeneous big-data set of signals, rather
than benchmarking a wide variety of classification machines.
This is the reason to use a classification algorithm as simple and effective as possible, the voting k-nearest neighbors
(k-NN) classifier. It is a nonparametric algorithm classifying an

1258

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 4. CSM featuring signals for the TWO episode in Fig. 2: (a) Individual EGM channels (two upper panels) and Ccat (lower panel); (b) Mod, Pha, and Xcat
signals.

instance according to the most frequent label among the labels
of its k nearest instances, by using a suitable distance measure
[20]. It can be shown that when the number of instances tends
to infinity, the voting k-NN classifier tends to the optimal one
(Bayesian classifier), what is a quite desirable consistency property even though k-NN does not assume any statistical model
for the data. Furthermore, k-NN has been shown to provide a
quite reasonable performance in comparison to more complex
machine classifiers, with the additional advantage of its interpretability.
An essential point in the k-NN classifier design is the selection
of parameter k (best number of neighbors for voting). To avoid
poor performance, the k value must be chosen so that the classifier is not sensitive to atypical instances while avoiding data
overfitting. For this reason, the best k value not only depends
on the data distribution, but also on the size and dimensionality
of the dataset [20].
VI. RESULTS
A. Classification Performance
Real world applications usually have imbalanced datasets,
this is, scenarios where instances of different classes are not
equally represented in the dataset used for designing the classifier. This fact is specially relevant for evaluating performance in
multiclass imbalanced problems. Several merit figures are used
to quantify the classifier performance [23], among them, accuracy rate and Cohen’s Kappa coefficient have been considered in
this paper. The term baseline accuracy is used here to denote the
accuracy obtained when classifying all instances as belonging
to the class with highest a priori value (i.e., the majority class).
Results provided by our CAC approach are shown in Table III, where each cell presents the accuracy rate (first value)
and Kappa coefficient (second value) for different evaluation
techniques (LOEOCV and LOPOCV), number of classes (eight
and three), input spaces for CSM featuring, and CSMs (NCD,
NDD, FCD and WFCD). The classification scheme was k-NN
voting, and parameter k was tuned for the best accuracy according to the validation strategies in Section V-A. A wide range of
k values was explored for each classifier design (k ∈[1,100]),
selecting k = 1 for all cases in LOEOCV, and values around

k = 13 for eight-class and k = 5 for three-class in LOPOCV.
Best performances are denoted in bold for every evaluation technique, number of classes, and quality indicator (accuracy rate
and Kappa coefficient). The best accuracies were always for
concatenated channels and WFCD, and among them, the worst
accuracy was for the eight-class case with LOPOCV (62.67%),
close to the baseline accuracy (60.06%, see Table II).
A key result from Table III is the dramatically different accuracy for LOEOCV and LOPOCV, the former being a much
more optimistic scenario. This fact indicates that considering
previous episodes from one patient when designing a classifier
improves significantly the accuracy when another episode of the
same patient is classified. Comparison of the accuracy rates obtained for WFCD-Ccat-eight-class in LOEOCV (89.78%) and
LOPOCV (62.67%) shows that LOPOCV accuracy is about
30 percentage points below that of LOEOCV. This reduction is
not so dramatic for the three-class case, which outperforms the
baseline accuracy (64.06%) in 20 percentage points in spite of
its reduction with respect to the LOEOCV technique. In general,
results in Table III indicate that the three-class scenario is much
better than the eight-class case for all CSMs.
Regarding the Kappa coefficient, it allows us to interpret
the reliability of the CAC schemes, specially for imbalanced
datasets, by providing a numerical rating of the degree to which
sometimes correct classification is just by chance (Kappa equal
to 0). In this setting, it is possible to conclude from Table III
that the accuracy provided by the LOEOCV technique is far
from being by chance, because Kappa value is greater than 0.65
except when the FCD measure is used. The opposite conclusion
could be inferred for the eight-class LOPOCV classification
schemes, with Kappa values close to 0 and accuracy rates close
to the baseline (60.05%), suggesting the strong relevance of
imbalance in the CAC schemes. Note that Kappa values for
three-class LOPOCV classifiers were significantly higher than
those for the eight-class schemes. The best case was 0.49 for
WFCD, indicating that part of the classification structure is
captured by the CAC scheme (accuracy 77.96%).
With respect to CSM featuring, the best results were obtained
for channels concatenation, what may be reasonable since the
use of just modulus and just phase has an implicit loss of information. Regarding the CSMs performance comparative, the

LILLO-CASTELLANO et al.: SYMMETRICAL COMPRESSION DISTANCE FOR ARRHYTHMIA DISCRIMINATION IN CLOUD-BASED BIG-DATA

1259

TABLE III
ACCURACY RATE (FIRST VALUE, IN %) AND KAPPA COEFFICIENT (SECOND VALUE) IN EPISODES CLASSIFICATION (EIGHT-CLASS AND THREE-CLASS CASES)
WHEN USING CONCATENATED CHANNELS, MODULUS, PHASE, CONCATENATED MODULUS-PHASE WITH FOUR DIFFERENT CSMS (IN ROWS) AND TWO
EVALUATION STRATEGIES (LOEOCV AND LOPOCV)
k -NN LOEOCV
eight-class

NCD
NDD
FCD
WFCD

k -NN LOPOCV
three-class

eight-class

three-class

Ccat

Mod

Pha

Xcat

Ccat

Mod

Pha

Xcat

Ccat

Mod

Pha

Xcat

Ccat

Mod

Pha

Xcat

85.66
0.76
87.40
0.79
34.32
0.11
89.78
0.83

81.07
0.68
83.15
0.72
36.74
0.08
85.32
0.75

86.52
0.77
87.50
0.79
42.36
0.18
89.54
0.82

85.63
0.76
87.54
0.79
35.41
0.12
89.71
0.82

93.27
0.85
93.71
0.86
57.35
0.22
95.43
0.90

89.63
0.78
90.71
0.80
58.31
0.20
92.35
0.84

92.49
0.84
93.12
0.85
61.78
0.28
94.62
0.88

92.29
0.83
93.35
0.86
62.59
0.29
95.33
0.89

62.00
0.27
62.41
0.28
40.73
0.08
62.67
0.27

61.04
0.23
61.04
0.25
48.51
0.02
61.36
0.22

60.53
0.20
60.79
0.20
47.56
0.07
60.24
0.19

61.02
0.23
62.22
0.26
35.71
0.03
61.25
0.23

75.80
0.47
77.12
0.48
48.93
0.15
77.96
0.49

74.09
0.40
74.93
0.42
48.29
0.07
74.05
0.39

71.67
0.34
71.27
0.33
55.25
0.12
70.14
0.30

72.44
0.36
74.06
0.38
53.46
0.15
73.47
0.37

TABLE IV
CONFUSION MATRIX USING THE LOEOCV STRATEGY, CCAT AND WFCD IN
(A) EIGHT-CLASS AND (B) THREE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION SCENARIOS

proposed WFCD always provided the best results both in eight
and three classes scenarios, with concatenated channels. Table IV shows the confusion matrices for eight classes (A) and
three classes (B) when using the LOEOCV technique with
WFCD. Penultimate row indicates the accuracy rate (in %) per
class, while last row shows the total accuracy rate (see Table III).
Since all the classifiers in LOEOCV corresponded to 1-NN, the
confusion matrix for three classes can be directly obtained by
aggregating results of the confusion matrix for eight classes. In
these tables, the number of episodes correctly classified for each
class is shown in bold (main diagonal). Confusion matrices are
informative about the clinical performance and behavior of the
classifier. For instance, note that the number of misclassifications among atrial rhythms in Table IV(A) is in general larger
than in the others. Also, the absolute number of misclassifications between SMVT and VF is relevant, however, one has to
keep in mind that there is not a widespread used cutoff criterion

for discriminating both arrhythmias. The capabilities for noise
identification are extremely high and reliable, with a very low
number of misclassifications. With respect to the three-class discrimination scheme, still a number of errors are present among
atrial and ventricular origin arrhythmias.
From a clinical and technical point of view, the higher performance of the LOEOCV validation strategy is in accordance
with the fact that a patient has individual physiopathological
mechanisms characterizing his/her EGM episodes. Thus, when
a patient suffers from a specific type of arrhythmia, it is likely
that the patient will suffer again from the same type of arrhythmia. Then, 1-NN will likely be among the best k-NN classifier
because other episodes of the same patient have been considered for the classifier design. On the other hand, the same patient
may have overlapped segments between contiguous episodes,
often for patients suffering from an arrhythmic storm (those
segments seldom exceed 2 s). Accordingly, an additional experiment was carried out to check the accuracy bias when episodes
with shared segments are considered in the classifier design.
For this purpose, the LOEOCV accuracy was achieved by discarding from the classifier design (in each realization) those
episodes of the same patient in a 6, 12, and 24 h window. Ccat
CSM features and WFCD were used. For the eight-class cases,
accuracy(%)/kappa was 84.11/0.73, 83.85/0.73 and 83.88/0.72
for 6, 12 and 24 h window, respectively. For the three-class cases,
results were 91.91/0.82, 91.77/0.82 and 91.59/0.82 for 6, 12 and
24 h window, respectively, showing a moderate and acceptable
bias due to this effect. These results also stress the importance
of considering patient prior information in the classifier design,
which significantly improve the performance.
It is interesting to compare the performance of the proposed
compression-based with morphology-based discrimination algorithms as the wavelet algorithm (WA) [24], which is implemented in several ICD models in SCOOP database. The activation of WA depends on the clinician criteria, and different
settings can be adjusted for its programming. WA only discriminates between the supraventricular or ventricular anatomical origin of the arrhythmia, and its automatic diagnosis is not always
available for all episodes, given that cycle-based discrimination
algorithms could inhibit it. For these reasons, the comparison

1260

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

between our CSM method and morphology discriminators used
by ICDs is only possible when WA was activated in ICDs, in
total 2837 episodes of the SCOOP database. For this subset, the
EGMs in SCOOP database were retrieved from four different
ICD models. We compared the ICD labels with those from the
experts, obtaining a 76.91% of concordance with a kappa value
of 0.44. The same comparison was made using the labels provided by our algorithm with the LOEOCV strategy with those
of the experts, yielded a 95.28% of concordance with kappa of
0.9. These results evidence that the discrimination capabilities
increase with the proposed learning system.

Fig. 5. Compression performance: (a) Histograms of the time (seconds) spent
to compute NCD and WFCD measures between one episode (Ccat) and the rest
of episodes in the SCOOP dataset; (b) Histogram of the WFCD dictionary size,
normalized by the episode length (number of samples).

B. Compression Performance
A relevant requirement in a cloud-based big-data service is
the computational burden. A service of this nature handles a
huge amount of data, hence its tools should be as efficient and
simple as possible in order to avoid an increase in the response
time. We benchmarked the computational burden of NCD (the
most used CSM in the literature) and WFCD. When computing
CSMs, the computational burden depends on the number of
processors, the type of compressor, the strings length, and the
number of similarities to be calculated (the number of strings in
the dataset). The last one is highly relevant because the number
of operations for NCD calculation is different from that for
WFCD calculation, as shown next.
Let us consider the NCD computation between bits string
x and a set of N strings given by Y = {y 1 , y 2 , · · · , y N }.
Let us also assume that we have previously compressed each
string in Y , storing the values Cy1 , Cy2 , . . . , CyN . As indicated in (3), apart from Cx it is always necessary to calculate Cxy1 , Cxy2 , . . . , CxyN , what requires a high computational
cost because the compression task is computationally expensive.
For comparison purposes, let us consider now the computational time used to get the WFCD and NCD between one string
x and the set of N strings Y . If after compression we store the
set of words {Wy1 , Wy2 , . . . , WyN } and corresponding cardinalities, it is just necessary to perform the compression of x.
In this case, the highest computational cost is associated to that
of obtaining the sets Wx ∩ Wy1 , . . . , Wx ∩ WyN . Since getting the common words of two dictionaries (match operation) is
faster than the compression task, it is clear that WFCD is computationally lighter than NCD. For visual illustration, Fig. 5(a)
shows the histograms of the time spent in computing the similarity between each episode and the rest of the SCOOP dataset
for WFCD and NCD using concatenated channels and the LZW
compressor on an Intel Core i7 CPU Q 720 @1.60GHz. The
LZW compressor was configured to find words of bytes, words
with size 1 were removed (LZW algorithm initializes the dictionary with all possible words with size 1) and no maximum
word-size was defined. Note that WFCD computation is about
one order of magnitude quicker than that of NCD (means were
7.22 and 0.89 s in NCD and WFCD, respectively).
Another important performance parameter to analyze is the
episode compression rate, which can be represented by means
of the dictionary size of each episode when normalized to the
corresponding length (number of episode samples). Fig. 5(b)

shows the distribution of these values, resulting in a Gaussian
distribution with mean 0.6 and standard deviation 0.06. A compression rate of 0.6 (mean of the distribution) points out that
LZW only can compress the episode information with a 40%
mean rate, what indicates that episodes present high variability
and that LZW does not find long patterns (the median word size
in dictionaries was 3). However, and as shown by the classification performance of our CSM method, this fact is supportive
for our goal, since it allows to characterize episodes according
to its class and to correctly classify a high number of episodes.
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
CAC is still an open and active research field, with memory and computational constraints by the ICDs requiring low
complexity arrhythmia discrimination algorithms. Simple criteria as cardiac cycle length or RR intervals have limitations
when discriminating SVT from VT, and alternative algorithms
have been proposed, as the EGM width criterion, which present
limitations for wide QRS complex SVT [25], or morphological methods, such as the correlation waveform analysis or the
probability density function, which do not improve the classification accuracy in current devices [4] and often they have not
been validated in large databases. Similarity measures based
on information theory have been successfully applied to a high
number of applications, including language tree construction
[5], content-based image retrieval [6], or weaning outcome prediction [10], among many others. Our CSM method aims to
open an alternative approach to CAC, from an offline scenario
of big data services, by pursuing the following algorithmic properties: 1) minimum signal preprocessing; 2) minimum number
of free parameters; 3) possible comparison among signals with
different lengths or sampling frequencies, and even when blank
intervals are present; and 4) no need for feature selection or
extraction stages.
When working with large databases from patients, it seems
reasonable to develop automatic, fast enough and reliable procedures capable of learning the diagnosis provided by the expert.
A usual classification requirement is a reasonable tradeoff between reliability and efficiency. In the case of SCOOP, there
is a need for continuous clinical evaluation of device-stored
episodes by physicians, since the ICDs do not provide an accurate discrimination for all of them. This has special relevance

LILLO-CASTELLANO et al.: SYMMETRICAL COMPRESSION DISTANCE FOR ARRHYTHMIA DISCRIMINATION IN CLOUD-BASED BIG-DATA

in clinical studies, where automatic classification is required
to have an accurate idea of the impact of incorrect episode
classifications in terms of inappropriate therapies. In addition, a
subsequent clinical evaluation of the episode could help in the
patient follow-up for automatic discrimination and fast communication to the clinician about the actual patient’s episodes and
the therapies which could have been inappropriately delivered.
Due to the observed high variability and classification difficulty,
each episode in SCOOP database was analyzed by at least two
expert reviewers and labeled only after expert consensus. However, previous research has shown that there is a wide diversity
of visual evaluation methodologies in clinical studies [26], [27],
and its rigor is strongly tied to the available time and resources.
In addition, there exists a bias in the expert classification that
can be linked to the inter and intraphysician variability, which
generates a systematic error which is also dependent on the ICD
model [26], [27].
The high accuracy required for ICD episodes classification
needs to be analyzed in the context of the scope of existing and
ongoing algorithms for current devices. In [4], performance was
benchmarked for VT vs SVT+ST discrimination in bicameral
devices in four detection algorithms, yielding 98% sensitivity
for VT detection with specificity from 66% to 94%, whereas
previous studies [28] had benchmarked the same algorithms in
a similar dataset (consisting of 71 SVT and 15 VT) and yielded
extremely low specificities (11%, 12%, 20%, and 28%). Recently, the preliminary results of the PainFREE SST study [29]
showed SmartShock algorithm providing with an impressively
low inappropriate shock rate, namely, larger than 97% in different device models. Note that inappropriate shock reduction is
associated with improved detection, but this does not mean that
detection is completely accurate, as far as inappropriate shocks
can be avoided by changing the device detection criteria.
SCOOP is currently a national open project created and running in Spain, so that any Spanish hospital can join and participate on it at any time, and there is a possibility to its expansion
in an international environment. Since the fast growing and development of cloud computing systems and big data analytics
are changing the basis of data knowledge extraction, they are
increasingly present in everyday life of companies and organizations, and platforms like SCOOP can offer great possibilities
to physicians for further analyzing and supporting their patient’s
diagnosis and treatment, as well as provide with new scenarios
for developing new algorithms and tools for the daily clinical
practice.
The proposed methodology would benefit from further development for its advantage use in cloud-based big-data services,
since it has some limitations. One of them is the presence of
a bias in the predominant SVMT class detection due to unbalanced classes. Moreover, an additional bias is also present due
to arrhythmic episodes of the same patient near in time, which
often exhibit similar features and morphology. In our study, the
use of machine learning techniques was constrained to explore
the most simple and effective ones, however, other probabilistic machine learning schemes considering prior probabilities
and weighted costs could probably improve the CAC performance reducing the aforementioned bias. Another limitation is

1261

the WFCD dependence on both sampling rate and amplitude
resolution, which is a crucial factor for the use of the proposed
approach in CAC databases with mixed sampling rates and amplitude resolutions. In this study, this dependence has not been
further scrutinized because in SCOOP database EGMs were always stored by ICDs with the restriction of a fixed sampling rate
and amplitude resolution (128 Hz and 0.063 mV, respectively).
The classification algorithm proposed in this study certainly
should be required to provide not only with the estimated classification label, but also with the estimated confidence on this
classification, hence it could be used for retrieving only those
highly reliable labels. This ongoing theoretical and practical
study is at this moment beyond the scope of the present study.
Within the current SCOOP framework, several advantaged uses
can be designed for the algorithm, which do not consist of
the substitution of the scientific committee for labeling, but
rather of running parallel in collaboration with some committee
members.
The potential of the algorithm for large databases labeling can
include other clinical studies different from SCOOP, and the algorithm could also be used in clinical studies using devices from
other companies. According to current database size, and only
looking at those arrhythmias with better algorithm recognition
rate for the three-class scenario (ventricular), our approach could
be used for more than 50% of the episodes with a classification
error of about 2.5%. This is an acceptable rate for an environment like SCOOP, where scientific clinicians are expected
to review more than 60.000 episodes in the near future. Our
methodology could have potential advantage as an intelligent
tool for existing remote monitoring systems, by providing with
priority when many episodes are pending of cardiologist evaluation, or for suggesting those episodes with discordance between
device and algorithm classification for preferential analysis, or
for preselecting actual ventricular episodes from inappropriate
therapy episodes and sending alert messages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank M. G. de Pablo, R. Moreno,
G. Gutiérrez, and the team at Medtronic Ibérica S.A. for
their kind and professional support throughout all the project.
They would also like to thank the researchers and contributors in SCOOP: M. Ahumada (Hospital General Universitario de Elche), M. Álvarez (Hospital Universitario Virgen de
las Nieves), J. Alzueta (Hospital Clı́nico Universitario Virgen de la Victoria), M. Fe Arcocha (Hospital Universitario
de Basurto), Á. Arenal (Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón), J. M. Arizón (Hospital Universitario Reina
Sofı́a de Córdoba), J. Balaguer (Hospital Universitario de
Guadalajara), N. Basterra (Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra),
J. Benezet (Hospital General Ciudad Real), A. Bodegas (Hospital Universitario de Cruces), J. Brugada (Hospital Clinic i
Provincial de Barcelona), D. Calvo (Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias), E. D. Infante (Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena), J. F. de la Concha (Hospital Universitario
Infanta Cristina de Badajoz), I. F. Lozano (Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro Majadahonda), M. L. F. Andrés (Com-

1262

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

plejo asistencial Universitario de León), A. F. Fontenla (Hospital
Universitario 12 de Octubre), X. Fosch (Hospital Son Llatzer),
J. Garcia (Hospital Universitario de Burgos), E. G. Campo
(Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo), A. H. Madrid
(Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal), J. Jiménez (Hospital
de la Ribera), J. G. Martı́nez (Hospital General Universitario
de Alicante), J. M. Ferrer (Hospital Universitario de Áraba),
J. Mercé (Hospital Universitario Joan XXIII de Tarragona),
J. M. Arribas (Hospital Universitario San Juan de Alicante),
R. M. Aguilera (Hospital Universitario Infanta Leonor), J. Olalla
(Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla), R. Pavón (Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Valme), R. Peinado (Hospital Universitario de La Paz), L. Pérez (Complejo Hospitalario
Universitario de A Coruña), F. P. Lorente (Hospital General Univesitario Reina Sofı́a Murcia), J. M. Porres (Hospital Universitario Donostia), R. Porro (Complejo Hospitalario de Cáceres),
A. Quesada (Consorcio Hospital General Universitario de Valencia), A. Rodrı́guez (Hospital Universitario de Canarias),
J. C. Rodrı́guez (Hospital Universitario Insular de Gran Canaria), R. Romero (Complejo Hospitalario Nuestra Señora de
la Candelaria), J. Rubio (Hospital Clı́nico Universitario de Valladolid), R. Ruiz (Hospital Clı́nico Universitario de Valencia),
X. Sabaté (Hospital Universitario de Bellvitge), M. J. S. Tello
(Hospital Universitario La Fe), F. J. Tornés (Complejo Hospitalario Torrecárdenas), J. Villacastı́n (Hospital Clı́nico Universitario San Carlos), R. Villuendas (Hospital Universitario
Germans Trias i Pujol), X. Viñolas (Hospital de la Santa Creu i
Sant Pau) and F. Zumalde (Hospital de Galdakao-Usansolo).
REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization. (2011). The top 10 causes of death (fact
sheet no. 310) [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs310/en/
[2] T. B. Garcı́a and G. T. Miller, Arrhythmia Recognition: The Art of Interpretation. Boston, MA, USA: Jones & Bartlett, 2004.
[3] R. X. Stroobandt, S. S. Barold, and A. F. Sinnaeve, Implantable Cardioverter - Defibrillators Step by Step: An Illustrated Guide. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2009.
[4] E. Aliot, R. Nitzschéb, and A. Ripartb, “Arrhythmia detection by dualchamber implantable cardioverter defibrillators. A review of current algorithms,” Europace, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 273–286, 2004.
[5] M. Li, X. Chen, X. Li, B. Ma, and P. M. B. Vitányi, “The similarity metric,”
IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 3250–3264, Dec. 2004.
[6] D. Cerra and M. Datcu, “A fast compression-based similarity measure
with applications to content-based image retrieval,” J. Visual Commun.
Image Representation, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 293–302, 2012.
[7] D. Salomon, Data Compression: The Complete Reference. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2007.
[8] P. Vitanyi, “Compression-based similarity,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Data
Compression, Commun. Process., Jun. 2011, pp. 111–118.
[9] R. Cilibrasi and P. Vitanyi, “Clustering by compression,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1523–1545, Apr. 2005.
[10] J. M. Lillo-Castellano, I. Mora-Jiménez, R. Santiago-Mozos,
J. L. Rojo-Álvarez, J. Ramiro-Bargueño, and A. Algora-Weber, “Weaning outcome prediction from heterogeneous time series using normalized
compression distance and multidimensional scaling,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1737–1747, 2013.
[11] D. Cerra, M. Datcu, and P. Reinartz, “Authorship analysis based on data
compression,” Pattern Recog. Lett., vol. 42, pp. 79–84, 2014.
[12] M. Li and P. Vitányi, An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and its
Applications. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008.
[13] C. H. Bennett, P. Gács, M. Li, P. Vitányi, and W. Zurek, “Information
distance,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1407–1423, Jul.
1998.

[14] D. Salomon, Variable-Length Codes for Data Compression. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2007.
[15] A. Gersho and R. M. Gray, Vector Quantization and Signal Compression.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1992.
[16] A. Macedonas, D. Besiris, G. Economou, and S. Fotopoulos, “Dictionary
based color image retrieval,” J. Visual Commun. Image Representation,
vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 464–470, 2008.
[17] A. Fontenla, M. López-Gil, J. Martı́nez-Ferrer, J. Alzueta, I. FernándezLozano, X. Viñolas, A. Rodrı́guez, J. Fernández-de-la-Concha, I. Anguera,
F. Arribas, “Clinical Profile and Incidence of Ventricular Arrhythmia in Patients Undergoing Defibrillator Generator Replacement in Spain,” Revista
Española de Cardiologı́a (English Edition), vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 986–992,
2014.
[18] G. Marsaglia, W. Tsang, and J. Wang, “Evaluating kolmogorov’s distribution,” J. Statistical Softw., vol. 8, no. 18, pp. 1–4, 2003.
[19] J. L. Rojo-Álvarez, A. Arenal-Maı́z, and A. Artés-Rodrı́guez, “Discriminating between supraventricular and ventricular tachycardias from egm
onset analysis,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 16–26,
Jan./Feb. 2002.
[20] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Classification. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[21] E. Wegert, Visual Complex Functions: An Introduction With Phase Portraits. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012.
[22] A. Casaleggio, P. Rossi, A. Dall’Acqua, A. Faini, G. Sartori, G. Musso,
R. Mureddu, E. Casali, V. Malavasi, and S. Chierchia, “On cardiac activity
characterization from implantable cardioverter defibrillator electrogram
analysis: Is far-field better?,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiology, Sep. 2002,
pp. 161–164.
[23] C. Aggarwal, Data Classification: Algorithms and Applications. London,
U.K.: Chapman & Hall, 2014.
[24] C. Swerdlow, M. Brown, K. Lurie, J. Zhang, N. Wood, W. Olson, and
J. Gillberg, “Discrimination of ventricular tachycardia from supraventricular tachycardia by a downloaded wavelet-transform morphology algorithm: A paradigm for development of implantable cardioverter defibrillator detection algorithms,” J. Cardiovascular Electrophysiology, vol. 13,
no. 5, pp. 432–441, 2002.
[25] F. Duru, M. Schönbeck, T. F. Lüscher, and R. Candinas, “The potential for
inappropriate ventricular tachycardia confirmation using the intracardiac
electrogram (egm) width criterion,” Pacing Clinical Electrophysiology,
vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1039–1046, 1999.
[26] P. Friedman, R. McClelland, W. Bamlet, H. Acosta, D. Kessler, T. Munger,
N. Kavesh, M. Wood, E. Daoud, A. Massumi, C. Schuger, S. Shorofsky,
B. Wilkoff, and M. Glikson, “Dual-chamber versus single-chamber detection enhancements for implantable defibrillator rhythm diagnosis: The
detect supraventricular tachycardia study,” Circulation, vol. 113, no. 25,
pp. 2871–2879, 2006.
[27] B. Powell, Y. Cha, S. Asirvatham, D. Cesario, M. Cao, P. Jones,
M. Seth, L. Saxon, and F. Roosevelt, “Implantable cardioverter defibrillator electrogram adjudication for device registries: Methodology and
observations from altitude,” Pacing Clinical Electrophysiology, vol. 34,
no. 8, pp. 1003–1012, 2011.
[28] F. Hintringer, S. Schwarzacher, G. Eibl, and O. Pachinger, “Inappropriate
detection of supraventricular arrhythmias by implantable dual chamber
defibrillators: A comparison of four different algorithms,” Pacing Clinical
Electrophysiology, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 835–841, 2001.
[29] C. Wollmann, T. Lawo, V. Kühlkamp, R. Becker, C. Garutti, T. Jackson,
M. Brown, and H. Mayr, “Implantable defibrillators with enhanced detection algorithms: Detection performance and safety results from the
painfree sst study,” Pacing Clinical Electrophysiology, vol. 37, no. 9, pp.
1198–1209, 2014.

J. M. Lillo-Castellano received the Telecommunication Engineering degree and the M.Sc. degree in information and communication technology in biomedical engineering from the Rey Juan Carlos University,
Madrid, Spain, in 2010 and 2012, respectively. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree and working as hired researcher at the Department of Signal
Theory and Communications, Telematics and Computing, Rey Juan Carlos University.
His research interests include multivariate data
analysis, machine learning, digital image processing,
and their applications to bioengineering.

LILLO-CASTELLANO et al.: SYMMETRICAL COMPRESSION DISTANCE FOR ARRHYTHMIA DISCRIMINATION IN CLOUD-BASED BIG-DATA

I. Mora-Jiménez received the Telecommunication
Engineering degree in 1998 from the Polytechnic
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, and the Ph.D.
degree in telecommunication in 2004 from Carlos III
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
She is an Associate Professor at the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, Telematics and Computing, Rey Juan Carlos University,
Madrid. Her main research interests include statistical learning theory, neural networks, and their applications to image processing, bioengineering, and
communications.

1263

A. Cano-González received the Telecommunication Engineering degree and the M.Sc. degree in
telemedicine and biomedical engineering in 2006 and
2008, respectively, from the Polytechnic University
of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
She is working in the area of implantable cardiac
devices in the company Medtronic Ibérica (Spain).
She works as a Project Manager of an innovative
project (SCOOP Project) focused on encouraging the
design and development clinical/scientific research to
enhance clinical evidence generation of implantable
cardiac devices.

R. Santiago-Mozos received the Ph.D. degree in signal processing and communications from the Carlos
III University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, in 2009.
He has just finished a Postdoctoral Fellow of
the Spanish Program for Recruitment and Incorporation of Human Resources at the University Rey Juan
Carlos of Madrid, Madrid. He has been a Spanish
Foundation for Science and Technology Postdoctoral
Fellow at the Machine Learning and Data Mining
Group, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland, where he had also completed a Marie Curie
Fellowship. His research interests include machine learning and medical applications and he has coauthored more than 20 papers appearing in refereed
journals and conference proceedings.

F. Chavarrı́a-Asso received the Computer Science
Engineering degree in 2009 from the High Polytechnical Center, University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza,
Spain.
He is working in the area of implantable cardiac
devices in the company Medtronic Ibérica, Madrid,
Spain. He has worked in the concept and development
of several projects and services involving device data
mining and management of patient information gathered through the Medtronic CareLink remote monitoring network.

A. Garcı́a-Alberola received the M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from Universitat de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Since 1993, he has been a Cardiologist and a Professor of medicine at Hospital Universitario Virgen
de la Arrixaca and Universidad de Murcia, Murcia,
Spain, where he is the Chief of the Laboratory of
Cardiac Electrophysiology. He has coauthored more
than 120 scientific papers and more than 50 communications in cardiac electrophysiology, and his main
research areas are repolarization analysis, arrhythmia
mechanisms, and cardiac signal processing.

J. L. Rojo-Álvarez (SM’13) received the Telecommunication Engineering degree in 1996 from the University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, and the Ph.D. degree
in telecommunication in 2000 from the Polytechnic
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
Since 2006, he has been an Associate Professor
at the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, Telematics and Computing, Rey Juan Carlos
University, 28943, Madrid. He is Senior Member of
IEEE since 2012. He has published more than 70 papers in JCR journals and more than 100 international
conference communications. He has participated in more than 50 projects (with
public and private funding), and directed more than ten of them, including several actions in the National Plan for Research and Fundamental Science.
Dr. Rojo-Álvarez was awarded in 2009 with the I3 Prize of Spanish Science
and Innovation Ministry to the research path.

