IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

521

Instrumental Assessment of Bradykinesia:
A Comparison Between Motor Tasks
Thierry Q. Mentzel, Charlotte L. Mentzel, Stijn V. Mentzel, Ritsaert Lieverse, Hein A.M. Daanen,
and Peter N. van Harten

Abstract—Bradykinesia, a common symptom in psychiatry, is
characterized by reduced movement speed and amplitude. Monitoring for bradykinesia is important, as it has been associated with
reductions in quality of life and medication compliance. Subtle
forms of bradykinesia have been associated with treatment response in antipsychotic-naı̈ve first episode patients. Therefore, accurate and reliable assessment is of clinical importance. Several
mechanical and electronic instruments have been developed for
this purpose. However, their content validity is limited. This study
investigated which tasks, or combinations thereof, are most suitable for assessing bradykinesia instrumentally. Eleven motor tasks
were assessed using inertial sensors. Their capability of distinguishing bradykinetic patients with schizophrenia (n = 6) from
healthy controls (n = 5) was investigated. Seven tasks significantly discriminated patients from controls. The combination of
tasks considered most feasible for the instrumental assessment of
bradykinesia was the gait, pronation/supination, leg agility and
flexion/extension of elbow tasks (effect size = 2.9).
Index Terms—Antipsychotic-induced, bradykinesia, instrumental assessment, motor task, schizophrenia & psychotic states.

I. INTRODUCTION
NTIPSYCHOTIC-INDUCED bradykinesia is associated
with physical disability, social stigmatization, lower quality of life, and reduced medication compliance [1]–[4]. Bradykinesia expresses itself as a reduction in speed and amplitude of
voluntary movement [5]. Bradykinesia occurs as a symptom of
Parkinson’s Disease, drug-induced parkinsonism, depression,
negative symptoms of schizophrenia, and others. The pathophysiological basis of bradykinesia lies in a dysregulation of
the basal ganglia, specifically the pathways involved with the

A

Manuscript received September 4, 2014; revised January 8, 2015; accepted
February 22, 2015. Date of publication March 24, 2015; date of current version
March 3, 2016.
T. Q. Mentzel was with the VU University, Amsterdam, 1081 HV the Netherlands. He is now with the Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 6200 MD the Netherlands and Innova, and is
also with the GGz Centraal, Amersfoort 3800 DB the Netherlands (e-mail:
t.mentzel@ggzcentraal.nl).
C. L. Mentzel is with the Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 6200 MD the Netherlands and Innova, GGz Centraal, Amersfoort 3800 DB the Netherlands (e-mail: c.mentzel@ggzcentraal.nl).
S. V. Mentzel was with VU University, Amsterdam, 1081 HV the Netherlands (e-mail: stijn.mentzel@gmail.com).
R. Lieverse is with the Department of Psychiatry and Psychology,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, 6200 MD the Netherlands (e-mail:
r.lieverse@maastrichtuniversity.nl).
H. A. M. Daanen is with TNO, Soesterberg, 3769 DE the Netherlands and
the Faculty of Human Movement Sciences, VU University, Amsterdam, 1081
HV the Netherlands (e-mail: h.a.m.daanen@vu.nl).
P. N. van Harten is with the Innova, GGz Centraal, Amersfoort 3800
DB the Netherlands and the Department of Psychiatry and Psychology,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, 6200 MD the Netherlands (e-mail: peter.
vanharten@maastrichtuniversity.nl).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2412656

scaling of the amplitude and velocity of movement [5]. Dysregulation of these pathways can be a result of psychotic disorders
and/or antipsychotic treatment [6].
In first-episode antipsychotic naı̈ve patients with schizophrenia, bradykinesia is a predictor of reduced treatment response
[7]. Bradykinesia can also debut as a prodrome for psychosis in
antipsychotic-naı̈ve ultra-high risk (UHR) groups [8]. Therefore, accurate assessment of bradykinesia is of clinical and
scientific importance. Bradykinesia is typically assessed using
observer rated scales, for example, the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and the St. Hans Rating Scale For
Extrapyramidal Side-Effects (SHRS). However, the assessment
of movement disorders using observer rated scales is subjective,
has a moderate reliability, and shows a low sensitivity to subtle forms of movement disorders [9], [10]. Consequently, rating
scales are less suitable for both the monitoring of bradykinesia
and the detection of subtle prodromal bradykinesia. A logical
alternative would be instrumental assessment.
Several objective and reliable instrumental methods of assessing bradykinesia have been developed [8], [11]–[18]. However,
they are rarely applied in research and clinical practice, likely
due to their cost and ease of use in comparison to rating scales.
Nowadays, more affordable and user-friendly motion capture
technologies are available [13], [15]–[17]. To assess the severity of bradykinesia instrumental assessments mechanically or
electronically capture performances on motor tasks [8], [11]–
[18]. These instruments focus on measuring a specific motor
task, for example, handwriting or spiral drawing. As a result,
the scope of these instruments does not cover the entire construct
of bradykinesia.
Content validity of instrumental assessments can be improved
by assessing a broader selection of motor tasks. As a proof of
principle discriminability between patients with bradykinesia
and healthy controls was investigated for a wide range of motor
tasks. We hypothesized that a suitable selection of tasks should
be able to discriminate between these two groups.

II. METHODS
A. Subjects
Power calculations indicated that in order to significantly
discriminate between groups, n = 5, an effect size of at least
2.0 is required to ensure a p-value of 0.05 with a power of 0.8.
Therefore, we opted to investigate two very distinct populations
in order to be able to achieve meaningful results with a small
subject population. We recruited six DSM-IV schizophrenic
inpatients with antipsychotic-induced bradykinesia from Zon

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

522

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

Fig. 1. Overview of the instrumental setup and data analysis. Left: Placement
of the inertial sensors attached to the index and middle fingers, upper, and
lower arm and leg, and sternum. Sensors connected to a Bluetooth receiver
worn around the waist. Middle: 3-D-Model constructed from sensor data.
Right: Elbow angle (degrees) plotted against time (seconds) during the flexion/extension task. Asterisks indicate when the elbow is fully extended and
flexed, and were used to determine the mean duration, amplitude and velocity
of a flexion/extension cycle.

& Schild, a psychiatric hospital in the Netherlands. Criteria for
bradykinesia were at least one moderate or two mild scores
on the UPDRS bradykinesia items [19]. Five healthy controls
were recruited from the staff and local community. Criteria for
inclusion were age between 40 and 60 and male gender, as age
and gender affect bradykinesia [20]. Considering the scale of
this study, we opted to investigate a homogeneous population
to reduce the risk of a type II error. Exclusion criteria were
use of other medication that can induce movement disorders,
severe cognitive impairment or mental retardation and injuries
or neurological diseases affecting movement.
All subjects provided informed written consent, and the study
was approved by the local ethics committee.
B. Instruments
Subjects’ movements were registered using six inertial sensors (MTx, XSENS, Enschede, the Netherlands). In contrast to
inertial sensors used in previous studies [12]–[14], these sensors use a proprietary Kalman filter that combines data from
the accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer to reduce sensor drift and improve the accuracy of movement registration
[21]. Sensors were attached to the subjects’ dominant upper and
lower arm and leg, ring and middle finger, and to their sternum
using Velcro straps. The sensor secured to the ring and middle finger was only attached during the hand movements task.
Exact placement of the sensors is illustrated in Fig. 1. Each sensor connected to an XBUS receiver (XSENS, Enschede), worn
around the waist, that registered data and sent it via Bluetooth
to a computer running MT software 1.8.1 (XSENS, Enschede,
the Netherlands).
C. Tasks
Repetitive movements are one of the primary clinical measures of bradykinesia. Velocity and amplitude are impaired when
performing repetitive motor tasks at high movement rates with
large amplitudes [22]. Therefore, the selection of tasks primarily existed of repetitive motor tasks. Tasks were derived from

existing observer rated scales and instrumental assessments. The
following tasks were selected: 1) hand movements, 2) pronation/supination movements of hand, 3) leg agility, 4) arising
from chair, and 5) gait tasks from the UPDRS following previous studies [13], [14]–[15]. Tasks selected from other instruments were the 6) Flexion/extension of elbow [19] and small
and large 7) tapping and 8) tracing tasks [17]. On the tapping
and tracing tasks subjects were instructed to repeatedly tap on
two lines, 30 and 55 cm apart, and trace circles, 17 and 32 cm in
diameter. Patel et al. proposed that the instrumental assessment
of bradykinesia could be extended to motor tasks derived from
activities of daily living [12]. Therefore, the following three
tasks were also included: 9) pouring water from a plastic jug
into four plastic glasses, 10) repeatedly flipping over a plastic
glass and setting it down on the table, and 11) twisting a peppermill (similar to the pronation/supination movements of hand
task of the UPDRS). Subjects were instructed to perform tasks
with a large amplitude as fast as possible for 30 s. Except for the
gait, arising from chair and pouring tasks. In these tasks subjects
were instructed to walk in their own pace for 20 m between two
markers on the floor spaced 5 m apart, arise from their chair and
sit back down twice, and pour a marked volume of water into
four glasses. Subjects were given 30 s to practice each task and
2 min rest between tasks.
D. Task Outcomes
For each task mean cycle duration, amplitude and velocity
were determined. An exception was made for the arising from
chair and pouring glass tasks, because they were only performed
a couple of times. A linked segment model was built using
the sensor output, the sensors absolute orientation as a rotation
matrix, in MATLAB 2012a (Mathworks), Fig. 1. Segment lengths
were corrected for body height [23].
Analysis of hand movements, flexion/extension of elbow,
pronation/supination movements of hand, leg agility, flipping
glass, and peppermill tasks was based on joint angles. These angles were defined as the angle between the sensors proximal and
distal to the joint, determined using Euler decomposition and
filtered using a low pass bidirectional Butterworth filter. The cutoff frequency was determined by adding 2 Hz to the frequency
with the highest power in the joint angle signal, calculated using Direct Fourier Transformation. Each tasks’ average cycle
duration, amplitude, and velocity were calculated from the joint
angle using a peak detection algorithm, where peaks in joint
angle were defined as subsequent minima an maxima that are at
least one standard deviation apart, see Fig. 1.
To analyze gait, arising from chair and the small and large tapping and tracing tasks, the positions of either the ankle, torso or
wrist were investigated, respectively. The linked segment model
was used to determine the position of the ankle/wrist relative to
the hip/shoulder joint in the transversal plane, the plane parallel
to the ground. To analyze arising from the chair the sternum’s
position was used relative to the ankle in the longitudinal plane,
perpendicular to the transversal plane. The gait task also required regular walking to be differentiated from turning, which
was defined as a rotation over 160° of the sensor attached to

MENTZEL et al.: INSTRUMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF BRADYKINESIA: A COMPARISON BETWEEN MOTOR TASKS

the sternum. Mean cycle/stride durations, amplitudes, and velocities on these tasks were obtained by analyzing the positions
of the ankle, wrist, and sternum filtered and analyzed using the
same method and algorithm as mentioned above. For the arising
from chair task the average durations of standing up and sitting
down were determined as well as their average velocities.
Differences in the execution of the pouring glass task resulted in data not suitable for automated analysis. Therefore,
the average pouring time per glass was determined by visually
inspecting the data.
E. Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 17.0 for Windows (IBM). Group means of task outcomes were determined
for patients and controls. To investigate the discriminability of
the combined task outcomes (durations, amplitudes, and velocities) of selections of tasks, the outcomes were normalized and
summed. Differences between group were investigated with two
tailed t-tests assuming unequal variances. To achieve sufficient
statistical power to significantly differentiate patients from controls an effect size above 2.0 was required. Therefore, effect
sizes, Cohen’s D, were determined using the pooled standard
deviations of the groups.
III. RESULTS
A. Subjects
Age and height of patients and controls were 52.2 ± 6.8 and
52.0 ± 3.9 years, and 1.87 ± 0.10 and 1.80 ± 0.07 m. One patient used a walking aid, therefore, his scores on gait, leg agility
and arising from chair tasks were excluded from the analysis.
B. Tasks
Gait, leg agility, elbow flexion/extension, arising from chair,
small and large tracing, small and large tapping, and flipping
glass tasks significantly discriminated patients from controls,
Table I. Differences between patients and controls were largest
on the flipping glass task. This was also the only task to significantly discriminate on its duration, amplitude and velocity,
with respective effect sizes of 2.3, 2.8, and 2.8. Thereafter the
flexion/extension of the elbow task was most discriminative, effect sizes for duration and velocity were 2.1 and 2.7, as seen in
Fig. 2. An interesting finding is that in contrast to standing up,
patients sat down significantly slower than controls.
C. Task Combinations
Combining tasks increased effect sizes by as much as 50%,
illustrated in Fig. 2. Table I lists the differentiability of the combinations of tasks derived from the UPDRS (hand movements,
pronation-supination movement of hands, leg agility, and gait
tasks), tracing/tapping tasks (small and large tapping and tracing
tasks), the combination of all tasks, except for the arising from
chair and pouring glass tasks. These tasks could not be combined
with the other task due to their outcomes being different.

523

Also included in Table I is the recommended selection of
tasks (flexion/extension of elbow, gait, leg agility, and pronation/supination movements of hand tasks).
Criteria for the selection of these tasks are described in the
discussion. The highest effect size, 4.2, was reported for the
combined durations of all tasks.
D. Task Outcomes
Mean cycle/stride duration, amplitude, and velocity significantly discriminated between patients and controls in four, one,
and seven tasks, respectively. Velocity discriminated most in
five of the seven tasks. Duration was most discriminative in the
other two tasks.
When task outcomes were combined, only duration and velocity achieved significance, and most discrimination was reported for the combined durations.
IV. DISCUSSION
The majority of the tasks are suitable for assessing bradykinesia instrumentally, as seven of the 11 tasks significantly discriminated patients with bradykinesia from controls. As expected,
combining outcomes of different tasks markedly improved discriminative potential.
Other studies reported that gait, arising from chair, leg agility,
flexion/extension of the elbow and pro/supination movements
of hand tasks are capable of measuring bradykinesia instrumentally [8], [11]–[18]. This is confirmed by our findings and
indicates that these tasks are suitable for measuring bradykinesia in long term psychiatric patients, with the exception of the
pro/supination task. Granted that the instrument in the study of
Patel et al. measured bradykinesia less accurately than tremor
and dyskinesia [12].
In the selection process of tasks for the instrumental assessment of bradykinesia, practical aspects should also be considered, see Table II. The flexion/extension and gait tasks are most
feasible, being similar to tasks on validated observer rated scales.
Other tasks are less feasible, because 1) they are less practical
due to the requirement of additional standardized materials (leg
agility, arising from chair, tapping, tracing, pouring, flipping,
and peppermill). 2) The tasks could not discriminate patients
from controls (hand movements, pronation/supination, pouring and peppermill). 3) Performance on the tasks depended on
more than the underlying construct of bradykinesia. For example, muscle weakness, rigidity, tremor, and required accuracy of
movements also affect movement speed [24], [25]. Therefore,
confounding could have been an issue in the tapping, tracing,
pouring, and flipping glass tasks.
Variance in expression of bradykinesia between patients
is considerable, partly since severity can differ per region
(head/neck/arms/trunk/legs). Observer rated scales rely on the
analysis of a broad selection of tasks to achieve adequate content
validity. Our results also show that assessing a combination of
tasks improves discriminability. Although combining all tasks
achieved best discriminability, this is an impractical solution as
an assessment would cost too much time, approximately 30 min.
Therefore, to improve the content validity of the instrumental

524

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

TABLE I
TASK OUTCOMES AND COMBINATIONS THEREOF SIGNIFICANTLY DISCRIMINATING PATIENTS FROM CONTROLS

MENTZEL et al.: INSTRUMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF BRADYKINESIA: A COMPARISON BETWEEN MOTOR TASKS

525

Fig. 2. Three sets of boxplots detail differentiability of the outcomes for duration, amplitude and velocity. Data of patients with bradykinesia are grey and data of
controls are white. To aid the visual comparability scores were normalized (including the normalized sum scores of the combinations of task outcomes). Scores were
reported for the flexion/extension of elbow task and the combined scores of the tasks derived from the UPDRS (hand movements, pronation-supination movement
of hands, leg agility, flexion/extension of elbow and gait tasks), of the tapping and drawing tasks (small and large tapping and tracing tasks), the recommended
selection, see discussion, of tasks (flexion/extension of elbow, gait, leg agility and pronation-supination movement of hands tasks) and of all tasks (Excluding
tasks producing different outcomes, arising from chair and pouring glass task). This figures illustrates that most differentiability is achieved by combining tasks •
Outliers labelled to indicate which group the subject was in and their respective number in the study.  UPDRS.∗ Indicates an effect size greater than a Cohen’s D
of 2.0. ∗∗ Indicates an effect size greater than a Cohen’s D of 3.0.

TABLE II
TASKS FEASIBILITY FOR ASSESSING BRADYKINESIA
Task
Hand Movement
Gait
Pronation/Supination
Movements of hand
Leg Agility
Flexion/extension of elbow
Arising from chair
Pouring water in glass
Tracing (small and large)
Tapping (small and large)
Flipping glass
Peppermill

Materials

Content Validity

Discriminability

++
++
++

++
++
++

−
+
−/+

−/+
++
−/+
−−
−−
−−
−
−

++
+
++
−
−
−
−
+

+
++
++
−−
++
++
++
−

Overview of practical aspects tasks must meet to be feasible for use in an instrumental
assessment. Tasks are scored on the extra materials required to perform the tasks,
favoring tasks that do not require any. Content validity indicates to what degree a task
measures the underlying construct of bradykinesia. Scores for discriminability were
based on the effect sizes found in this study. Scores range from −−, −, −/+, + to
++.

assessment of bradykinesia a combination of tasks investigating different body parts is required and the selection of tasks
should be limited to tasks with a high content validity, adequate
discriminability and that are easy to perform and require few additional materials. Thus, the recommended selection of tasks for
the design of an instrumental assessment for bradykinesia is the
combination of the average cycle/stride velocities on the gait,
pronation/supination, leg agility, and flexion/extension of elbow
tasks. This selection can be performed in less than ten min. and
discriminates very well between patients with bradykinesia and
controls, Cohen’s D = 2.9.
The external validity of this study could be limited. As this
study was limited to male subjects, aged 40 to 60. Although age
and gender affect the severity of bradykinesia, they do not affect
in which parts of the body bradykinesia is most prominent. In

addition, the large effect sizes and the fact that performances on
the tasks were based on repeated movements, contribute to a high
statistical power. Therefore, this study’s findings can likely be
generalized to other populations. Investigators were not blinded
to the status of the participants, patient or control, or the aim
of the study. As patients were compared to healthy controls it
was clear which group they were part of. However, data were
collected electronically reducing the possibility of estimator
bias. Nevertheless, it remains possible that minor variations in
instructions between groups resulted in a slight bias.
Instrumental assessment of bradykinesia is ideal for research
and monitoring patients, because in contrast to rating scales it
is easy to achieve sensitive, reliable, and objective measurements without extensive training. An interesting application is
instrumentally assessing the UHR group for psychosis. There
is evidence that in UHR individuals, subtle forms of movement
disorders, such as bradykinesia, predict conversion to psychosis
[9]. If so, instrumental screening of bradykinesia may be of high
clinical value as a biomarker to predict conversion to psychosis
in UHR populations.

V. CONCLUSION
We confirm that instrumental assessment of bradykinesia is
feasible and that content validity can be improved. The selection
of tasks considered most feasible for an instrumental assessment
was the flexion/extension of elbow, gait, leg agility, and pronation/supination tasks. Larger studies are warranted to investigate
the validity and reliability of instruments based on these tasks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ir. Natasha Maurits, Dr.
Tim Bosch, and Dr. Constantin Ungureanu for their assistance.

526

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, MARCH 2016

REFERENCES
[1] W. W. Fleischhacker, U. Meise, V. Gunther, and M. Kurz, “Compliance
with antipsychotic drug-treatment: Influence of side-effects,” Acta Psych.
Scandinavaca Suppl. vol. 89, pp. 11–15, Sep. 1994..
[2] W. M. M. Schuepbach, J. Rau, K. Knudsen, J. Volkmann, P. Krack, L.
Timmermann, T. D. Hälbig, H. Hesekamp, S. M. Navarro, N. Meier, D.
Falk, M. Mehdorn, S. Paschen, M. Maarouf, M. T. Barbe, G. R. Fink, A.
Kupsch, D. Gruber, G. H. Schneider, E. Seigneuret, A. Kistner, P. Chaynes,
F. Ory-Magne, C. Brefel Courbon, J. Vesper, A. Schnitzler, L. Wojtecki,
J. L. Houeto, B. Bataille, D. Maltête, P. Damier, S. Raoul, F. SixelDoering, D. Hellwig, A. Gharabaghi, R. Krüger, M. O. Pinsker, F. Amtage,
J. M. Régis, T. Witjas, S. Thobois, P. Mertens, M. Kloss, A. Hartmann,
W. H. Oertel, B. Post, H. Speelman, Y. Agid, C. Schade-Brittinger, and
G. Deuschl for the EARLYSTIM Study Group, “Neurostimulation for
Parkinson.s disease with early motor complications,” New Engl. J. Med.
vol. 368, no. 7, pp. 610–622, Feb. 2013.
[3] L. Zaghdoudi, W. Homri, S. Belaid, M. Ben Bechir, and R. Labbane,
“Quality of life of patient with schizophrenia treated by conventional and
atypical neuroleptics,” Tunis Med. vol. 87, no. 9, pp. 593–598, Sep. 2009.
[4] S. R. Marder, “Facilitating compliance with antipsychotic medication,”
J. Clin. Psych. vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 21–25, Apr. 1998.
[5] M. R. DeLong and T. Wichmann, “Part IV movement,” in Principles of
Neural Science, E.R. Kandel, Ed. 5th ed. New York, NY, USA: McGrawHill, 2013, p. 991.
[6] O. D. Howes and R. M. Murray, “Schizophrenia: An integrated
sociodevelopmental-cognitive model,” Lancet, vol. 383, no. 9929,
pp. 1677–1687, May 2014.
[7] D. G. Robinson, M. G. Woerner, J. M. Alvir, S. Geisler, A. Koreen,
B. Sheitman, M. Chakos, D. Mayerhoff, R. Bilder, R. Goldman, and J.
A. Lieberman, “Predictors of treatment response from a first episode of
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder,” Amer. J. Psych. vol. 156, no.
4, pp. 544–549, Apr. 1999.
[8] J. P. Koning, R. S. Kahn, D. E. Tenback, L. J. van Schelven, and P. N. van
Harten, “Movement disorders in nonpsychotic siblings of patients with
nonaffective psychosis,” Psych. Res, vol. 188, no. 1, 133–137, Jun. 2011.
[9] D. A. Bennett, K. M. Shannon, L. A. Beckett, C. G. Goetz, and
R. S. Wilson, “Metric properties of nurses’ ratings of Parkinsonian signs
with a modified Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale,” Neurology,
vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 1580–1587, Dec. 1997.
[10] C. E. Dean, J. M. Russell, M. A. Kuskowski, M. P. Caligiuri, and
S. M. Nugent, “Clinical rating scales and instruments: How do they
compare in assessing abnormal, involuntary movements,” J. Clin. Psychopharmacol., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 298–304, Jun. 2004.
[11] M. P. Caligiuri, J. B. Lohr, and R. K. Ruck, “Scaling of movement velocity:
A measure of neuromotor retardation in individuals with psychopathology,” Psychophysiology, vol. 35 no. 4, pp. 431–437, Jul. 1998.
[12] S. Patel, K. Lorincz, R. Hughes, N. Huggins, J. Growdon, D. Standaert,
M. Akay, J. Dy, M. Welsh, and P. Bonato, “Monitoring motor fluctuations
in patients with Parkinson’s disease using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 864–873, Nov. 2009.

[13] A. Salarian, F. B. Horak, C. Zampieri, P. Carlson-Kuhta, J. G. Nutt, and
K. Aminian, “ITUG, a sensitive and reliable measure of mobility,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 303–310, Jun. 2010.
[14] C. Zampieri, A. Salarian, P. Carlson-Kuhta, K. Aminian, J. G. Nutt, and
F. B. Horak, “The instrumented timed up and go test: Potential outcome
measure for disease modifying therapies in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psych., vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 171–176, Feb. 2010.
[15] K. Banaszkiewicz, M. Rudzinska, S. Bukowczan, A. Izworski, and
A. Szczudlik, “Spiral drawing time as a measure of bradykinesia,” Neurol.
Neurochirurgia Polska, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 16–21, Jan. 2009.
[16] M. P. Caligiuri, H. L. Teulings, J. V. Filoteo, D. Song, and J. B. Lohr,
“Quantitative measurement of handwriting in the assessment of druginduced Parkinsonism,” Hum. Movement Sci., vol. 25, no. 4/5, pp. 510–
522, Oct. 2006.
[17] J. Westin, S. Ghiamati, M. Memedi, D. Nyholm, A. Johansson, M.
Dougherty, and T. Groth, “A new computer method for assessing drawing
impairment in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 190, no. 1,
pp. 143–148, Jun. 2010.
[18] M. Hong, J. S. Perlmutter, and G. M. Earhart, “Recommendations for
bradykinesia assessment in Parkinson disease”, J. Neurologic Phy. Therapy, vol. 30, p. 205, 2006.
[19] P. N. van Harten, G. E. Matroos, H. W. Hoek, and R. S. Kahn, “The prevalence of tardive dystonia, tardive dyskinesia, Parkinsonism and akathisia
The Curacao Extrapyramidal Syndromes Study: I,” Schizophrenia Res.,
vol. 19, nos. 2/3, pp. 195–203, May 1996.
[20] H. W. Shin and S. J. Chung, “Drug-induced Parkinsonism,” J. Clin.
Neurol., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 15–21, Jun. 2012.
[21] D. Roetenberg, H. Luinge, P. Veltink, “Inertial and magnetic sensing of
human movement near ferromagnetic materials,” Proc. Second IEEE ACM
Int. Symp. Mixed Autom. Reality, 2003, pp. 268–269.
[22] E. L. Stegemoller, D. P. Allen, T. Simuni, and C. D. MacKinnon. “Ratedependent impairments in repetitive finger movements in patients with
Parkinson’s disease are not due to peripheral fatigue,” Neurosci. Lett.,
vol. 482, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Sep. 2010.
[23] I. P. Herman, Physics of the Human Body. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 1993, p. 18.
[24] A. Berardelli, J. C. Rothwell, P. D. Thompson, and M. Hallet, “Pathophysiology of bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease,” Brain, vol. 124,
no. 11, pp. 2131–2146, Nov. 2001.
[25] L. Docx, M. Morrens, C. Bervoets, W. Hulstijn, E. Fransen, M. De Hert,
C. Baeken, K. Audenaert, and B. Sabbe, “Parsing the components of the
psychomotor syndrome in schizophrenia,” Acta Psych. Scandinavica vol.
126, no. 4, pp. 256–265, Oct. 2012.

Authors’ photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

