IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2177

Patient Registration Using Intraoperative
Stereovision in Image-guided Open Spinal Surgery
Songbai Ji∗ , Xiaoyao Fan, Keith D. Paulsen, Senior Member, IEEE, David W. Roberts, Sohail K. Mirza,
and S. Scott Lollis

Abstract—Despite its widespread availability and success in open
cranial neurosurgery, image-guidance technology remains more
limited in use in open spinal procedures, in large part, because
of patient registration challenges. In this study, we evaluated the
feasibility of using intraoperative stereovision (iSV) for accurate,
efficient, and robust patient registration in an open spinal fusion
surgery. Geometrical surfaces of exposed vertebrae were first reconstructed from iSV. A classical multistart registration was then
executed between point clouds generated from iSV and preoperative computed tomography images of the spine. With two pairs of
feature points manually identified to facilitate the registration, an
average registration accuracy of 1.43 mm in terms of surface-tosurface distance error was achieved in eight patient cases using a
single iSV image pair sampling 2–3 vertebral segments. The iSV
registration error was consistently smaller than the conventional
landmark approach for every case (average of 2.02 mm with the
same error metric). The large capture ranges (average of 23.8 mm
in translation and 46.0° in rotation) found in the iSV patient registration suggest the technique may offer sufficient robustness for
practical application in the operating room. Although some manual effort was still necessary, the manually-derived inputs for iSV
registration only needed to be approximate as opposed to be precise and accurate for the manual efforts required in landmark
registration. The total computational cost of the iSV registration
was 1.5 min on average, significantly less than the typical ∼30 min
required for the landmark approach. These findings support the
clinical feasibility of iSV to offer accurate, efficient, and robust patient registration in open spinal surgery, and therefore, its potential
to further increase the adoption of image guidance in this surgical
specialty.
Index Terms—Fusion surgery, intraoperative stereovision (iSV),
patient registration, registration accuracy, spinal surgery.

I. INTRODUCTION
ESPITE its widespread commercial availability and success in cranial neurosurgery, use of image guidance has
been relatively limited in open spinal procedures [1], [2].
Most spinal applications have involved a narrow set of clinical

D

Manuscript received October 27, 2014; accepted March 18, 2015. Date of
publication March 26, 2015; date of current version August 18, 2015. This work
was supported in part by the NIH under Grant 1R21 NS078607, The Dartmouth
Clinical and Translational Science Institute under Award KL2TR001088 from
the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the NIH (SJ), and
the Dow-Crichlow Award (SSL). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ S. Ji is with the Thayer School of Engineering, Hanover, NH 03755 USA
(e-mail: Songbai.Ji@dartmouth.edu).
X. Fan and K. D. Paulsen are with the Thayer School of Engineering.
D. W. Roberts, S. K. Mirza, and S. S. Lollis are with the Geisel School of
Medicine, Dartmouth College, and also with the Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical
Center.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2415731

indications such as fusion and stereotactic radiation delivery,
and image guidance has remained largely unrealized in tumor
removal, assessment of deformity correction, or even simpler
surgeries, such as decompression and discectomy. Even in the
area of spinal fusion, 60% of surgeons never use image guidance, while only 11% of spine surgeons employ the technique
on a regular basis [3].
For spinal fusion procedures, in which pedicle screws are
implanted to stabilize vertebral instabilities resulting from disk
degeneration, congenital deformities, and trauma [4], the accuracy of screw insertion is critical. Unfortunately, failure or
“misplacement” rates of pedicle screw insertion can be as high
as 30% in the lumbar spine or even 55% in the thoracic region, when using conventional free-hand techniques [5]; higher
misplacement rates in the thoracic spine are likely due to the
smaller anatomic confinements of the pedicle in this area. While
most pedicle breaches are asymptomatic, screw misplacement
can result in impingement on a nerve (causing pain or neurologic deficit), injury to the dura or the spinal cord (leading
to cerebrospinal fluid leakage or permanent paralysis), and in
rare cases, injury to a major artery or vein (a potentially fatal
complication) [6]–[8].
The use of image guidance improves surgical accuracy. Numerous studies have shown that the use of image guidance is
associated with a decreased incidence in screw misplacement,
compared with the conventional free-hand approach, especially
when using navigational systems based on computed tomography (CT) or three-dimensional (3-D) fluoroscopy [2], [5],
[9]–[12]. A randomized, controlled trial of navigated versus
free-hand pedicle screw insertion found a substantial, statistically significant reduction of pedicle breach with navigation
(2% versus 23%, [13]). While no study has confirmed superior
clinical outcomes with the use of intraoperative navigation, the
relative rarity of neurologic or vascular injury and the challenge
of accruing a cohort with sufficient statistical power are practical
barriers to completion of a randomized trial.
Resistance to a wider acceptance of spinal image-guidance
technology is largely due to the inefficiency of patient registration, which is a process to establish the spatial transformation
between preoperative images and the patient’s anatomy in the
operating room (OR). In cranial neurosurgery, the scalp’s relative immobility enables the use of skin fiducials for simple,
accurate, and quick registration. However, the soft tissues over
the spine are mobile; therefore, skin fiducials are not a viable
option for spinal surgery. When skin fiducials have been used,
large registration errors have been reported (up to 2 cm [14] or
even 3 cm at the level of the disc space [15]). Instead, spinal

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF PATIENT GENDER, AGE, CONDITION, STATUS OF PREVIOUS SURGERY, TYPE OF SURGERY, AND THE EXPOSED VERTEBRAE LEVELS
(THE TOTAL NUMBER OF VERTEBRAL SEGMENTS EXPOSED ARE SHOWN IN PARENTHESIS)
Patient (gender/age)

Condition

1 (M/76)

L3-5 stenosis with L4-5
spondylolisthesis
L1 fracture

2 (M/29)
3 (F/50)
4 (F/67)

Previous surgery
with bone removed?
No
No

5 (M/44)
6 (M/69)

L4-5 spondylolisthesis
L4-5 spondylolisthesis (prior
L4-5 hemilaminotomies)
T6 fracture
L2-4 stenosis and scoliosis

No
Yes1

7 (M/64)

L4-5 spondylolisthesis

No

8 (F/61)

L5-L6 spondylolisthesis
(supranumerary lumbar vertebra)

No

No
Yes2

Type of surgery

L3-5 laminectomy and L4-5
instrumented fusion
T12-L2 laminectomy and
T10-L3 instrumented fusion
L4-5 instrumented fusion
L4-5 instrumented fusion
T3-T8 instrumented fusion
L2-5 laminectomy and
instrumented fusion
L4-5 instrumented fusion
with interbody cage
L5-6 instrumented fusion
with interbody cage

Exposed vertebrae

S7 Registration error
(mm)

L3-L5 (3)

1.65

T10-T12, L1-L3 (6)

2.16

L4, L5 (2)
L3-L5 (3)

2.76
2.29

T2-T8 (7)
L1-L3 (3)

3.08
1.65

L3-L5 (3)

2.15

L5, L6 (2)

3.31

The estimated registration error reported from the StealthStation using the pointwise landmark approach is also shown.
1
Prior L4-5 hemilaminotomies; 2 Prior L4-5 laminectomy and instrumented fusion.

registration typically involves the identification of anatomic
landmarks within the surgical field. This requires a substantial investment in time and effort on the part of the surgeon to
define, expose, and localize these locations [16]. Moreover, the
one-time registration at the start of surgery cannot account for
intervertebral motion that occurs after surgery is begun. Spinal
surgery is a physical process, requiring large-excursion surgical manipulation for bone removal and screw placement. This
intraoperative movement degrades navigational accuracy, especially when multiple vertebrae are involved. Although guidance
is attainable directly from images acquired with intraoperative
CT (iCT) and 2-D or 3-D fluoroscopy, radiation exposure (occupational and medical) from these techniques is a concern, and
their substantial capital costs are additional barriers to wider
deployment.
Radiation-free intraoperative images from ultrasound (US)
[17]–[22]), stereovision (iSV) ([23]–[25]), laser range scanning
(LRS) [26], [27], and more recently, conoscopic holography [28]
have been employed to aid navigation in image-guided surgical
interventions. Both feature- and intensity-based methods can be
used to register US with CT of the spine. With a feature-based
approach, contours of bony surfaces in US and CT are registered via the iterative closest point (ICP; [29]) technique [18] or
more recent variations that improve the registration algorithm
efficiency, robustness, and tolerance of noise and poor initial
starting positions [30]. However, because registration performance depends on accurate feature segmentation in US, which
is often manual, its utility is limited in practice. Intensity-based
US-to-CT registration eliminates manual segmentation, but typically requires image preprocessing to increase the similarity
of bony features in US and CT before the registration begins
[19]–[22].
Vision-based intraoperative images [31] including iSV and
LRS capture 3-D geometry and texture intensity of the exposed
anatomical surface. They have been successfully employed to
register either with preoperative magnetic resonance images of
the brain [26], [27], [32], [33] or with each other, when acquired

at two temporally distinct surgical stages [24], [27], [34], [35],
to compensate for intraoperative brain shift. Because reconstructed stereoscopic surfaces provide both 3-D geometry and
texture intensity, either source of information can be employed
for registration separately or in combination. Rigid registrations
that depend solely on geometry (e.g., via ICP [29]) may not be
sufficiently accurate, especially when significant lateral brain
shift occurs [36]. In this case, incorporating both 3-D geometry
and texture intensity improves registration accuracy [24]. On the
other hand, when registering two textured 3-D surfaces acquired
with iSV or LRS at two different points in time, the 3-D surfaces can be projected into a common 2-D coordinate system to
transform the 3-D geometrical surface registration problem into
a simpler 2-D image registration [34], [35]. This concept is especially appealing in clinical applications where the registration
process needs to be fully automated, and can be achieved with
optical-flow-based registration of the iSV images [35] without
requiring manual feature segmentation (e.g., vessels [27]).
Despite these effective and substantial deployments in cranial neurosurgery [31], vision-based guidance techniques have
not been applied to open spinal surgery to date [2]. The primary purpose of this study is to evaluate the performance of the
iSV methods, which we previously developed in the setting of
image-guided cranial surgery [35], [37], for rapid intraoperative
patient registration in open spinal fusion procedures with minimal user intervention. The efforts provide insight into the clinical feasibility of using this radiation-free, noninvasive imaging
technique as the basis for establishing accurate, efficient, and
robust image guidance and navigation during spinal fusions.
II. METHODS
A. Patient Cases and Anatomical Landmark Registration
Eight patients undergoing open spinal fusion surgeries were
prospectively recruited under the approval from the Dartmouth
Institutional Review Board. Patient demographic information
is summarized in Table I. For each patient, preoperative CT

JI et al.: PATIENT REGISTRATION USING INTRAOPERATIVE STEREOVISION IN IMAGE-GUIDED OPEN SPINAL SURGERY

2179

B. iSV Image Acquisition

Fig. 1. Coordinate systems involved in patient registration. Solid/dashed arrows indicate transformations determined from calibration/registration. A transformation reversing the arrow direction is obtained by matrix inversion.

(pCT) images of the spine were acquired in the standard supine
position. Anatomical landmarks (e.g., tips of the transverse and
spinous processes) were manually identified in pCT during planning prior to surgery. After opening the spine with sufficient
vertebral surfaces exposed, the same set of homologous feature points were manually identified in the OR using a tracked
probe via the Medtronic StealthStation S7 navigational system
(Medtronic Navigation; Louisville, CO, USA). By coregistering the two sets of ordered homologous points in the pCT and
the OR coordinate systems, traditional patient registration was
established. The registration error for the anatomical landmark
patient registration, as reported by the StealthStation, is shown
in Table I for each case. The mean estimated registration error
was 2.38 ± 0.62 mm.
The coordinate systems and transformations involved in patient registration are illustrated mathematically in (1), and
visually in Fig. 1. Specifically, a “world” coordinate system provided by the StealthStation serves as a common reference that
determines the spatial positions and orientations of the trackers
rigidly fixed to the patient’s vertebra or pelvis and the surgical microscope-stereovision camera assembly (i.e., patient Tworld
and iSV Tworld , respectively; see Fig. 1). In a conventional
landmark-based approach for patient registration, the transformation between the patient in the OR and the corresponding
pCT image volume (i.e., “patient registration” or pCT Tpatient
in Fig. 1) is obtained by matching the two sets of ordered
homologous anatomical markers identified in the OR using a
digitizing stylus (typically 8–10) and in the pCT image space.
When the spatial transformation between iSV and pCT image
volumes (i.e., pCT TiSV ) is directly available, the patient registration (pCT Tpatient ) can be readily computed from


pCT
Tpatient = pCT TiSV ×iSV Tworld × inv patient Tworld (1)
which completes the iSV-based patient registration technique
described in this paper (see Fig. 1).

A custom-designed stereovision system consisting of two
C-mount cameras (Flea2 model FL2G-50S5C-C, Point Grey
Research Inc., Richmond, BC, Canada) was rigidly mounted to
a Zeiss surgical microscope (OPMI Pentero, Carl Zeiss, Inc.,
Oberkochen, Germany) through a binocular port [37]. The cameras were operated at a resolution of 1024 × 768, and capable
of recording 15 frames/s. In this study, however, only a single
iSV snapshot was acquired for each camera/microscopic position and orientation. All iSV images were recorded at the same
microscopic zoom and focal length to simplify image reconstruction, although an efficient surface reconstruction method at
arbitrary camera settings without recalibration does exist [38].
A tracker was rigidly attached to the operating microscope to
allow the reconstructed iSV surface to be transformed into the
patient’s space via the Medtronic StealthStation S7 navigational
system.
For each patient, multiple iSV image pairs (range 3–8) were
acquired to ensure sampling of all exposed spinal surfaces.
Combining multiple image pairs offers the advantage of increased field-of-view, which may improve registration performance. However, this requires additional image processing, and,
as the number of included vertebrae increases, the distorting
effect of patient repositioning (e.g., supine image acquisition
versus prone surgery) is magnified by accumulation of motion
between segments. This effect was observed in patients 2 and
5, both of whom had more than six vertebrae visible within the
surgical field (see Table I). As a result, we selected only one
iSV image pair for each patient registration (which was a direct
“top” view sampling 2–3 consecutive vertebral segments).
C. Geometrical Surface Reconstruction and Accuracy
Assessment
Both stereoscopic camera calibration and correspondence
matching between two rectified images are critical for accuracy in iSV surface reconstruction [39], [40]. Techniques for
camera calibration are well studied [39]. Here, the stereoscopic
system was calibrated prior to surgery using an instrumented
calibration block by matching a set of points with known 3-D
coordinates to their counterparts found in the stereo image pair
[23]. A perspective projection matrix was then established from
the resulting intrinsic and extrinsic calibration parameters for
surface reconstruction, following image rectification and triangulation of correspondence points.
Correspondence matching between two rectified left and right
camera images is essentially a nonrigid registration along the
epipolar line, which is a constraint established during rectification [see Fig. 2(a) and (b)]. Most algorithms are based on the
optimization of cross correlation or its variants (e.g., sum of
squared differences) between two windowed subimages [40].
Here, we employed an optical-flow-based technique to treat the
correspondence matching as an unconstrained nonrigid registration to obtain a pixel-level disparity map [41]. The full-field
disparity maps can be readily used for feature segmentation
and assessment of confidence in correspondence matching (see
Section II-D for details).

2180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. Rectified (a) left and (b) right images of the spine for patient 2 and the
resulting (c) horizontal and (d) vertical disparity maps. The spinous processes
were automatically segmented via a region growing approach based on the
horizontal disparity map [red boundaries in (a) and (c)], while other bony areas
on the transverse processes were manually delineated [green boundaries in (a)].
(d) Vertical disparity map indicates the confidence in correspondence matching
as a result of the epipolar constraint. A typical epipolar line is shown in (a) and
(b), demonstrating homologous features are aligned on the same horizontal line
(arrows; i.e., “ground-truth” vertical disparity of zero). Units in pixels (images
downsampled to 25% along each dimension for illustration).

The millimeter accuracy of the iSV system has been previously quantified on a phantom [23], and more recently, on a
phantom and neurosurgical patient cases [38]. Similarly, in this
study, we used a tracked probe to sample selected feature points
on the exposed spinal surface independently by acquiring additional iSV images with the probe in view to minimize localization uncertainty. Their locations were then compared with their
homologous points, manually identified on the reconstructed
iSV surface to report the reconstruction accuracy in terms of
pointwise distance error for each patient. Certainly, errors from
the probe calibration and landmark localization compromise the
accuracy evaluation of the iSV technique. However, the former
is submillimetric (<0.5 mm) and well characterized by the manufacturer. The latter is more difficult to quantify precisely, but is
also considered to be small (<1 mm). Thus, despite introducing
some errors that bound the accuracy to which the iSV reconstruction can be assessed, the tracked probe is a widely used
and well-accepted digitizer that provides a practical reference
for comparison within the actual surgical setting, and hence,
makes an appropriate, even if imperfect, gold standard.
D. Image Preprocessing
To improve registration performance, maximizing the overlapping regions between common features of the exposed bony
surfaces in iSV and pCT was necessary. Because the horizontal
disparity map resulting from the optical flow was full field, morphological operations (e.g., median filtering to reduce noise) and
feature segmentations based on topological information were
possible [see Fig. 2(c)]. Therefore, the spinous processes were
automatically segmented via region growing [42] because they
were topologically “above” the surrounding tissue [red boundaries in Fig. 2(a) and (c)]. However, for exposed spinal surfaces

Fig. 3. (a–d) Illustration of four randomly generated initial starting points
used to initiate the multistart patient registration between iSV and pCT point
clouds. Two corresponding point pairs were first manually identified in iSV
(green) and pCT (red) to serve as the anchor and testing point pair, respectively.
All initial starting points had the anchor point pair pre-aligned as shown in (a).
Selected points on the pCT spinal surface used for registration are shown in blue
in (a).

on the transverse processes, the height difference in the horizontal disparity map was insufficient for automatic segmentation. Consequently, these areas were manually delineated [green
boundaries in Fig. 2(a)]. The vertical disparity map further facilitated the segmentation/delineation of features because of the
zero “ground-truth” vertical displacement known a priori as
a result of the epipolar constraint [i.e., any vertical disparity
larger than a threshold would indicate poor confidence in correspondence matching at a particular location; see Fig. 2(d)].
Only areas corresponding to actual bony structures were used
for registration.
The pCT images were first Gaussian-filtered and then thresholded. Voids in the resulting binary image volume were filled to
generate an isosurface of the spine. Because iSV only captured
the exposed surface of the spine, the pCT surface was limited
to the dorsal side for registration. This dataset was generated
by removing pCT isosurface nodes according to their coordinates and their surface normal directions [i.e., nodal coordinates
3 cm away from the spinal process tip in the ventral direction or
nodal surface normal pointing away from the dorsal direction
were removed; see Fig. 3(a)].
E. Multistart Patient Registration
To improve the point-based registration performance, we employed a variant of the ICP algorithm based on kd-tree search

JI et al.: PATIENT REGISTRATION USING INTRAOPERATIVE STEREOVISION IN IMAGE-GUIDED OPEN SPINAL SURGERY

for correspondence point matching with optimized subset selection and minimization techniques [43]. Prior to registration,
the reconstructed iSV surface was first transformed into the
pCT image space by aligning a pair of homologous points manually identified on the two corresponding surfaces (i.e., “anchor” point pair; e.g., using the tip of a spinous process visible in both iSV and pCT; see Fig. 3). However, only aligning
the anchor point pair with an arbitrary relative orientation between the two point clouds was not sufficient to ensure a correct
registration because ICP algorithms are sensitive to the initial
alignment [29], [30]. Therefore, a classical multistart registration was employed in which a number of initial starting points
(N = 16 × 10 = 160; fully utilizing a dual octo-core computer;
see Section II-G) were generated by randomly rotating the iSV
surface in pCT image space while maintaining the anchor point
alignment. ICP registrations corresponding to each initial starting point were executed independently but in parallel. Again,
because the converged registration may not correspond to the
correct one [29], [30], a second pair of homologous points was
identified on the iSV and pCT surfaces (i.e., testing point; e.g.,
using the tip of a different spinous process, preferably far from
the anchor points; see Fig. 3) to assess the likelihood of registration success. Upon convergence, the registration that resulted
in the smallest distance between the testing points was chosen as the final result. The anchor and testing point pairs only
needed to be approximate; therefore, unlike in the landmark
registration, a precise or accurate identification of these points
was not necessary. Registrations that resulted in distance errors
greater than 10 mm between the testing points were considered
failed.
F. Registration Accuracy and Robustness
Registration accuracy was assessed in terms of average
surface-to-surface distance between iSV and pCT point clouds
corresponding to the exposed spine after registration convergence. Specifically, for each point in iSV, its closest point on
the pCT surface was identified using a kd-tree approach [44].
The average of the resulting pointwise distances was reported
to evaluate the registration accuracy.
The robustness of patient registration is important to assess
for feasibility and safety in clinical application. Because of
the spine’s approximate anatomical symmetry in the medial–
lateral direction, characterizing the translational and rotational
capture ranges along and about each major axis is important.
Therefore, the iSV data points were systematically perturbed at
regular steps away from their successfully converged locations
(“ground-truth”; step size of 1 mm) along and about the three
major axes passing through the iSV point cloud centroid. The
same ICP registration was launched to reregister the perturbed
iSV data and the stationary pCT point cloud. For each perturbation, distances between the newly converged iSV points and their
counterparts in the “ground-truth” locations were computed to
report an average residual distance error based on pointwise distances. A distance error threshold of 2 mm was used to define a
successful registration, and the capture ranges were found as the
largest consecutive linear or rotational perturbation about the

2181

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF ISV SURFACE RECONSTRUCTION AND PATIENT REGISTRATION
ACCURACIES USING LANDMARK AND ISV TECHNIQUES
Registration accuracy (mm) 3

iSV reconstruction
Pat. #

# of probe
data

Accuracy (mm)2

Landmark

iSV based

iSV registration
cost (s)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Avg.

4
5
4
5
8
5
4
6
51

2.50 ± 1.12
2.22 ± 1.03
2.38 ± 0.99
1.73 ± 0.44
2.64 ± 1.12
1.94 ± 0.89
2.45 ± 0.51
2.10 ± 1.00
2.21 ± 0.31

1.95 ± 1.25
1.83 ± 1.50
1.93 ± 1.30
1.73 ± 0.11
2.71 ± 1.80
2.01 ± 1.62
1.98 ± 1.03
2.03 ± 1.7
2.02 ± 0.30

1.27 ± 0.91
1.09 ± 0.73
1.20 ± 0.77
1.11 ± 0.61
1.90 ± 1.41
1.91 ± 1.82
1.70 ± 1.12
1.30 ± 1.02
1.43 ± 0.35

33
94
134
106
73
100
42
184
95.8 ± 48.9

1

Median value; 2 iSV reconstruction accuracy is the average pointwise distance error relative to the probe points; 3 registration accuracy is the average SDE relative to pCT. The
computational cost for multistart iSV registration is also included.

“ground-truth” position within which the reregistrations were
successful.
G. Data Analysis
To ensure sufficient resolution in data used for registration
while minimizing computational cost, the iSV images were
downsampled to achieve a point cloud resolution (i.e., average
closest point distances) of approximately 0.4–0.5 mm. Similarly,
the pCT isosurface was also decimated to produce a resolution
of approximately 0.5 mm. The computational cost of iSV surface reconstruction was typically 10 s. The accuracy of iSV
geometrical surface reconstruction was evaluated in terms of
average pointwise distances between selected feature points on
the exposed spinal surface. For iSV-based patient registration
using the ICP algorithm, a pointwise distance error between
iSV and pCT was unavailable because no physical correspondence between feature points existed between the two image
modalities. Instead, the patient registration accuracy was evaluated in terms of average surface-to-surface distance between
the two 3-D point clouds. To compare with the performance of
the anatomical landmark method, the same surface-to-surface
distance error (SDE) was reported by using the landmark registration to transform iSV into the pCT image space. The computational cost of the ICP patient registration was also reported
(excluding the manual intervention for image segmentation
and point pair identification, which were typically completed
within 1–2 min). Finally, the translational and rotational capture
ranges were summarized for each patient along and about each
major axis. All image processing and data analyses were performed on a Windows computer with due octo-cores (Intel Xeon
E5-2650, 2.6 GHz, 32-GB RAM) using MATLAB (R2014a, The
Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA).
III. RESULTS
A. iSV Geometrical Reconstruction Accuracy
The iSV surface reconstruction accuracy in terms of average
pointwise distance error is shown in Table II for each patient

2182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. Comparison of the alignment between iSV and pCT surfaces using
(a) anatomical landmark or (b) iSV patient registration for patient 2. The cross
sections of the pCT surface (red) and those of the iSV surfaces obtained from
the landmark (yellow) or iSV (green) registrations are shown on an axial pCT
image [the corresponding plane is shown in (b)]. Axis units in millimeter.

in Fig. 6, suggesting the registration accuracy is comparable for
the techniques.
C. Patient Registration Robustness
Fig. 4. (a–c) Reconstructed iSV surface in pCT space for patients 2, 4, and
6, respectively. A set of feature points was identified using a tracked probe
(blue crosses). The corresponding homologous locations on the reconstructed
iSV surface are also indicated as solid green (relative pointwise distance error
ࣘ 2 mm) or open magenta (distance error > 2 mm) markers. All units in mm.

along with the number of probe points available for accuracy
evaluation. The average reconstruction accuracy was 2.21 ±
0.31 mm for the eight patients based on an average of five
probe points. Fig. 4 shows the reconstructed iSV surfaces and
feature points used for accuracy assessment in three patients as
illustrative examples.

Table III summarizes the translational and rotational capture
ranges for each patient. Directional dependence was not evident
in the rotational capture ranges. The overall average translational and rotational capture ranges combining all the three directions were 23.8 ± 11.2 mm and 46.0◦ ± 12.3◦ , respectively.
Fig. 7 shows residual errors as a result of the perturbation and
reregistration process for a typical patient (patient 2). The translational capture range along the x- or medial–lateral-direction
and all of the rotational capture ranges were approximately symmetric relative to the center (i.e., “ground-truth” registration),
whereas symmetry was not evident in the translational capture
ranges in the ventral–dorsal and longitudinal directions (y- and
z-directions, respectively).

B. Patient Registration Accuracy
For each patient, SDE for the iSV patient registration was
consistently smaller than the anatomical landmark equivalent,
and resulted in a superior accuracy of 1.43 ± 0.35 mm compared
with 2.02 ± 0.30 mm (see Table II). The average computational
cost for iSV patient registration was significantly less, 95.8 ±
48.9 s (range 33–184 s), compared with ∼30 min for a typical
landmark registration involving point identifications in both pCT
and in the OR.
Using either landmark or iSV patient registration, the iSV surface was transformed into pCT space and the cross sections from
these surfaces (from landmark and iSV registration) intersecting the corresponding axial pCT image were formed. Contours
from the two surfaces were similarly aligned as shown in Fig. 5
for patient 2 and several other patient cases (patients 1, 4, and 6)

IV. DISCUSSION
An accurate, efficient, and reliable registration between
anatomy in the OR and the preoperative images is the cornerstone of successful and effective image guidance. In spinal
surgery, having the ability to update this registration may be
particularly important because of the significant loads often imparted to the patient; such loads have the potential to result in
significant intraoperative movement of the patient’s body. While
iCT and fluoroscopy may enable a need-based reregistration,
their associated radiation exposure limits the update frequency
during surgery.
In this study, we used radiation-free iSV to accurately register point cloud generated from the reconstructed iSV surface
of the exposed spine to that from pCT, using an improved ICP

JI et al.: PATIENT REGISTRATION USING INTRAOPERATIVE STEREOVISION IN IMAGE-GUIDED OPEN SPINAL SURGERY

2183

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF TRANSLATIONAL (T x, T y, AND T z; IN MM) AND ROTATIONAL
(Rx, Ry, AND Rz; IN DEGREE) CAPTURE RANGES FOR EACH PATIENT CASE
Pat. #
1
2
3
8
5
6
7
8
Avg.

Tx

Ty

Tz

Rx

Ry

Rz

11
22
17
30
21
41
30
45
14
51
51
49
13
30
16
38
62
47
17
29
14
41
61
46
29
37
13
28
44
36
27
36
13
51
24
56
27
55
18
41
71
55
18
23
18
49
56
55
21.5 ± 7.6 34.6 ± 11.2 15.4 ± 2.1 41.1 ± 9.0 48.8 ± 18.1 48.1 ± 7.2

The x-, y-, and z-directions corresponded to the medial–lateral, ventral–dorsal, and the
longitudinal directions of the spine, respectively.

Fig. 6. (a–c) Cross sections of the segmented pCT surface (red) overlaid with
the reconstructed iSV surfaces obtained from the landmark (yellow) or iSV
(green) registrations for patients 1, 4, and 6, respectively. The large mismatch
between iSV and pCT surfaces in (a) resulted from incomplete iSV sampling
due to its line-of-sight limitations (see arrows).

algorithm. In eight patient cases undergoing open spinal fusion surgery involving short or long segments of exposed vertebrae (2–3 versus 6–7 segments, respectively), the iSV patient
registration achieved an average accuracy of 1.43 ± 0.35 mm,
measured as SDE between the two point clouds. This was consistently smaller than the average SDE from the conventional
anatomical landmark method in every patient case (average accuracy of 2.02 ± 0.30 mm; see Table II). While both registration
techniques achieved an overall average accuracy within the recommended 2-mm tolerance for spinal procedures [5], errors
greater than 2 mm occurred in three patients (patients 5, 6, and
8) with landmark registration; additionally, patients 5 and 8 had
a Stealth-reported error greater than 3 mm with the conventional patient registration (see Table I). By contrast, with the
iSV technique, all errors were less than 2 mm (see Table II).
To some extent, the improved accuracy afforded by iSV was
expected—the ICP algorithm is designed to minimize SDE.
Nonetheless, comparable accuracy between the two registration approaches was also observed qualitatively by comparing
the alignment of vertebral bony features between pCT and the
transformed iSV surface using their respective registration (see
Figs. 5 and 6).

Fig. 7. Residual errors as a result of perturbation and re-egistration between
iSV and pCT point clouds to estimate the translational and rotational capture
ranges for a typical patient case (patient 2). The approximate symmetry (translation along x-direction and rotations about x-, y-, and z-directions) and asymmetry
of the capture ranges (translations along y- and z-directions) about the center
are evident.

The computational cost of the iSV-based registration was
1.5 min on average (largest of 3 min; see Table II), a significant improvement over the landmark registration (typically
∼30 min). Although some manual intervention was still needed
with the iSV registration, neither accurate feature segmentation
nor precise placement of homologous point pairs was necessary
to achieve convergence of the multistart registration. In contrast,
accurate and precise identifications of anatomical feature points
both in pCT and on the patient were crucial to the accuracy of the
landmark registration, which required substantial investment of
time and effort on the part of the surgeon. Thus, the benefit of
the iSV-based spinal registration may reside both in its accuracy
and efficiency.
The large overall capture ranges (average of 23.8 ± 11.2 mm
in translation and 46.0◦ ± 12.3◦ in rotation) were comparable to other intramodality volumetric image registrations, such
as 3-D US (e.g., 32.5 mm in [45] and 40° in [46]), suggesting iSV patient registration may be sufficiently robust in the
context of open spinal surgery. Instead of evaluating the translational/rotational directions in sum (common for the brain [46],

2184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

[47], the heart [48], and abdominal and thoracic organs [45]),
we report the capture ranges along and about each major axis
separately because of the anatomical symmetry of the spine.
Indeed, the apparent symmetry and asymmetry in the translational and rotational capture ranges (see Fig. 7) suggest an
anatomically directional dependence in the robustness of the
iSV-to-pCT registration, which was expected because of the approximate spine medial–lateral symmetry and the vertebral geometrical similarity along the longitudinal direction. The translational capture range component along the longitudinal direction
of the spine is likely to be the most relevant for an actual patient
registration because the iSV and pCT point clouds could first
be demeaned and prealigned in the medial–lateral and ventral–
dorsal directions before starting the actual registration process.
The smaller translational capture range along the longitudinal
direction (15.4 ± 2.1 mm on average; see Table III), which presumably is the result of the repetition of morphologically similar
vertebral segments. Because the error metric from the ICP algorithm may not reliably identify the desired registration, some a
priori knowledge of the initial alignment between iSV and pCT
may be necessary to ensure a robust registration (e.g., manually
identifying at least one “testing point pair”).
To evaluate the significance of interoperator variability in localizing testing points, their locations in iSV and pCT were
randomly perturbed (N = 20; within a radius of 5 mm) for a
typical patient (Patient 2). All of the perturbed testing point
pairs yielded virtually the same final registration. The relative
insensitivity of registration performance to interoperator variability in the testing point localization was not surprising, given
the large capture ranges and the small residual errors for all
of the successfully converged registrations (see Fig. 7). Certainly, more homologous point pairs (at least four point pairs
that are not collinear, and more are usually preferred to increase
robustness) could be used to generate an initial registration sufficiently close to the “ground-truth” to enable a “single-start”
registration. Although testing points can be eliminated for registration verification, an ordered point-pair list is necessary and
would require extra personnel time and effort. Conceptually,
the “single-start” approach would degenerate into a probe-based
registration, which would defeat the purpose of using the iSV
technique to minimize user intervention in the first place. On the
other hand, a completely automatic approach may not be desirable clinically, given the catastrophic consequences that could
result should misalignment/misregistration occur during spine
surgery.
Both the landmark and iSV patient registrations suffered
from the limitation of a one-time rigid registration that does
not compensate for intervertebral motion between segments.
This limitation could be especially important when many vertebral segments (e.g., > 3) are involved because of accumulated motion between vertebral bodies. Incorporating multiple
iSV image pairs may address this limitation, for example, by
combining multiple iSV surfaces sampling different vertebral
bodies into a unified point cloud. The combined iSV surface
could then be used to register with pCT using the same multistart registration technique developed in this study. The resulting rigid registration provides an initial starting position for a

second, more refined registration to compensate for intervertebral motion, possibly without the need of further manual intervention. Because iSV represents the actual spinal geometry
during surgery, individual vertebra in pCT may need to be segmented and individually matched with the iSV surface. On the
other hand, the registration robustness for an individual vertebra may degrade because of reduced sampling, which, in turn,
may adversely affect registration reliability. Alternatively, two
or three adjacent vertebrae could be treated as a single unit. This
two-step registration strategy is likely feasible, given the registration performance already achieved in this study based on 2–3
segments for each patient. Combining multiple iSV images may
also overcome line-of-sight limitations [see Fig. 6(a)]. By acquiring images from different perspectives, additional sampling
regions from each individual vertebra can be incorporated into
the registration process, thereby improving registration robustness and performance.
An important limitation of this study is the lack of a pointwise
target registration error (TRE), which was unavailable because
no homologous feature points existed between iSV and pCT for
these patients. It is possible to instrument fiducial markers on
phantoms [22] or animal models that are discretely visible in
both iSV and pCT to report pointwise TREs; however, the added
invasiveness and risk of additional instrumentation for purely
research purposes could not be justified in human patients. Alternatively, iCT may be employed to serve as ground-truth.
The accuracy of the iSV geometrical reconstruction was
2.21 ± 0.31 mm on average, based on pointwise distances between features identified on the surface and their “ground-truth”
counterparts reported by the tracked probe, which was comparable to the recommended level of 2 mm in spine surgery [5].
However, these results were not as good as the iSV surface reconstruction accuracy reported for the brain (1.26 and 0.71 mm
along and perpendicular to the microscope optical axis on patient cases, for an approximate overall accuracy of 1.45 mm;
see [38]). This reduced reconstruction accuracy can likely be attributed to the more complex topology of the spine, the relatively
“featureless” bony area in terms of image intensity, where points
were sampled for accuracy assessment (as opposed to the geometrically simpler but feature-rich cortical surface in the brain
[35]), and the larger localization error associated with these
factors. Despite the challenges, the results presented here provide important initial confidence in the technique which awaits
further systematic investigation in the future.
Similar to any vision-based technique, iSV registration requires sufficient exposure of bony surfaces for geometrical reconstruction, which translates into additional time and effort on
the part of the surgeon to remove soft tissues (∼5 min for a typical case). The probe-based approach is seemingly insensitive
to complete soft tissue removal, but still requires time, effort,
and experience on the part of the surgeon to define and localize anatomic landmarks. Further, point registration may not be
possible later during surgery, for example, after instrumentation or bone removal when anatomical feature points become
inaccessible or no longer exist.
Combining the iSV registration technique with other imaging modalities, such as US [19]–[22], [49], may mitigate the

JI et al.: PATIENT REGISTRATION USING INTRAOPERATIVE STEREOVISION IN IMAGE-GUIDED OPEN SPINAL SURGERY

requirement of having sufficient bone exposure. Because the
two imaging modalities have complementary information and
features sampled in the region-of-interest (surface only with geometrical information in iSV versus intensity information capturing surface/subsurface features in US), a more accurate and
robust patient registration is likely to follow than either image
modality alone can offer. In addition, the inherently coregistered US may alleviate some of the manual effort involved in
iSV segmentation (e.g., using easily detectable bony features in
US images to aid the segmentation of bony surfaces in iSV),
thereby further improving the efficiency and efficacy of imagebased patient registration in open spinal surgery.
If an accurate and efficient patient registration can be achieved
on-demand with radiation-free intraoperative images, the technique is likely to broaden use of spinal navigation within the
surgical community, and expand the applications beyond simple pedicle screw placement to other areas, such as tumor resection and deformity correction. In the future, such a scheme
may enable the safe use of (semi-)autonomous robots capable
of identifying and actively reacting to changes in patient registration during surgery.
V. CONCLUSION
The current study suggests that iSV may provide rapid and
accurate rigid registration in open spinal surgery. The registration accuracy achieved appeared to be consistently superior to
the conventional, landmark-based technique in terms of surfaceto-surface distance; iSV also appeared to be substantially more
time-efficient. Future areas of study may include real-time, nonrigid registration that accounts for intraoperative changes in
spinal configuration and the use of other imaging techniques,
such as US, to augment registration accuracy and robustness.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. T. Schaewe for technical
assistance on SteathLink and help from the Medtronic Navigation (Louisville, CO).
REFERENCES
[1] K. Cleary and T. M. Peters, “Image-guided interventions: Technology
review and clinical applications,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 12,
pp. 119–142, Aug. 2010.
[2] G. F. Jost et al., “Intraoperative imaging and image-guided therapy,” in
Intraoperative Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy, F. A. Jolesz, Ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2014, pp. 613–628.
[3] R. Härtl et al., “Worldwide survey on the use of navigation in spine
surgery,” World Neurosurg., vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 162–172, Jan. 2013.
[4] R. A. Deyo et al., “Spinal-Fusion surgery—The case for restraint,” Spine
J., vol. 4, pp. 138S–142S, 2004.
[5] T. Tjardes et al., “Image-guided spine surgery: State of the art and future
directions,” Eur. Spine J., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 25–45, Jan. 2010.
[6] S. L. Parker et al., “Incidence and clinical significance of vascular
encroachment resulting from freehand placement of pedicle screws in
the thoracic and lumbar spine,” Spine, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 683–687,
2014.
[7] K. C. Foxx et al., “A retrospective analysis of pedicle screws in contact
with the great vessels,” J. Neurosurg. Spine, vol. 13, pp. 403–406, 2010.
[8] S. Pesenti et al., “Endovascular aortic injury repair after thoracic pedicle
screw placement,” Orthop. Traumatol. Surg. Res., vol. 100, pp. 569–573,
2014.
[9] L. T. Holly, “Image-guided spinal surgery,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput.
Assist. Surg., vol. 2, pp. 7–15, Jan. 2006.

2185

[10] N.-F. Tian et al., “Pedicle screw insertion accuracy with different assisted
methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative studies,”
Eur. Spine J., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 846–859, Jun. 2011.
[11] I. D. Gelalis et al., “Accuracy of pedicle screw placement: A systematic review of prospective in vivo studies comparing free hand, fluoroscopy guidance and navigation techniques,” Eur. Spine J., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 247–255, Feb. 2012.
[12] M. J. Tormenti et al., “Intraoperative computed tomography imageguided navigation for posterior thoracolumbar spinal instrumentation
in spinal deformity surgery,” Neurosurg. Focus, vol. 28, no. 3, p. E11,
Mar. 2010, doi: 10.3171/2010.1.FOCUS09275.
[13] S. Rajasekaran et al., “Randomized clinical study to compare the accuracy of navigated and non-navigated thoracic pedicle screws in deformity
correction surgeries,” Spine, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. E56–E64, 2007.
[14] K. Roessler et al., “Frameless stereotactic guided neurosurgery: Clinical
experience with an infrared based pointer device navigation system,” Acta
Neurochirurgica, vol. 139, no. 6, pp. 551–559, 1997.
[15] B. Brodwater et al., “Extracranial application of the frameless stereotactic operating microscope: Experience with lumbar spine,” Neurosurgery,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 209–213, 1993.
[16] E. W. Nottmeier, “A review of image-guided spinal surgery,” J. Neurosurg
Sci., vol. 56, pp. 35–47, 2012.
[17] G. Ionescu et al., “Automated registration of ultrasound with CT images:
Application to computer assisted prostate radiotherapy and orthopedics,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervention,
1999, pp. 768–778.
[18] D. Muratore et al., “Three-dimensional image registration of phantom
vertebrae for image-guided surgery: A preliminary study,” Comput. Aided
Surg., vol. 7, pp. 342–352, 2002.
[19] S. Winter et al., “Registration of CT and intraoperative 3-D ultrasound
images of the spine using evolutionary and gradient-based methods,” IEEE
Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 284–296, Jun. 2008.
[20] A. Lang et al., “Multi-modal registration of speckle-tracked freehand 3D
ultrasound to CT in the lumbar spine,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 675–86, Apr. 2012.
[21] S. Gill et al., “Biomechanically constrained groupwise ultrasound to
CT registration of the lumbar spine,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 662–674, Apr. 2012.
[22] C. X. B. Yan et al., “Validation of automated ultrasound-CT registration of
vertebrae,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 601–610,
Jul. 2012.
[23] H. Sun et al., “Stereopsis-Guided brain shift compensation,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1039–1052, Aug. 2005.
[24] P. Paul et al., “A surface registration method for quantification of intraoperative brain deformations in image-guided neurosurgery,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 976–983, Dec. 2009.
[25] C. Delorenzo et al., “Image-guided intraoperative cortical deformation
recovery using game theory: Application to neocortical epilepsy surgery,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 322–338, Mar. 2010.
[26] M. I. Miga et al., “Cortical surface registration for image-guided neurosurgery using laser-range scanning,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22,
no. 8, pp. 973–985, Aug. 2003.
[27] S. Ding et al., “Tracking of vessels in intra-operative microscope video
sequences for cortical displacement estimation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1985–1993, Jul. 2011.
[28] A. L. Simpson et al., “Evaluation of conoscopic holography for estimating tumor resection cavities in model-based image-guided neurosurgery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1833–1843,
Jun. 2014.
[29] P. J. Besl and N. D. McKay, “A method for registration of 3-D shapes,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 239–256,
Feb. 1992.
[30] S. Rusinkiewicz and M. Levoy, “Efficient variants of the ICP algorithm,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. 3-D Digital Imag. Model., 2001, pp. 145–152.
[31] D. J. Mirota et al., “Vision-based navigation in image-guided interventions,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 297–319, Aug. 2011.
[32] C. DeLorenzo et al., “Nonrigid 3D brain registration using intensity/feature information,” Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Intervention, vol. 9, no. Pt 1, pp. 932–939, Jan. 2006.
[33] X. Fan et al., “Stereovision to MR image registration for cortical surface displacement mapping to enhance image-guided neurosurgery,” Med. Phys., vol. 41, art. no. 102302, (2014). [Online].
http://dx.doi.org/10.1118/1.4894705
[34] T. K. Sinha et al., “A method to track cortical surface deformations using a
laser range scanner,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 767–781,
Jun. 2005.

2186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

[35] S. Ji et al., “Cortical surface shift estimation using stereovision and optical
flow motion tracking via projection image registration,” Med. Image Anal.,
vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1169–1183, Jul. 2014.
[36] X. Fan et al., “Registering stereovision surface with preoperative magnetic
resonance images for brain shift compensation,” Proc. SPIE, Med. Imag.
Visualization, Image-Guided Procedures, Modeling, vol. 8316, 2012.
[37] S. Ji et al., “An integrated model-based neurosurgical guidance system,”
Proc. SPIE, Med. Imag. Visualization, Image-Guided Procedures, Modeling, vol. 7625, art. no. 762536, Mar. 2010, doi: 10.1117/12.843499
[38] S. Ji et al., “Efficient stereo image geometrical reconstruction at arbitrary
camera settings from a single calibration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2014, pp. 440–447.
[39] E. E. Hemayed, “A survey of camera self-calibration,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Adv. Video Signal Based Surveillance, 2003, pp. 351–357.
[40] X. Hu and P. Mordohai, “A quantitative evaluation of confidence measures for stereo vision,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 34,
no. 11, pp. 2121–2133, Jan. 2012.
[41] S. Ji et al., “Flow-Based correspondence matching in stereovision,” Mach.
Learn. Med. Imag., vol. 8184, pp. 107–114, 2013.
[42] W. K. Pratt, Digital Image Processing, 4th ed. Los Altos, CA, USA: Wiley,
2007.
[43] H. M. Kjer and J. Wilm, “Evaluation of surface registration algorithms
for PET motion correction,” Informatics and Mathematical Modelling,
Technical University of Denmark, 2010.

[44] J. L. Bentley, “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative
searching,” Commun. ACM, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 509–517, Sep. 1975.
[45] R. Shekhar and V. Zagrodsky, “Mutual information-based rigid and
nonrigid registration of ultrasound volumes,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 9–22, Jan. 2002.
[46] P. J. Slomka et al., “Evaluation of voxel-based registration of 3-D power
Doppler ultrasound and 3-D mag- netic resonance angiographic images
of carotid arteries,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 945–955,
2001.
[47] S. Ji et al., “Mutual-information-based image to patient re-registration using intraoperative ultrasound in image-guided neurosurgery,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 4612–4624, 2008.
[48] V. Walimbe et al., “Mutual information-based multimodality registration
of cardiac ultrasound and SPECT images: A preliminary investigation,”
Int. J. Cardiovasc. Imag., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 483–494, Dec. 2003.
[49] S. Ji et al., “Intraoperative patient registration using volumetric true 3D
ultrasound without fiducials,” Med. Phys., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 7540–7552,
Dec. 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

