This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, 00 2015

1

A Passive Biodegradable Implant for Subcutaneous
Soft-Tissue Trauma Monitoring
Jonathan M. Rigelsford, Senior Member, IEEE, Baraa F. Al-Azzawi,
Christopher James Davenport, and Peter Novodvorsky

Abstract—In-body medical devices can play an important role
in clinical monitoring and diagnosis of diseases. Wireless devices
implanted within a patient have to be physically small, and must
overcome the challenges of having a little or no onboard electrical
power and the highly attenuating electromagnetic propagation environment which is the human body. In this paper, we investigate
the use of biodegradable implant to monitor the healing of softtissue trauma and to allow early stage diagnosis of infection. The
implantable tag is designed to degrade in a predetermined and controlled method, the stage of which can be measured from outside
the body without the need for further surgical intervention. The
speed of degradation of the tag depends on the temperature and
acidity of the subcutaneous tissue in which the tag is implanted.
We show that as the electrical length of the tag pattern increases
due to degradation, the resonant frequency changes significantly,
and this change in resonant frequency can be detected from outside
the patient. Results are presented showing the tag’s performance
at normal and oblique incidence, and techniques for miniaturizing
and enhancing the tag’s response sensitivity are given. As the entire tag is biodegradable, there is no need for further postoperative
surgery to remove it from the patient at the end of its useful life.
Index Terms—Biodegradable, implant, in-body devices, radio
frequency identification (RFID).

I. INTRODUCTION
O achieve high-quality standards within the healthcare sector, improved and robust health monitoring systems have
become a necessity. Such systems can help to reduce the number of specialist medical consultations and hospital admissions.
Additionally, they can make the process of establishing medical
diagnoses less error prone [1], [2]. Implantable medical devices
are being used frequently in diagnosis and treatment of a variety
of medical conditions [3]. They can also be used to monitor
physiological parameters, such as heart rate, blood pressure and
body temperature [2], or glucose levels in blood [4]. Communication often occurs with an external reader is wireless in the
frequency band 402 to 405 MHz (medical implant communication service) [5].

T

Manuscript received November 1, 2014; revised February 4, 2015; accepted
March 20, 2015. Date of publication; date of current version. This work was partially funded by the University of Sheffield and the EPSRC E-Futures Doctoral
Training Centre.
J. M. Rigelsford, B. F. Al-Azzawi, and C. J. Davenport are with the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Sheffield, Sheffield
S1 3JD, U.K. (e-mail: j.m.rigelsford@sheffield.ac.uk; baraa.faiq@gmail.com;
christopher.davenport@sheffield.ac.uk).
P. Novodvorsky is with the Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield S10 2JF, U.K. (e-mail: p.novodvorsky@
sheffield.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754

Fig. 1.

Illustration of a patient with implanted tag (tag is not shown to scale).

Radio frequency identification (RFID) technology has gained
a considerable importance in recent years. Its use is no longer
restricted to tracking and positioning of patients but it has been
used as a monitoring device for different processes inside the
human body [6]. RFID tags can be embedded in other implanted
devices, sutures, and prostheses to collect data or track chemical or physical changes in the surrounding environment [7], [8].
It has been suggested that RFID could also be used to monitor healing processes in soft-tissue injuries and to signal any
abnormalities [9].
This paper presents an investigation into the design of a
biodegradable passive RFID tag which is suitable for monitoring the healing process within the patients who have sustained
soft-tissue trauma. The proposed implant eliminates the need for
implanting electronic components. It is envisaged that this passive device would be subcutaneously implanted near the wound
site during the final stages of surgery as illustrated in Fig. 1. As
the soft tissue around the wound site repairs itself, the implanted
device will biodegrade and be safely absorbed into the body.
This degradation of the device will result in a change to its radio
frequency (RF) signature, which can be monitored from outside
the patient. Suitable designs will result in a methodology,
whereby the rate of tissue repair can be remotely assessed.
Currently, complications caused by infection are only detected
when the patient becomes acutely unwell, with localized
swelling and redness, or with fever. Severe infections may lead
to the wound weeping pus. Assessment of the patient using the
proposed passive RFID implant can lead to early diagnosis of infection or postoperative complications, reduce the over reliance

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
2

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, 00 2015

on excessive prescription of antibiotics, and help mitigate unnecessary additional surgery, which in itself can lead to further
risk of infection and complications. The implanted RFID tag
can be monitored from outside the patient using a measurement
device similar to the hand held “wand” metal detectors used by
airport security. Alternatively, the implant can be continuously
monitored using a compact body worn antenna system.
Section II provides an overview of the background theory
and the motivation behind this study, outlining why development of such a device is important. Section III briefly addresses
biodegradable materials, which are suitable for the use in medical implants and which can be exploited in this study. The
concept and the operation of the tag are discussed in Section
IV, while Section V discusses simulated results and analysis,
including the tag’s performance at oblique illumination angles.
Section VI presents techniques for miniaturization and increasing the tag response sensitivity. Preliminary experimental results
and validation are presented in Section VII, and discussions and
conclusions are given in Section VIII.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Colorectal (bowel) cancer is the most commonly diagnosed
cancer and the second most common cause of cancer deaths in
Europe [10]. In 2008, there were 450 000 new cases of colorectal cancer, and 232 000 deaths caused by this condition within
the World Health Organization European Region [11]. Due to
location and nature of surgery required to remove this type of
cancer, the risk of infection and complications to the wound site,
deep within the lower abdomen, can be problematic to the patient. Additionally, shrapnel wounds caused by military combat
operations or terrorist attacks are another (and unfortunately far
too common) cause of soft-tissue trauma. In the first Gulf War
(1990–1991) 80% of penetrating wounds on British personnel
were caused by fragments from explosive munitions, such as
shells, grenades, and improvised explosive devices, rather than
bullets. Beyond the damage caused by shrapnel to tissue and organs within the body, infection will result in further progressive
tissue damage and represents a key risk factor for the patient’s
recovery. Tissue healing may also be delayed by metal poisoning from the shrapnel itself [12]. Data obtained from the Wound
Data and Munitions Effectiveness Team database [12] show
that although there is a 47% chance of the soft tissue being the
primary injury site, less than 1% of these result in death. Conversely, injuries to the abdomen (8%) and chest (4%) account
for 9% and 24% of fatal injuries, respectively, [13]. Despite the
high survival rate from the initial soft-tissue trauma, there is
significant potential for long-term complications for a patient
who is likely to survive.
Complications and postoperative infections of soft-tissue
traumas deep within the body can be difficult to monitor using
conventional techniques, such as X-rays or CT/MRI scanners,
although the wound site can be marked using medical staples.
As the range of currently available effective antibiotics diminishes, treatment via prolonged or extensive doses of antibiotics
becomes less feasible. Frequently, complications are only detected when the patient becomes acutely unwell, with localized
swelling and redness or with fever and wounds weeping pus.

Inflammation can be defined as a nonspecific biological response of the human body to harmful stimuli, such as infection,
radiation, and tissue damage [14]. It represents a nonspecific
body defense mechanism in which a number of substances are
released from damaged tissues. These further trigger various
inflammatory cascades, leading to substantial changes in the
surrounding area. Regardless of the cause, inflammatory response shares some common characteristics. Inflammation can
be characterized by five key signs: heat, pain, redness, swelling
[15], [16], and loss of function. It has been shown that injured
tissues experience local acidosis—an increase in acidity level
(defined by lower pH). This is explained mainly by the increase
of lactic acid production as a result of anaerobic metabolism
of infiltrated white cells (neutrophils), but also by production
of fatty acid by-products of bacterial metabolism [17], [18].
Additionally, the intracellular pH of an activated neutrophil is
very low, and this highly acidotic content gets released to the
surrounding environment when neutrophils die [19].
Surgical site infection is a generic term which refers to any
postoperative infections developed at the site of surgery [20].
Statistics have shown that about 4–5% of all surgical patients
will suffer from the postoperative infection [20], [21]. They are
one of the significant causes of morbidity for patients who have
undergone a surgery [21], and it has been suggested that SSIs are
responsible for about one third of the postsurgical mortality [20].
It has been reported that SSIs can occur at any point up to 30
after surgery [22]. Apart from the negative impact on the patient
health, SSIs impose economic burdens on health services, with
patients who suffer from SSIs requiring on average an additional
6.5 days in hospital. Generally, SSIs are treated with antibiotics
[22], although excessive prescription of antibiotics has led to
an increase in antibiotic resistant bacterial strains [20] and help
mitigate unnecessary additional surgery, which in itself can lead
to further risk of infection and complications.
Therefore, in this study, we consider the engineering challenges that must be solved when designing a passive biodegradable implant for subcutaneous soft-tissue trauma monitoring.
Having examined how the two key signs associated with infection of soft tissues, namely increase in temperature and acidity
can influence degradation behavior of biodegradable polymers,
we intend to exploit this in our design of a passive biodegradable
tag, which can be used for the early stage detection of infection.
As the tag degrades in a predetermined and controlled manner, changes in its electromagnetic response can be monitored
from outside the patient. Acceleration in the rate of degradation
caused by an increase in local temperature and acidity are indicative of infection. This acceleration is beyond the normal degradation which is influenced by the choice of biodegradable materials, the location of the tag and the time since it was implanted.
III. BIODEGRADABLE MATERIALS FOR MEDICAL IMPLANTS
Materials used for medical implants should have properties
which make them safe for biological body. They should not
cause an immune system response when implanted [23]. Implants may only be needed temporarily (e.g., monitoring digestive problems) or for an extended period of time (e.g., pacemakers, stents, etc.). Biodegradation refers to the chemical process

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
RIGELSFORD et al.: PASSIVE BIODEGRADABLE IMPLANT FOR SUBCUTANEOUS SOFT-TISSUE TRAUMA MONITORING

which converts implanted materials into simpler compositions,
and finally into basic chemical elements [24]. This study considers two forms of biodegradable materials: polymers and metallic alloys. Choosing among them depends on how they will
be applied [25]. With biodegradable materials there is no need
for human intervention to remove them, as they will eventually be absorbed by the body. Several types of biodegradable
polymers are available such as polylactic acid (PLA), polycaprolactone (PCL), and polylactide-coglycolide. Among them,
PLA has gained special interests due to its ease of fabrication
and to some unique properties. Degradation of polymers occurs either biotically or abiotically. Biotic degradation refers to
changes that occur by the help of biological environment, such
as microorganisms or enzymes. Abiotic agents are mainly environmental factors, such as mechanical forces, light, heat, and
chemicals. Biodegradable polymers are used in several applications in medicine, pharmaceutical, and biomedicine. Examples
of them are sutures, drug delivery carriers, and tissue or organ
repairing [26]. Some magnesium alloys have been developed to
be biodegradable [27]. They are used in different medical applications, such as in orthopedic implants as pins and screws, and
as stents in cardiovascular procedures. The advantage of such
alloys is that they can be dissolved in the body completely without toxic remnants. It has been shown that metallic alloys can
degrade much faster than the polymers in the same biological
environment [23].
Degradation time of plastic polyesters in the human body
depends on many factors ranging from the surface area and total size of the substrate, to the material composition itself and
the acidity surrounding the implanted material. Research into
this area is well documented [28]–[31]. In this study, we focus
on PLA and PGA as suitable biodegradable substrates for the
manufacture of our passive implant. The difference in degradation between PLA-PCL and PGA-PCL composite fibres in
both water and phosphate buffered saline are presented in [32].
This study shows that PGA composite degrades much quicker
than the PLA, and copolymerization of the two can be used to
control the speed of degradation finely. Furthermore, the effect
of acidity on the degradation of PLA brushes over the course
of a few weeks has been investigated [33], where results show
that the neutral or slightly alkaline solutions result in the fastest
breakup of PLA, whereas slightly acidic solutions severely reduce the rate of degradation. Investigation of the degradation
of the PLA sheets used in our experiments are currently being conducted to establish whether similar degradation will
occur.
IV. PASSIVE DEGRADABLE TAG DESIGN
This section provides the design and analysis of a passive
tag which changes its frequency response based on degradation
state. It is proposed that when the tag is illuminated by a RF
transmission from outside the body, the degradation state, and
ultimately the state of infection, can be assessed. This study
provides an analysis of several key interest areas, such as the
effect of degradation state, angle of interrogation, and insertion
into a fat layer, on the tag’s frequency response.

3

Fig. 2. Copolarized frequency response of a degradable cross-shaped tag, of
diameters 20 (large) and 10 mm (small).

A. Passive Structure Resonance
The design process of passive structures involves investigation of several parameters, such as shape, size, and substrate
choice. There are two main RF considerations in developing
such structures for use as implantable devices. First, it is essential to ensure that the device resonates in a frequency band that
is easy to measure. Second, the frequency response must change
based on a progressive degradation.
In general, the frequency response of a frequency selective
surface (FSS) is related to its dimensions [34]. A similar principle can be applied to these structures. It is thus proposed that
degradation involving changing the length of the biodegradable
implant would be the best choice. A basic example explaining
the possible changes in harmonic frequency response due to reducing the size of the tag is shown in Fig. 2, whereby a large
cross with a diameter of 20 mm produces a resonance at 3 GHz,
while a smaller 10-mm diameter cross produces a resonance at
4 GHz. By simply alternating the size of the cross, a different
RF response can be measured.
B. Tag Structure and Degradation
Based on initial degradation simulations, a cross shape with
several break points was designed, as shown in Fig. 3. The
tag has track widths, w = 0.15 mm. Each arm length L was
6.25 mm, having an arm interconnect length A of 0.55 mm. The
subsectioned lengths were arbitrarily chosen as B = 2.15 mm,
C = 0.98 mm, D = 0.81 mm, E = 0.67 mm, F = 0.68 mm,
and G = 0.72 mm.
The cross is to be designed in such a way to enable gradual
degradation, measureable from outside the body due to its harmonic frequency response. This tag shape was chosen in-part
due to its strong resonant harmonic response, making it easier
to measure when implanted within the body. Previous work has
shown that the human body is a difficult environment for propagation of high-frequency signals due to the large quantity of
lossy (for RF signals) tissue, muscle, and bone structure. The
frequency response can be optimized by changing the relative
lengths of the sections within each arm of the cross (see labeled
B, C, D, E, F, and G in Fig. 3). The shape should be able to
degrade in a manageable way. By using the cross shape, the

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
4

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, 00 2015

Fig. 4.

Simulation model of the degradable tag and coordinate system.

Fig. 5.

Copolarized response of the tag at different degradation levels.

Fig. 3. (a) Proposed tag structure with closer view of tag dimensions. (b)
Illustration of miniaturized break points to ensure sequential degradation.

interconnects within each arm section (see labeled 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 in Fig. 3) can be designed to degrade in a predetermined
sequence by changing the width and thickness of the conductive
track. As each interconnect degrades in turn, the path length of
the inner cross increases and, thereby, decreasing the resonant
frequency of the tag. Realistically, the degradation would be
achieved by designing small break points at the ends of each
interconnect [see Fig. 3(b)], using thick or wider track lines
which take longer to degrade, rather than relying on the entire
interconnect to degrade. Such techniques have been previously
considered in [35] and [36].
In our simulation work, the structure of the tag is gradually
changed to understand how the harmonic response changes and
whether or not a measurable difference can be seen.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Electromagnetic performance analysis of the degradable tag
has been simulated using CST Microwave Studio. The tag was
illuminated by a linearly polarized plane wave signal. The frequency response of the tag was obtained using two perpendicular
radar cross section (RCS) probes, enabling co- and cross-polar
measurements to be performed. Both RCS probes were located
100 mm from the tag.
Simulations have been performed from 1 to 18 GHz using the
transient (time domain) solver was used with hexahedral meshing, with care being taken to ensure features were adequately
meshed and that scattering from the solver mesh did not produce
false responses in the results. The boundary conditions were set
to open (add space).
The tag structure was modeled using a perfect electrical conductor material which is representative of metallic materials.
The cross was positioned on a PLA substrate.
A. Initial Simulation
Simulation results showing the gradual degradation of the tag
are shown in Fig. 5. It is evident that as the tag degrades the

harmonic frequency changes considerably. The most noticeable
effects are the reduction of the harmonic null, which ranges
from 9.6 GHz for the complete tag to 6.2 GHz for degradation
state 5.
B. Tag Geometry and RF Response
A primary objective of this study is to develop a degradable
tag, which has a unique RF signature which can be used to
determine the tag’s state of degradation. If the tag is implanted
in a patient, monitoring this degradation on a regular basis will
allow for early detection of infection as this increases the rate of
degradation due to the local increase in temperature and acidity
as described in Section II. It is, therefore, not only desirable to
be able to detect the series of unique RF signatures as the tag
degrades, but to be able to predict the degradation status at a
given time after being implanted. The break points in the passive
tag can be positioned to provide predetermined frequencies at
which the peaks and nulls in the frequency response will occur.
These frequencies can be empirically determined by analysis of
the simulated tag responses. For the tag geometry shown in Fig
3, the frequency of the resonance peak can be expressed as
Fp eak (x) = F (0) − 0.345(x − 1)

(1)

where F(0) is the resonant frequency of the undegraded tag, x is
an integer number of degradation states, and F is in GHz.

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
RIGELSFORD et al.: PASSIVE BIODEGRADABLE IMPLANT FOR SUBCUTANEOUS SOFT-TISSUE TRAUMA MONITORING

Fig. 6. Copolarized response of the tag for different oblique azimuth (φ)
angles for (a) the full tag and (b) the fully degraded tag.

Similarly, the position of the first null at a higher frequency
than the resonance is located at
Fnull (x) = Fp eak (x)(1.385 − 0.04(x − 1)).

(2)

5

Fig. 7. Copolarized response of the tag for different oblique elevation (θ)
angles for (a) the full tag and (b) the fully degraded tag.

response at higher frequencies can be seen to decrease as the
oblique azimuth and elevation angles are increased. These highorder frequency responses enable the orientation of the tag to
be determined, relative to the illuminating transmission source.

C. Oblique Incidence Performance

D. Response When Implanted Into Fat Tissue

Once implanted and fixed within the patient’s body, there is
no guarantee that the illumination of the transmitter will be at
normal incidence to the tag. The absolute position and orientation of the tag will vary from patient to patient. Therefore, the
performance of the tag at several angles of incidence in both the
elevation (θ) and azimuth (φ) are investigated (see Fig. 4) when
illuminated by a plane wave polarized parallel to the x-axis. The
response for a complete tag over various angles of incidence is
compared to a fully degraded one.
Fig. 6 compares the copolarized response of the tag for different oblique azimuth (φ) angles for (a) the full tag and (b) the
fully degraded tag. This can be compared to Fig. 7 which compares the copolarized response of the tag for different oblique
elevation (θ) angles for (a) the full tag and (b) the fully degraded
tag. In both cases, the results show good levels of angular stability with no change in resonant frequency and minimal change
to the peak amplitude. However, the relative amplitude of the

The frequency response of the tag when implanted in body fat
is investigated. The permittivity and loss tangent parameters of
fat were imported into CST using information in [37] to ensure
accurate simulation.
Initially, the tag was positioned within two layers of fat, each
2-mm thick, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
The transmission response of the tag implanted within two 2mm layers of fat is shown in Fig. 9 for various degradation states.
Compared to the normal tag frequency response (see Fig. 5),
the implanted tag harmonics are shifted down in frequency,
where the complete tag has a null at 5.8 GHz. Also, evident is
the reduced received transmission due to the fat absorbing some
of the illumination signal power. However, it is clear that the
degradation still shifts the frequency harmonics over a 2-GHz
frequency band.
Fig. 10(a) shows the degradation responses for the same tag
design within two 10-mm layers of fat. To try and reduce the

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
6

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, 00 2015

Fig. 8.

Fig. 9.

Tag placed between two layers of fat, each 2-mm thick.

Copolarized response of tag within two 2-m fat layers.

Fig. 10. Copolarized response of (a) tag and (b) modified tag within two
10-mm fat layers.

negative effects of the fat when implanted, the length of the
cross was increased by 50%. Other dimensions were kept the
same. This additional length reduces the resonant frequency of
the tag but compensates for the attenuation due to the increased
fat layer as shown in Fig 10(b).
VI. TECHNIQUES FOR MINIATURIZATION AND INCREASING
TAG RESPONSE
In the previous section, we have presented the fundamental
design principles of a degradable tag, which can be used for
infection monitoring. As this monitoring occurs from outside
the patient, solutions which can increase the implantable devices
frequency response, making it easier to detect changes in its
geometry, are of obvious benefit. Techniques for miniaturizing
the physical size of the implantable device will aid adoption
of the technology and simplify their use in the final stages of
surgery.
A simple method for increasing the amplitude of the frequency response of the tag is to use an array of resonating elements [34] such as designs for FSS. Fig. 11 compares the copolarized forward transmission response of a single resonating
element and that of a 3 × 3 element array, where each element

Fig. 11. Comparison of copolarized frequency response between a 3 × 3
element array and single unit cell.

is spaced 10 mm from its closest neighbor. At the resonant frequency (∼7 GHz), it can be seen that the amplitude of the tag
response increases by 20 dB when an array of elements are utilized, and there is a 4 dB increase in the peak to first null dynamic
range. Increasing the number of resonant elements improves the
sensitivity of the implantable tag but has the detrimental effect
of increasing its physical size.

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
RIGELSFORD et al.: PASSIVE BIODEGRADABLE IMPLANT FOR SUBCUTANEOUS SOFT-TISSUE TRAUMA MONITORING

7

Fig. 14. Samples of the conducting silver tag, with sequential stages of degradation. Track width and total length of the tag at each stage are inset.
Fig. 12. (a) Tag miniaturization by folding the cross to form a Gammadion
Cross shape. (b) Array of inter woven Gammadion Crosses.

Fig. 15. Forward transmission plot in dB, of the conducting silver RFID tag,
with various levels of degradation measured.

VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND VALIDATION

Fig. 13. Copolarized frequency response of a 3 × 3 array of Gammadion
Crosses for different stages of tag degradation.

Balancing the physical size of the implantable tag, while
improving its response characteristics are vital for successful
adoption in monitoring soft-tissue trauma for the early stage
postoperative infection. A common technique for miniaturizing
resonant elements in an FSS design is to fold or intertwine the
shape. For example, our degradable cross (see Fig. 3) can be
folded to form a Gammadion Cross, as illustrated in Fig. 12(a).
In the example shown, the aperture of the tag has been reduced by approximately 40%. The Gammadion Cross can also
be easily intertwined [see Fig 12(b)] when an array of elements
are required, allowing for improved tag sensitivity at a reduced
physical size.
Fig. 13 shows the copolarized frequency response of a 3 × 3
array of Gammadion Crosses for different stages of tag degradation. The degradation of the implantable tag is not effected by
the resonant element forming part of an array. All nine elements
in the array can be designed to degrade in parallel and will therefore provide a similar but larger response than a single element.
For each degradation state, the peaks and nulls in the frequency
response of the tag occur at uniquely identifiable frequencies
(see Fig. 13). In this case, a fat layer is not considered. Inclusion
of a fat layer would result in an attenuation of the peak to null
frequency response of the tag, as described in Section V-D.

To validate the concept of a passive biodegradable implant
which can be used for infection monitoring, prototypes were
manufactured using a conducting silver paint applied to a PLA
sheet substrate. Results presented here focus on the RF characterization and detection resonant tag as it degrades. The silver
has a conducting capacity of between 0.02 and 0.1 Ω/cm2 . Depending on stage of degradation, the tag’s length and total size
decreases, as shown in Fig. 14. Degradation can be controlled
by either changing the thickness of the tracks or by providing
predesigned weak links to break first. In this case, the cross
would degrade from the outside in.
Prototype tags were tested by measuring the changes in forward transmission (S21) of a free-space system, in a similar way
as to that described in [7]. The system comprises of two Rohde
and Schwarz HF906 double-ridged waveguide horn antennas
spaced 600 mm apart. Measurement samples are placed on a
large polystyrene block (600 mm × 600 mm), which is 200mm thick and has RF transmission properties close to air (i.e.
εr ≈ 1.02). The forward transmission measurement (S21) was
performed using a two port Agilent 8720D vector network analyzer, for a frequency range of 1 to 18 GHz with 1601 discrete
sample points. The system was calibrated using transmission
through just the polystyrene block, and a time gate with a span
of 0.6 ns was used to eliminate any multipath and scattered signals. An intermediate frequency bandwidth of 1 kHz and sweep
time of 2 s was used.
Three different stages were measured to examine how their
transmission response would change with progressive degradation. Fig. 15 shows the measured forward transmission response
of the three crosses illustrated in Fig. 14.

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
8

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 00, NO. 00, 00 2015

Fig. 16. Simulated response of the RFID tag with the same levels of degradation as the measured tag.

The results clearly show that even small changes in the cross
shaped biodegradable implant can have measureable effects on
its resonant frequency. As the overall size of the cross reduces,
it can be seen that the resonant frequency increases. For the
full cross [see Fig. 14(a)] resonance occurs at approximately
4.8 GHz, the partially degraded design resonates at 6.8 GHz,
while the small cross resonates at 8.1 GHz. As the peak measured responses of the tag are low (0.1–0.2 dB), this illustrates
the importance of optimizing the tag geometry and utilizing
techniques to improve the signal strength. This includes methods such as tag miniaturization and the use of intertwined arrays
as explained in the previous section (see Fig. 12).
For comparison, Fig. 16 presents simulated copolarized frequency response of a similar tag in the three states of degradation. The three resonant frequencies can be clearly seen and
align closely with those measured in Fig. 15. Discrepancies
between the simulated and measured results occur due to differences between the geometric accuracy between the simulated
and manufactured designs.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate the use of a biodegradable implant to monitor the healing of soft-tissue trauma and to allow
an early stage diagnosis of infection. The implantable tag is designed to degrade in a predetermined and controlled method, the
stage of which can be measured from outside the body without
need for further surgical intervention. The speed of degradation
of the tag depends on the temperature and acidity of the subcutaneous tissue in which the tag is implanted. We show that as
the electrical length of the tag pattern increases due to degradation, the resonant frequency changes significantly, and this
change in resonant frequency can be detected from outside the
patient. Results are presented showing the tag’s performance at
normal and oblique incidence and techniques for miniaturizing
and enhancing the tag’s response sensitivity are given.
As the entire tag is biodegradable, there is no need for further
postoperative surgery to remove it from the patient at the end of
its useful life. Our design meets the requirements that wireless
devices implanted within a patient have to be physically small,

and must overcome the challenges of having no onboard electrical power. Results are given showing the tags performance in
a highly attenuating electromagnetic propagation environment
and its suitability for being implanted within a patient’s body.
Various stages of degradation can be monitored wirelessly as
shown from our own measurements using a silver conducting
cross on a PLA substrate. Our measurements show that as the
cross degrades, the peak in harmonic shifts from 4.8 to 8.1 GHz
at each extreme.
It is proposed that assessment of a patient using the passive
RFID implant presented in this study can lead to an early diagnosis of infection as this will increase the rate of degradation
of the tag. This helps reduce the over reliance on excessive
prescription of antibiotics, and help mitigate unnecessary additional surgery, which in itself can lead to further risk of infection
and complications. The implanted RFID tag can be monitored
from outside the patient using a measurement device similar to
the hand-held “wand” metal detectors used by airport security.
Alternatively, the implant can be continuously monitored using
a compact body worn antenna system.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Valderas, C. Schmidt, and X. Chen, “Broadband implanted UHF RFID
antenna,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp., Jul. 2010,
pp. 1–4.
[2] A. Sani, M, Rajab, R. Foster, and Y. Hao, “Antennas and propagation
of implanted RFIDs for pervasive healthcare applications,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 98, no. 9, pp. 1648–1655, Sep. 2010.
[3] A. Kiourti and K. S. Nikita, “Recent advances in implantable antennas
for medical telemetry,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 54, no. 6,
pp. 190–199, Dec. 2012.
[4] J. Gemio, J. Parron, and J. Soler, “Human body effects on implantable
antennas for ISM bands applications: Models comparison and propagation
losses study,” Prog. Electromagn. Res., vol. 110, pp. 437–452, 2010.
[5] K. Y. Yazdandoost and R. Kohno, “Wireless communications for body
implanted medical device,” in Proc. Asia-Pac. Microw. Conf., Dec. 2007,
pp. 1–4.
[6] M. Kony, M. Walter, T. Schlebusch, and S. Leonhardt, “An RFID communication system for medical applications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Body Sens.
Netw., Jun. 2010, pp. 71–75.
[7] C. Occhiuzzi, G. Contri, and G. Marrocco, “Design of implanted RFID
tags for passive sensing of human body: The STENTag,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 3146–3154, Jul. 2012.
[8] X. Liu, J. L. Berger, A. Ogirala, M. H. Mickle, and L. Fellow, “A touch
probe method of operating an implantable RFID tag for orthopedic implant identification,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 236–242, Jun. 2013.
[9] J. M. Rigelsford and C. J. Davenport, “A passive RFID implant for soft tissue trauma monitoring,” in Proc. Loughborough Antennas Propag. Conf.,
Nov. 2013, pp. 127–130.
[10] (2014). 3rd European Colorectal Cancer Days: Brno 2014 = Prevention
and Screening. [Online]. Available: http://www.crcprevention.eu
[11] (2014). World Health Organization. Colorectal Cancer. [Online].
Available: http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicablediseases/cancer/news/news/2012/2/early-detection-of-commoncancers/colorectal-cancer
[12] H. R. Champion, R. F. Bellamy, C. P. Roberts, and A. Leppaniemi, “A
profile of combat injury,” J. Trauma, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. S13–S19, 2013.
[13] J. A. G. Singleton, I. E. Gibb, N. C. A. Hunt, A. M. J. Bull, and
J. C. Clasper, “Identifying future ‘unexpected’ survivors: A retrospective
cohort study of fatal injury patterns in victims of improvised explosive
devices,” BMJ Open, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 1–8, 2013.
[14] J. E. Hall and A. C. Guyton, Textbook of Medical Physiology. Saunders,
PA, USA: Elsevier Saunders, 2011.
[15] R. A. Rhoades and D. R. Bell, Medical Physiology: Principles for Clinical
Medicine. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013.

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information:
DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417754, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
RIGELSFORD et al.: PASSIVE BIODEGRADABLE IMPLANT FOR SUBCUTANEOUS SOFT-TISSUE TRAUMA MONITORING

[16] G. Villarreal, J. Zagorski, and S. Wahl, “Inflammation: Acute,” eLS, Wiley:
Jan. 2003, doi: 10.1038/npg.els.0000943
[17] V. Menkin, “The role of hydrogen ion concentration and the cytology of
an exudate,” Biochem. Mech. Inflammation, pp. 66–103, 1956.
[18] S. Grinstein, C. J. Swallow, and O. D. Rotsein, “Regulation of cytoplasmic
pH in phagocytic cell function and dysfunction,” Clin. Biochem., vol. 24,
pp. 241–247, 1991.
[19] M. H. Nekoofar, M. S. Hamazikhah, M. S. Sheykhrezae,
M. M. Mohammadi, A. Kazemi, Z. Aseeley, and P. M. H. Dummer, “pH
of pus collected from periapical abscesses,” Int. Endod. J., vol. 42, no. 6,
pp. 534–538, 2009.
[20] Surveillance of Surgical Site Infection in English Hospitals 1997–2002,
Health Protection Agency, London, U.K., 2002.
[21] National Collaborating Centre for Women’s and Children’s Health. (2008,
Oct.). Prevention and treatment of surgical-site infections. [Online]. Available: infectioncontrolsource.org
[22] John Hopkins Medicine. Surgical site infections. [Online]. Available:
http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/healthlibrary/conditions/adult/
dermatology/surgical_site_infections_134,144/
[23] University of Pavia. Biodegradable materials for medical applications. [Online]. Available: http://www.dist.unina.it/doc/seminari/
corso_Auricchio/biomaterials.pdf
[24] J. Ren, Biodegradable Poly (Lactic Acid): Synthesis, Modification, Processing and Applications. Beijing, China: Tsinghuna Univ. Press, 2010.
[25] H. Hermawan, Biodegradable Metals From Concept to Application. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2012.
[26] A. J. Domb, J. Kost, and D. M. Wiseman, Handbook of Biodegradable
Polymers. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1997.
[27] D. Persaud-Sharma and A. McGoron, “Biodegradable magnesium alloys:
A review of material developments and applications,” J. Biomim. Biomater.
Tissue Eng., vol. 12, pp. 25–39, 2012.
[28] R. Chamy Ed., Biodegradation—Life of Science. Rijeka, Croatia: InTech,
2013, ch. 1, pp. 4–29.
[29] S. Lyu and D. Untereker, “Degradability of polymers for implantable
biomedical devices,” Int. J. Mol. Sci., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 4033–4065, 2009.
[30] S. Lyu, J. Schley, B. Loy, L. Luo, C. Hobot, R. Sparer, D. Untereker, and
J. Krzeszak, “In vitrobiostability evaluation of polyurethane composites
in acidic, basic, oxidative, and neutral solutions,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res.
Part B, Appl. Biomater., vol. 85B, pp. 509–518, 2008.
[31] B. Ward, J. Anderson, R. McVenes, and K. Stokes, “In vivo biostability
of polysiloxane polyether polyurethanes: Resistance to biologic oxidation
and stress cracking,” J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A, vol. 77A, pp. 580–589,
2006.
[32] A. C. Vieira, J. C. Viera, R. M. Guedes, and A. T. Marques, “Degradation and viscoelastic properties of PLA-PCL, PGA-PCL, PDO and PGA
fibres,” Mater. Sci. Forum, vols. 636/637, pp. 825–832, 2010.
[33] L. Xu, K. Crawford, and C. B. Gorman, “Effects of temperature and pH
on the degradation of poly(lactic acid) brushes,” Macromolecules, vol. 44,
no. 12, pp. 4777–4782, 2011.
[34] B. A. Munk, Frequency Selective Surfaces: Theory and Design. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, May 2000.
[35] W. G. Whittow, “Manipulating microsized coupling gaps for reconfigurable antenna applications,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 54,
pp. 2444–2445, 2012.
[36] M. S. Bhuiyan and N. Karmakar, “Chipless RFID tag based on splitwheel resonators,” in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag., 2013,
pp. 3054–3057.
[37] D. Andreuccetti, R. Fossi, and C. Petrucci. (1997). An internet resource
for the calculation of the dielectric properties of body tissues in the
frequency range 10 Hz–100 GHz. [Online]. IFAC-CNR, Florence, Italy.
Available: http://niremf.ifac.cnr.it/tissprop

9

Jonathan M. Rigelsford (SM’13) received the
M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering
from the University of Hull, Hull, U.K., in 1997 and
2001, respectively.
From 2000 to 2002, he was a Senior Design Engineer with Jaybeam Limited. From 2002 to 2014, he
was a Senior Experimental Officer with the Communications Group, Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
U.K., where he is currently a Senior Research Fellow.
His current research interests include RF propagation,
biomedical electromagnetics, adaptive antennas, RFID, and cybersecurity.

Baraa F. Al-Azzawi received the B.Sc. degree in
electronic and communications engineering from
Nahrain University, Baghdad, Iraq, in 2010, and the
M.Sc. degree with distinction in wireless communication systems from the University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, U.K., in 2014.
From 2011 to 2013, he was a RF Engineer with
Rygon Corporation on projects for Ericsson Integrated Telecommunications. He is currently working
towards a Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electronic & Electrical Engineering at the University of
Sheffield, U.K.

Christopher James Davenport received the M.Eng.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Sheffield, Sheffield, U.K., in 2010, where he has
been working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering since
2011.
His current research interests include periodic
frequency selective surfaces, implantable RFID, and
wireless sensor networks.

Peter Novodvorsky was a Trust Fellow with the Cardiology Department, Northern General Hospital, Sheffield, U.K., and a Residency at the Coronary Care
Unit, Clinic of Cardiology and Angiology of the University Hospital, FriedrichAlexander University, Erlangen, Germany. He currently has an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellowship in Diabetes and Endocrinology, STH NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield. Prior to this role, he held an MRC Clinical Fellowship at
the MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics,

2168-2194 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE
permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

