2234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

The Role of Pulse Repetition Rate in nsPEF-Induced
Electroporation: A Biological and
Numerical Investigation
∗

Patrizia Lamberti, Member, IEEE, Stefania Romeo , Anna Sannino, Luigi Zeni, and Olga Zeni

Abstract—The impact of pulse repetition rate (PRR) in modulating electroporation (EP) induced by nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs) in mammalian cells was approached here by
performing both biological and numerical analysis. Plasma membrane permeabilization and viability of Jurkat cells were analyzed
after exposure to 500, 1.3 MV/m, 40 ns PEFs with variable PRR
(2–30 Hz). A finite-element model was used to investigate EP dynamics in a single cell under the same pulsing conditions, by looking
at the time course of transmembrane voltage and pore density on
the ns time scale. The biological observations showed an increased
EP and reduced viability of the exposed cells at lower PRR in
the considered range. The numerical analysis resulted in different dynamics of plasma membrane response when ns pulses were
delivered with different PRR, consistently with a phenomenon of
electrodesensitization recently hypothesized by another research
group.
Index Terms—Biological effects, electroporation (EP), nanosecond pulsed electric field (nsPEFs), numerical analysis, pulse repetition rate (PRR).

I. INTRODUCTION
ULSED electric fields (PEFs) with high intensity and duration in the microsecond to millisecond range are able to
increase the permeability of plasma membrane in mammalian
cells, an effect known as electroporation (EP). Such a phenomenon has been widely investigated over the last decades to
give insight into the cellular and molecular interaction mechanisms between the electric stimulus and the cellular structures,
and several EP-based technologies have been developed and are
currently employed in both medical and industrial applications
[1], [2]. More recently, pulses with higher intensities and duration in the submicrosecond to nanosecond time scale [nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs)], have been demonstrated to
induce destabilization of plasma membrane in mammalian cells,

P

Manuscript received September 24, 2014; revised January 2, 2015 and March
7, 2015; accepted March 31, 2015. Date of publication April 3, 2015; date
of current version August 18, 2015. This work was supported in part by the
Regione Campania (L.R. n. 5) and by the FARB of the University of Salerno.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
P.
Lamberti is with the University of Salerno.
∗
S. Romeo is with the Institute for Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment, Italian National Research Council, 80124 Napoli, Italy (e-mail:
romeo.s@irea.cnr.it).
A. Sannino and O. Zeni are with the Institute for Electromagnetic Sensing of
the Environment, Italian National Research Council.
L. Zeni is with the Second University of Naples and also with the Institute
for Electromagnetic Sensing of the Environment, Italian National Research
Council.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2419813

as well as permeabilization of intracellular membranes and alteration of cell functions [3]–[5]. The effects of nsPEFs, as well
as of other types of PEFs, are not yet completely characterized,
although in vivo applications have been already developed and
tested, and their usage in medical and clinical practice, including cancer therapy, is being pursued [6], [7]. The optimization
of technologies and treatments based on PEFs cannot disregard
a better understanding of the dependence of the effects on pulse
parameters. This is particularly true for the pulse repetition rate
(PRR) whose role in modulating EP is still controversial, and
conflicting, or apparently conflicting, results on this issue have
been reported in the literature. As a matter of fact, although pulsing conditions are never directly comparable (pulse duration,
amplitude, and number vary over broad ranges), several papers
reported higher efficiency with lower rates of pulsing [8]–[13],
while other reported higher efficiency with higher rates of pulsing [14]–[17], or more complex behaviors [18]. In most of the
aforementioned papers, the impact of PRR was evaluated on efficiency of cell killing and/or electropermeabilization, the latter
measured as either uptake of external molecules or electrical
bioimpedance drop, but also cell swelling was considered.
Analytical and numerical models of EP have been increasingly adopted to analyze the processes triggered by the application of nsPEFs in simplified cell systems. This approach provides quantitative and qualitative characterization of physical
entities that describe the EP onset and dynamics, with a relatively limited computational effort and on temporal and spatial
scales that are not always directly observable. Such approach,
moreover, allows us to setup “virtual experiments,” where the
model responses can be calculated under variable conditions,
with any variable parameter. Most of the times PEF parameters like shape, and/or duration, and/or amplitude, and/or count,
and/or rise/fall time have been changed [19]–[24]. However,
a systematic numerical analysis of the role of PRR in nsPEFinduced EP has never been carried out, to the best of authors’
knowledge.
In this study, the role of repetition rate of ns pulses was investigated from both a biological and numerical point of view.
Human lymphoblastoid-T cells (Jurkat) were subjected to 500,
1.3 MV/m, 40 ns PEFs with PRR ranging from 2 to 30 Hz, and
plasma membrane permeabilization after pulsing, and cell viability 24 h later, were investigated. A numerical model, usually
employed to analyze the EP phenomenon in eukaryotic cells
exposed to PEFs with duration in the millisecond to microsecond time scale [25]–[28], and previously validated for nsPEFs
as well [24], was employed here to investigate the EP onset and

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LAMBERTI et al.: ROLE OF PULSE REPETITION RATE IN nsPEF-INDUCED ELECTROPORATION

2235

dynamics induced under the same pulsing conditions adopted
for biological experiments. Specifically, EP onset was characterized by looking at the time evolution of transmembrane voltage
(Vm ), and pore density (N) in the anodic pole of a spheroidal cell.
The results of biological analysis indicated reduced bioeffects
when increasing PRR under the pulsing conditions here adopted.
The numerical analysis, which allows us to track the primary
events of EP on a time scale where available biological techniques do not provide reliable information, further suggested a
phenomenon of electrodesensitization, already hypothesized by
another research group [13].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Cell Culture Maintenance and nsPEF-Exposure
Human lymphoblastoid T-cells (Jurkat) were maintained in
an exponential growth phase (37 °C; 5% CO2 ) in complete
medium composed by RPMI 1640, supplemented with 10%
FBS, 1% L-glutamine, 1% penicillin-streptomycin (all reagents
were from BioWhittaker). For experiments, 40-μL aliquots of
cell suspension in absolute RPMI (8 × 106 cells/ml) were exposed in 0.1 cm (electrodes gap) EP cuvettes to 500, 40 ns,
1.3 MV/m PEFs with PRR ࢠ{2, 5, 10, 30} Hz. Cell aliquots
handled in parallel and subjected to the same treatments as
pulsed samples, but not exposed to nsPEFs (sham), were included in each experimental run, and served as controls.
B. Nanosecond Pulse Generation System
A double-switch Blumlein system was employed, which allows us to generate high voltage, ns electric pulses with variable
duration, polarity, and repetition rate. A complete description
of the design and realization of the pulse generation system
was reported previously [29]. Briefly, the system is composed
by a remote control system, a fiber-optic link, and a Blumlein
pulse forming network. The remote control system comprises
a PC and a couple of low-voltage digital pulse generators (USBpulse100, Elan Digital System), which provide the control signals for the switches activation. The devices are PC controlled
via USB ports and provide single pulses or trains of pulses with
variable length and repetition rate. These signals are propagated
to the switches by means of a fiber-optic link, consisting of two
transmitters (TX, HFBR 1414Z, Agilent Technologies), two receivers (RX, HFBR 2402Z, Agilent Technologies), and a fiber
optic patch cord. The Blumlein pulse forming network is made
up of a high-voltage dc power supply (PS375, SRS), two microstrip transmission lines, two solid state switches (HTSUF,
Behlke), and the load series connected to the transmission lines.
A schematic depiction of the pulse generation system is reported
in Fig. 1.
C. Plasma Membrane Permeabilization
The uptake of YOPRO-1 (two independent experiments with
triplicates), a normally cell-impermeant monomeric cyanine
dye, which fluoresces upon binding to nucleic acids [14], [30]
was measured to detect plasma membrane permeabilization.
Cell suspensions were exposed/sham-exposed in presence of

Fig. 1. Double switch Blumlein nanosecond pulse generation system. The
load consists of a 1-mm-gap EP cuvette filled with cell suspension.

YOPRO-1 1 μM (Invitrogen, Eugene), diluted in phosphate
buffer saline (PBS, BioWhittaker) and, 3 min later, samples
were analyzed with a flow cytometer (FACScalibur, Becton
& Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA). A total of 15 000 events
were acquired using FL1 channel, and analyzed by FlowJo software (TreeStar Inc.). Results were presented as fluorescence
histograms of exposed samples with concurrent sham, in order
to take into account that sham samples associated with different PRR conditions stayed different times in the presence of
YOPRO-1. To quantify the total fluorescence intensity, geometric mean of the fluorescence histograms was used.
D. Cell Viability
The trypan blue dye exclusion (TBDE) method and the resazurin assay, the former being related to the plasma membrane
integrity and the latter to the cell metabolic activity, were applied
24 h after exposure to nsPEFs to evaluate cell viability. In both
cases, after exposure/sham exposure, cells were transferred to
complete culture medium and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2
for 24 h.
For TBDE assay, cell aliquots were collected and treated with
0.4% (w/v) trypan blue (Euroclone), and the number of viable
cells was recorded by using a Burker hemocytometer under a
light microscope.
The resazurin assay was carried out as described in [31]. Nonfluorescent resazurin (Sigma) is reduced to highly fluorescent
resorufin in the growth medium by cell activity, and a direct
correlation exists between the reduction of resazurin and the
metabolic activity of living cells. For experiments, cells were
incubated at 37 °C with 10-μg/ml resazurin for 40 min. The
production of resorufin was analyzed in supernatants with a
fluorometer (LS50B, Perkin–Elmer Instruments) at excitation
and emission wavelengths of 530 and 590 nm, respectively, and
recorded as relative fluorescence units. Results were expressed
as a resorufin production (μg/ml/min).
For each assay, at least five independent experiments with
triplicates were carried out. Two-way analysis of variance for

2236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Pulse train applied to the domain in Fig. 2, reproducing the ns pulses as
in the biological experiments. The lightning cartoon represents the nth applied
pulse.

Fig. 2. Two-dimensional sketch of the spatial domains modeling the
spheroidal cell placed between a couple of planar electrodes at a distance d.
TABLE I
MODEL PARAMETERS

Extracellular medium
Plasma membrane
Cytoplasm
Nuclear envelope
Nucleoplasm

σ [S/m]

εr

Dimensions

1
5.6 × 10 −5
1.31
1.11 × 10 −2
2.04

80
12.8
60
106
120

Total area [μm2 ]
Thickness [nm]
Cell radius [μm]
Thickness [nm]
Nucleus radius [μm]

256
7
3.307
40
0.48

Electromagnetic (electric conductivity, σ and relative permittivity, ε R ) and geometrical properties of the extracellular medium and cell components considered in the
physical model. The values of parameters were derived from [32]–[34].

repeated measurements was applied to analyze groups of data
obtained from cell viability assays, and post hoc analysis using
Tukey test was applied to determine which conditions were
significantly different from each other. In all cases, statistics
was carried out on raw data and performed by using MATLAB
Statistics tool (MathWorks).
E. Numerical Analysis
A numerical model, based on the electroquasistatic formulation of the Maxwell equations and on the Smoluchowsky approximation of the pore dynamics, developed as reported before
[24], was employed to simulate the EP onset and dynamics in
a spheroidal cell, placed between a couple of planar electrodes
at a distance d, under the same pulsing conditions used in the
biological experiments. The model is based on the asymptotic
EP model defined in [26], which considers a population of pores
with a fixed pore radius of 0.76 nm and pore lifetime greater
than 1.5 s.
The 2-D geometry sketched in Fig. 2, with the indicated spatial domains, namely the extracellular medium (Ωext ), plasma
membrane (Ωm ), cytoplasm (Ωcyt ), nuclear envelope (Ωn e ),
and nucleoplasm (Ωnuc ), were used for solving the problem by
means of a finite-element commercial software (Comsol Multiphysics, Comsol Inc.). Geometric and electromagnetic properties of the domains were derived from [32]–[34] and are listed
in Table I. The time evolution and spatial distribution of the

electric potential, V(P,t), and of the pore density, N(P,t), due to
time varying applied nsPEF E(t), are obtained by solving the
following system of equations:
⎧


∂ε∇V
⎪
⎪
ˆ
− σ∇V − N iep ir = 0
⎪∇ · −
⎪
⎪
∂t
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎛
⎞ ⎛
⎞2 ⎞
⎛
⎨
Vm 2
Vm
⎝
⎠
⎠
⎝
(1)
−q
⎜
∂N
⎪
Vep
Vep ⎟
⎪
⎜1 − N e
⎟
⎪
=
α
e
⎪
⎝
⎠
⎪
∂t
N0
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
N (P, t) = 0 if P ∈
/ Ωm
if a fixed electric potential V(P, t) = {0, E(t) ∗ d} is given
+
for P ∈ {∂Ω−
ext , ∂Ωext }. In (1), iep is the current in an aqueous
pore [25]–[27], îr is the radial versor, and Vm = Vm (P ∗ , t) is
the transmembrane voltage in a generic point P ∗ ∈ ∂Ω+
m
 ∗ − 
∗
∗
Vm (P , t) = V (P , t) − V P ∂Ωm , t
(2)
∗
where P ∗ | ∂Ω−
m is the geometric projection of P on the internal
−
plasma membrane boundary ∂Ωm (see Fig. 2). Constant values
Vep = 258 mV, q = 2.46, α = 109 , and N0 = 1.5 × 109 m−2
were adopted as in [24], being N0 the “equilibrium value” of
the pore density when Vm = 0.
−
The Dirichlet conditions on ∂Ω+
ext and ∂Ωext lead to consider the PRR effect of n nsPEFs, with amplitude Em ax and
duration tON , on the EP phenomenon, when the input voltage Vinput (t) is adopted (see Fig. 3). The input signal is
a train of n trapezoidal pulses, each one characterized by
an amplitude Vm ax = Em ax ∗ d, rise (tr ), fall (tf ), and hold
(thold ) times. The experimental pulsing conditions, defined before, were numerically reproduced by applying to the model
n = 500, Vm ax = 20.8 V (being Em ax = 1.3 MV/m and d =
16 μm), tr = tf = 5 ns, and thold = 40 ns, leading to an on
time tON = 50 ns. The simulation windows were settled according to the PRR ࢠ{2, 5, 10, 30} Hz, and by considering a
post exposure time of 10 s in each case.
A postprocessing procedure, developed in MATLAB, allowed
to analyze the EP onset on the plasma membrane and its evolution upon the application of nsPEFs.
Results will be presented as a time evolution of the transmembrane voltage Vm (P ∗ , t) and pore density N(P ∗ , t) at a fixed
point P ∗ . In the considered geometry, the cell poles are known
to be the most sensitive to the applied electric field [24], [35].
For the sake of clarity, only the results at the anodic pole will be

LAMBERTI et al.: ROLE OF PULSE REPETITION RATE IN nsPEF-INDUCED ELECTROPORATION

2237

reported (see Fig. 2). The variables Vm and N were used in order
to verify the EP onset; the phenomenon is assumed to be acti∗
vated, at a fixed time instant t in a point P ∗ , when Vm reaches a
critical value, i.e., Vcrit = 4Vep = 1032 mV [28]. In this condition, a fast variation occurs in the number of electrically induced
pores [25]–[27], leading the pore density to exceed its equilibrium status (N >> N0 ) with a very high time derivative [19],
[24]. It is worth pointing out that the term “pore” indicates here
the formation of conductive pathways in the plasma membrane,
whose nature has not yet been elucidated, and is beyond the
scope of this paper. The term, however, is used for the sake of
simplicity.
III. RESULTS
A. Effect of PRR on Living Cells
An increased uptake of YOPRO-1 was recorded after exposure to nsPEFs in cells exposed to all the considered conditions,
as indicated by the right shift of the fluorescence histograms
with respect to sham control [see Fig. 4(a)]. The uptake resulted
lower upon increasing PRR, as showed by the geometric means
of the fluorescence histograms reported in Fig. 4. Moreover, the
fluorescence histograms of exposed samples exhibited a bimodal
distribution, with the second highly fluorescent peak more evident at 2 Hz and decreasing upon increasing PRR. From the
analysis of YOPRO-1 fluorescence versus forward scatter signal
[see Fig. 4(b)], it resulted that the second peak is representative
of a subpopulation of more damaged, smaller in size, and more
permeabilized cells than those in the main population.
Cell viability, assayed by TBDE 24 h after pulsing, always
showed a reduction in exposed samples with respect to the concurrent sham controls at all the PRR considered. Such reduction
resulted lower upon increasing PRR [see Fig. 5(a)]. Results
of TBDE assay, as obtained by the statistical analysis, are reported in Fig. 5(b) as an average number of viable cells in
sham/nsPEFs-exposed samples at each PRR condition, with a
99% confidence interval for the mean. Overlapping intervals
are representative of data points that are not statistically different between each other. In particular, samples exposed to 2, 5,
and 10 Hz PRR resulted significantly different from sham samples, (p < 0.01), while 30 Hz exposed samples were not. By
comparing the effects of different PRRs, 2 Hz exposed samples
resulted significantly different from those exposed to nsPEFs
at 10 and 30 Hz (p < 0.01), while 5 Hz exposed samples resulted significantly different from those exposed to nsPEFs at
30 Hz (p < 0.01). Cell viability assayed by the metabolic resazurin method, 24 h after pulsing, also showed a reduction at
all the PRRs considered but it resulted statistically significant
only in the case of 2 and 5 Hz when compared to the concurrent
sham controls (p < 0.05). Results are presented in Fig. 5(c) as
a resorufin production per minute, for each sham/nsPEFs exposed sample at each PRR condition considered. Interestingly,
by comparing results of Fig. 5(a) and (c), it can be pointed out
that viable cells exposed at 2 and 5 Hz, which were almost half
those exposed at 30 Hz, still produced almost the same quantity
of resorufin as cells exposed at 30 Hz PRR. This suggests that
cells exposed at lower PRRs might be more active.

Fig. 4. (a) YOPRO-1 fluorescence histograms (from a single representative
experiment) of Jurkat cells exposed [blue (grey) line] or sham-exposed [red
(black) line] to nsPEFs with variable PRR. The numbers above the histograms
show the geometric mean fluorescence intensity. (b) Representative dot plot of
YOPRO-1 fluorescence versus forward scatter signal for the 2 Hz case.

B. Effects of PRR on a Modeled Cell System
1) EP Onset at the First Pulse: EP occurred in all the considered numerical experiments, in accordance with biological
observations. As expected, the cell response to the first pulse
is the same for all the PRR conditions. The time evolution of
Vm and N upon the application of the first pulse delivered at
2 Hz are presented in Fig. 6. The time courses are typical of
EP onset: Vm exceeds Vcrit during the pulse application, Vinput ,
∗
and N(P ,t) is much higher than N0 and exceeds 1014 with a
very fast variation, leading to consider that the membrane is
actually electroporated [19]. Then, the increase in pore density
considerably increases the membrane conductivity, leading to a
voltage drop across the membrane [see Fig. 6(a)].
2) Transmembrane Voltage Drops Upon Increasing PRR:
The transmembrane voltage in a time window around the second
pulse is reported in Fig. 7, for all the PRR conditions considered.
The Vm (continuous lines) results lower for higher PRR, and it

2238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 6. (a) Transmembrane voltage V m (t) and (b) pore density at the first
pulse. The time courses are typical of EP onset. Only the 2 Hz case is reported
since the cell response after the first pulse is the same for any PRR, the pulse
duration and amplitude being always the same.

Fig. 7. Time evolution of V m during the second pulse delivered at 2 (black
line), 5 [red (light grey) line], 10 [blue (dark grey) line], and 30 Hz [green
(grey–white) line].

Fig. 5. (a), (b) Viability of Jurkat cells 24 h after exposure to nsPEFs, as
assessed by TBDE assay and (c) resazurin assay. In (a), results are reported
as percentage of sham (mean ± SE of six independent experiments), while in
(b), the output of the statistical analysis is reported as mean of six independent
experiments with 99% confidence interval for the mean (vertical dotted lines
indicate overlapping intervals: only some of them have been highlighted for
clarity). In (c), the results of
resazurin assay are showed as mean ± SE of five
∗
independent experiments ( indicates statistically significant differences with
respect to concurrent sham controls, as obtained by two-way ANOVA analysis
with post hoc Tukey test).

exceeds Vcrit (see dashed-dotted line in Fig. 7) only at 2 Hz. This
is due to the different time instant (T = 1/PRR) of application
of the second pulse at each PRR condition; when longer time
passes between pulses, the pore density decreases, leading to a
new initial value of N(P ∗ ,T), which is higher for higher PRR
(see Fig. 8). This is in good agreement with the result reported
in [36], where it is shown that although pulses with higher rates
induce a lower relative pore area, they also produce higher pore
density at the end of the first effective pulse. This is explained

∗

Fig. 8. Pore density N(P ,T) as a function of PRR. T is the time instant of
application of the second pulse.

by considering that at higher rates, i.e., when the interpulse interval is shorter, more pores are still present, resulting in a faster
dynamics of the membrane voltage.
3) Pore Density is Less Sensitive Upon Increasing PRR:
Fig. 9(a)–(d) presents the time evolution of pore density and

LAMBERTI et al.: ROLE OF PULSE REPETITION RATE IN nsPEF-INDUCED ELECTROPORATION

2239

Fig. 9. Pore density and
transmembrane voltage in a time window including the first ten pulses at each PRR. Marked lighting cartoons indicate uneffective
∗
pulses; insets report N(P ,t) and Vm (P∗ ,t) corresponding to the next effective pulse, (a) PRR = 2 Hz, (b) PRR = 5 Hz, (c) PRR = 10 Hz, and (d) PRR = 30 Hz.

2240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 11. Average value of N(P∗ ,t) and value of ΔN in the steady state as a
function of PRR.

PRR, where more pulses have been delivered [see Fig. 10(d)].
Moreover, a reduced ripple (ΔN) of the saw-tooth shape is
observed upon increasing PRR.
Fig. 11 shows that the average value of N(P ∗ ,t) in the steady
state is not significantly affected by the PRR and is about 1.25 ×
1014 /m2 , while the ripple exhibits a consistent decrease (one
order of magnitude from 2 to 30 Hz).
IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 10. Time evolution of the pore density in a 10-s-long time window at the
considered PRRs. Dashed lines indicate the response to a single pulse.

transmembrane voltage at each PRR in time windows including
the first ten pulses. In all cases, the second pulse is not effective; Vm (P ∗ ,t) never exceeds Vcrit during the pulse application
(Vinput ) (except for the 2 Hz case) and the pore density is not
significantly affected, but decreases, while keeping much higher
than N0 . When subsequent pulses are delivered, the number of
uneffective pulses increases upon increasing the PRR. Insets in
Fig. 9 allows us to identify the next effective pulse by considering the corresponding time courses of N(P ∗ ,t) and Vm (P ∗ ,t)
typical of EP onset.
Fig. 10 presents N(P ∗ ,t) in a 10–s-wide time window, in all
the PRR conditions, compared to the time evolution induced
if only a single pulse was applied (dashed line). After a first
interval, about 1-s wide, where the lines overlap, a saw-toothshaped steady state is reached, which establishes earlier at higher

The impact of PRR in eliciting bioeffects in Jurkat cells exposed to nsPEFs has been given insight here by means of both
biological and numerical analysis.
Pulse parameters (500 pulses, 40 ns duration, 1.3 MV/m electric field amplitude) were chosen on the basis of a preliminary
experimental run devoted to identify exposure conditions which
were able to induce EP but mild cell killing so that differences
among PRRs could be appreciated.
In the selected pulsing conditions, electropermeabilization in
Jurkat cells was reduced when increasing the PRR between 2
and 30 Hz. The same trend was observed 24 h postpulsing on
cell viability, which decreased at lower rates. The uptake of
YOPRO-1, a measurement of cell EP, was chosen as a direct effect to study the impact of PRR. The concordant tendency of cell
viability might also be an indirect effect of PRR impact, due to
the combination of other cellular processes triggered by nsPEFs
(not only permeabilization, but also cell swelling, release of
intracellular compounds [37]), nevertheless it gives some indications toward the optimization of nsPEFs applications.
These results are in agreement with part of the literature
reporting more or less systematic analyses of the effect of PRR
[8]–[13], although several other works reported the opposite
tendency [14]–[17].
The results of numerical experiments provided a possible
interpretation of the biological observations. First, EP onset occurs at the first pulse for all the considered PRR conditions,
being the constraints on Vm (t) and N(P ∗ , t) satisfied (see
Fig. 6). The effect of subsequent pulses resulted different at
different PRRs: transmembrane voltage drops (see Fig. 7) and
pore density is less sensitive (see Figs. 8–10) upon increasing
PRR. This observation might be interpreted as a phenomenon
of cell electrodesensitization, as suggested by Silve et al. [13].

LAMBERTI et al.: ROLE OF PULSE REPETITION RATE IN nsPEF-INDUCED ELECTROPORATION

When shorter time passes between pulses (higher rates), the pore
density, which models the presence of stable defects, is high
enough to keep the plasma membrane sufficiently conductive so
as to prevent the induced transmembrane voltage to reach the
threshold value. This makes the cell less prone to electrically
respond to a subsequent pulse. Even in the steady state, where
cell becomes sensitive to all subsequent pulses, higher rates
induce a lower variation of the pore density (see ΔN, Figs. 10,
11). Electrodesensitization is further suggested in the model by
the observation that when pulses are applied with higher rates,
the number of pulses effective in inducing further EP is reduced;
some of them are “missed” by the cell (see cartoons in Fig. 9).
In other words, it is likely that the energy associated with uneffective pulses does not translate to further EP leading to a less
effective process upon increasing PRR.
It is worth noting that a single-cell model was adopted here,
which does not take into account all the consequences of the EP
phenomenon. First, it can be speculated that since the duration
of the treatments considered in the experiments was always
above the threshold of 10 s suggested by Pakhomova et al.
[11], the treatment duration might be also a critical parameter
in the interpretation of the reported data. On the other hand, the
mechanisms underlying the observed effects cannot be purely
physical, but the delayed cell response may be a consequence
of biological modifications like cell swelling, calcium influx,
oxidative damage to the plasma membrane, and so forth. This is
also suggested by our results on cell viability, which show that
viable cells detected after exposure at lower PRRs, although
much less in number than those exposed at higher rates, might
express a higher metabolic activity. For a better representation
of the experiments, a more complex model should be set up, by
considering, for example, a multiple cells situation, with rotation
of the cells and/or variation of cell shape between consecutive
pulses, and the presence of membrane ionic channels and fluxes
[38].
More in general, the observations and considerations here
reported hold true for the pulsing conditions tested, which span
a relatively narrow PRR interval. Higher repetition rates can be
quite efficient if pulses are delivered in two or more fractions
[11], or if the PRR is very high [14], or can be more convenient
in the applications on patients in terms of reduction of pain and
treatment duration [39].
However, from the experimental and numerical results reported here, it can be concluded that as also suggested previously for longer electric pulses [36], also in the case of nsPEFs,
a good way of controlling an EP phenomenon in its applications
might be through the PRR.
V. CONCLUSION
The numerical model adopted here provided some cues on the
impact of PRR in the dynamics of EP in cells exposed to nsPEFs,
and served as an aid in the interpretation of biological results.
The reduced effect on plasma membrane EP and cell viability upon increasing PRR, observed in biological experiments,
might be ascribed to the different dynamics of plasma mem-

2241

brane resealing when subsequent pulses are applied at different
rates. Such behavior is consistent with an electrodesensitization
phenomenon, already hypothesized by other researchers, which
has been numerically approached here for the first time.
The role of PRR in modulating nsPEF-induced EP is still an
open issue. Several factors are involved, including characteristics of the biological samples (cell type and dimension, pulsing
buffer, membrane composition), pulsing parameters (characteristics of the signal, duration of the treatment, modality of pulse
administration), and the adopted numerical model with its intrinsic limitations. It is likely that a general rule cannot be outlined.
However, in this paper, an approach is proposed that can be
adopted to analyze different scenarios of nsPEF pulsing with
variable PRR.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was carried out in the framework of the activities of
the COST Action TD1104 “European Network for the Development of Electroporation-Based Technologies and Treatments.”
REFERENCES
[1] M. Breton and L. M. Mir, “Microsecond and nanosecond electric pulses
in cancer treatments,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 106–123,
Aug. 3, 2011.
[2] H. Akyiama et al., “Industrial applications of pulsed power technology,”
IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1051–1064, Oct.
2007.
[3] R. P. Joshi and K. H. Schoenbach, “Bioelectric effects of intense ultrashort
pulses,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, pp. 255–304, 2010.
[4] S. J. Beebe, “Bioelectrics in basic science and medicine: Impact of electric
fields on cellular structures and functions,” J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol., vol.
4, no. 2, pp. 163–170, 2013.
[5] L. Chopinet and M. P. Rols, “Nanosecond electric pulses: A mini-review
of the present state of the art,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 103, pp. 2–6, Jun.
2015.
[6] R. Nuccitelli et al., “Optimized nanosecond pulsed electric field therapy
can cause murine malignant melanomas to self-destruct with a single
treatment,” Int. J. Cancer, vol. 127, pp. 1727–1736, 2010.
[7] R. Nuccitelli et al., “Non-thermal nanoeleectroablation of UV-induced
murine melanomas stimulates an immune response,” Pigment Cell
Melanoma Res., vol. 25, pp. 618–628, 2012.
[8] M. P. Rols and J. Teissié, “Electropermeabilization of mammalian cells to
macromolecules: Control by pulse duration,” Biophys. J., vol. 75, no. 3,
pp. 1415–1426, Sep. 1998.
[9] G. Pucihar et al., “The effect of pulse repetition frequency on the uptake
into electropermeabilized cells in vitro with possible application in electrochemotherapy,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 167–172, Sep.
2002.
[10] G. Sersa et al., “Electrochemotherapy of mouse sarcoma tumors using
electric pulse trains with repetition frequency of 1 Hz and 5 kHz,” J.
Membrane Biol., vol. 236, no. 1, pp. 155–162, Jul. 2010.
[11] O. N. Pakhomova et al., “Electroporation-induced electrosensitization,”
PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 2, p. e17100, 2011.
[12] K. Mitsutake et al., “Effect of pulsing sequence of nanosecond pulsed
electric fields on viability of HeLa S3 cells,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr.
Insul., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 337–342, Feb. 2012.
[13] A. Silve et al., “Comparison of the effects of the repetition rate between
microsecond and nanosecond pulses: Electropermeabilization-induced
electro-desensitization?” Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1840, pp. 2139–
2151, 2014.
[14] P. T. Vernier et al., “Nanoelectropulse-driven membrane perturbation and
small molecule permeabilization,” BMC Cell Biol., vol. 7, pp. 37–53, Oct.
2006.
[15] Y. Sun et al., “Compact, nanosecond, high repetition rate pulse generator
for bioelectric study,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., vol. 14, no. 4,
pp. 863–870, Aug. 2007.

2242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

[16] C. Faurie et al., “Electro-mediated gene-transfer and expression are controlled by the life-time of DNA/membrane complex formation,” J. Gene
Med., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 117–125, Jan. 2010.
[17] S. Romeo et al., “Water influx and cell swelling after nanosecond electropermeabilization,” Boichim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembranes, vol. 1828,
pp. 1715–1722, 2013.
[18] M.-C. Vernhes et al., “Chinese hamster ovary cells sensitivity to localized electrical stresses,” Bioelectrochem. Bioenergetics, vol. 48, no. 1,
pp. 17–25, Feb. 1999.
[19] L. Retelj et al., “Electroporation of intracellular liposomes using nanosecond electric pulses—A theoretical study,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol.
60, no. 9, pp. 2624–2634, Sep. 2013.
[20] C. Merla et al., “Novel passive element circuits for microdosimetry of
nanosecond pulsed electric fields,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no.
8, pp. 2302–2311, Aug. 2012.
[21] D. Miklavcic and L. Towhidi, “Numerical study of the electroporation
pulse shape effect on molecular uptake of biological cells,” Radiol. Oncol.,
vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 34–41, 2010.
[22] T. R. Gowrishankar et al., “Microdosimetry for conventional and supraelectroporation in cells with organelles,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 341, pp. 1266–1276, Jan. 2006.
[23] T. R. Gowrishankar and J. C. Weaver, “Electrical behavior and pore
accumulation in a multicellular model for conventional and supraelectroporation,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 349, pp. 643–653,
Aug. 2006.
[24] P. Lamberti et al., “nsPEF-induced effects on cell membranes:
Use of electrophysical model to optimize experimental design,” IEEE
Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1231–1238, Aug.
2013.
[25] K. A. DeBruin and W. Krassowska, “Electroporation and shock-induced
transmembrane potential in a cardiac fiber during defibrillation strength
shocks,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 26, pp. 584–596, 1998.
[26] K. A. DeBruin and W. Krassowska, “Modeling electroporation in a single
cell: I. Effect of field strength and rest potential,” Biophys. J., vol. 77, pp.
1213–1224, 1999.
[27] K. A. DeBruin and W. Krassowska, “Modeling electroporation in a single
cell: II. Effect of ionic concentrations,” Biophys. J., vol. 77, pp. 1225–
1233, 1999.
[28] S. Elia et al., “Influence of uncertain electrical properties on the conditions for the onset of electroporation in an eukaryotic cell,” IEEE Trans.
Nanobiosci., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 204–212, Sep. 2010.
[29] S. Romeo et al., “A blumlein-type, nanosecond pulse generator with
interchangeable transmission lines for bioelectrical applications,” IEEE
Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1224–1230, Aug.
2013.
[30] S. Romeo et al., “DNA electrophoretic migration patterns change after
exposure of Jurkat cells to a single intense nanosecond electric pulse,”
PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 12, p. e28419, Dec. 2011.
[31] J. O’Brien et al., “Investigation of the Alamar blue (resazurin) fluorescent
dye for the assessment of mammalian cell cytotoxicity,” Eur. J. Biochem.,
vol. 267, no. 17, pp. 5421–5426, 2000.
[32] Ermolina et al., “Study of normal and malignant white blood cells by
time domain dielectric spectroscopy,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul.,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 253–261, Apr. 2001.
[33] R. P. Joshi et al., “Dynamical modeling of cellular response to shortduration high- intensity electric fields,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul.,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 778–787, Oct. 2003.
[34] A. L. Garner et al., “Ultrashort electric pulse induced changes in cellular
dielectric properties,” Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., vol. 362, pp.
139–144, 2007.
[35] K. C. Smith and J. C. Weaver, “Active mechanisms are needed to describe cell responses to submicrosecond, megavolt-per-meter pulses: cell
models for ultrashort pulses,” Biophys. J., vol. 95, pp. 1547–1563, Aug.
2008.
[36] A. O. Bilska et al., “Theoretical modeling of the effects of shock duration,
frequency, and strength on the degree of electroporation,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 51, pp. 133–143, 2000.
[37] S. J. Beebe et al., “Induction of cell death mechanisms and apotosis by
nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs),” Cells, vol. 2, pp. 136–162,
2013.
[38] S. Elia and P. Lamberti, “The reproduction of the physiological behavior of
the axon of nervous cells by means of finite element models,” in Innovation
in Intelligent Machines-3. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2013, ch. 5, pp.
69–87.

[39] D. Miklavcic et al., “The effect of high frequency electric pulses on mucle
contractions and antitumor efficiency in vivo for a potential use in clinical
electrochemotherapy,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 65, pp. 124–128, 2005.

Patrizia Lamberti (M’08) was born in 1974. She
received the Laurea degree in electronic engineering
and the Ph.D. degree in information engineering from
the University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy, in 2001 and
2006, respectively.
Since January 2005, she has been an Assistant Professor with the Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering and Applied Mathematics, University of Salerno. Her research interests include numerical methods for electromagnetic fields, optimization
algorithms, tolerance analysis and robust design of
electromagnetic systems, modeling, and treatment of mammalian cells by means
of pulsed electric fields. She is a MC Substitute of COST TD1104—European
Network for the Development of Electroporation-Based Technologies and Treatments.

Stefania Romeo was born in 1985. She received the
Laurea degree (summa cum laude) in biomedical engineering from the University of Naples Federico
II, Napoli, Italy in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in
electronic engineering from the Second University of
Naples, Aversa, Italy, in 2012.
She was a Visiting Student with the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Electrophysics, University of Southern California, from September 2010
to March 2011, and a Visiting Scientist with the University of Copenhagen, Herlev Hospital, Denmark, in
May 2014, for a short-term scientific mission in the framework of the COST Action TD1104, European Network for the Development of Electroporation-Based
Technologies and Treatments. Since June 2012, she has been with IREA-CNR,
Napoli, as a Research Fellow. Her research interests include the framework of
bioelectromagnetics, spanning from the design and realization of high voltage,
nanosecond pulse generators for in vitro biological applications, to the study
of biological effects of pulsed electric fields on mammalian cells, and to the
employment of numerical and experimental dosimetry techniques for in vitro
exposures to RF electromagnetic fields.

Anna Sannino was born in Castellammare di Stabia,
Naples, Italy, in 1975. She received the Laurea degree
in biology from the University of Naples Federico II,
Naples, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Salerno, Salerno, Italy, in 2002 and 2013, respectively.
From 2002 to 2014, she was a Research Fellow
with CNR-IREA, Naples, where she has been a temporary Technical Staff since 2014. Her research interests include the framework of bioelectromagnetics,
dealing with the evaluation of biological effects of
low- and high-frequency electromagnetic fields alone, or in combination with
environmental pollutant. These interests are carried out by means of cytogenetic
assays (micronucleus with cytokinesis block and comet assay) and cytotoxicity
assays (cell viability, oxidative stress, apoptosis). She has also been involved
with the evaluation of the cytotoxicity induced by multiwalled carbon nanotubes
(buckypaper) and magnetic nanoparticles in mammalian cell cultures, and with
the investigation of cellular and subcellular effects induced by high-voltage
nanosecond electric pulses in cell suspensions by means of molecular cytogenetic assays, cytofluorimetry, and confocal microscopy.

LAMBERTI et al.: ROLE OF PULSE REPETITION RATE IN nsPEF-INDUCED ELECTROPORATION

Luigi Zeni received the Laurea degree (summa cum
laude) in electronic engineering from the University
of Naples, Naples, Italy, in 1988, and the Ph.D. degree
in electronics and computer science from the Italian
Ministry of University, Italy, in 1992.
From 1998 to 2006, he was an Associate Professor of electronics with the Second University of
Naples, Aversa, Italy. From 2001 to 2012, he was
the Vice-Director with the Department of Information Engineering. He was with the Delft Institute of
Microelectronics and Submicrontechnology, Technical University of Delft, The Netherlands, as a Visiting Scientist. He has been a
Research Assistant at the Department of Electronic Engineering, University of
Naples “Federico II,” Naples, and he is currently a Full Professor of electronics
at the Second University of Naples and the President at the Research Consortium
on Advanced Remote Sensing Systems—CO.RI.S.T.A. His research interests
include the design and realization of optical fiber sensors for distributed measurements of deformation and temperature, the design and characterization of
optoelectronic devices with particular emphasis on silicon optoelectronics, optoelectronic integrated sensors, biosensors, and optofluidics, and the design and
realization of pulse forming networks for bioelectric applications.

2243

Olga Zeni received the Laurea degree in biology from
the University of Naples, Naples, Italy, in 1990, and
the Ph.D. degree in zootechnical science from the
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, in 1996.
Since March 2001, she has been with CNR-IREA,
Naples, as a Research Scientist. Her research interests include the framework of the study on biological
effects induced by low- and high-frequency electromagnetic fields, mainly deals with the evaluation of
cellular parameters related to carcinogenesis (cell viability, proliferation and cell cycle, apoptosis, oxidative stress, DNA molecule integrity) in mammalian cell cultures following electromagnetic field exposures to and coexposures with environmental pollutants.
More recently, she has also been involved with the evaluation of the biological effects of high voltage, nanosecond electric pulses on mammalian cells, and
with the evaluation of the cytotoxicity induced by multiwalled carbon-nanotubes
(buckypaper).

