IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2215

Aliasing Artefact Suppression in Compressed
Sensing MRI for Random Phase-Encode
Undersampling
Yang Yang, Feng Liu∗ , Zhaoyang Jin, and Stuart Crozier, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: Random phase-encode undersampling of
Cartesian k-space trajectories is widely implemented in compressed sensing (CS) MRI. However, its one-dimensional (1-D)
randomness inherently introduces large coherent aliasing artefacts
along the undersampled direction in the reconstruction and, thus,
degrades the image quality. This paper proposes a novel reconstruction scheme to reduce the 1-D undersampling-induced aliasing artefacts. Methods: The proposed reconstruction progress is
separated into two steps in our new algorithm. In step one, we
transfer the original two-dimensional (2-D) image reconstruction
into a parallel 1-D signal reconstruction procedure, which takes
advantage of the superior incoherence property in the phase direction. In step two, using the new k-space data obtained from
the 1-D reconstructions, we implement a follow-up 2-D CS reconstruction to produce a better solution, which exploits the inherent
correlations between the adjacent lines of 1-D reconstructed signals. Results: We evaluated the performance on various cases of
typical MR images, including cardiac cine, brain, foot, and angiogram at the reduction factor up to 10 and compared the results
with the conventional CS method. Experiments using the proposed
method demonstrated faithful reconstruction of the MR images.
Conclusion: Compared with conventional method, the new method
achieves more accurate reconstruction results with 2–5 dB gain in
peak SNR and higher structural similarity index. Significance: The
proposed method improves image quality of the reconstructions
and suppresses the coherent artefacts introduced by the random
phase-encode undersampling.
Index Terms—Aliasing artefact suppression, compressed sensing, random phase-encode undersampling, stationary MRI.

I. INTRODUCTION
N MRI, the raw image data are acquired in the k-space
(frequency domain), which is transferred by inverse Fourier
transform to obtain the diagnostic image. Limited by physical and physiological constraints, the sequential acquisition of
the full k-space is inherently slow. This intrinsically lengthy
scan process causes additional discomfort to the patient, invites

I

Manuscript received August 14, 2014; revised February 27, 2015; accepted
March 26, 2015. Date of publication April 2, 2015; date of current version
August 18, 2015. This work was supported by the Australian Research Council
and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61372024).
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Y. Yang and S. Crozier are with The University of Queensland.
∗ F. Liu is with the School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane Qld. 4072, Australia (e-mail:
feng@itee.uq.edu.au).
Z. Y. Jin is with the Institute of Information and Control, Hangzhou Dianzi
University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2419372

involuntary motion artefacts and reduces the temporal resolution
critical for diagnosis.
Compressed sensing (CS) [1]–[4], as a novel mathematical
framework, has gained considerable attention for its application
in MRI, because it can significantly reduce acquisition time
[5]–[8]. CS reconstructs images using far fewer samples than
required when using conventional methods.
In CS MRI, the obtained samples are incomplete, violating the
classical Shannon–Nyquist sampling criterion; thereby leading
to distortions in the acquired MR images. By taking advantage
of the sparse representations of MR images in certain mathematical transforms, CS exploits the underlying data structure to
overcome the distortions and faithfully reconstruct the images.
A successful application of CS in MRI has three requirements: transform sparsity, nonlinear reconstruction, and
incoherent undersampling patterns [5], [6]. The design of undersampling patterns is critical to the performance of CS MRI
because it determines the quality of reconstructed images and
the scanning time.
The undersampling scheme should make the collected subset of the k-space data to be efficiently representative of the
whole image and be incoherent with respect to the sparsifying
transform. In stationary CS MRI, the 2-D random undersampling scheme is the ideal choice for its perfect incoherence
performance [5], [9], [10]. Recently, 2-D random undersampling trajectories were specially designed for CS MRI [11]–[13].
However, the 2-D random undersampling pattern is physically
impractical because of MRI hardware constraints. In nonCartesian trajectories (e.g., spiral, radial), their inherent presence of incoherent aliasing artefacts for undersampling makes
them suitable for the performance of CS [14]; however, additional gridding and regridding processes are time consuming and
may degrade the CS reconstruction effort. In practice, random
phase-encode undersampling of Cartesian k-space trajectories
is implemented with minor modification of the existing pulse
sequences. Owing to its effectiveness in compressed data collection, as well as its robustness against system imperfections
[6], [15], it has been widely used for CS MRI research [4],
[5], [16].
The random phase-encode undersampling can compromise
the quality of reconstructed images by CS. Its 1-D randomness makes the incoherence significantly worse than 2-D random undersampling patterns. To address this issue, various approaches have been proposed, which mainly focus on the kspace undersampling pattern design. For example, Haifeng et al.
[17] propose a pseudo 2-D random undersampling scheme to

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

undersample the k-space along one direction first and then the
other. Tsai and Nishsimura [18] introduce an undersampling pattern that mainly collects high-energy points. Zhang et al. [12]
design undersampling patterns based on certain reference images and sample the k-space data with statistically high energy.
Yang et al. [19] process the low-frequency and high-frequency
k-space data separately through a two-stage reconstruction procedure. Seeger et al. [11] show the possibility of automatically
constructing an adaptive random undersampling pattern by using measured k-space data as a reference.
In this paper, we propose a novel reconstruction scheme that
will take advantage of the 1-D incoherence of random phaseencode undersampling patterns. In this new method, we first
decouple the undersampled 2-D k-space data to a series of 1-D
signals. Then, using the incoherence property of these randomly
collected 1-D signals, a parallel 1-D CS reconstruction is implemented. With the outputs of 1-D reconstruction, we implement
a follow-up 2-D reconstruction to take advantage of the correlation in the image domain between the contiguous 1-D signals.
To demonstrate the performance of the proposed method, we
used various typical MR images, cardiac cine, brain, foot, and
angiography as test datasets, at reduction factors up to 10. Using peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity
(SSIM) as numerical metrics for image quality of reconstruction, we have compared our new solution with conventional
one.
II. THEORY
A. CS MRI
The standard CS MRI operation can be mathematically described as follows:
Suppose I (for notation, see Table I), an object MR image
with M (columns) × N (rows) pixels, which has a sparse representation in a basis Ψ. A subset of its full k-space measurements
is obtained using certain undersampling patterns. The CS MRI
reconstruction model can thus be described as the following
constrained optimization problem [5], [6]
Min||Ψ (x) ||1
s.t.

||∅P (x) − y||2 < ε

(1)

where x is the M × N -pixel image to be reconstructed, ·1
M

is the l1 norm defined as ||x||1 = N
j =1
i=1 |xij |, Ψ denotes
the sparse transform, ∅P is the partial discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) with a undersampling pattern P, y = ∅P (I) consists of
the k-space measurements, and ε controls the data fidelity of
reconstruction relative to the selected k-space measurements y,
usually it is related to the expected noise level in the sampled
data [5].
B. Incoherence Problem in the Random Phase-Encode
Undersampling
The incoherence of the undersampling pattern is an essential ingredient for the sparse signal reconstruction in CS. The
theoretical mathematical condition for incoherence, restricted
isometry property, is hard to verify in practical applications. In

TABLE I
NOTATION USED IN THIS PAPER
Symbol

Quantity

I
x
x1mD

Object MR image, M (columns) × N (rows) matrix in image domain
Reconstructed image, M × N matrix in image domain
The mth column data of the reconstructed image through 1-D CS
reconstruction, N × 1 vector in image domain
The combination of all x1mD , M × N matrix in image domain
Sparse transform for 2-D matrix
Sparse transform for 1-D vector
k-space undersampling pattern, M × N matrix in k-space domain
one column of k-space undersampling pattern P, N × 1 vector in
k-space domain
partial DFT for 2-D matrix with the undersampling pattern P
partial DFT for 1-D vector with the undersampling pattern P1 D
IDFT for 1-D vector
The k-space measurements with the undersampling pattern P, M ×
N matrix in k-space domain, y = ∅P (I )
The intermediate data transformed from y, M × N matrix in
intermediate domain
The corresponding k-space data of object MR image I, M × N
matrix in k-space domain
The corresponding intermediate data of object MR image I, M × N
matrix in intermediate domain
The horizontal dimension of k-space domain
The vertical dimension of k-space domain and intermediate domain
The horizontal dimension of intermediate domain and image domain
The vertical dimension of intermediate domain and image domain

x1 D
Ψ
Ψ1D
P
P1 D
∅P
∅P 1 D
∅−1
1D
y
g
K
G
U
V
M
N

general, the point spread function (PSF) can be used to evaluate
the incoherence property of the undersampling pattern [5], [6].
The PSF is defined as PSF(i,j) = ej ∗ Fu ∗ Fu ei , where Fu is the
undersampled Fourier operator and ei is the ith vector of the
canonical basis, the operator ∗ stands for the conjugate transposing. Undersampling causes pixels to interfere and the PSF to
produce nonzero values. The convolution of the undersampling
pattern’s PSF and the fully sampled image is the undersampled
image. Thus, the standard deviation of the PSF side lobes was
used to quantify the power of the resulting incoherent artefacts
(pseudo-noise) and incoherence was computed using the main
lobe to pseudonoise ratio of the PSF [20].
In CS-MRI, the 2-D random undersampling [see Fig. 1(a)] is
shown to achieve high incoherence, as it obtains a completely
random subset of k-space [5]. Its PSF profile distributes randomly as shown in Fig. 1(b). It leads to incoherent artefacts in
the image domain, such as zero-mean random white Gaussian
noise [see Fig. 1(c)]. In the case of random phase-encode undersampling [see Fig. 1(d)], its parallel line sampling trajectory
makes its achievable incoherence significantly worse than with
2-D random undersampling [5], [16]. The PSF of random phaseencode undersampling has all the nonzero values assembled on
only one column with a peak value in the center, as illustrated
in Fig. 1(e). This reveals all the artefacts existing along the
position of the same column [see Fig. 1(f)]. Meanwhile, the
random phase-encode undersampling reduces the incoherence
of aliasing interference. This is illustrated by a comparison of
typical artefacts caused by these two kinds of random undersampling schemes, which are shown in Fig. 1(c) and (f). From
data of PSF in Fig. 1(b) and (e), we find that the incoherence is
10.29 with 2-D random undersampling and 4.37 using random
phase-encoding.

YANG et al.: ALIASING ARTEFACT SUPPRESSION IN COMPRESSED SENSING MRI FOR RANDOM PHASE-ENCODE UNDERSAMPLING

2217

Fig. 1. Comparison of 2-D random [(a)–(c)] and random phase-encode [(d)–
(f)] undersampling patterns. (a) 2-D random undersampling, (b) the PSF, (c)
reconstructed image with typical artefacts, (d) random phase-encode undersampling, (e) the PSF, (f) reconstructed image with typical artefacts.

C. Two-Dimensional Inverse DFT (IDFT) in Sequential
One-Dimensional IDFTs
In order to reduce the artefacts caused by phase-encode
random undersampling, we decided to split the 2-D image
reconstruction problem into several parallel 1-D signal reconstruction problems.
Normally, the MR images are directly obtained from 2-D
IDFT of the k-space data, as follows:
M −1 N −1
K (u, v)
I (m, n) =
u =0
v =0

 mu nv 
+
(2)
exp 2πi
M
N
	



M −1 N −1
2πinv
=
exp
K (u, v)
u =0
v =0
N


	
2πimu
(3)
exp
M
where m ∈ [0, M − 1] , n ∈ [0, N − 1], I(m,n) means the image with the dimension of M×N, and K(u,v) is the corresponding
k-space data.
Here, the 2-D IDFT actually involves a number of 1-D IDFT.
Through altering the calculation sequence, the traditional operation of 2-D IDFT in (2) can be easily split into two 1-D IDFTs
in sequence as illustrated in (3).
A schematic representation is illustrated in Fig. 2. For the kspace data K with a matrix of M (columns) × N (rows), we first
apply a 1-D IDFT to all the N rows along the frequency direction. This will transform the k-space data K(u,v) to G(m,v) of an
intermediate domain, in which the horizontal axis corresponds
to the dimension M in the image domain and the vertical axis
represents dimension V in the k-space domain. As the correlation between each column data of K(u,v) has been decoupled
by the 1-D IDFT, the column data of G(m,v) are treated independently. In the second process, we apply another 1-D IDFT
to each unassociated column data of G(m,v). The output of this
process 2, the new data I(m,n), will be in image domain.

Fig. 2. Schematic principle of splitting 2-D IDFT into sequential 1-D IDFTs.
A 1-D IDFT is applied in process 1 to the rows of k-space data K(u,v); thus, an
intermediate data G(m,v) is obtained. Then in process 2, another 1-D IDFT to
the columns of G(m,v) will produce the corresponding MR image I(m,n).

D. Proposed Method
As explained in Section II-C, through sequential 1-D IDFTs
operation, the 2-D image reconstruction has been transformed
to recovery of parallel 1-D signals. The CS recovery of these
1-D signals will take advantage of the excellent incoherence
property resulting from the pure random undersampling along
the phase direction. This will essentially help the exploitation
of the 1-D sparsity and elimination of the coherence aliasing
artefacts. The solution of the proposed method is illustrated in
Fig. 3, consisting of the following four steps.
Step 1: 1-D random undersampling along the phase direction.
Suppose I is the object MR image with M(columns) × N(rows)
pixels, P is the random phase-encode undersampling pattern, ∅P
is the partial Fourier transform with the undersampling pattern
P, y = ∅P (I) consists of the sampled k-space data.
Step 2: Transform the k-space measurements y to data g in
the intermediate domain G by g v = ∅−1
1D (y v ), where yv means
the vth row data of y along frequency direction and ∅−1
1D is the
IDFT of the 1-D signal. The 2-D data g can be separated into
M columns. Each column contains the 1-D data gm (the mth
column data of g in intermediate domain, n ∈ [1, M ].) The 2-D
data g has been decoupled by IDFT, so that each column data
gm can be processed independently.

2218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Flowchart of the proposed compressed sensing MRI. In the method, the full k-space data (a) is randomly sampled along the phase direction to get the
undersampled data (b), which transformed into an intermediate domain via 1-D IDFT (c). The intermediate data g will be treated as a series of 1-D signals (d)
and reconstructed using 1-D CS method (e). In the final step, a 2-D CS reconstruction of the image will be carried out, with an initial solution obtained from the
reconstructed 1-D signals (f).

Step 3: Parallel 1-D signal reconstructions. The 1-D signal
reconstruction can be solved by the CS algorithm as follows:


||1
Min||Ψ1D x1D
m
 1D 
s.t. ||∅P 1 D xm − g m ||2 < ε
(4)
where ∅P 1 D is the 1-D partial Fourier transform with the undersampling pattern P1D (one column of P), Ψ1D is the 1-D total
variation transform [5], x1D
m is the reconstructed 1-D signal in
the mth column data along the vertical direction N in the image
domain.
Step 4: 2-D reconstruction of the image data. Combining
the sequential reconstructed 1-D signals x1D
m , m ∈ [1, M ] from
step 3, we can obtain the image x1D with the upgraded k-space
data. Using x1D to set the initial solution x0 , we then carry out
a 2-D CS reconstruction to obtain the final reconstructed image
x, where Ψ denotes the 2-D wavelet transform (as the sparse
transform in (1)).
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Acquisition
To verify the performance of the proposed method, four typical MR datasets were chosen, including cardiac cine, brain,
foot, and angiography. The cardiac cine MR data were a frame
of full k-space data acquired using a 1.5T Philips system. The
images of brain, foot and, angiography were fully sampled using
a Siemens Magnetom Avanto 1.5T system. All the considered
MR images contain 256 × 256 pixels.
A variable-density undersampling scheme was implemented
to generate the random phase-encode undersampling pattern [5].
Gaussian distribution function with zero mean was utilized to
sample more in the k-space center. The standard deviation σ was
obtained experimentally with different reduction factors.

lems and considered as unconstrained problem with Lagrangian
form [5]:

All simulations were carried out on a computer with an Intel
Core i7-3770 eight-core processor and 12 GB of memory utilizing MATLAB (R2013b: The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA).
Equations (1) and (4) are constrained convex optimization prob-

(5)

where λ as a parameter determines the tradeoff between the data
sparsity (l1 norm) and consistency (l2 norms), experimentally
set to be λTV = 0.001 for 1-D reconstructions and λWavelet
= 0.001, λTV = 0.00174 for 2-D reconstructions, respectively.
We utilized nonlinear conjugate gradients and backtracking line
search [5] for solving the optimization problem involved in the
CS MRI study. In this study, the algorithm in [5] is considered
as the conventional CS method, which utilizes both Wavelet and
TV as sparse transforms.
For a comparison between the proposed and conventional
method, both visual and numerical metrics are used for the
reconstructed image quality assessment. The differences between the reconstructed images and fully sampled images of
both methods were also shown. We used the PSNR and SSIM
index [21] as the numerical criteria for the evaluation of the
reconstruction quality.
The parameter PSNR was calculated as
⎛

⎞

PSNR = 20log10 ⎝

MAXI

⎠
2
[I
(i,
j)
−
I
(i,
j)]
rec
i=1
j =1
(6)
where I is the benchmark (fully sampled image), MAXI is the
maximum signal intensity value of the pixel, and Irec is the
reconstructed image.
The SSIM matric is an alternative way for image quality
assessment. The SSIM value is computed as follows:
SSIM (I, I rec ) =

B. Experimental Methods

||∅P (x) − y||2 + λ||Ψ (x) ||1

argminx

1
mn

m n

(2μI μI r e c + c1 )(2σII r e c + c2 )
(μ2I + μ2I r e c + c1 )(σI2 + σI2 r e c + c2 )

(7)

where μI and μI r e c are the average pixel values of I and Irec ,
respectively, σI2 and σI2 r e c are the variance of I and Irec , respectively, σII r e c is the covariance of I and Irec , and c1 and c2 are
two variables to stabilize the division with weak denominator.

YANG et al.: ALIASING ARTEFACT SUPPRESSION IN COMPRESSED SENSING MRI FOR RANDOM PHASE-ENCODE UNDERSAMPLING

2219

Fig. 4. Performance comparison between conventional CS and the proposed method at different reduction factors in the case of (a) cardiac cine image, (b) brain
image, (c) foot image, (d) angiography image.

IV. RESULTS
A. Comparative Study of the Proposed and Conventional CS
Reconstructions at Different Reduction Factors
To demonstrate the performance degradation with the decreased amount of sampled data using the random phase-encode
undersampling scheme, PSNR curves of the conventional [5]
and proposed methods were plotted at different reduction factors of 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10. In Fig. 4, we can see that the proposed
method has a gain of PSNR from 2 to 8 dB compared with the
conventional approach. From Fig. 4, we can see that at higher reduction factors, the conventional method cannot keep the PSNR
at a high value. It reveals that the aliasing artefacts degrade the
image quality and that the conventional method cannot effectively suppress these artefacts. In contrast, the improvements

of the proposed method are more obvious for the cases with
higher reduction factors. For standard MR images, such as cardiac cine, brain, and foot, the PSNR improvements are 3.12,
3.29, and 2.04 dB, respectively, [see Fig. 4(a)–(c)] when the reduction factor is set as 10. For sparse MR images, as in the case
of angiography, the quality improves by 4.94 dB of the PSNR,
much higher than the situation of standard MR images as shown
in Fig. 4(d).
The reconstruction errors of the conventional method and the
proposed method are also measured by SSIM in Table II. At
the low reduction factors, such as R = 2 or 4, both methods
have good performance in all the cases and the SSIM values
are all above 0.94. This reveals that there is almost no visual
difference between the reference and the reconstructed images.
When the reduction factors are more than 4, however, we can

2220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE II
SSIM INDEXES OF THE RECONSTRUCTIONS BY CONVENTIONAL AND THE PROPOSED METHOD

R=
R=
R=
R=
R=

2
4
6
8
10

Cardiac Cine Proposed/Conventional

Brain Proposed/Conventional

Foot Proposed/Conventional

Angiography Proposed/Conventional

0.9707/0.9703
0.9445/0.9404
0.8966/0.8642
0.8798/0.7851
0.8401/0.6842

0.9743/0.9714
0.9559/0.9075
0.9012/0.8487
0.8658/0.7671
0.8458/0.7086

0.9678/0.9674
0.9390/0.9438
0.9049/0.8796
0.8917/0.7945
0.8621/0.7187

0.9947/0.9933
0.9855/0.9859
0.9598/0.8997
0.9516/0.8059
0.9218/0.6968

Different reduction factors (R) and different MR image types are considered.

Fig. 5. Reconstructed images of cardiac cine MR data (top row images) and
difference images (bottom row images) at R = 6. From left to right the applied
algorithms are: conventional and proposed method.

see the SSIM value of the conventional method reduces, which
means the reconstructed images are obviously blurred with the
aliasing artefacts introduced by the random phase-encode undersampling pattern. In contrast, with high reduction factors, the
SSIM value of the proposed method still maintains at a stable
level (more than 0.84). These prove the reconstructed images
are with an acceptable quality.
B. Comparative Study of the Proposed and Conventional CS
Reconstructions in Image Quality
We compared the reconstruction performance of the conventional method and the proposed method at the reduction factor
of 6 (16.67% of the fully sampled data). It is noted that there
are 256 phase encoding lines in total in the original full k-space
data.
The reconstruction results of the proposed and conventional
method are shown in Fig. 5. In the case of cardiac cine, there is
blurring around the cardiac boundary in the image reconstructed

Fig. 6. Comparison of difference images Fig. 5(c) and (d) in the region of
interest (ROI). (a) shows the original image in ROI and (b) shows the contour
of image in ROI. The difference images in ROI mapping with the contour: (c)
with conventional CS, and (d) with proposed method.

by the conventional method [see Fig. 5(a)]. It is caused by the
aliasing artefacts, which become more severe at high reduction factors (such as R = 6). Compared with conventional CS,
the proposed method produced clearer structures, as shown in
Fig. 5(b). Compared with the difference images Fig. 5(c) and
(d), the difference image between the images obtained from
the full k-space data and CS reconstructed image, it is easy to
see that the proposed method effectively reduced the aliasing
artefacts. For example, see the arrows in Fig. 5(c) and (d).
In cardiac cine MRI, the myocardial deformation is our main
interest. The myocardial structure is depicted by contours as
shown in Fig. 6(b), which defines the region of interest (ROI).
For the reconstruction of the myocardium in the ROI, it is easy
to see that the reconstruction errors of the conventional CS [see
Fig. 6(c)] are much larger than that of our new method [see
Fig. 6(d)].

YANG et al.: ALIASING ARTEFACT SUPPRESSION IN COMPRESSED SENSING MRI FOR RANDOM PHASE-ENCODE UNDERSAMPLING

Fig. 7. Reconstructed images of brain MR data (top row images) and difference images (bottom row images) at R = 6. From left to right the applied
algorithms are: conventional and the proposed method.

2221

Fig. 8. Reconstructed images of foot MR data (top row images) and difference
images (bottom row images) at R = 6. From left to right, the applied algorithms
are conventional and proposed method.

We further compared the methods with brain and foot imaging. As shown in Figs. 7 and 8, similar reduction of the aliasing
artefacts can be observed near the tissue boundaries.
The aliasing artefacts were exacerbated in those images with
sparsity in the pixel domain, such as angiography (see Fig. 9).
In these cases, the improvement of the proposed method was
clear when compared with conventional one. The weak incoherence of random phase-encode undersampling patterns limited
conventional method in removing artefacts, as can be seen in
Fig. 9(c), where the red arrows point to the artefacts. In contrast,
as shown in Fig. 9(d), the proposed method consistently outperforms the conventional CS method producing images with small
residual errors near the blood vessels.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Reconstruction Artefacts Reduction
In this paper, we reduced the dimension of the reconstruction
problem from 2-D to 1-D, in which excellent 1-D randomness
in the phase direction facilitate the incoherence property for CS
reconstruction. As Fig. 10(b) illustrates, the output of the 1-D
reconstruction in the proposed method eliminated the majority
of the aliasing artefacts when compared with the image transformed from the undersampled k-space data [see Fig. 10(a)]. The
comparison of the difference images [see Fig. 10(e) and (f)] may
indicate the artefacts suppression more clearly. Nevertheless, in
comparison with the conventional CS method [see Fig. 10(c)],
the result of the 1-D reconstruction only is unacceptable

Fig. 9. Reconstructed images of angiography MR data (top row images) and
difference images (bottom row images) at R = 6. From left to right, the applied
algorithms are conventional and proposed method.

yet. Though aliasing artefacts were not entirely eliminated [see
Fig. 10(g)], the reconstruction error of the conventional method
was smaller than that in Fig. 10(f). In the proposed method, we
utilized the outputs of the 1-D reconstruction [see Fig. 10(b)], as

2222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

B. Extension of the Proposed Method
The 1-D TV transform and 2-D wavelet transform were implemented as the sparsity base in the parallel 1-D signal reconstructions and 2-D reconstruction of the proposed method.
Other sparsity bases can also be applied to the proposed method,
such as wavelet transform, Walsh transform [22], and tensor
decomposition-based transform [23], for specific imaging studies. The developed algorithm can be easily combined with parallel MR imaging, for more rapid imaging studies.
C. GPU Acceleration
In the above four 256 × 256 MR image reconstruction studies, the average computation times of the conventional CS and
the proposed method are 164 and 235 s, respectively. Although
the new method is slightly slower than conventional CS methods, as the proposed method dissembles 2-D image reconstruction into several independent 1-D signal reconstructions, it is
thus quite straightforward to implement with GPU computing,
for solving the formed 1-D optimization problems in parallel
[24], [25]. With a successful GPU parallelization of the algorithm in the future, the efficiency of the proposed method can
be significantly enhanced; thus has the potential to be applied
to real-time reconstruction.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a novel reconstruction
scheme for the application of CS in conventional Cartesian MRI.
The proposed method is capable of eliminating large coherent
aliasing artefacts introduced by random phase-encode undersampling patterns. The theoretical analysis and imaging experiments have demonstrated the proposed approach can effectively
improve the reconstructed image quality in various MR imaging
cases at different reduction factors. In future work, we plan to
apply the proposed algorithm to various CS MRI applications.
REFERENCES

Fig. 10. Reconstructed images of phantom(left column images) and difference
images (right column images) at R = 4. From up to down, the applied algorithms
are zero padding, only 1-D reconstruction in the proposed method, conventional
CS and proposed method.

an improved initial solution, and undertook a followup 2-D CS
reconstruction procedure. In the 2-D reconstruction, signal correlations along both directions (phase and frequency) are considered; therefore, further exploiting the signal sparsity to produce
a better solution [see Fig. 10(d)]. As shown in Fig. 10(h), the
aliasing artefacts of the proposed method were minimized.

[1] E. Candès et al., “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.
[2] E. Candès and T. Tao, “Near optimal signal recovery from random projections: Universal encoding strategies,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5406–5425, Dec. 2006.
[3] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[4] R. M. B. Saad Qaisar et al., “Review Paper:Compressive sensing: From
theory to applications, a survey,” J. Commun. Netw., vol. 15, pp. 443–456,
2013.
[5] M. Lustig et al., “Sparse MRI: The application of compressed sensing
for rapid MR imaging,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 58, pp. 1182–1195,
2007.
[6] M. Lustig, “Sparse MRI,” Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford Univ., Stanford,
CA, USA, 2008.
[7] U. Gamper et al., “Compressed sensing in dynamic MRI,” Magn. Resonance Med., vol. 59, pp. 365–373, 2008.
[8] H. Hong et al., “Compressed sensing MRI with singular value decomposition based sparsity basis,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 56, pp. 6311–6325,
2011.
[9] E. Candes et al., “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.

YANG et al.: ALIASING ARTEFACT SUPPRESSION IN COMPRESSED SENSING MRI FOR RANDOM PHASE-ENCODE UNDERSAMPLING

[10] D. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[11] M. Seeger et al., “Optimization of k-space trajectories for compressed
sensing by Bayesian experimental design,” Magn. Resonance Med.,
vol. 63, pp. 116–126, 2010.
[12] Y. Zhang et al., “Energy preserved sampling for compressed sensing MRI,”
Comput. Math. Methods Med., vol. 2014, pp. 1–12, 2014.
[13] K. Sung and B. A. Hargreaves, “High-frequency subband compressed
sensing MRI using quadruplet sampling,” Magn. Resonance Med.,
vol. 70, pp. 1306–1318, 2013.
[14] L. Feng et al., “Golden-angle radial sparse parallel MRI: Combination of
compressed sensing, parallel imaging, and golden-angle radial sampling
for fast and flexible dynamic volumetric MRI,” Magn. Resonance Med.,
vol. 72, pp. 707–717, 2014.
[15] S. Geethanath et al., “Compressed sensing MRI: A review,” Critical Rev.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, pp. 183–204, 2013.
[16] L. Ciancarella et al., “Adaptive sampling and reconstruction for sparse
magnetic resonance imaging,” Comput. Modeling Objects Presented Images, vol. 15, pp. 115–130, 2014.
[17] W. Haifeng et al., “Pseudo 2D random sampling for compressed sensing MRI,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009,
pp. 2672–2675.
[18] C. M. Tsai and D. G. Nishimura, “Reduced aliasing artifacts using
variable-density k-space sampling trajectories,” Magn. Resonance Med.,
vol. 43, pp. 452–458, 2000.

2223

[19] Y. Yang et al., “Compressed sensing MRI via two-stage reconstruction,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 110–118, Jan. 2015.
[20] L. Feng et al., “Golden-angle radial sparse parallel MRI: Combination of
compressed sensing, parallel imaging, and golden-angle radial sampling
for fast and flexible dynamic volumetric MRI,” Magn. Resonance Med.,
vol. 72, pp. 707–717, 2014.
[21] Z. Wang et al., “Image quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612,
Apr. 2004.
[22] Z. Feng et al., “Improved l1-SPIRiT using 3D walsh transform-based
sparsity basis,” Magn. Resonance Imaging, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 924–933,
2014.
[23] Y. Yu et al., “Multidimensional compressed sensing MRI using tensor
decomposition-based sparsifying transform,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 6,
e98441, doi :10.1371/journal.pone.0098441
[24] M. Murphy et al., “Fast l1-SPIRiT compressed sensing parallel imaging
MRI: Scalable parallel implementation and clinically feasible runtime,”
IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1250–1262, Jun. 2012.
[25] J. Chi et al., “GPU-accelerated FDTD modeling of radio-frequency field
tissue interactions in high-field MRI,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 6, pp. 1789–1796, Jun. 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

