2208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Modeling Implantable Passive Mechanisms for
Modifying the Transmission of Forces and
Movements Between Muscle and Tendons
Taymaz Homayouni∗ , Kelsey N. Underwood, Kamin C. Beyer, Elon R. Martin, Christopher H. Allan,
and Ravi Balasubramanian

Abstract—This paper explores the development of biomechanical models for evaluating a new class of passive mechanical
implants for orthopedic surgery. The proposed implants take
the form of passive engineered mechanisms, and will be used to
improve the functional attachment of muscles to tendons and bone
by modifying the transmission of forces and movement inside
the body. Specifically, we present how two types of implantable
mechanisms may be modeled in the open-source biomechanical
software OpenSim. The first implant, which is proposed for hand
tendon-transfer surgery, differentially distributes the forces and
movement from one muscle across multiple tendons. The second
implant, which is proposed for knee-replacement surgery, scales
up the forces applied to the knee joint by the quadriceps muscle.
This paper’s key innovation is that such mechanisms have never
been considered before in biomechanical simulation modeling and
in surgery. When compared with joint function enabled by the
current surgical practice of using sutures to make the attachment,
biomechanical simulations show that the surgery with 1) the
differential mechanism (tendon network) implant improves the
fingers’ ability to passively adapt to an object’s shape significantly
during grasping tasks (2.74× as measured by the extent of finger
flexion) for the same muscle force, and 2) the force-scaling implant
increases knee-joint torque by 84% for the same muscle force.
The critical significance of this study is to provide a methodology
for the design and inclusion of the implants into biomechanical
models and validating the improvement in joint function they
enable when compared with current surgical practice.
Index Terms—Biomechanical modeling, implant design, orthopedic surgery.

I. INTRODUCTION
IOMECHANICAL simulation is a powerful tool for
validating new surgical procedures and designs for
new surgical implants. When compared with either in vivo
or cadaver studies, biomechanical simulations enable quick
and broad-based sensitivity analyses of how postsurgery

B

Manuscript received November 10, 2014; revised February 16, 2015; accepted
March 21, 2015. Date of publication April 2, 2015; date of current version
August 18, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ T. Homayouni is with the School of Mechanical, Industrial, and Manufacturing Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97330 USA (e-mail:
homayout@onid.oregonstate.edu).
K. N. Underwood and R. Balasubramanian are with the School of Mechanical,
Industrial, and Manufacturing Engineering, Oregon State University.
K. C. Beyer and E. R. Martin are with the School of Chemical, Biological
and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State University.
C. H. Allan is with School of Medicine, University of Washington.
This paper has supplemental material available online at http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org (File size: 3 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2419223

Fig. 1. Passive engineered mechanisms used as implants. (a) Using levers
connect one muscle to four tendons in a hand. (b) Using a pulley between the
quadriceps and the patella increases the knee joint torque. Legend: A—Vastus
Medialis, B—Vastus Intermedius, C—Vastus Lateralis, D—Patella.

performance varies with changes to the surgical procedure and
changes in the implant’s design parameters, and how the new
surgical procedure compares with prior art. This paper presents
our study in the development of a novel class of biomechanical
models for validating a new orthopedic surgical procedure that
uses implants to improve the functional attachment between
muscles and bone and tendons.
The new surgical procedure pioneered by our group uses
implants in the form of passive engineered mechanisms for
attaching muscles to bone or to one or more tendons with the goal
of modifying the transmission of forces and movement within
the body for improved musculoskeletal function (see Fig. 1
and [1]). The key motivation for this study is that the current
method used primarily for attaching muscles to tendons and
bone, namely the suture has drawbacks when used in orthopedic
surgery, even though it has been the mainstay of surgery for
30 000 years [2]. Specifically, the suture directly couples the
movement of the muscle and the tendons/bone and provides
limited ability to scale or distribute forces from the muscle across
the tendons. This leads to limited postsurgery musculoskel-etal
function and surgical choices. In contrast, the passive implants
developed in this study can scale and/or distribute forces from
the muscle across one or more tendons. This ability to modify
the transmission of forces and movement between muscles and
tendons and bones addresses the drawbacks that arise from the

U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright.

HOMAYOUNI et al.: MODELING IMPLANTABLE PASSIVE MECHANISMS FOR MODIFYING THE TRANSMISSION OF FORCES

direct coupling that the suture creates in the surgery. In addition
to improving joint function, it is expected that using the implants
will provide increased options in orthopedic surgery.
To date, we have focused on two specific surgical applications: Application 1: Advancing tendon-transfer surgeries,
where multiple tendons are attached to one muscle: the new
surgical procedure uses a differential mechanism in the form of
either pulleys, linkages, or tendon networks for distributing the
forces from one muscle across multiple tendons to improve hand
function in physical interaction tasks, such as the grasping of objects. Application 2: Advancing knee-replacement surgery: the
new surgical procedure uses passive implants to scale the force
created by the quadriceps muscles in order to increase knee-joint
torque and, thus, improve joint performance in everyday tasks,
such as stair climbing and chair rising.
While we have conducted pilot cadaver studies for Application 1 that demonstrate the feasibility of using one embodiment of a differential mechanism (namely a hierarchical pulley
mechanism) [3], this paper presents how the implants are modeled in a biomechanical simulation platform (in particular, the
OpenSim platform [4], [5]) and how the improvement in postsurgery function provided by the implants may be quantified
(when compared with using the suture in current surgical procedure) through biomechanical simulations. Section II presents
a background on relevant biomedical devices, OpenSim, and
other biomechanical simulation platforms, and the two surgeries
that are the current focus of our implant development work.
Section III presents the implant models and how they are incorporated into OpenSim’s upper and lower extremity biomechanical models. Section IV presents how the improved musculoskeletal function enabled by the implants can be quantified
and compared with the function enabled by the current surgical
procedure. Section V provides a discussion of the results and
the paper concludes in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Biomedical Devices
Prior work has explored three primary types of medical
devices for restoring or enhancing musculoskeletal function:
1) rigid passive implants that directly attach to bones, such as
joint-replacement implants [6] or implants for holding bones together after fractures [7]; 2) implants that secure two biological
tendons, such as tenofix and ortho-Hunter implants [8], or biological tendons to bone, such as the orthocoupler implant [9];
3) external devices that are body powered or externally powered, such as prostheses for replacing lost body parts, orthoses
for correcting misalignments [10], or exoskeletons for assisting
in movement [11]. Recently, there have been devices for directly attaching muscles in a residual limb to external prostheses
through surgeries called cineplasty [12]. The proposed implants
are differentiated from all existing medical devices since they
modify force and movement transmission inside the body.
B. Software Platforms for Biomechanical Modeling
A variety of software platforms are available for modeling the
biomechanics of the human musculoskeletal system and human
movement, such as SIMM [13], Anybody [14], and OpenSim

2209

Fig. 2. Current tendon-transfer surgery. (a) Hand musculature. (b) Suturebased procedure.

[4], [5]. The basic components in each of these platforms are definitions of the bone geometry and joint kinematics [14], muscle
force production models, and a dynamics engine that computes
how the forces are transmitted through the skeletal kinematics [15]. We have chosen to use the OpenSim platform for our
study since OpenSim is free and open source. Thus, it enables
users to customize the upper and lower extremity models to be
compatible with each patient anatomical variation [4].
The OpenSim program has been utilized extensively to model
upper extremity and lower extremity human movements [5],
[16] and how they are affected by different medical conditions
and surgery. For example, OpenSim’s hand models were used
to explore improved routing of tendons for carpal tunnel syndrome and tendon disorders [17]. OpenSim’s leg models were
utilized to study the pre/postoperative balance associated with
quadriceps insertion sites for patients with stiff knee gait [18].
However, all of these models only utilize natural elements such
as bones and tendons or replace bone joints with rigid artificial
elements. In contrast, the biomechanical models presented in
this paper are unique from all previous work in that the models use reconfigurable mechanisms as implants that change the
transmission of forces and movements between muscles and
tendons or joints within the body.
C. Application 1: Modeling of the Tendon-Transfer Surgery
for Median-Ulnar Nerve Palsy
Tendon-transfer surgeries are used to treat a variety of upper extremity conditions, such as stroke, palsy, spinal muscle
atrophy, brain, nerve or muscle trauma, and congenital defects
[19]. Each of these conditions severely affects hand function,
and prevents a person from performing even basic activities of
daily life. Tendon-transfer surgery restores lost hand function by
rerouting one or more tendons from the affected muscle and suturing them to a functioning muscle (see Fig. 2). About 20 000
hand tendon-transfer surgeries are performed annually in the
U.S. alone at an estimated cost of $200 million [20].

2210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Our group has focused on developing implants for the tendontransfer surgery for high median-ulnar palsy, a severe condition
that disables all four flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) muscle bellies. This condition results in an inability to fully close
the fingers, leading to weak grasps [21]. The current surgical
procedure addresses this condition by suturing all four FDP tendons to a functioning muscle, such as the extensor carpi radialis
longus (ECRL). The ECRL muscle, which is a wrist extensor,
has only one muscle belly. Thus, when the ECRL contracts, all
the fingers curl inward simultaneously and equally.
The key problem with the current surgical procedure is that
the suture couples the movement of all four fingers, leading to
poor hand function in fundamental tasks such as grasping of objects since the fingers cannot adapt naturally to the object shape
[19]. Specifically, the coupled finger movement leads to 1) incomplete and weak grasps [19], 2) greater forces being required
of the muscle since the muscle has to isometrically stretch tendons to flex the other fingers once one finger makes contact (see
Section IV-A Preliminary Results), 3) an uneven stretching
of the tendons, which results in even more unbalanced finger movement over time [22], and 4) large unbalanced forces
on the object during the grasping process (observed in robotic
hands [23]). Also, significant challenges arise in current tendontransfer surgery due to the uncertainty in the surgical process
[22], differences in biomechanical structure between patients,
and the tradeoffs the surgeon must make when choosing from
a limited set of donor muscles [24]. Specifically, if the surgeon
makes even 5% error in tensioning the tendons, finger movement would be either premature or delayed during the grasping
process, leading to weak grasps [1], [22]. Variation in the tendons’ moment arms (the mechanical advantage the tendon has
over a joint) and small deviations of the hand from the target
object’s center also leads to similar outcomes. Finally, to date,
there is a little quantitative evaluation of how choices made in
a tendon-transfer surgery affect hand function in physical interaction tasks such as grasping. Prior work only qualitatively
evaluates a postsurgery hand function [25] or quantitatively evaluates finger and wrist movement in free space without external
contact [26].
The current version of this tendon-transfer surgery has been
modeled using OpenSim’s upper extremity model [26]. We show
in Section III how to model the modified surgery that uses
implants.
D. Application 2: Modeling of Total Knee-Replacement
Surgery
Knee-replacement surgery is performed in nearly 600 000
patients a year in the U.S. at a total cost of $300 billion
[27]. In this surgery, the knee joint is replaced with a single
degree-of-freedom artificial joint that mimics the knee’s kinematics [28]. However, knee joint strength typically decreases
by 30% following surgery for a variety of reasons, such as soft
tissue disruption, implant pitting and fatigue, disturbance of
the quadriceps mechanism (moment arms), tibiofemoral capsular dislocation, even though range of motion is unaffected
[29]–[31]. Such joint-strength loss impedes daily activities, such

Fig. 3. Different hand differential mechanism simulated in OpenSim. (a) Tendon network. (b) Tendon network schematic, A, B, C are vertices of the network
and each have three degrees of freedom each, D and E are anchor points. All
sizes are in mm. (c) Seesaw mechanism.

as chair rising and stair climbing. Similar models have been used
to predict the knee-load forces and joint torques using inverse
kinematic [5].
III. METHODS
A. Design of a Passive Implant to Create Differential
Movement Between One Muscle and Multiple Tendons
in Tendon-Transfer Surgery (Application 1)
In order to address the problem of coupled movement that
arises from the current tendon-transfer surgery for high medianulnar nerve palsy (see Section II-B), we have explored the use
of a passive implant in the form of a differential mechanism to
distribute the forces from one muscle to multiple tendons. The
key idea is that a differential mechanism can route the forces
and motion from a single muscle across multiple tendons, while
allowing variable excursions in each tendon depending on the
external contact the fingers make. The additional degrees of
freedom provided by the implant to the muscle-tendon-finger
biomechanics enable the fingers that have not made contact with
the object to close even if other fingers have made contact1 [1].
We have designed two embodiments of the differential mechanism: 1) a tendon network [see Fig. 3(a) and (b)]; 2) a moving
lever mechanism [see Fig. 3(c)]. A key challenge in the design
of these mechanisms is that they should be small enough to fit
inside the forearm, be able to withstand the physical stresses
during operation, and be biocompatible. In this paper, we describe primarily how we address the design challenges of size
1 This is similar to the use of a differential shaft in an automobile, which
allows the four wheels to spin at different rates when negotiating a turn even
though all the wheels are driven by a single engine.

HOMAYOUNI et al.: MODELING IMPLANTABLE PASSIVE MECHANISMS FOR MODIFYING THE TRANSMISSION OF FORCES

and biomechanical function. The issues of biocompatibility and
material properties of the mechanism are beyond the scope of
this paper. However, they are briefly described in Section V.
The tendon-network implant was added to the OpenSim upper extremity model using a web of tendons similar in properties to biological tendon (see Fig. 3). The tendon network
has an equilateral triangular structure in order to distribute the
forces and movement from one input (a muscle) across two
outputs equally. This equilateral triangle is 32-mm long on
each side. The proximal end of the network is attached to the
ECRL muscle, while the distal ends are attached to the finger tendons. The artificial tendons are chosen to have the same
stiffness properties as biological tendons (normalized resistance
force F = 1.6x2 − 1.4x − 0.2, where x is the tendon strain [4]);
the physical version of the tendon network will be constructed
from Kevlar [32] or polyvinylidene fluoride [33], which have
favorable biological compatibility and mechanical properties
[32]–[34]. Note that since the tendon network is not rigid, it is
anchored to the forearm bones (the ulna and radius bones) in
order to maintain its structure. The three ends of triangle [see A,
B, C in Fig. 3(a)] are allowed to slide in a plane parallel to the
bones and thus have three degrees of freedom each. The points D
and E, however, are anchored to the bones. The same triangular
structure can be hierarchically assembled to create differential
action from one muscle across more than two tendons.
The moving-lever mechanism was added to the basic OpenSim upper extremity model in the form of a single rigid cylindrical element (these models may be designed in a 3-D modeling
software, such as AutoCAD or created inside OpenSim itself).
The ECRL muscle was connected at the center of the cylinder,
and the FDP tendons were attached at the two ends of the cylinder [see Fig. 3(c)]. Note that offsetting the position of the ECRL
attachment to either side of the center would create larger forces
on the tendon on that side; thus, enabling the scaled distribution of forces between the fingers. The cylinder was provided
three degrees of freedom to translate and rotate in the plane.
One challenge with the lever mechanism is that it would have to
be long for large muscle contractions. This is because the lever
mechanism ceases to create differential action when it rotates
beyond 80°. Specifically, our calculations show that the tendon
of one finger could travel up to 2.5 cm with a 3 cm long lever
after another finger is stopped due to contact during grasping.
Since the ECRL’s maximum excursion capability is 3.9 cm, the
patient would have to sacrifice some finger flexion capability for
having the ability to scale the force transferred to the different
fingers.
In all three models (model with the suture and models with
the two implants), finger movement was created by setting the
ECRL to have a linear-ramp-and-plateau activation profile (linear ramp over 3 s from 0% to 75% excitation, and then held at
75% for 3 s). Contact between the fingers and the target object
during the grasping process was simulated by creating contact
between the index fingertip and an external rigid constraint as
soon as the index finger flexed. The fingertips were set to be
stiff with static, dynamic and viscous friction coefficients of
0.8, 0.75, and 0.01 in order to represent the physical interaction between the human fingertip and the objects for grasping.

2211

Fig. 4. Passive implant for scaling of muscle forces to improve knee function.
(a) Implant simulation in OpenSim. (b) Knee musculature. (c) Knee musculature
with the implant.

Finger movement was measured using the “total flexion” of all
three flexion joints (MCP, PIP, and DIP) in the finger. The differential movement and fingertip force created by the muscle
action across the index and middle fingers were measured in
each simulation.
B. Design of a Passive Implant for Scaling of Muscle Forces to
Improve Knee Function Following Knee-Replacement Surgery
(Application 2)
In order to restore knee strength following knee-replacement
surgery, we propose implanting a passive pulley mechanism between the quadriceps and the patella. The pulley would scale the
quadriceps force by about 200%, while sacrificing about 50%
of the range of motion. Such partial loss of range of motion in
the knee is acceptable, because only 105° of movement is necessary for daily activities. The pulley was incorporated into the
basic OpenSim lower extremity model by inserting and attaching an additional tendon to the four quadriceps muscle heads,
routing it through a via point on the patella, and then anchored
to the femur bone. This routing acts as a pulley because the
tendon is free to slide around the via point on the patella [see
Fig. 4(c)]. In both models with and without the implant, knee
joint movement was created by setting all four quadriceps muscles to have a linear-ramp-and-plateau activation profile (linear
ramp over 3 s from 0% to 75% excitation, and then held at 75%
for 3 s). The knee joint torque was estimated using the force in
a virtual spring attached to the tibia. This spring was modeled
in OpenSim using a tendon with the same force–length curve
as biological tendons. The knee joint’s initial position was 54°,
and the knee joint’s change in angle was measured.
C. Key Challenges in Incorporating Implants Into
Biomechanical Models
There were two challenges that needed to be overcome when
incorporating these mechanisms into the biomechanical models.

2212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. Middle finger flexion enabled by the implant-based procedure and the
suture-based procedure.

First, the tendon lengths needed to be chosen carefully so the
biomechanical function is not affected. Specifically, if the tendons were too slack, then the transfer of the muscle contraction
to the joint would be delayed. If tendons were too tight, then that
would lead to premature movement in the joints. Second, the
implant can also change where along muscle force–length curve
the muscle operates [35]. Therefore, effort was taken to ensure
that the muscle operated in the same section of the force–length
curve with and without the implant.
IV. RESULTS
A. Improved Differential Finger Movement Following
Implant-Based Surgical Procedure (Application 1)
Fig. 5 shows the large difference in finger flexion enabled by
the implanted tendon-network and moving-lever mechanisms
when compared with the finger flexion enabled by the suturebased procedure when the fingers close in to grasp an object of
uneven shape. Specifically, both the implanted tendon-network
and moving-lever mechanisms provide nearly 170° of differential movement between the index and middle fingers, which
is nearly three times the differential movement (62°) enabled
by the suture-based procedure. It was confirmed that the ECRL
force was equal in all three cases, 275 (N), confirming that the
differential action was due to the implanted mechanism. Conversely, it was also observed that less muscle force was required
to close the fingers to the same extent following the implantbased procedure. Thus, when establishing a multifinger power
grasp, the fingers would adapt better to the object’s shape at
lower actuation force following the implant-based procedure.
While the above results show that the implant-based procedure improves finger adaptability during power grasps, the influence of the suture-based and implant-based procedures during
index-thumb precision grasp [36] was also analyzed. Specifically, the suture-based procedure enables the immediate creation
of a precision grasp once the index finger makes contact with
the object, since the movement of all the fingers ceases immediately after the index finger makes contact. Thus, the contact
force established between the index finger and the object is expected to be large. In the case of the implant-based procedure,
strong contact forces can be established only after the other

Fig. 6.

(a) Knee joint force and (b) movement with and without the implant.

fingers also close in. This marginally reduces the contact forces
that may be established in the precision grasp following the
implant-based surgery. However, the simulations showed that
the fingertip force enabled by the implant-based procedure in
pinch grasps is still comparable to the fingertip force of a healthy
person (about 27.9 N) [37]. Thus, the implant-based procedure is
able to create differential action between multiple fingers to improve power grasping capability, while also enabling sufficient
strength in pinch grasps similar to that of a healthy individual.
B. Increased Knee-Joint Torque Following Implant-Based
Surgical Procedure (Application 2)
Fig. 6(a) and (b) shows the time history of the knee-joint
torque and the knee-joint angle change due to quadriceps activation following the standard surgery and following the implantbased surgery. It is observed that the knee-joint torque generated
following the implant-based surgery is 1.84X the force generated in the suture-based procedure. A force scaling of 2X was
expected, but the reduced scaling arises from the irregular lines
of action for muscles and ligaments in the human body when
compared with mechanical systems [38]. Specifically, if the directions of the input and output tendons are not perfectly aligned
or in the plane, the angular discrepancy will affect the magnitude
of force scaling. The range of motion correspondingly decreased
0.56X when using the implant.
V. DISCUSSION
The long-term goal of this study is to develop implants that
provide an alternative to the suture (or other methods like the
surgical staple [39]) for attaching muscles to tendons and bones

HOMAYOUNI et al.: MODELING IMPLANTABLE PASSIVE MECHANISMS FOR MODIFYING THE TRANSMISSION OF FORCES

Fig. 7. Application 1, differential movement. (a) Pulley configuration.
(b) Testing pulley implant in cadaver.

in surgery. Such implants have the potential to bring a paradigm
shift in reconstructive orthopedic surgery since these implants
can customize the transmission of forces and movement within
the body based on the patient’s requirements, which has never
been explored in surgery. It is expected that these implants will
help restore musculoskeletal function and provide more options
in surgery.
The implants have to be carefully designed keeping in mind
that biomechanical function is highly sensitive to small alterations in muscle and tendon lengths and routings and where the
muscle operates in the force–length curve [35]. For example, it
was noticed during the design process for the knee implant that
any additional tendon length would result in the muscle operating at lengths where the force output is not maximum. Also,
the implants can be customized based on the musculoskeletal
function the patient desires. Specifically, by varying the stiffness
and dimensions of various elements of the tendon network in
Application 1, the movement of the index and middle fingers
can be selectively modified to achieve greater index finger movement (when compared with the middle finger movement). This
would enable the preferential creation of index-thumb precision
grasps over enveloping power grasps. This will be investigated
in future work.
Finally, we have successfully demonstrated the performance
of these implants in cadavers in the case of application 1, namely
tendon-transfer surgery for high median-ulnar nerve palsy using
the pulley system (see Fig. 7) [1], [3]. However, it is logistically
difficult and expensive to do extensive studies and optimize
different embodiments of the implants using cadavers. Thus,
biomechanical simulations provide us an important route for
evaluating various embodiments of the implants.
VI. CONCLUSION
The key contribution of this paper is to provide the methodology for incorporating and validating these mechanisms in
biomechanical simulation programs such as OpenSim. The beneficial impact of these implants on biomechanical function is evident from the results of the OpenSim simulations. Specifically,
in Application 1, the implanted differential mechanism enables
the fingers to adapt better to the object shape during grasping

2213

tasks. In Application 2, the pulley mechanism enables significantly greater knee joint torque for the same muscle activation
(see Figs. 5 and 6).
While these results are promising, additional experiments and
analysis are necessary in order to verify how the implants will
perform when embedded amidst living tissue. First, it is not
yet clear if the implant will damage surrounding tissue when
the passive mechanism moves and rotates in vivo due to muscle contraction [40]. Such physical interaction between the implant and surrounding tissue may be quantified through wetlab experiments and software, such as ANSYS that enables a
mechanobiology analysis [41]. Second, finite-element analysis
is necessary to analyze how the implant should be dimensioned
in order to withstand the forces that the muscle creates in the
implant. Third, in addition to fabricating the device using biocompatible materials such as titanium or ultrahigh molecular
weight polyethylene, the mechanism may have to be chemically
coated to reduce fibrosis when implanted in vivo long-term [42].
REFERENCES
[1] R. Balasubramanian et al., “Implanted miniature engineering mechanisms
in tendon-transfer surgery improve robustness of post-surgery hand function,” in Proc. 6th Hamlyn Symp. Med. Robot., 2013, pp. 29–30.
[2] D. Mackenzie, “The history of sutures,” Med. History, vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 158–168, 1973.
[3] K. L. Mardula et al., “Implanted passive engineering mechanism improves
hand function after tendon transfer surgery: A cadaver-based study,”
HAND, vol. 10, pp. 116–122, Sep. 2014.
[4] S. L. Delp et al., “OpenSim: Open-source software to create and analyze
dynamic simulations of movement,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54,
no. 11, pp. 1940–1950, Nov. 2007.
[5] E. M. Arnold et al., “A model of the lower limb for analysis of human
movement,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 269–279, 2010.
[6] U. Wijk et al., “Outcomes of proximal interphalangeal joint pyrocarbon
implants,” J. Hand Surg. Amer., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 38–43, 2010.
[7] I. J. Harrington and A. A. Tountas, “Replacement of the radial head in the
treatment of unstable elbow fractures,” Injury, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 405–412,
1981.
[8] B. W. Su et al., “A device for zone-II flexor tendon repair,” J. Bone Joint
Surg., vol. 88, no. 1 Suppl. 1, pp. 37–49, 2006.
[9] A. Melvin et al., “An artificial tendon to connect the quadriceps muscle
to the Tibia,” J. Orthop. Res., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1775–1782, 2011.
[10] D. Shurr and J. Michael, Prosthetics and Orthotics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 2001.
[11] J. C. Perry et al., “Upper-limb powered exoskeleton design,” IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 408–417, Aug. 2007.
[12] R. F. Weir et al., “Cineplasty as a control input for externally powered
prosthetic components,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 357–63,
Jan. 2001.
[13] SIMM (Software for Interactive Musculoskeletal Modeling), Musculographics, Inc., A division of motion analysis corporation, Santa Rosa, CA,
USA.
[14] M. Damsgaard et al., “Analysis of musculoskeletal systems in the AnyBody modeling system,” Simul. Model. Pract. Theory, vol. 14, no. 8,
pp. 1100–1111, Nov. 2006.
[15] R. Shadmehr and S. P. Wise, The Computational Neurobiology of Reaching
and Pointing: A Foundation for Motor Learning (Computational Neuroscience Series). Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[16] S. R. Ward et al., “Are current measurements of lower extremity muscle architecture accurate?” Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., vol. 467, no. 4,
pp. 1074–1082, 2009.
[17] A. M. Kociolek and P. J. Keir, “Modelling tendon excursions and moment
arms of the finger flexors: Anatomic fidelity versus function,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1967–73, Jul. 2011.
[18] D. H. Sutherland et al., “Treatment of stiff-knee gait in cerebral palsy:
A comparison by gait analysis of distal rectus Femoris transfer versus
proximal rectus release,” J. Pediatr. Orthop., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 433–441,
1990.

2214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

[19] P. W. Brand and A. Hollister, Clinical Mechanics of the Hand. St. Louis,
MO, USA: Mosby, 1993.
[20] AHA-UW. (2013). Based on American Hospital Association and
University of Washington Medicine records. [Online]. Available:
http://www.aha.org/research/rc/stat-studies/fast-facts.shtml
[21] D. M. Sammer and K. C. Chung, “Tendon transfers: Part I. Principles
of transfer and transfers for radial nerve palsy,” Plastic Reconstr. Surg.,
vol. 123, no. 5, pp. 169e–177e, May 2009.
[22] R. L. Lieber, “Biology and mechanics of skeletal muscle: What hand
surgeons need to know when tensioning a tendon transfer,” J. Hand Surg.
Amer., vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1655–1656, 2008.
[23] A. M. Dollar and R. D. Howe, “The highly adaptive SDM hand: Design and performance evaluation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 29, no. 5,
pp. 585–597, 2010.
[24] J. Fridén and R. L. Lieber, “Tendon transfer surgery: Clinical implications
of experimental studies,” Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., vol. 403, pp. S163–
S170, 2002.
[25] D. E. Beaton et al., “The DASH (disabilities of the arm, shoulder and
hand) outcome measure: What do we know about it now?” Brit. J. Hand
Ther., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 109–118, 2001.
[26] K. R. S. Holzbaur et al., “A model of the upper extremity for simulating musculoskeletal surgery and analyzing neuromuscular control,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 829–840, Jun. 2005.
[27] A. J. Carr et al., “Knee replacement,” Lancet, vol. 379, no. 9823,
pp. 1331–1340, 2012.
[28] R. L. Kane et al., Total knee replacement, US Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality, Washington, DC, USA, 2003.
[29] (2011, Oct. 22). Tendon Transfer Principles and Mechanics. [Online].
Available: http://emedicine.medscape.com/ article/1834677-overview
[30] B. T. Rougraff et al., “Complete quadriceps tendon ruptures,” Orthopedics,
vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 509–514, 1996.
[31] J. G. Kim et al., “The effective-ness of minimally invasive total knee
arthroplasty to preserve quadriceps strength: A randomized controlled
trial,” Knee, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 443–447, Dec. 2011.
[32] B. Pourdeyhimi et al., “Fracture toughness of Kevlar 29/poly (methyl
methacrylate) composite materials for surgical implantations,” Ann.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 277–294, May 1986.

[33] G. Laroche et al., “Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as a biomaterial:
From polymeric raw material to monofilament vascular suture,” J. Biomed.
Mater. Res., vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1525–36, Dec. 1995.
[34] J. H.-C. Wang, “Mechanobiology of tendon,” J. Biomech., vol. 39, no. 9,
pp. 1563–1582, 2006.
[35] C. N. Maganaris, “Force–length characteristics of in vivo human skeletal
muscle,” Acta Physiol. Scand., vol. 172, no. 4, pp. 279–285, 2001.
[36] J. H. House et al., “Restoration of strong grasp and lateral pinch in tetraplegia due to cervical spinal cord injury,” J. Hand Surg. Amer., vol. 1, no. 2,
pp. 152–159, Sep. 1976.
[37] F. J. Valero-Cuevas et al., “Large index-fingertip forces are produced by
subject-independent patterns of muscle excitation,” J. Biomech., vol. 31,
no. 8, pp. 693–703, Aug. 1998.
[38] A. V. Specogna et al., “Radiographic measures of knee alignment in
patients with varus gonarthrosis: Effect of weightbearing status and associations with dynamic joint load,” Amer. J. Sports Med., vol. 35, no. 1,
pp. 65–70, Jan. 2007.
[39] J. D. Bronzino, The Biomedical Engineering Handbook. 2. Boca Raton,
FL, USA: CRC Press, 2000.
[40] D. R. Carter et al., “Correlations between mechanical stress history and
tissue differentiation in initial fracture healing,” J. Orthop. Res., vol. 6,
no. 5, pp. 736–48, Jan. 1988.
[41] C. Zhao et al., “Soft tissue deformation ANSYS simulation of robotassisted percutaneous surgery,” in Proc. 10th World Congr. Intell. Control
Autom., 2012, pp. 3561–3566.
[42] L. Zhang et al., “Zwitterionic hydrogels implanted in mice resist the
foreign-body reaction,” Nature Biotechnol., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 553–556,
2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

