2196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Workspace Shape and Characteristics for Human
Two- and Three-Fingered Precision Manipulation
Ian M. Bullock∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Thomas Feix, Member, IEEE, and Aaron M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: To study precision manipulation, which involves
repositioning an object in the fingertips and is used in everyday
tasks such as writing and key insertion, and also for domain-specific
tasks such as small scalpel cuts, using tweezers, and hand soldering. Methods: In this study, the range of positions (workspace)
through which 19 participants manipulated a 3.3–4.1 cm-diameter
object are measured with a magnetic tracker. Each participant performed two conditions: a two-finger thumb-index finger condition
and a three-finger thumb-index-middle finger condition. Results:
The observed workspaces, normalized to a 17.5 cm hand length,
are small compared to free-finger trajectories; for the two-finger
trials, 68% of points are within 1.05 cm of the centroid and 95%
are within 2.31 cm, while the three-finger case shows a narrower
distribution, with 68% of points within 0.94 cm of the centroid
and 95% of points within 2.19 cm. The longest axis is a long thin
arc in the proximal-palmar plane. Analysis of fingertip workspaces
shows that the index fingertip workspace volume is the most linear
predictor of object workspace (R2 = 0.98). Conclusion: Precision manipulation workspace size and shape is shown, along with
how the fingers are used during the manipulation. Significance:
The results have many applications, including normative data for
rehabilitation, guidelines for ergonomic device design, and benchmarking prosthetic and robotic hands.
Index Terms—Dexterous manipulation, ergonomics, haptic interfaces, human hands, robot hands.

I. INTRODUCTION
ONSIDERING the immense scope and broad reaches of
the topic, there has been relatively little work done related
to understanding normal human hand use, and especially quantifying function. More prior research has studied human grasping
[1]–[4] and finger force modulation [5], while understanding the
human hand’s kinematic capabilities during dexterous, withinhand manipulation [6] has been largely ignored. Some studies
have analyzed the kinematic capabilities of individual fingers
in healthy participants [7], [8], as well as comparing the finger capabilities of participants with impaired hand functionality
[9]–[11]. However, only a few studies (see Section II) directly
consider the precision manipulation task of multiple fingertips
interacting with an object, as in the present work.
Precision manipulation, which is the hallmark of humankind’s
superior dexterity, is key to the ability to perform a large number

C

Manuscript received October 17, 2014; revised February 6, 2015; accepted
March 18, 2015. Date of publication March 31, 2015; date of current version August 18, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Gustavus and
Louise Pfeiffer Foundation and the National Science Foundation under Grant
IIS-0953856. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ I. M. Bullock is with Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511 USA (e-mail:
bullock.ian@gmail.com).
T. Feix and A. M. Dollar are with Yale University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2418197

Fig. 1. Three-fingered precision manipulation workspace example. A voxel
grid is fitted to the original workspace points, both to calculate workspace
volume and for visualization.

of daily tasks. Precision manipulation is used in tasks such as
writing or using a haptic input device (see, e.g., [12] and [13]).
Knowledge of the precision manipulation workspace can be
applied to the analysis of surgical technique and dexterity [14],
or to improve the design and usage of hand-held medical devices
[15], including teleoperated surgical robots [12]. Devices and
methods can be tailored to take advantage of the most natural
motion ranges, potentially resulting in greater precision, lower
strain, and less energy consumption than larger wrist and wholearm motions. For example, if only within-hand movement is
needed, the upper limb can be braced to increase precision and
reduce fatigue [16]. This kinematic information can also be
used to better target rehabilitation efforts [17] or surgery of
an impaired hand [18], and to benchmark prosthetic or robotic
hands [19]–[21].
The current work seeks to experimentally determine the precision manipulation workspace of the human hand and builds
on an initial conference paper by the authors [22]. We define
this workspace as the range of motions through which a person
can feasibly move an object held between the fingertips, without
removing or replacing the contact, or allowing the object contact point to slide [6]. Fig. 1 shows a sample workspace from
one subject, indicating the approximate size, shape, position,
and orientation of the workspace for the tested object size and
three-finger contact condition. We also examine the tradeoffs in
manipulation workspace between using two and three fingers.
While using three or more fingers may give additional stability,
we hypothesized that, due to additional constraints, the precision manipulation workspace where only the thumb and index
finger are used would be larger than when the middle finger is
also involved.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BULLOCK et al.: WORKSPACE SHAPE AND CHARACTERISTICS FOR HUMAN TWO- AND THREE-FINGERED PRECISION MANIPULATION

Fig. 2. Four sizes of the pointed object used for manipulation. The object
is scaled to one of the four discrete sizes based on participant hand length.
The set screw points help to maintain a fixed contact location throughout the
manipulation trials.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next
section provides an overview of related work, particularly hand
workspace estimation. Section III describes the study methodology used. Section IV shows various characteristics of the manipulation workspace across all participants, as well as the patterns
of finger usage during manipulation. Section V analyzes the
workspaces and trends and discusses broader applications. Finally, Section VI discusses limitations of the study and potential
future work.
II. BACKGROUND
Our current work differs from existing work by directly studying the within-hand kinematic workspace of human precision
manipulation of a real nonzero size object. Some existing work
which has looked at related tasks will be discussed.
Kuo et al. [23] examined functional workspace of 20 participants by calculating the area of intersection of the free thumb
and finger trajectories, to estimate the ability of the hand to move
a small object within a precision pinch grasp. The work illustrates the resulting 3-D workspaces and analyzes relationships
between finger length and the workspace for each thumb–finger
combination. A follow-on work does some additional fitting of
the resulting shapes [24]. However, the current work differs by
analyzing manipulation workspace of a real nonzero size object
directly and considers workspace as a 3-D volume rather than
the simplified 3-D surface used in [23]. It is also important to
note that the interaction with the object creates a different kinematic structure from the free swing trajectories of the fingers.
Youm and Chung [25] modeled a workspace using a technique
similar to the Kuo et al. [23] workspace intersection method.
However, this work models only a planar workspace, assuming
that manipulation in a three-fingered grasp is always along the
medial plane of the hand. The present work does not make this

2197

simplifying assumption and considers experimental data for the
full 3-D workspace.
The manipulability of the thumb and index finger pinch in
three postures is analyzed in [26]. The results indicate, for example, that the index finger posture plays a greater role in determining manipulability than the thumb posture. This work differs
because it considers only three poses with a small stick object
and focuses on manipulability, rather than the current work’s
larger object and continuous kinematic view.
Some work in the robotic domain has looked at precision
manipulation workspace. For example, Borras and Dollar [27]
looks at the workspace of a three-fingered symmetric robotic
hand using a framework inspired from the parallel platform
literature. Odhner and Dollar [28] analyzed planar workspace
of a symmetric, underactuated two-finger hand. Ma and Dollar [29] applies a linkage-based analysis to the workspace of a
similar hand. Finally, Cui and Dai [30] analyzes how a flexible
palm influences the workspace and manipulability of the threefingered metamorphic hand. The present work differs from previous robotic efforts in that it looks at the specific case of the
human hand, taking an experimental approach to assessing the
workspace.
Some works have looked at related tasks, but from a force
perspective rather than a kinematic perspective. Rácz et al. [31]
looked at the force coordination patterns of the thumb, index,
and middle fingers while performing simple tasks with a threeload cell object. Their results indicate a strong synchrony of
normal force modulation by each finger during the tasks tested.
However, this work did not involve significant displacement of
the overall object. Many motor control related works do study
finger forces in detail; see [5] for a review. However, these works
generally consider forces and overall hand and arm movements,
rather than the kinematics and within-hand behavior that are the
focus of the present work.
Finally, Gilster et al. [32] looked at the finger contact points
used during grasping and lifting of a cylinder and other objects. This study indicates comfortable grasp point positions for
a three-fingered cylinder grasp are to have the index and middle
◦
finger positions at approximately ±20 − 30 relative to a position opposite the thumb. These results were utilized in this work
◦
to determine the grasp point (angles of ±30, see Fig. 2) on the
pointed object used in this study.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Our experimental protocol involves unimpaired human subjects manipulating a pointed object (see Fig. 2) held between
the thumb and forefinger or thumb, forefinger, and middle finger, while the relative position of the center of the object with
respect to a hand base coordinate frame is measured. A pointed
object was used to minimize changes in finger contact location,
while still allowing free pivoting of the object. Magnetic tracker
sensors (see Fig. 3) and visual feedback (see Fig. 4) were used.
A. Participants
Nineteen participants completed the experiment. They are
aged 18–31 (median 25), with six male and 13 female

2198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

B. Equipment

Fig. 3. Hand coordinate frame. The sensor defining the origin is placed onethird of the way from the continuation of the wrist flexion crease to the bump
from the fourth metacarpal head, along the fourth metacarpal. All motions are
referenced relative to this sensor.

A trakSTAR magnetic tracking system (Ascension Technologies, Burlington, VT) with a medium range transmitter and eight
MODEL 180 2 mm diameter sensors were used. Each sensor
provides 6-DOF data (x, y, and z position, and three rotations) at
the configured, recommended sampling rate of 80 Hz. The positional accuracy of the system is 1.4 mm RMS and the angular
accuracy is 0.5° RMS. The three trakSTAR sensors to be placed
on the back of the hand were inserted into small rubber sleeves
(see Fig. 3) to reduce unintended rotation around the long axis
of the sensor during the experiment. The object sensor was fixed
in the center of the object using a nylon screw.
The object shown in Fig. 2, referred to from here on as the
“pointed object,” was machined to allow three adjustable 4–40
(2.6 mm diameter) nylon setscrew finger contact points at 30
degree angle increments. The final object has a mass of 11 g,
excluding the magnetic sensor. These were set to provide 3.30,
3.56, 3.81, or 4.06 cm effective diameter, depending on participant hand length. This range was picked based on anthropometric data [33] to allow object scaling from a 1% female hand to a
99% male hand, as well as informal tests that showed this to be
a comfortable object size that ought to give a large workspace.
Visual feedback was provided on a 27 in LCD monitor 1 m
in front of the experimental table to help participants thoroughly explore their position workspace; a diagram of the views
used can be seen in Fig. 4. Three views were aligned with
two anatomical axes of the hand (distal-proximal, radial-ulnar,
dorsal-palmar), while the fourth view was a perspective view.
During each trial, participants were instructed to visually trace
out as large a workspace volume as possible, and to fill in this
volume as best they can. A goal-based variant of this visualfeedback exploration approach was considered, but ultimately
decided against due to the added risk of biasing the results based
on the goal characteristics, rather than capturing a more natural
range of movement.
C. Procedure

Fig. 4. Visual feedback. The four views shown were displayed on a monitor
in front of the participant. Axes and axis labels were not shown during the
actual experimental trials to reduce distractions, but the plot locations are the
same in this figure as were used on the monitor during the experimental trials.
Participants were instructed both to trace out as much area on the screen as
possible, and also to fill in the area.

participants. Participants were recruited from the local university community. Hand length (wrist crease to middle fingertip) ranged from 15.5 to 19.8 cm, with a median hand length
of 17.5 cm. The measurement setup required that all subjects
be right handed and have normal unimpaired hand function.
Specifically, any participants with history of significant hand
and wrist injury were excluded from participation. The study
was approved by the local IRB and all subjects were individually
consented and financially compensated for their participation.

Some preparation was performed before the experiment. First,
the participants removed any metal-containing objects, such as
keys and cell phones, from their pockets, since metal could distort the magnetic fields emitted by the magnetic tracking system.
Then, the participants were shown a short series of slides explaining the experimental procedure in detail. Participants were
instructed to minimize any sliding of the pointed object at the
pointed contact points, and to make sure that the initial contact points were within the area of the distal half of each finger
pad used. Participants were also instructed to avoid removing
any fingers from the object during a trial. In this manner, the
participant is prevented from using sliding or finger gaiting during the trials. Although this constraint was participant enforced,
the experimenter did also observe the participants to make sure
they had understood the instructions and were not violating the
constraints.
Sensors were then attached to the subject, as can be seen in
Fig. 2. 3M Transpore tape was used to attach four sensors to
the fingernails and wrist. Three more sensors were inserted into

BULLOCK et al.: WORKSPACE SHAPE AND CHARACTERISTICS FOR HUMAN TWO- AND THREE-FINGERED PRECISION MANIPULATION

1.5 × 1.5 × 0.3 cm rubber mounts and attached to the back of
the hand using Top Stick Men’s Grooming Tape. The sensor
cords were draped over the participant’s shoulders, and a hook
and loop strap was wrapped around the sensors and participant’s forearm to provide effective strain relief to prevent the
cables from disturbing the sensor positioning. The participant
was instructed to flex their fingers fully while setting the sensor
cable rest lengths to avoid any tugging of the sensors during the
study. Hand length and width were measured according to [33].
Specifically, the length measurement is taken from the wrist
flexion crease to the tip of the middle finger. The object size
to be used was calculated according to the equation d = 0.2 lh ,
where d is the object diameter and lh is the hand length, both
in centimeters. The diameter closest to one of the four discrete
target diameters was then set. The final sensor was placed inside
the object and held in place with a nylon set screw.
The hand position for the trials can be seen in Fig. 3. A plastic
alignment guide was used to help the participant keep their wrist
approximately straight and their hand in the same location for
each trial, while avoiding the constraints on hand motion that
other bracing methods could impose. Subjects were instructed
to keep their arm and the back of their hand aligned along this
guide during the experiment in order to reduce hand base frame
movements due to skin motion. The alignment guide and chosen hand position could have a minor impact on the motions
observed. The table provides a planar constraint under the hand,
which was not observed to provide a limitation on the participant’s motion, but theoretically could restrict certain motion
trajectories in the ulnar direction. Hand orientation affects the
relative orientation of the gravity vector, which could make it
easier to perform certain motions without dropping the object.
However, this should only affect the very edges of the workspace
where manipulation becomes difficult.
For this work, two blocks of trials involving a pointed object
(see Fig. 2) manipulated with two and three fingers will be
considered. The full study did include additional trials with a
spherical object and individual finger movements. These trials
were used to evaluate finger surface usage and are discussed
separately in [34]. These additional trials are noted here simply
to give a full understanding of the set of tasks each participant
had to perform during their experimental session. The order of
the trial blocks was randomized. Before each block of three
trials, a 1 min practice period was given for the participant to
explore the workspace without visual feedback. Following the
practice, three 2 min workspace trials were performed. After
every trial, a rest period of about 30 s was given. In total, the
duration of the trials was about 80 min, including the time
required for the experimenter to switch between trial conditions.
D. Workspace Volume Calculation
A voxel binning method was used to calculate the workspace
volume, similar to that used in [19]. Specifically, workspace
points from each trial were binned into a 3-D grid of voxels.
The grid spacing, or size of each bin, was set using a 95% confidence interval for the deviation of the hand reference frame
sensor points, which is 2.15 mm. This number sets a reason-

2199

Fig. 5. Workspace volume as a function of hand length. A slight increase
in volume is observed as hand length increases, but a great deal of variability
occurs which is not explained by hand length alone.

able range within which workspace points cannot be effectively
discriminated. The effect of bin size on resulting workspace
volume was evaluated, and it was determined that volume increases roughly linearly with increasing voxel size. This linear
scaling makes the ratio of the workspaces more meaningful than
the absolute size values. It was also confirmed qualitatively that
2.15 mm is a large enough voxel edge width to prevent frequent
holes in the workspace volumes due to sparse data points. The
final volume is calculated as the sum of the individual voxel
volumes that contain at least one data point.
E. Normalization and Trial Combination
Unless otherwise stated, all data is normalized to the median
17.5 cm hand length from the study participants. Specifically,
the workspace points for a given participant i are scaled by
 ¯
¯l
¯l 
l
  
x,
y,
z
(1)
(x , y , z ) =
lhi lhi lhi
where ¯l is the median hand length, lhi is the given participant’s
hand length, and the primed coordinate frame is scaled relative
to the raw data in the unprimed frame. The desired effect is
to view all data as if it came from a participant with median
17.5 cm hand length, while keeping the data in units that are
easier to understand intuitively.
With the exception of some initial statistical tests and the
analysis for Fig. 5, the three trials for each participant and experimental condition were simply combined together into one
larger trial for the analysis in this work.
F. Statistical Methods
A few statistical methods are used frequently to analyze the
results. For positions in R3 , confidence intervals are often given
for the individual (x, y, z) coordinates by simply calculating a
95% confidence interval based on the standard error for each

2200

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 6. Two- and three-finger object and finger workspaces for ten participants. All units are cm. The colors used are explained in the lower left corner of the twoand three-finger sections. Each row corresponds to a particular participant (as indicated by the participant number on the right), while each column corresponds
to a particular workspace view. The left set of three columns is for the two-finger case, while the right set of three columns is for the three-finger case. The
participants are sorted in descending order from top to bottom by the sum of their two- and three-fingered workspaces. Every other participant is shown due to
space considerations. Ellipsoids are fitted to the object workspace using PCA and the variance along each of the PCA axes.

BULLOCK et al.: WORKSPACE SHAPE AND CHARACTERISTICS FOR HUMAN TWO- AND THREE-FINGERED PRECISION MANIPULATION

2201

Fig. 7. Principal components for all participants. PCA is used to find an orientation for three principal vectors for each participant’s workspace. The length of
these vectors is then set by extending the axes 1.96σ in either direction. The first axis is darkest and the third axis lightest. Different dash patterns are also used
for the non-summary axes. These vectors are used to define the axes of the ellipsoids in Fig. 6. Finally, an average of all the participants’ PCA vectors is taken and
plotted as a thicker set of lines.

individual variable. To assess the variability of a set of orientations (often expressed as unit vectors in R3 ), we expand a cone
centered around the mean orientation until it contains a given
percentage (e.g., 68%) of the orientation data. The resulting
semivertical angle for the cone gives an intuitively understandable measure for how spread out the orientation data is. This
method is also discussed in [34]. Some conventional methods
which apply only to certain aspects of the data are discussed
when relevant in the context of the results.

IV. RESULTS
Several statistical tests were performed initially to check for
any complicating effects in the dataset. These initial tests are
performed without the normalization discussed in Section III-E.
By fitting a linear regression model to the cube of hand length,
and testing for significance of the slope term, it was found
that hand length significantly affects the resulting workspace
(p = 0.001) (see Fig. 5). The effect of sex on volume was tested
by performing a t-test for the means of all female and male
workspace volumes in the study, which gave an almost significant p = 0.07, but if the effect of hand length on volume is taken

into account by subtracting out a compensating term based on
the equation in Fig. 5, this difference in means is reduced and
is no longer significant (p = 0.49). It was initially hypothesized
that workspace volume would increase with participant experience. This was tested by performing a linear regression for
the relationship between volume and trial number, but this did
not give a statistically significant slope parameter (p = 0.6). On
average, the workspace volume increased a modest 24% from
the first to third trial of each block, but again the slope parameter
for the corresponding linear regression is not statistically significant (p = 0.3). After accounting for hand length effects by
subtracting a compensating term based on the equation in Fig. 5,
a linear regression of volume versus object diameter does not
yield a statistically significant slope term (p = 0.8) for the range
of sizes utilized in this study. Following this initial analysis, sex
and any trial order effects were not considered in the following.
The relationship between workspace volume and hand length
is shown in Fig. 5. It is hypothesized that volume should scale
as the cube of hand length. This hypothesis should hold if the
human hand scales in a manner which preserves relative link
lengths and maintains constant joint limits, in which case the
conversion between workspace volumes could be thought of

2202

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. PCA axis length distributions. Histograms are shown for the first, second, and third PCA axis length in the two- and three-finger cases. Lengths are
calculated by the variance of the workspace data along that particular axis; the axes are shown graphically in Fig. 7. The vertical lines indicate means.

as a simple unit conversion between link lengths (given that
object size has been scaled deliberately with hand length in this
study). With this hypothesized cubic model, the fitted equation
obtained to calculate expected volume for a given hand length is
V = 9.54 × 10−4 lh3 , where V is the volume in cubic centimeters
and lh is the hand length in centimeters. The increase in volume
with hand length is statistically significant, with p = 0.001.
While the increase in volume with hand length is significant,
it should be noted that this statistical test does not confirm
whether the simple cubic model proposed is the best model.
Combined overlaid three-trial workspaces for ten out of 19
participants are shown in Fig. 6 for both the two- and threefingered conditions, along with individual finger workspaces.
The participants were sorted by workspace volume, and then,
every other participant was plotted, resulting in the ten participants shown. All data have been normalized to the 17.5 cm
median hand length from this study as discussed in Section IIIE. Ellipsoids are shown in red over the black object workspace
points and are defined by three axes from principal component
analysis (PCA), i.e., the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix.
The length of the axes is defined by a ±1.96 σ range for the data,
projected onto each axis, and the center location is the mean of
the data. The ellipsoid is a simplified way to visualize the work
space, while preserving key characteristics of the workspace,
such as position, orientation, and size. This figure demonstrates
the characteristics of participant variability—many participants
have smaller, more spherical shaped workspaces, while the
larger volume workspaces usually show an elongated shape with

a characteristic arc in the proximal-palmar plane. The participants with the two largest workspace volumes appear able to
extend this proximal-palmar plane arc to greater thickness.
Fig. 6 also shows the workspace of the individual fingertips
during manipulation for all participants, as well as the differences between finger usage in the two- and three-finger cases.
The workspace of the index fingertip in the two-finger case
actually seems to be quite similar to the workspace of the middle fingertip in the three-finger case. In the three-finger case, it
seems that the motions of the index and middle fingers generally trace out similar, but offset, trajectories. This is especially
evident by the almost complete overlap of the index and middle
finger point clouds in the proximal-palmar plot.
On average, the two-fingered workspace is 38% larger
than the three-fingered workspace, with a paired t-test giving
p < 0.001. However, it is difficult to see clear differences in
workspace shape between the two- and three-finger cases. One
noticeable difference is that for the lowest volume participants,
the three-fingered workspaces seem noticeably more contracted
than in the two-fingered trials, with fewer outlier points.
The principal axes for each participant’s object workspace
are shown in a combined view in Fig. 7. An overall average
of the axes is taken and plotted as a thicker set of axes in the
same color scheme. Specifically, the summary axis directions are
computed by taking a simple average of the vectors in Euclidean
space [35], after projecting the vectors into a single hemisphere
to avoid any issues with averaging equivalent “negative” and
“positive” versions of the same vector. The directions are first

BULLOCK et al.: WORKSPACE SHAPE AND CHARACTERISTICS FOR HUMAN TWO- AND THREE-FINGERED PRECISION MANIPULATION

Fig. 9. Distribution of distances from trial centroid. These two plots show
the probability of a given trial point being found a certain distance away from
the trial centroid in both the two and three-fingered cases. The distributions are
similar, with the three-fingered distribution dropping off slightly more sharply.

normalized, so that each participant’s data are weighted equally.
The mean location and axis lengths are a simple average of the
mean location and lengths for the individual participants.
Overall, the principal axes shown in Fig. 7 appear similar between the two- and three-fingered conditions. The primary axis
orientation is particularly similar between the two conditions in
the proximal-palmar plane. However, there is more of an overall shift in orientation when viewed in the proximal-radial plane
(left plots), or in the palmar-ulnar plane (right plots). Specifically, in the two-finger trials, the axis aligns closely to the
proximal and palmar axes, while in the three-finger trials, it tilts
more in the direction of the added middle finger.
The distribution of principal axis lengths can be seen in Fig. 8.
These distributions help illustrate what proportion of participants can achieve a given workspace size along the principal
axes found. The first axis shows a bimodal or multimodal distribution with a few extreme outliers (especially in the three-finger
trials. The second axis length appears to be much closer to a normal distribution. The third axis length is, on average, only half
the length of the second axis. Specifically, the first, second, and
third average axis lengths are (2.0, 1.1, 0.5) cm, respectively,
for the two-finger case and (1.8, 1.0, 0.5) cm for the threefinger case. One should note that the lengths (as defined from
the covariance matrix) will always progressively decrease due
to the nature of PCA, but the extent of this decrease can still
be meaningful. In addition to breaking down the results by the
principal axis vectors, the workspace data can also be analyzed
more simply relative to the mean location.
Fig. 9 shows the distribution of the data’s distance from the
centroid of the trial it was taken from. The centroid for a trial is
simply the arithmetic mean position of all the object points for

2203

Fig. 10. Distribution of distance from initial trial starting points to trial centroids. The means are indicated by the vertical lines in each of the two plots.
For the two-fingered case, the mean start distance from the trial centroid is 1.0
± 0.1 cm, while it is 0.8 ± 0.1 cm for the three-fingered case (both normalized
distances for a 17.5 cm hand).

that trial, corresponding intuitively also to the center of mass
of the trial points, considering each trial point to be a point
mass of equal mass. This figure shows data from every trial
for all 19 participants, broken up by the two- and three-finger
manipulation cases, with 547 200 total points sampled at 80 Hz.
The numerically determined cumulative distribution function
(cdf) is plotted as a curve on each plot and shows the ratio of
points within a distance 0 < d < x from the centroid, where x
is the maximum distance being evaluated. For the two-fingered
case, the cdf shows that 68% of points are within 1.05 cm, 95%
of points are within 2.31 cm, and 99% of points are within
3.36 cm. For the three-fingered case, the distribution of points is
slightly closer to the centroid; the cdf shows that 68% of points
are within 0.94 cm, 95% of points are within 2.19 cm, and 99%
of points are within 3.16 cm.
During the study, the participants were instructed to position
the object within their fingertips in a comfortable, neutral resting position at the start of each trial. We hypothesized that this
relaxed start position should be close to the center of the observed position workspace. The distances from the initial object
position of each trial to the centroid for that trial are shown in
Fig. 10. The results indicate the two-fingered and three-fingered
mean distances from the initial trial position to the trial centroid
are 1.0 ± 0.1 and 0.8 ± 0.1 cm, respectively (using a standard
error based 95% confidence interval). By looking at the distribution of distances of points from the centroid, the percentile
for these initial point distances can be calculated. The twoand three-finger percentiles for the start location distance to the
centroid are 57 ± 7% and 51 ± 7%, respectively. This indicates
that for the two-finger case, 57% of the data points are closer to

2204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 11. Average finger positions relative to average object positions. View planes are the same as in Fig. 7. For each participant and set of three trials, centroids
(averages) are calculated for the finger and object workspaces. The finger positions are then plotted by their position relative to the object. These plots show what
angles the fingers are generally used at during the two- and three-fingered manipulation trials.

the centroid than the initial point, whereas for the three-finger
case, it is 51%. The difference between these two percentiles is
insignificant (p = 0.12). Thus, our original hypothesis that the
initial position for each trial should be particularly close to the
trial centroid is contradicted—the start locations are merely at
an average distance from the trial centroid, though still within
1 cm.
Fig. 11 shows the centroid (average) of each fingertip
workspace relative to the object positions and demonstrates that
across all participants, these angles are quite consistent. Specifically, the semivertical angles of cones containing 68% of the
orientations are all within the range of 8–13°, as seen in Table I.
In general, the thumb is used for precision manipulation in a position, which is significantly further in the palmar direction than
the fingers are. The index finger in the two-finger case generally
appears to be in a position roughly centered between where the
index and middle finger positions are in the three-finger case.
The average object to finger vectors can be seen in Table I.
Fig. 12 shows the correlation of the individual finger
workspace volumes to the object workspace in the two- and
three-finger cases. For the two-finger case, R2 values for the
thumb and index finger are 0.75 and 0.94, respectively. The
slopes, with ± standard error, are 0.95 ± 0.06 and 0.98 ± 0.03
for the thumb and index finger, respectively. R2 values for the
three-finger case for the thumb, index, and middle fingers are

0.79, 0.98, and 0.96, respectively. The slopes for the thumb,
index, and middle fingers are 0.97 ± 0.07, 0.91 ± 0.02, and
0.74 ± 0.02, respectively, where the standard error follows the
“±.” Overall, the volume of the thumb and index workspaces
scale very similarly to the workspace of the object, while the
middle finger traces out a larger workspace volume than the
object does. The index finger workspace to object workspace
scaling has the best R2 value, whereas the thumb workspaces do
not fit a linear trend as well, especially in the two-finger trials.
V. DISCUSSION
The results show the precision manipulation workspaces and
fingertip usage of all 19 participants. First, the workspace characteristics will be discussed in terms of size, shape, center location, and inter-participant variability. Then, the workspace differences observed between the two- and three-finger conditions
will be analyzed. Finally, applications will be discussed.
A. Workspace Volume
Overall, the workspace volume achieved is small, much
smaller than the volume the fingertip can fill in free motion.
The distance distributions shown in Fig. 9 indicate that only
about 2–3 cm of motion from the centroid can be expected, and
the majority of the points are within 1 cm. These movement

BULLOCK et al.: WORKSPACE SHAPE AND CHARACTERISTICS FOR HUMAN TWO- AND THREE-FINGERED PRECISION MANIPULATION

2205

TABLE I
SUMMARY DATA AND STATISTICS
Data
1

Object workspace centroid
Object workspace PCA vector 1
Object workspace PCA vector 2
Object workspace PCA vector 3
Object workspace PCA vector 1 68% cone angle2
Object workspace PCA vector 2 68% cone angle2
Object workspace PCA vector 3 68% cone angle2
Mean object to thumb vector3
Mean object to index finger vector3
Mean object to middle finger vector3
Mean object to thumb vector 68% cone angle2
Mean object to index finger vector 68% cone angle2
Mean object to middle finger vector 68% cone angle2

Two-Finger Condition

Three-Finger Condition

Figure

(−1.6 ± 0.4, −7.3 ± 0.4, 7.6 ± 0.3) cm
(−0.2, 1.1, 1.7) cm
(0.8, 0.5, 0.6) cm
(−0.1, −0.4, 0.3) cm
44°
52°
22°
(−1.4, 1.4, 1.2) cm
(1.2, −2.0, −0.7) cm
n/a
13°
10°
n/a

(−1.0 ± 0.4, −7.0 ± 0.4, 8.0 ± 0.3) cm
(−0.8, 1.1, 1.2) cm
(0.7, 0.4, 0.6) cm
(−0.08, −0.34, 0.33) cm
32°
40°
24°
(−1.3, 1.4, 1.2) cm
(0.0, −2.5, −0.8) cm
(1.8, −1.9, −0.2) cm
11°
8°
8°

7
7
7
7
7
7
7
11
11
11
11
11
11

Length units in cm are based on a 17.5 cm length hand. All three element values are given in (ulnar, proximal, palmar) coordinates relative to the base
frame skin sensor one-third of the way from the continuation of the wrist flexion crease to the bump from the fourth metacarpal head, along the fourth
metacarpal (see Fig. 3).
1
95% confidence interval based on standard error of the mean for each individual coordinate.
2
Semi-vertical angle of cone expanded from mean vector to minimum size which includes 68% of orientations. See Section III-F.
3
Mean vector from object workspace centroid to the centroid of each of the finger workspaces, as in Fig. 11.

ranges give an upper bound for the amount of motion that can
be expected before arm/wrist motion or regrasping of an object
will be required to accomplish a given displacement. The principal axis lengths can be used to provide a more nuanced view of
these motion ranges. These small motion ranges are important
because motion purely within the hand could increase precision
by allowing the wrist/arm to be braced or stabilized, for example. Small within-hand movements ought to also reduce overall
energy consumption relative to larger wrist or arm movements.
Thus, an understanding of these motion ranges could be useful for high precision applications, such as surgery with handheld surgical devices, ranging from simple passive tools (e.g.,
scalpels) to complex active robots, whether hand-held or teleoperated [15]. These motion ranges can also provide a baseline
comparison for clinical assessment of a patient’s range of motion, or to evaluate rehabilitation progress based on amount of
recovery of workspace along the different principal axes found.
B. Workspace Shape
In addition to workspace size, the results show the shape
and orientation of the workspace. In particular, most participants show a characteristic thin long arc in the proximal-palmar
plane. This arc is the longest observed axis for the manipulation
motion of the majority of participants. This shape suggests that
if an application demands a long within-hand motion, it may be
advantageous to align that motion with this long arc, generally
in the palmar direction but with a slant away from the palm.
The thinness of the arc also indicates that motions toward the
palm, roughly along the palmar axis, are either difficult or at
least very unintuitive for most participants. Tools, such as handheld medical devices, can be designed to take advantage of the
longer arcs of motion or more flexible areas of the workspace. It
is possible that this characteristic motion arc could be used for
clinical assessment as well. Having a patient perform a simple
precision manipulation motion along this arc and measuring the
range of motion achieved could be predictive of overall manip-

ulation ability, but more work would be needed to assess the
exact effect of this motion range on overall performance, such
as performance of other related daily tasks.
Understanding the centroid location for the workspace may
be quite useful. For example, hand-held devices can be designed
to be comfortably held at a position close to the center of the
precision manipulation workspace, to give the user greater flexibility of motion from their starting position. If manipulation
tasks are used to evaluate hand function, tasks which allow a
patient to start from or rest their fingers close to this region
may be more comfortable and also allow freer motions. While
we anticipated the relaxed starting locations of the participants
might correspond well to the center of the Cartesian workspace,
in practice, we found the starting locations to be no closer than
a random point from the trials. This suggests that if it is important to precisely determine the center of the Cartesian precision
manipulation workspace, an active exploration method may be
necessary, and simply picking a relaxed starting location in the
fingertips will give about 1 cm of error on average. However,
further experiments may be necessary to further validate these
results, since the initial position of the participants was simply a
comfortable self-selected position and not rigorously controlled
to a greater degree.
C. Interparticipant Variability
While certain aspects of the overall workspace shape are
consistent across many participants, there is still extensive variability. The participants could be broken up into three ranges
based on the workspace volumes achieved. The lowest volume
group of about two to three participants appears to simply make
small movements around a central point, resulting in a fairly
spherical workspace. Most participants lie in a middle range,
where the arc in the proximal-palmar plane becomes apparent
and other ranges of motion also increase. Finally, there are two
participants with the highest volumes who were able to produce
a thicker arc, apparently adding a motion toward the palm that

2206

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

them to act as a unit together rather than further constraining
the motion. However, the kinematics of the manipulation do
shift, as evidenced in the tilt of the first principal axis toward
the ulnar direction when adding the middle finger, as well as the
individual fingertip use.
For the usage of the fingertips, it is noteworthy that the thumb
and index finger workspaces do not simply align along the distalproximal axis, but are tilted, moving distally, toward the ulnar direction. The thumb is also significantly further along the palmar
axis relative to the other fingers in both the two- and three-finger
cases.
The results showing the natural alignment of the thumb and
fingers during precision manipulation can be used in various
ways. For example, devices intended for precision manipulation,
such as small tools, can be designed so that their outer shape
matches up with the finger shapes comfortably when the fingers
are in the positions observed. The motion ranges can be used
to avoid having parts of a device unintentionally constrain hand
motion. For rehabilitation, the typical positions of the thumb
and fingers relative to the object can help to show which parts
of the thumb and finger workspace might be most important
to maintain or restore in order to enable effective precision
manipulation.
E. Applications

Fig. 12. Correlation between finger workspace volume and object workspace
volume. The thumb and index finger volumes match closely to the object volume,
while in the three-finger case, the middle finger traces out a larger volume than
the object does.

most participants found difficult or at least highly unintuitive.
We believe that the observed variability is likely a mix of motivation, what could be called motor creativity, as well as physical
differences such as range of motion or finger pad characteristics.
For example, a participant with a particularly sticky or compliant finger pad could enable secure manipulation through a wider
range of motion.
D. Two- and Three-Finger Conditions and Finger Usage
In addition to intersubject variability, certain shifts are observed when the number of fingers used during the manipulation is changed. Overall, the two-fingered workspace is larger
(p < 0.001), but this trend does not hold for every participant or
trial. We expected a volume decrease due to the extra kinematic
constraints from the additional finger, but the decrease may be
less dramatic than expected due to the similar kinematics and
compliance of the index and middle fingers, which can allow

As discussed above, this understanding of within-hand manipulation kinematics can be applied in various domains. For
example, awareness of the within-hand manipulation ranges can
help to effectively train precision tasks such as small scalpel cuts
or soldering, by taking advantage of the largest motion ranges.
Devices designed to take advantage of the within-hand motion
ranges could enable better precision and potentially reduce fatigue, since wrist and arm movements would be reduced. When
designing prosthetic or robotic hands, the angles of finger usage and ranges of motion common in precision manipulation
could be imitated. A more precise understanding of precision
manipulation workspace can also be used to help focus methods for rehabilitation or hand assessment. For example, since
the workspace is quite small, using the longest motion axes
for test motions could help to measure precision manipulation
capability more accurately. These long motions may also be
useful exercises during rehabilitation. In addition, the finger–
object angles help show which parts of the finger workspace are
most essential to maintain for successful precision manipulation, and where the fingers of the unimpaired hand are typically
positioned.
VI. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The present work can be extended in a number of ways. The
current work analyzes the positional manipulation workspace
and finger workspaces for only a single object. While efforts
were made to select a comfortable object size which should allow a wide range of motions, different object sizes and shapes
will impact the results. Objects that require different finger
placement may have a particularly large effect, since the effective alignment of the kinematic constraints during manipulation

BULLOCK et al.: WORKSPACE SHAPE AND CHARACTERISTICS FOR HUMAN TWO- AND THREE-FINGERED PRECISION MANIPULATION

would be altered. The present study also illustrates that training
and motor creativity may have a significant effect on the resulting workspace. This suggests that different training methods
could be tested to see if they can enhance the size of a participant’s available manipulation workspace. Future work could
also consider more complex manipulation tasks involving sliding at contact surfaces and adding/removing fingers during the
task.
Despite the opportunities for further work, we believe the
present work helps answer many basic questions about the precision manipulation workspace of the human hand, and that this
basic information will be useful in a variety of domains, including biomechanics, rehabilitation, surgery, ergonomics, and
device design.
REFERENCES
[1] M. R. Cutkosky, “On grasp choice, grasp models, and the design of
hands for manufacturing tasks,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 269–279, Jun. 1989.
[2] G. Schlesinger, “Der mechanische Aufbau der kunstlichen Glieder,” in
Ersatzglieder und Arbeitshilfen für Kriegsbeschädigte und Unfallverletzte.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1919, pp. 321–661.
[3] J. R. Napier, “The prehensile movements of the human hand,” J. Bone
Joint Surg., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 902–913, 1956.
[4] T. Feix et al., “A comprehensive grasp taxonomy,” in Proc. Robot., Sci.
Syst.: Workshop Understanding Human Hand Advancing Robot. Manipulation, 2009.
[5] V. M. Zatsiorsky and M. L. Latash, “Multifinger prehension: An
overview,” J. Mot. Behav., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 446–76, Sep. 2008.
[6] I. M. Bullock et al., “A hand-centric classification of human and
robot dexterous manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 129–144, Apr.–Jun. 2013.
[7] I. Carpinella et al., “Experimental protocol for the kinematic analysis
of the hand: definition and repeatability,” Gait Posture, vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 445–54, Jun. 2006.
[8] S. T. Leitkam et al., “Determining functional finger capabilities of
healthy adults: Comparing experimental data to a biomechanical model,”
J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 136, no. 2, p. 021022, Feb. 2014.
[9] S. T. Leitkam and T. R. Bush, “Comparison between healthy and arthritic
hand function using ranges of motion and a weighted fingertip space
model,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 137, p. 041003, 2015.
[10] I. Carpinella et al., “Multi-finger coordination in healthy subjects and
stroke patients: a mathematical modelling approach,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 19, Jan. 2011.
[11] E. G. Cruz et al., “Kinetic and kinematic workspaces of the index finger
following stroke,” Brain, vol. 128, no. Pt 5, pp. 1112–21, May 2005.
[12] G. Guthart and J. Salisbury, Jr., “The Intuitive telesurgery system:
Overview and application,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2000,
pp. 618–621.
[13] T. H. Massie and J. K. Salisbury, “The PHANTOM haptic interface: A
device for probing virtual objects,” in Proc. ASME Symp. Haptic Interfaces
Virtual Environ. Teleoperator Syst., 1994, pp. 1–6.
[14] V. Datta et al., “The use of electromagnetic motion tracking analysis to
objectively measure open surgical skill in the laboratory-based model,” J.
Am. Coll. Surg., vol. 193, no. 5, pp. 479–85, Nov. 2001.
[15] C. J. Payne and G.-Z. Yang, “Hand-held medical robots,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1594–605, Aug. 2014.

2207

[16] M. A. Fehlberg et al., “Active handrest: A large workspace tool for
precision manipulation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 289–301,
Mar. 2012.
[17] R. Zheng and J. Li, “Kinematics and workspace analysis of an exoskeleton
for thumb and index finger rehabilitation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Biomimetics, 2010, pp. 80–84.
[18] D. B. Slocum and D. R. Pratt, “Disability evaluation of the hand,” J. Bone
Joint Surg., vol. 28, pp. 491–495, 1946.
[19] T. Feix et al., “A metric for comparing the anthropomorphic motion capability of artificial hands,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 974–980, Aug. 2012.
[20] G. A. Kragten and J. L. Herder, “A platform for grasp performance assessment in compliant or underactuated hands,” J. Mech. Des., vol. 132,
no. 2, p. 024502, 2010.
[21] L. Birglen and C. Gosselin, “Optimal design of 2-phalanx underactuated
finger,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Manip. Grasping, 2004, pp. 110–116.
[22] I. M. Bullock et al., “Dexterous workspace of human two- and threefingered precision manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE Haptics Symp., 2014,
pp. 41–47.
[23] L.-C. Kuo et al., “Functional workspace for precision manipulation between thumb and fingers in normal hands,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol.
19, no. 5, pp. 829–839, Oct. 2009.
[24] C. Chang and Y. Sun, “Learning-based estimation of functional workspace
in cooperative fingers motion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Bioinformatics Biomed.
Technol., 2012, vol. 29, pp. 141–145.
[25] Y. Youm and W. K. Chung, “Human kinematic factor for haptic manipulation: the wrist to thumb,” in Proc. 10th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual
Environ. Teleoperator Syst., 2002, pp. 319–326.
[26] R. Yokogawa and K. Hara, “Manipulabilities of the index finger and thumb
in three tip-pinch postures,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 212–219,
2004.
[27] J. Borras and A. M. Dollar, “A parallel robots framework to study precision
grasping and dexterous manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., 2013, pp. 3086–3092.
[28] L. U. Odhner and A. M. Dollar, “Dexterous manipulation with underactuated elastic hands,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2011,
pp. 5254–5260.
[29] R. R. Ma and A. M. Dollar, “Linkage-based analysis and optimization of
an underactuated planar manipulator for in-hand manipulation,” J. Mech.
Robot., vol. 6, pp. 011002-1–011002-9, 2013.
[30] L. Cui and J. S. Dai, “Posture, workspace, and manipulability of the metamorphic multifingered hand with an articulated palm,” J. Mech. Robot.,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1–7, 2011.
[31] K. Rácz et al., “An involuntary stereotypical grasp tendency pervades
voluntary dynamic multifinger manipulation,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 108,
pp. 2896–2911, Sep. 2012.
[32] R. Gilster et al., “Contact points during multidigit grasping of geometric
objects,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 217, no. 1, pp. 137–51, Mar. 2012.
[33] Military Handbook: Anthropometry of US Military Personnel. (metric)
DODHDBK 743A, Feb. 1991.
[34] I. M. Bullock et al., “Analyzing human fingertip usage in dexterous
precision manipulation: Implications for robotic finger design,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2014, pp. 1622–1628.
[35] N. I. Fisher et al., Statistical Analysis of Spherical Data, 1st ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

