2244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Effects of Visual Feedback Distortion on Gait
Adaptation: Comparison of Implicit Visual
Distortion Versus Conscious Modulation
on Retention of Motor Learning
Seung-Jae Kim∗ , Mitchell Ogilvie, Nathan Shimabukuro, Trevor Stewart, and Joon-Ho Shin

Abstract—Goal: Visual feedback can be used during gait rehabilitation to improve the efficacy of training. We presented a
paradigm called visual feedback distortion; the visual representation of step length was manipulated during treadmill walking.
Our prior work demonstrated that an implicit distortion of visual
feedback of step length entails an unintentional adaptive process
in the subjects’ spatial gait pattern. Here, we investigated whether
the implicit visual feedback distortion, versus conscious correction,
promotes efficient locomotor adaptation that relates to greater retention of a task. Methods: Thirteen healthy subjects were studied
under two conditions: (1) we implicitly distorted the visual representation of their gait symmetry over 14 min, and (2) with help of
visual feedback, subjects were told to walk on the treadmill with
the intent of attaining the gait asymmetry observed during the first
implicit trial. After adaptation, the visual feedback was removed
while subjects continued walking normally. Over this 6-min period,
retention of preserved asymmetric pattern was assessed. Results:
We found that there was a greater retention rate during the implicit
distortion trial than that of the visually guided conscious modulation trial. Conclusion: This study highlights the important role of
implicit learning in the context of gait rehabilitation by demonstrating that training with implicit visual feedback distortion may
produce longer lasting effects. Significance: This suggests that using visual feedback distortion could improve the effectiveness of
treadmill rehabilitation processes by influencing the retention of
motor skills.
Index Terms—Gait adaptation, gait rehabilitation, gait retention
rate, step length symmetry, visual feedback distortion.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATIENTS that suffer from neurological disorders, such as
a stroke, tend to have gait abnormalities and participate in
rehabilitation with the hope to regain a normal gait pattern. The
desire is that their rehabilitation process would create permanent results rather than momentary progress [1]. Rehabilitative

P

Manuscript received September 17, 2014; revised January 24, 2015 and March
28, 2015; accepted April 3, 2015. Date of publication April 8, 2015; date of
current version August 18, 2015. This work was supported by the Gordon and
Jill Bourns College of Engineering at California Baptist University. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ S.-J. Kim is with the Gordon and Jill Bourns College of Engineering,
California Baptist University, Riverside, CA 92504, USA (e-mail: sjkim@
calbaptist.edu).
M. Ogilvie and N. Shimabukuro are with the Bioengineering Department,
California Baptist University.
T. Stewart is with McCrometer.
J.-H. Shin is with the Department of Stroke Rehabilitation, National Rehabilitation Center.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2420851

Fig. 1. Visual feedback display. The range of the right and left step length
was mapped to the visual feedback bars, shown in the bottom row. For example,
during the swing phase of the leg, the corresponding bar increases in real-time
proportional to the step length and stops when heel strike occurs for that leg.
The range of step length mapped to the visual bar was then gradually distorted.

procedures that only induce transient adaptive processes may
produce little to no results over long periods of time. Evidence
supports that adaptation may consist of two processes; one process is faster but transiently stored and the other is slower and
more persistently stored [2], [3]. Therefore, gait rehabilitation
needs to emphasize techniques that drive the more efficient adaptive and consolidated process for locomotion, such as the more
persistently stored process, rather than simply evoke a reactive
type of adjustment during training [4], [5].
More interactive therapeutic training programs are known to
promote an efficient adaptive process for motor learning, leading to functional improvement [6]–[8]. The method of using
visual feedback could be one of these training methods for gait
rehabilitation. As a prelude to developing an interactive gait rehabilitation program using visual feedback, we have previously
presented a rehabilitative paradigm called visual feedback distortion in which we manipulate the visual representation of step
length [9]. In our previous studies, the visual feedback of each
subject’s step length symmetry was shown to the respective subjects while they walked on a treadmill (see Fig. 1). During this
time, we visually distorted the step lengths implicitly, where the
subjects walked without their knowledge about the visual distortion. Even with a distraction task added or explicit knowledge of
the manipulation, subjects spontaneously modulated their gait
symmetric pattern away from actual symmetry in response to
the distortion of visual feedback [9], [10]. These results indicate

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KIM et al.: EFFECTS OF VISUAL FEEDBACK DISTORTION ON GAIT ADAPTATION: COMPARISON

that their gait pattern implicitly changed in order to adapt to the
visual feedback they were given via the display. Therefore, our
prior studies suggest that the effects of visual feedback distortion
on changes in step symmetry involve an implicit or unconscious
adaptive process. In addition, prior work on visuomotor and
gait adaptation suggested that the implicit processes play an important role in forming motor adaptation [11], [12]. However,
we still needed to answer the question of whether or not the
implicit adaptation, driven by the visual feedback distortion,
would promote efficient motor learning. Thus, we performed a
test to answer the following question: how would the implicitly
given visual feedback distortion strategy, versus the conscious
strategy, affects the retention rate of gait asymmetric pattern?
We hope to develop better rehabilitation programs using a visual
feedback distortion paradigm, which entail lasting and significant changes in motor adaptation within subjects who undergo
the programs. Since the presence of aftereffects (retention of
new motor patterns followed by training) can be a basis of motor learning processes [6], in this study, we investigated the
advantage of using an implicit visual distortion strategy over an
explicit conscious strategy in terms of retention rate of the new
gait pattern.
Our hypothesis was that the implicit visual distortion technique used in our experiment would alter the rate of retention of
the new gait pattern, which might lead to longer lasting effects
of the training than using conscious effort. In terms of clinical
applications, a positive outcome of this study would suggest that
implicitly using visual feedback may be useful in enhancing the
gait rehabilitative process if conducted for a longer period of
time.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subject
Thirteen healthy subjects (five men and eight women; 19–
24 years of age) participated in this study. All subjects were
informed of the physical stress that they would experience and
were familiar with walking on a treadmill. They gave their written consent prior to participating, and the experimental protocols
were approved by the California University Institutional Review
Board.
B. General Experiment Setup
All subjects were given a 5–10 min habituation period to
adjust to walking on the treadmill where they determined their
own comfortable walking speed (range 1.8 ∼ 2.2 miles/h), which
was used throughout the remainder of this study. During the trials, the subjects looked at a 24-in LCD computer monitor that
was placed in front of the treadmill. The computer monitor displayed two vertical bar graphs corresponding to the subjects’
step length (see Fig. 1). Step length was defined as the distance
between feet and was mapped to the visual feedback bars. During the swing phase of a leg, step length increases. Likewise,
the bar increased in height when the corresponding leg is in the
swing phase. When the heel of the leg struck the treadmill floor,
the bar remained at its maximum for the whole stance phase

2245

until the next swing phase begun. Thus, at every heel strike,
whether it is from the left or the right leg, it was possible to
observe the maximum stride length of both the right and the left
steps side by side. We explained to the subjects the meaning of
the bar graphs and they clearly understood what was they were
presented during the habituation period.
During the implicit visual feedback distortion trial, we distorted the length of the right bar representing the right step length
in 1% increments from 100%∼114%. For example, at 100%,
no distortion was applied. 104% distortion changed the scaling
factor between the actual right step length and the displayed bar
height from 100% to 104%. In other words, subjects visually
perceived that their right step length was 4% longer than the actual length during visual distortion. Each distortion level lasted
for 60 s for the first 14 min of the trial.
The actual step length was tracked and recorded using an optometric motion capture system (OPTOTRACK 3D Investigator,
Northern Digital Inc., Canada). Two infrared markers were attached to the subjects’ shoes on the side of each heel. These
markers are seen by the motion capture system in order for its
positions to be located. The data retrieved were then sent to the
PC in real time using a program developed with LABVIEW to
graphically represent the subjects’ step length measurements.
C. Procedure
In order to see if there was an advantage of using implicit
visual distortion strategy instead of explicit conscious strategy
in terms of retention rate of the new gait pattern, two different conditions were tested; In the first condition, subjects were
told to walk on the treadmill while receiving visual feedback
without being given any knowledge of the visual distortion or
being told to try to attain gait symmetry based on the feedback
they received. Subjects spontaneously modified their symmetric
pattern when exposed to visual feedback distortion. During the
second condition, they were told to consciously attempt to attain
the modified symmetric pattern while they were presented with
the help of visual-guided feedback. In the final minutes of each
condition, the visual feedback was taken away and subjects
were asked to continue to walk comfortably for the remainder of the time. Over this time period, retention of aftereffects
was assessed in all subjects during the implicit and conscious
conditions.
For all the conditions, the experimental trial lasted 20 min
per session. The 20-min trial consisted of 14 min of walking
with visual feedback (the adaptation period) and a period of
6 min of walking with no visual feedback at all (the postadaptation period). While walking on the treadmill, subjects continued
to look at the visual feedback display over the first 14 min of
walking and continued to walk comfortably over the remaining 6 min period of no visual feedback. During the period of
no visual feedback, visual bars disappeared from the computer
screen and subjects were instructed to continue walking for the
remainder of the experimental period.
Running through the two conditions in the test, each subject
participated in three sessions that were each one-week apart.
All three sessions consisted of a 5-min habituation period, a

2246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

10-min rest period, and the 20-min experimental trial. The first
two sessions were conducted under the same first condition (the
implicit visual feedback condition). During the first 14 min of
this trial, the distortion level was increased by increments of 1%
reaching a total of 114% distortion, and each visual distortion
period lasted for 60 s. Thus, the experimental trial started with
100% (no-distortion period) followed by 102, 103, 104, 105,
106 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, and 114%. Then, visual
feedback disappeared from the screen over the remaining period
of the trial. We called this the implicit visual feedback condition
as the subjects were given a distorted image at a constant rate
without knowing that the representation of their step lengths
was being manipulated.
The last (third) session was conducted using the second condition. It was called the conscious modulation condition because
the subjects consciously, or voluntarily, adjusted their gait pattern to be asymmetric during the adaptation period of the trial.
In this condition, the subjects were told to generate the same
asymmetric gait patterns as they had unknowingly produced
in the previous implicit sessions. Thus, instead of increasing
the distortion rate by 1% every minute, we changed the distortion levels that were set as the average step symmetry ratio
for the corresponding time frame in the previous implicit trials (either the first or second sessions). The subjects were then
asked to match the height of the bars over the entire adaptation
period. Matching the bars meant that they were following the
gait asymmetric patterns in the same amount as the previous
sessions. Thus, in the conscious modulation condition, the subjects were visually guided by information that was dependent
upon their own personal results from a previous trial. Following
the adaptation period, the last 6 min of treadmill walking came
with no visual feedback. During this postadaptation period, we
recorded the gait symmetry retention rate of the subjects for all
the sessions and the rate of retention was assessed for the implicit visual feedback and the conscious modulation conditions.
D. Data Analysis
The primary measurement used in this study was step length
symmetry. The ratio (%) between the left step length and the
right step length was calculated for each stride to create the step
symmetry ratio. Thus, a step symmetry ratio greater than 100%
means that the right step is shorter than the left step and vice
versa for values smaller than 100%. The mean step symmetry
ratios over different distortion levels (with 60-s period at each
level) were calculated per subject, averaged across all of the
subjects, and used to test the changes in step asymmetry induced
by the implicit visual distortion for the analysis of Fig. 2. During
the period when the visual feedback was taken away, the mean
step symmetry ratios of multiple strides were calculated every
30 s to compare trends over different time periods.
We have measured a dependent variable (the mean gait step
symmetry) over different time periods when subjects have undertaken two conditions (two within-subjects factors). Thus,
two-way repeated measures ANOVA tests were employed to
examine whether the gait symmetry at different time periods
would depend on the condition (the implicit visual distortion and

Fig. 2. (a) Example of adaptation and aftereffects for step length symmetry
for two different conditions obtained from a single subject. The horizontal axis
shows time; the vertical axis shows step length ratio between the actual left
and right step lengths (%, the measured left step length/the measured right
step length). The 20-min period consisted of 14 min of walking with visual
feedback followed by 6 min of walking with no visual feedback at all. The gray
dots represent the ratios during the implicit visual distortion condition, and the
small squares represent those during the conscious modulation condition. The
larger circles and squares represent the mean step symmetry values, averaged
over subsequent 60 s (during the initial 14-min period) and 30 s (during the
following 6-min postadaptation period) intervals. (b) Changes in step length
symmetry (ratio) of both conditions over time ±one standard deviation (SD),
averaged across all of the subjects. The solid circles indicate distortion changes
applied during the implicit visual distortion condition.

conscious modulation conditions) in adaptation and postadaptation periods. When interactions between time bins and conditions were found to be significant, repeated measures ANOVA
tests were used to compare the means of symmetry. The mean
differences were calculated by averaging the values across all
of the subjects for the analysis of Figs. 3 and 4.
III. RESULTS
We compared and contrasted the changes of step length symmetry during the adaptation and postadaptation (aftereffects)
periods for the conscious modulation condition and the implicit
visual distortion condition for all subjects. The top panel of
Fig. 2 shows the changes of step length symmetry (expressed
as a ratio) as a function of time for a single subject obtained for
each of the two different conditions. A stride consists of right
and left step length, so each point represents the step symmetry
ratio of each stride. The bottom panel shows the average step
symmetry ratio of all of the subjects at the given time interval
for each of the two conditions. As shown in Fig. 2(b), we observed an upward trend in step symmetry while the distorted

KIM et al.: EFFECTS OF VISUAL FEEDBACK DISTORTION ON GAIT ADAPTATION: COMPARISON

2247

Fig. 3. Mean difference of step length symmetry ±SD, averaged across all of the subjects between the implicit visual distortion and the conscious modulation
conditions. The bar graph shows the percent difference between both conditions for the time intervals that were analyzed (every 60 s during the adaptation period
and every 30 s during the postadaptation period). The mean values of conscious modulation condition were subtracted from those of implicit visual distortion
condition. This plot shows that the visual feedback distortion had a greater effect on the retention of adaptation than conscious correction of stepping.

Fig. 4. Mean difference of step length symmetry ±SD, averaged across all of the subjects between the same implicit visual distortions that were each one-week
apart. The bar graph shows the percent difference between both conditions for the time intervals that were analyzed (every 60 s during the adaptation period and
every 30 s during the postadaptation period).

visual feedback was displayed during the implicit visual distortion condition. The repeated-measures ANOVA test showed
significant effects of implicit visual distortion on the step length
symmetry during the adaptation period, F(4.135, 49.617) =
38.156, p < 0.001. Furthermore, there was an immediate downward trend in the data once the visual feedback was taken away
(during the postadaptation period). This occurs because subjects
gradually reverted closer to their initial or normal walking pattern when visual feedback was not present. Fig. 2(b) shows the
effects of the two conditions (the implicit visual distortion trial
and the visually guided conscious modulation trial) on retention
of aftereffects.
Fig. 3 shows the mean difference of step length symmetry between each of the two conditions for different time periods that
was analyzed throughout the trial. The bars represent the percent

difference between both conditions. In the postadaptation period, there were no statistically significant interactions between
conditions and time periods on the gait symmetry, F(11,132) =
0.784, p = 0.655, and the ANOVA test showed significant effects
of different conditions on the step length symmetry during periods of post-adaptation, F(1, 12) = 38.659, p < 0.001. One-way
ANOVA test also showed that the mean difference of the step
length symmetry was not significantly different across different
periods of time during the postadaptation period, F(11,144) =
0.505, p = 0.898, indicating that the difference in the size of
retained aftereffects between the two conditions remained until
the end of trial.
Fig. 4 shows the mean difference of step symmetry across
seven subjects between the two identical implicit visual distortion conditions that took place one-week apart. The bars

2248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

represent the percent difference between both trials for every
interval (every 60 s for the first 14 min and every 30 s for
the last 6 min of trial). The changes of step length symmetry
indicate some degree of fluctuation over time. There was no statistically significant difference in step length symmetry between
the two implicit trials over the respective entire time period, F(1,
6) = 0.135, p = 0.726. However, since there were statistically
significant interactions between trial and time period on step
symmetry, F(25, 150) = 14.596, p < 0.001, differences in step
symmetry between the two implicit trials at each time period
were tested to see the simple main effects of the trial. Pairwise
t-test showed no significant difference except for two periods
that were marked by asterisks in Figure.
IV. DISCUSSIONS
A. Effects of Distorting Visual Feedback on Step
Length Symmetry
As a prelude to developing more efficient gait rehabilitation
training methods for persons with neurological disorders, such
as a stroke, we have developed and tested a novel way of using visual feedback. The method used in this study employs
very plain bar graphs representing the right and left step lengths
within the subjects’ vision in addition to walking on a treadmill. During the trials, the subjects were told only to keep their
gaze on the screen with no specific instructions while walking
on a treadmill comfortably. Interestingly, every subject modulated their own step length as the visually displayed bars were
distorted; the asymmetry of their step length was modified in
order to adapt to the implicitly changing visual feedback (see
Fig. 2). Our previous studies have shown that the visual feedback distortion still affected gait symmetry even in the presence
of cognitive load through a distraction task or in the explicit condition where subjects were aware of the imposed distortion of
visual feedback while attempting to maintain their natural gait
symmetric pattern [9], [10]. These findings, taken all together,
suggest that the effect of visual feedback distortion on changes
in step symmetry should involve an implicit (unconscious or unintentional) motor adaptation. It should also be noted that even
though the visual feedback display used in our study did not
alter visual space or evoke illusion of motion, such simple perturbation of visual information about subjects’ movement can
cause motor adaptation that is implicitly learned.
B. Effects of Visual Feedback on Motor Adaptation
Understanding the adaptation processes for locomotion is essential for effective rehabilitation because aftereffects driven
by adaptation can lead to rehabilitation effects [13]. Adaptive
change is an error-driven learning process that adjusts the sensorimotor mappings between limb state and muscle forces [14],
[15]. The gait symmetry changes induced by the visual feedback
distortion are better classified as motor adaptation, not reactive
adjustment that rapidly occurs using peripheral feedback during training and shows no aftereffects following treatment [3].
Motor adaptation is extremely important for rehabilitation because therapeutic interventions that drive such adaptation can

promote appropriate formation of motor patterns. Moreover, repeated training may result in motor learning, characterized as
generalization and permanent changes of motor performance
[6]. As shown in Fig. 2, during implicit visual distortion walking, the results show an upward trend in step symmetry over
time when distorted visual feedback was displayed. Even after
the visual feedback was removed, the influence of the adjusted
symmetric pattern still remained. This similar kind of adaptation, even long-term change of gait, was also evidenced by
split-belt treadmill training [16], [17]. The split belt treadmill
training is not, however, easily applicable because of the price of
equipment or the definite feeling of the discrepancy between the
limbs. Therefore, our visual distortion strategy could be another
option to induce motor adaptation. A previous study suggested
specific unifying principles across perceptual and motor learning [18], thus this type of visual feedback might lead to motor
learning naturally.
C. Comparison of Implicit Visual Distortion versus Conscious
Modulation on Step Length Symmetry
During gait rehabilitation, explicit strategies such as conscious control of movement are commonly used. Encouraging
conscious correction processes during gait therapy may be beneficial in forming a new walking pattern. Since walking is, however, normally an automatic process, it might be possible that
gait adaptation is driven using more implicit and automatic processes than conscious control of movement [11], [19]. For this
reason, conscious effort could act on gait adaptation differently.
In order to understand this, we compared the results from the
implicit visual feedback condition to those from conscious modulation condition by assessing the rate of aftereffects from both
conditions. During the conscious modulation condition, subjects
were told to walk on the treadmill with the intent of attaining
the same amount of gait asymmetry observed during the implicit
visual trial. In order to aid them in accomplishing this task, the
visual feedback displayed the bars representing step length with
the distortion levels, which were set to be the same asymmetric values observed from the implicit visual condition they ran
through previously. Subjects were then instructed to match the
height of the two bar graphs on the display. This could be accomplished by consciously producing the targeted asymmetric
gait patterns over the first 14 min period. In this way, we tried to
have each subject generate the same amount of gait symmetries
between the two conditions during adaptation period. We called
this trial “the visually guided conscious modulation condition”;
the subjects consciously produced the gait asymmetric patterns
with help of visual feedback. Like the implicit visual condition,
the visual feedback was taken away during the final 6 min. Over
this time period, we also measured the retention in asymmetric
adaptation of each subject.
As shown in Fig. 2(B), the conscious modulation trials mimics the asymmetries taken of the implicit visual feedback trial
relatively well over the first 14 min of trial. Interestingly, however, there is a much greater gap between the two trials during
period of postadaptation. The mean difference of the rate of
retention of the asymmetric pattern between the two conditions

KIM et al.: EFFECTS OF VISUAL FEEDBACK DISTORTION ON GAIT ADAPTATION: COMPARISON

across all the subjects is shown in Fig. 3. There were significant differences found in retention of aftereffects between the
two conditions during postadaptation periods. The results of this
study showed that subjects walking with the implicitly distorted
visual feedback retained their asymmetrical walking pattern for
longer than the visually guided conscious trials, possibly suggesting that the implicit strategy through the visual feedback
distortion retains aftereffects longer than explicit strategies.
There were, however, some variations in the induced gait
asymmetries between the two conditions during the first 14min adaptation period (see Fig. 3). This might be due to the
fact that the subjects were not able to perfectly match the bars
of the visual feedback during the conscious trial even though
they intended to attain the same amount of gait asymmetry observed from the implicit trial. The comparison of the retention
rate between two conditions might be biased due to this, but it
is unlikely that such small variations give rise to such significant difference of retention rate after the removal of the visual
feedback between the two conditions. In this study, we did not
attempt to explore the changes in the retention rate with each
step individuals or smaller time intervals during the relatively
short postdeadaptation period. Instead, we focused on showing
differences in the retention rate between the two conditions.
Further study needs to examine the retention rate over a more
extended postadaptation period to understand the time course of
aftereffects more meaningfully.
D. Effects of Interference Between Subsequent Trials
on Adaptation
This study highlights the important role of implicit learning,
which may have a greater effect on storing learned motor patterns than conscious efforts (or explicit learning) at least on our
visual feedback trials. The results demonstrate that the retention
rate of gait asymmetry in the implicit condition was greater than
that in the conscious condition. In our experiment, however, the
conscious condition was always conducted a week after the implicit condition. If memory of an adapted pattern from the first
trial would persist long term, at least more than a week, the
second trial could be affected by the first trial resulting in biased
results of retention difference between two trials. In order to
see whether memory of adaptation induced by a single implicit
trial would interfere with another trial that comes a week later,
we repeated the implicit trial a week apart and examined the
difference in adapted and postadaptation patterns between these
two identical conditions. As shown in Fig. 4, it showed small
variations over time, but no significant statistical difference.
This may indicate that the adapted pattern from a single implicit
session should not interfere with the following trial, suggesting
that the data from the conscious trail might be unaffected by the
preceded implicit trial in our experiment.
E. Utilizing Visual Feedback Distortion
as a Rehabilitation Intervention
An issue that commonly occurs during gait rehabilitation is
that patients do not consistently retain the results from the training that they undergo [20], [21]. Employing visual feedback

2249

during gait rehabilitation could potentially enhance the outcome
of gait training as subjects can more actively engage [22], [23].
In addition, as we demonstrated in this study, implicit (or automatic) adaptation can be driven by a novel way of using visual
feedback. In the implicit adaptive process, subjects do not have
to attempt to consciously make corrections in movement, but
the adaptation proceeds regardless of this [24]. Importantly,
such automatic adaptive processes seem to improve retention as
seen by the greater retention rate. Thus, it is possible that motor
learning in such an implicit manner results in more permanent
changes than those driven in an explicit manner [1], [11], [25].
Most of therapeutic interventions in gait rehabilitation focus on
subjects’ voluntary correction of movement. Subjects are commonly instructed to consciously correct or change their walking
pattern after an injury. However, training in such an explicit
manner may involve an adaptation process that is faster but
transiently stored [2]. The integration of visual feedback distortion that can drive implicit learning into gait rehabilitation could
potentially enhance the outcome of gait therapy with longer aftereffects. Although the experimental protocol used in our study
was designed to study short-term effects and our finding does
not necessarily indicate longer retention, longer treatment with
the visual feedback distortion may prove longer effectiveness
[26]. Thus, our future goal is to test this rehabilitation method
in a clinical setting to see if it can be useful in enhancing the
gait retention rate if conducted for a longer period of time.
V. CONCLUSION
This study investigated the adaptation in step length symmetry between implicit visual feedback distortion and visually
guided conscious modulation of gait symmetry. Even though
the visual information used in this study was simple bar graphics, not altering visual space nor evoking illusions, our results
showed that subjects spontaneously modulated their gait pattern away from symmetry according to the distortion of visual
feedback, indicating that its effects involve unconscious or implicit motor learning. The difference between both conditions
was minimal during the adaptation period but was more drastic
during the retention period. The retention rate of the subjects
during the implicit visual feedback distortion condition was
significantly greater than that of the visually guided conscious
modulation condition. This may suggest that subjects trained
with implicit visual feedback distortion can retain aftereffects
longer than with conscious modulation of gait symmetry. This
study highlights the important role of implicit learning in the
context of gait rehabilitation by demonstrating that training with
visual feedback distortion may produce longer lasting effects,
at least on short-term basis, by entailing an implicit (automatic)
adaptive process. The visual feedback distortion paradigm could
be a possible strategy for training an automatic behavior such
as walking as it increases the unconscious contributions to the
process. We do not know, however, how the manipulation of visual distortion will work out with real-world patients or during
long-term training. Future work will be aimed at understanding
long-term functional effects of the visual feedback distortion
paradigm.

2250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

REFERENCES
[1] L. A. Malone and A. J. Bastian, “Thinking about walking: Effects of
conscious correction versus distraction on locomotor adaptation,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 1954–62, Apr. 2010.
[2] M. A. Smith, “Interacting adaptive processes with different timescales
underlie short-term motor learning,” PLoS Biol., vol. 4, no. 6, e179, pp.
1035–1043 Jun. 2006.
[3] S. M. Morton and A. J. Bastian, “Cerebellar contributions to locomotor
adaptations during splitbelt treadmill walking,” J. Neurosci., vol. 26, no.
36, pp. 9107–9116, Sep. 2006.
[4] T. Kitago and J. W. Krakauer, “Motor learning principles for neurorehabilitation,” Handbook Clin. Neurol., vol. 110, pp. 93–103, 2013.
[5] C. J. Winstein, “Knowledge of results and motor learning—Implications
for physical therapy,” Phys. Ther., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 140–149, Feb. 1991.
[6] J. W. Krakauer, “Motor learning: Its relevance to stroke recovery and
neurorehabilitation,” Current Opinion Neurol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 84–90,
Feb. 2006.
[7] K. H. Cho and W. H. Lee, “Virtual walking training program using a realworld video recording for patients with chronic stroke: A pilot study,”
Amer J. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 371–380, May 2013.
[8] G. Rosati, “On the role of auditory feedback in robot-assisted movement
training after stroke: Review of the literature,” Comput. Intell. Neurosc.,
vol. 2013, art. no. 586138 (15 pages), 2013.
[9] S. J. Kim and H. I. Krebs, “Effects of implicit visual feedback distortion
on human gait,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 218, no. 3, pp. 495–502, May 2012.
[10] S. J. Kim and D. Mugisha, “Effect of explicit visual feedback distortion
on human gait,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 11, pp. 74–84, Apr. 2014.
[11] P. Mazzoni and J. W. Krakauer, “An implicit plan overrides an explicit
strategy during visuomotor adaptation,” J. Neurosci., vol. 26, no. 14, pp.
3642–3645, Apr. 2006.
[12] R. F. Reynolds and A. M. Bronstein, “The broken escalator phenomenon.
Aftereffect of walking onto a moving platform,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 151,
no. 3, pp. 301–308, Aug. 2003.
[13] G. Rode, “Bottom-up transfer of sensory-motor plasticity to recovery of
spatial cognition: Visuomotor adaptation and spatial neglect,” Progr. Brain
Res., vol. 142, pp. 273–287, 2003.
[14] B. J. Anderson, “Alterations in the thickness of motor cortical subregions
after motor-skill learning and exercise,” Learning Memory, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 1–9, Jan.–Feb. 2002.

[15] A. J. Bastian, “Understanding sensorimotor adaptation and learning for
rehabilitation,” Current Opinion Neurol., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 628–33, Dec.
2008.
[16] D. S. Reisma, “Locomotor adaptation on a split-belt treadmill can improve
walking symmetry post-stroke,” Brain, vol. 130(Pt 7), pp. 1861–1872, Jul.
2007.
[17] D. S. Reisman, “Repeated split-belt treadmill training improves poststroke
step length asymmetry,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 27, no. 5, pp.
460–468, Jun. 2013.
[18] R. Paz, “Viewing and doing: similar cortical mechanisms for perceptual
and motor learning,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 496–503, Aug.
2004.
[19] A. M. Bronstein, “What the “broken escalator” phenomenon teaches us
about balance,” Ann. New York Acad. Sci., vol. 1164, pp. 82–88, May
2009.
[20] K. P. Westlake and C. Patten, “Pilot study of Lokomat versus manualassisted treadmill training for locomotor recovery post-stroke,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 6, pp. 18–29, Jun. 2009.
[21] R. Dickstein, “Rehabilitation of gait speed after stroke: A critical review
of intervention approaches,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 22, no. 6,
pp. 649–660, Nov.–Dec. 2008.
[22] H. Thikey, “Augmented visual feedback of movement performance to enhance walking recovery after stroke: study protocol for a pilot randomised
controlled trial,” Trials, vol. 13, pp. 163–170, Sep. 2012.
[23] D. E. Young and R. A. Schmidt, “Augmented kinematic feedback for
motor learning,” J. Motor Behav., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 261–273, Sep. 1992.
[24] T. A. Martin, “Throwing while looking through prisms. II. Specificity and
storage of multiple gaze-throw calibrations,” Brain, vol. 119 (Pt 4), pp.
1199–1211, Aug. 1996.
[25] M. A. Rendell, “An implicit basis for the retention benefits of random
practice,” J. Motor Behav., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2014.
[26] R. A. Schmidt and T. D. Lee, Motor Control and Learning: A Behavioral
Emphasis, 5th ed. Champaign, IL, USA: Human Kinetics, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

