IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

1321

Modeling of an Optimized Electrostimulative Hip
Revision System Under Consideration of Uncertainty
in the Conductivity of Bone Tissue
Christian Schmidt, Member, IEEE, Ulf Zimmermann, and Ursula van Rienen, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Since several years, the number of total hip arthroplasty revision surgeries is substantially growing. One of the main
reasons for this procedure to become necessary is the loosening
or damage of the prothesis, which is facilitated by bone necrosis
at the implant–bone interface. Electrostimulation is one promising
technique, which can accelerate the growth of bone cells and, therefore, enhance the anchorage of the implant to the bone. We present
computational models of an electrostimulative total hip revision
system to enhance bone regeneration. In this study, the influence of
uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue on the electric field
strength and the beneficial stimulation volume for an optimized
electrode geometry and arrangement is investigated. The generalized polynomial chaos technique is used to quantify the uncertainty
in the stimulation volumes with respect to the uncertain conductivity of cancellous bone, bone marrow, and bone substitute, which
is used to fill defective areas. The results suggest that the overall
beneficial stimulation areas are only slightly sensitive to the uncertainty in conductivity of bone tissue. However, in the proximity of
tissue boundaries, larger uncertainties, especially in the transition
between beneficial and understimulation areas, can be expected.
Index Terms—Electrical stimulation, finite-element method,
multiobjective optimization, total hip arthroplasty (THA) revision,
uncertainty quantification.

I. INTRODUCTION
IP revision surgery, or more specifically a total hip arthroplasty (THA) revision, becomes necessary, if a previously
implanted artificial hip joint or prothesis has to be replaced
mainly due to a loosening or damage of the prothesis and to restore the patient’s mobility. Since the 1990s, the number of such
THA revision surgeries increased constantly and is predicted to
grow substantially in the next decades by more than 130% [1].
In addition, about one-third of these THA revisions have to be
revised. The demand to again revise the hip revision is mainly
due to aseptic implant loosening, which is a result of mechanical instability at the implant–bone interface [2]. Besides the
influence of mechanical stress, the aseptic implant loosening is
facilitated by bone necrosis occurring at the implant–bone interface. Therefore, the reduction of the death of bone cells at

H

Manuscript received December 8, 2014; revised March 12, 2015; accepted
April 10, 2015. Date of publication April 17, 2015; date of current version
July 23, 2015. This work was supported by the German Science Foundation
Research Training Group 1505 “Welisa.”
The authors are with the Institute of General Electrical Engineering,
University of Rostock, 18059 Rostock, Germany (e-mail: christian.schmidt6@
uni-rostock.de; ulf.zimmermann@uni-rostock.de; ursula.van-rienen@unirostock.de).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2423705

this interface is one key aspect to increase the durability of these
implants. One possibility to reduce the bone necrosis is to enhance the regeneration of the bone by facilitating the growth of
bone cells at the implant–bone interface. In 1974, Basset et al.
[3] showed that electrostimulation of bone cells had an accelerating effect on their growth and, therefore, can be applied in
the healing process of fractures and bone defects. Until today,
several high- and low-frequency stimulation systems, which are
based on this effect, have been developed to provide an improved
regeneration of the bone [4], [5].
A prototype of such an electrostimulative hip revision system is currently developed by the Orthopedic Institute at the
University Medicine of Rostock. The prototype consists of an
inductively coupled system to induce an electric field distribution of a certain intensity in an area around the implant, which is
considered to be beneficial for bone growth and bone recovery.
To provide the optimal positioning of the stimulation electrodes,
a computational model of the hip revision system, comprising
the implant as well as a model of a pelvic bone, was developed
and subjected to a multiobjective optimization algorithm [6].
This optimal positioning of the stimulation electrodes is based
on the model parameters comprising the geometry of the implant and the pelvic bone as well as the electric conductivity
of the bone, which influences the resulting electric field pattern
and, therefore, the extent of the area, which is beneficial to the
growth of bone cells. While the geometry parameters are fixed
and controllable in the considered hip revision system [7], the
electric conductivity of bone tissue is subject to uncertainty in
the literature [8], [9]. In addition, an artificial material, which is
designed to substitute the mechanical and electrical properties of
bone tissue, is used to fixate the implant and to fill gaps between
the implant and the bone. Since this material often comprises
disintegrated parts of cancellous bone, its electrical properties
depend on that of the bone tissue and its composition. This
uncertainty in the electrical properties of bone tissue and bone
substitute results from the heterogeneity and composition of the
materials, as well as from deviations in the measurements of
biological tissue, in vivo and ex vivo [10]. In order to investigate
the influence of these parametric uncertainties on the optimized
stimulation protocol of the implant, it is necessary to quantify
the uncertainty in the resulting electric field distribution and the
optimal stimulation area.
This study aims at the uncertainty quantification of the electric field and the stimulation area in an electrostimulative hip
revision system with respect to uncertainty in the electric conductivity of bone tissue and bone substitute. To reduce the

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1322

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 1. Model of the acetabular cup including anchorage cone and four stimulation electrodes.

Fig. 2. Model of the femoral component including the stimulation electrode
and insulator.

computational expense for the quantification of this uncertainty
in the model solution, the generalized polynomial chaos (gPC)
technique is used, which determines a simply evaluable surrogate model of these quantities of interest. This method is
nonintrusive, which means that no change to the implementation of the deterministic model is required, and was already
successfully applied in previous studies regarding bioelectrical
applications [11], [12]. A preliminary version of this study has
been reported in [13].

A primary coil, which is placed around the patient’s hip,
provides a time-harmonic magnetic field at a frequency of 20 Hz.
This oscillating field induces a location-dependent current in the
secondary coils of the stimulation electrodes of the acetabular
cup and the femoral component resulting in an electric potential
distribution in the area around the implants. During surgery, each
electrode of the acetabular cup has to be placed into the bone,
which limits the number of utilizable stimulation electrodes. In
this study, we use four electrodes for the acetabular cup. The
model of the femoral part in its preliminary version consists of
one fixated electrode, which has been tested in a porcine femur.
In this study, the acetabular component of the implant is
attached to the pelvic bone of a human patient. The pelvic bone
is represented as a layered computer-aided design (CAD) model,
which is derived from computer tomography (CT) scans of a
healthy pelvic bone. Due to the damage of the primary implant,
the bone generally shows defects in the femoral and acetabular
areas, which comprise cavities as well as discontinuities. To
emulate this defective state, a cavity is manually inserted into the
CAD model of the pelvic bone, which resembles the geometry
of the former implant and the area of damaged tissue due to
bone necrosis.
The design of the prototype of the electrostimulative hip stem
used in this study is based on results from experimental studies
carried out for a porcine femur. Therefore, the computational
model of the hip stem is inserted into the CT-based CAD model
of such a porcine femur. Due to the adolescence of the porcine
test subject, the medullary cavity is larger than in adult human
femoral bones. For this reason, the conductivity of bone marrow inside this cavity is also considered in the modeling of the
femoral component. The stimulation electrode is connected to
a secondary coil, which geometry and location within the final femoral component will be chosen to provide the required
stimulation amplitude for beneficial stimulation of the bone determined in the computational model.
B. Computation of the Electric Field Distribution

II. METHODS
A. Electrostimulative Hip Revision System
The electrostimulative hip revision system contains an acetabular and a femoral component. The acetabular component
has stimulation electrodes attached to its surface, which are
connected via a coil inside an insulation layer (see Fig. 1). The
hemispherical stimulation electrodes have a diameter of 4 mm,
while the ovoid cup has a length of 70 mm and a width of
58 mm. The acetabular cup also includes an anchorage cone,
which is placed in one of five default drill holes within the cup.
The femoral component used in this study is a preliminary prototype still in its design state. So far, the component is composed
out of a hip stem (Hipstar, size 2)1 with a notch on one side of the
implant, in which the stimulation electrode (width: 1.45 mm)
and the surrounding biocompatible insulator are located (see
Fig. 2).
1 http://bizwan.com/_mydoc/stryker/Hip/HipStar TMZF Cementless Hip
System Surgical Technique.pdf.

The computation of the generated electric field distribution
in the pelvic and femoral bone, which results from the induced
oscillating field in the stimulation electrodes of the acetabular
cup and the femoral component, is carried out by using the software CST EM Studio2 . The acetabular cup is attached to the
pelvic bone, which has been altered to show a central cavity to
emulate a type 2C defect, as defined by Paprosky and Magnus
[14]. The cavity is replenished with bone substitute to provide
an adjoining interface between the implant and the bone (see
Fig. 3). Since the prototype of the femoral component is investigated with regard to a porcine femur, in which the medullary
cavity is larger than in adult human femoral bones, we focused
on the investigation of the influence of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone marrow and cancellous bone for the femoral
component.
The electric potential ϕ(r) in the bone tissue and at the surface
of the implant is computed by solving the Laplace’s equation
2 CST

Studio Suite 2012, http://www.cst.com/.

SCHMIDT et al.: MODELING OF AN OPTIMIZED ELECTROSTIMULATIVE HIP REVISION SYSTEM

1323

Fig. 3. Left: Acetabular cup fixated in the model of the pelvic bone with the defect filled up with bone substitute. Right: Femoral component fixated in the model
of the porcine femoral bone.

within the computational domain Ω
∇ · [σ (r) ∇ϕ (r)] = 0,

r∈Ω

(1)

which represents a volume conductor with purely resistive tissue
and material properties described by their electric conductivity
σ(r). The consideration of solely the conductivity of bone tissue is possible, because due to the low frequency of 20 Hz,
the strength of the displacement currents and eddy currents in
the model is negligibly small compared to the strength of the
conductive currents within the tissues [6]. The (1) is discretized
at the nodes of the model mesh using the finite-integration technique [15], which is implemented in CST EM Studio. Depending on the alignment of the secondary coil in the magnetic field,
the electric potential of each stimulation electrode is determined
based on the approach of Potratz et al. [6]. The potential at the
electrode surface in the discretized model is described by inhomogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions, while the remaining
surface of the implant components Ωsurf is set to a reference potential of ϕ(r) = 0V, r ∈ Ωsurf . Both models are discretized in
a hexahedral mesh, using local mesh refinement in the area of
interest and applying an automated adaptive refinement. For
this purpose, the models were imbedded into a cuboid-shaped
insulator. For the femoral part, a manual convergence study has
been carried out by using the power loss as a reference value.
The final meshes consisted out of approximately 10.1 million
hexahedral elements for the acetabular simulation model and
approximately 1.6 million hexahedral elements for the femoral
simulation model. The solution was computed by using the stationary currents solver of CST EM Studio with a solver accuracy
of 1 × 10−9 .
C. Optimization of the Electrode Arrangement
The accelerating effect on the growth of bone cells by electrostimulation described by Basset et al. [3] depends on the
electric field distribution in the bone. This field distribution is
determined by the placement of the stimulation electrodes on
the implant and depends also on the geometry of the pelvic bone
as well as the femoral part and the individual defects as classified in [14]. While the femoral component of the implant has
a fixed stimulation electrode located in a notch of the implant
(see Fig. 2), the stimulation electrodes on the acetabular cup
can be placed at different locations to provide a preferably large

beneficial stimulation region. To provide the optimal electrode
arrangement for the acetabular cup, we apply a multiobjective
evolutionary optimization algorithm as presented in [6]. Based
on the work of Kraus [16] and clinical advice, an electric field
of 5–70 V/m in the proximity of the implant and 35–70 V/m in
the defective area, which both forms the area of interest, is considered to be optimal. These requirements constitute the primary
and secondary optimization goals for the acetabular component,
respectively. Accordingly, an electric field above these threshold
values is considered to facilitate bone damage due to the death
of bone cells caused by overstimulation and an electric field
below these threshold values to have no beneficial effect on the
growth of bone cells [16]. The stricter definition for the second
goal is due to the emphasis on the stimulation of the defective
area. Here, a complete bone remodeling process has to take
place, while the healthy bone is stimulated to regenerate after
the surgery and to attach well to the implant. Due to the limited
number of stimulation electrodes to cover the whole implant
surface, high stimulation amplitudes, resulting in high potentials in the proximity of stimulation electrodes, are required to
provide the minimal threshold values for beneficial stimulation
in the area of interest. On the contrary, these high potentials
at the stimulation electrodes cause large areas of overstimulation. Therefore, the optimization process requires a tradeoff
between avoiding overstimulation and facilitating a beneficial
electric field strength in the area of interest. For this reason, a
multiobjective genetic optimization algorithm is applied.
For the multiobjective optimization, the nondominated sorting genetic algorithm-II is applied [17]. For an initial population,
which comprises a set of 200 random arrangements of the four
electrodes, the algorithm computes the electric field distribution for all arrangements and evaluates them with respect to the
optimization goals, described earlier in this section. From this
set, the best arrangements are used in the next generation of the
population. This is repeated until one of the following conditions is reached. The first condition is that every point in the
area of interest shows the desired electric field. The second condition is that multiple consecutive generations show the same
electrode arrangement, which is a sign for the convergence of
the solution to a stable state. The third breaking condition is
fulfilled when the maximum of 200 iterations is reached. The
final solution is shown as a set of Pareto optimal arrangements,

1324

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

from which one can be chosen manually or automatically [7].
This decision can be based on further parameters, like the applicability of the arrangements during surgery, or on a subsequent
preference of one stimulation goal within this Pareto optimal
set of arrangements. Since for every arrangement, the fulfillment of each optimization goal is represented by a scalar value,
the optimal arrangement was selected by minimizing both goal
functions equally in this study.
Due to the linearity of the electrical properties of bone tissue
with respect to the electric field at a fixed frequency [6], the
principle of superposition can be applied to determine the electric field distribution of each possible electrode arrangement by
a linear combination of the electric field distributions generated
by each single electrode. The required basic field distributions
are computed with the finite-integration technique using CST
EM Studio by subsequently applying a stimulation amplitude
of 1 V at one electrode at each point of an equidistant (1.5 mm)
grid with 4489 possible electrode positions across the surface of
the acetabular cup. The electric field in the whole area of interest is interpolated from the determined solution at these points.
This approach allows for separating the computational expensive simulation of the discretized model from the optimization
process and, therefore, enables the optimization process to be
carried out in the postprocessing, which substantially reduces
its computational expense.
For the optimization of the electrode geometry of the femoral
component, the design parameters are comprised by the width
of the electrode and its surrounding insulator as well as the
applied stimulation amplitude. To sustain mechanical stability,
the notch inside the hip stem and, therefore, the surface of
the insulator, has to be kept as small as possible. Contrary, an
increase in the insulator area would also increase the extent
of the beneficial stimulation volume. These goals constitute
a similar tradeoff condition as for the acetabular component.
Since the femoral component used in this study comprises a
prototype investigated in a porcine femur, the focus is on the
influence of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue. For
this reason, only the first optimization goal, to provide an electric
field strength between 5 − 70 V/m in the area of interest, is used
for the femoral component. The optimization is carried out with
the trust region framework [18] implemented in CST EM Studio.
This iterative optimization method compares mutually different
realizations of the model to choose the superior realization based
on the performance of the considered goal functions within a
trust region. This trust region is a subsection of the area of
interest. If the new local model fulfills the goal functions within
this subsection, the trust region is increased for the next model
realization. If the goal functions are not fulfilled, the trust region
is decreased. The optimization process stops either when all goal
functions are reached within the whole area of interest, or when
the radius of the trust region becomes smaller than the specified
domain accuracy.
D. Modeling of the Bone and Bone Substitute Conductivity
The measurement of the electrical properties of biological
tissue constitutes a challenging task associated with difficulties

TABLE I
LOWER AND UPPER BOUNDARY, AND RELATIVE DEVIATION OF THE
UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED CONDUCTIVITIES OF CANCELLOUS BONE,
BONE MARROW, AND BONE SUBSTITUTE
Tissue type

Cancellous bone
Bone marrow
Bone substitute (5%)
Bone substitute (10%)
Bone substitute (20%)
Bone substitute (40%)

Conductivity σ [m S/m ]
Min

Max

Rel. Deviation

78.9
1.3
105
94.6
74.8
35.2

150
101
124
134
154
194

31.1%
97.5%
8.66%
17.3%
34.6%
69.3%

Bone substitute was modeled for different relative standard deviations
with respect to a mean conductivity of 114 mS/m.

in the measuring process regarding the proper consideration of
several effects, such as electrode polarization at low frequencies and changes in the conditions of the tissue samples. Due to
ethical concerns and practical reasons, measurements are often
performed ex vivo on excised tissue samples, which can lead
to changes of the electrical properties of biological tissue [19].
As a result, different values for the conductivity of bone tissue
can be found in the literature [8], [9]. In addition, bone substitute is an artificial material, whose composition comprises
parts of disintegrated cancellous bone. Therefore, its electrical
properties depend not only on those of cancellous bone, but also
substantially on its composition. To account for this variability
in the electrical properties of cancellous bone and bone substitute, their conductivity values are modeled to be uniformly
distributed random variables in U[a, b], where the lower and
upper boundaries are based on the values found in the literature (see Table I). The use of uniform distributions accounts for
the lack of data and assumes each conductivity within the set
boundaries to be of the same probability, which resembles a kind
of a “worst-case” scenario. Due to the possibly large variability
in the fabrication process of bone substitute, its conductivity is
modeled for different levels of uncertainty, determined by its
respective relative deviation, which is defined by the distance of
the upper and lower boundary divided by the respective mean
value. Since the cortical bone compartment surrounds the major
compartment comprised of cancellous bone, and, therefore, has
a minor influence on the electric field strength in the proximity
of the surfaces of the implants, its conductivity was modeled
deterministic and set to a value of 20 mS /m [8].
E. Uncertainty Quantification Using Polynomial Chaos
The beneficial stimulation region resulting from the previously computed optimal electrode arrangement of the acetabular cup determined by the multiobjective evolutionary algorithm
and from the stimulation of the femoral component depend on
the conductivity of bone tissue and bone substitute. The uncertainty in these model parameters result in an uncertainty in the
determined electric field and, therefore, in the predicted beneficial stimulation region. To investigate the influence of the uncertainty in the model parameters on the model solution, stochastic

SCHMIDT et al.: MODELING OF AN OPTIMIZED ELECTROSTIMULATIVE HIP REVISION SYSTEM

methods such as Monte–Carlo simulation (MCS) are required.
Such probability sampling methods determine the statistics of
the model solutions of interest by computing random realizations of the deterministic model based on random samples of the
uncertain model parameters. In general, such methods require
a large number of model realizations to provide a sufficient accuracy in the statistics of the model solutions [20]. Since the
computation of the deterministic model requires a considerable amount of computational resources and time, as noted in
Section II-C, the application of MCS for the quantification of
the uncertainty in the model solutions is not practical. To reduce
the number of required model realizations, the gPC technique is
applied, which determines a simply evaluable surrogate model
by using the deterministic model as some kind of a “black-box”
[20]. This “nonintrusive” property of the method does not require changes to the code, which describes the deterministic
model. Since the model is generated by using commercial software to determine the beneficial stimulation region, this property
comprises a crucial factor in the uncertainty quantification of its
solutions.
The main idea of the gPC technique is to determine a surrogate model of the model solution or derived quantity of interest Y (ω), with ω indicating its statistical properties, by expanding the model solution in a series of multivariate orthogonal basis functions ψ (ξ(ω)), depending on the random vector
ξ(ω) = (ξ1 (ω), . . . , ξM (ω)) with ξi (ω) ∈ U[−1, 1], for which
the optimal choice of basis functions is determined by the product of univariate Legendre polynomials [21]. In general, this
series expansion is truncated at a certain expansion order p,
which determines the number P of basis functions [20]. The
corresponding coefficients ck , k = 1, . . . , P are determined by
projecting the basis function ψk (ξ(ω)) onto the model solution
Y (ω). Since the probability distribution of the solution is unknown, the integral formulation resulting from the projection has
to be computed by numerical integration, for which the model
solution Y(ω) and, therefore, the deterministic model is evaluated at the prescribed integration nodes selected from the model
parameters X(ω) = (X1 (ω), . . . , XM (ω)). Since the random
parameters Xi (ω) are uniformly distributed, the mapping on
the corresponding random variables ξi (ω), which is required
for the series expansion in the basis functions ψ (ξ(ω)), can be
carried out by a linear transformation [11]. In general, the generation of integration nodes, which comprise the deterministic
samples of the model parameters, are based on a tensor-grid
approach. These tensor grids comprise all combinations of the
integration nodes for each model parameter, which results in
an exponential growth of the number of integration nodes with
the number of model parameters M . To partly overcome this
so-called “curse of dimensionality,” sparse-grid methods can be
applied, which reduce the number of integration nodes compared to tensor grids by attributing less weight on the basis
functions with mixed higher order polynomials [22]. In a preliminary version of this study, tensor grids were used to compute
the coefficients of the gPC expansions for the beneficial stimulation region of the acetabular cup [13]. The results of this
investigation suggested that the model solution was not dependent on mixed higher order polynomials in the gPC expansions.

1325

Therefore, the computationally more efficient sparse grid methods based on the approach described by Constantine et al. [22]
are used in this study.
F. Determining the Uncertainty in the Stimulation Regions
To provide a measure on how the uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue influences the stimulation of bone tissue in the
considered electrostimulative hip revision system, the regions of
under-, beneficial, and overstimulation are computed for the acetabular component and the femoral component. These regions
are determined by computing the uncertainty in the electric field
norm for a set of sampling points located in the proximity of the
implant–tissue interface and using a tetrahedral mesh to obtain
the corresponding volumes. Although, the whole bone can benefit from a stimulation field above 5 V/m, the focus of this study
is in the stimulation of the close proximity to the implants. For
the acetabular component, the sampling points were positioned
in 15 equidistant layers between 1- and 15-mm distance to the
surface. Each layer comprises sampling points positioned over
the whole surface within the bone using a step size of 1 mm.
Adding up all layers, the total number of sampling points for
the acetabular cup is 61 184. A similar sampling is used for the
femoral component across the area of the stimulation electrode.
Since the prototype of the femoral component comprises only
one stimulation electrode, which is located in a notch of the implant, the electric field of the electrostimulative hip stem does not
reach that deep into the bone as compared to the acetabular cup.
Therefore, the sampling points are located in six layers between
0.5 and 5.5 mm normal to the surface, and a range of 13 and 47
mm with a step size of 0.5 and 1 mm in the x- and y-component
of each layer, respectively, resulting in a total of 7776 sampling
points. Due to the different sizes of the areas of interest, the optimization of the beneficial stimulation volumes resulted in different stimulation amplitudes at the electrodes in both models. For
the acetabular cup, the determined stimulation amplitudes are
1.704, 1.699, 1.451, and 1.534 V at electrode 1 to 4 (see Fig. 1)
and 0.17 V for the femoral component. The optimization of the
electrode arrangement, geometry, and stimulation amplitudes
was carried out for minimum conductivity of cancellous bone,
while the conductivity of bone substitute and bone marrow was
set to its mean and maximum value, respectively.
III. RESULTS
The uncertainty quantification of the stimulation regions was
carried out for the optimized hip revision system. The optimal electrode arrangement for the acetabular cup used in this
study is based on preliminary work [13]. The optimization of
the femoral component resulted in an optimal electrode and
insulator width of 1.45 and 1.4 mm. For each sampling point
the gPC expansion of the
r (k ) , k = 1, . . . , Ns in the

 models,
electric field strength E r (1) was computed, resulting in the



 
electric field strength E s = E r (1) , . . . , E r (N s ) in the
area of interest. To provide a measure for the approximation
error estimation gPC of the gPC expansions of the electric
field strength, the difference in its variance V with respect to
the applied expansion order p was evaluated a posteriori by

1326

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 4. Lower quantile (2.5%), upper quantile (97.5%), and mean of the beneficial stimulated area between 5 and 70 V/m for the femoral component. Uncertainty
areas are shown for relative deviations larger than 8.66% and 34.6%, respectively.

Fig. 6. Lower quantile (2.5%), upper quantile (97.5%), and mean of the over(red), under- (blue), and beneficial (green) stimulated areas for the femoral
component. The colors red, blue, and green are located at the top, bottom, and
middle of the bars, respectively.

Fig. 5. Posteriori approximation error estimate g P C of the variance of the
electric field strength at the sampling points in the areas of interest for the
acetabular and femoral component, respectively. For the acetabular component,
the uncertainty in the conductivity of bone substitute was modeled with values
between 8.66% and 69.3%.

computing
gPC (p) =

V [E s (r, p)] − V [E s (r, p − 1)] 
.
V [E s (r, p)]

(2)

A sufficient accuracy in the approximation error estimation
of the gPC expansions for the considered sampling points was
ensured by increasing the expansion order p until the estimate
was below 1 × 10−4 , which required an expansion order of
up to p = 5 for the acetabular component and p = 6 for the
femoral component (see Fig. 5). These expansion orders resulted in a number of 145 and 321 required model realizations,
respectively, to provide the model solution at the nodes of the
corresponding sparse grids. Based on the determined gPC expansions for the electric field norm of the sampling points, their
lower quantile, mean value, and upper quantile for a confidence
interval of 95% were determined by applying MCS to the gPC
expansions for a number of 10 000 random samples.
These stochastic measures of the electric field strength in
the area of interest allowed for computing the corresponding
stochastic measures for the volumes of under-, beneficial, and
overstimulation. For the femoral component, the determined

stimulation volumes resemble a cylinder-symmetrical shape
around the stimulation electrode, except for the upper region
close to the cutting plane (see Fig. 4 ). This upper region comprises several tissue boundaries between bone marrow, cancellous bone, and cortical bone, resulting in changes of the electric
field strength in the proximity of these boundaries. As a consequence, the largest local deviations of the uncertain electric
field strength can be found in this region with values in the
range of the uncertainty modeled in the conductivity of cancellous bone and bone marrow. The beneficial stimulation volume
includes nearly the complete anterior interface between implant
and bone along with the electrode with a maximum stimulation
depth for the mean beneficial stimulated area of 6 mm. Regarding the understimulated area, the beneficial stimulation volume
deviates by approximately 15.7% regarding the lower quantile
and by approximately 23.1% for the upper quantile compared to
its mean value (see Fig. 6 ). In contrast, the overstimulated area
shows only minor deviations in the lower and upper quantiles
with respect to its mean value. The uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume is approximately 8.5% and, therefore,
around one-fourth of the uncertainty modeled in the conductivity of cancellous bone and approximately 11 times smaller than
that of bone marrow.
For the optimized four-electrode arrangement of the acetabular cup, the uncertain beneficial stimulation volume regarding
the second optimization goal with an electric field strength between 35 and 70 V /m is shown in Fig. 7 . For this study case,

SCHMIDT et al.: MODELING OF AN OPTIMIZED ELECTROSTIMULATIVE HIP REVISION SYSTEM

1327

Fig. 7. Lower quantile (2.5%), upper quantile (97.5%), and mean of the beneficial stimulated area between 35 and 70 V/m for the acetabular component with an
uncertainty in the conductivity of bone substitute of 69.3%. Uncertainty areas are shown for relative deviations larger than 8.66% and 34.6%, respectively.

Fig. 8. Lower quantile (2.5%), upper quantile (97.5%), and mean of the over- (red), under- (blue), and beneficial (green) stimulated areas for the acetabular cup
shown for different levels of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone substitute. The colors red, blue, and green are located at the top, bottom, and middle of the
bars, respectively.

the level of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone substitute
was set to 69.3%. One electrode is located nearly in the center
inside of the defective area, and another one close to the tissue
boundary between bone substitute and cancellous bone, while
the remaining electrodes are located closer to the anchorage
cone inside the cancellous bone compartment. The beneficial
stimulation volumes for the second optimization goal resemble an almost spherical shape, except for the electrode close to
the anchorage cone. The quantiles of this beneficial stimulation
volume deviate at most at the tissue boundary between the defective area, filled with bone substitute, and the cancellous bone
compartment. The beneficial stimulation areas with an uncertainty larger than 8.66% are comparatively small regarding the
whole beneficial stimulation volume and are as well small in
magnitude compared to the uncertainty in the conductivity of
bone substitute (69.3%) and cancellous bone (31.1%). Smaller
areas of beneficial stimulation for the upper quantile are noticeable behind the anchorage cone. Due to application of an
optimized four-electrode system, the beneficial stimulation volume covers a large area of the pelvic bone. Since the focus of this
study is on the investigation of the beneficial stimulation in the
proximity of the implant, only that volumes for the second optimization goal (35–70 V/m) were illustrated. To investigate the
extent of the uncertain beneficial stimulation volumes regarding
the first optimization goal, their size within the area of interest
was compared to the volumes of under- and overstimulation for
an uncertain conductivity in bone substitute from 8.66% up to
69.3% (see Fig. 8 ). While the mean value of the beneficial

stimulation volume was similar for all cases, the uncertainty
increased from approximately 5% to 10.4%. The uncertainty in
the overstimulation volume was comparatively small with values ranging from approximately 2% to 6%. Compared to the
size of the beneficial stimulation volume, the absolute deviation
in the overstimulation volume was negligible. Therefore, the uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume resulted in mainly
a corresponding uncertainty in the understimulation volume.
The mean value of the beneficial stimulation volume for different levels of uncertainty in bone substitute conductivity did
not change substantially, while the uncertainty in the volume
increased continuously with a larger increase with respect to the
lower quantile compared to the upper quantile (see Fig. 9 ). The
increase of the lower and upper quantile was nonlinear, being in
good agreement with a quadratic fitting function. Compared to
the levels of uncertainty in bone substitute conductivity, the uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume was substantially
smaller. The ratio between the uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume and bone substitute increased from a factor 1.7
for an uncertain conductivity of 8.66% up to a factor of 6.7 for
an uncertain conductivity of 69.3%.
IV. DISCUSSION
The objective of this study was to investigate the influence
of uncertainty in bone tissue conductivity on the beneficial
stimulation of bone cells in the proximity of the surface of an
electrostimulative hip revision system. Computational models

1328

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 9. Lower quantile, upper quantile, and mean of the beneficial stimulation
volume for the acetabular cup shown for different levels of uncertainty in the
conductivity of bone substitute.

of an acetabular component and femoral component of a prototype system were attached to realistic 3-D models of the pelvic
and femoral bone. Electrode arrangements and geometry were
optimized in order to provide an optimal beneficial stimulation
in the proximity of the surface of the implants. Based on the
method of Kraus, beneficial stimulation was assumed in regions,
where the electric field strength was between 5 and 70 V/m at a
frequency of 20 Hz [16]. The goal of Kraus’ method is to achieve
a beneficial cellular response in a large region in the proximity
of the implant surface. In vitro experiments demonstrated that
alternative low-frequency electrostimulative methods as well as
dc-polarization approaches may also facilitate a beneficial cellular response by promoting osteoblast functions like proliferation
and calcification at the surface of conducting implant materials,
but with comparably lower electric field strengths [23], [24].
The optimal thresholds for the electric field strength to provide
beneficial stimulation are still subject of ongoing research [25].
For the acetabular cup, the second goal to provide an electric
field between 35 and 70 V/m within the defective region has
been introduced. This stricter optimization goal and the larger
beneficial stimulation region of the acetabular cup compared
to the region of the femoral part facilitate higher stimulation
amplitudes for the acetabular cup, which resulted in different
stimulation amplitudes of both implant parts.
The uncertainty in the electric field strength in the areas of
interest with respect to the uncertainty in the conductivity of
bone tissue and bone substitute was determined by using the
gPC technique. The gPC expansions of the electric field strength
in the areas of interest for the acetabular component and femoral
component were computed for expansion orders up to p = 5
and p = 6, which required the computation of the deterministic
model for 145 and 321 different sets of conductivity values.
MCS with 10 000 random samples of the uncertain bone tissue
conductivities was applied to the determined gPC expansions to
compute the stochastic measures of the electric field strength for
each point of interest. This number of random samples was required to reduce the error estimate of the variance in the electric
field strength to below 1%. Due to the large number of sampling
points in the areas of interest, the number of random samples was
chosen to provide a reasonable accuracy in the stochastic mea-

sures, while allowing for their computation in a reasonable time
on common workstations. The computation time of the model
solution of the acetabular component and the femoral component for the 145 and 321 model realizations, which were required
to provide gPC expansions of the order p = 5 and p = 6, was
approximately 43.5 and 16 h, respectively (workstation with
4 × 3.6 GHz, 64-GB RAM). The computation time of the gPC
expansions and the application of MCS on the expansions for
all sampling points in the areas of interest was approximately
10.3 and 2.7 h, respectively. Therefore, the whole computation
time for the uncertainty quantification in the stimulated areas
was approximately 54 h for the acetabular component and
19 h for the femoral component. In comparison, the application
of MCS directly to the models for the same number of 10 000
random samples would have required a computation time of
approximately four month for the acetabular component and
21 d for the femoral component, using the same workstation
without considering additional computational resources, and
would only allow for an accuracy in the variance of the electric
field strength in the considered models of approximately 1%.
Therefore, the applied gPC method in combination with the
sparse integration approach [22] allowed for a substantial reduction of the computational expense and required computational
resources in this study.
The quantiles and mean value of the electric field strength for
a confidence interval of 95% in the area of interest were used
to determine the volumes of under-, over- and beneficial stimulation. For the femoral component, almost the entire lateral
interface between the implant and the femoral bone is beneficially stimulated and resembles a cylindrical shape (see Fig. 4).
This shape results from the homogeneous conductivity in the
area of interest, dominated by the cancellous bone compartment.
Evidence for this behaviour can be derived from (1). In the case,
that a compartment boundary is sufficiently far away from the
stimulation electrode, the electric field distribution approaches
that for the homogenous Laplace equation, resulting in nullification of the influence of uncertainty in the conductivity of the
corresponding bone tissue. Therefore, the electric field strength
close to the stimulation electrodes is hardly affected by the
uncertainty in bone tissue conductivity, which explains the minor deviations in the overstimulation volumes. However, in the
upper part of the bone deviations from this shape can be found,
which result from conductivity changes across the boundaries
between the bone tissue compartments (Compare Fig. 3, right).
In this area, the bone marrow is comparatively small with regard
to cancellous bone, and the overall shape of the bone deviates
from the more cylindrical shape in its lower part, resulting in two
compartment boundaries in close proximity to the stimulation
electrodes, which are the reason for these deviations. Regarding
the uncertainty of the electric field strength in this area, the
largest deviations are located in the proximity of the bone tissue
boundaries. However, the overall uncertainty in the beneficial
stimulation volume is approximately 8.5% and, therefore, only
around one-fourth of the uncertainty modeled in the conductivity of cancellous bone and approximately 11 times smaller than
that of bone marrow (see Fig. 6). Taking into account a uniform
distribution, the corresponding variance of the beneficial

SCHMIDT et al.: MODELING OF AN OPTIMIZED ELECTROSTIMULATIVE HIP REVISION SYSTEM

stimulation volume is below 5%, which is considered as
tolerable.
For the acetabular component, the largest deviations in the uncertain beneficial stimulation volumes with regard to the second
optimization goal occur in the proximity between the boundary
of bone substitute and cancellous bone, which is consistent with
the results for the femoral component (see Fig. 7). In addition,
the second optimization goal facilitates these deviations by enforcing a stricter condition on the electric field strength in the
defective area. Therefore, the closer an electrode is located to
these bone tissue boundaries, the larger the deviations in the
uncertain beneficial stimulation volumes can be expected. Regarding the second optimization goal, the beneficial stimulation
volumes resemble a spherical shape, except for the first and
second electrode located close to the anchorage cone, which
perturbates the shape of the volumes. In addition, smaller areas
of beneficial stimulation for the upper quantile of the electric
field strength are noticeable behind the anchorage cone, which
result from the conductivity ratio between cancellous bone and
cortical bone at their compartment boundary. However, the size
of these areas and their level of uncertainty is comparatively
small to the overall beneficial stimulation volume. Due to the
comparatively large stimulation amplitudes determined for the
optimized electrode arrangement of the acetabular cup to that of
the femoral component, the beneficial stimulation volume with
regard to the first optimization goal covers a larger portion of
the sampled region and with that larger areas of overstimulation
(see Fig. 8).
Similar to the results for the femoral component, the deviations in the uncertain overstimulation volumes are negligibly
small compared to the uncertainty in the conductivity of the considered bone tissue types. This result is in agreement with the
local deviation areas depicted in Fig. 7, which show the largest
deviations at the transition between the uncertain beneficial- and
understimulation volumes. Compared to the size of the beneficial stimulation volume of the acetabular cup (see Fig. 8) that
of the femoral component is substantially smaller (see Fig. 6).
Besides the larger stimulation amplitudes at the electrodes of the
acetabular cup they are located at the surface and penetrate the
bone. In contrast, the prototype of the femoral component has
only one electrode, which is located in a notch in the implant.
A larger insulator would allow for higher stimulation voltages
at the electrode, which would lead to a larger beneficial stimulated area. However, this increase of the insulator size would
result in a larger area, at which the bone can only poorly connect, which would contradict the optimization goals. Besides,
the overstimulation volume for the femoral component is comparatively small. In the future design of the femoral implant,
the option to use multiple stimulation electrodes is considered,
which would also require an increase in the area of interest to
cover a larger surface of the implant and, therefore, would also
result in larger stimulation amplitudes and an increase in the
insulator size to optimally stimulated the area.
For the acetabular cup, the uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume increased with increasing uncertainty in the conductivity of bone substitute, but was considerably smaller in
magnitude with ratios from 1.7 for 8.66% uncertainty in bone

1329

substitute conductivity to 6.7 for 69.3% uncertainty (see Fig. 9).
Compared to the level of uncertainty in bone substitute conductivity, the uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume
increases by a substantially lower growth rate. To provide an
uncertainty in the beneficial stimulation volume bounded by
8.66%, which is considered to be tolerably small, an uncertainty of up to 66% in bone substitute conductivity would be
respectable. This large tolerance margin in the conductivity of
bone substitute allows for the possible application of several
substitute compositions and basic components. Furthermore,
the results suggest that the influence of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue and bone substitute on the beneficial
stimulation volumes of the considered electrostimulative hip
revision system is tolerably small. The optimized electrode arrangements and locations of the acetabular cup and geometry of
the femoral component are quite insensitive to uncertainty in the
conductivity of bone tissue as modeled in this study. However, it
has to be kept in mind that in the proximity of tissue boundaries
large local uncertainties can occur, which have to be controlled
in the modeling and design process of such electrostimulative
implants.
To the authors’ knowledge, this study presents the first computational results and insights on how uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue influences the therapeutic effect of an
electrostimulative hip revision system. The results of this study
enhance the design and optimization process of the implants
and allow for a prediction of the safety margins for their use. In
future studies, the uncertainty quantification will be included in
the optimization process to allow for a patient-individual optimization of the electrode arrangements under the consideration
of minimal deviations in the beneficial stimulation volumes.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, the influence of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue for an optimized electrostimulative total hip
revision system was investigated. For this purpose, the system,
which consists out of a femoral and an acetabular component,
is optimized using realistic bone models to provide maximal
regions of beneficial stimulation, while minimizing regions of
overstimulation. For both parts, optimization algorithms have
been used to reach the specific goals for the different bone
types. The optimized system was used to determine the influence of uncertainty in the conductivity of bone tissue on the
beneficial stimulation areas for each model. The results suggest
that the overall beneficial stimulation areas are only slightly sensitive with regard to uncertainty in the bone tissue conductivity.
In particular, the overstimulated areas were found to be robust
against the uncertainty in bone tissue conductivity. However, in
the proximity of tissue boundaries, larger uncertainties, especially in the transition between beneficial and understimulation
areas, can be expected.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the research team of R. Bader
of the Orthopedic Institute at the University Medicine Rostock

1330

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

for support and for providing the necessary CAD models of
bones and implants.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Kurtz, K. Ong, E. Lau, F. Mowat, and M. Halpern, “Projections of
primary and revision hip and knee arthroplasty in the United States from
2005 to 2030,” J. Bone Joint Surg. Amer., vol. 89, pp. 780–785, Apr. 2007.
[2] B. Springer, T. Fhering, W. Griffin, S. Odum, and J. Masonis, “Why
revision total hip arthtroplasty fails,” Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., vol. 467,
pp. 166–173, Jan. 2009.
[3] C. Bassett, R. Pawluk, and A. Pilla, “Acceleration of fracture repair by
electromagnetic fields. A surgically noninvasive method,” Ann. NY Acad.
Sci., vol. 238, pp. 242–262, Oct. 1974.
[4] W. Latham and J. Lau, “Bone stimulation. A review of its use as an
adjunct,” Techn. Orthop., vol. 26, pp. 14–21, Mar. 2011.
[5] R. Aaron, D. Ciombor, and B. Simon, “Treatment of nonunions with
electric and electromagnetic fields,” Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., vol. 419,
pp. 21–29, Feb. 2004.
[6] C. Potratz, D. Kluess, H. Ewald, and U. van Rienen, “Multiobjective
optimization of an electrostimulative acetabular revision system,” IEEE
Trans Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 460–468, Feb. 2010.
[7] U. Zimmermann and U. van Rienen, “An automatic Pareto classifier for the
multiobjective optimization of an electrostimulative acetabular revision
system,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 741–744, Feb. 2014.
[8] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293, Nov. 1996.
[9] H. Ewald, R. Bader, D. Kluess, R. Souffrant, C. Potratz, U. van Rienen,
and W. Mittelmeier, “Untersuchungen der elektrischen und dielektrischen
Eigenschaften von hüftknochen für den einsatz elektrostimulierender implanate,” in Proc. 5th Symp. Autom. Control, 2008, pp. 1847–1850.
[10] C. Gabriel, A. Peyman, and E. H. Grant, “Electrical conductivity of tissue
at frequencies below 1 MHz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 4863–4878,
Aug. 2009.
[11] C. Schmidt, P. Grant, M. Lowery, and U. van Rienen, “Influence of uncertainties in the material properties of brain tissue on the probabilistic
volume of tissue activated,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 5,
pp. 1378–1387, May 2013.
[12] C. Schmidt and U. van Rienen, “Global sensitivity analysis of the probabilistic volume of tissue activated in a volume conductor model for deep
brain stimulation,” in Proc. 6th Int. IEEE/EMBS Conf. Neural Eng., Nov.
2013, pp. 1218–1221.
[13] C. Schmidt, U. Zimmermann, and U. van Rienen, “Uncertainty quantification of the optimal stimulation area in an electro-stimulative hip revision
system,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 2014,
pp. 824–827.
[14] W. Paprosky and R. Magnus, “Principles of bonegrafting in revision total
hip arthroplasty,” Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res., vol. 298, pp. 147–155, Jan.
1994.
[15] T. Weiland, “A discretization method for the solution of Maxwells equations for six-component fields,” Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 31,
pp. 116–120, Feb. 1977.
[16] W. Kraus, “Magnetfeldtherapie und magnetisch induzierte Elektrostimulation in der Orthopädie,” Orthopädie, vol. 13, pp. 78–92, Apr. 1984.
[17] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, Apr. 2002.
[18] R. Byrd, R. Schnabel, and G. Shultz, “A trust region algorithm for
nonlinearly constrained optimization,” SIAM J. Numer. Anal., vol. 24,
pp. 1152–1170, Oct. 1987.
[19] G. Schmid, G. Neubauer, U. Illievich, and F. Alesch, “Dielectric Properties
of porcine brain tissue in the transition from life to death at frequencies
from 800 to 1900 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 24, no. 6,
pp. 413–422, Sep. 2003.
[20] D. Xiu, Numerical Methods for Stochastic Computations: A Spectral
Method Approach. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton Univ. Press, 2010.

[21] F. Nobile, R. Tempone, and C. G. Webster, “A sparse grid stochastic
collocation method for partial differential equations with random input
data,” SIAM J. Numer. Anal., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 2309–2345, May 2008.
[22] P. G. Constantine, M. S. Eldred, and E. T. Phipps, “Sparse pseudospectral
approximation method,” Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., vols. 229–
232, pp. 1–12, Jul. 2012.
[23] P. R. Supronowicz, P. M. Ajayan, K. R. Ullmann, B. P. Arulanandam, D. W.
Metzger, and R. Bizios, “Novel current-conducting composite substrates
for exposing osteoblasts to alternating current stimulation,” J. Biomed.
Mater. Res., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 499–506, Jul. 2002.
[24] R. A. Gittens, R. Olivares-Navarrete, R. Rettew, R. J. Butera, F. M. Alamgir, B. D. Boyan, and Z. Schwartz, “Electrical polarization of titanium
surfaces for the enhancement of osteoblast differentiation,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 599–612, Jul. 2013.
[25] P. Grunert, A. Jonitz-Heincke, Y. Su, R. Souffrant, D. Hansmann,
H. Ewald, A. Krüger, W. Mittelmeier, and R. Bader, “Establishment of a
novel in vitro test setup for electric and magnetic stimulation of human
osteoblasts,” Cell Biochem. Biophys., vol. 70, pp. 805–817, Nov. 2014.

Christian Schmidt (M’12) received the Ph.D. degree
from the Faculty of Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher in
computational engineering for applications of neuroscience and electrostimulative implants at the University of Rostock. His research interests include
stochastical methods for uncertainty quantification
for several applications in the field of bioelectrical
engineering.

Ulf Zimmermann received the Diploma degree
(comparable to the Master’s degree) in electrical engineering from the University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany, in 2010, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include computational modeling and simulation of electrically stimulating implants within biological tissues.

Ursula van Rienen (M’01) received the venia legendi in “electromagnetic field theory” and “scientific
computing” from the Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, in 1997.
Since 1997, she has been the Chair in “Electromagnetic Field Theory” at the University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. Her research interests include computational electromagnetics with various
applications, ranging from biomedical engineering
to accelerator physics.

