IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2269

A Novel Algorithm for the Automatic Detection
of Sleep Apnea From Single-Lead ECG
Carolina Varon∗ , Member, IEEE, Alexander Caicedo, Member, IEEE, Dries Testelmans,
Bertien Buyse, and Sabine Van Huffel, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: This paper presents a methodology for the automatic detection of sleep apnea from single-lead ECG. Methods: It
uses two novel features derived from the ECG, and two well-known
features in heart rate variability analysis, namely the standard deviation and the serial correlation coefficients of the RR interval
time series. The first novel feature uses the principal components
of the QRS complexes, and it describes changes in their morphology caused by an increased sympathetic activity during apnea.
The second novel feature extracts the information shared between
respiration and heart rate using orthogonal subspace projections.
Respiratory information is derived from the ECG by means of three
state-of-the-art algorithms, which are implemented and compared
here. All features are used as input to a least-squares support vector
machines classifier, using an RBF kernel. In total, 80 ECG recordings were included in the study. Results: Accuracies of about 85%
are achieved on a minute-by-minute basis, for two independent
datasets including both hypopneas and apneas together. Separation between apnea and normal recordings is achieved with 100%
accuracy. In addition to apnea classification, the proposed methodology determines the contamination level of each ECG minute.
Conclusion: The performances achieved are comparable with those
reported in the literature for fully automated algorithms. Significance: These results indicate that the use of only ECG sensors can
achieve good accuracies in the detection of sleep apnea. Moreover,
the contamination level of each ECG segment can be used to automatically detect artefacts, and to highlight segments that require
further visual inspection.

Manuscript received November 12, 2014; revised March 10, 2015 and April 2,
2015; accepted April 3, 2015. Date of publication April 13, 2015; date of current
version August 18, 2015. This work was supported by the Research Council
KUL: GOA/10/09 MaNet, CoE PFV/10/002 (OPTEC); Ph.D./Postdoc grants
Flemish Government: FWO: projects: G.0427.10N (Integrated EEG-fMRI),
G.0108.11 (Compressed Sensing) G.0869.12N (Tumor imaging) G.0A5513N
(Deep brain stimulation); Ph.D./Postdoc grants IWT: projects: TBM 080658MRI (EEG-fMRI), TBM 110697-NeoGuard; Ph.D./Postdoc grants. iMinds
Medical Information Technologies SBO 2014, ICON: NXT_Sleep. Flanders
Care: Demonstratieproject Tele-Rehab III (2012–2014). Belgian Federal Science Policy Office: IUAP P7/19/(DYSCO, “Dynamical systems, control and
optimization,” 2012–2017). Belgian Foreign Affairs-Development Cooperation:
VLIR UOS programs. EU: The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007–2013)/ERC Advanced Grant: BIOTENSORS (n◦ 339804). This paper reflects only the authors’ views and the Union is
not liable for any use that may be made of the contained information. Other EU
funding: RECAP 209G within INTERREG IVB NWE program, EU MC ITN
TRANSACT 2012 (n◦ 316679), ERASMUS EQR: Community service engineer
(n◦ 539642-LLP-1-2013). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ C. Varon is with the Department of Electrical Engineering-ESAT, STADIUS
Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing and Data Analytics, and
iMinds Medical IT Department, KU Leuven, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium (e-mail:
carolina.varon@esat.kuleuven.be).
A. Caicedo and S. Van Huffel are with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.
D. Testelmans and B. Buyse are with the University Hospitals Leuven.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2422378

Index Terms—Cardiorespiratory interactions, ECG morphology, least-squares support vector machine (LS-SVM), sleep
apnea.

I. INTRODUCTION
LEEP apnea is a sleep-related breathing disorder that affects about 10% of middle aged adults [1]. In addition, it is
considered a risk factor for morbidity and mortality due to its
long-term effect on the cardiovascular system [2]. This effect
is related to different physiological mechanisms like systemic
hypertension and increased sympathetic modulation that in a
long term compromises the well-functioning of the heart.
Apnea and hypopnea are two types of respiratory events
characterized by a complete absence or reduction of airflow,
respectively, during at least 10 s [3]. During these events, the
respiratory effort can differ, and this on its turn can be used
to distinguish between different types of apnea. For instance,
in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), the patients stop breathing,
despite the respiratory effort, due to an obstruction in the upper
airways that avoids air entering the lungs. In central sleep apnea
(CEN), patients also stop breathing, but in this case due to absence of respiratory effort. The combination of these two apnea
types is called mixed apnea (MIX), and it consists of a reduction
of respiratory effort that leads to an upper airway obstruction.
Hypopneas are characterized by a drop in oxygen saturation
caused by a reduction in the airflow. In addition, no clear ECG
changes can be observed in the majority of the cases. As a result,
hypopneas are the most challenging type of respiratory events to
be detected solely from the ECG signal. In these cases, other signals like oxygen saturation and airflow can complement the ECG
analysis. Apneas and hypopneas can occur up to hundreds of
times per night, and its recurrence can cause hypersomnolence,
excessive daytime sleepiness, insomnia, nocturia, memory loss,
attention deficit, and depression among others.
Currently, sleep-related breathing disorders are diagnosed using poly(somno)graphy, which is a sleep test performed in a
hospital or at home, and where the evaluation and supervision
of a clinician is essential. Eventhough poly(somno)graphy is
the most important diagnostic tool in sleep medicine, its high
costs and low comfort significantly reduce its diagnostic power.
Therefore, the development of more portable and less intrusive
systems is of paramount importance.
During poly(somno)graphy, several physiological parameters
are recorded such as heart rate and respiration, which are deeply
affected during episodes of apnea. Hence, several studies have
focused on the detection of sleep apnea using as few signals as
possible. For example, the authors in [4]–[6] and [7] proposed

S

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

to derive several features from the electrocardiographic (ECG)
signal to detect sleep apnea. Moreover, instead of measuring the
respiratory signal, those algorithms first estimate the respiration
from the ECG, and then derive a set of features that can later be
used for the discrimination of apneas.
In this context, this study proposes a simple algorithm for
the automatic detection of sleep apnea from the ECG signal.
In addition, two different features that capture valuable information related to apneas are proposed. One describes changes
in the morphology of the ECG, and one computes the information shared between respiration and heart rate, by means of
orthogonal subspace projections. Changes in the morphology of
the ECG associated with OSA events were first reported in [8],
where it was concluded that algorithms that take into account
changes in morphology perform better for the classification of
apnea. Later in [9], changes in the P-waves were used to discriminate between normal ECG segments, and segments containing
apneas. In this study, however, a novel methodology based on
principal component analysis (PCA) applied to the QRS complexes is proposed. Apart from the two novel features, this study
compares three different algorithms to compute the ECG derived respiration (EDR). The first EDR algorithm is based on
the R-peak amplitude [6], which has been widely used for apnea
detection, the second one uses PCA [10], and the last one uses
its kernel version kPCA [11]. The last two algorithms have not
been applied yet to the detection of sleep apnea, and this study
aims to determine their added value in this type of applications.
All the features derived from the heart rate and from the EDR
signals are used as input to different classifiers, namely, linear
discriminant analysis (LDA), support vector machines (SVM),
and least-squares support vector machines (LS-SVM). Variations of these three classifiers are implemented and compared
in this study. A final algorithm is then proposed and tested on
two different datasets. An important addition of the proposed
methodology is that a level of confidence is provided for each
classified segment. This level is associated with the level of
contamination of the ECG, which is used to derive all features.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the two datasets used in this study, the preprocessing steps, the three EDR algorithms implemented, and the
two novel features. The results are presented in Section III,
and then discussed in Section IV. Conclusions are presented in
Section V.
II. METHODS
A. Datasets
Two different datasets were used in this study. The first one
is the Apnea-ECG database [4], [8], publicly available on Physionet [12]. This dataset contains 70 single-lead ECG signals
sampled at 100 Hz, of lengths ranging between 7 and 10 h.
Each ECG signal was manually annotated by an expert, on a
minute-by-minute basis, for sleep apnea and hypoapnea events
using additional signals such as respiration and oxygen saturation. Unfortunately, no differentiation between hypoapneas and
apneas was indicated in the annotations. Eight of the 70 ECG
recordings are accompanied by concomitant respiratory effort

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF PATIENTS IN THE LEUVEN DATASET
Patient
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Gender

BMI

AHI

M
F
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

40.8
26.3
21.7
30.5
27.8
29.4
31.3
30.9
26.6
36.6

72.6
3.2
0.6
42.7
45.6
26.5
29
29.6
36.2
44.2

measured with respiratory belts in the abdomen and thorax. In
total, 34 324 annotated min were extracted and used in this
study.
The second dataset was recorded in the Sleep Laboratory
of the University Hospital Leuven (UZ Leuven) in Belgium,
and consists of ten single-lead ECG (lead II) signals extracted
from polysomnographic recordings of ten different patients. The
mean age of the patients was 48.4 ± 11.2, and they presented
habitual snoring, witnessed apneas, and hypersomnolence. The
body mass index (BMI), gender, and apnea-hypopnea index
(AHI) for each patient are indicated in Table I. Information
about respiratory effort was acquired using two respiratory belts
placed around the thorax and the abdomen. All signals were
sampled at 200 Hz and their duration ranges from 320 to 469
min (384±47). In total, 5956 min were extracted and annotated according to the Chicago Criteria [3], by a technician,
and a physician experienced on interpreting polysomnographic
signals. These annotations correspond to the relative and absolute time of the event, duration, and type of respiratory event:
obstructive apnea (OSA); central apnea (CEN); obstructive hypopnea (OSH); hypopnea (HPA); or mixed apnea (MIX). The
events annotated as OSA and HPA are characterized by a reduced or complete absence of airflow, respectively, during at
least 10 s. As mentioned in Section I, the detection of airflow
reductions can be made from signals like the oxygen saturation
and airflow. A central apnea (CEN) consists of a cessation of
respiratory effort, and mixed apneas (MIX) are events with initial absence of respiratory effort that are accompanied by upper
airway obstructions. A hypopnea was classified as obstructive
(OSH) if there was presence of snoring during the event or increased inspiratory flattening of the nasal pressure flow signal
compared to baseline breathing or associated thoracoabdominal
paradox during the event but not during preevent breathing.
B. ECG Preprocessing and the Construction of the Tachogram
Each ECG signal is segmented into epochs of 60 s. This
is done based on the results reported in [13], where different
epoch lengths were analyzed. It was concluded that segments of
60 s allow to obtain the best performance when discriminating
between respiratory events.
After segmenting the ECG, the power line interference at
50 Hz is filtered out using a notch filter, and the mean of the sig-

VARON et al.: NOVEL ALGORITHM FOR THE AUTOMATIC DETECTION OF SLEEP APNEA FROM SINGLE-LEAD ECG

Fig. 1. Computation of the flattened ECG signal. (top) upper (U e c g ) and
lower (L e c g ) envelope computed using the secant method on 150 ms. (bottom)
Resultant flattened ECG (Fe c g = U e c g − L e c g ) that is used to search for the
R-peaks. Remember that the locations found in Fe c g are used to determine the
final R-peak positions in the original ECG signal. Nu stands for normalized
units.

nals is removed. Next, all ECG signals are up-sampled at 250
Hz [14] by means of cubic spline interpolation. This is done in
order to fall within the frequency range recommended in [14]:
250–500 Hz. These R-peaks are found using an adapted version
of the Pan–Tompkins algorithm that is proposed in this study,
where no filters (bandpass, derivative, integrator) are applied
to the ECG. Instead, the upper (Uecg ) and lower (Lecg ) ECG
envelopes are computed and used to obtain a flattened version
defined as: Fecg = Uecg − Lecg . The computation of Uecg and
Lecg is done by means of the secant method on 150 ms, and it is
illustrated in Fig. 1. Fecg is only used to find the possible locations of the R-peaks, which are then used to find the final R-peaks
in the original ECG. In order to correct for missing, ectopic, and
false peaks, the search back procedure described in [6] is applied. The final location of the R-peaks is then used to compute
the RR interval time series, RR, or so-called tachogram [14].
C. ECG Contamination Level
It is well known that different types of artefacts contaminate the ECG signals. Hence, when deriving signals like the
tachogram, it is crucial to determine whether an ECG segment
is contaminated or not. By doing so, it is possible to estimate
the reliability of the results obtained from that particular segment. To do this, the method proposed in [15] is used, where
a weight ω is assigned to each ECG segment depending on
how similar its autocorrelation function (ACF) is to the ACFs
of the past segments. The similarity value for each segment is
calculated using the cosine pair-wise similarity between ACFs,
and its weight is then computed as the normalized sum of its
pair-wise similarities. The closer ω is to one, the cleaner the
segment is from artefacts. In [15], all segments with weights
below a certain threshold (95th percentile) were removed from
the dataset. Here, however, no threshold is applied. Instead, ω
is used to provide a contamination level for each particular segment, and only segments with a certain value of ω are included
in the training phase.
D. ECG-Derived Respiration
It has been shown by several authors [5]–[7], [16], [17] that
respiratory events can be detected using an ECG derived respiration (EDR). The derivation of this approximated respiratory

2271

Fig. 2. Computation of the ECG-derived respiratory signal (EDR) using PCA
[10]. (top) Matrix containing the QRS complexes, segmented with a window of
120 ms around the R-peaks. On the right is the general procedure to compute the
principal components. (bottom) The eigenvalues of the covariance matrix Σ are
indicated on the left, and the eigenvector corresponding to the first eigenvalue is
indicated on the right. Note that α (1 ) explains most of the variance of the data,
and it is identified as the EDR: R p c a .

signal is possible due to the mechanical interaction between the
respiratory movements and the morphology of the ECG. This is
to say that during each breathing cycle the electrical impedance
of the thorax, and the relative position of the electrodes with
respect to the heart change due to variations of the amount of air
in the lungs. These variations can be detected from the changes
in the amplitude of the different waves of the ECG.
Here, three different methodologies to compute the EDR signal are implemented, and they will be described below. The
performances of the algorithm using each EDR will be assessed
and compared against the one obtained using the real, reference
respiratory signals. This is done in order to determine the added
value of each methodology on the detection of sleep apnea from
portable ECG-based monitoring systems.
1) R-Peak Amplitude (Ramp): This methodology, first described in [18], uses the amplitude of the R-peaks in a baseline
corrected ECG signal. The baseline is computed by means of
two median filters, namely one of 200 ms that removes the QRS
complexes and P-waves, and one of 600 ms that removes the
T-waves. The resulting baseline is then subtracted from the original ECG, and the amplitudes of the R-peaks make up the EDR.
In the remaining of this document, this EDR will be denoted by
Ram p .
2) PCA: The EDR signal computed using PCA takes into
account not only the variations of the R-peak amplitude, but
also the modulation of the whole QRS complex due to respiratory movements. Here, all QRS complexes are segmented
using a symmetric window of 120 ms around the R-peaks. The
length of this window was selected based on the width of a normal QRS complex: 100 ms ± 20 ms [19]. Next, all windows are
aligned with respect to the R-peaks in a matrix X [10]. Since
the amplitude of all points around the R-peaks are modulated by
respiration, a mean variation is derived by means of PCA. This
mean corresponds to the Rp ca , which is the first principal component obtained from the eigendecomposition of the covariance
matrix of X: Σ = XXT . This methodology is summarized in
Fig. 2.

2272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

defined as X = USVT , where U are the eigenvectors of XXT ,
V the eigenvectors of XT X and the nonzero elements of the
matrix S correspond to the square root of the eigenvalues of
XXT or XT X. However, the PCA approach was adopted here
in order to include a direct link with the EDR methodology.
F. Feature Derived From Subspace Projections

XT

Fig. 3. Eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of
. The percentage of variance explained by each component is indicated next to the first two eigenvalues
for both cases: apnea and normal. Note that in order to describe most of the
variance contained in the morphology of the QRS complexes for an apneic
segment, it is necessary to also consider the second principal component.

3) Kernel Principal Component Analysis (kPCA): In [11], it
was shown that a nonlinear version of PCA, i.e., kPCA, achieves
better approximations of the real respiratory signal, when compared with the two previous methodologies. In this case, a nonlinear transformation of the input space is performed by means
of an RBF kernel function, which allows to take into account linear and nonlinear interactions between respiration and the morphology of the QRS complexes. The input space corresponds to
the 120 ms windows that were segmented around the R-peaks,
and the new, transformed space is called the feature space. It is
in this new space that the traditional linear PCA is performed.
After that, the EDR is computed in the feature space and then
mapped back to the input space by means of pre-image [20].
Details on how to compute the EDR using this methodology,
namely Rkp ca , can be found in [11].
E. Feature Based on the QRS Morphology
A new feature derived from the ECG is used here for the detection of sleep apnea. This feature is based on the computation
of the EDR using PCA. The variation here is that the algorithm
is applied to the matrix X T rather than to X. The reason for this
relies on the fact that when considering X T , a “local” interpretation of changes in morphology around the R-peaks can be made.
Furthermore, when an episode of apnea occurs, the changes in
QRS morphology within one segment are more heterogeneous,
an effect that can be observed from the eigenvalues of X T . This
is illustrated in Fig. 3, where the eigenvalues obtained from two
different ECG segments are indicated. The percentage of the
variance explained by
each component is also indicated, and
it is defined as (λi / λi ), where λi is the ith eigenvalue of
the covariance matrix of X T , i = 1, . . . , m, and m the window
size. Note that during a normal episode (i.e., nonapneic), the
variance explained by the first component describes more than
90% of the modulation of the QRS complexes. However, when
apnea occurs, it is necessary to also consider the information
contained in the second component, which explains more than
40% of the variance. Following these observations, the percentage explained by the second component is computed for each
ECG segment of 60 s, and it is used as a “morphology” feature
during the classification phase.
The procedure discussed previously is strongly connected
to the singular value decomposition of the matrix X, which is

It is well known that variations in heart rate are modulated by
variations in respiration through the physiological mechanism
called respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) [21]. Therefore, the
information contained in the heart rate signal could in principle
be split into two different components, one related to respiratory changes, and one related to physiological mechanisms
different from respiration (e.g., sympathetic activation). This
decomposition can be computed by means of orthogonal subspace projections, as proposed in [22] and [23], and it will be
described as follows.
Given are two physiological signals X and Y , where X is
the RR interval time series RR (resampled at 5 Hz), and Y
corresponds to one of the following respiratory signals (resampled at 5 Hz): Ram p , Rp ca , Rkp ca , RA B or RT H , with RA B
and RT H the respiratory effort measured on the abdomen and
on the thorax, respectively. All the information contained in X
that is linearly related to Y , can be computed by projecting X
onto a subspace V defined by variations in Y . In order to define
V , three different approaches are implemented and described as
follows.
1) The Wavelet decomposition of Y using db4 as a mother
wavelet and five levels is computed, as proposed in [23].
The corresponding approximation coefficients and its delayed version using m samples, are used to defined the
basis V1 , describing the low frequencies of respiration,
namely frequencies below 0.07 Hz. On the other hand, the
detail coefficients of levels 3, 4, and 5, and their delayed
versions using n samples, are used to construct the basis
V2 , which describe respiratory variations between 0.07
and 0.6 Hz.
2) The reference signal Y is first filtered using a bandpass,
fifth order, Butterworth filter with cutoff frequencies at
0.04 and 0.15 Hz. Next, the filtered signal and its delayed
version are used to construct the basis V3 . Note that the
range of frequency used here corresponds to the low frequency (LF) band commonly used in heart rate variability
analysis [14]. In order to describe the high frequency (HF)
band, Y is filtered using the same filter, but now with cutoff frequencies at 0.15 and 0.4 Hz. This new filtered signal
and its delayed version are used to construct V4 .
3) The subspace related to respiration is spanned by V5 ,
which is constructed using the original Y and its delayed
version.
As mentioned in each approach, a delay is included in the
different bases. This delay is computed using tenfold cross validation. The reason to use three approaches relies on the definition of the frequency bands. The first approach uses wavelet
decomposition, which imposes frequency bands depending on
the level of decomposition and the sampling frequency of the

VARON et al.: NOVEL ALGORITHM FOR THE AUTOMATIC DETECTION OF SLEEP APNEA FROM SINGLE-LEAD ECG

2273

TABLE II
SET OF FEATURES
Feature ID

Derived from
ECG

RR

S1
S2

x

rk

x

Frequency Range

Computation

-

std(R R )
std(R )
m
(r r i − μ)(r r i + k − μ)
i =
1
m
(r r i − μ) 2

Resp

x

-

i= 1

PC
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6

x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

0–0.07 Hz
0.07–0.6 Hz
0.04–0.15 Hz
0.15–0.4 Hz
All
All

λ2
Σ λi
XT Xi
F i = iT
X X

,

with
Xi = Pi X ,
i = {1, . . . , 5}, and
X6 = QX

Resp can be interpreted as any real or estimated respiratory signal

signal. Besides, in order to include a big part of the LF and HF
bands, this band configuration is used. In the second approach,
the traditional LF and HF bands are explored. The last approach
allows to describe “all” information of the heart rate that is
related to respiration.
After constructing a basis Vi , with i = {1, . . . , 5}, a projection matrix
Pi = Vi (ViT Vi )−1 Vi

(1)

is used to find all the information of X contained in the subspace
spanned by Vi , as
Xi = Pi X.

(2)

Note that Xi is a component of X related to variations of Y
that are described by Vi . It is important to mention, that when
computing X5 , it is possible to describe all information contained in the heart rate that is not related to respiration. This will
be denoted by X6 , and can be computed as X6 = QX, with
Q = I − P5 .
Once Xi is obtained, its relative power is computed as
XiT Xi
(3)
XT X
and it corresponds to a feature that will be used as input to
the classifier. In total, six features are computed for each ECG
minute using orthogonal subspace projections, and they are summarized in Table II, which also includes all the features used in
this study. These other features correspond to the standard deviation of the RR interval time series (S1 ), standard deviation
of the respiratory signal R (S2 ), and the serial correlation coefficients of the RR (rk ). For the last one, RR = {rri }N
i=1 , with
N the total amount of RR intervals per segment. μ corresponds
to the mean of the RR intervals per segment, and k = 1, . . . , 5.
As mentioned previously, the respiration modulates changes
in the heart rate through the RSA, where the RR intervals are
shortened during inspiration, and elongated during expiration.
This mechanism allows for an improved gas exchange that leads
to an optimal energy expenditure when respiration and heart rate
are highly synchronized [21]. This synchronization is in some
Fi =

Fig. 4. (top) RR interval time series and respiratory signal measured in the
abdomen for a normal (left) and an apneic (right) segment. Nu stands for
normalized units. (bottom) Heart rate components derived using orthogonal
subspace projections. X 1 corresponds to the component related to respiratory
dynamics in the range between 0–0.07 Hz, and X 2 describes variations in the
range between 0.07–0.6 Hz. Note that the components X 1 and X 2 get values
from t = 10 s because the order of the model was 50, which corresponds to 10
s for a sampling frequency of 5 Hz.

cases reduced during episodes of apnea [24]. However, a more
important effect of apnea is related to an increased sympathetic
modulation, which causes changes in heart rate that are not
modulated by RSA [25]. The increased sympathetic activity
has been already studied by means of the quantification of the
sympathovagal balance, which can be computed as the ratio
between the power of the heart rate in the LF band (0.04–0.15
Hz) and the power in the HF band (0.15–0.4 Hz). This ratio
however, is defined in order to take into account all vagally and
sympathetically mediated activities. Therefore, methodologies
like the one described previously, allow to determine whether or
not respiration is the strongest modulator of the heart rate during
a given minute epoch. This is to say, with this methodology,
it is possible to extract the information of the heart rate that
is modulated by mechanisms different from respiration. For
instance, Fig 4 shows a normal minute of respiration and heart
rate, and a minute containing OSA. The two different heart rate
components are also indicated in the figure. Note that the relative
amplitude of the component related to respiration decreases
during an episode of apnea.
G. Feature Selection
In total, 28 features are extracted from each ECG minute,
namely, the standard deviation of RR (S1 ), the standard deviation of the three EDR signals (S2 ), five serial correlation coefficients (r), the relative power of the second principal component
(P C), and 18 features computed using orthogonal subspace projections (F ). The reason to compute 18×F is that three EDR
algorithms are used to estimate the respiration. In order to determine the discriminative power of each respiratory signal and
of each feature, two different statistical tests are used, namely,
the F-score [26] and the Kruskal–Wallis test.
The F-score for a given feature zi , with i = {1, . . . , 28}, and
the number of positive and negative instances denoted by n+

2274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. (left) Percentage of the amount of data labeled as clean in the Physionet
dataset with respect to the contamination level ω. (right) Area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC) for different thresholds of ω. Note that
when ω = 0.9, about 95% of the data is considered as “clean,” and the slope of
the performance changes.

and n− , respectively, is computed as
(+)

F(i) ≡

(z̄i

(−)

− z̄i )2 + (z̄i
−
Z+
i + Zk

− z̄i )2

(4)

with

Fig. 6. Features extracted using orthogonal subspace projections in the Physionet (top) and Leuven (bottom) datasets. A comparison between the features
obtained from the real respiratory signals and the three different EDR algorithms is indicated. No significant differences were found between the features.
Note that the three EDR signals R a m p , R p c a , and R k p c a , lead to very similar
features.

 (+)
1
(+)
=
(zk ,i − z̄i )2
n+ − 1
n+

Z+
i

k =1

Z−
k

 (−)
1
(−)
=
(zk ,i − z̄i )2
n− − 1
n−

(5)

k =1

(+)

(−)

where z̄i , z̄i , and z̄i correspond to the average of the values of the ith feature for the whole set, the positive and the
negative sets, respectively. The larger the F-score, the larger the
discriminative power of the feature.
For each derived feature, one p-value (using the Kruskal–
Wallis test), and one F-score are computed. In addition, these
values are also computed for the transformed features obtained
after applying the logarithm. This logarithmic transformation is
used to obtain features with distributions closer to normal.
H. Classification
Once a set of features is selected for classification, segments
with ω > 0.9 are selected as candidates for the training set,
which is then extracted using the fixed-size method [27]. The
value of ω was selected using the values indicated in Fig. 5,
where it is clear that when a threshold of 0.9 is applied on the
values of ω, about 95% of the data is kept. In addition, the figure
also shows that the slope of the curve AUC vs. ω changes for
ω > 0.9. Therefore, by selecting the training set from segments
with ω > 0.9, a maximum performance is achieved by only
removing about 5% of the data.
This method finds a subset of data points that maximizes the
Renyi entropy. In other words, the subset contains parameters
derived from “clean” ECG segments, and it represents the underlying distribution of the dataset. This subset is used to perform
training and validation, and the remaining data points are later
used to test the apnea classifiers.
Different classifiers are used in this study, and they are listed
as follows:
1) LDA
2) SVM using linear, polynomial, and RBF kernels

3) LS-SVM using linear, polynomial, and RBF kernels [27].
Their performances are evaluated using sensitivity, specificity,
area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
(AUC), and accuracy.
III. RESULTS
This section presents the comparison between the different
EDR signals and the real respiratory efforts measured from the
abdomen and thorax. A comparison between the different parameters extracted from either signal was performed for the
two datasets separately, namely the Physionet, and the Leuven
datasets. Furthermore, the features with the highest F -score and
significant p-values were selected and will be presented below.
In addition, different classifiers were evaluated, and a final algorithm to classify sleep apnea was identified. All experiments
were carried out in MATLAB R2013a on an Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7, 2.4 GHz, 8-GB RAM, running Windows 8.1.
A. Comparison Between Respiratory Signals: Real and EDR
In order to assess the usability of the EDR signals for the
classification of sleep apnea, it is important to guarantee that the
derived features do not differ significantly from those derived
from the real respiratory signals. Hence, the features derived
by means of orthogonal subspace projections on the heart rate
and each respiratory signal (real or estimated) were compared.
Fig. 6 shows the different relative powers Fi for each respiratory
signal, and for the two datasets used in this study. The feature
ID corresponds to the notation used in Table II. No significant
differences were found between the respiratory signals. Moreover, it is clear from the figure that the three EDR signals led to
the computation of very similar parameters.

VARON et al.: NOVEL ALGORITHM FOR THE AUTOMATIC DETECTION OF SLEEP APNEA FROM SINGLE-LEAD ECG

2275

Fig. 7. Examples of the heart rate components derived using R a m p . Note that the dynamics of the EDR signal (R a m p ) change in segments containing apnea
events, which is an indication that the simplest EDR algorithm is sufficient to detect changes of the respiratory effort.

Fig. 8. Features selected as the most discriminative ones. The first panel in the left indicates the features for the physionet dataset, and the other six panels
show the features for the Leuven dataset and for all respiratory events. The F -scores of the features are larger than 0.3 and their p-values are lower than 0.05
for the distinction between normal (NOR) segments and respiratory events. Note that the proposed features, F1 , F2 , and P C , provide a clear differentiation
between normal and obstructive apneas. Obstructive apneas: OSA; obstructive hypopneas: OSH; hypopnea: HPA; central apneas: CEN; and mixed apneas: MIX,
are indicated.

It is important to mention that no discrimination between
normal and apnea episodes was made at this point.
It can be observed from Fig. 6 that the respiratory information
derived using the R-peak amplitude, Ram p , is similar to the
one obtained with the real respiratory signals. Fig. 7 shows
different examples of the components derived from the heart rate
using Ram p , for a normal segment and different types of apneas.
Note that in the segments containing apneas clear changes in the
derived respiratory signal can be observed, and the amplitude
of the components independent of respiration (dashed lines)
become larger. This indicates that the simplest EDR algorithm
already allows to observe variations in the respiratory effort,
which are typical during apnea events.
B. Feature Selection
After the observations described in the previous section, it is
clear that one can rely on features derived from estimated respiratory signals. This becomes of high importance, especially
in datasets such as Physionet, where not all recordings include

real measurements of respiration. With this in mind, only the
features derived from the EDR were taken into account in the
selection of the final feature set. In addition, no significant differences were found between different EDR. For this reason,
the features computed from Ram p were favored due to the simplicity of the computation of the EDR using only the amplitude
of the R-peaks. It was found that the features with F -scores
larger than 0.3, and p-values lower than 0.05 for the distinction
between apneas and normal segments were: F1 , F2 , P C, and
the logarithms of S1 , S2 , and r5 . Remember that F1 , F2 , and S2
were computed using Ram p . Fig. 8 shows the different features
for segments with and without apneas. Note that for the Leuven dataset, a discrimination between the different respiratory
events is indicated. It is clear that the proposed features already
provide a remarkable differentiation between respiratory events.
C. Apnea Classification
In total, 34 324 ECG min were segmented on the Physionet dataset, and 5956 on the Leuven dataset. As mentioned in

2276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE III
PERFORMANCES OF THE TESTED CLASSIFIER ON THE PHYSIONET AND ON THE LEUVEN DATASETS
Classifier

LDA
SVM

LS-SVM

Linear
Polynomial
RBF
Linear
Polynomial
RBF

Physionet

Leuven

Sens.

Spec.

Acc

AUC

Sens.

Spec.

Acc

AUC

71.74%
74.63%
78.36%
78.2%
71.48%
73.4%
84.71%

71.20%
68.51%
68.22%
70.55%
76.26%
73.43%
84.69%

71.43%
71.16%
72.6%
73.86%
71.78%
73.43%
84.74%

78.46%
78.5%
80.4%
81.85%
78.46%
81.18%
88.07%

81.22%
86.46%
88.21%
82.97%
80.35%
81.66%
78.81%

79.71%
74.6%
76.57%
81.78%
80.01%
81.7%
84.56%

79.86%
75.83%
77.78%
81.9%
80.05%
81.68%
83.95%

87.69%
87.74%
89.90%
88.41%
87.7%
89.17%
89.97%

All respiratory features were computed using R a m p . Sensitivity (Sens), specificity (Spec), accuracy (Acc), and area under
the ROC curve (AUC) are indicated.

Fig. 9. Real and estimated AHIs for both datasets under investigation. Note
that the maximum value for the estimated AHI is 60 due to the minute-by-minute
analysis. A complete differentiation between the normal and apnea patients in
the Physionet dataset can be made using a threshold of 10 min/h (dashed line).

Section II-B, the similarity between the ACF is used to determine a level of contamination of the ECG segment. All segments
with ω > 0.9 were included in a subset of “clean” ECGs. From
these clean ECGs (32 477 in Physionet, 5205 in Leuven)1 , training sets of 6000 segments from Physionet, and 3000 segments
from the Leuven dataset, were selected by means of the fixedsize method. The remaining segments were used as test set and
the comparison between classifiers was performed on this set.
Table III presents the performance for all tested classifiers
and for both datasets. It is clear from the table that the LS-SVM
classifier using an RBF kernel outperforms the other classifiers
in both datasets. Using the best classifier, the AHI is computed
for each patient and each dataset. Results are shown in Fig. 9,
where the real AHI is plotted against the estimated one. Note
that the largest differences are obtained for larger AHI in both
datasets. Some of these differences can be explained by the fact
that apnea events can occur several times per minute, and since
the data were segmented on a minute-by-minute basis, all those
events are grouped into one single episode. If a threshold of
10 min/h in apnea is applied to both datasets, it is possible to
separate normal from apnea patients in the Physionet dataset,
and patients with a higher than 10 AHI in the Leuven dataset,
with an accuracy of 100%.
When looking at the classification results of the Leuven
dataset, it is possible to manually identify the distribution of
different types of respiratory events within the class labeled as
1 In total, 1847 segments (5.3%) were removed from the Physionet dataset,
and 751 (12.6%) from the Leuven dataset.

apnea. This class contained 78.7% of 229 OSA, 37.7% of 496
OSH, 24.14% of 55 HPA, 93.48% of 48 MIX, 50% of 16 CEN,
and 8.9% of 1454 normal segments, from the test set. As can be
seen, if the OSH and HPA are excluded from the analysis, the
classifier achieves accuracies of more than 93%. These results
will be discussed in the next section.
The results described previously were obtained after selecting the training set using the “clean” ECG segments, which
correspond to the segments with ω > 0.9. If the training set is
selected from the whole dataset, the AUCs using LS-SVM with
an RBF kernel, are reduced to 80.2% and 84.1% for Physionet
and Leuven test datasets, respectively. This shows that by including segments with a high confidence level in the training
set, it is possible to reduce the bias in the classifier toward the
presence of artifacts.
IV. DISCUSSION
This study had three main objectives, namely, the evaluation
of the two novel features for the detection of sleep apnea, the
comparison between three algorithms to derive respiratory information from the ECG, and the assessment of their added
value in the classification of apnea. Bearing in mind the results
presented in the previous section, it is clear that both features
proposed here allow for a high discrimination between normal
segments and respiratory events. Furthermore, the classification
performance achieved with these two features is comparable
with many algorithms proposed in the literature, where many
more features are derived from the RR interval time series and
the EDR. For instance, for purely automatic algorithms based
on single-lead ECG, accuracies of about 85% to 90% were reported in [6] and [8] on the Physionet dataset. We believe that
the difference in accuracy between this work and the literature
is due to the size of the training set. In [6] and [8], 35 recordings
were used to train the classifiers, while in this study “only” 6000
ECG segments were selected as training set. The reason for this
is that the algorithms based on SVM formulations require the
computation of a kernel matrix, of which the size is limited by
the hardware specifications. In this study, the size was limited
to 6000 × 6000. Nevertheless, even with a smaller training set,
an accuracy of 84.74% was achieved for the Physionet dataset.
Concerning the feature derived from the morphology of the
ECG, namely P C, it was observed that indeed, the relative

VARON et al.: NOVEL ALGORITHM FOR THE AUTOMATIC DETECTION OF SLEEP APNEA FROM SINGLE-LEAD ECG

power of the second component is higher due to variations
in the QRS complexes caused by an increased sympathetic
modulation.
Turning now to the feature derived using orthogonal subspace projections, it is clear from the results that the information
shared between heart rate and respiration, in the traditional LF
and HF bands is significantly reduced during episodes of apnea. However, when looking at frequencies lower than 0.07 Hz,
it was surprising to see that changes in respiration could also
be observed in the heart rate. This could be the result of baseline variations in the respiration due to a reduced or complete
absence of respiratory effort, which cause a rise in the heart
rate at very low frequencies. It is important to remember that
the analysis was performed on a minute-by-minute basis, which
can be understood as a limitation in the frequencies that can be
described. This is to say that only frequencies between 0.03 and
0.07 Hz can be analyzed by this feature.
Another important point that requires attention is the fact that
a comparison between three different algorithms to derive the
EDR signal was performed. In addition, the features extracted
from these signals were validated against those computed using the real respiration. It was remarkable to see how those
features did not differ from each other. With this in mind, it
is clear that the usability of EDR signals on applications like
sleep apnea detection is valid and significant. However, since no
differences were observed between the three EDR algorithms,
it is possible to rely on the simplest approach in order to reduce
the complexity of the whole methodology. This last observation
has clear advantages when developing portable devices, where
less sensors are needed. Hence, if an accurate respiration can be
estimated from the ECG, there is no need for respiratory belts.
It is not a surprise that the most difficult respiratory events to
classify from the ECG signal are the hypopneas. As mentioned
in Section I, these events are associated with a reduced airflow
and a reduced respiratory effort, and can be accompanied by a
drop in oxygen saturation, or by a reduction of more than 50% of
the flow during at lest 10 s, or by a reduced airflow with arousal
or desaturation. Additionally, the difference between normal
breathing and (central) hypopnea is not always clear [3]. This is
because these respiratory events are not always accompanied by
arousal, desaturation, snoring, or thoraco-abdominal paradox.
Therefore, they may appear very similar to normal segments.
For this reason, in order to get a more reliable classification of
this type of events, the use of different physiological signals
such as airflow, SpO2 and CO2 is required. Remember that the
classifiers used in this study only discriminated between normal and respiratory events, and all apneas and hypopneas were
considered to belong to one class labeled as apnea. The differentiation made before was done manually in order to determine
the distribution of respiratory events within the group classified
as apnea.
V. CONCLUSION
A methodology for the automatic detection of sleep apnea
from single-lead ECG was presented. Two novel features were
proposed, one describes morphology changes of the QRS complexes caused by an increased sympathetic modulation during

2277

apnea, and one quantifies the information shared between respiration and HR at different frequency ranges. These two features
together with two well-known parameters used in HRV, namely
the standard deviation and the serial correlation coefficient allowed to discriminate apneas from normal activity. This discrimination was performed using an LS-SVM classifier, which
proved to outperform other classifiers. The accuracies achieved
in this study are comparable to the best results reported thus far
for fully automated algorithms, namely in the range between
85% and 90%.
Apart from providing a label to each ECG minute, the methodology allows to estimate the contamination level of the recording
by means of the ACF. This level was used in the training phase
of the classifier, but it can also be used to determine the level
of confidence on the results obtained for each segment. In other
words, manual inspection of the highly contaminated segments
can be recommended based on this feature.
Another contribution of this study was the comparison of
three algorithms to derive respiratory information from the ECG.
It was shown that the different parameters computed from the
respiratory signals, real or estimated, were comparable for the
detection of sleep apnea. Therefore, the use of only ECG sensors can guarantee up to 85% accuracies in the discrimination
of both apneas and hypopneas together. In addition, these performances can be achieved using only the amplitude of the
R-peaks. Hence, the added value of more elaborated EDR algorithms was negligible in this particular application. This is an
advantage for home monitoring systems that require algorithms
with low computational cost.
REFERENCES
[1] P. E. Peppard et al., “Increased prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing
in adults,” AM J Epidemiol, vol. 177, no. 9, pp. 1006–1014, May 2013.
[2] S. M. Caples et al., “Sleep-disordered breathing and cardiovascular risk,”
Sleep, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 291–303, Mar. 2007.
[3] Task Force AASM, “Sleep-related breathing disorders in adults: Recommendations for syndrome definition and measurement techniques in
clinical research,” Sleep, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 667–689, Aug. 1999.
[4] T. Penzel et al., “The apnea-ECG database,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol.,
2000, pp. 255–258.
[5] M. Bsoul et al., “Apnea medassist: Real-time sleep apnea monitor using
single-lead ecg,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 416–427,
May 2011.
[6] P. De Chazal et al., “Automated processing of the single-lead electrocardiogram for the detection of obstructive sleep apnoea,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 686–696, Jun. 2003.
[7] K. Kesper et al., “ECG signal analysis for the assessment of sleepdisordered breathing and sleep pattern,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 135–144, Feb. 2012.
[8] T. Penzel et al., “Systematic comparison of different algorithms for apnoea detection based on electrocardiogram recordings,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 402–407, Jul. 2002.
[9] S. Boudaoud et al., “Corrected integral shape averaging applied to obstructive sleep apnea detection from the electrocardiogram,” EURASIP J.
Adv. Sig. Pr., vol. 2007, art. no. 32570, pp. 1–12, 2007.
[10] P. Langley et al., “Principal component analysis as a tool for analyzing
beat-to-beat changes in ECG features: Application to ecg-derived respiration,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 821–829, Apr.
2010.
[11] D. Widjaja et al., “Application of kernel principal component analysis for
single-lead-ECG-derived respiration,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 4, pp. 1169–1176, Apr. 2012.
[12] A. L. Goldberger et al., “Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,”
Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, Jun. 2000.

2278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

[13] P. de Chazal et al., “Automated detection of obstructive sleep apnoea
at different time scales using the electrocardiogram,” Physiol. Meas.,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 967–983, Aug. 2004.
[14] Task Force ESC and NASPE, “Heart rate variability: Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation and clinical use,” Circulation,
vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 1043–1065, Mar. 1996.
[15] C. Varon et al., “Robust artefact detection in long-term ecg recordings
based on autocorrelation function similarity and percentile analysis,” in
Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., 2012, pp. 3151–3154.
[16] R. J. Thomas et al., “Differentiating obstructive from central and complex
sleep apnea using an automated electrocardiogram-based method,” Sleep,
vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 1756–1769, Dec. 2007.
[17] A. H. Khandoker et al., “Support vector machines for automated recognition of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome from ECG recordings,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. B., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 37–48, Jan. 2009.
[18] G. B. Moody et al., “Derivation of respiratory signals from multi-lead
ECGs,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 1985, pp. 113–116.
[19] G. D. Clifford et al., Advanced Methods and Tools for ECG Data Analysis.
Norwood, MA, USA: Artech House, 2006.
[20] J.-Y. Kwok and I. W. Tsang, “The pre-image problem in kernel methods,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1517–1525, Nov. 2004.
[21] G. G. Berntson et al., “Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: Autonomic origins,
physiological mechanisms, and psychophysiological implications,” Psychophysiology, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 183–196, Mar. 1993.
[22] A. Caicedo et al., “Cardiopulmonary coupling in sleep apnea assessed by
means of orthogonal subspace projection,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Adv.
Med. Signal Inform. Process, 2012, pp. 1–2.
[23] A. Caicedo et al., “Decoupling the influence of systemic variables in
the peripheral and cerebral haemodynamics during ECMO procedure by
means of oblique and orthogonal subspace projections,” in Proc. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol., 2012, pp. 6153–6156.
[24] T. Penzel et al., “Cardiovascular and respiratory dynamics during normal
and pathological sleep,” Chaos, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 015116-1–015116-10,
Mar. 2007.
[25] E. Vanninen et al., “Cardiac sympathovagal balance during sleep apnea
episodes,” Clin. Physiol., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 209–216, May 1996.
[26] Y.-W. Chen and C.-J. Lin, “Combining SVMs with various feature selection strategies,” in Feature Extraction. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2006, pp. 315–324.
[27] J. A. K. Suykens et al., Least Squares Support Vector Machines, vol. 4.
Singapore: World Scientific, 2002.

Carolina Varon (M’11) received the degree in electronic engineering from the Universidad de Ibagué,
Ibagué, Colombia, in 2005, the M.Sc. degree in astronomy and astrophysics in 2009, and the M.Sc.
degree in artificial intelligence in 2010, both from the
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering.
From 2002 to 2003, she was a Site Engineer
in Agroindustrial del Tolima, Ibagué. From 2005 to
2007, she was the Technical Support for Latin America for Security Solutions, Bogotá, Colombia. Her research interests include
biomedical signal processing, machine learning, and kernel methods.

Alexander Caicedo (M’12) received the degree in
electronic engineering in 2005 and the M.Sc. degree
in control engineering in 2007, both from the Universidad de Ibagué, Ibagué, Colombia. He received
the Ph.D. degree in engineering from the Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium,
in 2013.
From 2007 to 2009, he worked as an Assistance
Professor at Universidad de Ibagué. During the Ph.D.,
he developed several algorithms for the assessment
of cerebral autoregulation in premature infants. He
is currently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Department of electrical
engineering (ESAT) in KU Leuven, Belgium. His research interests include
biomedical signal processing, kernel methods, system analysis, and control
theory.
Dries Testelmans received the Graduation degree in
medicine and pneumology at the University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium. He received the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Respiratory Diseases,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
He further specialized in Sleep Medicine at the
Sleep Lab, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire in Grenoble, France. He is currently the Adjunct Head of clinic
at the Department of Respiratory diseases and at the
Leuven University Centre for Sleep/Wake Disorders,
University Hospitals Leuven. Besides clinical practice, he is also performing research in the field of sleep-related breathing disorders, noninvasive ventilation, and respiratory muscle function.
Bertien Buyse received the Graduation degree in
medicine and pneumology from the University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium. She received the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Respiratory Diseases,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven.
She is currently the Head of clinic at the Department of Respiratory diseases and the Director at
the Leuven University Center for Sleep/Wake Disorders, University Hospitals Leuven. Besides clinical practice, she is also performing research in the
field of sleep-related breathing disorders, regulation
of breathing, noninvasive ventilation, and diaphragmatic pacing and plication
techniques.
Sabine Van Huffel (M’96–A’96–SM’99–F’09) received the M.Sc. degree in computer science engineering, the M.Sc. degree in biomedical engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium, in June 1981, July 1985, and
June 1987, respectively.
She is currently a Full Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven. Her research interests include numerical (multi)linear algebra and software, system identification, parameter
estimation, and biomedical data processing. Special attention is given to the
numerical aspects and to the design of reliable algorithms and their practical
evaluation in medical diagnostics.

