IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2251

Local Gradients in Electrotonic Loading Modulate
the Local Effective Refractory Period: Implications
for Arrhythmogenesis in the Infarct Border Zone
Adam Connolly∗ , Mark L. Trew, Bruce H. Smaill, Gernot Plank, and Martin J. Bishop

Abstract—Ectopic electrical activity that originates in the periinfarct region can give rise to potentially lethal re-entrant arrhythmias. The spatial variation in electrotonic loading that results from
structural remodelling in the infarct border zone may increase the
probability that focal activity will trigger electrical capture, but
this has not previously been investigated systematically. This study
uses in-silico experiments to examine the structural modulation
of effective refractory period on ectopic beat capture. Informed
by 3-D reconstructions of myocyte organization in the infarct border zone, a region of rapid tissue expansion is abstracted to an
idealized representation. A novel metric is introduced that defines
the local electrotonic loading as a function of passive tissue properties and boundary conditions. The effective refractory period
correlates closely with local electrotonic loading, while the action
potential duration, conduction, and upstroke velocity reduce in regions of increasing electrotonic load. In the presence of focal ectopic
stimuli, spatial variation in effective refractory period can cause
unidirectional conduction block providing a substrate for reentrant arrhythmias. Consequently, based on the observed results,
a possible novel mechanism for arrhythmogenesis in the infarct
border zone is proposed.
Index Terms—Action potential (AP), arrhythmogenesis, bidomain, cardiac, electrophysiology, monodomain, propagation.

I. INTRODUCTION
NFARCTED hearts are susceptible to spontaneously developing life-threatening reentrant arrhythmias [1]. Heterogeneous tracts of preserved myocytes that surround and penetrate
the infarct are thought to provide a structural substrate for reentry, giving rise to tortuous propagation [2], [3] as well as focal

I

Manuscript received September 9, 2014; revised March 10, 2015; accepted
April 3, 2015. Date of publication April 9, 2015; date of current version August
18, 2015. This work was supported by the National Institute for Health Research
Biomedical Research Centre at Guy’s and St Thomas’ National Health Service
Foundation Trust and King’s College London, in addition to the Centre of Excellence in Medical Engineering funded by the Wellcome Trust and Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) (WT 088641/Z/09/Z). This
work was supported by an EPSRC First Grant Award to MJB (EP/K034367/1).
The work of G. Plank was supported by the Austrian Science Fund FWF grant
F3210-N18 and the National Institute of Health grant 1RO1 HL 10119601.
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Health Service, the National Institute for Health Research, or the
Department of Health. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. Connolly is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Kings
College London, London WC2R 2LS, U.K.(e-mail: adam.connolly@kcl.ac.uk).
M. L. Trew and B. H. Smaill are with the Auckland Bioengineering Institute,
University of Auckland.
G. Plank is with the Institute of Biophysics, Medical University of Graz.
M. J. Bishop is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Kings College London.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2421296

conduction delays and unidirectional block [3]. However, reentrant rhythm disturbances are commonly triggered by ectopic
electrical activity that also originates in the peri-infarct region
[4]. While the mechanisms that give rise to spontaneous depolarization (SD) have been extensively studied at the cellular
level [5], [6], it remains unclear how local stimuli of this kind
overcome electrotonic loading (EL) and generate propagated
activation [7].
In the infarct border zone (BZ), structural and electrophysiological heterogeneities are associated with rapid spatial variations in EL. For instance, the increased EL associated with a
region of abrupt tissue expansion gives rise to conduction velocity (CV) slowing immediately distal to the expansion [3],
[8], [9]. The corollary to this is that there are regions within
the BZ where tracts of preserved myocytes have much reduced
cell-to-cell coupling [3]. We hypothesize that the reduced EL in
these regions will increase the probability of successful capture
by an ectopic stimulus.
In this study, we have characterized regional EL in idealized
geometries that are informed by 3-D reconstructions of myocyte
organization in the infarct BZ [3]. Local EL is derived from the
membrane potential generated passively by a current source at
that point. This metric can be evaluated throughout a heterogeneous domain with complex boundary geometry and, in a 1-D
semiinfinite cable, is inversely proportional to the space constant λ [10], [11]. Active propagation was simulated in these
geometric models and local ERP, CV, and action potential duration (APD) were determined. We demonstrate large spatial
gradients in EL in geometric models that correspond to structural remodelling in the infarct BZ with corresponding variation
in ERP. In this setting, however, there is no relationship between APD and ERP. Finally, focal stimulation in regions with
large ERP gradients is shown to cause unidirectional conduction
block, providing a potential mechanism for arrhythmogenesis.

II. METHODS
A. Local EL
In this study, the effective local diffusive loading is called the
EL. A measurement of the local EL is sought in the presence
of structural and electronic heterogeneities, where λ may not be
measurable. The solution of the 1-D steady-state cable equation
for a point-source in a semiinfinite domain is given by [12]
V (x) = V0 e−|x|/λ

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(1)

2252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

where λ is the length constant, V (x) is the transmembrane
potential, and V0 is the transmembrane potential at the origin.
From the definition of the axial current density J = −σdV /dx,
and given the current density at the source is proportional to the
current injected at the point, I0 , we can write
λ
V0 ∝ I0
σ

The bidomain equations, stated in parabolic form, are written as
∇ · (σ i ∇φi ) = βIm
∇ · (σ e ∇φe ) = −βIm − Iei
Im = Cm

(2)

√
where σ is the bulk conductivity. Using λ ∝ σ allows (2) to
be rewritten as
I0
(3)
V0 ∝ .
λ
The term V0 in (3) is inversely proportional to the length constant
λ, so a large λ (high conductivity or good cell-to-cell coupling)
gives a small V0 and vice versa. This derivation for V0 only holds
in the 1-D semiinfinite domain. When boundaries are present or
the conductivity varies along the cable, V0 provides a measure of
the EL at the point source, or a measure of amount of diffusion
due to the surrounding continuum.
Using this concept, it is possible to produce a scalar field of
the EL (EL(x)), for point-source stimuli in a multidimensional
continuum, provided the source current remains constant. Assuming the conductivity is isotropic, the proximity of boundaries reduces the amount of current diffused at a point due to
the zero-flux boundary condition (BC) [13] (in the intracellular
domain) so V0 (x) increases with increasing proximity to the
boundary. Consequently, V0 (x) does not reflect the degree of
cell-to-cell electrical coupling that λ describes in the semiinfinite domain. When the conductivity varies as a function of
space, V0 (x) varies commensurately. When both varying conductivity (or varying fiber direction) and boundaries are present,
V0 (x) provides a measure of the local EL. It is important to note
that the EL, as defined here, is based on the steady-state variation of the transmembrane potential; thus, transient dynamics
are not captured. As V0 (x) is dependent upon the stimulation
current, it is normalized by the minimum of V0 (x) over the domain and then inverted to give a nondimensional value of EL:
EL(x) = (V0 (x)/ min{V0 (x)})−1 .
In the multidimensional case, the solution to the governing
equation [12] diverges at the origin (where the source-term exists). In this study, linear finite elements are used for the numerical solution of the governing equations, with the stimulus
current applied at element vertices. The element shape functions
effectively distribute the applied current over an area (in 2-D)
defined by the element shape, edge length, and connectivity.
Thus, the source-term is no longer applied at a point and the
solution at the vertex does not diverge. The length scale introduced by the finite discretization necessarily implies that the
solution is mesh-dependent. However, by injecting an equivalent current density over the same volume (or area in 2-D), the
mesh dependence is removed.
B. Computational Methods
The linear finite-element solver Cardiac Arrhythmia Research
Package [14] is used to solve the mono and bidomain partial
differential equations (PDEs) for cardiac electrodynamics [15].

∂V
+ Iion (V, η) − Is
∂t

σb ∇2 φe = −Ieb

(4)

where φi and φe are the intra- and extracellular potentials,
V = φi − φe is the transmembrane potential, σ i and σ e are the
intra- and extracellular conductivity tensors, β is the membrane
surface area to volume ratio, Im is the transmembrane current
density, Iei and Ieb are the extracellular current stimuli applied
to the interstitial and bath space, respectively, Is is the transmembrane current stimulus, Cm is the membrane capacitance
per unit area, and Iion is the membrane ionic current density,
as a function of the transmembrane potential V and the vector of state variables η. As described in [13], the BCs imposed
on (4) are motivated by physical arguments and ensure there
is no flux of the intracellular current into the bath space surrounding the heart, and that the extracellular and bath potentials
are continuous at the boundary of the heart ∂Ω = ∂Ωt ∪ ∂Ωtb .
The subscript t represents tissue and subscript tb represents the
tissue-bath boundary, so that the BCs are
n · (σ i ∇φi ) = 0,

∂Ωt

n · (σ e ∇φe ) = n · (σb ∇φb ),

∂Ωtb

(5)

where n is the outward pointing unit normal to the heart tissue
surface. When the anisotropy ratios of the conductivities in the
intracellular and extracellular spaces are equal, an effective, or
bulk, conductivity may be described by the harmonic mean of
the intra and extracellular directional conductivities (in 2-D for
illustration):
⎤
⎡  
σi σe
0


⎥
⎢ σ +σ
σm = ⎣ i e
(6)
⎦
σ i⊥ σ e⊥
0
⊥
⊥
σ +σ
i

e

where the superscripts  and ⊥ refer to the fiber perpendicular and parallel directions, respectively. The bulk conductivity
σ m allows the bidomain equations (4) to be rewritten as one
parabolic PDE for the transmembrane potential V :

	
∂V
+ Iion (V, η) − Is . (7)
∇ · (σ m ∇V ) = β Cm
∂t
The condition of equal anisotropy ratios for the intracellular to
extracellular conductivities is not observed in nature in general,
and many important second-order effects such as virtual electrode formation [16] are not captured by numerical solutions of
the monodomain equations. However, when using a harmonic
mean conductivity tensor, the monodomain and bidomain models are exactly equivalent for planar wavefronts propagating
along an eigenaxis.
The intra- and extracellular conductivity tensors σ i and σ e
were given experimentally measured values [17] for the directions longitudinal () and transverse (⊥) to the local fiber
orientation [with σ m calculated from (6)]. The prescribed time

CONNOLLY et al.: LOCAL GRADIENTS IN ELECTROTONIC LOADING MODULATE THE LOCAL EFFECTIVE REFRACTORY PERIOD

Fig. 1. Histology (from [3]) showing surviving myocyte bundle expansions
through the thickness, encapsulated in collagen.

2253

dissimilar values, and zero flux Neumann conditions elsewhere
on the boundary. Fig. 2(b) shows the fiber directions obtained
using the solution of Laplace’s equation. All of the meshes had
uniform triangular elements with constant edge length of 25 μm.
In this study, the active ionic currents were described by an established and robust rabbit ventricular cell model [20]. We note
that, although the histology data are obtained from a rat infarct,
similar variations in electrophysiological properties are to be
expected for different ionic models, as (it will be shown that)
the variations we observe are driven by the structure and BCs
and not the specific ionic model used.
2) Bath-Loading Effects: In order to test the influence of the
bath conductivity (in the clinical context the conductivity of the
collagen surrounding the healthy myocytes), the strip geometry
(θ = 0◦ funnel) was simulated, with surrounding area (square of
side l) representing the bath. The bath conductivity was varied
by three orders of magnitude (gb = {0.01, 0.1, 1.0} S/m) and
AP metrics were calculated at all nodes along the vertical axis
[see Fig. 2(a)] by solving the bidomain (4) and monodomain
equations (7).
D. Stimulation Protocols

Fig. 2. Schematics of the computational domains and imposed fiber directions for the θ ∈ {0, 30, 60, 90}◦ funnels. (a) Schematic of the computational
domains and stimulus locations (note that, although only four locations are
shown, the s2 stimuli were applied at each vertex coinciding with the symmetry
line). The reference frame and origin are shown in blue. (b) Example of the
imposed fiber directions.

step for time marching was set to Δt = 25 μs, a value found to
be stable and accurate [18] for all simulations when compared
against results obtained with a time step of 10 μs. When steadystate solutions were required for passive membrane simulations
(when calculating the local EL), iteration was performed until
the maximum change of the transmembrane potential at t = tn
ms reduced to less than 1% of its previous value (at t = (tn − 1)
ms) over the domain.
C. Computational Models
1) Funnel Models: Inspection of high-resolution (2-μm
voxel size) histology data of the rat infarct BZ [3] revealed
contiguous bundles of apparently healthy myocytes surrounded
by collagen. The diameter of the myocyte bundles was found
to expand and contract through the depth of the tissue (in the
apex-base direction) , as shown in Fig. 1. Two-dimensional idealized representations of these histology-informed [3] myocyte
fiber-bundle expansions were created; these geometries give rise
to source-sink mismatches [6]–[8]. The funnels had base width
w = 300 μm (approximately the most frequently observed bundle width in [3]) and length l = 2500 μm, with the expansion
occurring half way along the length and the funnel expansion
defined by the angle θ, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Four funnels were
defined with θ ∈ {0, 30, 60, 90}◦ . In contrast to the models used
in [8], realistic fiber directions were applied to the funnel meshes
by taking unit vectors of the gradient of the solution of Laplace’s
equation over the domain [19]; Laplace’s equation was solved
with Dirichlet BCs applied at the funnel bottom and top with

Stimulus s1 and s2 locations are shown in Fig. 2(a); s1 stimuli
were applied at all vertices lying at the base of the funnels and
s2 stimuli were applied to vertices inside 50-μm squares around
points along the vertical axes of the funnels, representing discrete locations undergoing SD. Measurements of refractoriness
and excitability were taken at the centroid of the stimulated
domain, following activation by a prior s1 stimulus.
1) ERP: The ERP is defined here as the minimum time following prior local activation from s1 stimulation (Ts1 ) at which
successful AP propagation from the s2 stimulus site occurred
(Ts2 ). The ERP was calculated using a bisection search algorithm [21] with a tolerance of approximately 0.1ms, and was
calculated using ERP (x) = Ts2 (x) − Ts1 (x). The funnels had
stimuli applied at the s1 location (along the base of the funnel) at
a basic cycle length of 200 ms, with a stimulus duration of 2 ms
for ten beats, before capture at the s2 stimulus locations were
attempted. The criterion used for successful propagation was
to test that activation had occurred at either of two test points
(at the bottom and the top of the funnel domain) after a time
sufficient for an AP wavefront to propagate from the point of
stimulation to the furthest test point. To remove the functional
dependence of the ERP on the stimulus current, Is at the s2 locations were equal for all the geometries and set to the minimum
current required to elicit successful AP propagation at the point
of highest EL for all the domains considered.
2) Computed Electrophysiological Metrics:
a) The max{dV /dt} was calculated as the maximum rate of
change of V during depolarization.
b) The APD was defined as the time interval between the time
of crossing the threshold potential (here assumed constant
at −20 mV) and the time at which the transmembrane
potential reached 90% of its resting potential (−78.1 mV).
c) The solution for the transmembrane potential was
recorded at 0.1 ms increments and the nodal activation
time was calculated by a piecewise linear interpolation

2254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 4. Nondimensional EL(x) for each vertex in the domain. EL(x) reaches
a maximum just above the funnel expansion in the θ > 0◦ funnels. In the θ = 0 ◦
funnel the maximum value is located at the centroid of the domain, due to the
symmetry.

Fig. 3. Variation in APD and max{dV /dt} for the θ = 0◦ geometry for
large variations in σ b . The bidomain variations in APD and max{dV /dt},
for different bath conductivities are small and correspond closely with the
monodomain results.

with a threshold potential of −20 mV. The CV was then
calculated using a second-order centered difference, with
a space step of 25 μm.

III. RESULTS
As edge (the top and bottom of the funnels) and s1 stimulation
effects contaminated the solution, the results are only shown
for −700 ≤ y ≤ 700 μm. The key dynamics occur around the
funnel expansions. These are located approximately 3.4 length
constants (calculated from the conductivity values [17]) away
from the top and bottom edges of the funnels, ensuring that edge
effects are negligible. With the exception of the bath-loading
studies, all results were calculated by solving the monodomain
equations (7).

A. Bath Loading
As the myocyte bundles observed in the histology data [3] are
surrounded by collagen, we first investigated the influence of the
surrounding bath conductivity on the electrophysiological properties inside the domain by solving the bidomain equations for
the θ = 0◦ funnel as it had the highest perimeter to surface area
ratio. Fig. 3 shows the variation in APD (top) and max{dV /dt}
(bottom) at points along the centre vertical axis [as shown in
Fig. 2(a)], as the bath conductivity is varied from σb = 0.01
to 1.0 S/m. The range in variation of APD and max{dV /dt}
is small. The monodomain solution corresponds closely with
the bidomain results for σb = 0.01 S/m. Note that the results
shown in Fig. 3 were solved using a higher spatiotemporal resolution (10-μ m edge length and 10-μs time step) than the rest
of the results presented to improve the stability of the bidomain
solution.

Fig. 5. Local variation in ERP (with dotted markers), APD, and EL for points
along the vertical (y) axis of the funnels. The ERP reaches a maximum above
the funnel expansion for the θ = {30, 60, 90}◦ funnels, whereas it is maximum
at the mid-point of the symmetrical (θ = 0◦ ) funnel. The ERP varies by approximately 20 ms in the θ = 90◦ funnel and 0.5 ms for the θ = 0◦ funnel. The
maxima in EL(x) is approximately colocated with the maxima in ERP for each
funnel.

B. Electrotonic Loading
The local EL for the geometries considered was calculated at
each vertex in the domain, as shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4 shows that points near or coincident with the boundaries
of the domain experience the lowest EL; this is due to the noflux BC [see (5)]. It can be seen from the θ = 0◦ funnel (the
strip) that highest EL occurs at the centroid of the domain; this
is due to symmetry and the fact that the fiber-directions do not
vary. For funnels with θ > 0◦ , the highest EL occurs just above
the funnel expansion in each case.
C. Refractoriness, APD, and Local EL
The local ERP and APD were calculated along the symmetry
line of stimulus domain (the vertices lying along the vertical
axes of the funnels) and shown in Fig. 5 along with the EL
at the same locations. The extrema in the ERP and EL are
approximately colocated. The magnitude of the variation in ERP
(for the θ = 90◦ funnel) was about 20 ms while the θ = 0◦ funnel
had a maximum variation of 0.5 ms. There is an oscillation

CONNOLLY et al.: LOCAL GRADIENTS IN ELECTROTONIC LOADING MODULATE THE LOCAL EFFECTIVE REFRACTORY PERIOD

2255

Fig. 7. CV and max{dV /dt} for the different funnels. (a) CV is approximately constant, at 50.6 cm · s−1 for the θ = 0 ◦ funnel, but retards at ≈ 525μm
below the expansion for the θ > 0◦ funnels to reach a minimum just above
the expansion for each case. (b) max{dV /dt} is approximately constant, at
145.5 mV for the θ = 0 ◦ funnel, but reduces at ≈ 525μm below the expansion
for the θ > 0 ◦ funnels to reach a minimum just above the expansion for each
case.

D. Propagation Metrics

Fig. 6. (a) Wavefronts for the different funnel geometries shown at t = 3, 4, 5
and 6 ms. When the wavefront approaches the funnel expansion (for the θ > 0◦
funnels), the anisotropic conductivity coupled with the varying fiber directions
causes the wavefront to become concave. (b) Lower plot: APs recorded at the
centre of the funnels (x = y = 0). Upper plot: a zoom-in of the AP upstrokes.
(a) Activation wavefronts for the different funnels. (b) Lower: APs recorded at
point x = y = 0. Upper: zoom-in of AP upstrokes.

in the ERP at a magnitude greater than the tolerance of the
ERP bisection search. This is caused by the complex dynamics
of the specific ionic model used. We tested a simpler ionic
model with fewer ionic currents (the modified Beeler–Reuter
[22], [23] model) and did not observe these oscillations. The
APD decreases monotonically from the site of activation in each
case, with the APD for the strip geometry (θ = 0◦ ) decreasing
approximately linearly along the height of the funnel. The APD
for the θ = 90◦ funnel is highest overall with the steepest descent
seen just above the funnel expansion. A similar trend is seen in
the other funnels.
Unidirectional block was observed in the θ > 0◦ funnels at
sites proximal to a high gradient in ERP, with the direction of
propagation favouring the side with a lower ERP. The θ = 0◦
funnel had a higher average ERP than the θ = 90◦ funnel. This
is due to the smaller domain size—there is a higher perimeterto-area ratio and due to the no-flux BC (5); there is less area
for diffusive redistribution of the transmembrane potential V .
Thus, the mean V over the domain is higher after pacing, so the
tissue is less repolarized, resulting in a higher ERP. A similar
trend can be seen with the other funnels.

The wavefront curvature from the first s1 stimulus is shown
in Fig. 6(a). The wavefront remains planar along the θ = 0◦
funnel but becomes concave just before the funnel expansion
in the funnels with θ > 0◦ . This change in wavefront curvature is induced by the conductivity anisotropy coupled with the
varying fiber directions. The action potential (AP) is shown at
the point of expansion for each of the funnels in Fig. 6(b). As
θ > 0◦ , the potential at the end of the upstroke is lower and
the upstroke velocity is lower; however, the AP traces become
similar around the plateau and repolarize at similar times. The
CV and max{dV /dt} were calculated at each point along the
vertical axis as shown in Fig. 7. The CV dropped from the converged value of approximately 50.6 cm. s−1 along the constantwidth part of the funnels to a minimum value of 13.6 cm.s−1 in
the θ = 90◦ funnel. The max{dV /dt} followed a similar trend
to the CV, converging to 145.5 mV/ms in the strip geometry
and reducing to a minimum of 41.4 mV/ms in the θ = 90◦
funnel. The extrema in the CV and max{dV /dt} are approximately coincident, as expected. The magnitude of the spatial
rate of change of the APD along the vertical axis of the funnels
(|∂/∂y(APD)|) is shown in Fig. 8. The rate of change of APD
increases sharply just below the funnel expansion to reach a
maximum of ≈ 7.9 ms/mm for the θ = 90◦ funnel (just above
the expansion) before decreasing again.
E. Effect of Fiber Orientation and Pacing Direction
To understand the influence of the fiber field, the ERP
and APD were calculated with an isotropic conductivity (the
arithmetic mean of the harmonic means of the intra- and

2256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Spatial rate of change of APDs for the different funnels. |∂/∂y(APD)|
is approximately constant for the θ = 0◦ funnel at 1.7ms/mm. |∂/∂y(APD)| is
slightly lower for the θ > 0 ◦ funnels between approximately 700 and 250μm
below the funnel expansion before it starts to increase, reaching a maximum
just above the expansion for each case.

Fig. 10. ERP (marker dots) and APD for the θ > 0◦ funnels, with the s1
pacing stimuli applied at the vertices along the top edge of the funnels.

ERP occurs, however, the mean slope in APD is in the opposite
direction and the mean APD is shorter by about 20 ms overall.
As in Fig. 5, localized gradients in ERP are sufficient to cause
unidirectional block, as discussed in the next section.
F. Unidirectional Block
In the (θ > 0◦ ) funnels that exhibited large gradients in ERP
along the vertical axis, unidirectional block occurred with stimulation between a region of high and low ERP and at a time
approximately equal to the local ERP. In each case, an s2 stimulus was applied to the mid-point of the funnel, colocated with the
funnel expansion (see Fig. 5). This is illustrated in Fig. 11. The
maximum AP amplitude and CV of the unidirectional wavefront
is greater for funnels with a larger expansion angle. This is due
to the lower ERP below the expansion for the larger angles (see
Fig. 5), as the region below the simulation point has had more
time to repolarize so the AP wavefront propagates more rapidly
into the more recovered tissue.
Fig. 9. ERP (marker dots), APD and EL for the θ > 0◦ funnels with an
isotropic conductivity. The maxima in the ERP again roughly correspond to the
maxima in EL.

extracellular conductivities in the longitudinal and transverse
directions). The EL for the isotropic conductivity was also calculated, this is shown in Fig. 9. In the absence of varying fiber
directions (scalar conductivity), the magnitude of the variation
in ERP (≈ 8 ms for the θ = 90◦ funnel) is greater than that
of the APD (≈ 2.5 ms for the θ = 90◦ funnel over the same
distance); however, the ERP varies more slowly through the
funnel expansion in comparison with Fig. 5. The maxima in
the ERP and EL again approximately coincide. The variations
of the ERP, APD, and EL are due only to the effect of boundaries and wavefront/waveback curvature [24], [25] in the case
of an isotropic conductivity. The effects of boundaries on the
dispersion of APD in isotropic domains are studied extensively
in [26].
Depending on the specific physiology, the sinus wave may
arrive from either direction in the isthmus. To test the effect
of the pacing direction, we calculated the ERP and APD, in the
same manner as before, but instead applied the s1 stimulus to all
nodes along the top edge of the funnels (with θ > 0◦ ) in Fig. 2.
These are shown in Fig. 10. It is clear that the same trend in

IV. DISCUSSION
A. Bath-Loading Effects
The effects of large variations in bath conductivity on the APD
and max{dV /dt} for thin (300 μm wide) bundles of myocytes
were shown to be small. This suggests that the uncertainty in
the specific value of bath conductivity σb (of the surrounding
fibrotic tissue) for computational bidomain simulations is of
little significance; variations in σb of two orders of magnitude
around the nominal value of σb = 0.01S/m had only a small
effect on the APD and max{dV /dt}. In addition, this result
suggests that, when the assumption of equal anisotropy ratios for
the intra- and extracellular conductivities is reasonable, solving
the monodomain equation instead of the full bidomain solution
will give acceptable results when simulating the effect of fibrosis
as in [3]. In [27], the monodomain equations are shown to be
equivalent to the zeroth order term in a perturbation solution of
the bidomain equations. Thus, the monodomain equations can
be thought of as a first-order approximation to the bidomain
equations.
B. Wavefront Propagation, APD and max{dV /dt}
The CV of the wavefront for the θ = 90◦ funnel [see Fig. 7(a)]
was similar to that shown in [8] for the abrupt expansion, despite

CONNOLLY et al.: LOCAL GRADIENTS IN ELECTROTONIC LOADING MODULATE THE LOCAL EFFECTIVE REFRACTORY PERIOD

2257

Fig. 11. Unidirectional wavefront propagation from stimuli at the mid-point of the funnel at t = tE R P for each funnel. (a) θ = 30 ◦ funnel. Stimulation is
applied at the mid-point at t = 155 ms. (b) θ = 60◦ . Stimulation is applied at the mid-point at t = 156 ms. (c) θ = 90◦ . Stimulation is applied at the mid-point
at t = 158 ms.

a different cell model and funnel base-width (200 μm) being
used. The wavefront shape after the wave had passed through
the funnel expansion was, however, completely different with
no concavity in the wavefront observed in [8]. This was due to a
constant fiber orientation used [8]. When the fiber orientation is
constant (with isotropic or anisotropic conductivity), it is possible to make meaningful predictions about the CV (or APD and
refractory period as done in [24]) based on the observation of
the wavefront curvature [25], [28]; however, this becomes difficult when varying fiber directions are present. In this study, the
CV was shown to reduce while the wavefront became concave.
Again, this is due to the presence of varying fiber directions.
The θ = 90◦ funnel was tested with isotropic conductivity and
the wavefront became convex at the expansion, in agreement
with [28]. The AP morphology, as the excitation wave passed
through the funnel expansion, was consistent with those shown
in [8], with an increased upstroke duration and a lower plateau
potential.
The max{dV /dt} was not explicitly measured in [8]. However, the transmembrane potential was measured at points along
the axis of the geometry. In [8], the max{dV /dt} can be seen
to decrease from the voltage–time plots of the transmembrane
potential shown at points through the expansion to reach a minimum just past the expansion. The same phenomenon was observed in this study [see Fig. 7(b)]. It is important to note that,
despite similar computational models being used in [8] and this
study, different objectives were sought. In [8], the critical strand
diameter required to cause conduction failure at an abrupt expansion was investigated, whereas here we are investigating the
effects of structure and BCs in light of possible mechanisms for
focal arrhythmogenesis in the BZ.
Fig. 5 shows that the (average) APD increased as the funnel expansion angle increased; this is due to the “feedback”
of transmembrane potential from the region above the funnel
expansion, in each case. The length constant of excitable tissue during the repolarization phase is generally longer than in
passive tissue [29] (as the membrane
resistance Rm increases
√
during repolarization and λ ∝ Rm ), and the APD of a single (diffusively uncoupled) cell is much greater than the time
constant for point stimulation in passive tissue. The larger the
funnel angle, the more depolarized tissue there is above the

Fig. 12. Schematic of how unidirectional block may arise due to SD in a region
with a spatial gradient in ERP. The symmetry plane implies 2-D symmetry or 3D cylindrical symmetry. The opacity of the red shading illustrates the magnitude
of the local ERP.

expansion to raise the transmembrane potential of the tissue below the expansion through diffusive transport, thus prolonging
the APD in the tissue below the expansion. The converse holds
true; if the top edge of the funnels are stimulated, the average
APD for the θ = 0◦ funnel is higher than the θ = 90◦ funnel.
The APD decreased approximately linearly for each funnel
before decreasing at a greater rate for the θ > 0◦ funnels just
before the expansion. The magnitudes of the gradients in APD
(see Fig. 8), in the y-direction, for the θ > 0◦ funnels were
similar to those observed experimentally, when unidirectional
block occurred in a 1.5-mm isthmus in the guinea-pig heart [30].
The APD was also calculated for focal s2 stimuli, as per the ERP
calculations; however, little variation (< 1 ms) in focal APD was
observed along the y-axis of the funnels, in comparison with
the ERP which varied significantly (≈ 17 ms for the θ = 90◦
funnel).
C. Focal EL and ERP
The EL, due to structure and proximity of boundaries, at a site
of focal stimulation has been shown to significantly modulate
the local ERP. Large variations in ERP between neighboring
points have been shown to cause unidirectional block, provided
the applied stimulus occurred at a point between a region of high
ERP and a region of low ERP (see Figs. 5, 10, and 11). This type
of unidirectional propagation was observed to occur regardless
of the orientation of the initial s1 wave, demonstrating that the
ERP, as we have defined it, is relatively insensitive to gradients
in repolarization. This asymmetry in AP propagation is due to

2258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 13. Emergence of circus movement from stimulation at the local ERP in an idealized isthmus geometry. s1 stimulation was applied at vertices along the top
of the domain and s2 stimulation was applied at a points corresponding to the s2 location show in Fig. 12; the stimulus can be seen at t = 200 ms. Unidirectional
propagation from the s2 stimulus occurs due to the large gradient in ERP, resulting in a re-entrant circuit (t > 200 ms). The slowed propagation in the middle of
the domain is due to the lower conductivity imposed in that region to replicate slow tortuous conduction through the central isthmus [33].

stimulation inside the window of vulnerability for the membrane
[31], [32].
In regions of high EL, the current density at the s2 stimulus
location, due to the stimulus, is low (due to the diffusive spread
of current), resulting in a reduced effective stimulus current.
Thus, in regions of high EL, a lower effective stimulus current
coupled with the AP phase of nearby points prolongs the refractory period in response to focal stimulations. Conversely, in
regions of low EL, the proximity to boundaries acts to confine
the s2 stimulus current, leading to an effectively higher stimulus current and consequent capture at shorter coupling intervals
(lower ERP). Although local gradients in repolarization (related
to local APD) play a role, we have shown that the ERP is largely
driven by the structural effects of a tissue expansion and confinement of stimulus current from the focal s2 stimulation. The
capture of focal ectopics is a complicated phenomenon, with
stimulus duration, stimulus strength, existing gradients in repolarization, and the effective diffusivity as factors. This study
shows that the ERP, as defined locally, is sensitive to the effects
of structure and BCs and correlates closely with the EL.

setting up a reentrant circuit. Alternatively, the focal wavefront
may block the sinus wave (before or after exiting the right-hand
side), causing the sinus wave far from the isthmus to enter the
left-hand side, setting up a reentrant circuit. In order for the
reentrant circuit to be sustained, the path length over which the
reentrant wave propagates must be larger than the wavelength
of the reentrant wave [31]; this has been demonstrated to be
the case in a high-resolution monodomain simulation of the rat
infarct BZ [3].
We simulated this mechanism by constructing a model based
on Fig. 12 and similar to the funnels in the remainder of the
study. An initial s1 stimulus current was applied to nodes along
the top edge of the domain and an s2 stimulus was applied
to nodes inside a 50-μm radius centered at the mid-point of
the left expansion. The s2 stimulus was applied at the ERP
(≈ 151 ms) at the stimulus location, resulting in unidirectional
propagation and a reentrant excitation wave. Fig. 13 shows the
transmembrane potential at different times through the domain.
The vulnerable window for unidirectional block formation was
150.5–150.9 ms.

D. Mechanism for Focal Arrhythmogenesis

E. Conclusion and Future Work

A spatial gradient in ERP may explain a potential mechanism for focal arrhythmogenesis in the BZ. This is illustrated in
Fig. 12. In Fig. 12, the EL at point p is significantly modulated
by the expansion, giving rise to a gradient in ERP. SD at point
p causes a unidirectional wavefront which travels in the direction of lowest ERP (to the right). Provided this focal wavefront
(blue in Fig. 12) does not collide with the sinus wave, it may
circulate around the isthmus and reenter from the left-hand side,

It has been demonstrated that the presence of structural remodeling in the infarct BZ provides conditions that facilitate the
capture of focal stimulations representing SDs. However, it is
important to note that, in order for SDs to cause AP propagation,
the EL of surrounding myocardium needs to be overcome so
that the membrane potential of surrounding myocytes is raised
to the threshold for activation. The source current required to
cause activation is modulated by the local EL. Thus, in regions

CONNOLLY et al.: LOCAL GRADIENTS IN ELECTROTONIC LOADING MODULATE THE LOCAL EFFECTIVE REFRACTORY PERIOD

with high EL, it may be less likely that spontaneously depolarizing bundles of myocytes cause AP propagation due to insufficient source current [7]. This source-sink mismatch represents
a countering (antiarrhythmic) mechanism which acts to protect
the heart. It has been suggested that increased concentrations of
myofibroblasts in the infarct BZ could raise the local transmembrane potential [34], reducing the current required from SDs to
cause AP propagation. We postulate that SDs in regions of rapid
tissue expansions in the BZ of infarct scars may be an important
mechanism for arrhythmogenesis.
How the findings from this study relate to the physiological
situation in which focal SDs cause AP propagation, perhaps
from early or delayed after depolarizations or abnormal automaticity, may be answered by investigating the minimum energy
stimulating pulse required for AP propagation. In light of the
proposed mechanism for arrhythmogenesis and the ERP as a
function of the stimulus current, it is natural to investigate how
the ERP varies for minimum energy focal stimulations. There
are a number of additional factors that warrant future investigation. Studies suggest that in the BZ, there may be changing
myofibroblast concentrations [35], more homogenized distributions of Cx43 [36], and electrical remodelling [37]. These will
be the focus of future work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their constructive comments in the preparation of this manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] N. el Sherif et al., “Reentrant ventricular arrhythmias in the late myocardial infarction period: Spontaneous versus induced reentry and intramural versus epicardial circuits,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 124–132, 1985.
[2] J. M. T. de Bakker et al., “Slow conduction in the infarcted human heart—
Zigzag course of activation,” Circulation, vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 915–926,
1993.
[3] S. L. Rutherford et al., “High-resolution 3-dimensional reconstruction
of the infarct border zone: Impact of structural remodeling on electrical
activation,” Circulation Res., vol. 111, no. 3, pp. 301–311, 2012.
[4] C. Antzelevitch, “Basic mechanisms of reentrant arrhythmias,” Curr.
Opin. Cardiol., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2001.
[5] Y. Xie et al., “β-adrenergic stimulation activates early afterdepolarizations
transiently via kinetic mismatch of PKA targets,” J. Molecular Cellular
Cardiol., vol. 58, no. 0, pp. 153–161, 2013.
[6] T. P. Nguyen et al., “Cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmogenesis: The road
to repair is paved with perils,” J. Molecular Cellular Cardiol., vol. 70,
pp. 83–91, 2014.
[7] Y. Xie et al., “So little source, so much sink: Requirements for afterdepolarizations to propagate in tissue,” Biophys. J., vol. 99, no. 5,
pp. 1408–1415, 2010.
[8] V. G. Fast and A. G. Kleber, “Block of impulse propagation at an abrupt
tissue expansion: evaluation of the critical strand diameter in 2-and 3dimensional computer models,” Cardiovascular Res., vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 449–459, 1995.
[9] V. G. Fast and A. G. Kleber, “Cardiac tissue geometry as a determinant
of unidirectional conduction block: assessment of microscopic excitation
spread by optical mapping in patterned cell cultures and in a computer
model,” Cardiovascular Res., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 697–707, 1995.
[10] F. G. Akar et al., “Optical measurement of cell-to-cell coupling in intact
heart using subthreshold electrical stimulation,” Am. J. Physiol.-Heart
Circulatory Physiol., vol. 281, no. 2, pp. H533–H542, 2001.
[11] S. Weidmann, “Electrical constants of trabecular muscle from mammalian
heart,” J. Physiology, vol. 210, no. 4, pp. 1041–1054, 1970.
[12] R. Plonsey and R. C. Barr, Bioelectricity: A Quantitative Approach. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2007.

2259

[13] B. J. Roth, “A comparison of two boundary conditions used with the
bidomain model of cardiac tissue,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 669–678, 1991.
[14] E. Vigmond et al., “Computational tools for modeling electrical activity
in cardiac tissue,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 36, pp. 69–74, 2003.
[15] C. S. Henriquez, “Simulating the electrical behavior of cardiac tissue using
the bidomain model,” Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1–77,
1992.
[16] I. R. Efimov et al., “Virtual electrodes and deexcitation: New insights into
fibrillation induction and defibrillation,” J. Cardiovascular Electrophysiol., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 339–353, 2007.
[17] L. Clerc, “Directional differences of impulse spread in trabecular muscle
from mammalian heart,” J. Physiol., vol. 255, no. 2, pp. 335–346, 1976.
[18] J. Cooper et al., “Cellular cardiac electrophysiology modelling with Chaste
and CellML,” Frontiers Physiol., vol. 5, pp. 1–16, 2014.
[19] M. J. Bishop et al., “Modeling the role of the coronary vasculature during
external field stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 10,
pp. 2335–2345, Oct. 2010.
[20] A. Mahajan et al., “A rabbit ventricular action potential model replicating cardiac dynamics at rapid heart rates,” Biophys. J., vol. 94, no. 2,
pp. 392–410, 2008.
[21] M. J. Bishop et al., “Structural heterogeneity modulates effective refractory period: A mechanism of focal arrhythmia initiation,” PLoS ONE,
vol. 9, no. 10, p. e109754, 2014.
[22] G. W. Beeler and H. Reuter, “Reconstruction of the action potential of
ventricular myocardial fibres,” J. Physiol., vol. 268, no. 1, pp. 177–210,
1997.
[23] M. Courtemanche and A. T. Winfree, “Re-entrant rotating waves in a
Beeler-Reuter based model of two-dimensional cardiac electrical activity,”
Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos Appl. Sci. Eng., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 431–444, 1991.
[24] P. Comtois and A. Vinet, “Curvature effects on activation speed and repolarization in an ionic model of cardiac myocytes,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 60,
pp. 4619–4628, 1999.
[25] Z. Qu et al., “Origins of spiral wave meander and breakup in a
two-dimensional cardiac tissue model,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 28,
pp. 755–771, 2000.
[26] E. M. Cherry and F. H. Fenton, “Effects of boundaries and geometry on
the spatial distribution of action potential duration in cardiac tissue,” J.
Theoretical Biol., vol. 285, no. 1, pp. 164–176, 2011.
[27] B. J. Roth, “Approximate analytical solution to the bidomain equations with unequal anisotropy ratios,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 55, no. 2,
pp. 1819–1826, 1997.
[28] V. G. Fast and A. G. Kleber, “Role of wavefront curvature in propagation
of cardiac impulse,” Cardiovascular Res., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 258–271,
1997.
[29] K. J. Sampson and C. S. Henriquez, “Electrotonic influences on action
potential duration dispersion in small hearts: A simulation study,” AJP:
Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 289, no. 1, pp. H350–H360, 2005.
[30] K. R. Laurita and D. S. Rosenbaum, “Interdependence of modulated dispersion and tissue structure in the mechanism of unidirectional block,”
Circulation Res., vol. 87, no. 10, pp. 922–928, 2000.
[31] A. G. Kleber and Y. Rudy, “Basic mechanisms of cardiac impulse
propagation and associated arrhythmias,” Physiol. Rev., vol. 84, no. 2,
pp. 431–488, 2004.
[32] W. Quan and Y. Rudy, “Unidirectional block and reentry of cardiac excitation: A model study,” Circulation Res., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 367–382,
1990.
[33] Z. J. Engelman et al., “Structural heterogeneity alone is a sufficient substrate for dynamic instability and altered restitution,” Circulation: Arrhythmia Electrophysiol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 195–203, 2010.
[34] K. A. MacCannell et al., “A mathematical model of electrotonic interactions between ventricular myocytes and fibroblasts,” Biophys. J., vol. 92,
no. 11, pp. 4121–4132, 2007.
[35] S. W. M. van den Borne et al., “Myocardial remodeling after infarction:
The role of myofibroblasts,” Nature Rev. Cardiol., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 30–37,
2010.
[36] N. S. Peters et al., “Reduced content of connexin43 gap junctions in
ventricular myocardium from hypertrophied and ischemic human hearts,”
Circulation, vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 864–875, 1993.
[37] J. M. B. Pinto and P. A. Boyden, “Electrical remodeling in ischemia and
infarction,” Cardiovascular Res., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 284–297, 1999.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

