2750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

From Wearable Sensors to Smart Implants—Toward
Pervasive and Personalized Healthcare
Javier Andreu-Perez, Daniel R. Leff, H. M. D. Ip, and Guang-Zhong Yang∗ , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: This paper discusses the evolution of pervasive healthcare from its inception for activity recognition using
wearable sensors to the future of sensing implant deployment and
data processing. Methods: We provide an overview of some of the
past milestones and recent developments, categorized into different
generations of pervasive sensing applications for health monitoring. This is followed by a review on recent technological advances
that have allowed unobtrusive continuous sensing combined with
diverse technologies to reshape the clinical workflow for both acute
and chronic disease management. We discuss the opportunities
of pervasive health monitoring through data linkages with other
health informatics systems including the mining of health records,
clinical trial databases, multiomics data integration, and social media. Conclusion: Technical advances have supported the evolution
of the pervasive health paradigm toward preventative, predictive,
personalized, and participatory medicine. Significance: The sensing technologies discussed in this paper and their future evolution
will play a key role in realizing the goal of sustainable healthcare
systems.
Index Terms—Health informatics, implantable sensors, pervasive health, wearable sensors.

I. INTRODUCTION
SCALATED incidence and costs associated with chronic
symptoms, senescence-related dependence, lifestyleinduced poor health (e.g., obesity), and noncommunicable diseases such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases are major
healthcare challenges globally. Rather than relying on delayed
intervention and expensive treatments, the future of a sustainable global healthcare system is one that is specifically focused
on prevention, early detection, and minimally invasive management of diseases. Recent advances in sensing technologies
have made it possible to monitor health in an unobtrusive and
seamless manner, transforming episodic, largely manual sampling processes to continuous, context-aware monitoring, and
intelligent intervention. Fig. 1 outlines the evolution of allied
technologies in the last ten years. Three factors in particular
have contributed to these advances: 1) increased data processing power, 2) faster wireless communications with higher bandwidth, and 3) improved design of microelectronics and sensor
devices. The first two represent general trends in computing,
whereas the third is of particular interest to pervasive health.

E

Manuscript received December 11, 2014; revised February 26, 2015; accepted
April 2, 2015. Date of publication April 13, 2015; date of current version
November 20, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
J. Andreu-Perez, D. R. Leff, and H. M. D. Ip are with Imperial College
London.
∗ G.-Z. Yang is with the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, London
SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: g.z.yang@imperial.ac.uk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2422751

Fig. 1. Evolution of the allied technologies for pervasive healthcare in the last
from 2004 to 2015.

Advances in sensor electronics have supported the development
of a wide range of embedded systems, as well as devices that
are small, lightweight, and can be comfortably worn by an individual or ubiquitously placed in the environment with minimal
power consumption.
Thus far, wearable devices are widely used to measure key
health indicators, such as electrocardiogram (ECG), heart rate,
blood pressure, blood oxygen saturation (SpO2 ), body temperature, postures, and physical activities (see Table I). Likewise,
ambient sensing systems are now embedded in homes and affixed to doors, beds [1], mattresses [2], toilets [3], wardrobes [4],
and electrical appliances [5]. The wearable systems supported
by ambient sensing have the capability to continuously monitor human physiology and dysfunction enabling critical events
such as myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, and strokes to be
captured and consequently expediting treatments and saving
lives [6]. Health and wellbeing can be similarly monitored and
seamlessly tracked, motivating high-risk groups such as people
with higher than normal body mass indices to engage in physical
activity and adopt a change in lifestyle. These relatively simple
interventions may improve cardiovascular and bone health, reduce dependence, escalated healthcare costs, and morbidity of
lifestyle-induced poor health.
Advances in technologies are largely underpinned by recent
improvements in low-power microelectronics, fabrication, and
packaging for device miniaturization. In addition to developments in micro-fabrication and nanofabrication, new designs
in biocompatible materials and sensors for minimizing foreign
body reactions to implants, adaptive management of sensor drift
and accelerated data transmission from inside the body, have
propelled recent advances in implantable biosensors. Clinically,
implantable sensors can better address the challenges of chronic

0018-9294 © 2015 British Crown Copyright

ANDREU-PEREZ et al.: WEARABLE SENSORS TO SMART IMPLANTS—TOWARD PERVASIVE AND PERSONALIZED HEALTHCARE

2751

TABLE I
EXEMPLAR WEARABLE AND IMPLANTABLE SENSORS DEVELOPED IN RECENT YEARS AND THEIR CLINICAL APPLICATIONS

disease monitoring, capture critical events, enhance personalization of surgically implanted prosthetics and critically accelerate
the detection of failing implants thereby minimizing healthcare
hazards. Patients with diabetes would no longer have to undergo
painful blood capillary tests or inject insulin if an intelligent implantable device could sense blood glucose levels and respond
accordingly. White blood cells and neutrophil counts could be
continually monitored in patients undergoing chemotherapy cycles, such that the earliest sign of neutropenia could be coupled
with granulocyte stimulation to prevent sepsis. Implantable sensors that monitor the axial load on an individual subject’s spine
may lead to personalized orthopedic prostheses. Similarly, analgesic drug delivery may be tailored to the individual based on
data from implanted sensors in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Rapid automated detection of failing prosthetics
may prevent health risks, such as that exemplified by Poly Implant Prothèse (PIP) implants in which breast prostheses with
a significantly higher risk of rupture were implanted into thousands of women worldwide. Fabricating sensors within implants
may have accelerated detection of rupture and may have provided rapid reassurance to those women with intact prostheses.
Regardless of the healthcare application, or whether the sensors
are wearable, implantable, or placed in the ambient surroundings, three different generations of development can be considered as shown in Fig. 2. In the following sections, we discuss
the evolution of the pervasive health paradigm as well as the
technical implications, with a particular focus on the future of
pervasive health monitoring.

Fig. 2. Schematic overview of the three generations of advances in sensor
technology (left side) and data analytics and intelligent systems (right side). On
the left, the figure displays small low-powered sensors (first layer), ultralowpowered microsensors (second layer), and biologically powered microimplants
and nanoscale devices (third layer). On the right, the figure represents single
sensor monitoring systems (first layer), continuous monitoring with multiple
sensors in an environment enabling context awareness (second layer), and pervasive health combined with other big data health sources enabling integrated
care (third layer).

II. EVOLUTION OF PERVASIVE HEALTH APPLICATIONS
A. First Generation
In first-generation applications, the architectural system typically consists of a single sensing modality with wireless connectivity being able to make predictions about activities or
health status. Notable first-generation devices applications include daily activity recognition from wearable motion sensors
or sensors embedded in the environment [7], gait analysis from

2752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

wearable sensors [8], or those embedded in the flooring of a
smart house [9]. While the amount of data processed from wearable sensors that can be stored is limited to several megabytes,
applications based on video and/or audio signals can generate
up to hundred megabytes of data [10]. Processing is typically performed centrally, relying on offline, retrospective batch
processing.

variants of known pharmacogenetic importance may lower or
raise the threshold for treatments [36]. Patients at seemingly
low risk of cardiovascular disease can be identified for treatment
once family history, global genetic risk and genomic predictors
of response to therapy are considered. Identifying patients with
a disease variants known for drug resistance may lead to decisions to alter pharmacological interventions or increase the dose
of medication (e.g., CYP2C19 and clopidogrel [35]).

B. Second Generation
The second generation of wireless monitoring devices
emerged as a result of advances in sensing technology that facilitate continuous monitoring with multiple sensors, each of them
being responsible for providing inference, either from wearable
or ambient sensors. With this generation, we introduce the concept of agents, which are processing entities that, in addition
to sensing, may take the necessary actions toward an objective.
These actions can be based on an autonomous interaction with
the environment or cooperation with other agents. Integrating
the outputs from a diverse range of intelligent agents, therefore,
requires a higher level of reasoning than in first-generation devices. The objective is to reduce the uncertainty of predictions
by fusing multimodal information and/or providing a sense of
context awareness, which can improve the level of integration
of the application with the monitored scenario. For instance, a
sleep disorder monitoring was developed in [11] using a combination of wearable light sensors and video recordings in order to
detect the most relevant events during sleep and allow long-term
monitoring. In another example, a fall detection system using
information from wearable motion and ambient vision sensor as
well as energy consumption (appliances and lights turned ON
and OFF) was able to appreciate the context of a fall in order
to recognize environmental hazards [12]. Typically, the data acquired from such applications may be up to several hundreds of
megabytes or even several gigabytes [13].
C. Third Generation
The third generation is a nascent research area that aims
to combine continuous health monitoring with other sources
of medical knowledge. In addition to the aforementioned pervasive sensing modalities of the first and second generations,
the objective in third-generation applications is to integrate intelligent agents that implement technologies, such as stream
processing, data mining, genetic, and multiomics data. These
agents are, thus, responsible for extracting information from a
variety of sources including clinical research, patient records,
laboratory generated data (e.g., genomics, proteomics, metabonomics). Through effective fusion of multimodal information,
the system examines patients from a system level with all compounding factors taken into account [34]. This will support
the decision-making process governed by the latest evidence in
biomedical and health informatics. Integrating knowledge from
multiple sources has great potential to improve and personalize
clinical care.
For example, family history data combined with personal
genome analysis have the potential to integrate disease risks
across multiple known polymorphisms [35]. In particular,

III. ADVANCES IN SENSING AND HARDWARE DESIGN
Due to consumer demand and a shift in research landscape,
the evolution of sensing hardware in the past decade has been
accelerated. In Table I, we summarize some of the state-of-theart developments in sensing hardware covering devices used in
research as well as products available from the industry. The table is organized into categories according to sensor placements,
from torso mounted wearable sensors to sensors placed on a finger. The clinical relevance of each reported sensing hardware is
included at the end of each row. This ranges from activity recognition to tackle obesity to potential infection detection by measuring core body temperatures. In addition to wearable sensors,
implantable and ingestible wireless sensing hardware examples
are equally included. The main application of these implantable
sensors is to act as loss-of-function replacement prosthesis or
for chronic disease management. For each category, the example devices are arranged in decreasing technological readiness
levels (TRL) with TRL = 4 indicating in-lab component validation through to TRL = 9 where technology is in its final
form, being used under operational conditions. Platform technologies that underpin the advance of sensing hardware can be
categorized as developments in sensor embodiment technology,
microelectronics, and fabrication processes, and the availability of wireless power delivery toward miniaturized implantable
sensors. In the following sections, we summarize these technological advancements that give rise to current state-of-the-art
sensing systems and beyond.
A. Sensors and Sensor Embodiment
Traditionally, wireless sensing nodes comprised of sensors,
processing and wireless electronics assembled on printed circuit
boards (PCBs) made of glass-refined epoxy laminate (FR4). Recently, flexible materials such as polyimide [37], [38] have been
used for sensor node platforms. These flexible sensor node assemblies facilitate flexible sensor embodiment and ultimately
allow easier sensor application on the human body in the form
of a conformal “patch.” On the other hand, a recent trend in lowcost sensor patch embodiments is to realize microfluidic channels, printed sensors, and electronics on the same engineered
paper substrate [39]. Thus, liquid flow systems are constructed
on paper by taking advantage of hydrophilic channels. In this
case, liquid is driven by capillary forces; therefore, eliminating
the need for pumps used in traditional bulk-based microfluidic
devices. Biochemical sensing of ions, glucose, and lactate have
been demonstrated on a paper microfluidic device for pointof-care diagnostic applications [40]. For the low-cost integration of electronic components, various nanoparticles have been

ANDREU-PEREZ et al.: WEARABLE SENSORS TO SMART IMPLANTS—TOWARD PERVASIVE AND PERSONALIZED HEALTHCARE

printed to construct conductive tracks and passive electronic
components as well as strain/temperature sensors [41]. A related trend to paper-based microfluidic sensors concerns smart
textiles, where force, chemical, humidity, and temperature sensors have been realized in wearable fabrics. Two approaches
exist in functionalizing fabric for sensing purposes; one being
the attachment of discrete sensors to existing fabrics, while the
other one involves applying coatings to the fabric via means such
as screen/ink-jet printing and electrodeposition. Sensor read-out
circuits can also be integrated into fabrics through weaving or
knitting conductive threads with conventional fabric materials
[42]. Recent advances in material science have also enabled the
realization of epidermal electronics and sensors [43] for monitoring tissues and organs in an implantable device setting. These
are thin-film sensor devices fabricated on substrates with only
∼20-μm thickness. A range of sensors including pH, temperature, strain, ECG, and PPG are integrated with microstructures
to provide electrical, thermal, and optical stimulation. These
sensors and stimulators are all assembled on the same flexibleconformal substrate for cardiac monitoring [14].
Soft lithography is the key enabling technology behind
epidermal sensors [44]. These were developed specifically for
micro/nanoprocessing of flexible thin-film materials, such as
polymers, as opposed to traditional lithography techniques
mainly used for processing bulk silicon for integrated circuits.
Notable soft-lithography techniques include moulding, embossing, and transfer-printing with polymeric stamps. These techniques have been used to successfully integrate sensor electrodes
with microfluidic devices in the micronanoscale [45]. Softlithography processing has been used in conjunction with traditional lithography processing such as photolithography and
physical vapor metal deposition to realize bioresorbable devices
[46]. These bioresorbable sensing platforms are engineered
by depositing organic semiconductor materials or thin-film
semiconductor materials on biodegradable substrates to form
complete systems of sensors and electronic components. These
systems are, thus, dissolvable in salt solutions given exposure
times from a few hours to weeks. As well as wireless-wearable
sensing, bioresorbable sensors, and electronics have tremendous
potential in the area of transient implants where only short-term
implantation is required to monitor postoperative infection. Another area of active research in advanced materials for sensors
is self-healing structures [47]. These are largely based on selfadhesion on flexible substrates by conductive particle-embedded
organic polymers. These polymers consist of reversible hydrogen bonding networks that can dynamically associate/dissociate
with external disturbances, providing the self-healing capabilities. These self-healing materials will facilitate the development of next-generation, fully integrated, robust sensing
platforms with minimum sensor drift and ambiguity, as well
as self-powered electronic readouts.
B. Microelectronics and Fabrication
Advances in application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
technology [48] have paved the way for wireless sensing platform development toward minimum size, minimum power

2753

consumption, as well as minimizing measurement uncertainty.
A typical system-on-chip ASIC consists of sensor signal conditioning circuits, microcontroller, and radio communication circuitry supporting devices applications throughout generations
I–III. The available silicon resource facilitates the deployment of
low-power, mixed-mode, analogue/digital on-node processing
to maximize the mutual information between the input signals
and the output variables and support data reduction at source.
With the advent and increased availability of microfabrication
techniques, the sensor ASIC can also be used as a substrate
for fabricating additional sensors. This leaves the overall sensor
and processing/radio circuitry footprint being not much larger
than the typical ASIC die, which is in the region of less than
1cm2 . Specifically, special fabrication processes integrate physical microelectromechanical sensors [49] such as strain gauge,
pressure sensors, and inertia sensors on the same ASIC silicon
substrate [50]. It is also not uncommon to carry out postprocessing to deposit biochemical sensing elements on the top of ASICs
[51]. Example applications of biochemical sensor integration
include “on-chip” sensors for DNA detection, as well as neurotransmitter and proteomic measurements through on-chip sensing microstructures such as nanowires and carbon nanotubes
[52]–[54]. The signal transduction process for DNA detection
involves immobilized oligonucleotides on a metal surface (e.g.,
gold). The specific binding of the target oligonucleotide to the
probe creates a change in charge or capacitance at the electrode
surface. This change in charge or capacitance is then sensed
by the read-out circuitry. In many cases, the metal probe residing the immobilized oligonucleotides consists of modified
metal tracks on a microfabricated integrated circuit. This setup
with close proximity between the sensors and interfacing ASIC
also improves sensor signal integrity. In the case where the sensors and ASIC can only be fabricated using their respective
optimum technologies, advanced integration processes known
as system-in-package (SiP) [55], [56] are used to drastically
reduce sensing system footprint compared to traditional horizontal assembly with PCBs. To this end, SiPs employ vertical
stacking of silicon bare dies or packaged sensors/chips.
C. From Wearables to Implantables
Recent interests in published materials and patents on technologies related to wearable–implantable sensors are shown in
Fig. 3. Smart sensing and stimulation implant technologies are
essential for managing a large number of critical chronic diseases. They also play an increasingly important role in postsurgical infection prevention. As an example, in the U.K. alone,
tens of thousands of pacemakers are implanted each year [57].
On the other hand, despite increasing sophistication of surgical interventions, surgical site infection occurs in 2–5% of all
surgical hospitalizations, accounts for 17% of all hospital acquired infections and burdens approximately 20% of high-risk
surgical patients [58]. The deployment of wearable/implanted
sensors serves to help to understand, model, predict, and ultimately minimize postoperative complications and avoid patient readmission. The challenge of chronic sensing implants
remains to be in the areas of long-term sensor stability, power

2754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

on-node processing combined with the latest advances in mixed
signal ASIC with algorithms mapped directly to the silicon level
to achieve ultralow-power high-throughput processing.
E. Sources of Data and Heterogeneity

Fig. 3. Evolution of academic publication trends (left) and issued patent trends
(right) in sensor hardware in the last 20 years, showing the rapid development
in ASIC design and biodegradable sensor in both academic and commercial
sectors. Publication data were collected from the following databases: IEEE Explorer, ACM Digital library, PubMed (National Library of Medicine, Bethesda,
MD), Web of Science and Scopus. Patent data were collected from the European
Patent Office master documentation database (called DOCDB).

management of active implants, and biocompatibility of embodiment. To this end, active sensor management schemes can
be used to mitigate sensor degradation due to biofouling [59].
For active implants requiring an energy source, wireless power
transmission ultrasultra [60] or ultrasonic [61] links doubling
as a data communication path can be deployed as a wireless
battery charger for critical/noninterruptible implants, such as a
pacemaker. Biocompatible materials such as Parylene and liquid crystal polymer [62] can be used to encapsulate the sensor
implant. Implants capable of sensing postsurgical infection and
monitoring tissue healing should be transient in nature and must
be extracted without the need for reoperative intervention. To
this end, biodegradable [46] technologies serve as a promising
platform for further investigation.
D. Data Management and Sensor Informatics
The evolution of the sensing devices toward pervasive data
capture and heterogeneous data integration has introduced significant challenges in data management and analytics for decision support. Early systems involved relatively small-scale data,
often processed via offline, retrospective analysis. The ability
of real-time data capture and the need for integration with a diverse range of heterogeneous data sources has presented unique
challenges in sensor informatics [63].
The management of preeclampsia (a pregnancy-related disorder which if allowed to progress to eclampsia potentially risks
the life of the mother and fetus), for example, may be optimized
by incorporating mobile home-monitoring data, physiological
knowledge, and disease factors such as risks and treatment side
effects [64]. For intensive care units (ICU), it is possible to fuse
information from all bedside sensors, lab results, and electronic
patient records [65].
Increasingly, we are dealing with big databases and clinical
decision support is no longer limited to isolated data sources
and data abstraction can start right from the node level, allowing

The integration of multiple information databases to combine with information from pervasive health sensors provides
several opportunities as well as important challenges. Effective
integration of the myriad of sensing data with existing biomedical databases requires specific considerations. Electronic health
records (EHRs) describing treatments and patient outcomes are
rich but underutilized. Mining local information included in
EHR data-aware houses has already proved an effective way of
managing a wide range of healthcare challenges, such as supporting disease management system [66], [67], pharmacovigilance [68], building models for predicting health risk assessment
[69], [70], communicating survival rates [71], [72], making therapeutic recommendations [71], [73], discovering comorbidities,
and building support systems for clinical trial recruitment [74].
When longitudinal health data are sampled in a continuous fashion, meaningful and rich time series can be collected in order to
enable temporal data mining. This feature can be useful to identify patterns in patient trajectories through treatments, diseases,
and intervention timelines.
Clinical research databases can be used to provide rapid answers to queries, such as possible drug interactions, risk factors,
indicator thresholds, and disease signatures. A good example of
a clinical research database is ClinicatTrials.gov [75]. Trials are
usually performed in multiple study sites and analysis might be
provided by diverse labs. This issue brings more complexity to
an already heterogeneous dataset. Multiple participants can be
recruited simultaneously and equipped with a pervasive health
monitoring system that can be set up to automatically collect the
desired data in distributed but synchronized schedules, removing the effect of different environmental conditions and seasons.
This streamlines and accelerates data collection protocols. Data
mining over trial data has been proposed as a method to identify
predictive biomarkers of a treatment effect [76] or determining relevant groups of interest [77] by combining the details
from several studies. These indicators may serve to specify the
set of biomedical markers of interest where a pervasive health
monitoring system can subsequently place special emphasis on.
Multiomics acquisition and profiling will enable the full potential of EHR to be realized. Combining the effect of these
new features with pervasive health monitoring may enable rapid
gathering of necessary information to understand sequence variances in the human genome. Although genotyping is still a
relatively new field in EHR, it has great potential for genetic
stratification in patient screening, for instance in the case of
factors arising from genotyping, such as high-risk DNA mutations, milk and gluten intolerance, and mucoviscidosis. In
current practice, screening for genetic anomalies takes several
weeks, and often requires a priori information regarding the
mutation to be screened. The delays incurred not uncommonly
restrict treatment options and impact on decision making. The
cost and time required for genotyping and genome sequencing

ANDREU-PEREZ et al.: WEARABLE SENSORS TO SMART IMPLANTS—TOWARD PERVASIVE AND PERSONALIZED HEALTHCARE

have both reduced. Indeed, in recent years, there has been major
interest in lab-on-a-chip approaches for DNA sensing [78]. This
sensing modality aims at detecting disease-related nucleotide
variations which could, for example, contribute to disease susceptibility or reaction to pathogens and drugs. Consider a patient
diagnosed in her forties with unilateral breast cancer (receptor triple negative), who also has a strong family history of
breast and ovarian cancer, prompting her surgeon to consider
whether or not to prophylactically treat her “healthy” contralateral breast. Currently, she would qualify for gene testing but
the results may take over a month leading to inevitable treatment delays. Faced with this dilemma, she may decide to have
unilateral surgery and delay testing. Subsequently, she is found
to have a high-risk breast cancer mutation (e.g., BRCA1) and
undergoes a delayed contralateral mastectomy. In the future, onchip sequencing would enable rapid detection of risk mutations
simultaneous with a cancer diagnosis and the patient can better
decide whether to undergo simultaneous bilateral mastectomy
and reconstruction. Such a patient if found to have a risk mutation may want to rapidly access the location of support groups
and other sufferers in an extended network.
One important yet emerging source of information for pervasive health is the one provided by social network data. In
healthcare, social network data have helped to understand the
evolution of diseases and unhealthy habits from geographical,
behavioral, and time viewpoints. For example, collective dynamics from people suffering from obesity and smokers have
been assessed using social network [79]. It has also been used in
health crises and epidemic studies such as in the case of severe
acute respiratory syndrome, H1N1 influenza, tuberculosis outbreaks [80], [81], and more recently muted to track Ebola [82].
The rapid availability of social network data can be effectively
combined with pervasive health monitoring, for example assessing the current health status of a patient with their interactions
with other individuals and the effects that these ones induce in
their health status.
F. Data Processing and Analysis
Fig. 4 shows the research trends in the data analysis frameworks used for clinical decision support systems with an exponential increase in interest in this area and a greater variety
in the frameworks used. While the development of intelligent
medical systems is still an intensive research area, parts of this
intelligence are implemented in low-resource processing platforms. This is driven by an explosion of data volume because in
order for pervasive sensing to be sustainable for managing large
population groups, it is necessary to reduce the data at source
through effective on-node processing. To this end, the mapping
of analytical algorithms directly to ultralow power μC (microcontrollers) and implantable sensors has been pursued. Musiani
et al. [83] argued that a signal analysis based on a Hilbert transform implemented in a Shimmer programmable sensor [84]
node required over 100million instructions/s. Common operations used in machine learning and signal processing, such as
matrix inversions and decompositions, have a complexity order
of approximately O(n3 ). This means that for just 100 samples,

2755

Fig. 4. Evolution of academic publications with respect to the data processing
frameworks used to develop clinical decision support systems. Publication data
were collected from the following databases: IEEE Explorer, ACM Digital
library, PubMed (National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA), Web of
Science and Scopus.

a simple algebraic operation would require around 1 million
internal loop instructions, without accounting for additional operator instructions such as floating point products. Nevertheless,
simple and light-weight processes have been implemented for
elemental processing parts of online algorithms, such as noise
filters, feature extraction, and peak detectors. For instance, in
[85], a continuous wavelet transform based algorithm is implemented on-board in an ad hoc low-resource integrated platform
that enables running precompiled C scripts to detect ECG heartbeats. For the recognition of physiological activities, some studies have proposed to reduce the on-node implementation to the
inference process of a pretrained model [86].
Concurrent advances in high-performance computing have
made it possible to process high volumes of data in large repositories more efficiently. In particular, map-reduce frameworks
with sophisticated models of data caching and in-memory processing have played a key role from a software viewpoint. Likewise, advances in hardware including coprocessors and GPU
accelerators such as Xeon Phi and Nvidia Tesla have enabled
highly intensive operations and transformations to be performed
in parallel. Machine learning algorithms that have benefited
from these advances include deep learning, which can also be
used to learn a set of artificially generated features. Ensemble
learning is another interesting framework aimed at combining
inferences from many algorithms trained with subsets of the
data via a voting strategy, which can run as parallel processes.
G. Machine Learning
Continuous sensing data in real-life environment is beset with
artifact, missing data, and uncertainties. Bayesian estimation
provides an intuitive and formal foundation to express learning
models in terms of uncertainty. For this reason, graphical models based on hierarchical and nonhierarchical Bayesian networks
(BN) have become popular in clinical research. The inclusion of
temporal data has raised interest in dynamic Bayesian networks,

2756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

TABLE II
EXEMPLAR TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE FIVE V’S OF BIG DATA IN PERVASIVE HEALTH

Volume

Velocity
Variety

Veracity

Variability

Causes

Technological solutions

Relevant research areas

• Large population and biological datasets.
• Growing streaming data.

• Large-scale processing frameworks.
• Scalable and flexible data storage.

• Continuous streaming data.

• Light-weight processing models.

• High frequency data sources (e.g. pervasive
sensors, social media).
• Integration of multiple health sources.
Distinct labeling strategies across institutions.

• High performance computing (HPC).

• Measurement imprecision, confounding factors.

• Uncertainty quantification.

• Inference certitude of output.
• Nonstationary systems.
• Unforeseen events in health.
• Seasonality and behavioral changes.

• Causality.

• Map-reduce (in-memory) frameworks [87].
• Scalable distributed databases and cloud
computing [87].
• Low-complexity algorithms, very fast machine
learning and on-node processing [88].
• Grid computing, parallel programming and
coprocessors [87]
• Non-relational databases [89]
• Formal ontologies and semantic web [90]
• Multi-agent systems [91]
• Uncertainty analysis (Bayesian probabilities or
fuzzy sets) [92]
• Causal modeling [93]

• Adaptation.
• Handling concept drift.

• Online learning models [94]
• Adaptive and drift-aware learning models [95]

• Metadata protocols.
• Semantic web models of data integration.

which were previously more commonly applied to areas such
as robotics, sensing, and speech recognition. To obtain an inference based on multiple sources and, therefore, a large amount
of heterogeneous dimensions, models able to integrate the conditional dependencies and relationships between these factors
are appealing. Thus, in clinical applications, causal modeling
has been suggested as a method to facilitate the specification of
BNs with many parent variables [96]. When the purpose is to
model the causality of concurrent dynamical systems in continuous time, learning probabilistic graphical models considering
all unmeasured confounding factors can become challenging,
but the availability of continuous (rather than episodic) contextaware sensing data offers unique opportunities to address this
issue.
Instead of using probabilities, fuzzy logic is a framework that
is based on the concept of “degree of truth.” Fuzzy set memberships enable the input to interpolate between the crisp set of
classical logic, allowing a soft transition of the degree from false
to true. These soft assumptions are helpful as they allow formalizing vagueness in the inference of clinical decision support
systems. In order to model uncertainty, general type-2 fuzzy sets
implement the same operators as type-1 fuzzy sets but the membership function is made three-dimensional, therefore, enabling
to account for uncertainty in the primary membership. Fuzzy
systems have been widely applied to the first- [97], [98] and
second-generation applications of pervasive health [99]. Softclustering algorithms based on fuzzy logic have been proposed
as a method to scale data analysis to large volumes of data [100].
Data stream learning techniques have been proposed to process
the data one-pass and enable adaptation [101]. More recently,
similar data stream learning algorithms have been developed
using different frameworks [102].
H. From Sensor Informatics to Big Data
One of the bottlenecks to consider for the third generation
of pervasive sensing platforms is to achieve rapid and scalable processing for large datasets. From a software point of
view, processing big data is usually linked to programming

paradigms such as maps reduce [103]. Several open-source
frameworks such as Hadoop are frequently used to store a distributed database in a scalable architecture, as a basis for tools
(such as Cascading, Pig, Hive) that enable developing applications to process vast amounts of data (by the order of terabytes)
on commodity clusters. However, when combined with continuous streams of pervasive heath monitoring, this also requires
capacities for iterative and low-latency computations, which depends on sophisticated models of data caching and in-memory
computation. Thus, other frameworks such as Storm and Spark
have been created to fulfil this gap.
For handling data variety and heterogeneity, sematic web
technologies such as ontologies and data representation languages are used. They provide structural and organizational
tools of knowledge management, already adopted by many organizations [104]. Defining explicit data descriptors and semantics
can have multiple uses, such as reasoning, integrating heterogeneous sources, data linkages, and data sharing. Linking data
is a particularly important feature to provide new sensing applications with querying capabilities over the multiple sources for
exploration and synthesis.
One of the common issues in sensing data is to deal with
unforeseen events in health, such as seasonal and behavioral
changes. Some data stream algorithms have been implemented
considering adaptation such as adaptive, very fast decision tree
learners [105], which has been used for sleep apnoea monitoring [106]. Likewise, an adaptive neurofuzzy stream learning
approach was proposed for the recognition of activities of daily
living [107], [108]. Additionally, signal processing algorithms
such as symbolic aggregate approximation can also implement
adaptation to deal with data stream segmentation and approximation [109]. Adaptive stream data algorithms can be made
resource aware by taking advantages of their adaptation and
online processing capabilities to leverage their control parameters and minimize the amount of input/output data processed
[110].
The above considerations can be mapped to the 5 V·s considered in big data research as listed in Table II. Regardless of
the 5 V·s, almost all pervasive health applications raise privacy

ANDREU-PEREZ et al.: WEARABLE SENSORS TO SMART IMPLANTS—TOWARD PERVASIVE AND PERSONALIZED HEALTHCARE

2757

Fig 5. Geolocation information served by Tweeter followers of hashtag at totally_toxic, shown by number of tweets at international locations and within London
(left); percentage of women who underwent breast assessment in the last three years by London borough of residence (middle); map of London boroughs coloured
by breast assessment percentage in women population (right).

challenges. For big data applications, the issue is greater due
to the need for performing linkages with other sources. This
requires the use of identifiers that uniquely represent the data
about an individual. The techniques for data privacy preserving
analysis can be categorized into five groups: 1) encrypting data,
i.e., cryptographic; 2) adding noise to data, i.e., randomized responses; 3) grouping data by factor/attribute, i.e., condensation;
4) hiding attributes in data, i.e., anonymization; and 5) applying a transformation in the factors/attributes so that the data
distributions are recovered independently, i.e., perturbation. In
addition, pervasive sensing data can also raise security threats
across the different stages of data transmission from sensors
to remote databases. Sensor biometrics have been proposed as
a solution to secure communications in body sensor networks
[111].
IV. IMPLICATION ON FUTURE HEALTHCARE DELIVERY
The developed world is experiencing a major demographic
shift. Age-related diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular accidents, and cancer are set to become more prevalent [112]. Emerging evidence suggests rising ill-health in the
elderly population with an increasing incidence of chronic conditions, such as osteoarthritis, chronic airways disease, and diabetes [113]. Similarly, the global burden of disease is leading
to an increase in interventional procedures, especially surgery
[114]. While techniques have become increasingly minimally
invasive, postoperative complications such as surgical site infection, inadequate tissue healing, and gastrointestinal anastomotic
failure persist.
Traditional monitoring of chronic diseases and even acute
symptoms reflects the episodic nature of the symptomatology.
However, pathology is a continuing process and certain transient but important events may go undetected with such infrequent measurements. Despite the ability to measure extensive
biomechanical and biochemical information, the diagnostic and
monitoring utility is generally limited to brief time points and
unrepresentative physiological states or artificially introduced

tests. Transient critical abnormalities cannot always be captured, leading to delayed diagnoses and escalating healthcare
costs. Important and even life-threatening disorders can go undetected because they occur infrequently and only under specific
situations so that they may not be recorded objectively. Pervasive sensors that provide continuous physiological monitoring
offer new hope for complex data analysis, leading to physician
alerts to support clinical decision making and diagnosis.
One good example of smart sensing combined with the integration of a diverse range of data sources is to revisit the recent
PIP implant scandal as previously mentioned. As an example
of the way in which third-generation systems may change the
way health crises are anticipated and managed by public health
authorities. PIP breast prostheses with a significantly higher
risk of rupture and comprising lower levels of platinum and
higher levels of low molecular weight siloxanes than medical
grade silicone were implanted into thousands of women worldwide. Many women presented themselves to clinics describing pain, swelling, tenderness, and lymphadenopathy associated with symptomatic implant rupture. Asymptomatic women
attended requesting ultrasound scans to check the integrity of
their implants. Others attended unsure if PIP implants had been
inserted. While robust evidence of a link between PIP rupture
and disease is lacking, many attribute rupture to autoimmune
diseases that were subsequently contracted. A recent review by
the department of health has called for a new implant register
[115] and greater regulation but currently there is no way of
monitoring implant integrity without clinical assessment.
Analysis of social media has revealed locations where the social interest regarding faulty breast prostheses is highly prevalent. Analyzing the current administrative database offered by
the National Health Service, we evaluated the number of women
in London who underwent breast assessment during the last
three years and classified them by the borough of residence as
shown in Fig. 5. These data may suggest that women at risk
due to their exposure to PIP do not reside in areas with easy
access to breast screening assessment centers. These data could

2758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

be combined in an inference system to identify the geolocation
of women affected based on social networking trends, and determine the likely volume of patient’s requiring assessment and
treatment to aid workforce planning and streamline resources to
locations of greatest need.
It is interesting to note that with this information alone, a
health alarm could have been triggered. Against this background
of heightened awareness and concerns regarding implant ruptures, next generation of wireless low power, low drift sensors
incorporated into the elastomer that monitor outer shell integrity
and/or that sense silicone on the outer surface of the implant
that may herald an intracapsular rupture. Automated detection
of rupture is coupled with an alert sent to the surgeon who
implanted the device. The implant is removed at the earliest
opportunity; silicone spillage into body tissues is contained and
capsule formation minimized.
A. From Episodic Monitoring to Continuous Sensing
and Integrated Care
The devices listed in Table I represent the general trend from
episodic monitoring to continuous sensing and integrated care.
Accurate and timely detection of healthcare states facilitates
early treatment, limits body trauma, and prevents organ damage. The negative impact of episodic data capture in healthcare
is arguably best exemplified in the management of cardiovascular disease, postoperative surgical care, monitoring of tissue
healing, and in cancer treatments. Following myocardial infarcts, life-threating arrhythmias can occur unpredictably without warning, and may remain undetected if cardiac monitoring
is infrequent and intermittent. Sensors have already been developed for accurate methods for continuous monitoring of blood
pressure, pulse, and cardiac rhythm [116], such that arrhythmias
can be detected in near real time and signals sent to a smartphone
for ulterior processing [117]. Critical abnormalities of cardiac
rhythm such as atrial fibrillation can be detected, recorded, and
rapidly treated.
For monitoring postoperative issues, such as sepsis [118], for
example, there are data to suggest that aggressive early therapy
can improve outcomes. Surgical site infections, dehiscence of
wounds, and gastrointestinal anastomosis are recognized complications following surgery. The severity of these complications
can be mild necessitating oral antibiotic therapy and close observation in hospital but can be serious with life-threatening sepsis
necessitating repeated surgical and radiological interventions
with high morbidity and mortality. Hospital stay is inevitably
prolonged, significantly inflating the costs of healthcare delivery. Early detection of surgical site infections, dehiscence, and
anastomotic failure are critical to patient management to ensure prompt instigation of appropriate therapy and to avoid the
mortality associated with overwhelming sepsis, and yet in current clinical practice, these complications tend to be detected
far too late. Wound infection is self-evident once the patient
has developed erythema, pain, tenderness, or is discharging pus
from the wound. By the time, important changes are detectable
within the patient’s circulation; pathological processes have, by
definition, reached a systemic level and are likely to challenge

the patient’s physiological reserve. Sensors built into dressings,
embedded within catheters and anastomoses such as those that
can detect biochemical changes in the microenvironment (e.g.,
lactate, glucose, pH) may herald SSI or tissue failure, prompt
further investigation or corrective clinical action.
It has been shown repeatedly that delayed diagnosis negatively impacts cancer outcomes, whereas screening saves lives
[119]. Similarly, the episodic macroscopic and structural imaging of tumours in patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy means that assessments of tumour response remain crude.
Smart sensors implanted within the radiological marker clips,
capable of monitoring at the cellular level and/or continually
detecting cellular proliferation proteins may provide a more accurate assessment of chemotherapeutic response upon which
clinicians may act to switch regimen or expedite surgery in case
of poor response.
The above examples illustrate that a vast amount of clinical
information is recorded on any given patient and the attending
clinician may not always have easy access to this data, impairing
quality of care. Patients with increasingly complex health and
social needs often visit a number of healthcare providers, who
may recommend treatments in sequence or in parallel without understanding the impact on the holistic needs of the patient. Continuous sensing may provide a convenient solution to
the need for integrated care, which describes a drive toward
a patient-centered, coordinated, and tailored service. For example, a cardiologist may prescribe a statin for a patient with
hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia without realizing they
were taken off this treatment previously as it was causing severe
cramps. The result is unnecessary readmissions and costs. The
next generation of sensing may have the capability to minimize
these vicious cycles of poor care by improving awareness of
medication side effects (knowledge) and enhancing linkage between healthcare providers through rapid knowledge and event
sharing (integration).
B. Stratified Patient Management
Clinical decision support systems able to digest and understand continuous personalized health data in real time can improve the quality of care provision particularly in the field of
cancer management. Clinical decision support systems have the
advantage of being able to capitalize on a broad knowledge
base by data mining patient records and accounting for other
data repositories, such as genomics, clinical phenotypes, and
biomarkers. The clinical impact of clinical decision support
systems is best exemplified by considering the management of
a patient treated for malignancy. Consider a patient scheduled to
receive chemotherapy for bladder cancer. The patient’s DNA is
sequenced, identifying a high-risk genotype for urological malignancy and an appointment is scheduled with a geneticist to
discuss the impact of the risk mutation. The clinical team suggest a wearable system for constant physiological monitoring,
being able to detect poorly controlled hypertension and consider
increasing blood pressure control.
Following the first cycle of chemotherapy, the wearable sensor detects pyrexia (body temperature >37.6° C) and a low

ANDREU-PEREZ et al.: WEARABLE SENSORS TO SMART IMPLANTS—TOWARD PERVASIVE AND PERSONALIZED HEALTHCARE

neutrophil count. This information can be used to identify likely
side effect of chemotherapy. Once chemotherapy has been discontinued and clinical remission established, the system seeks to
promote health and wellbeing and minimize disease recurrence.
For example, wearable motion sensors can detect sedentary behavior and a recommendation can be sent to the patient to engage
in a more active lifestyle.
C. Managing the Continuum of Health and Disease
With the current paradigm shift toward prevention, prediction, personalized treatment, and participatory medicine, it is
necessary to consider health and disease as a continuum. For
many life-style diseases, enhancing pervasive health systems
with context-aware capabilities provides an extra set of contextual information about the monitored condition under consideration. For example, motion sensors combined with intelligent
behavior modification can be used to motivate overweight and
obese individuals engage in physical activity to lose weight improving diabetic control, hypertension, and reducing the risk of
cancer [120]. Sensors that monitor basal metabolic rate and activity energy consumption can derive total energy expenditure.
However, weight loss only occurs if total energy expenditure
exceeds calorific intake and accurately calculating the latter can
be challenging. Therefore, there is a need for sensors that can
monitor both calorific intake and energy expenditure simultaneously and feedback data to the user logs of consumption and
activity.
Similarly, shifts toward prevention, predication, and more
personalized approaches are required to improve outcomes in
major noncommunicable diseases, such as cancer. Traditionally,
cancer management had relied on generic treatments supported
by trial data such that any two patients with a given cancer
may be similarly treated on the basis that they were found to
have contracted the same “disease.” Yet, a critical aspect of
most complex diseases such as cancer is that they encompass
many different types of disease owing to differences in diseaseperturbed networks [121]. Returning to the example to breast
cancer, data from recent genomic analysis informs us that the
phenotypic diversity of breast tumours is supported by similar
diversity in gene expression resulting in an improved molecular
taxonomy of breast cancer [122]. Improved risk modeling and
identification of at risk mutations will lead to more widespread
adoption of preventative strategies (e.g., risk screening, chemoprophylaxis, and risk reducing surgical protocols). Moreover,
improved genetic stratification of cancer may enable the pharmaceutical industry to develop novel drug targets. Routine collection of genomic, metabonomic, and proteomic data in patients
with cancer, if coupled with sensor informatics, has the potential
to improve our understanding of resistance to chemotherapeutics. The future of personalized cancer treatments demands this
improved understanding of drug choice, dose, and duration to
enhance cure, minimize adverse effects and treatment failure,
and prevent recurrence.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Over the last decade, technological advances have supported
the evolution of a pervasive health paradigm, which is also

2759

captured in alternative names such as ubiquitous health (uhealth) and mobile health (m-health). Considered in this paper,
we discussed different generations of devices and their associated analytics.
From a clinical perspective, the evolution of each generation
of pervasive health monitoring has consisted of a sequence of
technological steps necessary to provide integrated care, bridging the gap between health and disease management. Current
healthcare services are typically fragmented into many processes that are often disjoint in space and time.
From a technical standpoint, there remains a need for horizontal advances within each generation to improve the quality
of the involved technologies. However, vertical developments
may see an entirely new generation of wearable sensing devices
and smart implants that are of low power, low drift, resistant to
biofouling, and that can be easily implanted and extracted when
no longer required.
From a data analysis perspective, long-term continuous sensing and the need not only to monitor but also to intervene in real
time bring unique challenges, as well as opportunities to sensor informatics. Other challenges are related to integrating large
datasets from heterogeneous health data sources. Advances in
high-performance computing, stream learning models and semantic web are, therefore, likely to play a key role in the future.
These technical challenges, if overcome, are set to transform
future healthcare delivery. Big data mining and social network
analysis have the potential to manage global epidemics, such
as Ebola, incorporating geographical information systems to
track cases, accelerate warning systems, and streamline outbreak response [82]. This can be translated into clinical medicine
progress from a reactive to a proactive discipline. In our opinion,
meeting these challenges will help to address the key areas of
unmet clinical needs including the management of chronic diseases, such as diabetes and cancer, detection of nosocomial and
surgical site infections, and monitoring of surgical prostheses.
More importantly, technological advances in sensor design coupled to improved data analytics will shift the focus from disease
to prediction and prevention. Predictive medicine must capitalize on diverse information from a range of bioinformatics data
to define a baseline of health (wellness) and then similarly employed to detect transition to disease. Mining these numerous
data sources per individual will help to create predictive and
actionable models [121] to better tailor therapeutic regimens,
thereby improving the outcomes and quality of life. Challenges
such as data storage, analytics, and a cultural reluctance to rely
on open-source algorithms, data sharing and open data policies
will need to be overcome.
Clearly, if the ultimate goal in healthcare is to be based on preventative, predictive, personalized, and participatory medicine,
the sensing technologies as discussed in this paper and their
future evolution will play a key role in realizing this goal.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Yonezawa et al., “A new intelligent bed care system for hospital and
home patients,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol., vol. 39, pp. 313–319, 2005.
[2] W. Gu et al., “A novel method for the contactless and continuous measurement of arterial blood pressure on a sleeping bed,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2009, pp. 6084–6086.

2760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

[3] K. K. Kim et al., “The electrically noncontacting ECG measurement on the toilet seat using the capacitively-coupled insulated electrodes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2004,
pp. 2375–2378.
[4] Q. Zhang et al., “Determination of activities of daily living of independent
living older people using environmentally placed sensors,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., 2013, pp. 7044–7047.
[5] C.-H. J. Lee et al., “Augmenting kitchen appliances with a shared context
using knowledge about daily events,” in Proc. Intell. User Interface,
2006, pp. 348–350.
[6] G. Z. Yang, Body Sensor Networks, 2nd ed. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 2014.
[7] Andréu et al., “An ambient assisted-living architecture based on wireless
sensor networks.”, in Proc. Symposium of Ubiquitous Computing and
Ambient Intelligence, 2009, pp. 239–248.
[8] R. M. Kwasnicki et al., “Assessing functional mobility after lower limb
reconstruction: A psychometric evaluation of a sensor-based mobility
score” Annals Surg, vol. 261, no. 4, pp. 800–806, April 2015.
[9] M. Howell Jones et al., “A pressure sensitive home environment,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Haptic Audio Visual Environ., 2006, pp. 10–14.
[10] F.-T. Sun et al., “Activity-aware mental stress detection using physiological sensors,” in Proc. MobiCASE, 2012, pp. 211–230.
[11] M. Borazio and K. Van Laerhoven, “Combining wearable and environmental sensing into an unobtrusive tool for long-term sleep studies,” in
Proc. ACM SIGHIT, 2012, pp. 71–80.
[12] J. Lanagan et al., “Utilising wearable and environmental sensors to identify the context of gait performance in the home,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Developing Innovative Visual Edu. Resources Students Everywhere, 2011,
pp. 1–5.
[13] J. Ahn, “Enhancing performance and reliability of RFID middleware
using mobile agents,” in Proc. Int. Conf. WASA, 2012, pp. 292–300.
[14] L. Xu et al., “3D multifunctional integumentary membranes for spatiotemporal cardiac measurements and stimulation across the entire epicardium,” Nature Commun., vol. 5, art. no. 3329, pp. 1–10, Feb 2014.
[15] P. S. Pandian et al., “Smart Vest: Wearable multi-parameter remote physiological monitoring system,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30, pp. 466–477, May
2008.
[16] S. Carrara et al., “Remote system for monitoring animal models with
single-metabolite bio-nano-sensors,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 1018–1024, Mar. 2013.
[17] M. Sung et al., “Wearable feedback systems for rehabilitation,” J.
Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 2, pp. 1–12, 2005.
[18] K.-G. Ng et al., “Evaluation of the cadi thermosensor wireless skincontact thermometer against ear and axillary temperatures in children,”
J. Pediatric Nursing-Nursing Care Children Families, vol. 25, pp. 176–
186, Jun. 2010.
[19] M. Leonardi et al., “Wireless contact lens sensor for intraocular pressure
monitoring: assessment on enucleated pig eyes,” Acta Ophthalmologica,
vol. 87, pp. 433–437, Jun. 2009.
[20] L. Atallah et al., “Observing recovery from knee-replacement surgery by
using wearable sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Body Sensor Network, 2011,
pp. 29–34.
[21] Q. Wei et al., “Novel design for non-latency wireless binaural hearing
aids,” IEEE Trans. Electr. Electron. Eng., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 566–568, Sep.
2014.
[22] M. S. Mannoor et al., “Graphene-based wireless bacteria detection on
tooth enamel,” Nature Commun., vol. 3, pp. 1–8, Mar. 2012.
[23] M.-Z. Poh et al., “A wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term assessment of electrodermal activity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57,
no. 5, pp. 1243–1252, May 2010.
[24] S. Patel et al., “Monitoring motor fluctuations in patients with Parkinson’s
disease using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 864–873, Nov. 2009.
[25] S. Xu et al., “Soft microfluidic assemblies of sensors, circuits, and radios
for the Skin,” Science, vol. 344, pp. 70–74, Apr. 4, 2014.
[26] H. Zhou et al., “Use of multiple wearable inertial sensors in upper
limb motion tracking,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 30, pp. 123–133, Jan.
2008.
[27] E. S. Sazonov et al., “Monitoring of posture allocations and activities
by a shoe-based wearable sensor,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58,
no. 4, pp. 983–990, Apr. 2011.
[28] K. Kong and M. Tomizuka, “A gait monitoring system based on air
pressure sensors embedded in a shoe,” IEEE-Asme Trans. Mechatron.,
vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 358–370, Jun. 2009.

[29] R. C. King et al., “Development of a wireless sensor glove for surgical
skills assessment,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 5,
pp. 673–679, Sep. 2009.
[30] B. O’Flynn et al., “Novel smart sensor glove for arthritis rehabiliation,”
in Proc. Body Sensor Network, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[31] U. Marschner et al., “Integration of a wireless lock-in measurement of
hip prosthesis vibrations for loosening detection,” Sensors Actuators APhys., vol. 156, pp. 145–154, Nov. 2009.
[32] J. E. Pandolfino et al., “Ambulatory esophageal pH monitoring using a
wireless system,” Am. J. Gastroenterol., vol. 98, pp. 740–749, Apr. 2003.
[33] J. Holmberg et al., “Battery-less wireless instrumented knee implant,”
IEEE-Asme Trans. Med. Devices J., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Mar. 2013.
[34] G.-Z. Yang et al., “Multi-sensor fusion,” in Body Sensor Networks, 2nd
ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2014, pp. 301–354.
[35] E. A. Ashley et al., “Clinical evaluation incorporating a personal
genome,” Lancet, vol. 375, pp. 1525–1535, May 2010.
[36] D. I. Chasman et al., “Polymorphism in the apolipoprotein(a) gene,
plasma lipoprotein(a), cardiovascular disease, and low-dose aspirin therapy,” Atherosclerosis, vol. 203, pp. 371–376, Apr. 2009.
[37] T. Sekitani and T. Someya, “Stretchable, large-area organic electronics,”
Adv. Mater., vol. 22, pp. 2228–2246, May 2010.
[38] X. Li et al., “A perspective on paper-based microfluidics: Current status
and future trends,” Biomicrofluidics, vol. 6, pp. 11301–1–11301-13, Mar.
2012.
[39] D. D. Liana et al., “Recent advances in paper-based sensors,” Sensors,
vol. 12, pp. 11505–11526, Sep. 2012.
[40] W. Dungchai et al., “Electrochemical detection for paper-based microfluidics,” Analytical Chem., vol. 81, pp. 5821–5826, Jul. 2009.
[41] D. Tobjork and R. Osterbacka, “Paper electronics,” Adv. Mater., vol. 23,
pp. 1935–1961, May 2011.
[42] L. M. Castano and A. B. Flatau, “Smart fabric sensors and e-textile
technologies: A review,” Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 23, pp. 1–27, 2014.
[43] D. H. Kim et al., “Epidermal electronics,” Science, vol. 333, pp. 838–843,
Aug. 2011.
[44] Y. N. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, “Soft lithography,” Annu. Rev. Mater.
Sci., vol. 28, pp. 153–184, 1998.
[45] J. A. Rogers and R. G. Nuzzo, “Recent progress in soft lithography,”
Mater. Today, vol. 8, pp. 50–56, Feb. 2005.
[46] S. W. Hwang et al., “Materials and fabrication processes for transient
and bioresorbable high-Performance electronics,” Adv. Funct. Mater.,
vol. 23, pp. 4087–4093, Sep. 2013.
[47] B. C. K. Tee et al., “An electrically and mechanically self-healing composite with pressure- and flexion-sensitive properties for electronic skin
applications,” Nature Nanotechnol., vol. 7, pp. 825–832, Dec. 2012.
[48] F. Boeuf et al., “An evaluation of the CMOS technology roadmap from
the point of view of variability, interconnects, and power dissipation,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1433–1440, Jun. 2008.
[49] T.-H. Tsai et al., “A CMOS micromachined capacitive tactile sensor
with integrated readout circuits and compensation of process variations,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 608–16, Oct. 2014.
[50] B. Alandry et al., “A fully integrated inertial measurement unit: Application to attitude and heading determination,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 11,
no. 11, pp. 2852–2860, Nov. 2011.
[51] E. Stern et al., “Label-free immunodetection with CMOS-compatible
semiconducting nanowires,” Nature, vol. 445, pp. 519–522, Feb. 2007.
[52] A. Manickam et al., “A CMOS electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) biosensor array,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, no. 6,
pp. 379–390, Dec. 2010.
[53] F. L. Chan et al., “An electrochemical dopamine sensor with a CMOS
detection circuit,” J. Micromechan. Microeng., vol. 18, no. 7, p. 1–7, Jul.
2008.
[54] B. Y. Lee et al., “Biosensor system-on-a-chip including CMOS-based
signal processing circuits and 64 carbon nanotube-based sensors for the
detection of a neurotransmitter,” Lab Chip, vol. 10, pp. 894–898, 2010.
[55] A. Shamim et al., “Wireless dosimeter: System-on-chip versus systemin-package for biomedical and space applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 643–647, Jul. 2008.
[56] R. R. Tummala, “SOP: What is it and why? A new microsystemintegration technology paradigm-Moore’s law for system integration of
miniaturized convergent systems of the next decade,” IEEE Trans. Adv.
Packag., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 241–249, May 2004.
[57] (2014). National audit of cardiac rhythm devices. [Online]. Healthcare Quality Improvement Partnership (HQIP). London, U.K. Available:
http://www.hqip.org.uk/

ANDREU-PEREZ et al.: WEARABLE SENSORS TO SMART IMPLANTS—TOWARD PERVASIVE AND PERSONALIZED HEALTHCARE

[58] D. Cardo et al., “National nosocomial infections surveillance (NNIS)
system report, data summary from January 1992 through June 2004,
issued October 2004,” Am. J. Infection Control, vol. 32, pp. 470–485,
Dec. 2004.
[59] W. Kenneth Ward, “A review of the foreign-body response to
subcutaneously-implanted devices: The role of macrophages and cytokines in biofouling and fibrosis,” J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., vol. 2,
pp. 768–77, 2008.
[60] C. M. Zierhofer and E. S. Hochmair, “High-efficiency couplinginsensitive transcutaneus power and data-transmission via an inductive link,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 716–722, Jul.
1990.
[61] S. Ozeri and D. Shmilovitz, “Ultrasonic transcutaneous energy transfer
for powering implanted devices,” Ultrasonics, vol. 50, pp. 556–566, May
2010.
[62] Y. Qin et al., “Polymer integration for packaging of implantable sensors,”
Sensors Actuators B-Chem., vol. 202, pp. 758–778, Oct. 2014.
[63] Y. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for health
informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Informat., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1538–
1554, May 2014.
[64] M. Velikova et al., “Exploiting causal functional relationships in
Bayesian network modelling for personalised healthcare,” Int. J. Approx.
Reason., vol. 55, pp. 59–73, 2014.
[65] F. Portela et al., “A pervasive approach to a real-time intelligent decision support system in intensive medicine,” in Knowledge Discovery,
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management. Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 2013, pp. 368–381.
[66] J. Sun et al., “Predicting changes in hypertension control using electronic
health records from a chronic disease management program,” J. Am. Med.
Informat. Assoc., vol. 21, pp. 337–344, 2014.
[67] G. N. Forrest et al., “Use of electronic health records and clinical decision
support systems for antimicrobial stewardship,” Clin. Infectious Dis.,
vol. 59, pp. S122–S133, 2014.
[68] R. Eriksson et al., “Dose-specific adverse drug reaction identification in
electronic patient records: Temporal data mining in an inpatient psychiatric population,” Drug Safety, vol. 37, pp. 237–247, 2014.
[69] D. W. Bates et al., “Big data in health care: Using analytics to identify
and manage high-risk and high-cost patients,” Health Affairs, vol. 33,
pp. 1123–1131, 2014.
[70] M. R. Boland et al., “Discovering medical conditions associated with
periodontitis using linked electronic health records,” J. Clin. Periodontol.,
vol. 40, pp. 474–482, 2013.
[71] H. Xu et al., “Validating drug repurposing signals using electronic health
records: A case study of metformin associated with reduced cancer mortality,” J. Am. Med. Informat. Assoc., vol. 22, pp. 179–191, 2014.
[72] Y. Hagar et al., “Survival analysis with electronic health record data:
Experiments with chronic kidney disease,” Statist. Anal. Data Mining:
ASA Data Sci. J., vol. 7, pp. 385–403, 2014.
[73] T. Cars et al., “Extraction of electronic health record data in a hospital
setting: Comparison of automatic and semi-automatic methods using
anti-TNF therapy as model,” Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol., vol. 112,
pp. 392–400, 2013.
[74] M. Marcos et al., “Interoperability of clinical decision-support systems and electronic health records using archetypes: A case study in
clinical trial eligibility,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 46, pp. 676–689,
2013.
[75] (2015). Clinical trial registry. [Online]. National Library of Medicine
(NLM). MD, USA. Available: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov
[76] I. Lipkovich and A. Dmitrienko, “Strategies for identifying predictive
biomarkers and subgroups with enhanced treatment effect in clinical
trials using SIDES,” J. Biopharmaceutical Statist., vol. 24, pp. 130–153,
2014.
[77] F. Altiparmak et al., “Information mining over heterogeneous and highdimensional time-series data in clinical trials databases,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 254–263, Apr. 2006.
[78] J. P. Metters et al., “New directions in screen printed electroanalytical sensors: An overview of recent developments,” Analyst, vol. 136,
pp. 1067–1076, 2011.
[79] N. A. Christakis and J. H. Fowler, “The collective dynamics of smoking
in a large social network,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 358, pp. 2249–2258,
2008.
[80] S. Cauchemez et al., “Role of social networks in shaping disease transmission during a community outbreak of 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza,” in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 108, pp. 2825–2830,
2011.

2761

[81] J. L. Gardy et al., “Whole-genome sequencing and social-network analysis of a tuberculosis outbreak,” New Engl. J. Med., vol. 364, pp. 730–739,
2011.
[82] R. Ansumana et al., “Ebola in sierra leone: A call for action,” Lancet,
vol. 384, pp. 303–303, Jul. 2014.
[83] D. Musiani et al., “Active sensing platform for wireless structural health
monitoring,” in Proc. ACM/IEE Int. Symp. Inform. Process. Sensor Netw.,
2007, pp. 390–399.
[84] A. Burns et al., “SHIMMERT M —A wireless sensor platform for noninvasive biomedical research,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1527–
1534, Sep. 2010.
[85] J. Hulzink et al., “An ultra low energy biomedical signal processing
system operating at near-threshold,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst.,
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 546–554, Dec. 2011.
[86] L. Atallah et al., “Real-time activity classification using ambient and
wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6,
pp. 1031–1039, Nov. 2009.
[87] A. Bahga and V. K. Madisetti, “A cloud-based approach for interoperable
electronic health records (EHRs),” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 894–906, Sep. 2013.
[88] E. B. Mazomenos et al., “A low-complexity ECG feature extraction
algorithm for mobile healthcare applications,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 459–469, Mar. 2013.
[89] N. Leavitt, “Will NoSQL databases live up to their promise?,” Computer,
vol. 43, pp. 12–14, 2010.
[90] G. B. Laleci et al., “Providing semantic interoperability between clinical
care and clinical research domains,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 356–369, Mar. 2013.
[91] H. Damasceno Vianna and J. L. V. Barbosa, “A model for ubiquitous
care of noncommunicable diseases,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1597–1606, Sep. 2014.
[92] B. Taati et al., “Data mining in bone marrow transplant records to identify
patients with high odds of survival,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 21–27, Jan. 2014.
[93] S. Perera et al., “Semantics driven approach for knowledge acquisition from EMRs,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 515–524, Mar. 2014.
[94] A. Mannini et al., “Online decoding of hidden Markov models for gait
event detection using foot-mounted gyroscopes,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1122–1130, Jul. 2014.
[95] J. Y. Xu et al., “Context-driven, prescription-based personal activity classification: Methodology, architecture, and end-to-end implementation,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1015–1025, May
2014.
[96] S. Visscher et al., “Modelling treatment effects in a clinical Bayesian
network using Boolean threshold functions,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 46,
pp. 251–266, 2009.
[97] J. Andreu and P. Angelov, “Real-time human activity recognition from
wireless sensors using evolving fuzzy systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Fuzzy Syst., 2010, pp. 1–8.
[98] F. Doctor et al., “A type-2 fuzzy embedded agent to realise ambient intelligence in ubiquitous computing environments,” Inform. Sci.,
vol. 171, pp. 309–334, 2005.
[99] B. Yuan and J. Herbert, “Fuzzy CARA—A fuzzy-based context reasoning system for pervasive healthcare,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 10,
pp. 357–365, 2012.
[100] L. O. Hall, “Exploring big data with scalable soft clustering,” in Synergies
of Soft Computing and Statistics for Intelligent Data Analysis. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2013, pp. 11–15.
[101] C. C. Aggarwal and D. S. Turaga, “Mining data streams: Systems and
algorithms,” in Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery for Engineering Systems Health Management. Abingdon, U.K.: Taylor & Francis,
2011, ch. 1, pp. 3–39.
[102] A. Bifet and G. D. F. Morales, “Big data stream learning with SAMOA,”
in IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining Workshop, 2014, pp. 1199–1202.
[103] E. A. Mohammed et al., “Applications of the MapReduce programming
framework to clinical big data analysis: Current landscape and future
trends,” BioData Mining, vol. 7, pp. 7–22, 2014.
[104] L. Feigenbaum et al., “The semantic web in action,” Sci. Am., vol. 297,
pp. 90–97, 2007.
[105] A. Bifet and R. Gavaldà, “Adaptive learning from evolving data streams,”
in Proc. Int. Symp. Intell. Data Anal., 2009, pp. 249–260.
[106] S. L. Wakchaure and G. D. Ghuge, “Apnea pulse-care: Real-time data
mining in sleep apnea monitor,” Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Adv. Eng., vol. 3,
pp. 70–76, 2013.

2762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

[107] J. Andreu et al., “Real time recognition of human activities from wearable
sensors by evolving classifiers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst.,
2011, pp. 2786–2793.
[108] J. Andreu and P. Angelov, “An evolving machine learning method for
human activity recognition systems,” J. Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 4, pp. 195–206, 2013.
[109] B. Hugueney, “Adaptive segmentation-based symbolic representations
of time series for better modeling and lower bounding distance measures,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Principles Practice Knowl. Discovery Databases,
2006, pp. 545–552.
[110] M. M. Gaber et al., “Resource-aware mining of data streams,” J. Univ.
Comput. Sci., vol. 11, pp. 1440–1453, 2005.
[111] C. C. Poon et al., “A novel biometrics method to secure wireless body
area sensor networks for telemedicine and m-health,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 73–81, Apr. 2006.
[112] A. Soule et al., Focus on Older People. Hampshire, U.K.: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2005.
[113] C. Jagger et al., “Cohort differences in disease and disability in the
young-old: Findings from the MRC cognitive function and ageing study
(MRC-CFAS),” BMC Public Health, vol. 7, pp. 156–164, 2007.
[114] D. Ozgediz et al., “The burden of surgical conditions and access to
surgical care in low- and middle-income countries,” Bull. World Health
Org., vol. 86, pp. 646–647, 2008.
[115] (2013). Review of the regulation of cosmetic interventions. [Online]. Dept. Health, Govt. U.K. Avilable: https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/
[116] G. R. Tsouri and M. H. Ostertag, “Patient-specific 12-lead ECG reconstruction from sparse electrodes using independent component analysis,”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 476–482, Mar. 2014.
[117] S. Adibi, “Biomedical sensing analyzer (BSA) for mobile-health
(mHealth)-LTE,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 345–351, Jan. 2014.
[118] B. Venema et al., “Robustness, specificity, and reliability of an in-ear
pulse oximetric sensor in surgical patients,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informat., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1178–1185, Jul. 2014.
[119] K. Kerlikowske et al., “Efficacy of screening mammography—A metaanalysis,” J. Am. Med. Assoc., vol. 273, pp. 149–154, Jan. 1995.
[120] N. A. de Glas et al., “Physical activity and survival of postmenopausal,
hormone receptor-positive breast cancer patients results of the tamoxifen exemestane adjuvant multicenter lifestyle study,” Cancer, vol. 120,
pp. 2847–2854, Sep. 2014.
[121] L. Hood and S. H. Friend, “Predictive, personalized, preventive, participatory (P4) cancer medicine,” Nature Rev. Clin. Oncol., vol. 8,
pp. 184–187, Mar. 2011.
[122] C. M. Perou et al., “Molecular portraits of human breast tumours,”
Nature, vol. 406, pp. 747–752, Aug. 2000.
Javier Andreu-Perez (S’10–M’13) received the
M.Eng. degree in computer science and engineering, the M.Sc. degree in software engineering, and
the Ph.D. degree in intelligent systems.
He is currently a Research Associate at the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, London, U.K.
His research interests include biomedical engineering, health informatics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence.
Dr. Andreu-Perez is a Member of the Body Sensor
Networks and Human Robot Interaction Groups.

Daniel Richard Leff received the Ph.D. degree in
surgery. He is currently a Senior Clinical Lecturer
of surgery with Imperial College London, London,
U.K., and an Honorary Consultant in oncoplastic
breast surgery with Imperial College Healthcare NHS
Trust, London. His research interests include imaging, biosensing, neuroergonomics, and brain function.
Dr. Leff is a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, and a Member of the Association of Surgical
Oncology, U.K.

Henry Man Ip received the B.Eng. degree in electrical and electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree
in bioengineering.
He is currently a Research Associate at the Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, London, U.K.
His research interests include development of smart
sensors and implants, as well as advances in microfabrication and embodiment of pervasive sensors.
Dr. Ip is a Member of the Body Sensor Networks
and Implantable Sensing Groups.

Guang-Zhong Yang (S’90–M’91–SM’08–F’11) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Imperial College London, London, U.K.
He is the Director, Cofounder, and currently Chairs
the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College London. He holds a number of key academic
positions at Imperial College, including the Director and the Founder of the Royal Society/Wolfson
Medical Image Computing Laboratory, a Cofounder
of the Wolfson Surgical Technology Laboratory, and
the Chairman of the Centre for Pervasive Sensing,
Imperial College London. His current research interests include biomedical
imaging, sensing, and robotics.
Dr. Yang is also a Distinguished Lecturer for IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society and a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering, the
Institution of Engineering and Technology, the American Institute for Medical
and Biological Engineering, the International Academy of Medical and Biological Engineering, the Society of Medical Imaging and Computer Assisted
Intervention, and the City and Guilds of London. He has also received Royal
Society Research Merit Award, the I.I. Rabi Award from the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, and The Times Eureka Top 100 in
British Science.

