IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2289

A Smart Capsule With GI-Tract-Location-Specific
Payload Release
Wuyang Yu, Rahim Rahimi, Manuel Ochoa, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Rodolfo Pinal,
and Babak Ziaie∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we present a smart capsule for locationspecific drug release in the gastrointestinal tract. Once activated
through a magnetic proximity fuse, the capsule opens up and releases its powdered payload in a location specified by an implanted
miniature magnetic marker or an externally worn larger magnet.
The capsule (9 mm × 26 mm) comprises of two compartments:
one contains a charged capacitor and a reed switch, while the second one houses the drug reservoir capped by a taut nylon thread
intertwined with a nichrome wire. The nichrome wire is connected
to the capacitor through the reed switch. The capacitor is charged
to 2.7 V before ingestion and once within the proximity of the permanent magnet; the reed switch closes, discharging the capacitor
through the nichrome wire, melting the nylon thread, detaching
the cap, and emptying the drug reservoir.
Index Terms—Drug absorption study, drug delivery, magnetic
actuation, smart capsule.

I. INTRODUCTION
N recent years, smart capsules which once ingested can perform endoscopy and biopsy have been the focus of intense
research and development. PillCam is perhaps the best-known
endoscopic smart capsule commercialized by Given Imaging
and used by gastroenterologists to collect images from hard-toreach areas in the GI tract (in particular, the small intestine which
cannot be reached via standard endoscopic methods) [1], [2].
Pharmaceutical companies have also been interested in similar
technologies for releasing medications at specific sites in the GI
tract (Drug Absorption Study, DAS) [3]. Site-specific delivery
can optimize the therapeutic efficacy of many drugs with preferential absorption sites. The Enterion capsule, commercialized
by Quotient Bioresearch is a device used in the pharmaceutical industry for studying human drug absorption. This capsule
incorporates a spring-loaded cylinder which, once actuated and
released by a radio frequency (RF) signal, pushes a piston and
forces the drug formulation out through a small hole [4]–[6]. The
location of the capsule is monitored through gamma ray scintillation imaging by incorporating a small amount of radioactive

I

Manuscript received August 7, 2014; revised December 29, 2014 and March
13, 2015; accepted March 21, 2015. Date of publication April 20, 2015; date of
current version August 18, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
W. Yu, R. Rahimi, and M. Ochoa are with the Birck Nanotechnology Center
and the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University.
R. Pinal is with the Department of Industrial and Physical Pharmacy, Purdue
University.
∗ B. Ziaie is with the Birck Nanotechnology Center and the School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907,
USA (e-mail: bziaie@purdue.edu).
This paper has supplemental material available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 55 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2418340

material in the capsule. Other similar efforts in this area include the InteliSite capsule commercialized by the now-defunct
company Innovative Devices LLC [7]. InteliSite was a RF activated capsule relying on a shape-memory alloy actuator to rotate
a cylinder and align a series of holes, allowing the drug to be
released from a reservoir (location tracking was accomplished
by X-ray fluoroscopy). Beside the two aforementioned commercial devices, other efforts include systems based on electrolytic
actuation (gas production) [8] or solid fuel microthrusters [9]
with the former being too slow for most practical applications
and the latter posing safety issues related to high temperatures
and pressures generated within the device. Magnetically actuated capsules [10], [11] have also been investigated. Yim
et al. developed a capsule, which contracts or collapses under
magnetic attraction to realize a multimodal drug release [10].
MAARS [11] is a similar capsule made up of magnetic semihard
and soft materials, which disintegrates upon a demagnetization
process. Another noteworthy work by Woods and Constandinou incorporates a holding mechanism into the capsule to resist
peristalsis and achieve targeted therapy [12]. This system deploys a set of extensible legs for holding on to the target site
and a retractable needle for drug delivery, both controlled by a
single micromotor. The location of the capsule is discerned by
real-time optical images transmitted through RF link.
Although suitable for drug absorption studies in clinical settings, the abovementioned approaches cannot be used for actual
therapy in larger populations that can benefit from smart capsules, which release the drug at an optimum location in the GI
tract. This is mainly due to the problems associated with the
need for real-time tracking of the capsule location (using either
gamma rays or fluoroscopy both of which are not practical in a
nonclinical setting and pose health hazards, if used repeatedly).
In addition, all these systems require active participation by the
patient/volunteer or investigator in the form of triggering an RF
transmitter, once the capsule is in the targeted position. Such
requirement is very difficult to enforce and/or guarantee (the
capsule might reach the desired location in the middle of the
night or in a social gathering).
Another important design consideration and possible limiting
factor for smart capsules is the power source. PillCam and many
other similar devices use on-board batteries. This increases the
cost of the system (tolerable in PillCam that is used for singletime endoscopy but prohibitive for drug therapy systems that
require multiple administrations) and poses potential dangers if
the batteries are inadvertently exposed to the body fluids and
shorted (this is more of a concern in drug release capsules that
need to be opened up while in the GI tract). Inductive powering
is an alternative method to provide energy to the device [8], [13].

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

for drug release at the junction of small and large intestine
(ileocecal valve). This location is relatively constant among
individuals (lower right quadrant and over the appendix) and an
externally worn magnet on the belt can trigger the release; thus,
making the device useful for treating large intestine diseases,
such as Crohn’s disease, inflammatory bowel disease, C. difficile
infection, and colon cancer.
II. DESIGN AND OPERATION
A. Structure of the Capsule

Fig. 1. (a) Conceptual illustration of the smart capsule for location specific
(in the case shown here, at ileocecal valve) drug release (original image source
[19]), and (b) profile schematic showing the detailed structure of the capsule.

However, due to its short range and misalignment sensitivity, it
faces major bottlenecks for powering devices that have to travel
through the tortuous GI tract.
In this paper, we present an alternative approach addressing
the abovementioned problems using a precharged capacitor, a
magnetic reed switch, a spring loaded cap, a nichrome wire,
and a nylon fuse. Once the capsule reaches the proximity of an
implanted or externally worn permanent magnet, the reed switch
closes, discharging the capacitor through the nichrome wire,
melting the nylon fuse, opening the cap, and releasing the drug.
Each targeting option, i.e., implanted versus externally worn
magnet, has its pros and cons and can be used depending on the
application and other circumstances. For example, an implanted
miniature magnet is more suitable for obese patients, while
an externally worn one does not require surgical implantation,
albeit at the cost of a lower spatial accuracy. The fact that our
device does not require real-time tracking means that it can be
used for providing treatments over a wide range of diseases in
the GI tract. Considering the GI tract anatomy and as a matter of
practical application, the described smart capsule is best suited

Fig. 1(a) depicts the smart capsule traveling through the small
intestine in proximity to an implanted miniature permanent magnet. The capsule consists of two compartments isolated by a
separating wall, [see Fig. 1(b)]. The compartment on the right
contains a capacitor and a magnetic reed switch. Both pins of
the capacitor are exposed on the exterior of the capsule to allow charging prior to ingestion. The pins can be insulated by
an additional cap after charging (alternatively one can easily
charge the capacitor remotely via an inductive link, which requires additional components, such as a coil and rectifier inside
the capsule). The reed switch is electrically connected in series with the capacitor and a heating element, i.e., a nichrome
wire. The wire is placed across the separating wall, with two
terminals in the right chamber for electrical connection and the
rest in the left chamber. The compartment on the left side is the
drug reservoir (in the powder or solid form). Along the axis of
this chamber is an elastic latch (taut rubber band), linking the
nichrome wire to a cap through a loop of fusible nylon thread.
The cap is connected to the reservoir with an elastic ring washer
(EcoFlex or PDMS) used for reliable and water-tight sealing.
Additionally, a PDMS rod is used as a preloaded spring pushing
the cap out, once the fusible thread is broken. All feed-through
holes on the capsule used for passing wires, pins, and bands are
sealed with epoxy resin.
B. Operation Mechanism
The working mechanism of the capsule is demonstrated in
Fig. 2. Initially, the taut rubber band holds the reservoir cap,
preventing drug leakage, while ensuring good contact between
the fusible thread and the nichrome wire. When the capsule
encounters a magnetic field strong enough to close the reed
switch, the capacitor is shorted across the nichrome wire, heating
it to a temperature greater than the melting point of nylon thread
(60–85 °C). Once the nylon thread is melted, the reservoir cap
opens, releasing the drug.
Since a capacitor is usually smaller in size compared to a
battery [14], which delivers the same level of power and the
current drain does not need to last long to fuse the thread, the
employment of a capacitor rather than a battery reduces the dimension (and cost) of the capsule. Using a charged capacitor
along with a magnetic switch enables easy actuation with an
implanted miniature magnet or a larger externally worn one.
Implantation of small magnets in and around the GI tract using minimally invasive endoscopic methods has already been
demonstrated by Gantz in an elegant device used for treatment

YU et al.: SMART CAPSULE WITH GI-TRACT-LOCATION-SPECIFIC PAYLOAD RELEASE

2291

Fig. 3. Photograph of the assembled smart capsule for location specific drug
delivery in the GI tract.

Fig. 2. (a) Before actuation by a magnet, the rubber band is in tension, the
elastic rod is in compression, the reed switch is open, and the nylon thread hooks
up to the cold nichrome wire. (b) Upon proximity to the magnet, the reed switch
closes and the capacitor starts to discharge, heating the nichrome wire. (c) After
a short time, the nylon thread melts and both the rubber band and the elastic rod
return to their original state, releasing the cap.

of gastroesophageal reflux disease [15]. A similar approach can
be used to implant the magnetic marker used for our device.
III. FABRICATION
A. Capsule Enclosure/Casing
The enclosure casing was made of acrylic using a laser machining system (PLS6MW Multi-Wavelength Laser Platform,
Universal Laser Systems, Scottsdale, AZ, USA). First, four annuli (9-mm-outer diameter and 8.4-mm-inner diameter) were
cut from a 5.58-mm-thick acrylic sheet. These were stacked and
glued together to form the lateral wall of the capsule. Next, three
discs (9-mm diameter × 1-mm height) were cut to form the end
caps and the dividing wall. Two 1.45 mm × 0.60 mm windows
were opened on the separating wall and the end cap for exposing the nichrome wire and the charging pins, respectively. Other
two 1.65 mm × 1.15 mm windows were opened on the release
cap for guiding the rubber bands. We should emphasize that
one can fabricate the casing using other materials and machining methods, as long as the material is biocompatible, low cost,
nonmagnetic (to allow the actuation), and easily machinable.
B. Assembly
First, a magnetic switch (100 VDC, 10 W, Digi-Key Corp.)
and a capacitor (electric double layer supercapacitor, 1 F, 2.7 V,

10.5 mm × 6.3 mm, Digi-Key Corp.) were electrically connected via a soldered copper wire. Two more (copper) leads
were separately soldered onto the capacitor and the magnetic
switch. Next, the switch and the capacitor were placed into the
capsule and the end cap was affixed. Weld-On (IPS Corp.) was
used for joining acrylic parts, acting as glue. The dividing wall
was then glued onto the opposite opening to encapsulate the
switch and the capacitor, while allowing the suspended copper wires out through the two windows in the cap. A 2–3-mm
segment of nichrome wire (Nichrome 60, 70.2 Ω/ft, Diameter 0.0031 in, Jacobs Online LLC) was soldered to the copper wires and the window was sealed. A length of fusible nylon thread (Grilon bonding yarn, EMS-GRIVORY, Switzerland)
was passed through the loop shaped by the nichrome wire, and
its two ends were joined by heat melting to form a ring. A strip
of rubber band (1 × 1 mm2 cross section) was trimmed by a
blade and intertwined through the thread ring. Next, the drug
was loaded, and the casing of the drug reservoir was glued to the
capacitor and reed switch compartment. Before final closure, a
flexible PDMS rod slightly longer than the height of the chamber, acting as a preloaded spring, was placed inside to ensure its
opening, following the magnetic actuation. Fig. 3 shows the photograph of a completely assembled capsule having a diameter
and length of 9 and 26 mm, respectively. We should emphasize that the Smart Capsule concept presented here can be made
smaller than a standard 000 size gelatin capsule (9.97 mm ×
26.14 mm, gelatin capsule size chart, https://www.erowid.org).
A key component of the capsule is the drug reservoir end cap
seal. This has to be tight and water resistant to prevent liquid
from seeping into the capsule, while simultaneously allowing
easy release of the end cap, following the capsule’s journey
through the stomach and small intestine. A washer made of
Ecoflex elastomer was identified as a suitable sealing ring. It was

2292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PROTOTYPE CAPSULE
Capsule enclosure
Outer diameter
Length
Inner diameter
Separating wall and caps’ thickness
Drug reservoir volume

9 mm
26 mm
8.4 mm
∼1 mm
0.618 mL
Reed switch

Profile dimension
Tube length

1.8 mm (MAX)
7 mm

Diameter
Height

6.3 mm
10.5 mm

Switching voltage
Switching current

< 100 V
< 1A

Capacitance
Rated voltage

1F
2.7 V

Capacitor

Nichrome wire

Fig. 4.
2.3 Ω/cm
2∼3 mm

Resistance/unit length
Length
Fusible nylon thread

60–85 °C

Melting point
PDMS rod
Height
Profile dimension

12.5 mm
1.2 mm × 1.2 mm

fabricated by depositing a drop of uncured polymer mixture on
the drug reservoir end cap, which was then spread evenly over
the cap and cured at room temperature for 4 h. After curing, the
central region covering the feed-through windows was removed
with a sharp blade allowing the two ends of the rubber band
to be passed through. The rubber band was pulled moderately
and knotted over the window frame, squeezing the PDMS rod
and the washer; thus, sealing the drug reservoir opening. Table I
provides a summary of the capsule specifications.
IV. EXPERIMENT SETUP
A. Magnetic Switch Characterization
Since drug release occurs when the capsule encounters a
magnetic field strong enough to close the reed switch, the switch
response to amplitude and orientation of the field has to be
determined. For these experiments, a small permanent cylinder
magnet (3 mm in diameter and 12.7 mm in height with a surface
magnetic field of 7343 G, K&J Magnetics, Inc.) was positioned
at various distances and orientations with respect to the reed
switch. Fig. 4 shows a photograph of the magnet and reed switch.
Micromanipulators were used to position the reed switch at
specific locations.
B. Payload Release Test
The payload release mechanism was tested using a fluidic
model of the small intestine. The model consisted of Tygon
tubing (12 mm in inner diameter and 17.4 mm in outer diameter)
mounted on a board in a meander configuration. The small
permanent magnet was mounted on the outside of the tubing
at a specific location, selected as the desired payload release
site. A stable water flow was provided by a pump at 230 mL/h

Reed switch characterization setup.

(9 min to travel ∼1 ft). The capsule was tested by loading it
with a powdered dye, charging its capacitor, and immediately
deploying it through the top of the tubing. The capsule was
allowed to drift downstream, eventually flowing near the magnet
and releasing its payload. Meanwhile, the position of the capsule
was recorded with a video camera. The video was then used to
measure the distance between the magnet and the actual site of
the payload release.
C. Reliability Test
To ensure that the capsule is able to successfully open in the
small intestine, which is the intended anatomical site for most
drugs, a reliability verification experiment was conducted. In the
first step, mimicking the stomach environment and transit time,
the charged capsule was inserted inside a balloon filled with
400 mL of DI water acidified to pH 2 [16]. Then, the balloon was
shaken at 1 Hz for 3.5 h to simulate the gastric motion and transit time [17]. Subsequently, the pH was raised to pH 7.4 (small
intestine pH [18]) and balloon was shaken for another 4 h to stimulate the intestinal peristalsis. After a total of 7.5 h, the capsule
was inspected for leakage and activated by a permanent magnet.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Magnetic Switch Performance
Fig. 5 shows a map of the spatial regions around the reed
switch, which allows magnetic actuation with the small permanent magnet. When a switch and magnet move such that their
longitudinal axes are parallel with respect to each other, as illustrated in Fig. 5(a), the region of actuation is radially symmetrical.
In this case, the switch will be triggered if the magnet lies within
the envelope, an eighth of which is shown in Fig. 5(a). The data
reveal that actuation can occur at distances of up to 11 mm above
the center of the longitudinal axis of the cylindrical magnet [see
central envelope in Fig. 5(a)]. This value is sufficient to trigger
the reed switch in the intestine model used in our experiments
(see Section IV-B), since the capsule is expected to drift by the
magnet at a distance of no more than 13 mm based on the tubing diameters, the capsule casing thickness, and the reed switch
diameter. Magnets with stronger field, hence wider actuation

YU et al.: SMART CAPSULE WITH GI-TRACT-LOCATION-SPECIFIC PAYLOAD RELEASE

2293

Fig. 6. Snap shot photographs of the in-vitro experiment showing the capsule
traveling next to the permanent magnet. Frames (a)–(f) show times between 1
to 62 s. The cap starts to open in frame b and the apparent release of the Evans
blue powder is visible in frame c (1 s later than frame b), with the powder
continuously diffusing out of the reservoir and the release completed in frame e
(cap totally separated). Frame f shows complete discharge of the dye.

Fig. 5. Reed switch actuation map configurations. (a) Switch and magnet
moving such that their longitudinal axes are parallel with respect to each other.
(b) Switch and magnet moving such that their longitudinal axes are perpendicular to each other. (Two different perspectives are illustrated in the inset: (Left)
the two axes are in the plane of the page, (Right) the switch axis is perpendicular
to the plane of the page.)

range, might be required for in vivo implantation to completely
cover the diameter of the small intestine (about 2.5 cm); alternatively, one can implant two smaller ones each at one side of the
small intestine to ensure proper actuation (other configuration,
such as staggering can also be used). The off-center envelope
in Fig. 5(a) indicates a maximum switching distance of 5 mm
when the capsule approaches the magnet from either side.
In another scenario, where the switch and magnet move such
that their longitudinal axes are orthogonal to each other, the
actuation occurs within four spherical regions around the magnet, an octant of which is illustrated in Fig. 5(b). However, as
the graph shows, this configuration makes the actuation more
difficult, in particular, near the midpoint (due to the orthogonality of the magnetic field and the reed switch axis). Since it is
more probable that the capsule transits in the bowel with its long
axis along the length of the intestine, the parallel orientation of
the magnet relative to the reed switch [see the case shown in
Fig. 5(a)] is a more realistic configuration.
B. Evaluation of the Release Mechanism
Fig. 6 shows snapshots of the capsule traveling in the tubing at
various points with respect to the permanent magnetic marker.

The photographs clearly show the multiple stages of release
in the in vitro payload release test. The capsule starts to open
in frame “a” (1 s), with the opening completed (cap totally
separated from the capsule) in frame “e” (17 s). Considerable
diffusion and mixing of the powdered dye in water is observed
within a minute, in frame “f.”
We also performed several reliability tests in order to evaluate
the capsule functionality after exposure to acidic and slightly
alkaline pH values (stomach and small intestine, respectively),
while being shaken in a balloon (a total of 7.5 h, see Section
IV-C). Out of total four capsules tested in this manner, none
showed any leakage into the electronic and drug compartments
and all opened without any difficulty.
C. Energy and Capacitance Requirements
It is evident that the capacitor size and electrical characteristics play an important role in the device size and functionality.
This poses several interesting design tradeoffs. It is rather obvious that in order to reduce the total size of the device and/or
increase the reservoir capacity, one needs a small capacitor.
The capacitor should, however, be large enough to store adequate energy in order to heat the nichrome wire to the temperature above the nylon thread melting point.
As the first design step, one has to identify an appropriate
value for the nichrome wire (resistance, length, and diameter)
such that it can provide sufficient temperature increase in a
short time with limited available energy stored in the capacitor.
Assuming that the capacitor is a constant voltage source, the
heating process can be described as
cmδT = U 2

RN
δt
(RN + RS )2

(1)

2294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

charging voltage of 1 V for proper operation, whereas, a 100 μF
capacitor has to be charged to 16 V.
VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 7. Experimental curve showing the capacitance versus the minimum
voltage required for the nichrome wire (2 mm long, 0.08 mm thick, ∼0.23 Ω)
to melt the nylon fuse (Grilon yarn, 60 °C).

where c is the specific heat capacity of nichrome, m is the mass
of the nichrome wire, δT is temperature change, U is the source
voltage, RN is the nichrome wire resistance, RS is the lumped
series resistance (capacitor dc internal resistance plus contact
resistances), and δt is the time interval. Additionally, m and
RN can be described, respectively, as
m = ρAl

(2)

l
σA

(3)

RN =

where ρ is the density, σ is the conductivity, and l/A are the length
and the cross-sectional area of the nichrome wire. Combining
(1)–(3) yields
δT
1
=
2
l
δt
cρ σ + ARS

(4)

where δT /δt is the temperature increase rate. This clearly indicates that a short and thin-nichrome wire has to be used in order
to rapidly increase the temperature as long as it is strong enough
to perform its latching function (i.e., hold the nylon thread tight
enough).
With the nichrome wire resistance fixed, we need to identify an appropriate capacitor that satisfies the aforementioned
tradeoffs. From a stored energy perspective (0.5 CU 2 ), a larger
capacitance reduces the required charging voltage for a given
total energy. A high charging voltage can cause several difficulties, such as peak discharge current beyond the limit of
the reed switch (thus destroying the switch), difficulty in wireless charging, increasing the likelihood of charge leakage, and
safety issues associated with sealing cap breakdown and possible electrical shock. However, as mentioned previously, a
large capacitor usually means increased dimensions of the capsule and a higher equivalent series resistance. Fig. 7 shows
the results of experiments done using a fixed value for the
nichrome wire (2 mm long, 0.08 mm thick, ∼0.23 Ω) in order to determine the capacitance and charging voltage required
to heat the wire high enough to melt the nylon fuse. As can be
seen, a super capacitor of 1 F used in our capsule requires a

In this paper, we presented a smart capsule that can release
its payload at a specific predetermined location in the GI tract.
This was achieved using energy stored in a capacitor to melt
a taut nylon fuse holding a release cap, through a prestressed
rubber band. The actuation process was triggered by a proximity
scheme using an implanted miniature permanent magnet closing
a reed switch, discharging the capacitor through a nichrome
wire; thus, heating the thread to its melting temperature. The
smart capsule was 9 mm in diameter and 26 mm in length,
smaller than a standard Size 000 gelatin capsule. Future work
involves validating the functionality of the capsule in in vivo
models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the staff of the Birck Nanotechnology Center for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Iddan et al., “Wireless capsule endoscopy,” Nature, vol. 405, pp. 417–
417, 2000.
[2] A. Moglia et al., “Capsule endoscopy: Progress update and challenges
ahead,” Nature Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., vol. 6, pp. 353–362, 2009.
[3] I. R. Wilding and D. V Prior, “Remote controlled capsules in human drug
absorption (HDA) studies,” Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst., vol. 20,
pp. 405–431, 2003.
[4] P. J. Houzego et al., “Ingestible device for the release of substances at
distinct locations in alimentary canal,” U.S. Patent 6 884 239 B2, Apr. 26,
2005.
[5] I. Wilding et al., “Development of a new engineering-based capsule for
human drug absorption studies,” Pharm. Sci. Technol. Today, vol. 3, no.
11, pp. 385–392, Nov. 2000.
[6] I. R. Wilding et al., “Assessment of lumiracoxib bioavailability from
targeted sites in the human intestine using remotely activated capsules
and gamma scintigraphy,” Pharm. Res., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 443–446, Mar.
2004.
[7] M. McGirr et al., “The use of the InteliSite companion device to deliver
mucoadhesive polymers to the dog colon,” Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., vol. 36,
no. 4/5, pp. 386–391, Mar. 2009.
[8] R. Gröning et al., “Control of drug release from capsules using high
frequency energy transmission systems,” Int. J. Pharm., vol. 364, no. 1,
pp. 9–13, Nov. 2008.
[9] X. Pi et al., “A novel micro-fabricated thruster for drug release in remote
controlled capsule,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 159, no. 2, pp. 227–232,
May 2010.
[10] S. Yim et al., “Magnetically actuated soft capsule with the multimodal
drug release function,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 1413–1418, Aug. 2013.
[11] C. T. Dietzel et al., “Magnetic active agent release system: Evaluation of
a new way for a reproducible, externally controlled drug release into the
small intestine,” J. Control. Release, vol. 161, pp. 722–727, 2012.
[12] S. P. Woods and T. G. Constandinou, “Wireless capsule endoscope for targeted drug delivery: Mechanics and design considerations,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 945–953, Apr. 2013.
[13] B. Hugemann and O. Schuster, “Device for the release of substances at
defined locations in the alimentary tract,” U.S. Patent 4 425 117 A, Jan.
10, 1984.
[14] A. Lambert et al., “Autonomous telemetric capsule to explore the small
bowel,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 191–196, 1991.
[15] R. Ganz et al., “Esophageal sphincter device for gastroesophageal reflux
disease,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 368, pp. 719–727, 2013.
[16] J. J. Powell et al., “Concentrations of metals in gastric juice in health and
peptic ulcer disease,” Gut, vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 1617–1620, Dec. 1992.

YU et al.: SMART CAPSULE WITH GI-TRACT-LOCATION-SPECIFIC PAYLOAD RELEASE

[17] L. P. Degen and S. F. Phillips, “Variability of gastrointestinal transit in
healthy women and men,” Gut, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 299–305, 1996.
[18] J. Fallingborg et al., “Intraluminal pH of the human gastrointestinal tract,”
Dan. Med. Bull., vol. 46, pp. 183–196, 1999.
[19] WebMD, LLC., “Digestive Disorders Health Center,” (2014). [Online]. Available: http://www.webmd.com/digestive-disorders/picture-ofthe-intestines.

Wuyang Yu received the B.S. degree in microelectronics from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2012. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
Since September 2012, he has been with Ziaie
Biomedical Microdevices Laboratory, Purdue University. His research interests include developing
low-cost and flexible microdevices and microsystems
for biomedical sensing and drug delivery.

Rahim Rahimi received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the Iran University of Science
and Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2008. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical
and computer engineering at Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA.
He has been a Research Assistant with the Ziaie Biomedical Microdevices Laboratory, Purdue
University, since 2012. His research interests include drug delivery, microfluidics, implantable devices, flexible electronics, electrochemical sensors,
biomedical sensors, and biomedical applications of microelectromechanical
systems.

Manuel Ochoa (GS’09) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from the California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, in 2009, the M.S.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 2012,
where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering.
Since 2009, he has been a Research Assistant
with the Ziaie Biomedical Microdevices Laboratory,
Purdue University. His research focuses on the integration of common materials for the development
low-cost, multifunctional, and microsystem platforms for biomedical applications, including transdermal drug delivery and dermal wound healing.

2295

Rodolfo Pinal received the Ph.D. degree in pharmaceutical science from the University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA, in 1988.
He is an Associate Professor of industrial and
physical pharmacy with Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA. His research interests include
drug solubility, solubilization, and strategies for optimizing the delivery. An important part of his research
focuses on producing next generation pharmaceuticals for use in patient-centered precision medicine.

Babak Ziaie (M’95–SM’07) received the Doctoral
Degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1994.
From 1995 to 1999, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
and an Assistant Research Scientist at the Center for
Integrated Microsystems, University of Michigan. He
was with Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Minnesota, as an Assistant
Professor, from 1999 to 2004. Since January 2005,
he has been with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, where he is
currently a Professor. His research interests include biomedical applications of
MEMS and Microsystems.

