938

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

In-Body to On-Body Ultrawideband Propagation
Model Derived From Measurements
in Living Animals
Pål Anders Floor, Raúl Chávez-Santiago, Sverre Brovoll, Student Member, IEEE, Øyvind Aardal, Jacob Bergsland,
Ole-Johannes H. N. Grymyr, Per Steinar Halvorsen, Rafael Palomar, Dirk Plettemeier, Svein-Erik Hamran,
Tor A. Ramstad, and Ilangko Balasingham, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Ultrawideband (UWB) radio technology for wireless
implants has gained significant attention. UWB enables the fabrication of faster and smaller transceivers with ultralow power
consumption, which may be integrated into more sophisticated implantable biomedical sensors and actuators. Nevertheless, the large
path loss suffered by UWB signals propagating through inhomogeneous layers of biological tissues is a major hindering factor.
For the optimal design of implantable transceivers, the accurate
characterization of the UWB radio propagation in living biological tissues is indispensable. Channel measurements in phantoms
and numerical simulations with digital anatomical models provide
good initial insight into the expected path loss in complex propagation media like the human body, but they often fail to capture the
effects of blood circulation, respiration, and temperature gradients
of a living subject. Therefore, we performed UWB channel measurements within 1–6 GHz on two living porcine subjects because
of the anatomical resemblance with an average human torso. We
present for the first time, a path loss model derived from these in
vivo measurements, which includes the frequency-dependent attenuation. The use of multiple on-body receiving antennas to combat
the high propagation losses in implant radio channels was also
investigated.
Index Terms—Channel model, implant, in-body (IB), in vivo,
path loss.
Manuscript received November 14, 2014; revised February 4, 2015; accepted
February 28, 2015. Date of publication April 6, 2015; date of current version
May 7, 2015. This work was a part of the MELODY Project-Phase II under
Contract 225885, which was supported by the Research Council of Norway.
P. A. Floor, R. Chávez-Santiago, and I. Balasingham are with the Intervention
Centre, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0027 Oslo, Norway, with the Institute
of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, NO-0104 Oslo, Norway, and also
with the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway (e-mail: flo@rr-research.no; raul.chavez-santiago@rr-research.
no; ilangko.balasingham@medisin.uio.no).
S. Brovoll, Ø. Aardal, and S.-E. Hamran are with the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, NO-2027 Kjeller, Norway (e-mail: Sverre.
Brovoll@ffi.no; Oyvind.Aardal@ffi.no; Svein-Erik.Hamran@ffi.no).
J. Bergsland, O.-J. H. N. Grymyr, and P. S. Halvorsen are with the Intervention
Centre, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0027 Oslo, Norway and are also with the
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo (e-mail: jacobbergsland622@
googlemail.com; olegry@ous-hf.no; sthalvor@ous-hf.no).
R. Palomar is with the Norwegian Colour and Visual Computing Laboratory, Gjøvik University College, NO-2815 Gjøvik, Norway, and also with
the Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital, NO-0027 Oslo, (e-mail:
Rafael.Palomar@rr-research.no).
D. Plettemeier is with the Dresden University of Technology, D-01069 Dresden, Germany (e-mail: dirk.plettemeier@tu-dresden.de).
T. A. Ramstad is with the Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway (e-mail: ramstad@iet.ntnu.no).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2417805

I. INTRODUCTION
ATA from the World Health Organization indicate that
the global population suffering from chronic diseases is
increasing at an alarming rate. It has been estimated that in
2001, chronic diseases contributed to approximately 60% of
the reported deaths worldwide. It is forecasted that by 2020,
nearly three-quarters of deaths in the world will be caused by
chronic conditions, like diabetes and ischemic heart disease
[1]. For the prevention and better management of chronic diseases, the involvement of the patients themselves is crucial.
This can be achieved with the real-time monitoring of various physiological signals. The use of telecommunications and
microelectronic technology can significantly contribute to this
goal through the development of radio frequency (RF) wireless biomedical sensors [2]. For instance, continuous glucose
monitoring systems [3] utilizing subcutaneous RF implantable
sensors can contribute greatly to the self-management of diabetes. Other in-body (IB) sensors, like the wireless capsule
endoscope (WCE) [4]–[6] facilitate the diagnosis of disease in
the small bowel, which is difficult to visualize with conventional
endoscopic techniques.
The IEEE Standard 802.15.6-2012 specifies the physical
(PHY) and medium access control layers for communication
between small RF transceivers deployed on the surface, inside,
or in the peripheral proximity of the human body [7]. Combined with various biomedical sensors, real-time measurement
and monitoring of physiological signals becomes possible with
this technology. The centrally coordinated or distributed interconnection of wireless biomedical sensors, referred to as a body
area network, can be implemented in existing industrial, scientific, medical bands, as well as other portions of the electromagnetic spectrum approved by national medical and/or regulatory
authorities. Although IEEE Standard 802.15.6-2012 does not
consider the use of ultrawideband (UWB) signals for IB biomedical devices, the feasibility of high data rate communication
for implantable devices using UWB signals has been demonstrated in a number of studies [8]. As defined by the United
States Federal Communications Commission (FCC), UWB signals are those with fractional bandwidth exceeding 20% of
the center frequency, or alternatively, a bandwidth greater than
500 MHz. UWB communication systems have the ability to operate with ultralow power and low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
using different modulation and coding strategies, characteristics

D

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

FLOOR et al.: IN-BODY TO ON-BODY ULTRAWIDEBAND PROPAGATION MODEL DERIVED FROM MEASUREMENTS IN LIVING ANIMALS

that are attractive for the wireless interfaces of implantable
biomedical sensors. Additionally, UWB signals may not represent a threat to patients’ safety [9]. In the United States UWB
outdoor/indoor communication systems are allowed to operate
within 3.1–10.6 GHz according to FCC spectrum regulations,
whereas in other parts of the world different subbands within
this spectrum portion are used according to local regulations.
Computer simulations of in-body to on-body (IB2OB) communications, i.e., a wireless link between a sensor operating
inside the human body and an on-body (OB) gateway device,
have suggested that data rates as high as 100 Mb/s are feasible
using UWB [10], [11]. Nevertheless, an in vivo experiment on
a living porcine subject demonstrated a significantly lower data
rate of 1 Mb/s and a bit error rate of 10−2 for an UWB link between a transmitter implanted at a maximal depth of 12 cm into
the abdominal cavity and an OB receiver [12]. This discrepancy calls for further research to determine whether a sensor
implanted into the human body at a depth of several centimeters
could actually communicate at data rates in the order of tens of
megabit per second using a UWB interface. The large path loss
suffered by UWB signals propagating through living biological tissues is the main hindering factor. Therefore, an accurate
characterization of the radio channel is necessary to enhance the
design and optimization of implantable RF transceivers.
Nevertheless, there have been limited attempts to model the
IB2OB channel for UWB implants. To the best of our knowledge, the first IB2OB UWB channel model was reported in
[13], which stemmed from numerical simulations using a voxel
anatomical model. To collect channel data, an implantable disc
dipole antenna was designed, which covered the frequency band
of 3.4–4.8 GHz. Although the channel impulse response (CIR)
for propagation in the thoracic cavity was obtained, no path loss
formulas were presented therein. A more elaborated model providing a statistical description of both the CIR and path loss of
an IB2OB UWB link within 1–6 GHz for the thoracic cavity
was presented in [14]. This model was derived from numerical
simulations, using the voxel anatomical dataset of the Visible
Human Project. In addition to path loss, the model predicted
a root-mean-square (RMS) delay spread below 1 ns. Further
improvement by including the frequency-dependent attenuation
was introduced to this model in [15].
Despite the reliability of modern anatomical voxel models
and electromagnetic simulation tools, the best way of gathering
accurate channel data for an IB2OB propagation model consists
of performing measurements in a realistic propagation medium,
i.e., living biological tissues. This facilitates capturing the effects
of blood circulation, respiration, and temperature gradients of
a living subject. Therefore, expansion of research to involve
expertise from the healthcare domain to develop more accurate
propagation models for implant communications was devised
in [16] as an important strategy. Nevertheless, for practical and
ethical reasons such measurement campaigns with humans are
not possible. Therefore, performing channel measurements in
living animals that anatomically resemble parts of the human
body is a viable alternative.
In the following, we present a path loss model for the IB2OB
UWB channel derived from in vivo measurements on two liv-

939

ing porcine subjects. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first IB2OB UWB path loss model derived from in vivo measurements that is reported in the literature. Scattering matrices
were measured at different implantation depths in the abdominal cavity using a single implanted UWB antenna and one or
two OB antennas. From these matrices, we obtained measurements of the forward channel gain in the frequency domain, i.e.,
the S21 (f ) parameter, at different implantation depths, which
were later processed in MATLAB to derive the path loss of each
link as −PL = mean {|S21 (f )|} in decibels (dB). The proposed path model describes average behavior of all the channel
measurements obtained within 1–6 GHz and is valid for implantation depths ranging 5–16 cm. An investigation of simultaneous
reception with two antennas was also undertaken in order to assess the possible use of multiple antennas to recover more of
the power transmitted from inside the body. The use of multiple
receiving antennas may help to tackle the effects of the very
large path loss typically observed in IB2OB channels [17].
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the experimental methodology is described in detail
and some channel measurements are presented. In Section III
the IB2OB path loss model is derived based on the obtained
measurements. In Section IV we investigate the use of multiple
OB receiving antennas. Finally, in Section V, our conclusions
are given and future work is briefly discussed.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND METHODOLOGY
The measurement campaigns were undertaken at the Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital, with the approval of
the Norwegian Animal Research Authority. Because of the appropriate size to approximate the anatomy of an average human
torso, two Norwegian landrace female pigs with body weights
of 42 and 46 kg, respectively, were utilized in two separate
experiments. During both procedures, humane treatment was
provided to the experimental subjects by researchers certified
with FELASA1 Category C [European Convention for the Protection of Vertebrate Animals (ETS No. 123)] in accordance to
standard clinical protocol. Laparotomy was performed in order
to enable the implantation of an IB probing antenna at various depths in the abdominal cavity. The measurement points
where the OB receiving antenna(s) were placed on the anesthetized porcine subject during the first experiment are indicated
in Fig. 1, whereas the swine anatomy is depicted in Fig. 2 [18].
A small surgical incision in each case was made on the side of
the animal to insert the IB antenna. In order to avoid coupling
between the IB and OB antennas through creeping waves, the
point of entry was carefully covered with an electromagnetic
insulating material.
An electromagnetic tracking system (NDI Aurora) measured
the distance between the IB and OB antennas with an RMS
1 FELASA stands for Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations, which has established an accreditation system for teaching programs
for all categories of personnel involved in the care and use of laboratory animals.
The FELASA Accreditation Scheme is intended for courses that educate and
train persons for Functions A, B, C, and D defined in article 23 of EU Directive
2010/63.

940

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Measurements points on the anesthetized swine for the first experiment.

error margin of 0.7 mm. The IB and OB antennas were connected to the ports of a Rohde and Schwarz ZVA67 vector network analyzer (VNA) through shielded coaxial cables of 2 m in
length. The cables’ frequency response was subtracted from the
channel measurements by performing a full calibration of the
VNA. Electromagnetic compatibility tests were performed in
order to ensure that unwanted electromagnetic emissions from
collocated electronic devices like the electromagnetic tracking
system did not interfere with the UWB communication system.
The scatter matrix was obtained for all the points indicated in
Fig. 1 during the first experiment, as well as 16 additional points
(in the same area as in Fig. 1) during the second experiment.

Fig. 2. Swine anatomy (taken with permission from http://www.
biologycorner.com/pig/review.html). The IB probing antenna was implanted
within the area delimited by the green border.

A. IB Probing Antenna
Because of the difficulty to keep the IB and OB antennas aligned with respect to each other during the in vivo
measurements, an UWB implantable antenna with quasiomnidirectional radiation pattern had to be employed. This
consideration corresponds to some practical IB medical sensor applications like the WCE, in which quasi-omnidirectional
antennas are used to establish the IB2OB radio communication
link because of the unpredictable orientation that the device can
have as it travels inside the gastrointestinal tract [4]–[6].
Hence, for the IB probing antenna, a conformal trapezoid strip
excited broadband hemispherical dielectric resonator antenna
(DRA) [19] was utilized. This implantable DRA was originally
designed for optimal operation within 3.1–4.8 GHz for possible
application in WCEs. With a diameter of just 8 mm (see Fig. 3),

Fig. 3. (a) Dimensions and (b) physical implementation of the UWB IB
antenna. The radiation pattern and technical details of this antenna can be found
in [19].

this antenna design facilitates the implantation, while providing
the adequate radiation pattern for the measurements. The DRA
was implanted into the abdominal cavity in the area of the small
intestine within the area delimited by the green border indicated
in Fig. 2.
During the first experiment, the DRA was implanted at two
different depths, 5 and 9 cm, measured from the reference points

FLOOR et al.: IN-BODY TO ON-BODY ULTRAWIDEBAND PROPAGATION MODEL DERIVED FROM MEASUREMENTS IN LIVING ANIMALS

941

TABLE I
DISTANCES BETWEEN IB AND OB ANTENNAS IN EXPERIMENT 1
Point

Distance from IB antenna
implanted at 5 cm depth

Distance from IB antenna
implanted at 9 cm depth

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10

5 cm
10 cm
15 cm
10 cm
15 cm
6.5 cm
10 cm
×
×
×

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
9 cm
13 cm
16 cm

Fig. 4.

Physical implementation and dimensions of the UWB OB antenna.

TABLE II
DISTANCES BETWEEN IB AND OB ANTENNAS IN EXPERIMENT 2
Point

Dist. from IB antenna
implanted at 7 cm depth

Dist. from IB antenna
implanted at 6 cm depth

Dist. from IB antenna
implanted at 13 cm depth

P1E2
P2E2
P3E2
P4E2
P5E2
P6E2
P7E2
P8E2
P9E2
P10E2
P11E2
P12E2
P13E2
P14E2
P15E2
P16E2

7 cm
12 cm
9 cm
12 cm
7.5 cm
10 cm
7 cm
8.5 cm
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
6 cm
8 cm
7.5 cm
7 cm
7 cm
8 cm
×
×

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
13 cm
14 cm

1 (P1) and 8 (P8) in Fig. 1, respectively. Table I shows the
distance between each measurement point in Fig. 1 and the IB
probing antenna. Note that for an implantation depth of 9 cm
only P8, P9, and P10 were considered.
In the second experiment, the DRA was implanted at depths
of 6, 7, and 13 cm. Table II shows the distance between each of
the measurement points (here, labeled as E2 for “Experiment 2”)
and the IB probing antenna. Points P1E2, P10E2, and P18E2 are
reference points for the implantation depths of 6, 7, and 13 cm,
respectively.
In both experiments, and for each point, the measurements
were repeated 8–12 times over 4–5 min in order to reveal and
account for any significant change in the propagation medium
over time.
B. OB Receiving Antenna
The OB receiving antenna was an UWB bowtie dipole [20]
made of conductive patches on a printed circuit board with
a total size of 3.6 × 7.6 cm2 (see Fig. 4). As in the case of
the IB probing antenna, the bow tie dipole exhibited a quasiomnidirectional radiation pattern.

Fig. 5. (a) Reflection coefficient of the IB probing and (b) OB receiving
antennas, averaged over 30 measurements for an implantation depth of 5 cm.

In the first experiment, measurements with a single bowtie
dipole were taken at P1, P2, P3, and P8. Furthermore, in order
to investigate whether several antennas could be used for reception as well as determining the correlation between different
propagation paths, two OB antennas were placed 8 cm from
each other to simultaneously obtain measurements at P4, P5,
P6, P7 (with one of the bowtie dipoles fixed at P1) as well as
P9 and P10 (with a bowtie dipole fixed at P8). In the second
experiment, the OB receiving antennas were placed even closer
to each other (between 3 and 5 cm), and during some of these
measurements, a smaller bowtie dipole antenna [20] of total size
2.5 × 5 cm2 had to be applied (see Section IV).
C. Reflection Coefficient of the IB Antenna
For implantation, the IB probing antenna had to be covered
with a thin layer of nitrile butadiene rubber (NBR), which is a
polymer commonly used for the fabrication of disposable laboratory gloves. The cover was applied manually by wrapping the
antenna in a prefabricated thin sheet of NBR, which was sealed
tightly with a tape after extracting the air between the antenna’s
surface and the polymer. This was done to prevent physical contact with the abdominal fluids, which could have short-circuited
the printed board elements or the connector thereby rendering
the antenna inoperative. Through measurements of the S11 parameter in a tissue-simulating phantom solution [21] with and
without the NBR protective layer, we concluded that the presence of this thin layer of polymer did not change significantly
the radiating characteristics of the antenna. When implanted in
the swine’s abdominal cavity, however, the S11 parameter of the
IB probing antenna [see Fig. 5(a)] differed significantly from the
S11 obtained through numerical simulations and measurements
in a tissue-simulating liquid phantom [19]. Reportedly, the S11

942

Fig. 6.
(b) P8.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Average versus one-trial channel gain measurements for (a) P1 and

parameter in a phantom had a value of −10 dB within 3–5 GHz.
This significant discrepancy with our results reinforces the claim
that in vivo measurements are necessary in order to include some
effects that are not captured by simulations or measurements in
homogeneous propagation media like phantoms. Disregarding
such effects may lead to overoptimistic estimation of the antenna
characteristics and propagation conditions.
Although the reflection coefficient of the IB probing antenna
was rather high for frequencies below 3 GHz as seen in Fig. 5(a),
it is possible to compensate for the antenna response by using
the S11 parameter averaged over many measurement repetitions.
Since the channel attenuation is very high, which implies a high
isolation between the IB and OB antennas, and considering that
the S22 exhibits good behavior within 1–6 GHz [see Fig. 5(b)],
the compensation can be done by considering S11 only. Since
the S11 parameter acts as the reflection coefficient whenever all
the other VNA ports (here Ports 2 and 3) are well matched, the
power that is coupled into the swine’s body is given by
P̃Tx = PTx (1 − |S11 |2 )

(1)

where PTx is the power delivered at Port 1 of the VNA. However,
when the VNA computes the S21 , it considers the ratio between
a wave coming out of Port 2 and a wave going into Port 1, given
that Port 2 is matched impedance-wise (i.e., there is no wave
reflected into Port 2). This implies that the output/input power
ratio based on the VNA measurements are given by |S21 |2 =
PRx /PTx . However, since only the power P̃Tx is coupled into
the animal’s body, a more realistic value of |S21 |2 is obtained
by the ratio
 2
|S21 |2
PRx
PTx |S21 |2
 
=
=
.
S̃21  =
2
PTx (1 − |S11 | )
P̃Tx
1 − |S11 |2

(2)

This value will be substantially different from |S21 |2 when
|S11 | is close to unity. In the remainder of this paper both
compensated and noncompensated
transmission coef forward
 2
ficients will be evaluated, i.e., S̃21  and |S21 |2 , respectively.
The noncompensated data will serve as a pessimistic estimate
of the path loss, whereas the compensated data will be closer
to what can be expected in practical propagation situations. As
an example, Fig. 6 shows the channel forward transmission coefficient (gain) for a single measurement trial compared to the

Fig. 7. Compensated versus noncompensated channel gain measurements for
(a) P1 and (b) P8.

Fig. 8.

Curve fitting to path loss measurements at (a) 1 GHz and (b) 4 GHz.

average over ten trials for P1 and P8. From these figures, one can
observe that the channel gain does not change abruptly over the
course of several minutes within 1–6 GHz for P1 and 1–3 GHz
for P8.
Fig. 7 shows the compensated and noncompensated channel
gain measurements for P1 and P8. Note that 10–15 dB reduction
in the attenuation is observed at 1 GHz when the measured gain
is compensated, which is more in agreement with simulation
results [11].
III. PATH LOSS MODEL
A path loss formula as a function of the propagation distance
was obtained by fitting exponential curves to the data obtained
from all the S21 measurements in all the points listed in Tables I
and II. The well-known log-distance model for IB channels
given in [22] was applied as
 
d
PL (d) = PL0 + 10n log10
(3)
d0
where d is the separation between antennas, i.e., implantation
depth in centimeters, and d0 is the reference implantation depth
with a value of 5 cm, i.e., the minimal depth for which we were
able to obtain measurements. PL0 is the path loss at the reference
depth d0 = 5 cm and was obtained from the measurements at
P1. The path loss exponent n was found by a nonlinear leastsquares curve fitting algorithm. Fig. 8 shows both the scatter plot
for all the obtained measurements as well as the curve fitting for
1 and 4 GHz, respectively.
Because of the frequency dependence of the dielectric constants of the different organs and tissues along the propagation
path [15], the rate at which the path loss increases with distance

FLOOR et al.: IN-BODY TO ON-BODY ULTRAWIDEBAND PROPAGATION MODEL DERIVED FROM MEASUREMENTS IN LIVING ANIMALS

943

TABLE III
COEFFICIENTS FOR QUADRATIC FITTING TO PATH LOSS EXPONENT

No compensation
Compensation

a

b

c

−0.813
−0.800

7.817
7.839

−3.235
−3.647

Fig. 9. Path loss exponent fitting for the (a) noncompensated and (b) compensated data.

is a function of frequency f. This rate is expressed by the path
loss exponent, which as a function of frequency is denoted as
N (f ). This parameter closely follows a second degree polynomial of the form
N (f ) = af 2 + bf + c

(4)

where a, b, and c are fitting coefficients, the optimal values of
which are given in Table III. Fig. 9 shows how the path loss
exponent model in (4) approximates the channel measurements
within the entire frequency band of 1–6 GHz. Note that these
coefficients may change if the reference depth d0 changes too.
Hence, the presented model is valid for 5 ≤ d ≤ 16 cm only.
By inserting (4) into (3) and using the data obtained from
P1 to determine PL0 , the two-dimensional path loss profiles in
Fig. 10 as a function of both frequency and depth were obtained.
From these graphics, it is clear that the propagation in lower frequencies (approximately within 1–3 GHz) exhibit significantly
lower path loss. Moreover, the rate at which the path loss increases with depth is much higher as frequency increases. Also
note that the rate at which the path loss increases with frequency
is larger as depth grows. To illustrate the last statement, we have
compared three path loss curves as a function of frequency for
three different depths in Fig. 11. We set all the curves to the
starting point of 0 dB to observe the relative path loss with respect to each other, i.e., the different rates of path loss change.
Evidently, the rate at which path loss increases as a function
of frequency becomes more severe at higher depths. This can
be explained by the inhomogeneity of organs and tissues in the
deep abdominal cavity, contrasting the lower depths in which
more homogeneous layers of skin, fat, and muscle tissues are
found.
The propagation effects described above were also observed
in [15] from numerical simulations. The characterization of all
these path loss variations over depth and frequency provides
useful guidelines for the design of wireless implant commu-

Fig. 10. Path loss as a function of frequency and implantation depth for (a)
noncompensated and (b) compensated measurements.

nications. Due to the lower path losses in lower frequencies,
the power consumption of implantable UWB transceivers could
be reduced even further by transmitting within 1–3 GHz. This
would increase the operational life span of UWB biomedical
implants. As mentioned in Section I, spectrum regulations constrain the utilization of UWB to 3.1–10.6 GHz for indoor and
outdoor propagation environments. Nevertheless, regulating the
use of 1–3 GHz for IB UWB transmissions [23] would be highly
beneficial for the use of this RF technology in applications that
demand high data transmission rates like the WCE [4]–[6].

IV. MULTIPLE RECEIVER ANTENNAS
One way of extracting more of the power transmitted from the
quasi-omnidirectional IB antenna is to use multiple OB receiving antennas placed at different points on the porcine subject’s
abdomen [17]. This can reduce some of the large losses observed
in Fig. 10, given that the reception from each antenna is strong
enough. In the following, the gains from multiple antennas as
well as the correlations between different propagation paths are
investigated.

944

Fig. 11.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Path loss slopes over frequency for different depths within 1–3 GHz.
Fig. 13.

CIR obtained in P9E2 and P12E2.

fectly estimated at the receiver. We chose to cover the frequency
band of 1–4 GHz by using a Gaussian window
 f −μ
e 2 σ 2 , f ∈ [fl , fu ]
(5)
HG (f ) =
0,
f ∈ [fl , fu ]
Fig. 12. Example of mutual coupling between two OB receiving antennas at
(a) 5 cm and (b) 3 cm from each other.

A. Gain From Multiple Antennas
In order to investigate the use of multiple antennas, two OB
receiving antennas were applied simultaneously on the skin of
the porcine subject and 3 × 3 measurement scatter matrices
were obtained with the VNA. Simultaneous measurements were
done between points P1 and P4-P7, P8, and P9-P10 (see Table I), P1E2 and P3E2-P8E2, P9E2 and P10E2-P14E2, as well
as P15E2 and P16E2 (see Table II). Three different distances
separating the two OB receiving antennas were considered: 8 cm
(e.g., between P1 and P6), 5 cm (e.g., between P1E2 and P6E2),
and 3 cm (e.g., between P9E2 and P12E2).
In order to place the antennas as close as 3 cm from each
other, the smaller bowtie antenna design described in Section
II-A had to be used; the smaller bowtie antennas exhibited an
S22 behavior similar to the bigger size one’s. When placing
the antennas as close as 3–5 cm from each other, it is also
important to investigate their mutual coupling. The coupling
can be observed from the S32 parameter averaged over eight
measurement trials and plotted in Fig. 12. As seen, the mutual
coupling is highest at 1 GHz when the antennas are at 3-cm
distance, but it falls off rapidly as the frequency increases. We
concluded that this mutual coupling was acceptably low.
Here, we tried to obtain insight into the typical gains that may
be achieved with the use of multiple antennas. We, therefore,
considered a rather ideal scenario, where the channel can be per-

where fl = 1 GHz and fu = 4 GHz. With μ = 2.5 GHz and σ =
0.68, the −3-dB points occur at 2 and 3 GHz, respectively. The
total response is then HRx 1 = HG (f ) S21 (f ) between the input
and output of Antenna 1 and HRx 2 = HG (f ) S31 (f ) between
the input and output of Antenna 2. Both S21 and S31 were
obtained by averaging measurements for the relevant points
over 8–10 trials. At the receiver, a filter matched to the whole
response, HRx 1 , was applied
∗
(f ) · e−j 2π f T i .
HM F i = κ · HRx
i

(6)

In (6), the exponential is a phase term depending on the delay
of path i, Ti , and κ is a constant, one specific example of which is
given in [24]. This filter maximizes the peak SNR at the receiver
i, which is given by
 fu
1
1
|HRxi (f )|2 df =
αi
(7)
γi =
N0 f i
N0
where N0 is the noise power spectral density (PSD). This is a
well-known result in communication theory. For further details,
the reader may consult [25, pp. 414–415]. With γ1 ≥ γ2 , the
SNR gain from two antennas can be computed as




γ1 + γ2
α1 + α2
G = 10 log10
= 10 log10
.
(8)
γ1
α1
The last equality is due to the noise PSD cancelling out.
Fig. 13 shows the CIR for P9E2 (green) and P12E2 (red). The
distance between these two points was 3 cm, and the CIR was
obtained by performing the IFFT of HRx i (f ). For these two
points, one can calculate a gain of G = 2.1 dB. Note that the
highest possible gain using two antennas simultaneously is 3 dB,

FLOOR et al.: IN-BODY TO ON-BODY ULTRAWIDEBAND PROPAGATION MODEL DERIVED FROM MEASUREMENTS IN LIVING ANIMALS

945

TABLE IV
GAIN FOR DIFFERENT OB RECEIVING ANTENNA DISTANCES
Distance: 8 cm
0.18 dB (P1P6)
0.16 dB (P1P4E2)
0.34 dB (P8P9)

Distance: 5 cm

Distance: 3 cm

1.23 dB (P1P5E2)
0.22 dB (P1P6E2)
1.67 dB (P15P16E2)

2.09 dB (P9P12E2)
1.1 dB (P1P7E2)
1.98 dB (P1P8E2)

which is obtained when α1 = α2 . Table IV summarizes the gain
obtained at some selected points (PiPjE2 denotes point i and
point j from Experiment 2, respectively).
From these results, several interesting features can be noticed. First of all, it is convenient to use multiple antennas since
a significant power gain can be achieved. Take P1E2, with one
antenna placed at 3-cm distance (at P8E2) and one at 5-cm distance (at P5E2), one can gain approximately 3.2 dB, which is
equivalent to doubling the received power. With more antennas
at both sides of P1E2 (and any reference point in general), the
gain may be even higher. However, as Table IV shows there
are large variations in the gain that can be obtained. Now take
P1P5E2 and P1P6E2, where 1.28 and 0.22 dB are gained, respectively. Although these two gains are obtained for the same
antenna distance, their difference in decibel is significant. There
are three main reasons for this phenomenon.
1) Since the experimental subject’s surface is not flat, the IB
to OB distance from the second antenna may vary. For
example, P5E2 is 7.5 cm from the IB probing antenna,
whereas P6E2 is 10 cm away, as seen in Table II.
2) The dielectric properties can differ from point to point
because of different types of biological tissues along each
propagation path. This implies that the gain may be different even if the distances between OB antennas as well
as the distances between IB to OB antennas are the same.
3) The IB antenna’s radiation pattern is not isotropic.
Hence, in practice, one way of implementing an OB receiver
for IB2OB UWB communication links can be the use of a belt
around the waist with many antennas embedded in it. In order
to pick out the antennas with the best gain at any time, it is
important to implement a selection algorithm at the receiver. If
the implant sends pilot signals at certain fixed time intervals,
the algorithm can select the subset of antennas with the best
reception at any given time. The design of such OB receiver
opens many opportunities for research in signal processing for
wireless implants.
B. Interchannel Correlations
When constructing signal processing and communication algorithms for multiple receivers (e.g., for applications like combining, localization, and tracking of moving devices, etc.), it is
important to know the correlation between the different propagation paths.
In order to determine the correlation between different paths
in our measurements, the cross-correlation function (CCF) was
calculated between the CIRs obtained through simultaneous
measurements at several points. The same band and window

Fig. 14. Maximal correlation between CIRs from two propagation paths at
different distances.

as in Section IV-A were assumed. The CCF computed was
normalized so that the (auto)-correlation between two equal
signals would be 1 at lag 0. Fig. 14 shows the correlation between
some selected points from Tables I and II for distances separating
the OB receiving antennas of 3, 5, and 8 cm, respectively.
Although the spreads of the correlation values are significant
for a given antenna separation, the clear trend is that the correlation increases as the distance between antennas decreases.
The correlation is generally quite high, which is expected since
the different paths do not change significantly over the course
of several minutes. Note that a high power gain between two
OB receiving antennas does not necessarily imply a higher correlation value. For example, the correlation between P1E2 and
P7E2 is 0.91 with a gain of 1.1 dB, whereas the correlation
between P9E2 and P12E2 is 0.72 with a gain of 2.1 dB.
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
We presented the results of two separate measurement campaigns of the UWB implant channel on living porcine subjects. A
path loss model as a function of the propagation distance and frequency was developed for 5–16 cm and 1–6 GHz, respectively.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first UWB IB2OB path
loss model stemming from in vivo measurements that has been
reported in the literature. It is clear that the presented path loss
model is antenna dependent, and our future research will aim to
improve the implantable antenna’s radiating performance. This
is a challenging problem, especially considering the limitations
in size for real application in wireless implants. The use of several OB receiving antennas to enhance the quality of the received
signal was also investigated. The main conclusions that can be
drawn from the presented results are as follows.
1) UWB communications in low frequencies, i.e., 1–3 GHz,
can reduce the transmission power consumption of wireless implants. Since the path loss is significantly lower in
1–3 GHz than in higher frequencies, regulations for the
use of this band for UWB implant communications should
be pursued.

946

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

2) The use of multiple OB receiving antennas is beneficial.
It is plausible that power gains of 3 dB and above can
be achieved if the antennas are place sufficiently close to
each other.
3) There is a rather high correlation between different propagation paths, which may or may not be beneficial when
constructing algorithms for signal processing and communications.
Another standing problem is the verification of the validity of
our path loss model for humans. Although the anatomy of the
porcine abdomen was deemed suitable by our medical advisors
to approximate the human abdominal cavity, a thorough and fair
comparison between numerical simulations with digital human
body models and in vivo measurements in swine has to be realized in the future. In order to achieve fairness, the same antenna
types have to be used in both modeling approaches. Such a thorough validation lies beyond the scope of this paper. However,
an initial comparison with the path loss model in [15] shows
fair agreement between the simulation results therein and our in
vivo measurements. For instance, for a depth of 5 cm and a center frequency of 3.5 GHz, the simulation-based model estimates
a path loss of 43 dB, whereas our so-called noncompensated
model predicts 41 dB. For a depth of 10 cm and 3.5 GHz, the
predicted path loss is 89 and 83 dB with the simulation-based
and in vivo noncompensated models, respectively. For the same
depths and frequency, our compensated model predicts 39 and
81 dB, respectively. The agreement between these three different models demonstrates the usefulness of performing measurements in porcine subjects to characterize the path loss of UWB
signals propagating through the human body. Nevertheless, further research in this direction is required to firmly establish in
vivo measurements in swine as a standard radio propagation
modeling technique for implants in humans.

REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization. The global burden of chronic. (2015, Jan. 19).
[Online]. Available: http:// who.int/nutrition/topics/2_background/en/
[2] E. Y. Chow, M. M. Morris, and P. Irazoqui, “Implantable RF medical
devices,” IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 64–73, Jun. 2013.
[3] R. Hovorka, “Continuous glucose monitoring and closed-loop systems,”
Diabetic Med., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2006.
[4] M. R. Yuce and T. Dissanayake, “Easy-to-swallow wireless telemetry,”
IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 90–101, Sep./Oct. 2012.
[5] R. Chávez-Santiago, J. Wang, and I. Balasingham, “The ultra wideband
capsule endoscope,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ultrawideband, Sydney,
Australia, 2013, pp. 72–78.
[6] K. Thotahewa, J.-M. Redoute, and M. R. Yuce, “A UWB wireless capsule
endoscopy device,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., Chicago, IL, USA, 2014, pp. 6977–6980.
[7] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Part 15.6:
Wireless Body Area Networks, IEEE Standard 802.15.6-2012, 2012.
[8] R. Chávez-Santiago and I. Balasingham, “Ultrawideband signals in
medicine [life sciences],” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 31, no. 6,
pp. 130–136, Nov. 2014.
[9] E. Zastrow, S. K. Davis, and S. C. Hagness, “Safety assessment of breast
cancer detection via ultrawideband microwave radar operating in pulsedradiation mode,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 221–225,
Jan. 2007.
[10] M. R. Yuce, H. C. Keong, and M. Chae, “Wideband communication for
implantable and wearable systems,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.,
vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 2597–2604, Oct. 2009.

[11] A. Khaleghi, R. Chávez-Santiago, and I. Balasingham, “Ultra wideband
pulse-based data communications for medical implants,” IET Commun.,
vol. 4, no. 15, pp. 1189–1197, Oct. 2010.
[12] A. Daisuke, K. Katsu, R. Chávez-Santiago, Q. Wang, D. Plettemeier,
J. Wang, and I. Balasingham, “Experimental evaluation of implant UWBIR transmission with living animal for body area networks,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 183–192, Jan. 2014.
[13] J. Wang and Q. Wang, “Channel modeling and BER performance of an
implant UWB body area link,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Appl. Sci. Biomed.
Commun. Technol., Bratislava, Slovak Republic, 2009, pp. 1–4.
[14] A. Khaleghi, R. Chávez-Santiago, and I. Balasingham, “Ultra-wideband
statistical propagation channel model for implant sensors in the human
chest,” IET Microw., Antennas Propag., vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 1805–1812,
Dec. 2011.
[15] A. Khaleghi, R. Chávez-Santiago, and I. Balasingham, “An improved ultra
wideband channel model including the frequency-dependent attenuation
for in-body communications,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., San Diego, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 1631–1634.
[16] R. Chávez-Santiago, K. Sayrafian-Pour, A. Khaleghi, K. Takizawa,
J. Wang, I. Balasingham, and H.-B. Li, “Propagation models for IEEE
802.15.6 standardization of implant communication in body area networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 80–87, Aug. 2013.
[17] J. Shi, D. Anzai and J. Wang, “Channel modeling and performance analysis of diversity reception for implant UWB wireless link,” IEICE Trans.
Commun., vol. E95-B, no. 10, pp. 3197–3205, Oct. 2012.
[18] M. M. Swindle, Swine in the Laboratory: Surgery, Anesthesia, Imaging,
and Experimental Techniques, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2007.
[19] Q. Wang, K. Wolf, and D. Plettemeier, “An UWB capsule endoscope
antenna design for biomedical communications,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp.
Appl. Sci. Biomed. Commun. Technol., Rome, Italy, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[20] S. Brovoll, Ø. Aardal, Y. Paichard, T. Berger, T. R. Lande, and
S.-E. Hamran, “Optimal frequency range for medical radar measurements
of human heartbeats using body-contact radar,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka, Japan, 2013, pp. 1752–1755.
[21] H. Yamamoto, J. Zhou, and T. Kobayashi, “Ultra wideband electromagnetic phantoms for antennas and propagation studies,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron., Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. E91-A, no. 11, pp. 3173–
3182, Nov. 2008.
[22] Channel Model for Body Area Network (BAN), IEEE Standard P802.1508-0780-12-0006, Nov. 10, 2010.
[23] R. Chávez-Santiago and I. Balasingham, “Computation of the transmission frequency band for the ultra wideband capsule endoscope,” in Proc.
7th Int. Symp. Med. Inf. Commun. Technol., Tokyo, Japan, 2013, pp. 66–70.
[24] T. Sereewattanapong and S. Promwong, “Evaluation of ultra wideband
impulse radio transmission loss due to laptop computer,” in Proc. 9th
Malaysia Int. Conf. Commun., Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2009, pp. 259–
262.
[25] S. Haykin, Communication Systems, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
1994.

Pål Anders Floor received the B.Sc. degree from
Gjøvik University College (HIG), Gjøvik, Norway,
in 2001, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the
Department of Electronics and Telecommunications,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
(NTNU), Trondheim, Norway, in 2003 and 2008, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Intervention Center, Oslo University Hospital, as well as with
the Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo,
from 2008 to 2013. He is currently a Postdoctoral
Fellow at the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, NTNU. His
research interests include joint source-channel coding, information theory, and
signal processing applied on point-to-point links, in small and large networks,
as well as in neuroscience. He is currently doing research on communication issues for in-body sensors as well as lightweight cryptography for low-complexity
devices.

FLOOR et al.: IN-BODY TO ON-BODY ULTRAWIDEBAND PROPAGATION MODEL DERIVED FROM MEASUREMENTS IN LIVING ANIMALS

Raúl Chávez-Santiago was born in Oaxaca City,
Mexico. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel, in 2007.
From 2007 to 2008, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow
with the University Paris-Sud XI, France, where he
investigated radio resource management for mobile
WiMAX systems. He was also a Postdoctoral Fellow with Bar-Ilan University, Israel, researching the
information theory aspects of ad hoc and cognitive
radio networking. In 2009, he joined the Intervention
Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, where he currently investigates
short-range radio communication technologies for body area networks and implantable biomedical sensor systems.
Dr. Chávez-Santiago is a Management Committee Member in various European COST Actions, focusing in wireless communications, wireless power
transmission, and biomedical topics.

Sverre Brovoll (S’03) received the M.Sc. degree in
cybernetics from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, in 2006.
Since 2011, he has been working toward the Ph.D.
degree in medical radar systems at the Norwegian
Defence Research Establishment (FFI), Kjeller, Norway, and the Department of Informatics, University
of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
In 2006, he started working as a Scientist at the
FFI on synthetic aperture radar systems.

Øyvind Aardal received the M.Sc. degree in applied
mathematics and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, in 2008 and 2013, respectively.
In summer 2007, he was a Lecturer in mathematics with Oslo University College, Oslo. Since 2009,
he has been with the Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment, Kjeller, Norway, where he is currently
working as a Scientist. His research interests include
radar signal processing, target recognition, and medical radar.

Jacob Bergsland received the medical degree from
the University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, and subsequently specialized in general and cardiovascular and
thoracic surgery at the State University of New York,
Buffalo, USA, and the Buffalo General Hospital, Buffalo, in 1983.
He was the Chief of cardiac surgery at the Buffalo VAM Medical Center and subsequently a Cardiac
Surgeon and the Chief of Minimally Invasive Cardiac
Surgery at Buffalo General Hospital. He was also the
Chief of Cardiac Transplantation Services. He was
appointed at SUNY as a Clinical Associate Professor of Surgery. In 1998, he
was instrumental in establishing cardiac surgery in Tuzla, Bosnia, and Herzegovina utilizing a grant from the Clinton Administration in the USA. He has been
working at the Intervention Centre at Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,
since 2001 and currently is the Chief of the Section for Method Development
and Industrial Cooperation. He has traveled the world extensively for teaching
purposes and to train future cardiac surgeons.
Dr. Bergsland received numerous research and development grants both in
the US, Bosnia, and Norway. He has written more than 140 peer-reviewed papers and is a frequently used reviewer for high impact medical journals.

947

Ole-Johannes H. N. Grymyr received the M.D.
degree from the University of Tromso, Norway, in
2002. He accomplished his education in anesthesiology from the University Hospital of North-Norway
and the Oslo University Hospital from 2005–2011.
He was authorized as a Specialist in Anesthesiology
in 2011. He has been working toward the Ph.D. degree in “Accelerometers for continuous assessment
of cardiac performance: extending the use of cardiac devices in diagnostics and treatment” from the
Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.

Per Steinar Halvorsen received the M.D., Ph.D., and
M.H.A. degrees from the University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway, in 1990, 2010, and 2014, respectively.
He is currently a Chief Anesthesiologist at the
Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway.

Rafael Palomar received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in computer science from the University of Córdoba,
Córdoba, Spain, in 2007 and 2010, respectively. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at Gjøvik
University College, Gjøvik, Norway.
From 2010 to 2013, he was a Software Engineer
with the Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Norway, developing software for planning and
navigation in image-guided surgery.

Dirk Plettemeier received the Diploma degree in
communication engineering from the University of
Applied Sciences in Lemgo, Lemgo, Germany, in
1987, and the Diploma degree in electrical engineering from the University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany, in 1992, and the Ph.D. degree in 2002 from the
same university.
He was with the Institute for High-Frequency
Technique/Department of Antennas and Wave Propagation at the University of Bochum, till 2003. From
2003 to 2007, he was the Head of the research group
Numerical Calculation of High Frequency Electromagnetic Fields and Waves,
Electrotechnical Institute/Chair, and Laboratory for Theory of Electromagnetic
Fields and EMC, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. From
2007 to 2010, he was the Head of the research group Antennas and Propagation,
Communication Laboratory. Since 2011, he has been the Chair for RF Engineering, Technische Universität Dresden.

948

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Svein-Erik Hamran received the M.Sc. in technical
physics from the Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, in 1984, and
the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University of
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway, in 1990.
From 1985 to 1996, he was with the Environmental Surveillance Technology Programme, and from
1989 to 1990, a Visiting Scientist with CNRS Service
d’Aeronomie, Paris, France. From 2001 to 2011, he
was an Adjunct Professor in near surface geophysics
with the Department of Geosciences, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Since 1996, he has been with the Norwegian Defence
Research Establishment, Kjeller, Norway, as a Chief Scientist, managing radar
programs. Since 2011, he has been an Adjunct Professor at the Department of
Informatics, University of Oslo. He is currently the Principal Investigator of the
Radar Imager for Mars’ subsurFAce eXperiment—RIMFAX on the Mars 2020
NASA rover mission and a Coprincipal Investigator on the WISDOM GPR experiment on the ESA ExoMars rover. His research interests include UWB radar
design, radar imaging, and modeling in medical and ground penetrating radar.

Tor A. Ramstad received the Siv.Ing. and Dr. Ing.
degrees from the Norwegian Institute of Technology
(NTH), Trondheim, Norway, currently a part of the
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
(NTNU).
He has held various positions at the Faculty of
Electrical Engineering at the NTH, and became a
Full Professor of telecomminications in 1983. From
2012, he is a Professor Emeritus at NTNU. He has
spent sabbaticals leaves with the University of California, Santa Barbara from 1982 to 1983, from 1997
to 1998, and from 2008 to 2009; with the Georgia Institute of Technology from
1989 to 1990; and with EURECOM, France, from 2003 to 2004, Spring 2009.
His research interests include multirate signal processing, speech and image
processing with emphasis on compression, and joint source-channel coding.
Dr. Ramstad was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ACOUSTICS, SPEECH, AND SIGNAL PROCESSING, and a Member of the IEEE DSP Technical Committee. He has chaired the Doctoral Committee NTH. He is a Member
of the Norwegian Academy of Technical Sciences.

Ilangko Balasingham (SM’11) received the M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim,
Norway, in 1993 and 1998, respectively, both in signal processing. He performed his Master’s degree thesis with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering,University of California Santa Barbara,
Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
From 1998 to 2002, he was as a Research Scientist, developing image and video streaming solutions
for mobile handheld devices with Fast Search and Transfer ASA, Oslo, Norway,
which is currently a part of Microsoft Inc. Since 2002, he has been with the
Intervention Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, as a Senior Research Scientist, where he heads the Wireless Sensor Network Research Group. In 2006,
he was appointed as a Professor in Signal Processing in Medical Applications at
NTNU. He has authored or coauthored 190 journals and full conference papers,
and has given 14 invited/ keynotes at international conferences. His research
interests include superrobust short-range communications for both in-body and
on-body sensors, body area sensor network, microwave short-range sensing of
vital signs, short-range localization and tracking mobile sensors, and nanoneural communication networks. He organize special sessions and workshops on
wireless medical technology at the major conferences and symposiums.
Prof. Balasingham served as the General Chair of the 2012 Body Area Networks conference and serves as the TPC Cochair of the 2015 ACM NANOCOM
and an Area Editor of Elsevier Nano Communication Networks.

