1660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Letters
Compressed Sensing for Ultrasound Computed Tomography
Ruud van Sloun, Ashish Pandharipande∗ , Massimo Mischi, and Libertario Demi
Abstract—Ultrasound computed tomography (UCT) allows the reconstruction of quantitative tissue characteristics, such as speed of sound, mass
density, and attenuation. Lowering its acquisition time would be beneficial;
however, this is fundamentally limited by the physical time of flight and
the number of transmission events. In this letter, we propose a compressed
sensing solution for UCT. The adopted measurement scheme is based on
compressed acquisitions, with concurrent randomised transmissions in a
circular array configuration. Reconstruction of the image is then obtained
by combining the born iterative method and total variation minimization,
thereby exploiting variation sparsity in the image domain. Evaluation using
simulated UCT scattering measurements shows that the proposed transmission scheme performs better than uniform undersampling, and is able
to reduce acquisition time by almost one order of magnitude, while maintaining high spatial resolution.
Index Terms—Born iterative method, compressed sensing, ultrasound
computed tomography.

I. INTRODUCTION

LTRASOUND as an imaging modality may be exploited
for tissue characterization for many diagnostic applications. Using ultrasound computed tomography (UCT) specifically, quantitative tissue characteristics, such as speed of sound
and attenuation can be reconstructed. A possible application of
UCT is in the area of breast cancer localization, where cancerous regions are suspected to have different acoustical properties
compared to benign regions. Reconstruction of speed of sound
and attenuation has been exploited for this purpose [1]. A typical
arrangement is one where the breast is enclosed by a circular array of ultrasound transducer elements, sequentially transmitting
one-by-one and receiving the resulting scattered wave fields at
all elements [2]. For a large number of transducer elements, the
acquisition time and complexity of this method are high. In this
letter, we propose a compressed sensing (CS) solution with a
circular array for diffraction UCT.
Considering a high-resolution ring-shaped ultrasound transducer with a diameter of 20 cm, 1024 transmit elements, and an
average speed of sound c0 of 1540 m/s, it takes roughly 130 ms
to image a single slice using sequential transmissions. Extension
to 3-D imaging can be obtained by either mechanically translating the transducer ring after each acquisition, and combining all
slices, or by extending the 1-D circular array to a cylindrical matrix configuration. In the latter, imaging a full breast consisting

U

Manuscript received December 2, 2014; revised February 11, 2015 and April
2, 2015; accepted April 2, 2015. Date of publication April 10, 2015; date of
current version May 18, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
R. van Sloun, M. Mischi, and L. Demi are with the Laboratory of Biomedical
Diagnostics, Eindhoven University of Technology.
*A. Pandharipande is with Philips Research Eindhoven, High Tech Campus,
Eindhoven, AZ 5612, The Netherlands (e-mail: pashish@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2422135

of a number of slices in the order of 100, would require an acquisition time in the order of tens of seconds. Lowering this time
would be beneficial, e.g. for reduction of movement artifacts
and maximization of patient throughput. It is therefore critical
for the future applicability of UCT for the detection of breast
neoangiogenic processes, related to the presence of tumors using dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound [3], where sufficient
temporal resolution is required to capture the dynamics of ultrasound contrast agents. With the required temporal resolution in
the order of 1 Hz, acquisition time should be reduced by an order
of magnitude in the case of the previously illustrated cylindrical
matrix transducer. One approach is to uniformly undersample
in the transmission domain, while keeping the same number of
receivers and employing sparse reconstruction techniques to retain the desired image features. A comparable technique is used
in [4], where total variation (TV) minimization [5] was applied
to sparse-view and limited-angle data in diffraction tomography.
Similarly, in [6], CS reconstruction techniques are employed for
sparse-view ultraound diffraction tomography.
Instead of applying CS-based reconstruction to sparse-view
data, we consider compressive acquisitions with randomized
parallel transmissions from the circular array. Introducing randomness allows near-optimal conditions on the number of measurements in terms of the sparsity [7], facilitating reduction of
acquisition time, while keeping high spatial resolution.
The analytical details of the ultrasound measurement model
and acquisition are provided in Section II. The received signals at the array elements are used to reconstruct the image
using the Born iterative method (BIM) [8] and TV minimization; thereby exploiting variation sparsity in the image domain.
This CS reconstruction algorithm is presented in Section III.
The method is evaluated using simulated UCT scattering measurements in section V. We compare the performance of the
proposed method with a uniform undersampling approach that
uses TV minimization. CS theory has been applied in a number
of biomedical applications, e.g., echo mode ultrasound imaging
[9] and thermal acoustic tomography [10]. In this letter, we show
that CS can be applied effectively in UCT to reduce acquisition
time by almost an order of magnitude, while maintaining high
image resolution.
II. MEASUREMENT MODEL

Acoustic pressure wave propagation can be compactly described in the form of wave equations. For a single frequency,
the lossless wave equation with spatially varying wavenumber
k(r̄) m−1 , where r̄ is the position vector, may be written as [11]
∇2 p(r̄) + k02 p(r̄) = −O(r̄)p(r̄)

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

(1)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

1661

scattered pressure p̄sc at the Nt transducers can be written as
p̄sc = Bdiag(Ō)p̄ = Bdiag(p̄)Ō

(7)

where B is an Nt × N 2 matrix with the Green’s coefficients
G(r̄ − r̄ ) from each pixel in the domain to the transducers.
B. Inverse CS Problem

The inverse problem is concerned with retrieving the object
function O from the received pressures p̄sc . We allow transmission from all Nt transducers. The total received Nt2 × 1 pressure
vector p̄sc,N t is then given by
p̄sc,N t = ΨŌ

(8)

Ψ = repN t (B)diag(p̄N t )

(9)

with

Fig. 1. System configuration. The pressure distribution p at the grid points
(m, n) from one transmitter is also shown.

where
O(r̄) = k 2 (r̄) − k02

p(r̄) = G(r̄) ∗ [Spr (r̄) + O(r̄)p(r̄)]
(3)

where ∗ denotes the spatial convolution, G(r̄) is the Green’s
function of the lossless wave equation, and p0 (r̄) is the transmitted wavefield in the absence of an object. In 2-D, G(r̄) may
be written as [12]
i (2)
G(r̄) = − H0 (k0 |r̄|)
4

(4)

√
(2)
where i = −1 and H0 denotes the Hankel function of the
second kind with order zero. The scattered pressure can then be
written as
psc (r̄) = p(r̄) − p0 (r̄) = G(r̄) ∗ O(r̄)p(r̄).

(5)

A. Forward Problem

We consider the configuration described in Fig. 1, with O(r̄)
discretized on an N × N grid, surrounded by Nt transducers
that are uniformly distributed on a circle with radius N . Using
the method of moments [12], the pressure field on the grid points
can then be formulated as
p̄ = p̄0 + Cdiag(Ō)p̄

ȳ = ΦΨŌ

(2)

denotes the object function, describing the spatial wavenumber
distribution with homogeneous wavenumber k0 . The solution of
(1) with inclusion of a primary transducer source term Spr (r̄)
can be described as an integral equation [11]

= p0 (r̄) + G(r̄) ∗ O(r̄)p(r̄)

where p̄N t is the Nt N × 1 vector, describing the pressure at
the grid points (m, n) as a result of the Nt transmissions and
repN t (·) is an operator repeating a matrix row wise Nt times.
The complete measurement is then written as
2

where the M ×
measurement matrix Φ describes the sampling procedure, being compressive for M < Nt2 . The measurement is linearly defined in terms of Φ and Ψ, and for M < Nt2
the solution is ill-posed in general. However, assuming that O is
sparse in some domain, CS theory is applied by choosing the matrix Φ such that transducers simultaneously transmit pressure
waves with random amplitudes that are Gaussian distributed,
having mean zero and standard deviation equal to one. Since
we are interested in reducing the amount of transmissions only,
we choose to receive with all elements. Although, the resulting measurement matrix is not fully i.i.d. Gaussian [7], it still
satisfies the requirements on the conditioning of the measurement matrix, since the receivers do receive independently of
each other. The total amount of transmission events is reduced
by a factor M/Nt2 , here referred to as the acquisition reduction
factor (ARF).
III. CS RECONSTRUCTION

Based on the theory behind compressed sensing and sparse
reconstruction, we exploit the fact that there is sparsity in some
domain of O. If we assume O constant within certain segments of the object, and variations to be limited to the jumps
on the boundaries of these segments, a TV-based penalty with
1 heuristic [13] can be used to exploit this sparsity during the
reconstruction:
minimize
O

subject to

(6)

where p̄, p¯0 , and Ō are the N 2 × 1 vectorized versions of the
N × N matrices, describing the total pressure, transmitted pressure, and object function at the grid points, respectively. C is an
N 2 × N 2 matrix with the Green’s coefficients G(r̄ − r̄ ) from
each pixel to each pixel in the spatial domain. Equation (6)
can be solved using an iterative Neumann scheme [11]. The

(10)

Nt2

||Dm O|| 1 + ||Dn O|| 1
||ΦΨŌ − ȳ|| 2 ≤ 

(11)

where
(Dm O)m ,n = Om +1,n − Om ,n
(Dn O)m ,n = Om ,n +1 − Om ,n

(12)

and  are a small measurement error tolerance, relaxing the optimization. The constraints enforce that only reconstructions that

1662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 2. Plot (A) shows the numerical phantom k (m Δ x ), (n Δ x ) /k 0 . Plots (B), (E), and (F) show the reconstruction results with an ARF of 8 for 2 minimization
with Tikhonov regularization, sparse TV reconstruction, and CS with TV reconstruction, respectively. Plots (C, D) and (G, H) give the sparse TV reconstruction
and CS with TV reconstruction for an ARF of 4 and 12, respectively.

produce the measurements within this tolerance are considered.
To solve (11), we used CVX, a package for solving convex programs [14]. From Om ,n , the estimated wavenumber k̂m ,n can
be derived employing (2). Unlike 2 minimization, the 1 TV
norm filters high-frequency variations, while preserving sharp
jumps. Since the matrix Ψ in (11) depends on the a priori unknown pressure p̄N t , an iterative procedure is employed. First,
Ō is estimated based on a prediction of the free space wave field
p̄0 originating from the transducers. In line with the iterative
Neumann solution, the estimated object function is then used
to obtain an improved prediction of p̄N t based on (6), which is
then employed to do a new reconstruction of O. This procedure
is repeated until convergence.
IV. VALIDATION METHODOLOGY

To validate the method, we perform simulations using an
object wavenumber km ,n that is represented by the 2-D numerical Shepp–Logan phantom, with N = 64 and k0 = 12240 m−1 .
The transducer pressure beam is given by
(2)

p0 (r̄) = H0 (k0 |r̄ − r̄t |)

(13)

where r̄t denotes the transmitter location. Compression is used
during acquisition and the CS matrix Φ is chosen as described
in Section II-B. To verify the convergence of the BIM with TV
reconstruction, we consider at iteration number j an error E(j)
E(j) =

||k̂(j) − k̂(j − 1)||2 2
||k̂(j)||2 2

(14)

where k̂(0) = k. The mean normalized absolute error (MNAE)
in percentage is defined as
MNAE =

N
N
1   |k̂m ,n − km ,n |
× 100.
N 2 n =1 m =1
km ,n

(15)

V. RESULTS

Convergence for both uniformly undersampled and CS data
reconstruction is validated using an ARF of 8 and a maximal
wavenumber amplitude contrast of 2%. The results are shown
in Fig. 3. Both methods converge, and the stopping criterion
Estop = 10−7 , requiring three iterations. In Fig. 4, a comparison between the MNAE for TV reconstruction applied to both
the uniformly undersampled as well as the compressed sensed
data is given as a function of the ARF. The CS-based acquisition
approach has a lower MNAE, becoming increasingly significant
for higher reduction factors. In Fig. 2 , we present a qualitative
evaluation at a higher wavenumber contrast, i.e., 6%. A comparison is given between reconstruction results, when using an ARF
of 8 and applying (B) 2 optimization with Tikhonov regularization [15] to uniformly undersampled data E, the proposed TV
reconstruction approach uniformly undersampled data, and (F)
the proposed TV-based reconstruction approach to CS data, using the described random transmission events. The 2 optimization method is unable to reconstruct the object for undersampled
data, as it does not exploit the object’s sparsity in the variation
domain. TV reconstruction shows an improvement when applied

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 3. Convergence of the BIM with TV reconstruction for uniformly undersampled and CS data, using an ARF of 8.

Fig. 4. Comparison of MNAE after TV reconstruction from uniformly undersampled and CS data, given in percentages.

to the uniformly undersampled data, and is able to capture some
of the object’s features. The improvement is remarkable when
fully exploiting CS theory and using randomized transmission
events. Most of the original object’s features are now recognizable from the reconstruction. To give a qualitative indication of
the degradation of reconstruction performance with increasing
ARFs, the resulting images using ARF’s of 4 and 12 are also
presented.
VI. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

In this letter, we presented a new CS-based approach to
diffraction UCT in a circular array configuration. By combining compressed, randomized transmission events, and sparse
reconstruction techniques, the proposed method potentially al-

1663

lows reduction of the acquisition time by an order of magnitude, while preserving high image resolution. First of all, we
showed convergence of both transmission schemes. Although
this does not influence acquisition time, reconstruction using
randomized compressed transmissions required about one iteration more. Then, a qualitative comparison of the developed CS
transmission scheme and uniform undersampling of transmissions demonstrated that CS outperforms uniform undersampling
at preserving the object’s features. A quantitative analysis for
both methods showed that using CS results in a lower MNAE
for all ARFs, with the difference becoming increasingly significant for higher reductions. More specifically, the uniform
method’s performance declines rapidly up to a reduction factor
of 8, whereas the CS method remains more stable. For higher
ARFs, the performance of the former seems to stabilize, implying that most of the strong variations in the image have vanished.
Reducing the acquisition time using CS, comes at the cost of
higher computational expense. Although solving the 1 minimization problem is about 30–50 times as expensive as solving the least-squares problem [16], the problem size is reduced
by ARF.
The advantage of exploiting CS for diffraction UCT, especially in situations where one wants to drastically reduce acquisition time, is remarkable. In today’s systems, it has the
potential to reduce the slice acquisition time by approximately
ARF. While it would be beneficial to reduce this time in many
applications, it is particularly critical when envisioning future
applications of 3-D UCT for dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging of the vascularization in tumors. Such techniques require
additional developments that extend beyond the ones presented
in this letter, such as the ability of diffraction-based UCT to deal
with strong contrast, as well as increasing computational power.
Furthermore, alternate sparse reconstruction techniques in the
context of breast imaging, e.g., learned dictionaries [17] should
be investigated.

REFERENCES
[1] B. Ranger et al., “Breast ultrasound tomography versus magnetic resonance imaging for clinical display of anatomy and tumor rendering:
Preliminary results,” Amer. J. Roentgenol., vol. 198, no. 1, pp. 233–239,
2012.
[2] N. Duric et al., “Breast density measurements with ultrasound tomography: A comparison with film and digital mammography,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 40, no. 1, art. no. 013501 (12 pages), 2013.
[3] H. Zhao et al., “Contrast-enhanced ultrasound is helpful in the differentiation of malignant and benign breast lesions,” Eur. J. Radiol., vol. 73,
no. 2, pp. 288–293, 2010.
[4] S. J. LaRoque et al., “Accurate image reconstruction from few-view and
limited-angle data in diffraction tomography,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A., Opt.
Image Sci. Vis., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1772–1782, 2008.
[5] E. Y. Sidky and X. Pan, “Image reconstruction in circular cone-beam computed tomography by constrained, total-variation minimization,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 53, no. 17, pp. 4777–4807, 2008.
[6] S. Hua et al., “Sparse-view ultrasound diffraction tomography using compressed sensing with nonuniform FFT,” Comput. Math. Methods Med.,
vol. 2014, art. no. 329350 (13 pages), 2014.
[7] H. Rauhut, “Compressive sensing and structured random matrices,” in
Theoretical Foundations Numerical Methods Sparse Recovery, Berlin,
Germany: Walter de Gruyter, vol. 9, pp. 1–92, 2010.

1664

[8] M. Haynes and M. Moghaddam, “Large-domain, low-contrast acoustic
inverse scattering for ultrasound breast imaging,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 2712–2722, Nov. 2010.
[9] C. Quinsac et al., “Compressed sensing of ,” Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal
Process. Syst., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2010, pp. 231–236.
[10] X. Zhu et al., “Microwave-induced thermal acoustic tomography for
breast tumor based on compressive sensing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1298–1307, May 2013.
[11] M. D. Verweij et al., “Simulation of ultrasound fields,” in Proc. Comprehensive Biomed. Phys. Oxford, U.K.: Elsevier, 2014.
[12] R. Lavarello and M. Oelze, “A study on the reconstruction of moderate
contrast targets using the distorted Born iterative method,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 112–124, Jan.
2008.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

[13] E. Candès et al., “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.
[14] M. Grant and S. P. Boyd, “Graph implementations for nonsmooth convex
programs,” in Proc. Recent Adv. Learning Control, Hyderabad, 2008,
pp. 95–110.
[15] L. Montero, “New developments on quantitative imaging using ultrasonic
waves,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng., Univ. Illinois, Champaign,
IL, USA, 2009.
[16] J. Romberg, “Imaging via compressive sampling,” IEEE Signal Process.
Mag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 14–20, Mar. 2008.
[17] I. Tosic et al., “Ultrasound tomography with learned dictionaries,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 2010,
pp. 5502–5505.

