IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

803

Automatic UPDRS Evaluation in the Sit-to-Stand
Task of Parkinsonians: Kinematic Analysis and
Comparative Outlook on the Leg Agility Task
Matteo Giuberti, Member, IEEE, Gianluigi Ferrari, Senior Member, IEEE, Laura Contin, Veronica Cimolin,
Corrado Azzaro, Giovanni Albani, and Alessandro Mauro

Abstract—In this study, we first characterize the sit-to-stand
(S2S) task, which contributes to the evaluation of the degree of
severity of the Parkinson’s disease (PD), through kinematic features, which are then linked to the Unified Parkinson’s disease
rating scale (UPDRS) scores. We propose to use a single bodyworn wireless inertial node placed on the chest of a patient. The
experimental investigation is carried out considering 24 PD patients, comparing the obtained results directly with the kinematic
characterization of the leg agility (LA) task performed by the same
set of patients. We show that i) the S2S and LA tasks are rather
unrelated and ii) the UPDRS distributions (for both S2S and LA
tasks) across the patients have a direct impact on the observed
system performance.
Index Terms—Inertial sensors, leg agility (LA), Parkinson’s disease (PD), sit-to-stand (S2S), unified Parkinson’s disease rating
scale (UPDRS) scores.

I. INTRODUCTION
CCORDING to the global declaration for Parkinson’s
disease (PD), 6.3 million people suffer from PD worldwide [1]. The prevalence of PD is about 0.3% of the whole
population in industrialized countries, rising up to 1% over the
age of 65 and to 4% over 80. The clinical picture of PD is characterized by a progressive deterioration of the motor performance.
Although the symptoms can be improved by dopaminergic

A

Manuscript received October 31, 2014; revised February 28, 2015; accepted
April 13, 2015. Date of publication April 22, 2015; date of current version May
7, 2015. This work was supported by the Italian Ministry of Health (RF-20091472190).
M. Giuberti was with the CNIT Research Unit of Parma and the Department of
Information Engineering, University of Parma, Parma I-43124, Italy. He is now
with Xsens Technologies B.V., 7500 AN Enschede, The Netherlands (e-mail:
matteo.giuberti@xsens.com).
G. Ferrari is with the CNIT Research Unit of Parma and the Department of
Information Engineering, University of Parma, Parma I-43124, Italy (e-mail:
gianluigi.ferrari@unipr.it).
L. Contin is with the Research & Prototyping, Telecom Italia, Turin 10148,
Italy (e-mail: laura.contin@telecomitalia.it).
V. Cimolin is with the Department of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering, Polytechnic of Milan, Milan 20133, Italy (e-mail: veronica.cimolin@
biomed.polimi.it).
C. Azzaro and G. Albani are with the Division of Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Piancavallo (VB) 28824,
Italy (e-mail: c.azzaro@auxologico.it; g.albani@auxologico.it).
A. Mauro is with the Division of Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Istituto
Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Piancavallo (VB) 28824, Italy, and also with the
Department of Neurosciences, University of Turin, Turin 10126, Italy (e-mail:
mauro@auxologico.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2425296

drugs, such as L-dopa, over time its effectiveness worsens and
motor fluctuations may occur as well as dyskynesias and involuntary movements. Furthermore, variations in the severity of
these symptoms are observed during dosing intervals.
The clinical picture assessed during an outpatient checkup
in the medical office poorly represents the real (actual) clinical status, especially in fluctuating patients. Indeed, repeated
daily assessments of motor symptoms would be required (as
suggested by the guidelines of the Movement Disorder Society,
MDS [2] and this can be done by asking the patient or someone
close to him/her (a relative or home nurse personnel) to annotate
the numbers of hours of OFF (i.e., when drugs are not effective) and ON (i.e., when they are effective) conditions. However,
patient-related annotation is not fully reliable because of perceptual bias and, in recent years, a number of studies on automatic
systems to evaluate motor fluctuations of PD patients have been
developed [3]. The most common approach is leveraging sensing technology to automatically evaluate the performance of
specific motor tasks, such as sit-to-stand (S2S) [4], [5], gait [6],
[7], tremor [8], and leg agility (LA) [9]–[14]. The basic idea is
to develop a system able to get an evaluation of the motor status
of a patient as close as possible to the evaluation of neurologists when they apply semiquantitative evaluation scales, such
as the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) [15].
The design and implementation of on-body sensor-based automatic systems for continuous assessment of PD has, overall,
several benefits, ranging from medical (automaticity, objectivity) to socioeconomical (less burden for the healthcare system,
less specialized personnel would be needed).
In [12]–[14], a novel approach for quantitative evaluation of
relevant kinematic features, representative of the UPDRS score
of the LA task performed by a PD patient, is presented. In the
current study, we apply the same approach to kinematically characterize the S2S task. We identify relevant kinematic features, in
both time and frequency domains, representative of the UPDRS
level of the S2S task using a single body-worn inertial sensor
placed on the chest of a PD patient. An experimental analysis is carried out considering 24 PD patients, identifying the
most significant kinematic features associated with the S2S task
characterization, by mapping them with the UPDRS scores attributed by expert neurologists. The use of principal component
analysis (PCA) is also considered in order to reduce the dimensionality of the kinematic features’ space. Finally, we propose
an outlook on the LA task, analyzing the correlation between
UPDRS scoring in the S2S and LA tasks and comparing the

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

804

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

distributions of the probability of decision error of our automatic
detection system with respect to the neurologists’ decisions.
We remark that our starting design point was to map to the
S2S task the automatic UPDRS classification approach proposed in [14] for the LA task. We believe that its applicability, notwithstanding a radically different body sensor network
(BSN) configuration (there is only one inertial node on the chest,
instead of one node per thigh) and the considered kinematic features (as will be discussed in the remainder of the paper), is a
strong indicator of the validity of our BSN-based automatic
classification approach.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we provide the reader with preliminaries and an overview on related
works. Section III describes the experimental setup, detailing the
used hardware and the considered PD subjects. In Section IV,
the methods used in the paper for feature characterization and
automatic classification are presented. In Section V, the obtained experimental results are presented, considering, first, an
exploratory feature analysis and, then, evaluating the performance of the proposed classification algorithms. Section VI is
dedicated to discussions related to i) a comparative outlook of
the S2S task with the LA task and ii) interesting future research
directions. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES AND RELATED WORK
In [16] and [17], it is shown that different UPDRS tasks are
representative of different aspects of the PD and allow to evaluate different motor/functional abilities. Concerning the evaluation of the S2S transition, in [4] an accurate kinematic study of
the S2S movement pattern is conducted. In [18], a review about
the determinants that can influence the movement is presented.
Different approaches used to estimate some of the spatiotemporal parameters typical of the movement are described, through
devices equipped with accelerometers and gyroscopes, in [5],
[19] and [20] and, through devices based on accelerometers,
in [21]–[23]. Moreover, the accuracy of an inertial approach to
the measurement of the kinematics of arising from a chair with
accelerometers and gyroscopes is discussed in [24].
The LA task aims at evaluating the severity of motion impairments of a PD patient, with specific focus on the lower
limbs [9]–[11]. In this exercise, the patient is asked to sit on
a chair provided with rigid backrest and armrests. The patient
must place both his/her feet on the floor in a comfortable position and, then, alternately raise up and stomping the feet on
the ground, as high and as fast as possible, ten times per leg (in
order to test each leg separately). In [13] and [14], a detailed
investigation, through the use of a BSN of inertial nodes (one
sensor per thigh), of the LA task, with the final aim of characterizing it kinematically, is presented. The observed kinematic
parameters are associated with the UPDRS evaluation according
to the guidelines of the MDS.
In the S2S exercise, the patient is asked to sit on a straightbacked chair with armrests. The patient must keep both his/her
feet on the floor and lean against the backrest of the chair (if
the patient is not too short). The exercise consists in crossing
the arms across the chest (in order to avoid their use in the

TABLE I
UPDRS MAPPING FOR THE S2S TASK
UPDRS

Failed attempts &
use of armrests

0

0 failed attempts, no
no
need to use armrests
≥ 1 failed attempts,
yes
no need to use
armrests
0 failed attempts,
–
need to use armrests
≥ 1 failed attempts,
–
need to use armrests
not able to stand up alone

1

2
3
4

Slowing

Move forward on
chair
no
yes

–
–

movement) and raising from the chair. In case of failure, the
patient can retry to raise. After a maximum of three failed trials, the patient can move forward on the chair to facilitate the
movement (still keeping the arms crossed on the chest). If he/she
is still not able to stand up, the patient is allowed to push off
using his/her hands on the armrests. After a maximum of three
unsuccessful trials with the help of the arms, the examiner can
eventually help the patient to stand up.
According to the guidelines of the MDS, the S2S task must
be evaluated observing the following parameters and features:
number of failed attempts before succeeding, need to use of armrests, slowing, and need to move forward on chair [15], [25]. In
particular, in Table I, these parameters/features are mapped with
the corresponding UPDRS evaluation. Since the quantitative
evaluation of most of the features typically relies on the experience of neurologists, interneurologist score variations cannot
be a priori excluded.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Experimental Testbed
The experiments were carried out at the San Giuseppe Hospital, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, in Piancavallo, Verbania, Italy,
at a fully equipped last generation motion analysis laboratory.
The kinematic analysis was carried out, in a comparative way,
considering i) an optoelectronic system and ii) a wireless BSNbased system.
In particular, the BSN was formed by a single Shimmer
node [26], [27]), which is a small (size: 53 mm × 32 mm
× 25 mm; weight: 22 g) and low-power wireless sensing device
equipped with a triaxial accelerometer, a triaxial gyroscope, and
a triaxial magnetometer. The Shimmer device was placed on the
patient’s chest, attached to the body using a Velcro strap, as
shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, for ease of the following analysis, it was placed trying to align the plane defined by the xand y-axes of the device with the frontal plane of the user and
trying to align one of these two axes with the direction of the
spine. The Shimmer device was streaming data (via Bluetooth)
at 102.4 Hz to a personal computer, where the signal processing
analysis was performed.
In [14], for the purpose of accuracy validation, the considered BSN-based inertial system is directly compared with a

GIUBERTI et al.: AUTOMATIC UPDRS EVALUATION IN THE SIT-TO-STAND TASK OF PARKINSONIANS

Fig. 1.

805

Considered experimental S2S testbed.

reference optoelectronic system (Vicon, Oxford, U.K.). Specifically, the optoelectronic system has been used to estimate the
three-dimensional (3-D) position of passive markers positioned
on specific anatomical landmarks of the subject. Passive markers position data were collected for all body segments and the
Davis marker-set was chosen as the protocol of choice to acquire
the motion of lower limbs and trunk based on [28], [29]. The results in [14] highlight the accuracy of the proposed BSN-based
inertial system. Therefore, in the current study we rely on these
findings and assume that the measurements carried out through
our inertial system are sufficiently accurate.

Fig. 2. Distribution of the UPDRS scores assigned to the S2S trials considered
in the experimental analysis. A total of 34 UPDRS scores were given, performed
by 24 PD patients.

B. Subjects
The experimental results presented in the following refer to
a group of 24 PD patients (17 males and seven females) with
age ranging from 31 to 79 years (with mean equal to 65.9 years
and standard deviation equal to 12.3 years). The patients have
been asked to perform a S2S task, providing them instructions
as described in Section II. A total of 34 S2S trials have been
collected.1 The patients’ UPDRS scores, assigned by neurologists, ranged between 0 and 4. However, note that, unlike what
the MDS document indicates (namely, that only discrete integer
scores should be assigned), noninteger (0.5-type) scores have
also been used in the case of indecision between two consecutive integer UPDRS values. In Fig. 2, we report the distribution
of the 34 UPDRS scores assigned to the considered S2S trials—
note that, in this experiment, not all possible values of UPDRS
scores were observed in the considered patients.
IV. METHODS
A. Feature Extraction
As in [14], the 3-D orientation of the Shimmer device is
estimated through an orientation estimation filter [30] and the
inclination of the chest θ is then computed. Since the typical
shape of θ, during the S2S task, is the one shown in Fig. 3,
1 Note that, even if only 24 patients have been considered, some patients have
performed the S2S task multiple times, at different times, and/or for different
PD conditions.

Fig. 3. Time evolution of the chest inclination θ during a typical S2S transition:
the main segmentation events, namely the epochs tS , tP , and tE , are shown as
red crosses. Some of the kinematic features outlined in Table II are also shown.

the following relevant time labels are evaluated: i) the starting
epoch tS of the S2S (i.e., when the chest starts bending forward);
ii) the epoch of maximal bending of the chest tP (placed around
the middle of the S2S exercise); and iii) the ending epoch tE
of the S2S (i.e., when the chest returns in the vertical position).
Starting from the previous labels (tS , tP , and tE ) and the chest
inclination θ, it is then possible to easily extract the 12 geometric
features summarized in Table II and partly shown in Fig. 3. Note
that the previous features are chosen in order to provide the most
intuitive and complete (though possibly redundant) description
of the S2S task from a kinematic perspective and, specifically,
they contain information about the duration, the amplitude, and
the speed of the considered movement.
B. Principal Component Analysis
Since the chosen features may likely be (at least partly) correlated, the following analysis has been performed by considering both the original feature space and a new one obtained by
performing a PCA of (a subset of) the presented features, which

806

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

TABLE II
CONSIDERED FEATURES, PARTLY SHOWN IN FIG. 3 IN RELATION TO A TYPICAL
S2S TRANSITION, FOR THE S2S TASK
Name

Definition

Forwards bending duration
Backwards bending duration
Total duration

TF  tP − tS
TB  tE − tP
T  TF + TB =
tE − tS
DT  TF − TB

Forwards/backwards duration
difference
Forwards bending amplitude
Backwards bending
amplitude
Average bending amplitude
Forwards/backwards average
bending amplitude difference
Forwards bending speed
Backwards bending speed
Average bending speed
Forwards/backwards bending
speed difference

Θ F  θ (t P ) − θ (t S )
Θ B  θ (t P ) − θ (t E )
Θ

+Θ

Θ F2 B
DΘ  ΘF − ΘB
ΘF
TF
Θ
ΩB  T B
B
Θ +Θ
Ω  FT B =
TF
T
Ω F T + Ω B TB

ΩF 

DΩ  ΩF − ΩB

Dimension
[s]
[s]
[s]
[s]
[deg]
[deg]
[deg]
[deg]
[deg/s]
[deg/s]
[deg/s]
[deg/s]

aims at minimizing the redundancy and the dimensionality of
the data while still preserving and, possibly, maximizing the
variance in the original data.

where u is the actual UPDRS score (assigned by neurologists),
u
 is the estimated one (using NCC, kNN, or SVM), and u, u
∈
{0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4}. Note that the absolute value of
the error is taken since, when evaluating the performance of the
classifiers, we are mainly interested in quantifying the absolute
deviation of the estimated UPDRS score with respect to the one
given by neurologists.
In order to investigate the best performance achievable with
the proposed system and with the considered features, an exhaustive performance analysis has been carried out,2 by testing
the system performance: for all possible combinations of features; for all possible values of k (when the kNN method, which
will turn out to be the best, is used); and the number of considered principal components (when PCA data are used, instead of
original data). In particular:
1) combination of the following 12 features, presented earlier, are evaluated: T , TB , TF , DT , Θ, ΘB , ΘF , DΘ , Ω,
ΩB , ΩF , and DΩ ;
2) when using the kNN method, the following values of k
are considered: 1, 2, . . . , 10;
3) up to 12 principal components (as the number of features)
are used when considering PCA data.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Explorative Feature Analysis

C. Classification Algorithms
Since the aim of this study is to evaluate the feasibility of an
automatic detection system able to associate a measured set of
kinematic features to a specific UPDRS score, three well-known
classification algorithms have been considered: nearest centroid
classifier (NCC), k nearest neighbors (kNN), and support vector
machine (SVM) [31]. In a few words: the NCC method classifies
a new (unknown) point according to the same label of the nearest centroid (in terms of Euclidean distance); the kNN method
classifies the new point according to the labels of the k nearest
points (still in terms of Euclidean distance) through a majority
rule; and the SVM method classifies the new point according
to decision regions (associated with the UPDRS classes) that
are constructed in order to maximize the separation between
different classes.
D. Performance Analysis
As mentioned earlier, the three presented classifiers (namely,
NCC, kNN, and SVM) have been run on both original data and
“PCA-projected” data. In order not to bias the performance of
the classifiers, a leave-one-out cross-validation method is considered. According to this method, each point of the original
dataset is used, in turn, as the new (unknown) point and the
remaining points are used to train the classifiers. The overall
performance of the system is then evaluated by considering
together the single observed performance results. The metric
that we considered to quantify the performance of the aforementioned classifiers is the absolute UPDRS error e, which we
define as follows:
e  |
u − u|

(1)

As anticipated in Section I, the aim of the following analysis
is to devise an approach to automatically assign a UPDRS score
to a specific S2S task. To this end, it is crucial to determine if
there exists a relationship between the UPDRS score assigned by
neurologists to a task and the values of the kinematic features
introduced in Section IV-A. In [14], the presence of smooth
UPDRS “trajectories,” in proper kinematic (multidimensional)
feature spaces, is clearly shown in the case of the LA task: the
existence of these smooth trajectories indicates that it may be
feasible to define unambiguous decision regions in the feature
space, based on which the UPDRS scores can be automatically
and correctly estimated. We now extend this investigation to
the S2S task, trying to identify possible UPDRS characteristic
trajectories in proper (multidimensional) feature spaces, which
would suggest that a classification approach similar to the one
presented in [14] is still feasible.
For the sake of thoroughness, in Fig. 4 the distributions of
the values of all the considered features, with reference to the
UPDRS scores of the corresponding S2S tasks, are shown using
a “boxplot” representation. In particular, given a feature and
a UPDRS score, the box shows where the 50% of the feature
values around the median (namely, the red horizontal segment)
lie and, therefore, its vertical width gives a direct visual indication of the value of the interquartile range (which quantifies
the data dispersion). Furthermore, the black “whiskers” and red
crosses outside the box give information about the data skewness and highlight the presence of outliers (from a statistical
2 Note, in particular, that an exhaustive search was feasible due to the relatively
small parameter space that we evaluated. That allowed us to derive an exact
performance analysis, rather than an approximated one that would have derived,
for instance, by the use of heuristic methods for feature selection.

GIUBERTI et al.: AUTOMATIC UPDRS EVALUATION IN THE SIT-TO-STAND TASK OF PARKINSONIANS

807

Fig. 4. “Boxplot” diagrams for all the considered kinematic features (defined as in Table II): (a) T , (b) T F , (c) T B , (d) D T , (e) Θ, (f) Θ F , (g) Θ B , (h) D Θ ,
(i) Ω, (j) Ω F , (k) Ω B , and (l) D Ω . Feature values are treated separately according to the corresponding UPDRS score. All 24 patients are considered.

808

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

not uniformly distributed along the trajectories. In particular,
clusters of points, corresponding to different consecutive UPDRS scores, are not disjoint. This fact suggests that the use
of simple centroid-based classification algorithms will likely
fail, as we will see in the case of the NCC in the following
analysis.
B. Automatic UPDRS Evaluation

Fig. 5. Representation of original 12-tuples of features (obtained from the 34
trials) projected onto a (a) 2-D plane and a (b) 3-D space using PCA. Points
are colored according to the corresponding UPDRS scores. Centroids of each
cluster of points (drawn as filled stars), corresponding to the same UPDRS score,
are shown and are linked in UPDRS-wise order from 0 to 3.

point of view). In particular, whiskers extend to the last values which is distant less than 1.5 times the interquartile range
from the box. Beyond this limits, the values are considered as
outliers and depicted as red crosses. Finally, the red line links
all the median values. In order to investigate the existence of
monotonic behaviors of the considered features, as functions of
the UPDRS value, the medians (for the various UPDRS values)
are connected with solid (red) lines. It is apparent that only in
some cases [e.g., in cases (a) and (i)] monotonic trends can be
partially observed.
Motivated by the fact that the results in Fig. 4 do not highlight
any evident monotonic behavior of the considered features, as
anticipated in Section IV-B, we apply a PCA to the original data
(namely, the values of the original 12 features) in order to exploit
correlation (if any) between different features [31]. In particular, in Fig. 5, the behaviors of the first two principal components
[see Fig. 5(a)] and of the first three principal components [see
Fig. 5(b)], respectively, are investigated. In order to visually
highlight, in the reduced dimensionality spaces, the presence of
parametric (in terms of UPDRS score) “trajectories,” the centroids (drawn as filled stars) of each cluster of points associated
with the same UPDRS score are linked in UPDRS-wise order
from 0 to 3. Although it can be observed that, moving from
UPDRS 0 to UPDRS 3, the corresponding centroids are positioned in well-separated portions of the reduced dimensionality
space, the centroids relative to intermediate UPDRS values are

In Section V-A, we investigated the possibility of intuitively
defining decision regions in the feature space, with which it
would have been possible to automatically detect the UPDRS
scores of specific S2S tasks. Even though it was not possible to
derive insightful considerations by looking at the values of each
feature separately and by applying a PCA on the complete set
of features, it is well known that machine learning algorithms
are particularly effective at automatically identifying significant
data patterns, especially when the data are characterized by a
high dimensionality. Therefore, as explained in Section IV-D,
an exhaustive analysis has been performed where the performances of the classifiers have been evaluated for all possible
combinations of the 12 features presented in Section IV-A. The
classifiers performances have been studied for all the selected
subsets of features as well as for the same subsets projected
into new feature spaces using the PCA. Specifically, in Fig. 6,
a direct (exhaustive) comparison of the cumulative distribution
functions (CDFs) of the error e defined in (1) with NCC, kNN,
and SVM (using the PCA and not using it) is carried out. In
particular, in Fig. 6(a), the CDFs for all possible number and
combinations of features are shown. Different colors have been
used to highlight when different classifiers are used and when
PCA is applied to the features. Furthermore, in order to provide
a more concise idea of the classifiers performance, in Fig. 6(b),
the average CDFs (averaged over all possible combinations of
features) for each classifier are also shown. Due to the definition of CDF, the depicted curves are monotonically increasing
and the overall performance associated with a specific curve
may be mainly evaluated in two ways: i) by looking at its value
in e = 0, which represents the accuracy of the classifier (i.e.,
how often the classifier precisely estimates the UPDRS score),
and/or ii) by computing the area under the curve (AuC), which
ideally needs to be as large as possible and which provides a
more general indication of the classifier performance. In particular, in the following, we will use the AuC to determine the best
combination of features and the best classifier.
Looking at Fig. 6(a), it can be immediately noticed that the
choice of the classifier has a more pronounced impact on the
system performance rather than the choice of the features (whose
proper tuning is, however, crucial to the achievement of the best
performance, when considering a specific classifier). Indeed, the
groups of CDFs for each classifier tend to lie in the same portion
of the plane even for different combinations of features and even
if using or not the PCA. This is particularly evident, for instance,
in the case of NCC, which performs considerably worse than
kNN and SVM. Note that similar considerations have been also
made in [14], for the case of the LA task.
The system configuration that achieves the best performance,
chosen as the one that maximize the AuC of the CDFs, turns

GIUBERTI et al.: AUTOMATIC UPDRS EVALUATION IN THE SIT-TO-STAND TASK OF PARKINSONIANS

Fig. 6. CDFs of the absolute UPDRS error e for the S2S task using NCC,
kNN, and SVM. In (a), the CDFs for all possible combinations of parameters
and features are shown, whereas, in (b), the average CDFs for every classifier
are shown. The black solid line is the CDF of the best case (i.e., kNN with
k = 4 applied to the first principal component of PCA-projected data, where
PCA is only applied to the following subset of features: T , T F , T B , D T , Θ,
and Ω). For comparison purposes, in (b) we show the best average CDF for the
LA task, obtained in [14] (black dashed line).

out to be the one that uses kNN with k = 4 applied to the first
principal component of PCA-projected data, with PCA applied
to the following subset of features: T , TF , TB , DT , Θ, and Ω. In
Fig. 6(b), the black solid line represents the CDF associated with
this optimized system configuration. Note that, for comparison
purposes, the CDF of the best case for the LA task, obtained
in [14], is also shown: this CDF refers to the use of the kNN
with k = 3 and (Θ,R,PX θ ) as features (as defined in [14]). In
Section VI, further considerations will be made on the system
performance by examining, in a more comparative way, the
results obtained for the S2S and the LA tasks.
Finally, since PCA is used on the six features selected in the
optimized configuration (namely, T , TF , TB , DT , Θ, and Ω), in
Fig. 7 more details about the actual weight given to them in the
transformation process are provided. In particular, in Fig. 7(a),
the PCA loadings of each feature (namely, the coefficients given
to each feature in the linear combination performed by the PCA)
are shown for all considered trials. Furthermore, in Fig. 7(b),
the average PCA loadings over all trials are also shown. Since
the features, before applying the PCA, have been standardized
(namely, they have been centered by their mean and scaled
by their variance), larger values of the loadings correspond to
a larger importance of the features in the linear combination

809

Fig. 7. PCA loadings of the features considered in the optimized system
configuration (namely, T , T F , T B , D T , Θ, and Ω). In (a), the PCA loadings
are shown for all trials. In (b), their averages over all trials are shown. Features
are sorted in descending order of importance (according to their weights in the
PCA linear combination process).

process. It is easy to observe that the largest weight in the PCA
is given to the time-related features (namely, T , TF , TB , DT ),
whose aggregate weight represents almost 80% of the total.
Note also, by looking at Fig. 7(a) that the variance of the feature
loadings over all trials is very small. Therefore, the previous
consideration is almost always (and not just on average) valid.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. Comparative Outlook of S2S Task on the LA Task
As anticipated in Section I, the main motivation of this study,
as well as [14], is to investigate the feasibility of a unique
portable system able to automatically detect UPDRS scores of
functional tasks performed by PD patients, possibly leveraging
on a common algorithmic approach. The integrated evaluation of
multiple functional tasks (such as the LA and S2S tasks) is even
more significant when such tasks are not correlated and provide
diverse information of the clinical status of the PD patients.
In order to investigate the (un)correlation of the LA task and
the S2S task, the first interesting consideration can be made
by looking at the distribution of the UPDRS scores assigned
by neurologist to the considered 24 PD patients. To this end,
for comparison purposes, in Fig. 8 we show the distribution of
the UPDRS scores for the LA task (presented in [14]), where
the same set of 24 PD patients is considered. By comparing

810

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 8. Distribution of the UPDRS scores assigned to the LA trials (76 UPDRS
scores were given), already presented in [13] and [14]. The same set of 24 PD
patients is considered.

Fig. 8 with Fig. 2, it can readily be observed that the two tasks,
carried out by the same group of patients, have led to different
UPDRS evaluations. In particular, the S2S task appears to be
less “challenging,” for the considered PD patients, than the LA
task: in fact, in the S2S task the majority of the patients have
been given UPDRS scores equal to 0.
A further evidence of the loose correlation between the two
tasks can be observed in Fig. 9, where each PD patient is associated with the pair of UPDRS scores he/she has been given in
the two tasks. In particular, we distinguish between: 1) UPDRS
scores assigned by our automatic detection system (for S2S,
using the classification approach outlined in Section V-B and,
for the LA task, using the similar classification approach proposed in [14]) and 2) UPDRS scores assigned by neurologists.
As expected, a generally increasing trend can be observed, i.e.,
for increasing values of the UPDRS score in S2S task, the possible UPDRS scores in the LA task tend to increase. However,
this phenomenon is not very pronounced and, for each UPDRS
value assigned in a task, several UPDRS values are possible
for the other task—this is slightly more pronounced in case 2,
i.e., with UPDRS pairs assigned by neurologists. In fact, this
apparently noncorrelated behavior of UPDRS scoring is rooted
in the very definition, in the medical viewpoint, of the various
UPDRS tasks, which aim at characterizing different aspects of
the PD. In [16], a factor analysis of the various UPDRS tasks is
presented and it is shown that different tasks belong to different
characterizing subclasses of the PD: for instance, the S2S task
belongs to the subclass “posture,” whereas the LA task belong to
the “rigidity” subclass. Furthermore, in [17], following a physiatric perspective, it is shown that the S2S task allows to measure
functional abilities, whereas the LA task is representative of
the motor activity level. A comprehensive investigation of the
correlation between scoring in all UPDRS tasks is an interesting
research direction.
After highlighting the importance of an automatic system able
to automatically detect UPDRS scores of multiple functional

Fig. 9. Per-patient UPDRS value assigned for the S2S task as a function of
the UPDRS value assigned to the same patient for the LA task: (a) through the
proposed automatic detection system and (b) on the basis of the neurologists’
scoring.

tasks, we proceed by further comparatively characterizing the
performance achieved for the LA task and the S2S task. In order to directly compare the kinematic characterization of the
S2S task with the kinematic characterization of the LA task,
investigated in [14], the overall BSN on each PD patient is composed by three Shimmer nodes, i.e., one per thigh and one on
the chest. For ease of clarity, we show the typical placement of
Shimmer nodes on a patient in Fig. 10. Note that, concerning the
evaluation of the UPDRS in the LA task, placing the nodes on
the thighs and, thus, implicitly focusing on the thighs’ inclination, rather than directly focusing on the heel elevation (as the
definition of the task, presented in Section II, would suggest)

GIUBERTI et al.: AUTOMATIC UPDRS EVALUATION IN THE SIT-TO-STAND TASK OF PARKINSONIANS

811

Fig. 10. Considered experimental testbed for a direct comparison between
LA and S2S tasks.

has been motivated in [14], by verifying the strong correlation
between the heel elevation and the thigh inclination. In particular, the heel elevation was measured through an optoelectronic
system (by positioning a marker on the heel), whereas the inclination was measured with the Shimmer node positioned on the
thigh. The obtained results showed indeed that the correlation
between the two signals is over 0.98.
On the basis of thigh inclination/heel elevation equivalence,
various relevant kinematic features for the LA task (associated
with the inertial nodes on the thighs) are identified in the time
and frequency domains. Eventually, the classifier that guarantees
the best performance for the LA task is the kNN (as for the S2S
task) and the best features are the following:
1) in the time domain: the arithmetic average of the angular amplitudes of ascent and descent, concisely denoted
as angular amplitude Θ (dimension: [deg]), and the regularity of execution R (dimension: [s]), which intuitively
quantifies the regularity among the ten repetitions per leg
foreseen in the LA task;
2) in the frequency domain: the power of the spectrum of
inclination of the thighs (denoted as PX θ ).
Note that in [14], as in Section V-B, the best performance is
assumed to correspond to the system configuration that maximizes the AuC of the CDF of the error e given by (1). For
comparison purposes, the CDF corresponding to this optimized
configuration is also shown in Fig. 6(b).
In Fig. 11, we further investigate the error e 1) in in the S2S
task (using the best configuration of the proposed classification
method identified at the end of Section V-B) and 2) in the LA task
(using the optimized classification method proposed in [14]).
It can be observed that the probability mass functions have
different behaviors in the two tasks. In particular: in the S2S
case, most of the mass concentrates in 0 (i.e., the automatic
classification system makes no error), but there are some cases
where the error is 2; in the LA task, the masses in 0 and 0.5 are

Fig. 11. Distribution of the error e [defined in (1)] between the proposed
automatic detection systems and the decisions of neurologists: (a) S2S task
(using the best classification method proposed at the end of Section V-B) and
(b) LA task (using the best classification method proposed in [14]).

TABLE III
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR THE S2S TASK USING THE CLASSIFICATION METHOD
DEVELOPED IN SECTION V-B
[%]

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4

96.3
100
50
–
42.9
0
0
–
–

0
0
0
–
14.3
0
0
–
–

3.7
0
50
–
0
0
0
–
–

0
0
0
–
0
0
0
–
–

0
0
0
–
28.6
100
100
–
–

0
0
0
–
14.3
0
0
–
–

0
0
0
–
0
0
0
–
–

0
0
0
–
0
0
0
–
–

0
0
0
–
0
0
0
–
–

dominant and e never exceeds 1.5. This behavior is consistent
with the UPDRS distributions based on neurologists’ evaluation,
shown in Figs. 2 and 8, where it can be observed that: in the S2S
task, most of the patients have a UPDRS equal to 0; whereas,
in the LA task, the UPDRS distribution is less concentrated.
In order to better characterize the distributions of the error e,
in Tables III and IV, the confusion matrices associated with
the S2S and LA tasks, respectively, are also shown. It can be
observed that the confusion matrix in the S2S case is “less
sparse” than in the LA case. This is consistent with UPDRS
scores distributions of the available PD patients. Obviously, a
larger set of patients, with a uniform distribution of the UPDRS
values, would allow to obtain more relevant (from a statistical

812

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

TABLE IV
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR THE LA TASK, USING THE BEST CLASSIFICATION
METHOD PROPOSED IN [14]
[%]

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4

75
16.7
4.3
9.1
0
0
0
0
–

0
0
8.7
0
0
0
0
0
–

25
66.7
65.2
18.2
23.5
0
0
0
–

0
0
13
18.2
5.9
0
0
0
–

0
16.7
8.7
45.5
58.8
75
0
0
–

0
0
0
9.1
11.8
0
100
0
–

0
0
0
0
0
25
0
100
–

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
–

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
–

point of view) perspective. However, this goes beyond the scope
of the paper, which focuses on proposing a novel approach,
rather than an exhaustive medical investigation.
B. Research Extensions
While the proposed classification approach is designed to
output “discrete” UPDRS scores, since aimed at replicating the
neurologists’ decisions, a challenging research extension consists in extending the proposed approach to develop an automatic
UPDRS detection system able to output continuous values. In
other words, rather than providing a UPDRS score in a discrete
set of values, an automatic detection system could return a real
UPDRS value between 0 and 4 and quantify all the subtle differences that could be observed in the PD symptoms. In order
to reach this goal, the key point is to understand how to rely
on a set of discretized ground truth decisions (by the neurologists) and generate a continuous output. Considering Fig. 5, one
could think of parametrizing, in a continuous way, the obtained
trajectories identifying “virtual centroids” corresponding to any
possible value of UPDRS between 0 and 4. At this point, for each
observed patient, one could simply “project” the multidimensional point corresponding to the patient onto the trajectory and
select the corresponding continuous UPDRS score. However,
as already observed in Section V-A, clusters of points associated with the same UPDRS values are not disjoint and, thus,
the use of this projection-based approach needs to be carefully
investigated. Another very interesting approach consists of the
use of regression techniques, which are particularly effective at
dealing with continuous outputs [32].
Finally, the proposed automatic UPDRS classification system for the S2S task relies on the use of a personal computer
to process the inertial data received from the body-worn inertial node on the chest—from the two nodes on the thighs for
the LA task. Owing to the ever increasing processing capabilities of embedded systems, it is very likely that the proposed
classification algorithm could be run directly inside wearable
devices. As of now, the use of a smartphone could be a viable
option. Although the best classification algorithm turns out to
be the kNN, from the results in Fig. 6(b) it can be concluded
that the SVM algorithm has a performance comparable to (actually, slightly worse than) that of the kNN algorithm, but with
a lower computational complexity. In fact, while the SVM al-

gorithm builds a compact classification model on the basis of
the training data, the kNN algorithm, as most of the so-called
“lazy learning” algorithms, relies on the entire training dataset
for each classification act. Therefore, the SVM algorithm seems
an attractive processing strategy to make the implementation
of the proposed automatic detection algorithm on board of future wearable devices feasible. This represents an interesting
experimental research extension.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated how kinematic variables,
collected through a single inertial node placed on the chest, can
be representative of the UPDRS value assigned by neurologists
for the S2S task. The experimental investigation has been carried
out considering 24 PD patients. Various kinematic features of the
chest inclination signal, in the time domain, have been investigated, relying also on the use of PCA to investigate the presence
of correlation between the considered kinematic variables. After
an exploratory investigation of the extracted kinematic features,
the performance of automatic UPDRS evaluation systems, considering various classification methods (NCC, kNN, and SVM),
has been carried out. The best system configuration, chosen as
the one that maximize the AuC of the CDFs of the classification
error, turns out to be that which uses kNN with k = 4 applied
to the first principal component of PCA-projected data, with
PCA applied to the following subset of features: T , TF , TB ,
DT , Θ, and Ω. A comparative outlook of the S2S task on the
LA task has then been carried out, highlighting the rather uncorrelated relation between the two tasks and the impact of the
UPDRS distributions of the patients. The obtained results make
the design and implementation of an automatic UPDRS detection system, based on a simple BSN of inertial sensors applied
to various tasks, feasible. Our future research activities include
the application of the proposed approach to the gait analysis
task.
REFERENCES
[1] European Parkinson’s Disease Association [Online]. Available: http://
www.epda.eu.com/en/parkinsons/in-depth/parkinsonsdisease/
[2] Movement Disorder Society [Online]. Available: http://www.
movementdisorders.org
[3] B. Chen, S. Patel, T. Buckley, R. Rednic, D. McClure, L. Shih, D. Tarsy,
M. Welsh, and P. Bonato, “A web-based system for home monitoring of
patients with Parkinsons disease using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 831–836, Mar. 2011.
[4] S. Nuzik, R. Lamb, A. Vansant, and S. Hirt, “Sit-to-stand movement pattern. A kinematic study,” Phys. Therapy, vol. 66, no. 11,
pp. 1708–1713, 1986.
[5] D. Giansanti, G. Maccioni, F. Benvenuti, and V. Macellari, “Inertial measurement units furnish accurate trunk trajectory reconstruction of the sitto-stand manoeuvre in healthy subjects,” Med. Biological Eng. Comput.,
vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 969–976, Oct. 2007.
[6] A. Salarian, H. Russmann, F. J. G. Vingerhoets, C. Dehollain, Y. Blanc,
P. R. Burkhard, and K. Aminian, “Gait assessment in Parkinson’s Disease:
Toward an ambulatory system for long-term monitoring,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1434–1443, Aug. 2004.
[7] A. Salarian, C. Zampieri, F. B. Horak, P. Carlson-Kuhta, J. G. Nutt, and
K. Aminian, “Analyzing 180o turns using an inertial system reveals early
signs of progression of Parkinsons Disease,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Minneapolis, MN, USA, Sep. 2009,
pp. 224–227.

GIUBERTI et al.: AUTOMATIC UPDRS EVALUATION IN THE SIT-TO-STAND TASK OF PARKINSONIANS

[8] A. Salarian, H. Russmann, C. Wider, P. R. Burkhard, F. J. G. Vingerhoets,
and K. Aminian, “Quantification of tremor and bradykinesia in Parkinsons Disease using a novel ambulatory monitoring system,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 313–322, Feb. 2007.
[9] S. Patel, K. Lorincz, R. Hughes, N. Huggins, J. Growdon, D. Standaert,
M. Akay, J. Dy, M. Welsh, and P. Bonato, “Monitoring motor fluctuations
in patients with Parkinsons Disease using wearable sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 864–873, Nov. 2009.
[10] S. Das, L. Trutoiu, A. Murai, D. Alcindor, M. Oh, F. D. la Torre, and
J. Hodgins, “Quantitative measurement of motor symptoms in Parkinson’s
disease: A study with full-body motion capture data,” in Proc. Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 6789–6792.
[11] D. A. Heldman, D. E. Filipkowski, D. E. Riley, C. M. Whitney,
B. L. Walter, S. A. Gunzler, J. P. Giuffrida, and T. O. Mera, “Automated
motion sensor quantification of gait and lower extremity bradykinesia,” in
Proc. IEEE 34th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., San Diego, CA,
USA, Aug. 2012, pp. 1956–1959.
[12] M. Giuberti, G. Ferrari, L. Contin, V. Cimolin, N. Cau, M. Galli, C.
Azzaro, G. Albani, and A. Mauro, “On the characterization of leg agility
in patients with Parkinson’s Disease,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Wearable
Implantable Body Sensor Netw., Cambridge, MA, USA, May 2013, pp.
1–6.
[13] M. Giuberti, G. Ferrari, L. Contin, V. Cimolin, C. Azzaro, G. Albani,
and A. Mauro, “Linking UPDRS scores and kinematic variables in
the leg agility task of Parkinsonians,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Wearable Implantable Body Sensor Netw., Zurich, Switzerland, Jun. 2014,
pp. 115–120.
[14] M. Giuberti, G. Ferrari, L. Contin, V. Cimolin, C. Azzaro, G. Albani, and
A. Mauro, “Assigning UPDRS scores in the leg agility task of Parkinsonians: Can it be done through BSN-based kinematic variables?” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–51, Feb. 2015.
[15] S. Fahn and R. L. Elton, “Unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale,” in
Recent Developments in Parkinson’s Disease, vol. 2. Florham Park, NJ,
USA: Macmillan Health Care Information, 1987, pp. 153–163.
[16] S. D. Vassar, Y. M. Bordelon, R. D. Hays, N. Diaz, R. Rausch, C. Mao,
and B. G. Vickrey, “Confirmatory factor analysis of the motor unified
Parkinsons disease rating scale,” Parkinsons Disease, vol. 2012, p. 10,
2012.
[17] K. J. Brusse, S. Zimdars, K. R. Zalewski, and T. M. Steffen, “Testing
functional performance in people with Parkinson disease,” Phys. Therapy,
vol. 85, p. 134, Feb. 2015.
[18] W. G. M. Janssen, J. B. J. Bussmann, H. L. D. Horemans, and H. J. Stam,
“Determinants of the sit-to-stand movement: A review,” Phys. Therapy,
vol. 82, no. 9, pp. 866–879, Sep. 2002.
[19] R. Williamson and B. J. Andrews, “Detecting absolute human knee angle
and angular velocity using accelerometers and rate gyroscopes,” Med.
Biological Eng. Comput., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1–9, May 2001.
[20] D. Giansanti and G. Maccioni, “Physiological motion monitoring: wearable device and adaptive algorithm for sit-to-stand timing detection,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 713–723, Aug. 2006.
[21] W. G. M. Janssen, J. B. J. Bussmann, H. L. D. Horemans, and H. J. Stam,
“Analysis and decomposition of accelerometric signals of trunk and thigh
obtained during the sit-to-stand movement,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 265–272, Mar. 2005.
[22] W. G. M. Janssen, J. B. J. Bussmann, H. L. D. Horemans, and H. J. Stam,
“Validity of accelerometry in assessing the duration of the sit-to-stand
movement,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 879–887, Sep.
2008.
[23] W. G. M. Janssen, D. G. Külcü, H. L. D. Horemans, H. J. Stam, and
J. B. J. Bussmann, “Sensitivity of accelerometry to assess balance control
during sit-to-stand movement,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 479–484, Oct. 2008.
[24] M. C. Boonstra, R. M. A. van der Slikke, N. L. W. Keijsers,
R. C. van Lummel, M. C. de W. Malefijt, and N. Verdonschot, “The accuracy of measuring the kinematics of rising from a chair with accelerometers
and gyroscopes,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 354–358, 2006.
[25] C. G. Goetz, S. Fahn, P. Martinez-Martin, W. Poewe, C. Sampaio,
G. T. Stebbins, M. B. Stern, B. C. Tilley, R. Dodel, B. Dubois, R. Holloway,
J. Jankovic, J. Kulisevsky, A. E. Lang, A. Lees, S. Leurgans,
P. A. LeWitt, D. Nyenhuis, C. W. Olanow, O. Rascol, A. Schrag,
J. A. Teresi, J. J. V. Hilten, and N. LaPelle, “Movement disorder societysponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDSUPDRS): Process, format, and clinimetric testing plan,” Movement Disorders, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 41–47, Jan. 2007.
[26] Shimmer [Online]. Available: http://www.shimmersensing.com

813

[27] A. Burns, B. R. Greene, M. J. McGrath, T. J. O’Shea, B. Kuris, S. M. Ayer,
F. Stroiescu, and V. Cionca, “SHIMMER—a wireless sensor platform
for noninvasive biomedical research,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 10, no. 9,
pp. 1527–1534, Sep. 2010.
[28] R. B. Davis, S. Ounpuu, D. J. Tyburski, and J. R. Gage, “A gait analysis
data collection and reduction technique,” Human Movement Sci., vol. 10,
pp. 575–587, 1991.
[29] A. Ferrari, M. G. Benedetti, E. Pavan, C. Frigo, D. Bettinelli, P. Rabuffetti,
P. Crenna, and A. Leardini, “Quantitative comparison of five current protocols in gait analysis,” Gait Posture, vol. 28, pp. 207–216, 2008.
[30] S. O. H. Madgwick, A. J. L. Harrison, and R. Vaidyanathan,“Estimation
of IMU and MARG orientation using a gradient descent algorithm,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., Zurich, Switzerland, Jun. 2011,
pp. 1–7.
[31] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern Classification and Scene
Analysis. 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 2000.
[32] D. A. Freedman, Statistical Models: Theory and Practice. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.

Matteo Giuberti (GS’13–M’14) received the B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degrees (summa cum laude) in telecommunications engineering and the Ph.D. degree in information technologies from the University of Parma,
Parma, Italy, in 2008, 2010, and 2014, respectively.
He is currently a Research Engineer with Xsens
Technologies B.V., Enschede, The Netherlands. His
research interests include data processing in wireless
sensor networks and, more specifically, body sensor
networks (BSNs), body area networks, inertial motion capture and posture recognition, motion reconstruction, activity classification, orientation estimation algorithms, telerehabilitation and mobile health applications, and wireless (indoor) localization.
Dr. Giuberti received the first BSN Contest and ranked second in one task
of the Opportunity Challenge in 2011. He also received a Paper Award at BSN
2014.

Gianluigi Ferrari (S’96–M’98–SM’12) received the
Laurea (5-year program, summa cum laude) and
Ph.D. degrees, both in electrical engineering, from the
University of Parma in 1998 and 2002, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor of telecommunications with the University of Parma, Parma,
Italy. He was a Visiting Researcher with the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
from 2000 to 2001, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, from 2002 to 2004, King Mongkut’s
Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok, Thailand, in 2007, and Universitè Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, in 2010.
Since 2006, he has been the Coordinator with the Wireless Ad-Hoc and Sensor
Networks Laboratory, Department of Information Engineering, University of
Parma. His research interests include wireless ad hoc and sensor networking,
adaptive digital signal processing, and communication theory.
Dr. Ferrari currently serves on the Editorial Board of several international
journals. He received the Paper/Technical Awards at IWWAN ’06, EMERGING
’10, BSN ’11, ITST ’11, SENSORNETS ’12, EvoCOMNET ’13, BSN ’14, and
SoftCOM ’14.

Laura Contin is currently a Senior Researcher with
the Strategy and Innovation Department, Telecom
Italia, Turin, Italy. She has researched and published
extensively in multimedia telecommunications, and
is currently involved in R&D projects related to active
aging, remote rehabilitation, and remote monitoring
of neurological patients. She has authored numerous
international conference papers, journal papers, and
patents. Her research interests include body sensor
networks, algorithms for motion tracking, and ambient assisted living.

814

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Veronica Cimolin received the Master’s and Ph.D.
degrees in bioengineering (with a focus on the quantitative analysis of movement for the assessment of
functional limitation in children with Cerebral Palsy),
from the Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy, in 2002
and 2007, respectively.
She is currently a Researcher with the Department
of Electronics, Information, and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano. She is with the “Luigi Divieti”
Posture and Movement Analysis Laboratory. She is
involved in the activity of several movement analysis laboratories of national and international institutes. She teaches the course
“Impianti ospedalieri e sicurezza” and assists in the teaching of “Laboratorio di
valutazione funzionale.” She has authored several peer-reviewed international
papers. Her research interests include quantitative movement analysis for clinical and rehabilitative applications.

Corrado Azzaro received the degree in medicine
and surgery from the University of Palermo, Palermo,
Italy, in 2002.
He completed his specialty training in clinical neurology with the Neurology Department, “Molinette
Hospital,” Turin, Italy, in 2011. He has been a Visiting
Doctor with the “Centro de evaluaciòn neurologica
para niños y adolecentes,” Monterrey, Mexico, from
2002 to 2003, and with the Neurology Department,
“Hospital Virgen del Rocio,” Sevilla, Spain, in 2003.
He is currently an Assistant with the Department of
Neurology, “San Giuseppe” Hospital, Clinical Research Institute “Istituto Auxologico Italiano,” Piancavallo, Verbania, Italy. His research interests include
neurophysiology, movement analysis in virtual reality environments, and applied medical informatics.

Giovanni Albani received the degree in medicine
and surgery from the University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy, in 1992, and completed the School of Neurophysiopathology, Neurological National Institute
“Casimiro Mondino,” Pavia, Italy, in 1997.
He has been a Visiting Researcher with the Hospital Clinico in 1990 and Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain, in
1992, and Neurologische Clinic University of Zurich,
“Paul Sherrer Institute” Nuclear Medicine Centre Villigen, Switzerland, and “Balgrist” Swiss Paraplegic
Zentrum, Zurich, Switzerland (from 1995 to 1997).
After being a Chief of Service of neurophysiology in Clinical Hospital “Beato
Matteo,” Vigevano, Italy, in 1998–2005, he is currently an Assistant with the
Department of Neurology, “San Giuseppe” Hospital, Clinical Research Institute
“Istituto Auxologico Italiano,” Piancavallo-Verbania, Italy. His research interests include movement disorders, movement analysis, neurophysiology, and
virtual reality.

Alessandro Mauro received the degree in Medicine from the University of
Torino Medical School, Turin, Italy, in 1978, and completed his specialization
in Neurology from the University of Torino Medical School, Turin, Italy, in
1982. He has been a Full Professor of neurology with the Department of Neurosciences, Medical School, University of Torino, Turin, Italy, since 2007. Since
2000, he has been the Medical Director with the University Unit of Neurology
and Neurorehabilitation, and with the Laboratory of Neuropathology and Clinical Neurobiology, San Giuseppe Hospital-Istituto Auxologico Italiano-IRCCS,
Piancavallo-Oggebbio, VB, Italy. Since 2010, he has been the Medical Director
with the Centre of Sleep Medicine of the same institution. His research interests include clinical neurology, neurogenetics and molecular neuropathology of
neurodegenerative diseases, neurorehabilitation, and sleep disorders.
Dr. Mauro is an active Member of National and International Scientific Societies, including, the Italian Association of Neuropathology and Clinical Neurobiology of which he was the President from 2011 (current the Past-President
and a Member of the Board of Governors).

