IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

2389

Biomechanical Effects of Stiffness in Parallel
With the Knee Joint During Walking
Kamran Shamaei∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Massimo Cenciarini, Member, IEEE, Albert A. Adams,
Karen N. Gregorczyk, Jeffrey M. Schiffman, and Aaron M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The human knee behaves similarly to a linear
torsional spring during the stance phase of walking with a stiffness
referred to as the knee quasi-stiffness. The spring-like behavior of
the knee joint led us to hypothesize that we might partially replace
the knee joint contribution during stance by utilizing an external
spring acting in parallel with the knee joint. We investigated the
validity of this hypothesis using a pair of experimental robotic knee
exoskeletons that provided an external stiffness in parallel with the
knee joints in the stance phase. We conducted a series of experiments involving walking with the exoskeletons with four levels
of stiffness, including 0%, 33%, 66%, and 100% of the estimated
human knee quasi-stiffness, and a pair of joint-less replicas. The results indicated that the ankle and hip joints tend to retain relatively
invariant moment and angle patterns under the effects of the exoskeleton mass, articulation, and stiffness. The results also showed
that the knee joint responds in a way such that the moment and
quasi-stiffness of the knee complex (knee joint and exoskeleton)
remains mostly invariant. A careful analysis of the knee moment
profile indicated that the knee moment could fully adapt to the
assistive moment; whereas, the knee quasi-stiffness fully adapts to
values of the assistive stiffness only up to ∼80%. Above this value,
we found biarticular consequences emerge at the hip joint.
Index Terms—Human walking, knee biomechanics, lower
extremity exoskeleton, parallel stiffness, quasi-passive mechanism,
variable stiffness.

I. INTRODUCTION
NDERSTANDING how human locomotion and the
biomechanics of lower extremity joints are altered during interaction with external engineered systems and changes
in the environment is of importance to several fields, including orthotics and prosthetics [1]–[6], rehabilitation and physical
therapy [7]–[9], and fundamental physiology and biomechanics
[10]–[12]. Locomotor adaptation in the lower extremity joints
is typically studied by exposing the human (or relevant species)
lower limbs to externally applied mechanical impedances and
perturbations [13], externally added mass [14], [15], or to uneven terrains in locomotion tasks [16], [17]. A common message

U

Manuscript received September 13, 2014; revised December 16, 2014 and
April 20, 2015; accepted April 28, 2015. Date of publication April 30, 2015;
date of current version September 16, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ K. Shamaei is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511 USA (e-mail: kamran.
shamaei@yale.edu).
M. Cenciarini is with the Neurologische Universitätsklinik Freiburg
Breisacher.
A. A. Adams and K. N. Gregorczyk are with the US Army Natick Soldier
Research, Development and Engineering Center.
J. M. Schiffman is with the Liberty Mutual Research Institute for Safety.
A. M. Dollar is with Yale University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2428636

Fig. 1. Knee complex is defined as the combination of the knee joint and
exoskeleton. This study investigates the interaction between human knee joint
and parallel stiffnesses externally applied by an exoskeleton.

from these research undertakings is that the human body can
adapt to external environmental changes to exhibit stable gait.
Compliance at the leg and joint level plays an essential role
in achieving stable gait and is implemented through stiffness
and quasi-stiffness modulation in lower extremities [18]–[22].
Dynamic and static stiffness of the lower extremity joints have
been characterized by researchers using external perturbation
in conjunction with statistical system-identification techniques
[13], [23], [24], static loading tests [25], and in vitro/in vivo
validation of muscle models and electromyography [26]–[28].
Researchers have also explored lower extremity function in response to series stiffnesses and found that upon a change in the
surface stiffness, lower extremities adapt such that the overall
stiffness at the center of mass remains invariant [29], [30]. It is
unclear at this point, how the human body responds to external
mechanical impedances implemented in parallel.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in studying the
behavior of lower extremity joints in interaction with parallel
assistive systems. These studies could prove beneficial for the
development of exoskeletons meant for gait assistance with ablebodied users [3], [31]–[36], rehabilitation orthoses meant for
physical therapy [37], [38], and assistive orthoses meant for gait
assistance to impaired users [39]–[41]. To this end, researchers
have exploited the potentials of robotic exoskeletons to study
human motor response to parallel perturbations/assistance to
the ankle [1], [3], [34], [42], knee [31], [32], and hip joint
[35], [38], [43].
In this study, we explore the interaction of the knee joint
with externally applied parallel stiffnesses using a pair of quasipassive robotic knee exoskeletons. The knee joint demonstrates

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

TABLE I
DEFINITION OF PARAMETERS IN WEIGHT ACCEPTANCE PHASE
Parameter

Definition

Knee Joint
Knee Complex

Anatomical knee joint
Combination of knee joint and exoskeleton
(if the condition includes the exoskeleton)
Knee joint quasi-stiffness
Knee complex quasi-stiffness
Exoskeleton stiffness
Parallel stiffness (K E and K S in series)
Knee joint loading effort
Knee complex loading effort
Exoskeleton parallel assistive
Parallel assistive (equal to M E )
Interface series stiffness
Knee joint excursion
Knee complex excursion
Exoskeleton excursion
Interface series excursion

K K (Nm/kg · rad)
K C (Nm/kg · rad)
K E (Nm/kg · rad)
K P (Nm/kg · rad)
M K (Nm/kg · rad)
M C (Nm/kg · rad)
M E (Nm/kg · rad)
M P (Nm/kg · rad)
K S (Nm/kg · rad)
θ K (rad)
θ C (rad)
θ E (rad)
θ S (rad)

Fig. 2. Top: The exoskeleton implements a high-stiffness spring in the weight
acceptance phase of the gait and a low-stiffness spring (with negligible stiffness)
throughout the rest of the gait cycle. Bottom: The exoskeleton implements four
levels of spring stiffness including 0%, 33%, 66%, and 100% of the estimated
knee quasi-stiffness.

several major functions in walking—it primarily supports the
weight of the body, absorbs the shock resulting from heel strike,
and flexes in the swing phase to increase foot clearance and
obstacle avoidance, allowing the leg to move forward and initiate
the next gait cycle [45]. Each exoskeleton implements a spring
in parallel with the knee joint during the stance phase and allows
free motion throughout the rest of the gait cycle. This concept is
schematically shown in Fig. 1. We chose to study the knee joint
because it demonstrates a simple spring-like behavior during the
stance phase of gait, which enables us to simply implement a
spring in parallel to investigate the knee interaction with external
stiffnesses [22], [44].
The human knee joint experiences three consecutive phases
in a gait cycle: 1) substantial loading in the weight acceptance phase (first ∼40%, as depicted in Fig. 2 points a to c),
2) moderate loading in the terminal stance (∼40%–63%, as
shown in Fig. 2 points c to d), and 3) a swing phase (points d to
e in Fig. 2) [22], [44]–[48]. It demonstrates a linear flexion stage
(points a to b in Fig. 2), and a linear extension stage (points b
to c in Fig. 2) in the weight acceptance phase of gait [22], [44].
The quasi-stiffness is defined as the coefficient of a firstorder polynomial regressed to the moment-angle data of a lower
extremity joint during a period of gait. Quasi-stiffness is used
to provide a simplified understanding of the overall behavior
of the lower extremity joints in the linear loading phases of
gait [20], [49]–[54]. Previous research showed that the knee
quasi-stiffness in the flexion and extension stages of the weight
acceptance phase tended to be identical at the preferred gait
speed implying that the knee behaves close to a linear torsional
spring at the preferred gait speed [22], [44]. Accordingly, we
model the moment-angle behavior of the knee joint during the

Normalized

KK
KC
KE
KP
MK
MC
ME
MP
–
–
–
–
–

weight acceptance phase at the preferred gait speed by a linear
torsional spring with a stiffness equal to the knee quasi-stiffness
(KK ). Table I lists the definition of all the parameters used
throughout this paper.
This paper focuses on investigating the interaction between
the human knee joint (characterized by a quasi-stiffness KK )
and a spring (with stiffness KP ) implemented in parallel with
the knee joint only during the weight acceptance phase. To this
end, several hypotheses were formulated and tested as follows.
1) It was hypothesized that the overall behavior of the knee
complex, which is the combination of the knee joint
and the exoskeleton, would remain linear. Therefore, the
knee complex behavior is expressed by the following two
equations:
KC = KK + KP

(1)

MC = M K + M P .

(2)

and

In these equations, KC is the knee complex quasistiffness. The moment of the knee complex (MC ) is expressed as the summation of the knee joint moment (MK )
and parallel moment (MP ).
2) It was also hypothesized that the knee joint quasi-stiffness
and moment in the weight acceptance phase would change
in response to the presence of the parallel exoskeletal
stiffness and moment such that the overall quasi-stiffness
and moment of the knee complex would remain invariant
in response to parallel stiffnesses.
In other words, an increase in KP in (1) is negated by a
corresponding decrease in KK such that the overall knee
complex quasi-stiffness remains constant, namely
ΔKC = 0,

therefore ΔKK = −ΔKP

(3)

therefore ΔMK = −ΔMP .

(4)

and similarly
ΔMC = 0,

SHAMAEI et al.: BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF STIFFNESS IN PARALLEL WITH THE KNEE JOINT DURING WALKING

2391

Fig. 3. Left: A volunteer walking with the quasi-passive knee exoskeleton. The control unit is mounted on a belt, and wirelessly transfers the data to a host
computer. The exoskeleton and the controller are suspended with a harness from the shoulder. The exoskeleton is composed of a variable-stiffness module mounted
on an adjustable knee brace equipped with a potentiometer-pulley assembly. Right: A joint-less replica device that has a mass distribution similar to that of the
exoskeleton.

3) Finally, it was hypothesized that the mass and articulation
of an exoskeleton could affect the kinematic and kinetic
patterns of the knee joint.
To test these hypotheses, we used the quasi-passive exoskeletons in a series of experiments [see Fig. 3 (left)]. When using
the knee exoskeleton, four levels of external stiffness were implemented in parallel with the knee joint, but only during the
stance phase. Furthermore, the effects of the mass and articulation of the exoskeleton on the mechanical performance of the
lower extremity joints (especially the knee joint) were studied
using a pair of joint-less replicas of the exoskeleton with a mass
distribution that was similar to those of the exoskeletons [see
Fig. 3 (right)].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Exoskeletal Devices
1) Quasi-Passive Knee Exoskeleton: When worn on a user,
the quasi-passive knee exoskeleton implements a spring in parallel with the knee joint in the weight acceptance phase of gait
and allows free motion during the terminal stance and the swing
phases, as shown in Fig. 3 (left) and detailed in [39]. The exoskeleton mechanism includes two springs: a compliant spring
(with negligible stiffness KL ∼ 0; see Fig. 4) that remains
engaged throughout the gait cycle and an interchangeable highstiffness spring (with stiffness KH ) that is engaged only in
the weight acceptance phase of the gait cycle as schematically

shown in Fig. 2 (top). The primary function of the compliant spring is to return the exoskeleton shaft to the original reset
position without applying considerable moment to the knee. The
overall mechanical behavior of this system is shown in Fig. 4
(left), where the moment-angle graph of the exoskeleton is plotted over a typical moment-angle graph of human knee. The
engagement mechanism is detailed in our previously published
work [39].
The exoskeleton determines the engagement/disengagement
of the high-stiffness spring according to the status of an instrumented foot insole that has toe and heel force sensors, and the
angular knee joint velocity obtained as the readout derivative
(defined as the difference between the current and previous angle) of a potentiometer incorporated in the exoskeleton joint.
The high-stiffness spring is engaged at the beginning of the
weight acceptance phase and disengaged when the foot is flat
(both the heel and toe are on the ground), which in combination with the mechanism mechanical latency, roughly coincides
with the end of the weight acceptance phase of the gait cycle.
Table III includes the average time at which the exoskeleton
spring was disengaged. It is worth noting that the spring was
engaged exactly at the beginning of the gait cycle, considering
that the mechanism engagement was initiated in the extension
period of the swing phase [39].
2) Moment-Angle Characterization of the Exoskeleton:
Fig. 4 (right) schematically illustrates the configuration of the
exoskeleton springs and latching mechanism, which suggests

2392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 4. Left: The moment-angle characterization of the exoskeleton. K H
is the constant of the high-stiffness spring, K L is the constant of the lowstiffness spring, φ o is the angle of engagement, M is the exoskeleton moment,
and ϕ is the exoskeleton angle. Right: Schematic model of the exoskeleton.
A clutch mechanism engages/disengages the high-stiffness spring, whereas the
low-stiffness springs (with negligible stiffness) remains engaged throughout the
gait cycle.

the following equation for the exoskeleton stiffness:

(KL + KH ) · r2 engaged
KE =
disengaged
KL · r 2

(5)

and the following equation for the exoskeleton moment [39]:

KL · r2 · ϕ + KH · r2 · (ϕ − ϕo ) engaged
ME =
disengaged.
KL · r 2 · ϕ
(6)
Here, r = 5 cm is the exoskeleton pulley radius, KL =
5 N · m/rad is the constant of low-stiffness spring, ϕ is the knee
angle, and φo is the angle at which the high-stiffness spring is
engaged. The values of ϕ and φo and the engagement status of
the high-stiffness spring for both left and right exoskeletons are
continuously transferred to a host computer through the wireless
communication module of the exoskeletons.
One of the questions that the current study intends to address
is how the spring-type behavior of the human knee changes
when an externally applied parallel stiffness is assisting during
the stance phase. It is important to note that to ideally study this
problem, the exoskeletal spring should be rigidly implemented
between the femur and the tibia in the weight acceptance phase
of gait, which is highly challenging. In reality, the exoskeleton
spring interacts with the human leg through a series of compliant
interfaces including the soft biological tissues of the leg and the
cuffs and attachments of the exoskeletal devices, which are not
completely rigid. These compliant interfaces can lead to an
effective parallel stiffness that is different from the desired knee
quasi-stiffness. Therefore, to account for the possible effects,
the behavior of the interface was approximated by an additional
series spring (with stiffness KS ) between the exoskeleton spring
and the leg, as schematically shown in Fig. 5, and the overall
parallel stiffness perceived by the anatomical knee joint can be
estimated as
KE KS
.
(7)
KP =
KS + KE

Fig. 5. Schematic model of the knee complex comprising the knee equivalent
spring (K K ), exoskeleton spring (K E ), and a spring that models the interface
materials (K S ) including the biological soft tissues of the leg and exoskeleton
compliant components. The assistance conditions included modulation of K E ,
whereas the intention of this study was to investigate the effect of parallel spring
on the spring-type behavior of the knee joint.

3) Exoskeleton Mass Replica: To investigate the effects of
the exoskeleton mass and inertia on the biomechanics of the
knee, we fabricated a joint-less replica of the exoskeleton for
each leg termed mass replicas. As shown in Fig. 3 (right), the
mass replicas are composed of thigh and shank embodiments
that comprise five identical steel cylinders assembled on a pair
of thigh and shank cuffs similar to those of the exoskeleton.
The mass, center of mass, and moment of inertia of the mass
replicas and exoskeletons are nearly identical. The mechanical
properties of the thigh and shank segments of the exoskeleton
were estimated in SolidWorks (Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks
Corp., Waltham, MA, USA) as reported in Table II.
B. Subjects
Nine healthy adult volunteers were recruited from US Army
Soldiers assigned to Headquarters, Research, and Development
Detachment of Natick Soldier System Center. Inclusion criteria were a body height between 1.50 and 1.90 m and a body
weight less than 130 kg according to the size limitations of the
fabricated exoskeletons. Table III lists the demographics of the
volunteers, including the means and standard deviations (SD)
of mass, height, and age of each volunteer. Written informed
consent was obtained from each volunteer enrolled in this study
prior to participation. This study protocol was approved by the
Yale University Institutional Review Board, Human Use Review Committee of United States Army Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Army Human Research Protections
Office, and Battelle Institutional Review Board in accordance
with DoD 3216.02, protection of human subjects. The experimental conditions included walking on a custom-made force
plate treadmill (AMTI, Watertown, MA, USA). The treadmill
comprises two synchronized treadmill belts positioned side by
side, each on a separate force platform with a gap smaller than
1 cm. We used a ten-camera motion capture system (Qualysis,

SHAMAEI et al.: BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF STIFFNESS IN PARALLEL WITH THE KNEE JOINT DURING WALKING

TABLE II
MASS PROPERTIES OF THE EXOSKELETON

Gothenberg, Sweden) and Qualisys Track Manager Software
to track lower limb markers and calculate kinematic profiles at
1000-Hz frequency.
C. Experimental Conditions
The hypotheses were tested experimentally across the following six experimental conditions of treadmill walking.
1) Control Condition (CTRL): Without wearing the exoskeletons or mass replicas.
2) Exoskeleton Mass (MASS): Wearing the joint-less mass
replicas.
3) Exoskeleton Articulation (0%): Wearing the exoskeleton
unpowered with exoskeleton steel tendon detached.
4) –6) Exoskeleton Stiffness (33%, 66%, and 100%): Wearing the exoskeleton with assistance spring stiffnesses
equivalent to 33%, 66%, and 100% of the quasi-stiffness
of the anatomical knee estimated during normal walking
at preferred gait speed.
To size the exoskeleton spring (KE ), we used a previously
developed statistical model to estimate anatomical knee quasistiffness (KK ) in the weight acceptance phase of gait based on
the subject’s body size as [22]
√
√
KK = 5.21W H 3 − 7.50W H − 5.83W H + 11.64W − 6
(8)
where W (kg) is the mass and H (m) is the height of the volunteer. This model has shown a 9% error of estimation and was
established on data from volunteers with a wide range of masses
(from 67.7 to 94.0 kg) and heights (from 1.43 to 1.86 m) [22].
Once the volunteer’s KK was estimated using (8), this value
was used for condition 6 and it was then scaled to 33% and 66%
for conditions 4 and 5, respectively. The values of gait speed,
the estimated subject’s quasi-stiffness, and the spring constants
of the high-stiffness springs used for each volunteer are reported
in Table III.
D. Experimental Protocol
The study volunteers had three visits in total, including two
orientation sessions and one data collection session. On all visits, the participants wore shorts, t-shirts, socks, and their own
athletic shoes. The three visits took place within a single week
with one to two day(s) in between to provide rest and prevent any
fatigue that could affect the results. Volunteers’ mass and height
were measured on the first visit to estimate each volunteer’s
KK using (8), and size the KE for the assistance conditions
as described in the in the previous paragraph and reported in
Table III.
1) Orientation Sessions: Two orientation sessions were included prior to the data collection session to allow the volunteers
to become familiar with walking, while wearing the exoskeletons. On the first visit, participants walked on the treadmill for
3 min at 4.83 km/h to become familiar with treadmill walking, after which they were given a 3–5-min rest break. Each
participant was then instructed to walk on the treadmill with
a speed that slowly increased from the zero-speed state up to
a self-selected comfortable pace. This pace was then used as
the preferred gait speed throughout the experiments. Next, the

2393

Side

Segment

Weight (kg)

I x x (kg · m2 )

I y y (kg · m2 )

I z z (kg · m2 )

Right

Thigh
Shank

1.68
0.77

0.02370
0.00217

0.02312
0.00249

0.00211
0.00122

Left

Thigh
Shank

1.81
0.82

0.02370
0.00217

0.02312
0.00249

0.00211
0.00122

exoskeleton was fitted on the volunteers, while seated, and the
alignment of the exoskeleton joint with the knee joint was ensured. In an effort to minimize the vertical migration of the
exoskeleton, suspension harness straps were also put on the volunteer and fastened to the controller belt, which was strapped
around the chest and shoulders. Finally, the tension of the suspension straps was adjusted as the volunteers slowly stood up.
The volunteers were asked to walk overground wearing the
exoskeletons and mass replicas for each of the experimental
conditions with the exception of the control condition. For each
condition, the subjects walked overground for about 640 m at
their own pace, covering a distance approximately equivalent
to the distance covered in 8 min of treadmill walking. A 5-min
seated rest break was given to the volunteers before they walked
on the treadmill in the same condition for 8 min at their preferred
gait speed. The order of the conditions for the first session was
ordered from condition 2 to condition 6, and not randomized
across volunteers.
The second orientation session included only treadmill walking trials of 10-min duration. The order of the six conditions
was randomized (using a 6 × 6 Latin squares design) for each
volunteer. The order of the conditions during each volunteer’s
second orientation session was the same as the order followed
during the volunteer’s data collection session (third and last
session). To summarize, volunteers walked a total of 18 min
on the treadmill and about 10 min overground for each experimental condition during the first two orientation sessions to become more familiar with walking while wearing the exoskeletal
device.
2) Data Collection Sessions: Reflective markers were
placed on body landmarks according to the convention described
in [55], with slight differences in that four-marker clusters were
placed on the shank and the thigh such that the exoskeleton cuffs
could fit on the limbs without blocking their visibility from the
ten cameras. Additionally, a four-marker cluster was placed on
the chest to track the trunk and pelvis as a single segment. Within
each trial, a 30-s long data recording was taken after 4 min from
the start of the trial. Additional details can be found elsewhere
[56].
E. Kinematic and Kinetic Analysis
Visual3D software (C-Motion, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) was
used to calculate the lower extremity joint angles and moment
profiles for all conditions. First, the moment of inertia of the
shank, thigh, and trunk segments of the models in Visual3D
were updated by including those of the exoskeleton and mass
replicas listed in Table II. These adjusted values included the

2394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 6. Intersubject mean angle profiles on top half and moment profiles on bottom half as indicated on the left side of the image. The title of each column refers
to the condition of interest (dashed trace) and the profile of the reference condition is shown with a solid trace. CTRL stands for normal walking (no exoskeleton),
MASS stands for the mass replica condition (no articulation), and 0% till 100% stand for walking conditions wearing the exoskeletal devices with level of assistance
indicated as % of the estimated human knee quasi-stiffness. The comparison is made between MASS and CTRL, 0% and MASS, 33% and 0%, 66% and 0%, and
100% and 0%. The thick lines indicate the intersubject mean profiles, and the thin lines boundaries are the ±1 SD around the mean. Within each box and for each
trace, the CV is reported between parentheses R2 /scale of the regression comparison is also indicated for the comparison trace. The value of R2 indicates how
similar the profile patterns are, and the value of scale indicates how much the profiles are scaled. The values of R2 /scale for the MASS condition are presented
with respect to CTRL condition, the 0% condition with respect to the MASS condition, whereas the 33%, 66%, and 100% assistance conditions are presented with
respect to 0%. On the bottom of each graph box, horizontal brackets are plotted to indicate the periods during which the two profiles are significantly different
from each other.

Fig. 7. Intersubject mean moment-angle graphs of the knee joint. The boxes include the graphs of CTRL and MASS, MASS and 0%, 0% and 33%, 0% and
66%, and 0% and 100%. The graphs also include linear fits to the moment-angle graphs of the weight acceptance phase.

SHAMAEI et al.: BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF STIFFNESS IN PARALLEL WITH THE KNEE JOINT DURING WALKING

2395

human limbs and exoskeleton components. Inverse dynamics
analysis was then performed to obtain the moment profiles of
the ankle and hip joints and knee complex in the sagittal plane
for the left and right side. The kinetic and kinematic intrasubject
profiles of the left side and right side were averaged to obtain the
final mean profiles. A third-order Butterworth filter with cutoff
frequency of 8 Hz was used to filter the kinetic and kinematic
profiles. The rest of the analyses were carried out in MATLAB
(Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). The exoskeleton moment was
calculated using (6) and the angular data received from the
exoskeleton. To approximate the moment of the knee joint in
the sagittal plane, the synchronized moment of the exoskeleton
was subtracted from the moment of the knee complex assuming
that the axis of exoskeleton joint and knee joint were aligned.
F. Profiles Comparison Measures
The gait cycles were identified by the right heel strikes. Four
consecutive gait cycles for each trial were identified from the
force plate signals and complete marker data. We also verified
that the calculated intrasubject averages for the joint angle and
moment profiles from the four consecutive cycles were consistent among all trials. Additionally, the intrasubject mean profiles
of the joint angles were normalized with respect to the standing
configuration and the moment profiles with respect to the body
mass [57]. The intersubject mean and SD of angle and moment
profiles were subsequently obtained from the corresponding intrasubject mean profiles. The intersubject mean moment and
angle profiles in the sagittal plane are plotted in Fig. 6. The
coefficient of variability (CV; described elsewhere [47]) was
calculated for each profile using the mean and SD profiles.
To compare and measure variability of the moment and angle
profiles, we performed a paired t-test between all 100 points of
the profiles of CTRL and MASS, MASS and 0%, 0% and 33%,
0% and 66%, and 0% and 100% conditions, which was also
verified by a false discovery rate control, as explained in [58].
The periods where the two profiles are statistically different
are identified by horizontal brackets in Fig. 6. The angle and
moment profiles of the conditions (similar pairs of conditions
used for the t-test) were compared using a linear regression
between the intersubject mean profiles in these two conditions,
as explained in [3]. The coefficient of determination (R2 ) value of
the regression indicates the degree of similarity of the patterns,
while the slope refers to the scaling factor. For example, a profile
identical to the baseline profile would have an R2 value and a
scale of 1; whereas, a downscaled profile (i.e., smaller range of
values) with identical pattern would have R2 = 1 and slope <
1. One should note that the scale is not very meaningful when
R2 is relatively low.
G. Moment-Angle Analysis
In previous sections, we explained the method to calculate
the knee complex’s joint angles and moments for conditions
3–6, which included the exoskeletons. Fig. 7 include the intersubject mean moment-angle plots across all the conditions with
linear fits to the weight acceptance phase. To obtain the quasistiffness of the knee complex (KC ) and of the anatomical knee
joint (KK ), linear polynomials were, respectively, regressed on

Fig. 8. Intersubject moment-angle analysis of the knee complex, joint, and
exoskeleton in the sagittal plane. The first to fifth rows are, respectively, the
intersubject mean and ±1SD of knee complex quasi-stiffness, excursion, R2 ,
work, and loading efforts during the weight acceptance phase. The knee complex
joint is a virtual joint composed of the knee joint and exoskeleton joint. The
subscript C stands for the knee complex, K for the knee joint, and P for the
parallel component, which comprises the exoskeleton and soft tissues. The
subscript S stands for the series soft tissues and E for the exoskeleton. Note
that M K and M P are calculated as the integral of the moment profiles of the
knee joint and exoskeleton. Red lines indicate a statistically significant (p <
0.05) difference between adjacent conditions in the graphs, whereas dashed
lines indicate no statistically significant change.

the moment-angle data of the knee complex and knee joint in
the weight acceptance phase of the gait cycle (as illustrated in
Fig. 2). The slopes of the corresponding linear fits represent KC
and KK , and the R2 indicates the goodness of the fit representative of the linearity of the behavior of the knee complex and knee

2396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

joint in the weight acceptance phase. KK was subtracted from
KC to calculate KP and (7) was used to calculate KS . We also
define θC as the excursion of the knee complex, θK the excursion of the knee joint, θE the excursion of the exoskeleton, and
θS is the excursion of the interface. We subtracted the minimum
angle from maximum angle of the knee complex in the weight
acceptance phase to calculate θC or θK (Note that θC = θK ).
We similarly calculated θE by subtracting the minimum from
maximum angles of the exoskeleton in the weight acceptance
phase, and θS by subtracting θE from θC .
This study also aimed to investigate whether an external parallel spring can help to reduce the human knee joint moment
in the weight acceptance phase of gait and to what extent. To
address this question, the loading effort of the knee joint (MK )
and complex (MC ) were, respectively, defined as the integral of
the moment profiles of the knee joint and knee complex in the
weight acceptance phase. Parallel assistance (MP ) was defined
as the integral of the parallel/exoskeletal moment profile in the
weight acceptance phase of gait. These parameters allowed us to
investigate the overall effect of the exoskeleton assistance on the
reduction of the knee moment throughout the weight acceptance
phase of gait. Finally, the mechanical work of the knee joint in
the weight acceptance phase and the entire gait cycle were calculated as the area enclosed in the moment-angle graphs of the
corresponding period. The aforementioned parameters are plotted in Fig. 8. One should note that the knee complex and knee
joint were identical for CTRL and MASS conditions, due to the
lack of external exoskeleton joints or parallel stiffness in those
conditions.
To study the effect of exoskeleton mass and articulation,
a pairwise comparison was performed between the values of
quasi-stiffness (KC and KK ), excursion, R2 , work, and loading
efforts of CTRL and MASS, and MASS and 0% conditions using t-test with a significance level of 0.05. To study the effect
of the externally applied parallel stiffness, a one-way ANOVA
was performed on the aforementioned parameters for conditions
0%, 33%, 66%, and 100% in addition to a post hoc t-test with
Bonferroni correction leading to a significance level of 0.008.
In Fig. 8, we have connected the values by thin dashed lines if
no statistically significant difference was found (i.e., invariant
behavior) and by red lines when the p-value indicated otherwise
(i.e., significant behavior change).

H. Knee Response to Parallel Stiffness
We investigated the locomotor response of the knee joint to
externally applied parallel stiffnesses in terms of variations of:
1) the quasi-stiffness of the knee joint and complex as functions
of the parallel stiffness, and 2) the loading efforts of the knee
joint and complex as functions of the parallel assistance. These
analyses included the gait cycle for the left and right legs across
only the assistance trials (namely conditions 3–6, which correspond to 0% to 100% of the knee quasi-stiffness, respectively).
The values of quasi-stiffnesses and loading efforts were normalized with respect to the intrasubject mean values for the 0%
condition. The normalized quasi-stiffnesses of the knee joint
(κK ) was obtained from KK values in conditions 3–6 (0%,
33%, 66%, and 100%) divided by the intrasubject mean of KK

in the 0% condition for the corresponding subject, which is
assumed as the baseline for that subject. The normalized quasistiffnesses of the knee complex (κC ) were calculated in a similar
manner for each subject. It is worth noting that that KK = KC
in the 0% condition. The normalized parallel stiffness (κP ) was
also obtained by dividing KP by the intrasubject mean value of
KK in the 0% condition for each subject.
In a similar fashion, the normalized loading effort of the knee
joint (MK ) and complex (MC ) were obtained by, respectively,
dividing MK and MC by their intrasubject mean values in the
0% condition, and the normalized parallel assistance (MP ) by
dividing MP for each gait cycle by the intrasubject mean values
of MK in the 0% condition for each subject.
Finally, the normalized knee joint and complex quasistiffnesses (κK and κC , respectively) were plotted with respect
to the normalized external parallel stiffness (κP ), and the normalized loading efforts of the knee joint and complex (MK and
MC , respectively) with respect to the normalized exoskeleton
assistance (MP ) as shown in Fig. 9. The theoretical (3) and (4)
as well as the linear fits were also plotted on the corresponding
graphs to compare with the experimental values (see Fig. 9).
III. RESULTS
A. Kinematic and Kinetic Profiles
Fig. 6 includes the angle profiles on the top half and moment
profiles on the bottom half for the lower extremity joints in the
sagittal plane.
1) Effect of Mass: The values of R2 = 100% and scale =
0.99 to 1.07 for the angle profiles in Fig. 6 (graphs 1–3) show
that the exoskeleton mass did not notably change the overall
kinematic patterns of gait in the sagittal plane. However, the
exoskeleton mass resulted in a significantly more extended knee
in the terminal stance phase and more flexed knee at the heel
contact with the ground (note the dark gray stripes on graph 2),
which is in agreement with previous results [44]. The values of
R2 = 99% to 100% and scale = 1.05 to 1.11 for the moment
profiles in Fig. 6 (graphs 4–6) show that the exoskeleton mass did
not notably change the moment profiles patterns in the sagittal
plane but led to a slight overall upscale in the moment profiles.
2) Effect of Exoskeleton Articulation: The values of R2 =
99% and scale = 0.98 to 1.00 for the angle profiles in Fig. 6
(graphs 7–9) show that the kinematic constraint imposed by the
exoskeleton articulation did not notably affect the knee angle
patterns and profiles in the sagittal plane. However, the knee
joint was significantly more extended during the heel contact
and terminal stance phase (note the horizontal brackets on graph
8). The values of R2 = 98% to 99% and scale = 0.93 to 1 for
the moment profiles of the hip and ankle joints in Fig. 6 (graphs
10–12) show that the exoskeleton articulation does not notably
affect the moment patterns of the hip and ankle but led to an
overall downscale in the knee moment profile. Particularly, the
moment profile of the knee complex did not show a pattern
change (R2 = 98%), but showed a notable downscale (scale =
0.93) under the effect of the exoskeleton articulation.
3) Effect of Exoskeletal Stiffness: The values of R2 = 99%
to 100% for the ankle and hip angle and moment profiles for
conditions 33%, 66%, and 100% in Fig. 6 (graphs 13–30) show

SHAMAEI et al.: BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF STIFFNESS IN PARALLEL WITH THE KNEE JOINT DURING WALKING

2397

Fig. 9. Top: Normalized quasi-stiffness of the knee complex and joint with respect to the normalized parallel stiffness. Following a trend predicted by the
hypothesized equation for the knee stiffnesses (K C = K K + K P ), the knee joint quasi-stiffness decreases as the parallel stiffness increases up to ∼80% of the
knee quasi-stiffnesses. For parallel stiffnesses of more than ∼80%, the knee joint quasi-stiffness does not follow the hypothesized equation and remains relatively
constant leading to an increase in the knee complex quasi-stiffness. Bottom: Normalized loading effort of the knee complex and joint with respect to normalized
parallel assistance. The knee joint moment reduces as the parallel assistive moment increases, as predicted by the hypothesized equation for the joint moments
(M C = M K + M P ).

that the external assistance did not have a considerable effect on
the overall kinematic and kinetic patterns for those joints in the
sagittal plane. It is worth mentioning that the hip angle profile
started to deviate from the baseline at high exoskeletal stiffness
(note the horizontal brackets on graph 27). The angle and moment profiles of the knee complex exhibited invariant overall
patterns under the exoskeleton assistance (R2 = 98% to 99%),
with significant local variations in the angle profiles at the initial
stance and terminal swing phase (notice the horizontal brackets
on graphs 14, 20, and 26) and significant local variation in the
moment profile at the initial swing phase (note the horizontal
brackets on graphs 17, 23, and 29). A slight downscale in the
values of the angle profiles of the knee and hip in the sagittal
plane was observed, and an upscale in the values of the knee
and hip moments was observed in the sagittal plane.

B. Moment-Angle Performance of the Knee Complex
Fig. 8 shows the parameters that explain intersubject momentangle behavior of the knee in the weight acceptance phase of
gait. The first to third rows, respectively, include the quasistiffness (KC and KK ), excursion, and R2 of the weight acceptance phase, the fourth row includes the mechanical work of
the weight acceptance phase and entire gait cycle, and the fifth
row includes the loading efforts of the weight acceptance phase.
The dashed lines illustrate the trends, while the solid lines in
red and the p-values indicate those values that are statistically
different from the baseline measure, according to the statistical
comparison explained in Section-II.
1) Quasi-Stiffness: The intersubject mean and SD of the
knee complex quasi-stiffness in the weight acceptance phase

2398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

are shown in the first row of Fig. 8. The values of the knee
joint quasi-stiffness (KK ) and parallel stiffness (KP ) are also
reported using different colors in the bar graph [see Fig. 8 (top
row)]. A nonsignificant increase in KC was observed as a result
of the exoskeleton mass and as a result of the exoskeleton articulations. KC remained invariant across the assistance conditions
(33%–100%). However, a significant (p < 0.008) decrease in the
knee joint quasi-stiffness (KK ) relative to the 0% condition was
observed for each level of exoskeletal assistance (33%, 66%,
and 100%).
Columns 7 and 8 of Table III report the measured and estimated quasi-stiffnesses across the subjects, respectively. Comparing these two columns give us the average error of estimation
of our models as ∼33%. The first row of Fig. 8 also includes the
ratio of KE /KS , which in combination with the value of KP
and using (7), we can estimate KS . We skipped this analysis
because we calculated it in our previous work and it was outside
the scope of this paper [56].
2) Excursion: The intersubject mean and SD of the knee
joint excursion (θK ), exoskeleton excursion (θE ), and soft-tissue
excursion (θS ) in the weight acceptance phase are shown in the
second row of Fig. 8. A nonsignificant decrease in θK was
observed in MASS condition relative to CTRL condition and
a significant decrease for the knee excursion in 0% condition
relative to MASS condition (p < 0.05). The knee excursion
remained relatively constant across the different assistance conditions. However, θE significantly decreased with exoskeleton
assistance (33%, 66%, and 100%) as compared to the 0% condition (p < 0.008).
3) Linearity of the Knee Behavior: The intersubject mean
and SD of the R2 values for the linear fits to the momentangle graphs of the knee complex and knee joint in the weight
acceptance phase are shown in the third row of Fig. 8. There was
no significant change in R2 values for the knee complex across
all of the conditions implying that the overall behavior of the
knee complex remained linear. However, a significant reduction
(p < 0.008) in R2 values was observed for the knee joint across
the assistance conditions (33%, 66%, and 100%) relative to the
0% condition.
4) Mechanical Work: The intersubject mean and SD of the
knee joint mechanical work in the weight acceptance (WA)
phase and throughout the entire gait cycle (Total) are shown
in the fourth row of Fig. 8. No significant changes in the
mechanical work of the knee joint in the weight acceptance
phase and throughout the gait cycle were observed; except a
significant increase (p < 0.05) in the entire gait cycle work
was observed for the 0% condition as compared to the MASS
condition.
5) Loading Effort: The intersubject mean and SD of the
loading efforts (integral of the moment profile) of the knee joint
and complex as well as the exoskeleton assistance are shown
in the fifth row of Fig. 8. A significant (p < 0.008) decrease
in the loading effort of the knee joint was observed with the
exoskeletal assistance conditions (conditions 4–6) as compared
to the 0% condition (condition 3). The values of MC (equal
to MK + MP ) do not exhibit a significant change across the
conditions.

C. Changes in Knee Moment and Quasi-Stiffness
Fig. 9 (top) shows the graph of the normalized quasi-stiffness
of the knee joint and complex (κK and κC , respectively) against
the normalized parallel stiffness (κP ). Fig. 9 (bottom) shows
the graph of normalized loading effort of the knee joint and
complex (MK and MC , respectively) against the normalized
parallel assistance (MP ).
As seen in Fig. 9, the theoretical models are in close agreement with the trends of the experimental values of κK and κC .
Starting at around κP = ∼0.8, however, the experimental values
start to deviate from the theoretical models. In particular, κK
tends to remain relatively constant and κC tends to increase. The
cutoff value of κP = ∼0.8 was determined by visual inspection
and not from the data, because the values of κP do not span a
wide enough range to apply statistical methods to quantitatively
find the cutoff quasi-stiffness. In contrast, the experimental values of MK and MC appear to follow the theoretical models
throughout the range of experimental values of MP .
The theoretical models explained by (3) and (4) are also plotted on each graph (dashed lines) of Fig. 9. Linear polynomials
were regressed to the quasi-stiffness and loading effort data with
the 95% confidence intervals, as shown in Fig. 9. According to
these fits, there is a slight but significant difference between the
model [described by (3) and (4)] and the experimental values of
the quasi-stiffness and loading effort, with (4) matching more
closely the experimental loading effort data. Fig. 9 only includes
the gait cycle data for the exoskeletal assistance conditions (0%
to 100%).
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we experimentally studied the motor response
and biomechanical changes in lower extremity joints to external
stiffness applied in parallel with the knee joint. The external
stiffness was applied only during the weight acceptance phase
of gait, in which the knee behaves close to a linear torsional
spring. The experimental results revealed that the lower extremity joints undergo substantial motor changes in response to
parallel stiffness, while the kinematic and kinetic patterns remain invariant. The exoskeleton mass did not impose notable
disturbance on the moment and angle patterns but resulted in
an overall higher range of joint moments. The exoskeleton articulation was found to impose negligible kinematic and kinetic
constraints on the overall angle and moment patterns implying
that a simple uniaxial hinge joint can be a viable design choice
for knee exoskeletons. The exoskeleton mass, articulation, and
stiffness were mostly found to locally affect the knee joint moment and angle profiles around the initial and terminal stance as
well as the terminal swing phase.
A detailed analysis of the moment angle of the knee joint in
the weight acceptance phase revealed that the knee joint quasistiffness changes in response to an externally applied stiffness
such that the overall quasi-stiffness of the complex of the knee
joint and exoskeleton remains invariant; the same behavior was
observed for the knee joint and knee complex moments. However, the exoskeleton mass and articulation does not affect the
knee joint quasi-stiffness and loading effort. Moreover, the exoskeleton assistance affected the linearity of the moment-angle

SHAMAEI et al.: BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF STIFFNESS IN PARALLEL WITH THE KNEE JOINT DURING WALKING

2399

TABLE III
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA OF THE PARTICIPANTS AS WELL AS THE STIFFNESS OF THE EXOSKELETON SPRINGS AND TIMING OF DISENGAGEMENT

No.

Gender

Age

Height
(m)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

F
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
Mean
SD

24
24
26
23
29
18
22
21
22
23.2
3.1

1.70
1.69
1.83
1.68
1.77
1.80
1.76
1.89
1.73
1.76
0.1

Mass
(kg)

Preferred
Gait
Speed
(m/s)

79.9
78.5
68.0
71.0
66.7
68.0
67.0
103.8
86.0
76.5
12.3

1.43
1.39
1.21
1.12
1.21
1.43
1.03
1.34
1.30
1.27
0.14

Measured
Quasi-Stiffness
(Nm/rad)

Estimated
Quasi-Stiffness
(Nm/rad)

33%
Exoskeleton
Stiffness
(Nm/rad)

Disengagement
Time
(%Stride)

66%
Exoskeleton
Stiffness
(Nm/rad)

Disengagement
Time
(%Stride)

100%
Exoskeleton
Stiffness
(Nm/rad)

Disengagement
Time
(%Stride)

258
257
117
156
149
143
110
318
321
203
85

274
267
247
240
235
243
235
393
299
270
51

92
89
81
81
81
82
81
128
103
91
16

40
41
26
29
36
34
21
35
27
32
6

174
174
160
160
160
166
160
239
203
177
27

35
30
29
29
37
28
21
36
31
30
4

239
239
239
239
239
239
239
328
328
259
39

36
31
29
31
36
36
20
32
30
31
5

behavior of the knee joint as suggested by the significant reduction of the R2 values of the linear fits to the moment-angle
data of the knee joint in the weight acceptance phase decreased
as the exoskeleton assistance increased. On the contrary, the
overall moment-angle behavior of the knee complex remained
linear with R2 values abiding near 1 in all experimental conditions. This finding suggests that humans regulate their lower
limb biomechanics so that they experience an overall linear behavior at the knee joint during the weight acceptance phase,
which could be associated with higher rates of energy recovery
[22], [44]. The exoskeleton stiffness did not have a significant
effect on the mechanical work of the knee joint in the weight
acceptance phase implying that the assistance provided by the
exoskeletal stiffness did not require additional mechanical work.
The analysis of the knee joint quasi-stiffness response to parallel stiffness showed that the knee joint exhibits smaller quasistiffness in the presence of a parallel stiffness such that the
overall quasi-stiffness remains invariant. The knee joint quasistiffness progressively changed in response to increasing parallel stiffness, but saturated when the parallel stiffness reached
approximately ∼80% of natural knee quasi-stiffness. After this
approximate value, the knee joint quasi-stiffness remained relatively constant, and any further increase in the parallel stiffness
caused an increase in the overall knee complex quasi-stiffness.
Furthermore, it was observed that the loading effort of the knee
joint showed a significant reduction in response to parallel assistance suggesting that the knee joint can fully accommodate for
the external assistance. We should point out that the exact value
of the saturation quasi-stiffness was not quantitatively obtained
due to the limited range of parallel stiffnesses tested.
The saturation of the quasi-stiffness behavior could be attributable to the existence of biarticular muscles leading us to
speculate that the exoskeletal assistance can only unload the
monoarticular muscles to avoid any alteration in the behavior of
neighboring joints spanned by the biarticular. Future research
is needed to investigate this hypothesis through analysis of the
EMG signals of monoarticular and biarticular muscles.
The findings from this experimental work can give an insight to the design of exoskeletons/orthoses for lower extremity
joints (specifically the knee joint). Replication of the momentangle behavior of the lower extremity joints by an exoskeletal

device can be a viable strategy to assist and unload this joint.
The compliance of the biological soft tissues of the leg as well
as the interface components of the exoskeleton can neutralize
the assistance of the exoskeletons. This is especially true for
exoskeletons attached to the thighs, due to the large amount of
soft tissue located at those segments. Therefore, the design of
exoskeletons should minimize the effect of the soft tissues with
additional considerations such as larger pads and more carefully
chosen strap locations. Moreover, the control algorithm of the
exoskeletons should not solely rely on the angular movement of
the exoskeleton that could be disturbed by the excursion of the
soft tissues.
The exoskeleton uniaxial joint did not substantially perturb
the gait patterns implying that a uniaxial joint can be a suitable
choice in the design of knee exoskeletons. The kinematic constraints imposed by the exoskeleton joint resulted in a slightly
more flexed knee at the heel strike, which could be a result of
limited range of motion of the exoskeleton joints (as fabrication
imperfection), as it was reported by the participants about the
left exoskeleton. In another study, we found that the exoskeleton mass is the main contributor to the increase in the metabolic
cost of walking [59]. Here, we found that the exoskeleton mass
caused an upscale in the range of joint moments suggesting that
minimization of the exoskeleton mass should be a main goal
in the design of exoskeletons. The knee joint complex behaved
linearly under all six conditions implying that the human body
prefers to experience a linear behavior at the knee complex.
This preferred linear behavior may be related to the energetics of gait, the damping function of the knee, or the preferred
gait speed [44], [60]–[62]. Regardless of the reason, a knee exoskeleton ideally should demonstrate a linear behavior in the
weight acceptance phase of gait as shown here.
This study necessitated several assumptions. The reflective
markers of this study were mounted on the skin of the volunteer; hence, the kinematic profiles of the knee complex and
anatomical joint are assumed to be identical. The exoskeleton
was suspended from the shoulders using a pair of suspension
harnesses to limit the vertical migration of the exoskeleton.
These suspension straps may have caused confounding factors
in the results and affected the kinetic and kinematic behavior of
the joints.

2400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

To carry out the inverse dynamics analysis, several assumptions were made. The knee joint and exoskeleton were considered one single joint. Despite the independence of the inverse
dynamics analysis of the morphology of the joints, this assumption can have nuisance effects on the joint center estimations and
the calculations of the kinetic profiles. The exoskeleton moment
of inertia and center of mass were obtained from a computeraided design model of the exoskeleton and exoskeleton replica,
which ignores the effect of small movements of the exoskeleton
with respect to the limbs and slight differences between the actual device and the computer models. Furthermore, it should be
noted that as the exoskeletal stiffness increased the knee joint
behavior became less linear (lower R2 values, Fig. 8), which
could make the calculations of the knee joint quasi-stiffness
less accurate and the linear models of (3) and (4) less accurate.
The knee joint levels of quasi-stiffness in the 33%, 66%, and
100% conditions were estimated using a previously developed
statistical model, because a priori knowledge of the natural
knee quasi-stiffness of each volunteer was not available [22],
[39]. The estimation models were developed in previous studies
for design of lower extremity orthoses and prostheses [20]–
[22]. Table III lists the knee quasi-stiffness of each volunteer
for the CTRL condition as calculated using the moment-angle
data, which shows that the values estimated using the models
are different from the experimental values. This inaccuracy was
addressed by normalizing the quasi-stiffness of each assistance
level (0%, 33%, 66%, and 100%) by the natural knee stiffness
measured during the 0% condition for each volunteer in the
analysis of motor response presented in Fig. 9. One can see that
some data points have normalized parallel stiffness of ∼150%,
which is the result of the error in the initial estimation of the
knee quasi-stiffness.
Another limitation of this study is the method of estimation of
the exoskeleton moment. Currently, we calculate the exoskeleton moment by multiplying the stiffness of the exoskeleton by
the flexion of the exoskeleton using (6), rather than through instrumentation of the device. We chose not to include load cell in
the exoskeleton to minimize the exoskeleton mass, and to minimize the number of wires attached to the subjects during the
experiment. Ideally, we would have incorporated a force measuring device to directly measure the moment of the exoskeleton. In
previous studies, we characterized the moment-angle behavior
of the exoskeletons [56], [63].
To study the changes in the knee joint moment, we examined
the correlation between the loading effort, which is the summation of the knee joint moments and knee complex moments during the weight acceptance phase and parallel assistance, which
is the summation of the exoskeleton moments during the weight
acceptance phase. Alternatively, we could have investigated the
maximum moment of the knee joint and complex in the weight
acceptance phase. However, for some of the trials, we observed
that the exoskeleton springs disengaged before the end of the
weight acceptance phase (as detailed in Table III) depending
on the gait patterns and timing of the toe and heel contact with
the ground. Therefore, using the maximum moment of the knee
joint and complex would not have given a complete picture of
the effect of the exoskeleton assistance on the knee joint loading
effort throughout the weight acceptance phase.

As future steps for this research, we intend to investigate the
EMG activities of the muscles adjacent to the knee joint and
analyze the performance of both monoarticular and biarticular
muscles in interaction with the exoskeleton. We also intend to
analyze the behavior of the adjacent joints (i.e., ankle and hip)
under the effect of assistance to the knee joint to examine the
locality of the external stiffness effects. Finally, we intend to
investigate the effect of the exoskeleton on the metabolic cost
of locomotion [59].
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we found that a spring in parallel with the knee
joint can help to unload the knee joint during the stance phase.
We also found that the knee joint can accommodate a parallel
spring with a wide range of stiffness up to ∼80% of the natural
knee quasi-stiffness, after which the parallel spring still provides
assistance but the knee complex stiffness increases above the
normal rate. This finding also supports the assumption that the
knee joint can be theoretically modeled by a linear torsional
spring in the weight acceptance phase of gait. We also found that
a uniaxial joint is a viable design choice for a knee exoskeleton.
The exoskeleton mass was found to be the major contributor to
the increase in the joint moments implying that future design
efforts should focus on mass minimization.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Ferris et al., “Neuromechanical adaptation to hopping with an elastic
ankle-foot orthosis,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 163–170, 2006.
[2] G. Sawicki et al., “The effects of powered ankle-foot orthoses on joint
kinematics and muscle activation during walking in individuals with incomplete spinal cord injury,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil., vol. 3, pp 1–17, 2006.
[3] P. Kao et al., “Invariant ankle moment patterns when walking with and
without a robotic ankle exoskeleton,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 203–
209, 2010.
[4] P. Kao et al., “Short-term locomotor adaptation to a robotic ankle exoskeleton does not alter soleus Hoffmann reflex amplitude,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 7, no. 33, pp. 1–8, 2010.
[5] A. Dollar and H. Herr, “Lower extremity exoskeletons and active orthoses: Challenges and state-of-the-art,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 144–158, Feb. 2008.
[6] M. Eilenberg et al., “Control of a powered ankle-foot prosthesis based on
a neuromuscular model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 164–173, Apr. 2010.
[7] S. Jezernik et al., “Automatic gait-pattern adaptation algorithms for rehabilitation with a 4-DOF robotic orthosis,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom.,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 574–582, Jun. 2004.
[8] L. Marchal-Crespo and D. Reinkensmeyer, “Review of control strategies for robotic movement training after neurologic injury,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 6, pp. 1–15, 2009.
[9] D. Ferris et al., “Powered lower limb orthoses for gait rehabilitation,”
Topics Spinal Cord Injury Rehabil., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 34–49, 2005.
[10] D. Ferris and C. Farley, “Interaction of leg stiffness and surface stiffness
during human hopping,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 15–22, 1997.
[11] J. Ortega and C. Farley, “Minimizing center of mass vertical movement
increases metabolic cost in walking,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 99, no. 6,
pp. 2099–2107, 2005.
[12] J. Choi and A. Bastian, “Adaptation reveals independent control networks
for human walking,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1055–1062,
2007.
[13] A. Roy et al., “Measurement of human ankle stiffness using the anklebot,”
in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., 2007, pp. 356–363.
[14] R. Browning et al., “The effects of adding mass to the legs on the energetics
and biomechanics of walking,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 39, no. 3,
pp. 515–525, 2007.

SHAMAEI et al.: BIOMECHANICAL EFFECTS OF STIFFNESS IN PARALLEL WITH THE KNEE JOINT DURING WALKING

[15] T. Royer and P. Martin, “Manipulations of leg mass and moment of inertia:
Effects on energy cost of walking,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise, vol. 37,
no. 4, pp. 649–656, 2005.
[16] A. Birn-Jeffery and M. Daley, “Birds achieve high robustness in uneven
terrain through active control of landing conditions,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 215,
no. 12, pp. 2117–2127, 2012.
[17] H. van Hedel et al., “Obstacle avoidance during human walking: Transfer
of motor skill from one leg to the other,” J. Physiol.-Lond., vol. 543, no. 2,
pp. 709–717, 2002.
[18] H. Geyer et al., “Compliant leg behaviour explains basic dynamics of
walking and running,” in Proc. Roy. Soc. B-Biol. Sci., vol. 273, no. 1603,
pp. 2861–2867, 2006.
[19] M. Gunther and R. Blickhan, “Joint stiffness of the ankle and the knee in
running,” J. Biomech., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1459–1474, 2002.
[20] K. Shamaei et al., “Estimation of quasi-stiffness and propulsive work of
the human ankle in the stance phase of walking,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 3,
p. e59935, 2013.
[21] K. Shamaei et al., “Estimation of quasi-stiffness of the human hip in the
stance phase of walking,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 12, p. e81841, 2013.
[22] K. Shamaei et al., “Estimation of quasi-stiffness of the human knee in the
stance phase of walking,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 3, p. e59993, 2013.
[23] P. Weiss et al., “Position dependence of ankle joint dynamics: I. Passive
mechanics,” J. Biomech., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 727–735, 1986.
[24] R. Kearney et al., “Identification of intrinsic and reflex contributions to
human ankle stiffness dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44,
no. 6, pp. 493–504, Jun. 1997.
[25] G. Smidt, “Biomechanical analysis of knee flexion and extension,” J.
Biomech., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 79–92, 1973.
[26] A. Biewener and G. Gillis, “Dynamics of muscle function during locomotion: Accommodating variable conditions,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 202, no. 23,
pp. 3387–3396, 1999.
[27] J. Dean and A. Kuo, “Energetic costs of producing muscle work and force
in a cyclical human bouncing task,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 110, no. 4,
pp. 873–880, 2011.
[28] W. Farahat and H. Herr, “Optimal workloop energetics of muscle-actuated
systems: An impedance matching view,” Plos Comput. Biol., vol. 6, no. 6,
p. e1000795, 2010.
[29] C. Farley et al., “Mechanism of leg stiffness adjustment for hopping on
surfaces of different stiffnesses,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 1044–
1055, 1998.
[30] A. Kerdok et al., “Energetics and mechanics of human running on surfaces
of different stiffnesses,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 469–478, 2002.
[31] G. Elliott et al., “The biomechanics and energetics of human running using
an elastic knee exoskeleton,” presented at the IEEE Conf. Rehabil. Robot.,
Seattle, WA, USA, 2013.
[32] M. Cherry et al., “Design and fabrication of an elastic knee orthosis:
Preliminary results,” presented at the (ASME Int. Des. Eng. Tech. Conf.
Comput. Inf. Eng. Conf., Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2006.
[33] A. Grabowski and H. Herr, “Leg exoskeleton reduces the metabolic cost
of human hopping,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 670–678, 2009.
[34] D. Farris and G. Sawicki, “Linking the mechanics and energetics of hopping with elastic ankle exoskeletons,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 113, no. 12,
pp. 1862–1872, 2012.
[35] T. Lenzi et al., “Powered hip exoskeletons can reduce the user’s hip
and ankle muscle activations during walking,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 938–948, Nov. 2013.
[36] K. Gregorczyk et al., “Effects of a lower-body exoskeleton device on
metabolic cost and gait biomechanics during load carriage,” Ergonomics,
vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1263–1275, 2010.
[37] G. Colombo et al., “Treadmill training of paraplegic patients using a
robotic orthosis,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 693–700, 2000.
[38] J. Veneman et al., “Design and evaluation of the LOPES exoskeleton robot
for interactive gait rehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 379–386, Sep. 2007.
[39] K. Shamaei et al., “A quasi-passive compliant stance control knee-anklefoot orthosis,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot., Seattle,
WA, USA, 2013.
[40] S. Irby et al., “Gait of stance control orthosis users: The dynamic knee
brace system,” Prosthetics Orthotics Int., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 269–282,
2005.

2401

[41] B. Zacharias and A. Kannenberg, “Clinical benefits of stance control
orthosis systems: An analysis of the scientific literature,” J. Prosthetics
Orthotics, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 2–7, 2012.
[42] A. Blanchette et al., “Walking while resisting a perturbation: Effects on
ankle dorsiflexor activation during swing and potential for rehabilitation,”
Gait Posture, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 358–363, 2011.
[43] C. Walsh et al., “A quasi-passive leg exoskeleton for load-carrying augmentation,” Int. J. Humanoid Robot., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 487–506, 2007.
[44] K. Shamaei and A. Dollar, “On the mechanics of the knee during the
stance phase of the gait,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot.,
Zurich, Switzerland, 2011.
[45] J. Perry, Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function. Thorofare,
NJ, USA: SLACK, 1992.
[46] J. Rose and J. Gamble, Human Walking. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Williams
& Wilkins, 2006.
[47] D. Winter, The Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Gait: Normal,
Elderly and Pathological, 2nd ed. Waterloo, ON, Canada: Univ. Waterloo
Press, 1991.
[48] S. Mochon and T. McMahon, “Ballistic walking—An improved model,”
Math. Biosci., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 241–260, 1980.
[49] R. Davis, and P. DeLuca, “Gait characterization via dynamic joint stiffness,” Gait Posture, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 224–231, 1996.
[50] D. Stefanyshyn and B. Nigg, “Dynamic angular stiffness of the ankle
joint during running and sprinting,” J. Appl. Biomech., vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 292–299, 1998.
[51] P. Crenna and C. Frigo, “Dynamics of the ankle joint analyzed through
moment-angle loops during human walking: gender and age effects,” Human Movement Sci., vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1185–1198, 2011.
[52] C. Frigo et al., “Moment-angle relationship at lower limb joints during
human walking at different velocities,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 177–190, 1996.
[53] S. Lark et al., “Joint torques and dynamic joint stiffness in elderly and
young men during stepping down,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 848–
855, 2003.
[54] K. Shamaei et al., “On the mechanics of the ankle in the stance phase of
the gait,” in Proc. IEEE Ann. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Boston, MA,
USA, 2011, pp. 8135–8140.
[55] I. McClay and K. Manal, “Three-dimensional kinetic analysis of running:
significance of secondary planes of motion,” Med. Sci. Sports Exercise,
vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1629–1637, 1999.
[56] K. Shamaei et al., “Design and evaluation of a quasi-passive knee exoskeleton for investigation of motor adaptation in lower extremity joints,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1809–1821, 2014.
[57] D. Winter, Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement, 3rd
ed. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2005.
[58] Y. Benjamini, and Y. Hochberg, “Controlling the false discovery rate: A
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc.
Ser. B, Methodological, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 289–300, 1995.
[59] K. Shamaei et al., “Preliminary investigation of effects of a quasi-passive
knee exoskeleton on gait energetics,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 3061–3064.
[60] S. Gard and D. Childress, “The influence of stance-phase knee flexion on
the vertical displacement of the trunk during normal walking,” Arch. Phys.
Med. Rehabil., vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 26–32, 1999.
[61] S. Gard and D. Childress, “What determines the vertical displacement of
the body during normal walking?” J. Prosthetics Orthotics, vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 64–67, 2001.
[62] A. Minetti, “Invariant aspects of human locomotion in different gravitational environments,” Acta Astronaut., vol. 49, nos. 3–10, pp. 191–198,
2001.
[63] K. Shamaei et al., “Design and functional evaluation of a quasi-passive
compliant stance control knee-ankle-foot orthosis,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 258–268, May 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

