IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

2095

Electric Field Model of Transcranial Electric
Stimulation in Nonhuman Primates:
Correspondence to Individual Motor Threshold
Won Hee Lee, Member, IEEE, Sarah H. Lisanby, Andrew F. Laine, Fellow, IEEE,
and Angel V. Peterchev∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: To develop a pipeline for realistic head
models of nonhuman primates (NHPs) for simulations of noninvasive brain stimulation, and use these models together with
empirical threshold measurements to demonstrate that the models capture individual anatomical variability. Methods: Based on
structural MRI data, we created models of the electric field
(E-field) induced by right unilateral (RUL) electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in four rhesus macaques. Individual motor threshold
(MT) was measured with transcranial electric stimulation (TES)
administered through the RUL electrodes in the same subjects.
Results: The interindividual anatomical differences resulted
in 57% variation in median E-field strength in the brain
at fixed stimulus current amplitude. Individualization of the
stimulus current by MT reduced the E-field variation in
the target motor area by 27%. There was significant correlation between the measured MT and the ratio of simulated electrode current and E-field strength (r 2 = 0.95, p =
0.026). Exploratory analysis revealed significant correlations of
this ratio with anatomical parameters including of the superior electrode-to-cortex distance, vertex-to-cortex distance, and
brain volume (r 2 > 0.96, p < 0.02). The neural activation
threshold was estimated to be 0.45 ± 0.07 V/cm for 0.2-ms
stimulus pulse width. Conclusion: These results suggest that our
individual-specific NHP E-field models appropriately capture individual anatomical variability relevant to the dosing of TES/ECT.
These findings are exploratory due to the small number of subjects.
Significance: This study can contribute insight in NHP studies of
ECT and other brain stimulation interventions, help link the results to clinical studies, and ultimately lead to more rational brain
stimulation dosing paradigms.
Index Terms—Electric field model, electroconvulsive therapy,
finite element method, magnetic resonance imaging, motor threshold, nonhuman primate, transcranial electric stimulation.

I. INTRODUCTION

D

UE to physiological and behavioral similarities between
humans and nonhuman primates (NHPs), NHP studies

Manuscript received November 8, 2014; revised January 22, 2015 and April
19, 2015; accepted April 20, 2015. Date of publication April 22, 2015; date of
current version August 18, 2015. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant R01MH091083. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ A. V. Peterchev is with the Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Biomedical Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC 27710 USA (e-mail: angel.peterchev@duke.edu).
W. H. Lee is with the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
S. H. Lisanby is with the Duke University.
A. F. Laine is with the Columbia University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2425406

are increasingly deployed to develop mechanistic understanding
and to optimize noninvasive brain stimulation as a research and
therapeutic tool. Studies in NHPs, especially rhesus macaques,
have explored noninvasive brain stimulation techniques such as
electroconvulsive therapy [ECT—a form of transcranial electric
stimulation (TES)] [1]–[5], transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) [6]–[10], and focused ultrasound [11].
To characterize the effect of transcranial electric and magnetic
stimulation on the brain as well as to optimize and individualize dosing paradigms, computational models of the electric field
(E-field) induced in the brain, typically based on structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data, are increasingly used in
human studies [12]–[14]. Such models have not been developed
for NHPs, however. For generating an anatomically-accurate
NHP model, one critical requirement is tissue segmentation of
the head to represent the complex tissue geometries. While there
are a plethora of available segmentation tools to extract different tissue compartments from the human MRI images, they are
developed and fine-tuned for the human brain MRI data and
not for NHPs which have smaller brain sizes and different brain
anatomy.
Addressing this need, in this paper we present a pipeline for
creating finite element (FE) models of rhesus macaques—the
NHP most commonly used in research. Specifically, we develop
realistic volume conductor models of four NHP heads incorporating tissue heterogeneity and tissue conductivity anisotropy.
To demonstrate their utility, we use the head models and the
finite element method (FEM) to compute the spatial distribution
of the E-field strength generated by the right unilateral (RUL)
ECT electrode configuration. Leveraging the individual models,
we investigate the effect of anatomical differences on the E-field
strength in the brain across the four subjects at fixed stimulus
current amplitude to assess whether current individualization
is needed. Our previous work with simplified spherical models
suggested that stimulus current individualization in ECT may
be appropriate to compensate for individual anatomical differences [15], [16]. Reduced and individualized current amplitude
of ECT could potentially reduce its adverse cognitive side effects [16], [17].
Furthermore, to demonstrate the models’ capability to inform
stimulation dose selection, we combine the models of the four
NHPs with in vivo measurements of their motor threshold (MT)
with TES. The MT, defined as the lowest stimulus pulse amplitude required to elicit a muscle twitch, is commonly used in
TMS to individualize the amplitude of stimulus trains [18], [19],

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

since it captures the effect of anatomical variability on the Efield induced in the brain as well as individual variation in neural
excitability [20]. We have proposed that MT determined by administering TES through the ECT electrodes could be used to
individualize the current amplitude in ECT [3]. We test whether
individual differences in TES MT can be predicted by individual anatomical variability as captured by the subject-specific
E-field simulation models. We also explore some macroscopic
anatomical characteristics of the head that drive the individual
differences in the induced E-field strength.
Finally, we use the combination of realistic individual E-field
models and corresponding empirical MT data to estimate the
threshold E-field magnitude needed for neural activation with
TES/ECT. Previous estimates of the neural activation threshold
in ECT studies were mostly based on TMS which has different
pulse shape and E-field focality characteristics [21]. Therefore,
a neural activation threshold determined with TES using ECT
pulse shape and electrode configuration could be more relevant
to ECT studies.
Preliminary results from this study were previously presented
in part in conference proceedings [22].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The steps of the E-field modeling and analysis are diagrammed in Fig. 1 and described below.
A. Structural and Diffusion Tensor MRI Acquisition
All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committees of New York State Psychiatric Institute,
Columbia University, and Duke University. T1-weighted MRI
and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) datasets of four healthy
male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) (age = 12–18 years;
weight = 8.4–10.7 kg) were acquired on a Siemens 3 T Trio
scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using an eight-channel
knee coil. The NHPs were sedated with a combination of ketamine HCl (3 mg/kg body wt. IM) and dexdomitor (0.075 to
0.15 mg/kg body wt. IM) and transported to the MRI unit in
approved transport cages. Prior to MRI scanning, the NHPs
were intubated with a 4 to 5 mm tube for administration of
isoflurane gas anesthesia (0.5% to 3%). The NHPs were oriented in a sphinx position with the head forward and were continuously monitored by an Invivo (Essential) MRI-compatible
patient monitor. Vital signs monitored included heart rate and
blood oxygenation (SpO2). The T1-weighted MRI images were
acquired with a 3-D magnetization prepared rapid gradient
echo (MPRAGE) sequence (TR = 2300 ms; TE = 4.4 ms;
TI = 1100 ms; 256 coronal slices; 0.7 × 0.7 × 0.7 mm3 voxel;
FA = 8◦ ; two averages). The DWI data were acquired by employing a single-shot spin-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence (TR = 13000 ms; TE = 81 ms; 128 × 128 matrix;
1.4 × 1.4 × 1.4 mm3 voxel; interleaved acquisition; pixel bandwidth = 1346 Hz). The diffusion sensitizing gradients with a bvalue of 1000 s/mm2 were applied in 12 noncollinear directions.
Six image volumes with nondiffusion weighting (b = 0 s/mm2 )
were also acquired as reference images. A twice-refocused technique was used to minimize eddy current effects induced by

strong diffusion-weighting gradients [23]. The generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisitions (GRAPPA) parallel
imaging scheme with an acceleration factor of two was applied
to reduce susceptibility artifacts and to improve the SNR [24]. A
partial Fourier algorithm of a factor of 0.75 was used to reduce
the EPI echo train length, which further ameliorated geometric distortion [25]. DWI acquisition was repeated six times and
averaged to increase the SNR.
B. Preprocessing and Tissue Segmentation
We extracted the NHP head regions from background noise
and artifacts using a morphological processing technique including thresholding, opening, and closing of the head binary
masks [26]. The preprocessing of the extracted head MR volume was performed based on the open source software components available within 3-D Slicer 4.0 [27] and in-house image
processing algorithm [26]. The head MRI images were upsampled (0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 mm3 voxel), and were spatially oriented
along manually-defined anatomical landmarks, corresponding
to anterior commissure (AC), posterior commissure (PC), and
fiducials for interhemispheral midline, so that AC–PC line was
perpendicular to the coronal plane, and the midline plane was
aligned with the sagittal plane. The AC–PC alignment process
provides a common orientation for each brain while maintaining the original size of the brain intact. The MRI image intensities were corrected for bias field inhomogeneities that otherwise would reduce the accuracy of tissue segmentation [28].
We then applied content-preserving anisotropic diffusion filtering to remove the image noise while preserving content details
and enhancing tissue boundaries [29]–[31]. Finally, nonbrain
regions were removed using the skull-stripping algorithm BET
tool in FSL 4.1 (FMRIB Analysis Group, University of Oxford,
U.K.) [32]. This initial segmentation was further corrected for
accurate brain volume extraction using manual editing tools in
ITK-SNAP software [33].
We implemented an automatic algorithm that uses the unified
segmentation routines [34] implemented in SPM8 (Wellcome
Department of Cognitive Neurology, Institute of Neurology,
University College London, U.K.) to produce probability tissue maps that define the probability of occurrences of a given
tissue for each voxel of the image. Among various available
segmentation tools (see discussion in [35]), we selected SPM8
since its unified segmentation approach is fully automatic [34].
Furthermore, it was successfully tested with the macaque tissue
priors [36] and performed better than other available tools for
the NHP brain segmentation [37].
The deskulled NHP MRI images were segmented into tissue probability images in native space corresponding to gray
matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) based on
the 112RM-SL macaque tissue priors [36]. In this process, the
unified segmentation approach uses an objective cost function
integrating the prior tissue probabilities, a mixture of Gaussians,
and a registration term [34]. Instead of the default settings in the
“Segment” tool in SPM8, our algorithm utilized user-defined parameter settings: 1) human tissue priors (ICBM452 T1-weighted
average) were replaced by the 112RM-SL macaque tissue priors

LEE et al.: ELECTRIC FIELD MODEL OF TRANSCRANIAL ELECTRIC STIMULATION IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES:

2097

Fig. 1. Overview of the workflow for generating a realistic FE model of TES in NHPs for E-field computation and combining it with in vivo MT data to estimate
neural activation threshold. T1-weighted MRI and diffusion tensor MRI data sets of the NHP subjects are acquired. The T1-weighted MRI data are preprocessed
using 3-D slicer and in-house image processing pipelines. The T1-weighted MRI images are segmented into 14 tissues using FSL, SPM and ITK-SNAP: Example
segmentation of the rhesus macaque head shows 3-D surface renderings of skin (brown), gray matter (dark gray), and white matter (light gray), and 2-D masks
of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF, blue), gray matter (red), and white matter (green). The color-coded fractional anisotropy (FA) map and diffusion tensor ellipsoids
(enlarged view of the region framed in red) represent the principal orientations (largest eigenvectors) of the tensors (red: left–right, green: anterior–posterior, and
blue: superior–inferior). Diffusion tensor data are processed and registered to structural MRI data using FSL. White matter anisotropic conductivity tensors are
estimated within MATLAB. RUL TES electrodes are incorporated into the head model. The complete 3-D TES models are discretized into FE meshes, and the
FE models are completed by assigning the tissue electrical conductivities. The E-field distribution is computed using the FE method with ANSYS. MT is titrated
in vivo by the current amplitude of single stimulus pulses. Neural activation threshold is estimated by extracting the simulated E-field strength in the target motor
area at the empirical MT current. The E-field strength induced in the brain by the RUL TES electrode configuration is computed at the empirical MT current.

[36]; 2) affine regularization was changed to “average sized template;” 3) sampling distance was reduced to 2 mm [37]. Manual
segmentation of the nonbrain regions into 11 tissue compartments, representing skin, muscle, skull spongiosa, skull compacta, vertebrae, spinal cord, lens, eyeball, sclera, optic nerve,
and sinus, was carried out using a combination of segmentation
editing tools from the ITK-SNAP software [33] and an in-house
morphological segmentation algorithm [26], [29].
C. TES FE Model Generation
We modeled the RUL electrode placement which is standard
in clinical ECT [38]. The electrodes are round with a diameter
of 2.5 cm (half of the diameter of human electrodes due to
the smaller size of the NHP head). One electrode was centered
1.25 cm to the right of vertex and the second electrode was
placed in the homologous right frontotemporal position (see
Fig. 1). The contact surface between each electrode and the skin
was defined by the outer surface of the NHP head. Subsequently,
we applied an adaptive FE meshing technique to the individual
NHP head models incorporating the stimulation electrodes, see
details [26]. The four individual-specific TES FE models of the

rhesus macaque heads and electrodes were created by means of
the restricted Delaunay tessellation algorithm [39], [40], each
consisting of approximately 1.8 million tetrahedral elements.
D. Tissue Conductivity Assignment
We created volume conductor head models by assigning
anisotropic electrical conductivities to the white matter compartment, and isotropic conductivities to all other tissue regions.
The isotropic electrical conductivities (in S/m) are given in Table I [26], [41]–[46].
The estimation of the anisotropic conductivity tensors in the
white matter started with preprocessing of the raw DWI head
data. The NHP DWI data were processed using FSL’s diffusion
toolbox from the FMRIB Software Library. Artifacts and spatial
distortions due to eddy current effects caused by strong diffusion
gradients used in the EPI sequence and possible head motion
were corrected by performing an affine registration between
diffusion-weighted images and nondiffusion-weighted images.
For each of the four NHP DWI datasets, the diffusion-weighted
volumes were coregistered to the nondiffusion-weighted volume, which was used as the reference volume. A binary brain

2098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
TISSUE ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITIES (S/M)
Tissue
Skin
Muscle
Skull compacta
Skull spongiosa
CSF
Gray matter
White matter (iso.)

F. In Vivo MT Titration

Conductivity

Tissue

Conductivity

0.43
0.32
0.0063
0.04
1.79
0.33
0.14

Lens
Eyeball
Sclera
Spinal cord
Vertebrae
Optic nerve
Sinus

0.32
0.5
0.5
0.15
0.012
0.14
0

mask was extracted from the volume with nondiffusion weighting in diffusion space using FSL’s BET tool. The segmentation errors resulting from the automated segmentation algorithm
were further corrected to ensure that we only reconstructed diffusion tensors inside the brain rather than the surrounding air.
We then computed the diffusion tensors for each voxel of the
preprocessed DWI datasets [47]. The resulting diffusion tensor
volumes were coregistered to the structural T1-weighted MRI
volume using an affine registration with mutual information as
the cost function while the orientation of each diffusion tensor
was preserved [48]. The electrical conductivity tensors σ in the
white matter were computed from the measured diffusion tensors D and the isotropic white matter conductivity σiso from the
literature using the “volume normalized” approach [49]–[54]:
In each voxel, the diffusion tensor is linearly scaled so that the
volume of the resulting conductivity tensor ellipsoid matches
that of an isotropic conductivity tensor sphere with radius σiso
σiso
σ= √
D
3
d1 · d2 · d3

G. Neural Activation Threshold Estimation
(1)

where di are the diffusion tensor eigenvalues. This approach
preserves the orientation (eigenvectors) and anisotropy ratios
(eigenvalue ratios) of the diffusion tensors.
E. Electric Field Computation
Each of the realistic TES FE models along with the electrical conductivity values was imported into the FE analysis
software ANSYS (ANSYS, Inc., Canonsburg, PA). Due to the
low frequency content (< 10 kHz) of the stimulus current of
conventional TES and ECT devices, the quasi-static approximation can be deployed to simplify the E-field simulation by
neglecting wave propagation, capacitive, and inductive effects
[39], [55]. Thus, the E-field solutions were obtained by solving
the Laplace equation with no internal sources [26]
∇ · (σ∇V ) = 0

We determined the MT corresponding to the amplitude of
a single TES pulse required to elicit a motor response in sedated NHPs [3]. The NHP subjects were sedated with ketamine
(5–10 mg/kg i.m.) and xylazine (0.35–0.7 mg/kg i.m.) [1]. The
electrode sites were prepared by cleaning with alcohol to remove scalp oils and then rubbing with an abrasive gel (NuPrep,
Weaver and Co., Aurora, CO) to reduce impedance. Thymapad adhesive electrodes (Somatics, LLC, Lake Bluff, IL) were
cut down to 2.5 cm circles. The MT was titrated by stepping
the amplitude of single stimulus pulses (pulse width = 0.2 ms)
delivered through the RUL ECT electrodes with a DS7AH highvoltage constant-current stimulator (Digitimer, Welwyn Garden
City, Hertfordshire, U.K.). Electromyography was measured
with needle electrodes from the first dorsal interosseous (FDI)
muscle in the left hand, since the RUL electrode configuration
predominantly stimulates the right hemisphere [26]. We determined the MT as the lowest stimulus pulse amplitude needed to
achieve a 50-μV peak-to-peak motor evoked potential (MEP)
for at least five out of ten trials [56].
In each subject, the MT was titrated three times on three
separate days. Each titration session included determination of
two MTs corresponding to the two current polarities applied to
the electrodes, which were then averaged to produce a single
MT value per session. This average bidirectional MT is relevant
to ECT since the ECT stimulus consists of current pulses with
alternating polarity [17].

(2)

where V and σ denote the electric potential and tissue electrical
conductivity tensor, respectively. The linear equation system of
the FEM was solved using the preconditioned conjugate gradient
solver (relative tolerance = 1 × 10−8 ) within ANSYS. The Efield distribution was determined by taking the gradient of the
scalar potential V.

Individual neural activation threshold was estimated from the
median E-field strength in the FDI representation of motor cortex, EFDI , at the stimulus pulse amplitude corresponding to the
individual MT. Since there were three MT samples per subject,
we obtained three neural threshold estimates per subject using
the same individual model (since anatomy does not change) and
the three different MTs (to capture physiological variability).
To sample the simulated E-field in the FDI regions, we created an anatomical template map that includes the FDI areas,
which were manually delineated on the published macaque brain
“F99” atlas [57] based on the rhesus macaque brain stereotaxic atlases [58], [59] and the web-based scalable brain atlas
(http://scalablebrainatlas.incf.org). The primary motor cortical
representation area of the hand at the precentral gyrus “hand
knob” was determined from coronal MRI slices and verified
in the axial plane [6], [60]. For segmentation of multiple NHP
subjects, we developed an automatic algorithm for atlas-based
region of interest segmentation using subroutines of SPM8. Each
individual brain volume was warped to the atlas template in the
least squares sense, thus minimizing the sum of squares difference between the subject and template image. This process
computed a spatial transformation matrix that best registers the
individual brain volume to the template [34]. Subsequently, the
brain volume was aligned to the template map enclosing the
FDI labels, and each voxel was labeled with the FDI structure
label using the transformation matrix. Finally, the individual FDI

LEE et al.: ELECTRIC FIELD MODEL OF TRANSCRANIAL ELECTRIC STIMULATION IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES:

2099

volume labels were created by transforming back into the native
space through the inverse of the deformation field.
H. Correlation Between E-Field Model and MT
If the E-field models appropriately capture the individual
anatomy that impacts MT, then the individual ratio between
the simulated electrode current and induced E-field strength
should be correlated with the measured MT. To evaluate this
hypothesis, we calculated the ratio of the electrode current to
the simulated median FDI E-field strength, Ielectro de /EFDI , for
each subject, and correlated it with the measured MT using the
Pearson’s linear correlation coefficient. The Ielectro de /EFDI ratio is expected to be correlated with the individual MTs since it
characterizes the amount of current that has to be applied so that
the FDI region in motor cortex reaches an approximately fixed
neural activation threshold. The underlying assumption here is
that the E-field threshold for neural activation, estimated by the
median EFDI value at the individually-titrated MT current, is
comparable across subjects and would be expected to have less
interindividual variability compared to the individual MTs. The
extent to which this is the case will be evaluated as described in
Section II-G.
I. Anatomical Correlates of E-Field Strength
To evaluate how macroscopic anatomical parameters affect
the individual E-field models, we examined Pearson’s linear correlation between Ielectro de /EFDI and electrode-to-cortex distance under the two electrode centers, skin-to-cortex distance
at vertex, and brain volume. This analysis is only exploratory
since the sample was small and the various anatomical parameters considered are likely to be correlated with each other;
therefore, we did not apply multiple comparison corrections or
more sophisticated statistical analysis.
1) Tissue Thickness: Since the tissue thickness between the
electrode and cortex is a critical determinant of the amount of
stimulus current reaching the cortex, we examined the relations
between the measured MT and the electrode-to-cortex distance
under the electrode centers as well as the skin-to-cortex distance
at vertex. Calculation of these distances was performed in three
dimensions using the outer skin and cortical surface meshes.
The distance from slice views in two dimensions would result
in overestimation of the skin-to-cortex distance, since a closer
distance could be found out-of-plane [61]. Therefore, for each
node on the tessellated skin surface, we searched for the intersection along the direction of the surface normal at that node
and the cortical surface. The skin-to-cortex thickness was then
determined as the shortest distance between the two surfaces
[62].
2) Brain Region Volumes: The volumes of gray matter, white
matter, and extracerebral CSF excluding lateral ventricles were
computed by multiplying the mean voxel value across the partial
volume image by the total volume of that image [total volume
= number of voxels × voxel size (0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 mm3 )]. The
total brain volume was determined by summation of each tissue
volume fraction, finally divided by 1000 to obtain brain volume
in milliliters (mL).

Fig. 2. Individual head models of the four NHP subjects (MA, CH, DY, and
RZ, top to bottom rows, respectively) with RUL TES/ECT electrode configuration. The various conductivity compartments are labeled including (a) RUL
stimulation electrodes and tissue segmentation masks including (b) skin, (c)
muscle, (d) vertebrae, (e) skull compacta, (f) sclera, (g) gray matter, (h) lens, (i)
eyeball, (j) optic nerve, (k) spinal cord, and (l) white matter.

III. RESULTS
A. Individual Head Models
The four individualized NHP head models (subjects MA,
CH, DY, and RZ) used for the TES/ECT E-field simulation
are displayed in Fig. 2. The segmented tissue regions included
skin, muscle, vertebrae, skull compacta, skull spongiosa, CSF,
sclera, gray matter, lens, eyeball, optic nerve, spinal cord, sinus,
and white matter. The geodesic distance from electrode center
to electrode center varied across subjects due to interindividual
differences in anatomy, and was estimated to be 53.7, 46.7, 57.9,
and 47.3 mm for MA, CH, DY, and RZ, respectively.
B. Interindividual Variation in Electric Field Strength
The interindividual variation in E-field strength due to
anatomical differences between the subjects was investigated
at fixed current amplitude of 800 mA (conventional current amplitude for ECT). Fig. 3 shows descriptive statistics [first, 25th,
50th (median), 75th, and 99th percentiles] of the simulated Efield strength in the whole brain for the four subjects. The 99th
percentile of the simulated E-field strength was used as a robust
measure of peak strength that limits the influence of outliers
resulting from possible computational instabilities [63].
Subject RZ has the highest median E-field strength
(1.59 V/cm) in the whole brain, whereas subject CH has the
lowest E-field (1.01 V/cm), thus resulting in a 57% variation
in median E-field value in the whole brain across the four subjects. The ratio of the median E-field values between the right

2100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Simulated E-field strength (magnitude) in the brain induced by the
TES/ECT RUL electrode configuration at 800-mA current for the four NHP
subjects. The E-field strength (y-axis) is shown on a logarithmic scale to normalize the skewed E-field distribution. Boxes indicate the interquartile range
(25th to 75th percentile) with the median marked by the horizontal line within
the box, and whiskers delimit the first and 99th percentiles of the distribution.

and left hemispheres was 1.72 ± 0.15, which is expected since
the RUL electrode configuration targets preferentially the right
hemisphere. Finally, the coefficient of variation of the median
E-field in the FDI region, EFDI , across all subjects was 22%.
C. Interindividual Variation in MT
Fig. 4(a) shows the RUL TES MTs for each subject averaged
across the three titration sessions. The average MT across the
four NHP subjects is 80.33 mA, with a range of 50–120 mA (2.4fold variation) and coefficient of variation of 37%. A one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed a significant difference
in MT across the subjects (F (3, 8) = 18.65, p = 0.0006). Posthoc Tukey HSD test revealed that at the p < 0.05 significance
level, the MT for subject CH was different from all other subjects
and the MTs for subjects DY and MA differed from each other.
D. Electric Field Distribution at MT
Fig. 5 shows a set of representative views for the spatial Efield magnitude distribution at current strength corresponding
to the individual MT for the four NHP subjects. The results
in Fig. 5 demonstrate that, as expected, the lateralized RUL
electrode configuration predominantly stimulates the superior
regions of the right hemisphere, including the FDI representation in the right motor cortex. Nevertheless, the detailed Efield distribution is complicated due to the heterogeneous and
anisotropic electrical conductivity structure of the head as well
as interindividual variation in the head anatomy.
E. Estimated Neural Activation Threshold
The E-field threshold for neural activation was estimated from
the simulated E-field strength in the FDI representation in motor cortex at the individual MT current (illustrated in Fig. 5).
Fig. 4(b) shows the estimates of the E-field threshold for neural activation for each subject. The average neural activation

Fig. 4. (a) Measured individual amplitude-titrated RUL TES MT for 0.2-ms
pulse width for the four NHP subjects. (∗) The MT for subject CH was different
from all other subjects and the MTs for subjects DY and MA differed from
each other (p < 0.05). (b) Corresponding estimated E-field neural activation
threshold in the motor cortex representation of FDI, computed from the data in
(a) and the individual E-field models. The neural activation threshold estimates
did not differ significantly among subjects. Bars show mean values and error
bars show standard deviation associated with the three MT measurements for
each subject.

threshold across the four NHP subjects is 0.45 V/cm (standard
deviation = 0.07, coefficient of variation = 16%). Subjects CH
and MA yielded the highest and lowest neural activation threshold estimates, 0.52 and 0.35 V/cm, respectively. In contrast
to the differences in MT, we found no significant interindividual difference in the estimated neural activation thresholds
(F (3, 8) = 3.15, p = 0.087).
F. E-Field Model Correspondence With MT
Fig. 6 shows the correlation between the measured MT and
the Ielectro de /EFDI ratio computed from the individual FEM
simulation. The significant correlation (r2 = 0.95, p = 0.026)
suggests that the FEM model could predict the variation in the
empirical MT.
G. E-Field Strength Dependence on Anatomical Parameters
Quantifying one aspect of the head anatomy, Fig. 7(a) shows
individual maps of the distance from the skin surface to the

LEE et al.: ELECTRIC FIELD MODEL OF TRANSCRANIAL ELECTRIC STIMULATION IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES:

2101

Fig. 5. Simulated E-field distribution at current strength corresponding to the measured individual MT for the four NHP subjects (MA, CH, DY, and RZ, top
to bottom rows, respectively). Shown are E-field maps on the cortical surface (CSF–gray matter interface; first column), white matter surface (gray matter–white
matter interface; second column), representative coronal slice (third column), and transaxial slices (fourth to six columns; 1.5-mm interslice distance). The structural
MRI images of the extracerebral brain tissues are shown in gray around the slices as a reference for the anatomical results in Fig. 7. Region-of-interest outlines in
white show the FDI representation in motor cortex. Individual average MT is shown on the left below each row. R: right.

ical measures. The correlations between Ielectro de /EFDI and
the superior electrode-to-cortex distance, vertex-to-cortex distance, and brain volume are significant (r2 > 0.96, p < 0.02).
On the other hand, there was no significant correlation between
Ielectro de /EFDI and the electrode-to-cortex distance for the right
frontotemporal electrode (r2 = 0.37, p = 0.39), which is 2–
4 times further from the cortex than the superior electrode.

IV. DISCUSSION
A. FE Modeling of NHP for TES/ECT

Fig. 6. Correlation between the average measured MT and the
Ie le c tro d e /E F D I ratio computed from the individual FEM simulations of RUL
TES/ECT. Pearson’s correlation r 2 and p values are given in the correlation
plot.

cortex surface in the four NHP subjects. Subjects RZ and DY
had the lowest (16.4 ± 6.9 mm) and highest mean distance
(18.8 ± 8.4 mm), respectively, corresponding to 15% interindividual variation. There are also differences in the skin-to-cortex
distance at various points on the scalp—lateral areas have larger
skin-to-cortex distance compared to the vicinity of the vertex.
Fig. 7(b)–(e) shows an exploratory analysis of the correlations
between the simulated Ielectro de /EFDI ratio and several anatom-

We presented a modeling pipeline for generating anatomically realistic FEM representations of the NHP head incorporating complex tissue geometries and white matter anisotropic
conductivities, and used it to simulated the E-field generated by
RUL TES/ECT. This platform can be also used for modeling
of other forms of brain stimulation such as TMS, transcranial
direct current stimulation, and focused ultrasound.
Our model creation platform consists of a combination of
freely available software tools including 3-D Slicer, FSL, SPM,
and ITK-SNAP, that are continually refined and supported. This
platform is capable of generating the FEM model in a format importable into FEM software packages other than ANSYS, such
as COMSOL, Abaqus, or SCIRun (freeware). Alternative approaches for modeling human brain stimulation paradigms have
used open-source packages such as TetGen [64]–[66], SCIRun

2102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 7. (a) Maps of the distance from the skin surface to the cortex surface plotted over the head surface for the four NHP subjects, measured from the MRI data.
Correlation between the simulated Ie le c tro d e /E F D I ratio and the measured (b), (c) electrode-to-cortex distance under superior or frontotemporal electrodes, (d)
vertex-to-cortex distance, and (e) individual brain volume. Pearson’s correlation r 2 and p values are given in each correlation plot.

[67], and GetFEM++ [68] or commercial software (e.g., ScanIP
[12], [69]).
While the E-field simulations were not validated directly,
the range of E-field magnitudes in Fig. 3 is consistent with
intracerebral E-field recordings in two rhesus macaques that we
reported previously [1], [70]. Specifically, the average median Efield in the brain in the present study is 1.38 V/cm with maximum
values of over 8 V/cm with RUL electrodes at 800-mA stimulus
current. Under the same stimulation conditions, we measured
median E-field of 5.12 V/cm in central portions of the brain
[70]. In the latter publication the two subjects were different,
younger (age = 2–4 years), and lighter (weight = 3.1–5.4 kg)
than the subjects in this study; therefore, the higher E-field in
the brain is expected due to the smaller head size and thinner
scalp of younger subjects.
At present, there are no published validations of highresolution E-field models with direct measurements in the same
subjects, although an ongoing effort in this direction has been
announced [71]. Other approaches to validate the accuracy of the
FEM forward models have been indirect, for example, by comparing to scalp potential [69] or neurophysiological measurements [12], [13]. Indeed, the significant correlation we found
between the individual MT and the modeled Ielectro de /EFDI
ratio can be considered an indirect physiological validation of
the ability of the models to capture the individual anatomy.
B. Interindividual Variation in Electric Field Strength due to
Anatomical Variability
We showed that the E-field strength and spatial distribution
varies due to anatomical differences among the four NHP sub-

jects. The results in Fig. 3 indicating 1.6-fold variation in E-field
strength in the brain are consistent with published modeling
studies in the context of transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) that reported 1.5-to-3-fold variation in peak cortical Efield or current density in normal human subjects [12], [72].
Our results support and extend these findings in the context
of an ECT electrode configuration and NHP subjects. Due to
this interindividual anatomical variation, applying fixed stimulus current amplitude to all ECT patients can result in different
E-field exposure in the brain, yielding potentially variable clinical outcomes in terms of both therapeutic efficacy and adverse
side effects. These observations support individualizing the ECT
current amplitude as a means of compensating for interindividual variability in head anatomy to effect more focal stimulation
with potentially fewer side effects [3], [16], [17]. For example,
in this study, individualization of the stimulus current by the MT
reduced the E-field variation in the target motor area by 27%.
C. E-Field Model Predicts Individual Variability in TES MT
We found that the ratio of the electrode current to the E-field
strength in the FDI cortical area, Ielectro de /EFDI , calculated
from the individualized E-field models is significantly correlated with MT. This correlation suggests that the subject-specific
computational models predict variation in the individual current
required for neural stimulation in ECT and in other forms of
TES. These findings suggest that to compensate for individual
anatomical variability, individual E-field simulation could be
used to choose the TES/ECT current amplitude.
We also found that the Ielectro de /EFDI ratio is significantly
correlated with the individual brain volume as well as the

LEE et al.: ELECTRIC FIELD MODEL OF TRANSCRANIAL ELECTRIC STIMULATION IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES:

skin-to-cortex distance at vertex and under the superior electrode, suggesting that these macroscopic anatomical parameters
explain some of the individual E-field strength variability. On
the other hand, there was no significant correlation between
the Ielectro de /EFDI ratio and the skin-to-cortex distance under
the right frontotemporal electrode. This could potentially be
explained by the significantly larger distances from the lateral
electrode to the underlying cortex as well as the FDI cortical
area, due to the thick lateral muscles in the NHP, which cause
more diffusion of the current injected by the electrode.
Finally, due to the limited sample size and the significant correlation between the modeled MT and some of the macroscopic
anatomical parameters, we could not conduct analysis of which
is a better predictor of the measured MT.
D. Neural Activation Threshold
Based on the individual MTs of the left FDI muscle and the individual realistic E-field models, the neural activation threshold
was estimated to be 0.45 ± 0.07 V/cm for 0.2-ms rectangular
pulses. The 16% variation in the estimated neural activation
threshold across subjects is smaller than the variation in MT
(37%), indicating that the individualized FEM models indeed
account for interindividual differences in head anatomy as discussed in the previous section. For comparison, a study of TES
in anesthetized humans yielded an E-field threshold range of
0.45–1.12 V/cm for 0.05-ms pulse width [73]. In addition, the
E-field threshold from studies using TMS with a figure-eight
coil ranges from 0.3 to 1.3 V/cm [74]–[77]. Previously, we used
these data and information on the neural membrane time constant in motor cortex to estimate the neural activation threshold
for various pulse widths [21], obtaining 0.29 V/cm for 0.2-ms
pulse width. These prior threshold estimates are largely consistent with the estimate from this study, considering that both this
and prior studies have various limitations, which are discussed
below.
E. Limitations
This study has several potential limitations. First, the study
involves a small number of subjects; therefore, the interindividual variability and correlation analyses should be interpreted
with caution.
Second, there are possible source of errors related to the construction of the E-field models which are common to virtually all
modeling studies of this kind. The accuracy of the E-field/current
density fields induced in the head by TES is influenced by tissue
electrical properties [15], [26], [55]. Since accurate in vivo measurement of the tissue conductivities is not feasible at present,
the model accuracy depends on how well the tissue conductivity
values from the literature match the actual conductivities, which
is unknown. Nevertheless, conductivity errors would affect the
absolute E-field values more so that the relative values across
subjects, thus interindividual measures, which are the focus of
this paper, would be less affected. The E-field sensitivity to
variations in tissue layer thickness and conductivity has been
examined in detail in our previous study [15]. The model accuracy is also affected by potential errors in the individual tissue

2103

segmentation and modeled electrode placement [16]. By applying the same processing pipeline, including the same operator
carrying out the manual segmentation adjustments, to the models for all subjects, we aimed to avoid differential errors across
subjects.
Finally, the neural activation threshold estimate is subject to
several assumptions. We assume that neural activation had the
lowest threshold in the FDI representation in motor cortex. However, we cannot exclude that direct neural activation may have
occurred along the corticospinal tract away from the cortical
representation of FDI. Nevertheless, the significant correlation
between the MT and the E-field in the cortical FDI control area,
as shown in Fig. 6, provides some support for a cortical origin
of the MEPs. Furthermore, for robustness we considered the
median E-field value in the FDI motor cortex as representative
of the threshold, but subregions with higher E-field within the
FDI may have been the triggering points. Finally, in estimating
the neural activation threshold we took into account only the
E-field magnitude but not its direction, which may influence
the neural activation threshold [21], [78]. Directionality of the
activation threshold is difficult to predict as it potentially depends on the morphology and orientation relative to the E-field
of various neural populations and neural elements, including
cortical interneurons, pyramidal neurons, and fibers of passage.
Determining these interactions is beyond the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, for future studies addressing directionality effects,
the diffusion tensor data that are incorporated in our modeling
pipeline could be used to estimate characteristics of the neural
fibers.
V. CONCLUSION
We developed high-resolution individual-specific FEM models of NHP heads and used these models to simulate the E-field
in the brain generated by the RUL ECT electrode configuration.
The models provide insight into how individual anatomical differences among the NHPs affect the E-field distribution generated by TES/ECT, and allowed the estimation of the E-field
threshold for neural activation. While the study included only
four subjects, the significant correlation between the measured
and modeled MT suggests that the models appropriately capture interindividual anatomical variability. Furthermore, our exploratory analysis indicated that the interindividual differences
of the E-field strength in the brain are driven by macroscopic parameters of the head anatomy. This study can contribute insight
in NHP studies of ECT and other brain stimulation interventions, help link the results to clinical studies, and ultimately
lead to more rational brain stimulation dosing paradigms such
as individualization of the ECT current amplitude.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank C. Sikes-Keilp, M. Aly, B.
Chan, N. Reyes, M. A. Rosa, and N. Youssef for assisting in the
NHP procedures and data entry. W. H. Lee is inventor on invention disclosure to Duke University on the models presented in
this paper. In the past two years, S. H. Lisanby has served as
Principal Investigator on industry-sponsored research grants to

2104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Duke (ANS/St. Jude Medical, NeoSync, Brainsway, Nexstim);
equipment loans to Duke (Magstim, MagVenture); is coinventor
on a patent and patent applications on TMS technology; and has
no consultancies, speakers bureau memberships, board affiliations, or equity holdings in related device industries. A. F. Laine
reports no relevant financial disclosures. A. V. Peterchev is inventor on patents, patent applications, and invention disclosures
on TMS and ECT technology assigned to Columbia University
and Duke University, from which he has received royalties. He
has received research support from Rogue Research, Tal Medical, and MagVenture.
REFERENCES
[1] S. H. Lisanby et al., “Neurophysiological characterization of magnetic
seizure therapy (MST) in non-human primates,” Suppl. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 56, pp. 81–99, 2003.
[2] T. D. Moscrip et al., “A primate model of anterograde and retrograde
amnesia produced by convulsive treatment,” J. ECT, vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 26–36, 2004.
[3] A. V. Peterchev et al., “Individualized low amplitude seizure therapy:
Minimizing current for electroconvulsive therapy and magnetic seizure
therapy,” Neuropsychopharmacology, to be published.
[4] A. V. Peterchev et al., “Optimal frequency for seizure induction,” J. ECT,
vol. 26, pp. 154–154, 2010.
[5] T. Spellman et al., “Focal electrically administered seizure therapy: A
novel form of ECT illustrates the roles of current directionality, polarity,
and electrode configuration in seizure induction,” Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 2002–2010, 2009.
[6] F. Amaya et al., “Transcranial magnetic stimulation and PAS-induced
cortical neuroplasticity in the awake rhesus monkey,” Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 121, no. 12, pp. 2143–2151, 2010.
[7] F. S. Salinas et al., “Functional neuroimaging of the baboon during concurrent image-guided transcranial magnetic stimulation,” Neuroimage,
vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1393–1401, 2011.
[8] A. Gerits et al., “Transcranial magnetic stimulation of macaque frontal
eye fields decreases saccadic reaction time,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 212,
no. 1, pp. 143–152, 2011.
[9] A. Valero-Cabre et al., “Frontal non-invasive neurostimulation modulates
antisaccade preparation in non-human primates,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 6,
art. no. e38674, 2012.
[10] J. K. Mueller et al., “Simultaneous transcranial magnetic stimulation and
single-neuron recording in alert non-human primates,” Nat. Neurosci.,
vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1130–1136, 2014.
[11] T. Deffieux et al., “Low-intensity focused ultrasound modulates monkey
visuomotor behavior,” Current Biol., vol. 23, no. 23, pp. 2430–2433, 2013.
[12] D. Edwards et al., “Physiological and modeling evidence for focal transcranial electrical brain stimulation in humans: A basis for high-definition
tDCS,” Neuroimage, vol. 74, pp. 266–275, 2013.
[13] A. Opitz et al., “Physiological observations validate finite element models
for estimating subject-specific electric field distributions induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human motor cortex,” Neuroimage,
vol. 81C, pp. 253–264, 2013.
[14] C. K. Loo et al., “Revisiting frontoparietal montage in electroconvulsive
therapy: Clinical observations and computer modeling: A future treatment option for unilateral electroconvulsive therapy,” J. ECT, vol. 31,
pp. e.7–e.13, 2014.
[15] Z. D. Deng et al., “Effect of anatomical variability on electric field characteristics of electroconvulsive therapy and magnetic seizure therapy: A
parametric modeling study,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 22–31, 2015.
[16] Z. D. Deng et al., “Controlling stimulation strength and focality in electroconvulsive therapy via current amplitude and electrode size and spacing: Comparison with magnetic seizure therapy,” J. ECT, vol. 29, no. 4,
pp. 325–335, 2013.
[17] A. V. Peterchev et al., “Electroconvulsive therapy stimulus parameters:
Rethinking dosage,” J. ECT, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 159–174, 2010.
[18] S. Rossi et al., “Safety, ethical considerations, and application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in clinical practice and research,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120, no. 12,
pp. 2008–2039, 2009.

[19] J. C. Rothwell et al., “Magnetic stimulation: Motor evoked potentials. The
international federation of clinical neurophysiology,” Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. Suppl., vol. 52, pp. 97–103, 1999.
[20] P. Julkunen et al., “Within-subject effect of coil-to-cortex distance on
cortical electric field threshold and motor evoked potentials in transcranial
magnetic stimulation,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 206, no. 2, pp. 158–164,
2012.
[21] Z. D. Deng et al., “Electric field strength and focality in electroconvulsive
therapy and magnetic seizure therapy: A finite element simulation study,”
J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 1, art. no. 016007, 2011.
[22] W. H. Lee et al., “Anatomical variability predicts individual differences
in transcranial electric stimulation motor threshold,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 815–818.
[23] T. G. Reese et al., “Reduction of eddy-current-induced distortion in diffusion MRI using a twice-refocused spin echo,” Magn. Reson. Med.,
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 177–182, 2003.
[24] T. Jaermann et al., “Influence of SENSE on image properties in highresolution single-shot echo-planar DTI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 55,
no. 2, pp. 335–342, 2006.
[25] X. Liu et al., “Optimization of in vivo high-resolution DTI of non-human
primates on a 3 T human scanner,” Methods, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 205–213,
2010.
[26] W. H. Lee et al., “Regional electric field induced by electroconvulsive
therapy in a realistic finite element head model: Influence of white matter
anisotropic conductivity,” Neuroimage, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 2110–2123,
2012.
[27] A. Fedorov et al., “3D slicer as an image computing platform for the
quantitative imaging network,” Magn. Reson. Imaging, vol. 30, no. 9,
pp. 1323–1341, 2012.
[28] N. J. Tustison et al., “N4ITK: Improved N3 bias correction,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1310–1320, 2010.
[29] W. H. Lee et al., “Methods and evaluations of MRI content-adaptive finite
element mesh generation for bioelectromagnetic problems,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 51, no. 23, pp. 6173–6186, 2006.
[30] J. Weickert, “A review of nonlinear diffusion filtering,” Scale-Space Theory Comput. Vis., vol. 1252, pp. 3–28, 1997.
[31] M. J. Black et al., “Robust anisotropic diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 421–432, 1998.
[32] S. M. Smith et al., “Advances in functional and structural MR
image analysis and implementation as FSL,” Neuroimage, vol. 23,
pp. S208–S219, 2004.
[33] P. A. Yushkevich et al., “User-guided 3D active contour segmentation of
anatomical structures: Significantly improved efficiency and reliability,”
Neuroimage, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1116–1128, 2006.
[34] J. Ashburner and K. J. Friston, “Unified segmentation,” Neuroimage,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 839–851, 2005.
[35] Y. Huang et al., “Automated MRI segmentation for individualized modeling of current flow in the human head,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, no. 6,
art. no. 066004, 2013.
[36] D. G. McLaren et al., “A population-average MRI-based atlas collection
of the rhesus macaque,” Neuroimage, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 52–59, 2009.
[37] D. G. McLaren et al., “Rhesus macaque brain morphometry: A methodological comparison of voxel-wise approaches,” Methods, vol. 50, no. 3,
pp. 157–165, 2010.
[38] American Psychiatric Association, The Practice of Electroconvulsive
Therapy: Recommendations for Treatment and Privileging: A Task Force
Report of the American Psychiatric Association. Washington, DC, USA:
Amer.ican Psychiatric Pub, 2001.
[39] C. A. Bossetti et al., “Analysis of the quasi-static approximation for
calculating potentials generated by neural stimulation,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 44–53, 2008.
[40] J. P. Pons et al., “High-quality consistent meshing of multi-label datasets,”
Inf. Process. Med. Imaging, vol. 20, pp. 198–210, 2007.
[41] K. A. Awada et al., “Effect of conductivity uncertainties and modeling errors on EEG source localization using a 2-D model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 1135–1145, 1998.
[42] C. H. Wolters et al., “Influence of tissue conductivity anisotropy on
EEG/MEG field and return current computation in a realistic head model:
A simulation and visualization study using high-resolution finite element
modeling,” Neuroimage, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 813–826, 2006.
[43] R. J. Sadleir et al., “Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) in a
realistic head model,” Neuroimage, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1310–1318, 2010.
[44] C. Gabriel et al., “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2231–2249, 1996.

LEE et al.: ELECTRIC FIELD MODEL OF TRANSCRANIAL ELECTRIC STIMULATION IN NONHUMAN PRIMATES:

[45] R. N. Holdefer et al., “Predicted current densities in the brain during
transcranial electrical stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 117, no. 6,
pp. 1388–1397, 2006.
[46] S. B. Baumann et al., “The electrical conductivity of human cerebrospinal
fluid at body temperature,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 44, no. 3,
pp. 220–223, 1997.
[47] P. J. Basser et al., “Estimation of the effective self-diffusion tensor from the
NMR spin-echo,” J. Magn. Reson. Series B, vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 247–254,
1994.
[48] D. C. Alexander et al., “Spatial transformations of diffusion tensor magnetic resonance images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 20, no. 11,
pp. 1131–1139, 2001.
[49] D. Gullmar et al., “Influence of anisotropic electrical conductivity in
white matter tissue on the EEG/MEG forward and inverse solution.
A high-resolution whole head simulation study,” Neuroimage, vol. 51,
no. 1, pp. 145–163, 2010.
[50] H. Hallez et al., “Dipole estimation errors due to not incorporating
anisotropic conductivities in realistic head models for EEG source analysis,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, no. 20, pp. 6079–6093, 2009.
[51] H. Hallez et al., “Dipole estimation errors due to differences in modeling anisotropic conductivities in realistic head models for EEG source
analysis,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1877–1894, 2008.
[52] H. S. Suh et al., “Influence of anisotropic conductivity in the skull and
white matter on transcranial direct current stimulation via an anatomically
realistic finite element head model,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 21,
pp. 6961–6980, 2012.
[53] W. H. Lee and T. S. Kim, “Methods for high-resolution anisotropic finite element modeling of the human head: Automatic MR white matter
anisotropy-adaptive mesh generation,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 34, no. 1,
pp. 85–98, 2012.
[54] W. H. Lee et al., “Influence of white matter anisotropic conductivity on
EEG source localization: Comparison to fMRI in human primary visual
cortex,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 120, no. 12, pp. 2071–2081, 2009.
[55] G. Ruffini et al., “Transcranial current brain stimulation (tCS): Models
and technologies,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 333–345, 2013.
[56] P. M. Rossini et al., “Non-invasive electrical and magnetic stimulation of
the brain, spinal cord and roots: Basic principles and procedures for routine
clinical application. Report of an IFCN committee,” Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 79–92, 1994.
[57] D. C. Van Essen, “Surface-based atlases of cerebellar cortex in the human,
macaque, and mouse,” Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 978, pp. 468–479, 2002.
[58] G. Paxinos et al., The Rhesus Monkey Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates.
San Diego, CA, USA: Academic, 2000.
[59] K. S. Saleem and N. K. Logothetis, A Combined MRI and Histology Atlas
of the Rhesus Monkey Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier, 2007.
[60] T. A. Yousry et al., “Localization of the motor hand area to a knob
on the precentral gyrus. A new landmark,” Brain, vol. 120, no. (Pt 1),
pp. 141–157, 1997.
[61] M. S. Beauchamp et al., “The developmental trajectory of brain-scalp
distance from birth through childhood: Implications for functional neuroimaging,” PLoS One, vol. 6, no. 9, art. no. e24981, 2011.
[62] B. Fischl and A. M. Dale, “Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral
cortex from magnetic resonance images,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
vol. 97, no. 20, pp. 11050–11055, 2000.
[63] M. Parazzini et al., “Transcranial direct current stimulation: Estimation
of the electric field and of the current density in an anatomical human
head model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1773–1780,
2011.

2105

[64] S. M. Rampersad et al., “Simulating transcranial direct current stimulation
with a detailed anisotropic human head model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 441–452, 2014.
[65] H. Si, “Adaptive tetrahedral mesh generation by constrained Delaunay
refinement,” Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng., vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 856–880,
2008.
[66] C. H. Im et al., “Evaluation of local electric fields generated by transcranial direct current stimulation with an extracephalic reference electrode
based on realistic 3D body modeling,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 8,
pp. 2137–2150, 2012.
[67] M. Dannhauer et al., “A pipeline for the simulation of transcranial direct current stimulation for realistic human head models using
SCIRun/BioMesh3D,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 5486–5489.
[68] M. Windhoff et al., “Electric field calculations in brain stimulation based
on finite elements: An optimized processing pipeline for the generation
and usage of accurate individual head models,” Human Brain Mapping,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 923–935, 2013.
[69] A. Datta et al., “Validation of finite element model of transcranial electrical stimulation using scalp potentials: Implications for clinical dose,” J.
Neural Eng., vol. 10, no. 3, art. no. 036018, 2013.
[70] A. V. Peterchev et al., “Measurement of intracerebral electric field induced
by electroconvulsive therapy,” J. ECT, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 146–147, 2012.
[71] B. Lafon et al., “Direct experimental validation of computational current flow models with intra-cranial recordings in human and non-human primates,” in Proc. NYC Neuromodulation Conf. (2015). [Online]. Available: neuromodec.com/events/nycneuromodulation-conference-2015/abstracts/
[72] A. Datta, D. Truong, P. Minhas, L. C. Parra, and M. Bikson, “Interindividual variation during transcranial direct current stimulation and normalization of dose using MRI-derived computational models,” Frontiers
Psychiatry, vol. 3, no. 91, 2012, doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00091.
[73] B. Calancie et al., ““Threshold-level” multipulse transcranial electrical
stimulation of motor cortex for intraoperative monitoring of spinal motor
tracts: Description of method and comparison to somatosensory evoked
potential monitoring,” J. Neurosurgery, vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 457–470,
1998.
[74] S. Komssi et al., “Excitation threshold of the motor cortex estimated with
transcranial magnetic stimulation electroencephalography,” Neuroreport,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 13–16, 2007.
[75] A. Thielscher and T. Kammer, “Linking physics with physiology in TMS:
A sphere field model to determine the cortical stimulation site in TMS,”
Neuroimage, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1117–1130, 2002.
[76] C. M. Epstein et al., “Localizing the site of magnetic brain stimulation in
humans,” Neurology, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 666–670, 1990.
[77] D. Rudiak and E. Marg, “Finding the depth of magnetic brain stimulation:
A re-evaluation,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 93, no. 5,
pp. 358–371, 1994.
[78] T. Radman et al., “Role of cortical cell type and morphology in subthreshold and suprathreshold uniform electric field stimulation in vitro,” Brain
Stimulation, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 215–228, 2009.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

