958

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Enabling Wireless Powering and Telemetry for
Peripheral Nerve Implants
Rangarajan Jegadeesan, Member, IEEE, Sudip Nag, Member, IEEE, Kush Agarwal, Student Member, IEEE,
Nitish V. Thakor, Fellow, IEEE, and Yong-Xin Guo, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Wireless power delivery and telemetry have enabled
completely implantable neural devices. Current day implants are
controlled, monitored, and powered wirelessly, eliminating the
need for batteries and prolonging the lifetime. A brief overview
of wireless platforms for such implantable devices is presented in
this paper alongside an in-depth discussion of wireless platform
for peripheral nerve implants covering design requirements, link
design, and safety. Initial acute studies on the performance of the
wireless power and data links in rodents are also presented.
Index Terms—Inductive coupling, neural implants, peripheral
nerve implants, telemetry, wireless power delivery.

I. INTRODUCTION
EURAL implants [1]–[6] have become ubiquitous in recent times with some of them [3], [7]–[9] receiving FDA
approvals for commercial use. Some of these neural implants are
powered using nonrechargeable batteries, some using rechargeable batteries, and others sustainably powered by a wireless
power transfer scheme. Implants powered using batteries have
limited lifetime, and a surgical intervention is required to replace them. As batteries have finite recharge cycles, wirelessly
charging the batteries only provides an incremental lifetime.
Battery-free operation using sustainable wireless powering can
extend the lifetime of implants as long as needed. For example,
this approach is being adopted in current day retinal implants [9].
In this study, we first present the different approaches proposed to wirelessly power neural implants and compare their
performance metrics against the implant requirements. We then
discuss the implantable peripheral nerve prosthesis and its
wireless design requirements. We propose a wireless platform

N

Manuscript received November 3, 2014; revised February 23, 2015; accepted
April 15, 2015. Date of publication April 21, 2015; date of current version
May 7, 2015. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation,
Singapore, under the Grant Award NRF-CRP10-2012-01.
R. Jegadeesan and S. Nag are with the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology Singapore, 117456 (e-mail: rangarazan@gmail.com; sudipnag1@
gmail.com).
K. Agarwal is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576, and also with Singapore
Institute for Neurotechnology, Singapore 117456 (e-mail: agarwal.kush@
nus.edu.sg).
N. V. Thakor is with the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, Singapore
117456, and also with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Department of Bioengineering, and the Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576 (e-mail: sinapsedirector@gmail.com).
Y.-X. Guo is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576, and also with the National
University of Singapore Suzhou Research Institute, Suzhou 215123, China
(e-mail: eleguoyx@nus.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2424985

Fig. 1. Powering an implant device using the near-field inductive power transfer scheme. Vector B represents the magnetic field created by the transmitting
coil that induces an EMF (V + , V − ) in the receiving coil.

(power delivery and data telemetry) for the peripheral nerve
prosthesis (recording and stimulation implants) starting from
the architecture and design to implementation and experimental
results in rodents. The entire wireless platform was designed
with an intent to meet the safety standards. To the authors’
knowledge, no work exists that has showcased a wireless platform with large power handling capability (>100 mW) and
functional telemetry, while still adhering to safety standards
(shown using both experiments and simulation).
II. BACKGROUND
Near-field inductive coupling [10]–[12], midfield resonant
coupling [13], [14], near-field capacitive coupling [15], [16],
far-field electromagnetic coupling [17]–[19], and acoustics [20],
[21] are the various methods proposed to power implantable devices. Each method has its own merits and demerits as discussed
in the following sections.
A. Near-Field Inductive-Coupling Scheme
The near-field inductive-coupling scheme works on the principle of electromagnetic induction. A transmitting coil placed
close to the skin produces time-varying magnetic field, which induces an electromotive force (EMF) in the receiving coil placed
inside the body as shown in Fig. 1.

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JEGADEESAN et al.: ENABLING WIRELESS POWERING AND TELEMETRY FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS

The induced EMF is tapped by the implanted device for its
operation. There are numerous ways in which the induced EMF
can be tapped by the implant device, the most efficient way being
resonant coupling [22], [23]. Resonance improves power transfer efficiency, and in most cases, maximizes efficiency. Series
and parallel resonant topologies equally benefit the power transfer link; however, the link characteristics vary with the type of
resonance it uses. Various resonant network topologies that can
be used with inductive coupling are analyzed, and the optimal
design methodology to choose the link parameters (topology selection, optimal frequency of operation and load optimization)
is presented in [12]. Inductive power link optimization based
on the geometry [10], [11], [24], source-load decoupling [25],
and multicoil linkage [26] have been proposed for powering
generic implantable devices. With a complete understanding of
the inductive power transfer scheme and its efficient design techniques, the focus of the current day research has shifted toward
overcoming practical problems in implantable applications—
namely coil misalignment, flexibility, and biocompatibility of
the implant coil.
Coil misalignment is common in inductively coupled links
as the implant and external coils are in a moving frame. Coil
alignment using permanent magnets is one of the earliest proposed solutions to overcome this issue and is widely used in
current day implants [7], [8]. The alignment magnets generate
heat during MRI (strengths of 1.5, 2 T), requiring them to be
surgically removed before scanning. The problem has now been
claimed to be addressed using suspended magnets, which align
with the incident field allowing compatibility with MRI [6].
However, alternative approaches such as feedback coil [27] and
back-telemetry [28], [29] based closed-loop power control have
also been proposed to maintain sufficient power at implant.
Flexibility of the implant coil allows hassle-free placement
inside the body and efficiently uses the space allowed for the
implant. The major shortcoming of the inductive powering link
is that coil flexion detunes the resonance and the received power
at the implant drops significantly. Approaches using flexible
coils with serpentine structures of gold [30], [31] and liquid
metals [32] have been proposed, although they report a marked
drop in power delivered.
The inductive-coupling scheme to transfer power to implants
was the earliest proposed method [33], and many works have
demonstrated system-level implementations of the scheme in
retinal [34], [35], cortical [29], [36], cochlear [7], [8], cardiac
[37], [38], and neural stimulator [3], [39] implants. Of all the
proposed wireless power transfer schemes, only the near-field
inductive power transfer scheme has been shown to be functional in actual implants and almost all of the FDA approved,
wirelessly powered implants use it.
B. Near-Field Capacitive-Coupling Scheme
The near-field capacitive-coupling scheme works on the principle of charge displacement affected by capacitive coupling.
Metal patches, one above the skin and one below the skin are
used to create a capacitor supporting the displacement currents
to transfer power wirelessly. Two such capacitances, one for the

959

Fig. 2. Powering an implant device using the near-field capacitive-coupling
scheme. Vector E denotes the electric field between the capacitor plates formed
by the transmitting and receiving patches.

forward current and the other for the return path are used to
build a capacitive coupled link as shown in Fig. 2. The modeling of the near-field capacitive power transfer scheme and
the optimization for efficient operation is shown in [15] and
[16]. Unlike the inductive power transfer scheme, the capacitive power transfer scheme supports flexible patch realizations,
and the performance does not degrade much with flexion. It was
shown that the capacitive scheme can deliver much larger power
to the implant than the inductive scheme [40], while still adhering to the specific absorption rate (SAR) limits of 2 W/kg [41].
The main drawback of the capacitive power transfer scheme is
its short range of operation. The power transfer efficiency drops
significantly when the separation between the patches is more
than 5 mm [15] and, hence, this technique is recommended only
for subcutaneous applications. So far, no system-level functionality has been reported with a capacitive-coupled power transfer
scheme.
C. Far-Field Electromagnetic-Coupling Scheme
The far-field electromagnetic-coupling scheme works on the
principle of mutual impedance between a transmitting and receiving antenna. An external transmitting antenna radiates electromagnetic waves, which when incident on tuned receiver antenna placed inside the body generates a current across its terminals. The generated current is rectified and used by the implant
device as shown in Fig. 3.
The design of a far-field-based wireless power transfer
scheme for biomedical implants has been presented in [17] and
[19]. System-level design has been presented for cardiovascular
pressure measurement implant in [42]. The far-field method can
support a large range (few tens of millimeter) and can power
deep seated implants using antennas much smaller than the ones
used in near-field implants. However, since the link operates at
gigahertz frequencies, power rectification losses are higher. This

960

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 3. Powering an implant device using a far-field electromagnetic-coupling
scheme.

Fig. 5. Wireless power delivery using an acoustic scheme showing a piezo
electric ultrasound generator producing oscillations and exciting a piezoelectric
implanted receiver.

Fig. 4. Wireless power transfer using the midfield resonant-coupling scheme
showing a transmitting antenna producing focused beams of electromagnetic
fields (H t , H r ) and a miniaturized antenna (dimension a) receiving the power
from both the far-field and near-field components.

coupled with the inherent low power transfer efficiency of the
scheme makes it unattractive.
D. Midfield Resonant-Coupling Scheme
Midfield resonant power transfer scheme uses both near-field
inductive-coupling and far-field electromagnetic coupling to
transmit power from the external transmitter to receiver placed
deep inside the body as shown in Fig. 4.
The design of the midfield resonant-coupling scheme is presented in [14]. The optimal frequency of operation for various
implant locations in the body is derived and reported in [13].
Transmitter design and optimization for the midfield resonantcoupling scheme is presented in [43]. The system-level design
of powering scheme for cardiac implant is presented without experimental results in [44], and a miniaturized pacemaker implant
much smaller than the traditional one was built and powered using this scheme and tested in a rabbit model [14]. Midfield resonant coupling is an emerging scheme proposed for use in deep
seated ultralow power implants. This scheme boasts tiny implant
receivers and functionality up to few tens of millimeter. However, the power handling capability is quite low (less than 5 mW).

Fig. 6. Comparison of performance metrics of wireless power delivery
schemes.

E. Acoustic Scheme
The acoustic power transfer scheme uses ultrasound to vibrate a piezoelectric energy harvester implanted inside the body
as shown in Fig. 5. One design of the acoustic scheme is presented in [21]. A system-level design of the acoustic scheme
for wireless powering of microoxygen generator implant is presented in [20], and it is claimed that the ultrasound-based power
transfer scheme has lower power fluctuations caused by variations in alignment when compared with the near-field power
transfer schemes. However, long-term effects of tissue vibration
caused by this power transfer scheme are yet to be reported.
F. Comparison of Power Delivery Schemes
The power transfer capability and the range of power transfer offered by the aforementioned powering schemes have been
compared against the neural implant requirements as shown below in Fig. 6. It can be seen that the near-field inductive-coupling

JEGADEESAN et al.: ENABLING WIRELESS POWERING AND TELEMETRY FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS

961

scheme can most comprehensively address the requirements of
most of the neural implants. As the power requirements of the
next-generation implants are expected to reduce, and the demand for smaller size and form factor increases, the benefits
of emerging techniques, such as the midfield resonant coupling
and acoustic power transfer can be reaped.
Data telemetry to and from the implant is vital for controlling
and monitoring its functionality. Out of all the proposed power
transfer schemes, only the near-field methods and ultrasound are
capable of coupling data on to the power link. More often than
not, the control signal to the implant has low bandwidth and is
transmitted over the power link using amplitude modulation or
on–off keying. One exception is the retinal implant, where large
bandwidth data corresponding to image acquisition need to be
transmitted. A separate link for data transmission based on inductive coupling is used in this application [45], [46]. Similarly,
small bandwidth telemetry from implants can be transmitted
over the same power link using load modulation techniques as
presented in [47]. However, for large bandwidth telemetry from
implants, separate data link using near-field coupling [48] or traditional radiation-based far-field transceivers [49], [50] are used.
III. PERIPHERAL NERVE PROSTHESES
Peripheral nerve injuries result in dysfunction of the motor
and sensory functions in limbs. Most of the times, surgical
repair techniques proposed for such nerve injuries do not provide
complete functional recovery. The best approach is to directly
convey the nerve signals to the denervated muscles and restore
functionality immediately and not wait for nerve regeneration.
Such an approach needs a neural recording implant that can
record and classify the nerve signals and convey them to the
stimulator implant that provides patterned stimulation to achieve
functional actions like hand grasp etc. The system-level diagram
of the nerve prosthesis is shown below in Fig. 7. In this study, we
present the wireless platform for the recording and stimulator
implants aimed at building peripheral nerve prosthesis.
A. Stimulator Implant
Functional muscle stimulation is achieved by injecting current into corresponding muscles using electrodes in a particular
sequence at a particular strength [51]. The stimulator implant
has controllable multichannel accurate current drive capability
to inject charge to stimulate the target muscles. The external
control unit powers the implanted stimulator and sends control data defining the strength, duration, and type of stimulation
along with the stimulation pattern to the implanted stimulator as
depicted in Fig. 8(a). The stimulator unit acknowledges receipt
of the stimulator control data using backchannel impedance
modulation.
B. Neural Recording
The neural recording implant picks up neural signals from
the nerve using multichannel electrodes, which are then amplified, digitized, and sent wirelessly to an external control unit as
shown in Fig. 8(b). The external control unit wirelessly powers

Fig. 7.

Proposed peripheral nerve prosthesis in hand.

the implant unit and collects nerve signals from the implant,
classifies them, and sends corresponding control signals to the
stimulator unit to create a patterned stimulation.
C. Wireless Power Delivery and Telemetry Requirements
Functional muscle stimulation requires up to 10 mA of current
with electrode impedances varying from 500 Ω to 1 kΩ. Hence,
a peak power of 100 mW needs to be delivered to the stimulator implant for a sustainable operation. The stimulator implant
also needs 4.8 kb/s (16 bytes of data to be sent within a 50 ms
listening window of the stimulator to provide information about
pulse duration, pulse strength, phase and packet frame bytes)
bi-directional data telemetry for receiving the control signals
and providing acknowledgement. The neural recording implant
needs 35 mW of power for amplification, analog to digital conversion and digital logic functionality. A 1.3 Mb/s data link is
required to transfer the neural signals (8 channel, 20 kHz data)
from the implant to the external control unit. The complete requirements for the wireless platform are shown in Table I below.
IV. WIRELESS PLATFORM FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS
A. Wireless Platform for Stimulator Implant
Choosing the right wireless platform for the implant begins
with the power requirements for the implant. With large power
requirements (exceeding 10 mW) for both the stimulation and
recording implants, the only proven method to sustainably transfer power to the implants is the near-field inductive-coupling
scheme and is chosen for these implants. The data requirements

962

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 9. Schematic of the implant section of wireless platform for muscle
stimulator.

Fig. 8. (a) Wireless scheme for the muscle stimulator implant shown using
a cross-sectional view of the forearm. The power delivery and bidirectional
data telemetry is done using the inductors L 1 and L 2 . (b) Wireless scheme for
the neural recording implant shown using a cross-sectional view of the upper
arm. The power is delivered using coils L 1 and L 2 , whereas data telemetry is
performed using coils L D 1 and L D 2 .
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF REQUIREMENTS FOR THE WIRELESS PLATFORM USED IN
PERIPHERAL NERVE PROSTHESES
Fig. 10. Schematic of the external section of wireless platform for muscle
stimulator.
Implant type

Power Requirement

Data to Implant

Data from Implant

Stimulation
Recording

100 mW
35 mW

4.8 kb/s
NA

4.8 kb/s
1.3 Mb/s

are quite different with a stimulator implant needing bidirectional telemetry at low bandwidth (4.8 kb/s) and the recording
unit requiring large bandwidth telemetry (1.3 Mb/s for four
channel neural signal acquisition at 20 KHz) from the implant.
Bidirectional telemetry for the stimulator is easily achieved by
modulating the data on to the power link. However, for the
recording implant, a separate data link is needed to meet the
bandwidth requirements. The wireless platform to power the
peripheral nerve implants and perform telemetry is discussed in
the following sections.

Power to the implanted stimulator is delivered using an inductive power link comprising of a transmitting coil L1 placed
outside the body in the forearm and a receiving coil L2 , implanted just beneath the skin in the forearm as shown in Fig. 8(a).
The parallel resonant topology is chosen to meet the 10-V rectified voltage requirement for the stimulator. The power received
at the implanted coil L2 is utilized by the stimulator implant
at two voltage levels. While the current stimulator circuitry directly taps part of the power from the unregulated voltage (which
needs to be at least 10 V under loading conditions for proper
operation), the digital logic circuitry draws its power from the
3.3 V regulated supply.
Control data are sent from the external stimulator unit to the
implant using an on–off keying technique (see M2 in Fig. 10).

JEGADEESAN et al.: ENABLING WIRELESS POWERING AND TELEMETRY FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS

This keying disturbance is reflected at the implant side as intermittent absence of power and is recovered as control data using
a diode demodulator. The capacitor Co (see Fig. 9) momentarily powers the digital circuitry during power fluctuations caused
by modulation. The received data are decoded by the digital
logic, and the decoded command is used to set the stimulation
parameters. The data are looped back to the transmitter as an
acknowledgement (ACK) using impedance modulation effected
by the detuning capacitor Cm and switch M4 . This impedance
modulation is reflected at the transmitting coil L1 as voltage
fluctuations. Since the transmit power is quite large, the voltage
fluctuations cannot be directly demodulated without using extra
circuitry for high-voltage protection of demodulator. The class
E amplifier is also detuned by the demodulator input increasing power losses. Hence, a small reader coil LD 1 is used to
pick up the modulated data from the transmit coil which is then
demodulated and recovered using a logic detector as acknowledgement. It is worth mentioning that the coupling between the
transmitting coil L1 and the data reader coil LD 1 needs to be
kept to a minimal value (coupling coefficient <0.05) sufficient
for detecting data. A larger coupling would detune the class E
amplifier from its optimal operating point.
The class E amplifier generates the power signal for transmitting coil L1 and is designed to deliver 100 mW at the implant
at a separation of 5 mm. The load network comprising of Cm 1 ,
Cm 2 , Cm 3 , and Lm is chosen for a particular Rload (equivalent load of the implant as reflected to the primary side) and
a power requirement of 100 mW across this load. The timing
requirements for class E operation is met based on the analysis
provided in the classical work [52].
The optimal frequency of operation was found to be 1 MHz
based on the power level and the coil geometry. It is to be noted
that the ACK data can be optionally used to request different
transmit power level from the transmitter during coil misalignments to keep the received power at the implant sufficient. The
transmit power level can be adjusted using the switch M3 (see
Fig. 10), which modifies the class E amplifier gain.
B. Wireless Platform for Recording Implant
The neural recording implant is powered using a similar nearfield inductive power link as used by the stimulator implant. The
power received at the implant coil L2 is rectified and regulated
to 3.3 V, using which the entire recording implant is powered.
The maximum data rate limited by the carrier to signal separation requirement of the decoder is 125 kb/s for a carrier
frequency of 1 MHz. Increasing power carrier frequency to over
10 MHz can provide sufficient data rate to transmit the neural
recording data. However, high rectifier losses and low power
supply rejection ratio (PSRR) of recording amplifiers at high
frequencies will lead to an inefficient power transfer scheme
with a poor noise performance. Hence, a separate link to transfer neural signal data is used by the recording implant. The
neural data from the amplifier is digitized by the ADC, and is
sequentially sent using the high speed data link formed by the
inductances LD 1 and LD 2 . A digital signal synthesizer is used
to generate a 43-MHz square-wave signal at 3.3 VPK−PK and is
fed to the data reader coil LD 1 . The data from the neural implant

963

Fig. 11. Schematic of the implant section of wireless platform for neural
recording.
TABLE II
WIRELESS LINK COMPONENTS AND MEASUREMENT DATA
Transmitter coil

Receiver coil

Geometry

45 mm × 45 mm 0.5-mm trace
width 1-mm pitch 20 turns

Characteristics

8 mm × 8 mm 0.1-mm
trace width 0.2-mm
pitch 15 turns
1.2 μH (5 to 17 MHz)

10.1 μH at 5 MHz 13.75 μH at
13.56 MHz 16.7 μH at 17 MHz
800 Ω at 5 MHz 3.3 kΩ at 13.56 MHz 4.8 kΩ at 17 MHz

Optimal load for
the power link

are load modulated at the implant side (see M4, in Fig. 11). This
load modulation is recovered at the external unit as neural signal
data at Ld1 as shown in Fig. 12. The class E amplifier design
was carried out similar to the stimulator implant, however, with
a low target power of 35 mW.
V. DESIGN AND EXPERIMENTS
An acute study demonstrating the near-field inductivecoupled link was performed in rats to understand the performance variation between air and tissue environments. Inferences from the study are used to design the wireless link for the
peripheral nerve implants.
A. Power Transfer Characteristics in Tissue Environments
An inductive power link with characteristics described in Table II and coils as shown in the Fig. 13 is used to study the effect of tissues on power transfer efficiency at various transmitter
receiver separation and operating frequencies. This study will
enable us to identify the proper frequency of operation, which

964

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 12. Schematic of the external section of wireless platform for neural
recording.
Fig. 14. (a) Three different implant depths used for measuring the power
transfer efficiency between the transmitter and receiver coils in rat. (b) Graph
showing measured power transfer efficiency versus separation at three different
operating frequencies. The transmitter power is 250 mW.

Fig. 13. Planar PCB coils used in the inductive link study, implant coil
(8 mm × 8 mm) on the left and the transmit coil (45 mm × 45 mm) on the
right.

minimizes tissue losses and enables large power handling. The
implant coil is sealed using polyimide tape to prevent any short
due to tissue fluid leakage. One rat was used in this experiment
under institutionally approved animal care and use protocol.
The rat was anesthetized using a standard dose of ketamine xylazine. A small incision was made on the stomach region of the
rat through which the implant side coil was inserted into the rat.
Once the implant coil was positioned into the rat, the external
coil was positioned on top of the skin, and the optimal position
corresponding to the aligned coils was found. The incision was
then sutured to enclose the implant coil with two wires coming

out for power read out. It is to be mentioned here that the skin
thickness in the abdomen region of rat is around 2 mm, which
is very similar to the skin thickness of human arm, and which
varies between 2 and 3 mm. The external coil was powered using
a signal generator. The power at the implant coil was measured
at the read out terminals using optimal load (see Table II). The
power transfer efficiency was then calculated as the ratio of
power delivered to the load to the power drawn from the source.
(Note: The power drawn from the source was corrected for input
reflection, which was measured using a vector network analyzer
R&S ZVL13). The power transfer efficiency was measured at
three different depths during the study by creating small pockets
surgically one just beneath the skin, another beneath the fat and
another below the muscle as shown in Fig. 14(a). The separation
corresponding to these three positions were roughly measured
to be 5, 9, and 14 mm, respectively. The measurements were
repeated at different frequencies (5, 13.56, and 17 MHz), and
the results were compared with efficient measurements in air
for similar separations [see Fig. 14(b)].
From the experimental results, the following inference were
made, and which will be used to choose the characteristics of
the power transfer link for the peripheral nerve implants.
1) The power transfer efficiency drops significantly with distance, which is very much expected from the electromagnetic field theory. Hence, positioning the implant coil at
larger depth is not preferred, and a subcutaneous link
would be the best approach for the link design.

JEGADEESAN et al.: ENABLING WIRELESS POWERING AND TELEMETRY FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS

965

TABLE III
WIRELESS IMPLANT COMPONENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS
Component

L 2 (Stimulator/
Recording implant)
L 1 (Stimulator/
Recording implant)

Fig. 15. Transmitting coil (diameter = 30 mm), implant coil (diameter =
20 mm), and the data reader coil (diameter = 10 mm) encapsulated in PDMS.

2) The difference in power transfer efficiency between the
tissue and air environments is larger for higher frequencies. This shows that the tissue losses are more at higher
frequencies, which also corroborates with the Debye relaxation model of tissues showing frequency dependence.
Hence, we infer that low frequency of operation is desirable for handling large power. One other advantage of
using low frequency of operation is that the neural signal
amplifiers have good PSRR at low frequencies and, hence,
the carrier frequency is better suppressed. It must be noted
here that choosing a low frequency of operation reduces
the overall efficiency of the power transfer link (more coil
losses in the transmitter and the receiver), but at the same
time significantly reduces the tissue losses, which might
be needed to be considered, while transferring high power
to implant.
3) The square planar coils has sharp edges and is not suitable
for the long-term implantation. Hence, a circular coil with
smooth edges is needed for the link design.
B. Power Transfer Link for Peripheral Nerve Implants
The results from the initial study on the rat model shows
that the low-frequency subcutaneous power transfer link would
enable large power-handling capability, and would ideally suit
the power requirements of the peripheral nerve implant. Also,
handling such large power using planar coils on PCB is difficult
due to the thin traces and low-quality factor of coils. Hence, we
choose coils made of laminated AWG32 copper wire. However,
this leaves us with a problem of finding a repeatable way to fabricate the coils without being susceptible to deformation while
implanted. We choose to make the wire wound coils using plastic
molds with a release mechanism (to minimize coil variations),
which would then be encapsulated with polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) as shown in Fig. 15.
The PDMS was prepared by mixing the silicone elastomer
(SYLGARD 184) with its curing agent (10:1 mass ratio), well
stirred, and then degassed (20 min) in a vacuum chamber to
prevent the air bubbles and leakages. Then, the semicured PDMS
was poured over the mold to encapsulate the coil and associated
implant electronics. After that it was degassed again, and cured
in an oven (70 °C) for 2 h. The total thickness of the PDMS
encapsulated coil fabricated by this process was close to 3 mm.

LD 1 , LD 2
(Stimulator/Recording
implant)
M1
Digital Logic (Stimulator)
Regulator (Stimulator
Implant) Regulator
(Recording Implant)
Rectifier
(Stimulator/recording
implant)
Stimulator
Recording Amplifier
ADC, Digital Logic
Demodulator
ADC, Digital Logic
Demodulator (Stimulator/
Recording Implant)

Geometry/
Specification

Characteristics

25 turns, 20-mm
diameter, 32 AWG
copper
25 turns, 30-mm
diameter, 32 AWG
copper
6 turns, 10-mm
diameter 32 AWG
copper
IRF540
MSP430F2132

26.1 μH, 6.85 Ω (at 1 MHz)
SRF = 5.3 MHz

LTC3245, TPS78833

44.9 μH, 13.9 Ω (at 1 MHz)
SRF = 2.7 MHz
1.3 μH, 11.5 Ω (at 43 MHz)
SRF = 75 MHz
Power FET
Microcontroller, UART
demodulator
3.3-V regulator, < 38-V input
3.3-V regulator, < 12-V input

BAS70-04

Dual Schottky diodes

[53], [54], custom
stimulator
RHD2216
MPS430F2274
BAS70-04

four-channel muscle stimulator

MSP430F2274
BAS70-04,
two-stage filter,
LM7239

Up to 16 channel neural signal
amplifier 8 bit ADC,
microcontroller asynchronous,
single-slope demodulator
8 bit ADC, Microcontroller
Single-slope synchronous
demodulator.

We chose 1 MHz as the frequency of operation based on the
conclusion that large operating frequencies cause more tissue
loss, limiting the power transfer capability. The coils for the
power transfer link were designed and optimized for operation
at 1 MHz as follows. The maximum size of the implant coil as
limited by the human arm size is around 20 mm in diameter.
Hence, we built a circular implant coil with 20-mm diameter,
and the number of turns was chosen to be 25 to maximize the
quality factor (at 1 MHz). Though the external coil does not have
any size limitation having a larger coil than implant coil would
have low field strength at the center of the implant coil and
having a smaller coil would not have sufficient flux linkage with
the implant coil. Hence, the size of the external coil was chosen
optimally to have maximum coupling and sufficiently large field
strength as 30 mm. The number of turns was then optimized by
maximizing the quality factor at 1 MHz as found to be between
24 and 28 turns. We chose 25 turns coil as its inductance value
(numerical matching) reduced the total number of capacitors
used in the load network of the class E amplifier. A 10-mm coil
with 6 turns had sufficient mutual inductance to couple the data
modulation from the transmitter coil (L1) and was chosen as the
reader coil Ld1 (stimulator implant). The coils are characterized
using a vector network analyzer (R&S ZVL13) and the values
are shown in Table III.
The data coils for the recording implant need to have an
operating frequency greater than 10.4 MHz for a data rate requirement of 1.3 Mb/s (based on the frequency separation between carrier and signal for proper demodulation). Since the
data reader coil designed for the stimulator implant has a selfresonant frequency of 75 MHz, it was reused as the data link

966

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 16. (a) Sketch of the rat showing the location of incision and the implant
coil, and (b) cross-sectional view of the model illustrating the separation and
misalignment with respect to implant coil inside rat.

coils for the recording implant. The SAR simulations carried
out on a tissue model for the chosen coils showed regulatory
compliance with a safety margin of over two.
C. Stimulator Implant Experiment
The designed power and data links are studied acutely for feasibility in rats. In one experiment, the implant coil was inserted
beneath the skin through a small incision made in the stomach
region of the rat as shown in Fig. 16(a), and the incision was then
sutured allowing two read out terminals to come out. A power of
105 mW was measured across the implant coil for a separation
of 10 mm between the transmitter and the implant coil. As the
separation was reduced to 5 mm by bringing the transmitting
coil closer to the skin, the power delivered increased to 127 mW.
The power link was able to consistently deliver over 100 mW to
the implanted coil, when the radial misalignment of the powering coil was within 5 mm [see Fig. 16(b)]. The power delivered
to the implant coil at various transmitter receiver misalignments
for two different implant depths is shown in Fig. 17(a). The
power transfer efficiency of the link for aligned coils (maxi-

Fig. 17. (a) Power delivered to the implant coil versus its misalignment with
the transmitter for two different implant depths, and (b) heating of the tissues
is characterized by temperature rise of the tissues surrounding implant. Graph
shows the temperature rise with time, above and below the implant coil when
100 mW is delivered across its terminals.

mum PTE value without rectification) was found to be 65.8%.
Though slightly lower than the PTE at high frequencies, it
enables large power delivery without much tissue losses as heat
[see Fig. 17(b)].
Maximum heat would be generated at the tissues above and
below the implant coil. The temperature above and below the
implant coil was measured by using a K-type thermocouple
(sealed using polyimide tape to the implant coil) whose terminals were brought out through the skin suture and connected to
a thermometer (Fluke 51 II). The temperature above and below
the implant were measured as T1 and T2 as shown in Fig. 17(b).
It can be seen that there was less than 0.6 °C raise in temperature, while the power was continuously delivered for 20 min.
This is very much within the 2 °C localized temperature rise
reported for an equivalent SAR of 4 W/kg [41].
In another experiment, the designed wireless link powered
the stimulator implant to provide functional leg movement in

JEGADEESAN et al.: ENABLING WIRELESS POWERING AND TELEMETRY FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS

967

Fig. 18. Backscattered data waveform captured at the reader coil for the
recording implant, showing discernable data at 4.8 kb/s.

the rat. The 4.8 kb/s data link to the implant was tested over the
same power link. A scope shot of the data transfer over the same
power link is shown in Fig. 18. The stimulator implant and the
class E amplifier used for powering are shown in Fig. 19.
VI. SAFETY
A. Biosafety
The key aspect lost in the engineering analysis of inductive
power transfer scheme is the biosafety of the materials used to
build it. Since most metals including copper are not biocompatible, the coils need to be encapsulated in a biocompatible
material. Generally, silicone elastomers are used as an encapsulating material in FDA approved implants. We used PDMS to
encapsulate the coils as it is one of the biocompatible silicones
[55]. The PDMS encapsulation makes the coils leak proof and
sufficiently elastic as desired for an implantable device. The
characteristics of the wireless power and data transfer coils are
affected by this encapsulation. To perform the exact analysis of
change in the coil properties, the PDMS samples were characterized using the ring resonator method [56]. The measured values
of relative permittivity and loss tangent were 2.8 and 0.012, respectively. These values were used for power link optimization
and SAR simulations for safety.
B. Electrical Safety
Electrical safety is the most critical factor to consider, while
designing the power transfer scheme. Electromagnetic fields
form eddies in dispersive tissues and their high amplitudes can
cause electrocution. The effects depend upon the current paths
with sensitive locations having lower current thresholds than

Fig. 19. (a) Stimulator implant used in the rat experiment with Pt-Ir electrodes,
and (b) class-E amplifier and external decoder unit powered using USB.

others. The brain, respiratory muscles, and heart are sensitive
to currents, and irreversible effects leading to death can occur
if high currents are passed through them. Heating of tissues is
another effect of exposure to electromagnetic waves. In order
to avoid such adverse effects, the wireless link parameters are
iteratively chosen to meet the regulatory SAR limits provided
by the IEEE standards for safety level with respect to human
exposure [41]. The peak localized SAR has a safety restriction
specified at 4 W/kg for the extremities (Example: Pinnae) of
the body and 2 W/kg for other body regions. The SAR simulations for the stimulator implant is carried out in high-frequency
structural simulator (HFSS) for a transmit power of 180 mW.
The simulation setup used and the simulated SAR values are
shown in Fig. 20. The tissue models for the simulations were
obtained from detailed characterization data presented in [57].
VII. FUTURE WORK
Complete testing of the wireless recording implant is in
progress. Fully functional wireless platform, when tested chronically in rats will enable prosthesis experiments in nonhuman
primates. Reliable neural interface, hermetic sealing of the implant device, packaging the wireless implant electronics, mechanical integrity of the complete implant, and testing are the
avenues in which developments are being made to make peripheral nerve prosthesis a reality.

968

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Fig. 20. (a) Simulation setup for 180-mW transmit power to the implant with
skin layer (2.5 mm), fat layer (6 mm), and muscle layer (10 mm), and (b) SAR
values obtained from the simulation in HFSS V.12.

VIII. CONCLUSION
The various power delivery schemes for the implant devices
have been presented and their performance metrics are summarized. The near-field inductive power transfer link still remains the mainstream method for powering implants. Efficient
wireless power and data link platforms for the peripheral nerve
recording and stimulation implants are presented with their design requirements, link design, and safety analysis. Preliminary
acute experiments on rats demonstrate functional wireless links
for muscle stimulation with a power delivery of 100 mW and
data telemetry at 4.8 kb/s. The complete end to end testing of
the wireless platform for peripheral nerve recording implants is
underway.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. Bandla and L.-D. Liao
from the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, for their help
with the rodent experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] J. D. Weiland and M. S. Humayun, “Visual prosthesis,” Proc. IEEE, vol.
96, no. 7, pp. 1076–1084, Jul. 2008.

[2] T. Stieglitz, “Development of a micromachined epiretinal vision prosthesis,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 139–158, 2009.
[3] M. J. Kane, P. P. Breen, F. Quondamatteo, and G.O. Laighin, “BION
microstimulators: A case study in the engineering of an electronic implantable medical device,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 7–16,
2011.
[4] F. G. Zeng, S. Rebscher, W. V. Harrison, X. Sun, and H. Feng, “Cochlear
implants: System design, integration and evaluation,” IEEE Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 1, pp. 115–142, Jan. 2008.
[5] C. T. Wentz, J. G. Bernstein, P. Monahan, A. Guerra, A. Rodriguez, and
E. S. Boyden, “A wirelessly powered and controlled device for optical
neural control of freely-behaving animals,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 46021–46030, 2011.
[6] S. S. Lobodzinski, “Recent innovations in the development of magnetic
resonance imaging conditional pacemakers and implantable cardioverterdefibrillators,” Cardiol. J., vol. 19, pp. 98–104, 2012.
[7] I. Hochmair, P. Nopp, C. Jolly, M. Schmidt, H. Schosser, C. Garnham, and
I. Anderson, “MED-EL Cochlear implants: State of the art and a glimpse
into the future,” Trends Amplification, vol. 10, pp. 201–219, 2006.
[8] J. F. Patrick, P. A. Busby, and P. J. Gibson, “The development of the
nucleus freedom cochlear implant system,” Trends Amplification, vol. 10,
pp. 175–200, 2006.
[9] A. T. Chuang, C. E. Margo, and P. B. Greenberg, “Retinal implants: A
systematic review,” Brit. J. Ophthalmol., vol. 98, no. 7, pp. 852–856,
2014.
[10] U. M. Jow and M. Ghovanloo, “Modeling and optimization of printed
spiral coils in air, saline, and muscle tissue environments,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 339–347, Oct. 2009.
[11] A. K. Ramrakhyani, S. Mirabbasi, and M. Chiao, “Design and optimization
of resonance-based efficient wireless power delivery systems for biomedical implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 48–63,
Feb. 2011.
[12] R. Jegadeesan and Y.-X. Guo, “Topology selection and efficiency improvement of inductive power links,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
60, no. 10, pp. 4846–4854, Oct. 2012.
[13] A. S. Y. Poon, O. D. Stephen, and T. H. Meng, “Optimal frequency for
wireless power transmission into dispersive tissue,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1739–1750, May 2010.
[14] J. S. Ho, A. J. Yeh, E. Neofytou, S. Kim, Y. Tanabe, B. Patlolla, R.
E. Beygui, and A. S. Y. Poon, “Wireless power transfer to deep-tissue
microimplants,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 111, no. 22, pp. 7974–
7979, 2014.
[15] R. Jegadeesan, Y.-X. Guo, and J. Minkyu, “Electric near-field coupling for
wireless power transfer in biomedical applications,” in Proc. IEEE MTTS Int. Microw. Workshop Ser. RF Wireless Technol. Biomed. Healthcare
Appl., 2013, pp. 1–3,.
[16] A. Sodagar and P. Amiri, “Capacitive coupling for power and data telemetry to implantable biomedical microsystems,” in Proc. IEEE/EMBS 4th
Int. Conf. Neural Eng., 2009, pp. 411–414.
[17] C. Liu, Y.-X. Guo, H. Sun, and S. Xiao, “Design and safety considerations
of an implantable rectenna for far-field wireless power transfer,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 5798–5806, Nov. 2014.
[18] U. Lee, K. D. Song, and Y. Park, “Perspective in nanoneural electronic
implants with wireless power-feed and sensory control,” J. Nanotechnol.
Eng. Med., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 21007–21020, 2010.
[19] E. Falkenstein, M. Roberg, and Z. Popovic, “Low-power wireless power
delivery,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 2277–
2286, Jul. 2012.
[20] T. Maleki, N. Cao, S. H. Song, C. Kao, S. C. A. Ko, and B. Ziaie, “An ultrasonically powered implantable micro-oxygen generator (IMOG),” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3104–3111, Nov. 2011.
[21] S. Suzuki, S. Kimura, T. Katane, and H. Saotome, “Power and interactive
information transmission to implanted medical device using ultrasonic,”
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 41, pp. 3600–3603, 2002.
[22] N. Tesla, “The transmission of electrical energy without wires,” Electr.
World Eng., vol. XLV, pp. 21–24, Jan. 7, 1905.
[23] A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moffatt, J. D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher, and M. Soljacic, “Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic resonances,”
Science, vol. 317, pp. 83–86, 2007.
[24] U. Jow and M. Ghovanloo, “Design and optimization of printed spiral coils
for efficient transcutaneous inductive power transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 193–202, Sep. 2007.
[25] A. K. Ramrakhiyani and G. Lazzi, “On the design of efficient multi-coil
telemetry system for biomedical implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 11–23, Feb. 2013.

JEGADEESAN et al.: ENABLING WIRELESS POWERING AND TELEMETRY FOR PERIPHERAL NERVE IMPLANTS

[26] M. Kiani, U. Jow, and M. Ghovanloo, “Design and optimization of a 3coil inductive link for efficient wireless power transmission,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 579–591, Dec. 2011.
[27] S. E. Jo, S. Joung, J. F. Suh, and Y. J. Kim, “Improvement of wireless
power transmission efficiency of implantable subcutaneous devices by
closed magnetic circuit mechanism,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 50,
pp. 973–980, 2012.
[28] G. Wang, W. Liu, M. Sivaprakasam, and G. A. Kendir, “Design and
analysis of an adaptive transcutaneous power telemetry for biomedical
implants,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 10, pp.
2109–2117, Oct. 2005.
[29] K. M. Silay, C. Dehollain, and M. A. Declercq, “Closed-loop remote
powering link for wireless cortical implants,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 13,
no. 9, pp. 3226–3235, Sep. 2013.
[30] R.-H. Kim, H. Tao, T. Kim, Y. Zhang, S. Kim, B. Panilaitis, M. Yang,
D. Kim, Y. Jung, B. Kim, Y. Li, Y. Huang, F. Omenetto, and J. Rogers,
“Materials and designs for wirelessly powered implantable light-emitting
systems,” Small, vol. 8, no. 18, pp. 2812–2818, 2012.
[31] S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su, H.
Zhang, H. Cheng, B. Lu, C. Yu, C. Chuang, T. Kim, T. Song, K. Shigeta,
S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. Braun, Y. Huang, U. Paik, and J.
Rogers, “Stretchable batteries with self-similar serpentine interconnects
and integrated wireless recharging systems,” Nature Commun., vol. 4, pp.
1543–1550, 2013.
[32] A. Qusba, A. K. Ramrakhyani, J. H. So, G. J. Hayes, M. D. Dickey, and G.
Lazzi, “On the design of microfluidic implant coil for flexible telemetry
system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1074–1080, Apr. 2014.
[33] J. C. Schuder and H. E. Stephenson, Jr., “Energy transport to a coil which
circumscribes a ferrite core and is implanted within the body,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-12, nos. 3/4, pp. 154–163, May 1965.
[34] W. Liu, K. Vichienchom, M. Clements, S. C. DeMarco, C. Hughes, E.
McGucken, M. S. Humayun, E. De Juan, J. D. Weiland, and R. Greenberg,
“A neuro-stimulus chip with telemetry unit for retinal prosthetic device,”
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1487–1497, Oct. 2000.
[35] G. Kendir, W. Liu, G. Wang, M. Sivaprakasam, R. Bashirullah, M. Humayun, and J. Weiland, “An optimal design methodology for inductive
power link with class-E amplifier,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg.
Papers, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 857–866, May 2005.
[36] D. Borton, M. Yin, J. Aceros, and A. Nurmikko, “An implantable wireless neural interface for recording cortical circuit dynamics in moving
primates,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, pp. 26010–26015, 2013.
[37] J. Riistama, J. Väisänen, S. Heinisuo, H. Harjunpää, S. Arra, K. Kokko,
M. Mäntylä, J. Kaihilahti, P. Heino, M. Kellomäki, O. Vainio, J. Vanhala,
J. Lekkala, and J. Hyttinen, “Wireless and inductively powered implant
for measuring electrocardiogram,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 45, no.
12, pp. 1163–1174, 2007.
[38] B. Waters, A. Sample, P. Bonde, and J. Smith, “Powering a ventricular
assist device (VAD) with the free-range resonant electrical energy delivery (free-d) system,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 138–149, Jan.
2012.
[39] S. Y. Lee and S. C. Lee, “An implantable wireless bidirecional communication microstimulator for neuromuscular stimulation,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. I, Fundam. Theory Appl., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2526–2538,
Dec. 2005.
[40] A. I. Al-Kalbani, M. R. Yuce, and J. M. Redoute, “A biosafety comparison
between capacitive and inductive coupling in biomedical implants,” IEEE
Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 13, pp. 1168–1171, 2014.
[41] IEEE Standard for Safety Levels With Respect to Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 3 kHz to 300 GHz, IEEE Standard
C95.1-2005, pp. 1–238, 2006.
[42] E. Y. Chow, A. L. Chlebowski, S. Chakraborty, W. J. Chappell, and
P. P. Irazoqui, “Fully wireless implantable cardiovascular pressure monitor
integrated with a medical stent,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no.
6, pp. 1487–1496, Jun. 2010.
[43] S. Kim, J. S. Ho, and A. S. Y. Poon, “Wireless power transfer to miniature
implants: Transmitter optimization,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol.
60, no. 10, pp. 4838–4845, Oct. 2012.
[44] S. Kim, J. S. Ho, L. Y. Chen, and A. S. Y. Poon, “Wireless power transfer
to a cardiac implant,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 101, pp. 73701–73704, 2012.

969

[45] S. K. Kelly, D. B. Shire, J. Chen, P. Doyle, M. D. Gingerich, S. F. Cogan,
W. A. Drohan, S. Behan, L. Theogarajan, J. L. Wyatt, and J. F. Rizzo, “A
hermetic wireless subretinal neurostimulator for vision prostheses,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3197–3205, Nov. 2011.
[46] G. Wang, W. Liu, M. Sivaprakasam, and G. A. Kendir, “Design and
analysis of an adaptive transcutaneous power telemetry for biomedical
implants,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 2109–2117,
Oct. 2005.
[47] M. Catrysse, B. Hermans, and R. Puers, “An inductive power system with
integrated bi-directional data-transmission,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol.
115, pp. 221–229, 2004.
[48] G. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Tang, and W. Liu, “Analysis of dual band power and
data telemetry for biomedical implants,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 208–215, Jun. 2012.
[49] A. M. Sodagar, G. E. Perlin, Y. Ying, K. Najafi, and K. D. Wise, “An implantable 64-channel wireless microsystem for single-unit neural recording,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 2591–2604, Sep.
2009.
[50] M. S. Chae, Z. Yang, M. Yuce, L. Hoang, and W. Liu, “A 128-channel 6
mW wireless neural recording IC with spike feature extractionand UWB
transmitter,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 17, no. 4, pp.
312–321, Aug. 2009.
[51] M. W. Keith, P. H. Peckham, G. B. Thrope, K. C. Stroh, B. Smith, J. R.
Buckett, K. L. Kilgore, and J. W. Jatich, “Implantable functional neuromuscular stimulation in the tetraplegic hand,” J. Hand Surg. Amer., vol.
14, pp. 524–530, 1989.
[52] N. O. Sokal and A. D. Sokal, “Class E: A new class of high-efficiency tuned
single-ended switching power amplifiers,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
vol. SC-10, no. 3, pp. 168–176, Jun. 1975.
[53] S. Nag, X. Jia, N. V. Thakor, and D. Sharma, “Flexible charge balanced
stimulator with 5.6 fC accuracy for 140 nC injections,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 266–275, Jun. 2013.
[54] S. Nag, D. Sharma, and N. V. Thakor, “24 Vp p compliant biphasic stimulator for inductively powered animal behavior studies,” in Proc. IEEE
35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka, Japan, Jul. 2013, pp.
3242–3245.
[55] D. Lee, S. Kim, J. Sohn, I. Kim, S. Kim, D. Sohn, J. Kim, and B. Choi,
“Biocompatibility of a PDMS-coated micro-device: Bladder volume monitoring sensor,” Chin. J. Polymer Sci., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 242–249, 2012.
[56] P. A. Bernard and J. M. Gautray, “Measurement of dielectric constant
using a microstrip ring resonator,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.,
vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 592–595, Mar. 1991.
[57] S. Gabriel, R. W. Lau, and C. Gabriel, “The dielectric properties of
biological tissues—Part III: Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293,
1996.

Rangarajan Jegadeesan (M’09) received the Bachelor’s degree in electronics and communication engineering from the College of Engineering Guindy,
Chennai, India, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the National
University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2014. He was
with Cypress Semiconductor Corporation as a Product Engineer, where he focused on postsilicon characterization and later was a Systems Engineer, responsible for touch screen and low power RF solutions.
After receiving the Ph.D. degree, he joined Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology (SINAPSE), Singapore, in 2014, where he
is leading the efforts for development of wireless technologies for implant devices and establishment of regulatory compliance. He is currently a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with the SINAPSE. His research interests include antennas, implant technologies, electrical safety, sensors, and low power RF.Dr. Jegadeesan
is a Registered Professional Consultant with multiple semiconductor manufacturers on touch screen and RF solutions.

970

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 3, MAY 2015

Sudip Nag (M’03) received the Ph.D. degree from
the Electrical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India, and the
Bachelor’s of Engineering degree with distinction
from Nagpur University, Nagpur, India. His Ph.D.
dissertation was accomplished in collaboration with
the Biomedical Engineering Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. He works in
implantable bioelectronics and neural engineering
systems, while targeting prosthetic applications for
nerve, brain, spinal cord, and retina. He is currently a
Research Fellow with Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, National University of Singapore, Singapore. He has coauthored nine journal papers, one
book chapter, 16 conference proceedings, and five patent applications. His research interests include bioinstrumentation, bioinspired systems, ultralow power
analog/digital circuits, and micro/nanofabrication. He is associated with numerous academic and industry projects that are related to nerve prosthesis, wearable
medical electronics, wireless power/data transfers, and biochemical detectors.
Dr. Nag is a Member of the IEEE and its engineering in medicine and biology and communication societies. He has served as the IEEE Students’ Branch
Vice-Chairman and held other important officer positions at various institutions.
He has received numerous awards, such as the Award for Excellence in Ph.D.
dissertation work from IIT Bombay, the Best Student Paper Award from the
IEEE GIT2011, the Budding Innovators Award 2008 from the Government of
India, the IEEE ISSS-MDBS 2006 Student Award, and the Academic Excellence Award 2004 from Nagpur University.

Kush Agarwal (S’12) received the B.Tech. degree in
electronics and telecommunication engineering from
the College of Engineering Roorkee, Roorkee, India,
in 2010, and the M.Sc. degree in communications engineering from Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, in 2013. During this period, he was researching on metamaterial-based circularly polarized
antennas with RF, Antenna, and Optical Department,
Institute for Infocomm Research, A∗STAR, Singapore. He has been working toward the Ph.D. degree
under the joint supervision of Prof. Y.-X. Guo and
Prof. N. V. Thakor on the National University of Singapore (NUS) Graduate
Research Scholarship, Singapore, since 2014. He was a Software Developer
with CGI Group Inc., Canada, from 2010 to 2011. He joined the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, NUS, as a Research Engineer, in 2012,
under the supervision of Prof. Y.-X. Guo for research on wearable and implantable antennas and sensors. He has authored several conference and journal
papers in the field of metamaterial-based far-field antennas. His research interests include electromagnetics for biomedical implant applications, electrical and
biological safety, RF energy harvesting, RFID, near-field sensing, and antennas
for various applications. Mr. Kush is an active Member of the IEEE and its
three societies: Antennas and Propagation, Microwave Theory and Techniques,
and Engineering in Medicine and Biology, and is an active Graduate Student
Member in the IEEE Singapore section. He has received the Young Scientist
Award from the International Union of Radio Science in 2012 and the European
Microwave Association Student Grants in 2012 and 2013, for attending European Microwave Conferences in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and Nuremberg,
Germany, for his M.Sc. research work.

Nitish V. Thakor (F’94) received the Bachelors degree in Electrical Engineering from IIT Bombay,
Mumbai, India, in 1974 and the Masters and Ph.D.
degree from University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI,
USA, in 1978 and 1981, respectively. He is the Director of the Singapore Institute for Neurotechnology, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
and also a Professor of biomedical engineering at
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. He
has pioneered many technologies from brain monitoring to prosthetic arms and neuroprosthesis. He is
an author of more than 270 refereed journal papers, dozen patents, and Cofounder of three companies. His research interests include neurotechnology and
medical instrumentation. He is currently the Editor-in-Chief of the Medical
and Biological Engineering and Computing, and was the Editor-in-Chief of
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING from 2005 to 2011. He received the Research Career Development
Award from NIH, a Presidential Young Investigator Award from the NSF, and
is a Fellow of the AIMBE, a Founding Fellow of the BMES, and Fellow of the
IFMBE. He received the award of Technical Excellence in Neuroengineering
from the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Distinguished
Alumnus Award from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India, and a
Centennial Medal from the University of Wisconsin School of Engineering.

Yong-Xin Guo (SM’05) received the B.Eng. and
M.Eng. degrees from the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 1992, 1995,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2001, all in
electronic engineering. He was a Research Scientist
with the Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore,
from September 2001 to January 2009. He joined the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
(ECE), National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore, as an Assistant Professor, in February 2009,
and was promoted as an Associate Professor with tenure in January 2013. He is
also the Director of Center for Microwave and Radio Frequency, Department of
ECE, NUS. He is currently a Senior Investigator at the National University of
Singapore Suzhou Research Institute (NUSRI), Suzhou, China, and the Director
of Center of Advanced Microelectronic Devices at NUSRI. He has authored or
coauthored 155 international journal papers and 169 international conference
papers. Thus far, his publications have been cited by others more than 1751 times
and the H-index is 24 (source: Scopus). He holds one granted Chinese patent,
one granted U.S. patent, one filed PCT patent, three filed Chinese patents, and
one filed U.S. Provisional Patent. He has graduated seven Ph.D. students at
NUS. His current research interests include microstrip antennas for wireless
communications, implantable/wearable antennas for biomedical applications,
wireless power and RF energy harvesting, microwave circuits, and MMIC modeling and design. Dr. Guo received the Young Investigator Award 2009, NUS.
He received the 2013 “Raj Mittra” Travel Grant Senior Researcher Award and
the Best Poster Award in 2014 International Conference on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks , Zurich, Switzerland. He is the General Chair
for 2015 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Workshop Series on Advanced
Materials and Processes for RF and THz Applications, Suzhou, China. He was
the General Chair for IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Workshop Series
2013 on “RF and Wireless Technologies for Biomedical and Healthcare Applications,” Singapore. He was a Technical Program Committee (TPC) Cochair
for IEEE International Symposium on Radio Frequency Integration Technology. He has been a TPC Member and Session Chair for numerous conferences
and workshops. He is an Associate Editor for the IEEE Antennas and Wireless
Propagation Letters and IET Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation.

