IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

2379

Quantifying Pituitary-Adrenal Dynamics
and Deconvolution of Concurrent Cortisol
and Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Data
by Compressed Sensing
Rose T. Faghih∗ , Member, IEEE, Munther A. Dahleh, Fellow, IEEE, Gail K. Adler, Elizabeth B. Klerman,
and Emery N. Brown, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Pulsatile release of cortisol from the adrenal glands
is governed by pulsatile release of adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) from the anterior pituitary. In return, cortisol has
a negative feedback effect on ACTH release. Simultaneous
recording of ACTH and cortisol is not typical, and determining
the number, timing, and amplitudes of pulsatile events from
simultaneously recorded data is challenging because of several
factors: 1) stimulator ACTH pulse activity, 2) kinematics of ACTH
and cortisol, 3) the sampling interval, and 4) the measurement
error. We model ACTH and cortisol secretion simultaneously
using a linear differential equations model with Gaussian errors
and sparse pulsatile events as inputs to the model. We propose a
novel framework for recovering pulses and parameters underlying
the interactions between ACTH and cortisol. We recover the
timing and amplitudes of pulses using compressed sensing and
employ generalized cross validation for determining the number
of pulses. We analyze serum ACTH and cortisol levels sampled at
10-min intervals over 24 h from ten healthy women. We recover
physiologically plausible timing and amplitudes for these pulses
and model the feedback effect of cortisol. We recover 15 to 18
pulses over 24 h, which is highly consistent with the results of
another cortisol data analysis approach. Modeling the interactions
between ACTH and cortisol allows for accurate quantification
of pulsatile events, and normal and pathological states. This
could lay the basis for a more physiologically-based approach for

Manuscript received February 24, 2015; revised April 18, 2015; accepted
April 20, 2015. Date of publication April 29, 2015; date of current version September 16, 2015. The original data collection was supported under
Grant NIH R01AR43130 (GKA), Grant M01RR20635 (BWH GCRC), Grant
K01AG00661 (EBK), Grant R01GM 53559 (ENB), and Grant NASA NCC9-58
with the NSBRI. The work of R. T. Faghih was supported in part by the NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship. The work of M. A. Dahleh was supported in
part under Grant EFRI-0735956. The work of G. K. Adler was supported in part
under Grant NIH K24 HL103845. The work of E. B. Klerman was supported
in part under Grant NIH P01-AG09975, Grant K24-HL105664, Grant RC2HL101340, Grant R01-HL-11408, Grant R01-64105018, and Grant HFP01603
and Grant HFP02802 from the National Space Biomedical Research Institute
through NASA NCC 9-58. The work of E. N. Brown was supported in part by
NIH under Grant DP1 OD003646 and by NSF under Grant 0836720. A preliminary version of this work was presented in R. T. Faghih’s Ph.D. dissertation
[4]. Asterisk indicates corresponding author..
∗ R. T. Faghih is with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA 02139 USA, and also with , Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114 USA (e-mail: rfaghih@mit.edu).
M. A. Dahleh is with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
G. K. Adler and E. B. Klerman are with Harvard Medical School and also
with Brigham and Women’s Hospital.
E. N. Brown is with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, and also with Harvard Medical School.
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2427745

administering cortisol therapeutically. The proposed approach
can be adapted to deconvolve other pairs of hormones with similar
interactions.
Index Terms—Algorithms, biological system modeling, biomedical signal processing, compressed sensing, parameter estimation.

I. INTRODUCTION
ECRETION of some hormones is stimulated by a wellknown sequence of pulsatile events governed by a natural
control system. Neural interactions in the hypothalamus result in
the release of hormone-releasing hormones [e.g., corticotropin
releasing hormone (CRH)], which in turn induce the release of
hormones from the pituitary [e.g., adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH)]; pituitary hormones then induce secretion of hormones
from the target glands (e.g., cortisol). These hormones implement regulatory functions in the body and also have a feedback
effect on the release of hormone-releasing hormones and pituitary hormones [15]. In the 1960s, endocrinologists realized
that these hormones are not secreted in a continuous manner, and
instead are secreted in pulsatile episodes [26] and cleared exponentially [14]. It is currently unethical to measure the hormonereleasing hormones of the hypothalamus (e.g., CRH) in human
participants, and therefore, it is crucial to infer these pulsatile
episodes using serum measurements of only a subset of the hormones within these hierarchical hormone systems (e.g., ACTH
and cortisol).
ACTH and cortisol are steroid hormones that influence multiple areas of mammalian physiology including metabolism,
inflammation, and stress [2]. ACTH and cortisol levels vary over
a 24-h period as a result of the ultradian modulation of the timing
and circadian modulation of the amplitudes of the ACTH and
cortisol secretory pulses [2]. In order to understand the physiology and psychophysiology, effects of drugs, and other interventions, there is a need for quantifying pulsatile episodes in ACTH
and cortisol secretion. A question of interest is whether elevated
cortisol levels observed in some medical conditions are caused
by changes in the pulsatile episodes or by the increased sensitivity of the adrenal glands to ACTH [27]. One method for investigating whether a pathological condition related to cortisol has
been initiated by the hypothalamus, the pituitary, or the adrenal
glands, is to construct a model based on these interactions
and develop an algorithm that can find both the pulsatile

S

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

episodes of hormone release in the hypothalamus and the model
parameters corresponding to each step of the cascade using data
from individuals with and without the disorder. It is, therefore,
advantageous to have a model and an estimation algorithm
that can investigate the role of the amplitude and frequency of
the pulses as well as the sensitivity of the target gland to the
pituitary input. Moreover, a treatment could be designed to use
an optimal dosage (amount and timing) by employing a model
that predicts the dose response. This requires a comprehensive
model that includes the pulsatile secretion of hormones and
the feedback effect in hormone release so that hormone
secretion and hormone concentration in the blood can be
estimated.
As a first step in understanding endocrine systems quantitatively, we investigate concurrent release of ACTH and cortisol in
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. Various models
of the HPA axis and cortisol secretion have been proposed, for
instance, see [2], [3], [6]–[8], and [12] . These models describe
cortisol synthesis in the adrenal glands based on the first-order
kinetics of cortisol synthesis. Current mathematical models for
concurrent ACTH and cortisol measurements include [18], [19],
[21]–[23]. Peters et al. modeled ACTH and cortisol levels as a
function of exogenous CRH [21]. They intravenously injected
CRH to the participants, collected ACTH and cortisol levels until 4 h after injection, and estimated the model parameters given
the injected CRH [21]. Another data-driven model of concurrent ACTH and cortisol levels was proposed by Lonnebo et al.
where they assumed a surge-based nonlinear model with one
morning surge and one afternoon surge [19]. Van Cauter proposed a method for recovering episodic hormone fluctuations
[23], used it to analyze the 24-h profile of concurrent ACTH
and cortisol data and recovered the secretory events for each
of the two hormone profiles [18], [22]. Then, by analyzing the
timing of the detected ACTH and cortisol pulse peaks and the
respective durations those pulses overlapped, they determined
which detected ACTH and cortisol pulses were concomitant
[18], [22].
Some data analysis methods for recovering hormone secretory events are developed for single hormone time series (e.g.,
only cortisol) and are mostly based on pulse detection algorithms [25] or assume that the timing of the secretory events
belong to a certain class of stochastic processes [14]. We recently showed that hormone secretory events can be recovered
using compressed sensing [5]. Compressed sensing allows for
reconstruction of sparse signals (i.e., signals in which only a
small number of coefficients are large and most coefficients are
zero or close to zero) using fewer measurements than required
by the Shannon/Nyquist sampling theorem [1].
Our goal in this study is to quantify the secretory events and
the feedback control mechanisms that underly the HPA axis.
To tackle this problem, we develop a model that calculates the
first-order kinetics underlying the HPA axis and the infusion
and clearance coefficients, given datasets that include concurrent measurements of ACTH and cortisol serum levels. We use a
multirate state-space representation of the system and by using
a coordinate descent approach, we recover the model parameters and the secretory events. Based on the physiology, between

TABLE I
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PARTICIPANTS [5]
BMI ( mkg2 )

AGE
28
41
41
24
23
26
23
37
44
42

20.8
23.6
22.5
20.7
27.4
25.2
29.3
29.6
29.9
22.9

BMI refers to body mass index. None of the participants had a current diagnosis of depression.

15 and 22 secretory events are expected for the ACTH-cortisol
system over 24 h [2], [24]. Considering that these secretory
events are sparse (i.e., there are a small number of secretory
events), we employ compressed sensing techniques to recover
the secretory events. The exact number of secretory events for
each participant is unknown; using generalized cross validation
(GCV), we find the number of pulses such that there is a balance between capturing the noise and the sparsity. Since cortisol,
growth hormone, thyroid hormone, estrogen, and testosterone
are synthesized and secreted using a similar feedback control
mechanism, the proposed framework could potentially be applied to all these endocrine hormones.
II. METHODS
A. Experiment
To test our model, we used serum ACTH and cortisol measurements collected simultaneously from an inpatient study of
ten healthy women. The participants were recruited via advertisements in local newspapers to serve as healthy controls for
a study on women with fibromyalgia; participants with abnormal laboratory test results or current medical problems were
excluded [5], [16]. None of the participants had received glucocorticoids or estrogen/progesterone within the year or four
months before the study, respectively [5], [16]. Clinical characteristics of the participants are given in Table I. For three
consecutive nights at the General Clinical Research Center of
the Brigham and Women’s Hospital, participants had 8 h of
scheduled sleep in the dark at their habitual sleep–wake times
and three meals and two snacks; on day 4, all participants started
a constant routine protocol that was designed to minimize the
effects of stress, posture changes, eating, and ambulatory temperature on the participants [5], [16]. Blood drawing for hormones analyzed in this study was performed during the third
night of sleep and during the first 16 h of the constant routine
[5], [16]. Therefore, this dataset can be used to quantify ACTH
and cortisol variations as a function of the circadian and the
ultradian patterns. Blood was collected via an indwelling intravenous catheter in every 10 min for 24 h, assayed for ACTH
and cortisol in duplicate, and the immunoassay error for each
time series was obtained. Plasma ACTH levels were determined

FAGHIH et al.: QUANTIFYING PITUITARY-ADRENAL DYNAMICS AND DECONVOLUTION OF CONCURRENT CORTISOL

using the Nichols Allegro HS-ACTH kit (Nichols Institute Diagnostics, San Juan Capistrano, CA, USA). This assay has a lower
limit of detection 0.2 pmol/L, interassay coefficient of variation
7–8%, and intraassay coefficient of variation 3%. Serum cortisol levels were measured using the chemiluminescence assay
by Beckman Coulter, Inc., Chaska, MN, USA, interassay coefficient of variation 6–10%, and intraassay coefficient of variation
2.6–6.5% [16]. This project has been reviewed and approved by
the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Institutional Review Board
(IRB). During the review of this project, the IRB specifically
considered 1) the risks and anticipated benefits, if any, to subjects; 2) the selection of subjects; 3) the procedures for securing
and documenting informed consent; 4) the safety of subjects;
and 5) the privacy of subjects and confidentiality of the data.

where qi denotes the amplitude of a secretory event initiated at
time τi , and m denotes the number of the secretory events. Our
goal is to estimate the model parameters (θj for j = 1, 2, . . . , 5),
the number of the secretory events (m), and the amplitudes (qi
for i = 1, 2, . . . , m) and timing (τi for i = 1, 2, . . . , m) of the
secretory events using serum ACTH (x1 ) and cortisol (x3 ) levels
collected in 10-min intervals.
We start by putting the control feedback model of ACTH and
cortisol secretion [see (1)–(3)] in a state-space form, and writing
the discrete analog of the system assuming that the input and the
state remain constant over 1-min intervals. Since the data are
collected in every 10 min, we form the corresponding multirate
system. Then, using the initial conditions of the serum ACTH
and cortisol levels, we can represent the system as

B. Modeling Formulation
We build our model based on the stochastic differential equation model of diurnal cortisol patterns in [2]. This model is based
on the first-order kinetics for cortisol synthesis in the adrenal
glands, cortisol infusion to the circulation, and cortisol clearance by the liver. It uses a doubly stochastic pulsatile input with
gamma distributed interarrival times and a Gaussian circadian
amplitude [2]. This input marks pulsatile cortisol synthesis in
the adrenal glands.
We represent the secretory events of the anterior pituitary
using an impulse train. This impulse train marks the timing and
amplitude of the secretory events that result in ACTH synthesis
in the anterior pituitary. We assume that there are between 15
and 22 secretory events that control the 24-h serum cortisol
level based on [2] and [24]. We also include the known cortisol
negative feedback effect on ACTH secretion [2], [6], [7], [12],
[17] in our model. Equations (1)–(3) model the HPA axis and
cortisol and ACTH release
dx1 (t)
= −θ1 x1 (t) − θ2 x3 (t) + u(t) (Anterior Pituitary)
dt
(1)
dx2 (t)
= θ3 x1 (t) − θ4 x2 (t) ( Adrenal Glands)
dt
dx3 (t)
= θ4 x2 (t) − θ5 x3 (t) (Serum)
dt

(2)
(3)

where x1 is the serum ACTH concentration, x2 is the cortisol
concentration in the adrenal glands, x3 is the serum cortisol
concentration, and θ3 is the ACTH gain. θ1 and θ2 represent the
infusion rate of ACTH from the anterior pituitary to the blood
and the cortisol negative feedback gain, respectively. θ4 and θ5
represent the coefficients corresponding to infusion of cortisol
into the circulation from the adrenal glands and clearance of
cortisol by the liver, respectively. u(t) is an abstraction of the
secretory events in the anterior pituitary that result in ACTH
release and consequent cortisol release
u(t) =

m

i=1

qi δ(t − τi )

(4)

2381

yA = Fθ A z0 + Dθ A u + νA

(5)

yC = Fθ C z0 + Dθ C u + νC

(6)

where yA represents serum ACTH levels, yC represents serum
cortisol levels collected at 10-min intervals, and z0 is a vector of the initial conditions of the serum ACTH concentration,
the adrenal glands’ cortisol concentration, and the serum cortisol concentration. u represents the entire input over 24 h.
Elements of u take nonzero values qi at times τi for i =
1, 2, . . . , m when there is a secretory event, and are zero, otherwise. Fθ A , Fθ A , Dθ A , and Dθ C are the functions of θj for
j = 1, 2, . . . , 5. νA and νC represent the ACTH and cortisol
measurement errors, respectively. Complete details can be found
in supplementary information.
C. Model Estimation
Between 15 and 22 secretory events are expected for the
ACTH-cortisol system over 24 h [2], [24], so we assume the
minimum number of secretory events umin = 15 and the maximum number of secretory events umax = 22. Considering that
a pulse can occur at any minute, we assume u contains umin to
umax nonzero elements out of 1440 possibilities, and all these
nonzero elements are nonnegative (umin ≤ u0 ≤ umin , u ≥ 0).
Since hormone gains, infusion, and clearance coefficients cannot be negative, we assume that θ ≥ 0. Furthermore, we follow
[2] and assume that the infusion coefficient of cortisol from
the adrenal glands to the circulation is at least four times the
clearance coefficient of cortisol by the liver (4θ5 ≤ θ4 ). We can
formulate this problem as an optimization problem
min

1
1
yA − Fθ A z0 − Dθ A u22 + 2 yC − Fθ C z0 − Dθ C u22
2
σA
σC
(7)

s.t.
umin ≤ u0 ≤ umax
u≥0
Sθ ≤ q

2382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

where

⎡

0
0
⎢ −1 0
⎢
⎢ 0 −1
S=⎢
⎢ 0
0
⎢
⎣ 0
0
0
0

0 −1
0
0
0
0
−1 0
0 −1
0
0

⎤

⎡ ⎤
4
0
⎥
0 ⎥
⎢0⎥
⎢ ⎥
0 ⎥
⎥, and q = ⎢ 0 ⎥.
⎢ ⎥
⎥
0 ⎥
⎣0⎦
⎦
0
0
−1

σA and σC represent the standard deviation of the ACTH and
cortisol measurement errors, respectively. In this optimization
problem, solving for u is a combinatorial problem, which is generally NP-hard, and is solved using greedy algorithms and p optimization algorithms. The greedy algorithms include matching pursuit (MP), othogonal MP, iterative hard thresholding,
hard thresholding pursuit, gradient descent with sparsification,
and compressive sampling MP [13]. In the p -optimization algorithms, the 0 -norm is approximated by an p -optimization
problem, where 0 < p < 2 [13]. p -optimization algorithms
are more accurate than greedy algorithms, but computationally
more expensive [13]. It is possible to cast the above optimization
problem as
min Jλ (θ, u) =
u≥0

S θ ≤q

+

2
1
yA − Fθ A z0 − Dθ A u
2
2σA
2

2
1
yC − Fθ C z0 − Dθ C u + λupp
2
2σC
2

(8)

where the p -norm is an approximation to the 0 -norm (0 < p
≤ 2) and λ is chosen such that the sparsity of u is between umin
to umax . Then, using a coordinate descent approach, this optimization problem can be solved iteratively using the following
steps until convergence is achieved:
1)
u(l+1) = argminJλ (θ(l) , u)

(9)

θ(l+1) = argminJλ (θ, u(l+1) ).

(10)

u≥0

2)
S θ ≤q

The optimization problem in (9) can be solved using the focal
underdetermined system solver (FOCUSS) algorithm [10]. The
FOCUSS algorithm is based on the iteratively reweighted least
squares algorithm, and enforces a certain degree of sparsity [28].
The sparsity is determined by λ (the sparsity of u increases
with λ), and λ balances between sparsity and the residual error.
We use an extension of the FOCUSS algorithm called GCVFOCUSS+ [5]. The GCV-FOCUSS+ algorithm is based on
FOCUSS+ [20] that solves for nonnegative u such that u has a
certain maximum sparsity n (i.e., n = 22 for the HPA axis), and
uses the GCV technique [9] for estimating the regularization
parameter. In particular, GCV-FOCUSS+ is closely related to
a version of the FOCUSS algorithm by Zdunek et al. [28],
which uses the GCV technique for updating the regularization
parameter λ. Choosing a λ value that balances between the noise
and sparsity is important in detecting the sparsity level. If λ is too
small, overfitting can occur and noise can be detected as signal;

on the other hand, if λ is too large, it leads to underfitting the data,
and as a result, the signal will not be constructed completely.
The FOCUSS+ algorithm and the GCV-FOCUSS+ algorithm
are described in more detail in supplementary information.
An important factor in estimating the model parameters and
the input is the initialization of u and θ: This should be done
systematically. It is possible to obtain a good initial estimate for
the timing of the pulses that result in cortisol secretion by first
deconvolving the cortisol data using the model and the algorithm
in [5]. This algorithm detects the significant pulses that result in
cortisol release. Some peaks might not appear to be significant
given only cortisol measurements and the corresponding pulses
might not be detected; however, when analyzing the ACTH and
cortisol data together, these pulses might now appear significant.
Hence, we first find the peaks in the cortisol data, and then
break the data into peak-to-peak segments, and then for the
segments that no pulse is detected, we allow for the support (i.e.,
the timing of pulses) to occur any time over that segment. We
use the f ind peaks function in MATLAB R2011b to compare
each cortisol data point to its neighboring values, and then, by
finding the data points that take values higher than both of their
neighbors, we detect the peaks in the cortisol data. This process
gives a good initial condition for the possible support of u; θ
can be initialized randomly in the first step. Using these initial
conditions, we start the initialization algorithm that is provided
in detail in supplementary information; the model parameters
and the input that minimize Jλ (θ, u) in (8), denoted by θ̂0 and
0
û , respectively, are good initializers for the main estimation
algorithm.
The following is the algorithm that we propose for estimation
of concurrent measurements of cortisol and ACTH:
0
1) Initialize the algorithm at θ̂0 and û using the initialization
algorithm.
k
2) Set θ̂ equal to θ̂k −1 ; using GCV-FOCUSS+, solve for û
k −1
by initializing the optimization in (9) at û .
k
3) Set û equal to û , and using the Levenberg–Marquardt
method, solve for θ̂k by initializing the optimization in
(10) at θ̂k −1 .
4) Iterate between steps (2) and (3) until convergence.
5) Repeat steps (1)–(4) for various initializations.
6) Set the estimated model parameters θ̂ and û equal to the
values that minimize Jλ (θ, u) in (8).
The optimization problem in (8) is nonconvex and there are
multiple local minima; the proposed algorithm selects the set
of model parameters and the input that give the best goodness
of fit. We have implemented the algorithm under the assumption that hormone pulses occur at integer minutes. The serum
ACTH measurements are by four orders of magnitude smaller
than serum cortisol measurements, and this leads to issues for
numerical analysis due to the difference in the order of magnitude; the much smaller ACTH appears as noise. To handle
numerical issues in running the estimation algorithm, we scaled
up the ACTH measurements by a factor of four orders of magnitude. Then, we scaled down the estimated θ2 by four orders of
magnitude and scaled up the estimated θ3 by four orders of magnitude to compensate for scaling up ACTH in the estimation.

FAGHIH et al.: QUANTIFYING PITUITARY-ADRENAL DYNAMICS AND DECONVOLUTION OF CONCURRENT CORTISOL

2383

Fig. 1. Estimated deconvolution of the experimental 24-h concurrent ACTH and cortisol levels in ten women. In each panel, 1) the top subpanel shows the
measured 24-h ACTH time series (red stars), and the estimated ACTH levels (black curve), 2) the middle subpanel shows the measured 24-h cortisol time series
(red stars), and the estimated cortisol levels (black curve), 3) the bottom subpanel shows the estimated pulse timing and amplitudes (blue vertical lines with dots)
using concurrent measurements of ACTH and cortisol for the corresponding participant. The shaded gray area corresponds to sleep period and the white area
corresponds to wake period. The estimated model parameters are given in Table II.

2384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

TABLE II
ESTIMATED MODEL PARAMETERS FOR THE FITS TO THE EXPERIMENTAL ACTH
AND CORTISOL TIME SERIES
Participant
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Median

θ 1 (min−1 )

θ 2 (min−1 )

θ 3 (min−1 )

θ 4 (min−1 )

θ 5 (min−1 )

0.0043
0.0046
0.0054
0.0082
0.0054
0.0062
0.0060
0.0070
0.0045
0.0035
0.0054

4.2 × 10 −7
2.4 × 10 −7
2.5 × 10 −7
1.6 × 10 −7
2.8 × 10 −7
1.9 × 10 −7
1.3 × 10 −7
1.4 × 10 −7
1.1 × 10 −7
2.6 × 10 −7
2.2 × 10 −7

561
530
997
335
804
792
1161
382
205
548
554

0.5044
0.6513
0.9162
0.9788
0.9959
0.9995
0.4494
0.7089
0.1953
0.8185
0.7637

0.0510
0.0549
0.1055
0.0506
0.1092
0.0914
0.1122
0.0573
0.0488
0.0919
0.0743

The parameter θ 1 is the estimated infusion rate of ACTH from the anterior pituitary into
the circulation; θ 2 is the estimated cortisol negative feedback gain; θ 3 is the estimated
ACTH gain; θ 4 is the estimated coefficient corresponding to infusion of cortisol into the
circulation from the adrenal glands; and θ 5 is the estimated coefficient corresponding to
clearance of cortisol by the liver.

This step balances the units in the system of equations that describe the HPA axis. For evaluating the R2 , we estimated the
ACTH and cortisol levels using scaled θ values (reported in
Table II), and ACTH and cortisol initial conditions with units
ug
ug
dl . Also, the impulse input had units dl so that all equations
were balanced when evaluating the R2 . In implementing the
GCV-FOCUSS+ algorithm, we solve for u by letting p = 0.5.
Data analysis, estimation, and simulations were performed in
MATLAB R2011b.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 1 shows the model-predicted ACTH and cortisol estimates and the estimated amplitudes and timing of hormone
pulses for each participant. The timing and amplitudes of the
detected hormone pulses vary over a 24-h period across participants. The amplitudes of the recovered pulses have a circadian
rhythm; for most participants, there are fewer recovered pulses
at the beginning of the scheduled sleep, and there is a large pulse
toward the end of the sleep period or beginning of the wake period. There are multiple small- and medium-sized pulses during
the wake period.
The number of recovered pulses for all participants is within
their corresponding physiologically plausible ranges [2], [24]
and varies among participants. The squares of the multiple correlation coefficients (R2 ) are between 0.82 and 0.94 for cortisol
time series and between 0.46 and 0.79 for ACTH time series using concurrent measurements of ACTH and cortisol time series
(see Table III).
The number of pulses obtained using concurrent measurements of ACTH and cortisol range from 15 to 18 pulses; the
number of pulses obtained only from cortisol measurements
varies from 16 to 20 pulses. Fig. 2 shows the estimated secretory events of the anterior pituitary recovered using concurrent
ACTH and cortisol measurements as well as the estimated secretory events of the adrenal glands recovered using the cortisol
measurements. The timing of most of the significant pulses recovered from concurrent measurements of ACTH and cortisol

TABLE III
ESTIMATED NUMBER OF PULSES AND THE SQUARES OF THE
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS (R 2 ) FOR THE FITS
TO THE EXPERIMENTAL ACTH AND CORTISOL TIME SERIES
participant

M

N

2
RC

2
RA

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Median

18
17
16
17
18
20
16
16
16
20
17

18
17
16
17
15
15
17
16
17
17
17

0.94
0.88
0.94
0.88
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.89
0.83
0.82
0.89

0.74
0.65
0.66
0.73
0.52
0.58
0.51
0.79
0.67
0.46
0.66

M is the estimated number of cortisol pulses using only measurements
of cortisol levels, and N is the estimated number of ACTH pulses using
2
2
and R A
are
concurrent measurements of ACTH and cortisol levels. R C
the square of the multiple correlation coefficient for cortisol and ACTH
time series, respectively.

are in agreement with the timing of most significant pulses recovered only from cortisol measurements for most participants;
however, some of the less significant pulses are not in agreement
in terms of timing or have not been recovered when analyzing
concurrent ACTH and cortisol data versus cortisol data alone.
The mismatch between the detected ACTH secretory events and
cortisol secretory events could be due to the noise that exists in
the HPA axis during the secretion process as well as measurement noise or some nonlinearities in the HPA axis. These results
suggest that using only cortisol serum measurements one can
find the timing of most of the significant secretory events in
the HPA axis (i.e., the timing of pulses that are crucial in both
cortisol and ACTH profiles). By including ACTH serum measurements, either some of the pulses that were detected using
only cortisol data are not detected anymore or some new pulses
are captured that were not detected previously. Also, there can
be small differences in the timing of the detected pulses depending on whether cortisol data were used alone or both ACTH and
cortisol data were used. The amplitude of the recovered ACTH
secretory events are by four orders of magnitude smaller than
those of cortisol, which is expected as the amplitudes of the
ACTH data are by four orders of magnitude smaller than those
of the cortisol data.
The parameters θ4 and θ5 are estimated coefficients corresponding to the infusion and clearance of cortisol, respectively.
These coefficients are functions of the underlying infusion and
clearance rates of cortisol, respectively, which we reported in
[5]. Gains on ACTH are larger than the cortisol infusion and
clearance coefficients by four orders of magnitude and negative feedback gains on cortisol are smaller by four orders of
magnitude than the infusion rate of ACTH by the anterior pituitary. These differences in the orders of magnitudes are expected
as ACTH serum levels are smaller than cortisol serum levels
by four orders of magnitude. On average, after scaling up the
ACTH measurements by a factor of four orders of magnitude
and referring to the standard deviation
√ of the scaled-up ACTH
measurements as σA , we have σA ≈ 2σC .

FAGHIH et al.: QUANTIFYING PITUITARY-ADRENAL DYNAMICS AND DECONVOLUTION OF CONCURRENT CORTISOL

2385

Fig. 2. Comparison of estimated pulse timing and amplitudes using the experimental 24-h cortisol levels only with estimates from concurrent ACTH and cortisol
levels in ten women. Each panel shows the estimated pulse timing and amplitudes (blue vertical lines with dots) using concurrent measurements of ACTH and
cortisol, and the estimated pulse timing and amplitudes (red vertical lines with dots) using only cortisol measurements for the corresponding participant. The
shaded gray area corresponds to sleep period and the white area corresponds to wake period.

2386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

IV. DISCUSSION
Cortisol is released in pulses in response to pulses of ACTH,
and in return, has a negative feedback effect on ACTH release.
Typically, cortisol serum measurements are collected and analyzed, and simultaneous recording of ACTH and cortisol is not
typical. In this study, we analyze simultaneously recorded serum
ACTH and cortisol measurements from ten healthy women.
Modeling the HPA axis and determining the number, timings, and amplitudes of pulsatile events using simultaneously
recorded serum ACTH and cortisol measurements are challenging: Due to data collection costs, the sampling interval
of 10 min is relatively large compared to the interpulse intervals and secretion and clearance rates in the HPA axis. This
large sampling interval makes it challenging to identify the potential consecutive pulses that occur over one sampling interval as well as the potential delays over one sampling interval.
2) Since ACTH decays faster than cortisol, due to the low resolution of the data, the ACTH response to a small pulse might
not be observed in the ACTH data while the cortisol response
might be observed in the cortisol data. Distinguishing between
such a small pulse and noise is challenging. 3) The properties of
noise in the HPA axis are not known. 4) The HPA axis exhibits
circadian rhythmicity in multiple parameters over 24 h; therefore, the model parameters might be time varying. 5) There is
interindividual variation, even among healthy individuals.
We model ACTH and cortisol secretion simultaneously using
a third-order linear differential equations model with Gaussian
measurement errors and sparse pulsatile events as inputs to the
model. We propose a novel framework for recovering pulses and
parameters underlying interactions between ACTH and cortisol.
We recover the timing and amplitudes of pulses using compressed sensing, and employ GCV for determining the number
of pulses. We analyze simultaneously recorded serum ACTH
and cortisol levels sampled at 10-min intervals over 24 h from
ten healthy women. The 24 h began with 8 h of scheduled sleep
followed by 16 h of wake.
We recover physiologically plausible timings and amplitudes
for these pulses and model the feedback effect of cortisol. We
obtain 15 to 18 pulses over 24 h. The amplitudes and frequencies of the obtained secretory events are consistent with the
physiologically plausible amplitudes and pulse frequencies as
a function of the time of the day, without including an explicit
model for pulse amplitudes and interpulse intervals.
In [5], we modeled cortisol secretion using the first-order
kinetics underlying cortisol secretion and recovered the secretory events that lead to cortisol release and the corresponding
model parameters. The recovered pulses in this study are highly
consistent with cortisol serum measurements analysis using a
different model and estimation algorithm reported in [5]. Since
our model herein includes both ACTH and cortisol, pulses that
are detected using our approach are significant in both ACTH
or cortisol data, and pulses that only appear in ACTH or cortisol
data might be due to noise, and are not reported as significant.
For cortisol data, the high R2 values (above 0.82 for all ten participants) suggest that our proposed algorithm can successfully

reveal physiologically plausible information regarding cortisol
release in the HPA axis. Considering that the half-life of ACTH
is less than that of cortisol and a sampling interval of 10 min
cannot capture all the characteristics of the ACTH profile (e.g.,
the peak values), the current ACTH data are not as reliable as
the current cortisol data; this may explain why the R2 values
obtained for the ACTH data were lower than the R2 values
found for the cortisol data. The variations in the hormone data
also might be due to undersampling (when the sampling frequency is low), and experimental error that can be caused by
assay variability and pipetting [11].
Our model enables analyzing the HPA axis as a whole and
allows for accurate quantification of pulsatile events, and normal and pathological states relating the control of cortisol and
ACTH secretion. This can potentially lead to a systematic approach for treating disorders related to cortisol and also for
achieving normal cortisol secretion in an optimal manner. Modeling the interactions between ACTH and cortisol by including
concurrent data from both hormones allows for understanding
the input/output relationship between ACTH and cortisol. Currently, stimulation tests are used to diagnose hormonal disorders that are caused by a problem in the anterior pituitary or the
adrenal glands. Using data from a large population of healthy
human subjects, a model and a deconvolution algorithm that
includes the ACTH gain and cortisol negative feedback like the
model proposed in this study, we could find a range for model
parameters for the healthy population. This could then be used
to recognize the site of origin for some hormonal disorders of
the HPA axis for specific patients. For example, if a patient has
elevated cortisol levels, the model can distinguish whether the
negative feedback effect of cortisol on ACTH is too low, or the
gain on ACTH is too high, or the clearance rate of cortisol by the
liver is too low. The algorithm provided in our study is a novel
way of recovering the feedback gain, ACTH gain, and ACTH
secretory events simultaneously.
The described approach to the estimation of ACTH and cortisol measurements is a general approach that can similarly be
applied to concurrent measurements of other hormones. In this
paper, we used a state-space approach in estimation of the HPA
axis. We formulated the problem in a way that allows for concurrent deconvolution of two hormone profiles, while considering
one hormone (ACTH) as the input resulting in the release of the
other hormone (cortisol). The proposed state-space framework
can be applied to other hierarchical endocrine hormone systems
(e.g., thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroid hormone).
The proposed approach is also beneficial for analyzing concurrent measurements when one of the observations is very
noisy; using the proposed approach, one can fit the noisy data
implicitly and reduce the effect of noise when performing estimation. By implicitly fitting the ACTH data, we reduced the
effect of the high noise in the data, and compensated for the
cases in which there is a pulse of ACTH without a cortisol
response or vice versa.
While we used a deterministic approach for deconvolution of cortisol levels, it is possible to cast the parameter estimation problem as a Bayesian estimation problem by

FAGHIH et al.: QUANTIFYING PITUITARY-ADRENAL DYNAMICS AND DECONVOLUTION OF CONCURRENT CORTISOL

considering a Gaussian distribution for the 2 -norm and a
Laplace distribution for the 1 -norm in the cost function in
(8), and obtain confidence intervals for the model parameters and the pulses underlying cortisol secretion. Future directions of this research include developing a physiologically
plausible optimal control formulation that can result in impulse
control.
V. CONCLUSION
Cortisol is released in pulses (in response to pulses of ACTH),
and in return, has a negative feedback effect on ACTH release.
Simultaneous recording of ACTH and cortisol is not typical,
and determining the number, timing, and amplitudes of pulsatile events from simultaneously recorded data are challenging. In this study, we analyzed simultaneously recorded serum
ACTH and cortisol measurements from ten healthy women.
We modeled ACTH and cortisol secretion simultaneously using a linear differential equations model, with Gaussian errors
and sparse pulsatile events as inputs to the model. We proposed a novel framework for recovering pulses and parameters underlying the interactions between ACTH and cortisol.
We recovered the timing and amplitudes of pulses using compressed sensing, and employed GCV for determining the number of pulses. The amplitudes and frequencies of the obtained
secretory events are consistent with physiologically plausible
amplitudes and pulse frequencies as a function of the time of
the day, without including an explicit model for pulse amplitudes and interpulse intervals. Our model enables analyzing the
HPA axis as a whole and allows for accurate quantification
of pulsatile events, and normal and pathological states relating the control of cortisol and ACTH secretion. This can potentially lead to a systematic approach for optimally treating
disorders related to cortisol. The proposed state-space framework can be applied to other hierarchical endocrine hormone
systems (e.g., growth hormone, thyroid hormone, and gonadal
hormones).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
E. B. Klerman and G. K. Adler collected the data. R. T.
Faghih, M. A. Dahleh, and E. N. Brown developed the algorithms. R. T. Faghih analyzed the data and wrote the paper.
All authors edited the paper. Clinical studies were performed at
the Brigham and Women’s Hospital General Clinical Research
Center. Competing interests: E. B. Klerman received an unrestricted gift to the Brigham and Women’s Hospital from Sony
Corporation in 2011. The rest of the authors have declared that
no competing interests exist.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Boufounos et al., “Sparse signal reconstruction from noisy compressive
measurements using cross validation,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Statist.
Signal Process., 2007, pp. 299–303.
[2] E. N. Brown et al., “A stochastic differential equation model of diurnal
cortisol patterns,” Amer. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metabolism, vol. 280,
no. 3 pp. E450–E461, 2001.

2387

[3] M. Conrad et al., “Modeling the hypothalamus pituitary adrenal system:
Homeostasis by interacting positive and negative feedback,” J. Biol. Phys.,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 149–162, 2009.
[4] R. T. Faghih, “System identification of cortisol secretion: Characterizing
pulsatile dynamics,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci.,
Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014.
[5] R. T. Faghih et al., “Deconvolution of serum cortisol levels by using
compressed sensing,” PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 1, p. e85204, 2014.
[6] R. T. Faghih et al., “A feedback control model for cortisol secretion,” in
Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 716–719.
[7] R. T. Faghih, “The FitzHugh-Nagumo model dynamics with an application
to the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis,” S.M. thesis, Dept. Electr.
Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA,
2010.
[8] V. Frank et al., “The minimal model of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal
axis,” J. Math. Biol., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 663–690, 2011.
[9] G. H. Golub et al., “Generalized cross-validation as a method for choosing
a good ridge parameter,” Technometrics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 215–223,
1979.
[10] I. F. Gorodnitsky and B. D. Rao, “Sparse signal reconstruction from limited
data using FOCUSS: A re-weighted minimum norm algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 600–616, Mar. 1997.
[11] A. Gudmundsson and M. Carnes, “Pulsatile adrenocorticotropic hormone:
An overview,” Biol. Psychiatry, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 342–365, 1997.
[12] S. Gupta et al., “Inclusion of the glucocorticoid receptor in a hypothalamic
pituitary adrenal axis model reveals bistability,” Theor. Biol. Med. Model.,
vol. 4, no. 1, p. 8, 2007.
[13] Z. He et al. (2012, Feb.). On the convergence of FOCUSS algorithm for sparse representation. [Online]. CoRR,abs/1202.5470. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1202.5470.
[14] T. D. Johnson, “Bayesian deconvolution analysis of pulsatile hormone
concentration profiles,” Biometrics, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 650–660, 2003.
[15] W. M. Kettyle and R. A. Arky, Endocrine Pathophysiology, Philadelphia,
PA, USA: Lippincott-Raven, 1998.
[16] E. B. Klerman et al., “Circadian rhythms of women with fibromyalgia,”
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabolism, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 1034–1039, 2001.
[17] V. Kyrylov et al., “Modeling robust oscillatory behavior of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 1977–1983, Dec. 2005.
[18] P. Linkowski et al., “The 24-Hour profile of adrenocorticotropin and
cortisol in major depressive illness,” J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabolism,
vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 429–438, 1985.
[19] A. Lonnebo et al., “An integrated model for the effect of budesonide
on ACTH and cortisol in healthy volunteers,” Brit. J. Clin. Pharmacol.,
vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 125–132, 2007.
[20] J. F. Murray, “Visual recognition, inference and coding using learned
sparse overcomplete representations,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr.
Eng., Univ. California, San Diego, CA, USA, 2005.
[21] A. Peters et al., “The principle of homeostasis in the hypothalamuspituitary-adrenal system: New insight from positive feedback,” Amer. J.
Physiol. Regul., Integr. Comparative Physiol., vol. 293, no. 1, pp. R83–
R98, 2007,
[22] S. Refetoff et al., “The effect of dexamethasone on the 24-Hour profiles of adrenocorticotropin and cortisol in cushing’s syndrome*,” J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metabolism, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 527–535, 1985.
[23] E. Van Cauter, “Quantitative methods for the analysis of circadian and
episodic hormone fluctuations,” in Human Pituitary Hormones. New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 1981, pp. 1–28.
[24] J. D. Veldhuis et al., “Amplitude modulation of a burstlike mode of
cortisol secretion subserves the circadian glucocorticoid rhythm,” Amer.
J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metabolism, vol. 257, pp. E6–E14, 1989.
[25] A. Vidal et al., “Dynpeak: An algorithm for pulse detection and frequency analysis in hormonal time series,” PLOS ONE vol. 7, p. e39001,
2012.
[26] D. J. Vis et al., “Endocrine pulse identification using penalized methods and a minimum set of assumptions,” Amer. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metabolism, vol. 298, no. 2, pp. E146–E155, 2010.
[27] E. A. Young et al., “Twenty-four-hour ACTH and cortisol pulsatility
in depressed women,” Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 25, no. 267–276,
2001.
[28] R. Zdunek and A. Cichocki, “Improved M-FOCUSS algorithm with overlapping blocks for locally smooth sparse signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 4752–4761, 2008.

2388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Rose T. Faghih (S’12–M’15) received the B.S. degree (summa cum laude) in electrical engineering
(Hons.) from the University of Maryland, College
Park, MD, USA, in 2008, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science
with a minor in mathematics from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA,
USA, in 2010 and 2014, respectively.
She is currently a Postdoctoral Associate at the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT and a
Research Fellow at Massachusetts General Hospital
where she is a part of the MIT-Harvard Neuroscience Statistics Research Laboratory. She is also affiliated with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science and the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems
at MIT. Her research interests include control, estimation, and system identification of biomedical systems, with a focus on neural and endocrine systems in
health and disease.
Dr. Faghih was a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellow and received
an MIT Graduate Fellowship during her graduate studies. She received various
scholarships and awards during her undergraduate studies, including the University of Maryland President’s Scholarship, and the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering Chair’s Award. She has also been inducted into various
honor societies including Phi Kappa Phi, Tau Beta Pi, and Eta Kappa Nu.
Munther A. Dahleh (S’84–M’87–SM’97–F’01) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, USA,
in 1987.
Since 1987, he has been with the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
(EECS), MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA, where he
is currently the William A. Coolidge Professor of
EECS. He is currently the Director of the newly
formed MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society. Previously, he held the position of the Associate
Department Head of EECS. He has been a Visiting Professor at the Department
of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
USA, for the Spring of 1993. He has consulted for various national research
laboratories and companies. His work include various fields including game
theory, optimal control, distributed optimization, information theory, and distributed learning. His collaborations include faculty from all five schools at MIT.
He is the coauthor (with Ignacio Diaz-Bobillo) of the book Control of Uncertain Systems: A Linear Programming Approach (Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA:
Prentice-Hall, 1995) and the coauthor (with Nicola Elia) of the book Computational Methods for Controller Design (New York, NY, USA: Springer). He has
given many keynote lectures at major conferences. His research interests include
networked systems with applications to social and economic networks, transportation networks, neural networks, and power grid. Specifically, he focuses
on the development of foundational theory necessary to understand, monitor,
and control systemic risk in interconnected systems.
Dr. Dahleh received the George Axelby Outstanding Paper Award for the
best paper in the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL three times. He
also received the Donald P. Eckman Award from the American Control Council
in 1993 for the best control engineer under 35.
Gail K. Adler received the A.B. degree from Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, USA, the M.D. degree and the
Ph.D. degree in microbiology from New York University, New York, NY.
She completed her internal medicine internship
and residency at the University of Virginia Hospital
and her clinical research fellowship in endocrinology
at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. She then joined the faculty at Harvard Medical School where she is currently
an Associate Professor of medicine in the Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension at Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston. She is the Associate Clinical Research Center Director of the Harvard
Catalyst Clinical Research Center at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and
the Associate Program Director of the Training Program in Hypertension. She
has served on multiple national institutes of health study sections and is a past
Permanent Member of the Hypertension and Microcirculation Study Section.
She has served on the editorial boards of Endocrinology and the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism and is an Associate Editor for Endocrine
Reviews. She was elected as a Fellow by the American Heart Association and
the Council for High Blood Pressure Research.

Elizabeth B. Klerman received the B.Sc. degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, USA, the M.D. degree from
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, and the
Ph.D. degree in physiology from Harvard University,
Cambridge.
She is currently an Associate Professor and a
Physician in Medicine and Neurology within the
Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders at the
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School. She leads the Analytic and Modeling Unit
within that Division. Her research interests include experimental investigations
of the interactions of sleep, circadian rhythms, hormones, subjective alertness
and objective performance in humans and mathematical analyses and modeling
of sleep, circadian rhythms, hormones, subjective alertness, and objective performance. She is the Team Lead for the Human Factors and Performance Team
of the National Space Biomedical Institute.
Dr. Klerman was a Member of the Flexible Lighting Team that was awarded
the 2014 NASA Johnson Space Center Innovation Award for its work on the
new lighting being installed on the International Space Station. She has been
on the Board of the Association for Clinical and Translational Science and the
Sleep Research Society. She is a Research Fellow of the Holmes Society of
the Harvard Medical School and received the NIH K24 Award for support in
mentoring in patient-oriented research.

Emery N. Brown (M’01–SM’06–F’08) received the
B.A. degree from Harvard College, Cambridge, MA,
USA, the M.D. degree from Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, and the A.M. and Ph.D. degrees in
statistics from Harvard University, Cambridge.
He is the Edward Hood Taplin Professor of medical engineering at the Institute for Medical Engineering and Science and a Professor of computational
neuroscience at the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge; the Warren M. Zapol Professor
of Anaesthesia at Harvard Medical School; and an Anesthesiologist at the Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Cambridge. He is an Anesthesiologist-Statistician whose methodology research develops signal processing algorithms to characterize how the
brain represents and transmits information. His experimental research has made
important contributions to understanding the neurophysiological mechanisms
of how anesthetic drugs act in the brain to create the state of general anesthesia.
He was a Member of the NIH BRAIN Initiative Working Group.
Dr. Brown received the National Institute of Statistical Sciences Sacks Award
for Outstanding Cross-Disciplinary Research, an NIH Director’s Pioneer Award,
an NIH Director’s Transformative Research Award, and the 2015 Excellence in
Research Award from the American Society of Anesthesiologists. He is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, the American Institute of Medical
and Biological Engineering, the American Association for the Advancement
of Science, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is a 2015
Guggenheim Fellow in Applied Mathematics, a Member of the Institute of
Medicine, the National Academy of Sciences, and the National Academy of
Engineering.

