64

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Detecting Subclinical Diabetic Cardiac Autonomic
Neuropathy by Analyzing Ventricular
Repolarization Dynamics
Mohammad Hasan Imam, Student Member, IEEE, Chandan K. Karmakar, Member, IEEE,
Herbert F. Jelinek, Member, IEEE, Marimuthu Palaniswami, Fellow, IEEE,
and Ahsan H. Khandoker, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this study, a linear parametric modeling technique
was applied to model ventricular repolarization (VR) dynamics.
Three features were selected from the surface ECG recordings to
investigate the changes in VR dynamics in healthy and cardiac
autonomic neuropathy (CAN) participants with diabetes including heart rate variability (calculated from RR intervals), repolarization variability (calculated from QT intervals), and respiration [calculated by ECG-derived respiration (EDR)]. Surface
ECGs were recorded in a supine resting position from 80 agematched participants (40 with no cardiac autonomic neuropathy
(NCAN) and 40 with CAN). In the CAN group, 25 participants had
early/subclinical CAN (ECAN) and 15 participants were identified
with definite/clinical CAN (DCAN). Detecting subclinical CAN is
crucial for designing an effective treatment plan to prevent further cardiovascular complications. For CAN diagnosis, VR dynamics was analyzed using linear parametric autoregressive bivariate
(ARXAR) and trivariate (ARXXAR) models, which were estimated
using 250 beats of derived QT, RR, and EDR time series extracted
from the first 5 min of the recorded ECG signal. Results showed
that the EDR-based models gave a significantly higher fitting value
(p < 0.0001) than models without EDR, which indicates that QTRR dynamics is better explained by respiratory-information-based
models. Moreover, the QT-RR-EDR model fitting values gradually
decreased from the NCAN group to ECAN and DCAN groups,
which indicate a decoupling of QT from RR and the respiration
signal with the increase in severity of CAN. In this study, only the
EDR-based model significantly distinguished ECAN and DCAN
groups from the NCAN group (p < 0.05) with large effect sizes
(Cohen’s d > 0.75) showing the effectiveness of this modeling
technique in detecting subclinical CAN. In conclusion, the EDRbased trivariate QT-RR-EDR model was found to be better in
detecting the presence and severity of CAN than the bivariate QTRR model. This finding also establishes the importance of adding
Manuscript received October 23, 2014; revised April 8, 2015 and February
13, 2015; accepted April 21, 2015. Date of publication April 24, 2015; date of
current version December 31, 2015.
M. H. Imam and M. Palaniswami are with the Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic. 3010, Australia (e-mail: m.imam@student.unimelb.edu.au; palani@unimelb.edu.au).
C. K. Karmakar is with the Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic. 3010, Australia, and is also with the
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Data Analytics, Deakin University, Geelong,
Vic. 3220, Australia (e-mail: karmakar@unimelb.edu.au).
H. F. Jelinek is with the Centre for Research in Complex Systems and
the School of Community Health, Charles Sturt University, Albury, N.S.W.
2795, Australia, and also with the Australian School of Advanced Medicine,
Macquarie University, Sydney, N.S.W. 2109, Australia (e-mail: hjelinek@csu.
edu.au).
A. H. Khandoker is with the Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic. 3010, Australia, and is also
with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Khalifa University of Science,
Technology and Research, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail: ahsank@unimelb.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2426206

respiratory information for analyzing the gradual deterioration of
normal VR dynamics in pathological conditions, such as diabetic
CAN.
Index Terms—Cardiac autonomic neuropathy (CAN), coupling,
ECG-derived respiration (EDR), heart rate variability (HRV), linear parametric modeling, subclinical CAN, ventricular repolarization (VR) dynamics.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR disease is common in patients with
type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus [1]. One serious clinical
complication of diabetes is diabetic neuropathy including cardiac autonomic neuropathy (CAN), which is characterized by a
gradual increase in damage to the autonomic nerve fibers that
innervate the heart and blood vessels, resulting in abnormalities
in heart rate control and vascular dynamics [1]–[3]. Denervation of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) due to oxidative
stress leading to CAN increases the complexity in ventricular
repolarization (VR) dynamics, which can cause fatal arrhythmogenesis [3], [4]. The occurrence of confirmed CAN in diabetes
patients is approximately 20%, and increases up to 65% with
age and diabetes duration [3]. In addition, there is no established treatment plan for CAN. Therefore, early or subclinical
detection of CAN may lead to better treatment outcomes. Cardiovascular autonomic reflex tests proposed by Ewing et al. are
currently the gold standard for the detection and determination
of CAN progression [3], [5]. The main drawback of Ewing’s
autonomic reflex tests is the necessity of active participation by
the patients, which is not possible at all times due to comorbidities, such as cardiorespiratory pathology, obesity or frailty,
and the tests are not sensitive enough in detecting subclinical
CAN [6].
Recently ECG-based measures of heart rate variability (HRV)
and ventricular repolarization variability (VRV) have gained
popularity for CAN detection and prognosis due to the easily
available ECG signal recording and advanced computing algorithms to analyze the ECG for determining cardiac associated
pathology [7]. The traditional time- and frequency-domain analysis techniques of the ECG interbeat intervals (i.e., RR intervals)
have been applied for the detection of CAN and CAN progression [3], [7]. Time- and frequency-domain measures of HRV
provide an indication of the contribution of the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system on heart rate and VR, which
can reliably identify patients with symptomatic CAN [3], [6].
However, the results are not very sensitive for asymptomatic

C

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

IMAM et al.: DETECTING SUBCLINICAL DIABETIC CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY BY ANALYZING VENTRICULAR REPOLARIZATION

CAN at a subclinical level [6]. A decrease in HRV, prolongation
of heart rate corrected QT (i.e., QTc), alteration of dynamic
QT-RR relation, and a decrease or increase in QT dispersion
(QTd) measured from the surface ECG are the reported signs
of autonomic denervation and perturbed VR dynamics in diabetic CAN patients [1]–[3]. But, QTc prolongation is not a
reliable marker of VR heterogeneity due to the complexity of
correct determination of the heart rate corrected QT interval as
a result of the intersubject variability of the QT intervals, QT
hysteresis, and the effect of ANS control of ventricular force
of contractions [4], [8]. Therefore, dynamical analysis of the
QT interval might provide better information of CAN-related
alteration in VR [2], [9]. The coupling between HRV and respiratory information in terms of instantaneous lung volume (i.e.,
autonomically mediated coupling) and between respiration and
arterial blood pressure (i.e., mechanically mediated coupling)
were reported as useful measures for quantification of the severity of diabetic CAN using a system identification technique [10].
Therefore, the study of the dynamical changes of VR due to autonomic denervation may provide useful information in CAN
prognosis [4], [11]–[13].
Porta et al. proposed a methodology for analyzing dynamic
properties of the VR process noninvasively by modeling HRV
(i.e., RR interval variability) and VRV (i.e., QT interval variability) [13], [14]. Besides the direct effect of HRV, VRV is influenced by the ANS and factors, such as respiration, different
medication, and diverse pathological conditions [4], [11], [13].
Among other factors, respiration directly affects HRV through
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) and, hence, influences VRV
since there exists a direct relationship between VRV and HRV
[11], [13]. The direct modulatory effect of respiration on the QT
interval is reported in healthy human and heart failure patients
[15]. In our previous study, it was shown that use of respiration better reflects the changes of the repolarization dynamics
in healthy human participants due to ageing and altered psychological conditions [11]. Moreover, ECG-derived respiration
(EDR) was found to be an effective alternative to represent the
effect of the respiration signal in VR dynamics modeling for
healthy participants [11]. However, to our knowledge, the effectiveness of EDR-based VR dynamics modeling for detecting
pathological conditions and disease progression has not been
reported before.
The main objective of this study was to investigate the changes
in VR dynamics by using the linear parametric modeling techniques of QT and RR signals with and without respiratory information for the detection of the presence and the progression of
diabetic CAN. Preliminary results of this study were reported
in [9]. We propose a gradual decoupling of the QT from RR
interval and respiration with increasing severity of CAN that
can be revealed through modeling of VR dynamics using QT,
RR, and EDR extracted from the surface ECG. Another aim of
this study is to validate the use of EDR in place of respiration
to model VR dynamics in pathological conditions like diabetic
CAN and analyze the effect of EDR in dynamical changes of
VR due to CAN progression.

65

II. DATA AND METHOD
A. Study Population
All participants in this study were enrolled in the Diabetes
Complications Research Initiative at Charles Sturt University
[16]. The research protocol was approved by the Charles Sturt
University Ethics in Human Research Committee (03/164) and
complies with the declaration of Helsinki. Participants were
divided into three groups: 1) without or no CAN (NCAN),
2) diabetic early CAN (ECAN), and 3) diabetic definite CAN
(DCAN). Presence and the level of CAN was determined using
the suggested reference ranges for the outcome of five cardiac
ANS function tests as described by Ewing et al. [5]. These tests
measure changes in heart rate during lying to standing, deep
breathing, and the Valsalva manoeuvre, and the change in blood
pressure from lying to standing and during sustained forceful
handgrip. The criterion for NCAN was that all five tests had to be
within the normal range. For early signs of CAN, one heart rate
test had to be abnormal or two borderline. DCAN was defined
as two or more heart rate tests being abnormal. Details of the
experimental protocol have been reported in a previous study by
Karmakar et al. [6]. In this study, ECG signals were analyzed
for 80 age-matched participants (40 NCAN, 25 ECAN, and 15
DCAN), which include the whole population used in our previous study [6], [16]. Exclusion criteria included the presence of
cardiovascular, respiratory, renal disease, or use of antihypertensive or antiarrhythmic medication and any other comorbid
conditions that could influence ECG interbeat variability (i.e.,
RR interval variability) or T-wave characteristics. This ensured
that any changes in T-wave morphology (i.e., changes in VR
dynamics) and the interbeat or RR interval variability were due
to the presence or severity of CAN. We also carefully selected
ECGs with good SNR (i.e., ECG with clearly detectable highamplitude T wave) for all groups and selected participants with
ECGs having almost the same magnitude T wave so that QT
variability due to T-wave magnitude variation is minimized.
B. ECG Analysis
Twenty-minute Lead II ECG traces of all participants were
recorded with Powerlab and Macintosh Chart version 7 (ADInstruments) and the sampling rate set at 400 Hz in a supine resting
condition after a 5-min rest period to equilibrate the heart rate. A
digital notch filter at 50 Hz was applied to reduce the noise due
to electrical interference. Lead II was chosen for ECG recording as it normally provides the best T-wave morphology and the
strongest R peaks.
A 5-min ECG segment from the beginning of the each subject’s recording was selected for the analysis. The ECG signal
segment was filtered with a zero-phase linear high-pass (cut off
frequency 0.4 Hz) and low-pass filters (cut off frequency 40 Hz)
to remove baseline wandering and broadband noise, such as
muscle artefact. Filtered ECG segments were also manually
checked for baseline wandering due to the presence of any other
disturbances as they affect the EDR calculation. The RR interval
was found from the difference between two consecutive R wave

66

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

peaks, which were detected using the algorithm proposed by
Pan et al. [17]. The Q wave onset (i.e., Q point) is determined
by detecting the time instant where the gradient of the QRS
complex becomes negative to the left of the R wave peak. The
QT interval was calculated as the difference between the Q wave
onset and T-wave end point (i.e., QT end interval) in a cardiac
cycle. The end of the T wave is detected using the maximum
slope intercept method, which defines the end of the T wave as
the intercept between the isoelectric line with the tangent drawn
through the maximum down slope of the T wave [18], [19].
This method of T-wave end detection was successfully used in
several QT interval variability analysis studies [11], [20], [21].
The presence of nonsinus beats (i.e., ectopic beats) was checked
from the RR time series using the approach of Huikuri et al. [22].
An ectopic beat is detected when successive differences of beatto-beat RR interval exceed 100 ms. Moreover, we discarded any
QT interval that are outside of the three standard deviation (SD)
band for modeling as used in our previous study [11]. When any
RR or QT interval was removed, the corresponding QT or RR
interval was also discarded to retain equal numbers of RR and
QT intervals for model inputs. The respiratory information was
extracted as EDR from the beat-to-beat amplitude variation of
the R waves [23], [24]. The EDR time series is generated by
detecting the amplitude of each R wave peak from ECG filtered
for baseline wandering [11].
C. Liner Parametric Model Formation
Due to substantial intersubject variation of the QT-RR relation
[8], each subject was modeled individually using the fixed model
structure (i.e., bivariate ARXAR and trivariate ARXXAR) by
varying the model order and measuring performance in predicting the QT interval. First 250 consecutive beats of the derived
RR, QT, and EDR time series from the 5-min ECG segments
were used for the autoregressive models with single and double
exogenous inputs with an autoregressive noise term. QT, RR,
and EDR time series data were linearly detrended by subtracting
the mean and dividing by the SD before using the data as input
to model.
We analyzed a bivariate (ARXRR AR) and a trivariate
(ARXRR XEDR AR) linear parametric model with RR and EDR
as exogenous inputs for model estimation and validation using
the methodology proposed by Porta et al. [13].
The equation of the bivariate QT-RR model is
QT (i) = AQT −QT (z) ∗QT (i) + BQT −RR (z) ∗RR (i) + n(i)

(1)
and for the trivariate QT-RR-EDR model including EDR as
respiratory information is

QT (i) = AQT−QT (z) ∗QT (i) + BQT−RR (z) ∗RR (i)
+ BQT−EDR (z) ∗EDR (i) + n(i)

(2)

where
QT = {QT (i) , i = 1, 2, . . . , N } , RR =
{RR (i) , i = 1, 2, . . . , N } , and {EDR (i) , i = 1, 2, . . . , N }
are the beat-to-beat time series of the model output and
input variables and N is the total number of beats counted
for building the model, in this study N = 250. The model
equations indicate that it describes the QT variability by taking

account of the effect of previous QT intervals, current and
previous RR intervals, current and previous respiration or EDR
beats independent of RR, and other unknown inherent factors
independent of RR and respiration, which are modeled by the
noise term, n(i). A and B represent the model transfer function
polynomials whose order indicate the memory effect of QT,
RR, and EDR and indicates how the QT interval is affected by
the previous QT, RR, and EDR intervals and other factors (i.e.,
ANS effect on VR).
The goodness of fit value for the model is calculated from
the mean-squared prediction error, which measures the ability
of the model structure to fit the data. The fit values vary from
0 to 1, where 1 indicates perfect fit and 0 indicates the model
cannot describe the system dynamics for the input-output data
[25]. The higher goodness of fit values indicates a higher model
prediction capability and a more coupled structure between input
and output variables. A decrease in model fitting value specifies
the decoupling of output from the input variables and an increase
in complexity of the system dynamics [11], [13], [26]. The basic
block diagram of the model structure used in this study is shown
in Fig. 1.
The coefficients of the model transfer function polynomials
(i.e., A and B) were calculated using the prediction error estimation method (PEM) for linear models and residual analysis was
applied to choose the valid model [25]. The range of model order variation was fixed for all participants and within that range,
the best model order was selected by applying the Akaike information criteria [27]. Details of the model analysis are described
elsewhere [11], [13].
D. Surrogate Analysis
Surrogate analysis was used in this study to validate the coupling effect of respiration (i.e., EDR) on VR dynamics. Using
this technique, the model performance was calculated and compared including both original EDR and surrogate EDR signals
(EDRrand ), which contains the power spectrum similar to that of
the original EDR but uncoupled from each other. EDRrand was
generated by the Fourier-transform-based surrogate data analysis method [28], [29]. In this method, EDRrand was generated
by randomizing the phase (from −π to π) of the Fourier transform of original EDR data keeping the amplitude unchanged
and by applying the inverse transform of the phase randomized
series to generate the surrogate EDR time series. This method
distorts the dynamical information of the original EDR by removing the coupling from the surrogate EDR, but does not affect
the spectral properties of the original EDR data. Then, we used
EDRrand as the respiration signal input to the model and tested
the model performance by measuring the model fit for every
subject with the surrogate EDR. In this study, the EDR time series was surrogated 60 times for each subject and each surrogate
EDR was treated as EDRrand for the model input. A similar
model structure and model order that was used for model estimation with the original EDR signal was applied to determine
the model prediction capability with each EDRrand signal for
every subject. Only the converged model fitting values (i.e.,
negative fit values were discarded) for every randomized
EDRrand signal were recorded. Therefore, for each subject,

IMAM et al.: DETECTING SUBCLINICAL DIABETIC CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY BY ANALYZING VENTRICULAR REPOLARIZATION

67

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the trivariate (ARXR R XE D R AR) linear parametric model structure. For bivariate model (ARXR R AR) model, the EDR branch of the
block diagram is not used.

a maximum of 60 fitting values was obtained for the EDRrand
signal. Finally, the average of the fitting values obtained for a
particular subject was taken as the fit value of the EDRrand based model for that subject. The hypothesis is that if EDR has
a coupled effect on QT then such effect should be diminished
with the use of an EDRrand signal, which does not have actual
coupling with QT, since the dynamics of EDR was destroyed in
EDRrand signal. This effect will be reflected by the significantly
lower fit values for the model with EDRrand as input compared
to the original EDR-based model. This surrogate analysis verifies whether the changes in model fitting values with the addition
of EDR is due to the actual coupling effect of respiration with
QT on VR dynamics or it is just a random effect due to addition
of an extra exogenous input.
E. Receiver-Operating Characteristic (ROC)
and Statistical Analysis
Nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis test was used to check the
statistical difference of the model fit values and other RR- and
QT-based parameters among the three groups after checking
for normality of the data using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.
Then, the Bonferroni post hoc test was performed to compare
pairwise differences between subject groups. Mann–Whitney
U test was performed for pairwise comparison between two
groups. A value of p < 0.05 was considered significant.
In order to quantify the classification efficiency of a feature,
ROC analysis was used [30], with the area under the curve
(AUC) for the classifier feature representing goodness of fit in
our study. An AUC area value of 0.5 indicates that the distributions of the features are similar in the two groups with no discriminatory power. Conversely, an AUC area value of 1.0 would
mean that the distribution of the features of the two groups do
not overlap at all. The AUC was approximated numerically using the trapezoidal rule, where the larger the AUC is, the better
the discriminatory performance [30].
Effect size was assessed by Cohen’s d [31] values to measure
the strength of the model fitting values in differentiating the
study groups. A value of d = 0.2 to 0.3 shows a small effect
size, d ≥ 0.5 shows medium effect size, and a value of d ≥ 0.8
shows large effect size [31]. The effect size for a feature is a
more reliable measure for classification and it complements the

Fig. 2. Representative figure showing the trend of changes in RR, QT, and
EDR time series with CAN progression for a subject in three groups.

p value statistics when sample size changes [32]. All statistical
calculations were carried out using the statistical toolbox in
MATLAB R2012b.
III. RESULTS
Beat-to-beat variation of the derived RR, QT, and EDR time
series of 250 beats from the 5-min ECG segments of a single subject from each of the three groups (i.e., NCAN, ECAN
and DCAN) is shown in Fig. 2. The mean and the variance of
RR and QT time series is shown in Table I. Mean RR interval
and RR interval variance progressively decreased in magnitude
from NCAN to DCAN, whereas the mean QT interval duration increased in the ECAN and DCAN groups with respect to
the NCAN group, although the increase in QT interval is not
significantly different from the NCAN group (see Table I). RR
variance can significantly differentiate the NCAN group from
the CAN (ECAN and DCAN) groups. The variance of QT in the
ECAN group is greater than for the NCAN and DCAN groups,
but the QT variance is less in the DCAN group compared to the
NCAN group (see Table I). The high variance of the QT interval
in the ECAN group might be the result of increased sympathetic

68

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE I
VARIATION OF MEAN AND VARIANCE OF RR AND QT INTERVALS IN THREE
SUBJECT GROUPS [NCAN (WITHOUT CAN), ECAN (EARLY CAN), AND DCAN
(DEFINITE CAN)]
Features

NCAN

ECAN

DCAN

Mean RR(ms)
930.45 ± 121.06 907.41 ± 149.45 903.47 ± 125.96
1100 ± 896 ∗
520 ± 386 ∗
Variance of RR(ms2 ) 1799 ± 1600
Mean QT(ms)
404.34 ± 26.62 412.05 ± 36.06 413.91 ± 40.31
191 ± 170
233 ± 205
154 ± 150
Variance of QT(ms2 )

p value
0.251
0.0003
0.584
0.356

All values are expressed in median (first-third quartile).
∗
indicates ECAN and DCAN groups’ RR variance is significantly different from NCAN
group.

TABLE II
IMPROVEMENT IN GOODNESS OF FIT VALUES DUE TO ADDITION OF
RESPIRATORY INFORMATION OF TWO MODELS (ARXR R AR AND
ARXR R XE D R AR) IN THREE GROUPS (NCAN, ECAN, AND DCAN)
Group
NCAN (40)
ECAN (25)
DCAN (15)

ARXR R AR

ARXR R XE D R AR

p value

0.44(0.41–0.48)
0.40(0.37–0.46)
0.41(0.39–0.45)

0.61(0.59–0.65)
0.59(0.54–0.63)#
0.56(0.53–0.60)∗

9.15e–14
2.89e–9
1.10e–5

P values were calculated using Mann Whitney U test.
All values are expressed in median (first-third quartile).
#
indicates that the ECAN group is significantly different from the
NCAN group (p < 0.05).
∗
indicates that DCAN is significantly different from NCAN (p < 0.05).

drive due to early parasympathetic withdrawal at the subclinical
stage of CAN [3], [33].
The median (IQR) goodness of fit values of the ARXRR AR
and ARXRR XEDR AR models for the participants in all three
groups (NCAN, ECAN, and DCAN) are shown in Table II. The
fit values were significantly (p < 0.0001) higher for the EDRbased model (ARXRR XEDR AR) for all three groups compared
to ARXRR AR model. In contrast to the ARXRR AR model, the
ARXRR XEDR AR model showed clearly the gradual decreasing pattern in median fit values from NCAN with increasing
severity of CAN [see Table II and Fig. 3 (left panel)] and the
difference in fit values among the three groups were also significant (p = 0.001). The Bonferroni post hoc test results showed
that the fit values of the ARXRR XEDR AR model could significantly (p < 0.05) differentiate the NCAN group from both the
ECAN and DCAN groups (see Fig. 3, left panel). Although,
ARXRR AR showed decreased fit value for groups with diabetic CAN (ECAN and DCAN) compared to the healthy group
(NCAN), the difference in fit values with progression of CAN
was not statistically significant between any groups and not
pronounced particularly between the ECAN and DCAN group.
To check the classification efficiency between any two of the
possible combinations of three groups (NCAN versus DCAN,
NCAN versus ECAN, and ECAN versus DCAN), we performed
an ROC analysis for the ARXRR XEDR AR model. An ROC area
of 0.75, 0.70, and 0.57 was found for the NCAN versus DCAN,
NCAN versus ECAN, and ECAN versus DCAN, respectively
(see Fig. 3, right panel).

Median (IQR) values of goodness of fit for the original EDR-based model (ARXRR XEDR AR) and surrogate EDR
(EDRrand )-based model (ARXRR XEDRrand AR) for all three
groups of participants are shown in Table III. Fit values were
significantly lower (p < 0.05) for ARXRR XEDRrand AR model
compared to ARXRR XEDR AR model proving that the significant improvement in fit values of the ARXRR XEDR AR model
than the ARXRR AR model (see Table III) is due to the coupling
effect of respiration (i.e., EDR) on VR dynamics rather than the
addition of a random exogenous input.
Table IV shows the p values and corresponding effect sizes
(i.e., Cohen’s d) to evaluate the strength of classification of the
feature (model fit values) for comparison between two groups.
Larger effect size (d > 0.75) with significant p values (p <
0.05) were found for the ARXRR XEDR AR model in classifying NCAN from ECAN and DCAN groups, which proves the
effectiveness of the use of respiration-based models in a larger
population with the same pathological characteristics. Although
the ARXRR AR model showed a medium effect size for classification of ECAN and DCAN groups (d = 0.551 and 0.561) from
NCAN, the p values are not significant and this model cannot
be reliably used for CAN prognosis.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, we validated the application of an autoregressive
model-based VR dynamics analysis technique in the detection
and progression of CAN in diabetes participants. In addition, we
verified the effect of respiratory information on modeling VR
dynamics in differentiating different levels of CAN. Previous
studies have shown that respiratory information in terms of either respiration or EDR can improve the dynamical description
of VR in healthy subjects [11], [13] and linear parametric modeling of VR dynamics with EDR can be used as a detector of
CAN in diabetes [9]. In the current study, we expanded our previous work by adding more diabetic participants without CAN and
adding another new subject group with ECAN to extend our previous findings that an EDR-based VR dynamics model can also
successfully detect the presence of CAN at a subclinical level
(ECAN) in addition to the clinical level (DCAN) and describe
the alteration of VR dynamics associated with CAN progression.
Recent studies support the effectiveness of determining CAN
from short-term ECG using HRV and VRV (e.g., 5- to 10-min
recordings) [3], [6], [7], [9]. The relationship between shortterm HRV and EDR were found to be linear with the variation
of QT interval when the ECG is recorded in a supine resting
condition with spontaneous breathing [11], [13], [34]. The current study with 250 beats of RR and QT intervals extracted from
the 5-min ECG using linear parametric autoregressive models
in identifying progression of CAN is, therefore, valid and can
provide information about the coupling between VR, HRV, and
respiration [11], [14], [25]. The analysis of the alteration in the
autonomically mediated physiological coupling mechanism between respiration and heart rate as well as between respiration
and blood pressure was previously reported in quantifying diabetic CAN and shown to be promising for disease prognosis [10]. In this study, we have investigated the changes in

IMAM et al.: DETECTING SUBCLINICAL DIABETIC CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY BY ANALYZING VENTRICULAR REPOLARIZATION

69

Fig. 3. Variation in model fit in three groups for ARXR R AR and ARXR R XE D R AR models (left panel); ∗ indicates that the ECAN group is significantly
different from the NCAN group (p < 0.05); and # indicates that DCAN is significantly different from NCAN (p < 0.05). Right panel shows ROC curves and
AUC indicating the classification efficiency of the ARXR R XE D R AR model fitting values when comparing between each of the two group combinations of the
study.

VR dynamics related to CAN progression using the open-loop
modeling of QT, RR, and EDR as a surrogate of respiration to
investigate the effect of coupling of RR and respiration with QT
in diabetic CAN.
EDR used in our modeling study to represent the respiratory
information was also found to affect VR dynamics through its
effect on QT and RR intervals in healthy subjects with ageing
and psychological changes [11]. EDR was calculated from the
variation of the mean cardiac electrical axis rotation due to respiration, which causes modulation of the R-wave amplitude using
the method described elsewhere [11], [35]. EDR was found to
reproduce respiration information even with very low RSA in
aged and pathological conditions with no major respiratory abnormalities [23], [34]. The method of EDR determination used
in this study is also quite robust against muscle artefact and
broadband noise [36]. The findings of the current study showed
that fit values of the EDR-based model significantly increased
in all groups of participants compared to models without EDR
(see Table II and Fig. 3). In addition, the results of surrogate
EDR (i.e., EDRrand ) based modeling showed that the significant improvement of model fitting comes from the coupling
effect of respiration with QT rather than due to any random
effect generated from the addition of any extra exogenous input to the model. Moreover, this significant increase in model
fit, due to the addition of respiratory information (i.e., EDR),
in a QT-RR model indicates the presence of a coupled causal
link from respiration to QT according to the Granger causality
principle [26]. The decrease in model prediction capacity with
severity of CAN indicates the decrease in the strength of this
causal coupling, which may play a role in CAN progression.
The presence of a nonautonomic high-frequency power component in the RR interval spectra of CAN subjects might arise
due to a mechanical effect of respiration causing the changes in
lung volume [37]. This effect can be described properly using

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF MODEL FITTING VALUES GENERATED BY THE MODELS USING
ORIGINAL EDR AND SURROGATE EDR (EDRR A N D )
Group
NCAN(40)
ECAN(25)
DCAN(15)

ARXR R XE D R AR

ARXR R XE D R r a n d AR

p value

0.61(0.59–0.65)
0.59(0.54–0.63)
0.56 (0.53–0.60)

0.51 (0.50–0.55)
0.49(0.46–0.50)
0.50(0.46–0.53)

1.60E–10
3.67E–09
7.01E–03

All values are expressed in median (first-third quartile).

the EDR-signal-based modeling of VR dynamics. These results
validate the use of EDR as an alternative of respiration in CAN
diagnosis.
Since CAN is characterized by the gradual denervation of
sympathetic and parasympathetic branches innervating the heart
[1], [3], the control mechanism of the ANS and respiration on
heart rate and VR will also become affected by CAN and can
be analyzed by modeling VR dynamics using QT, RR, and the
respiration signal [9], [11], [13]. The significant decrease in the
ARXRR XEDR AR model fit value with the increased severity of
CAN (see Fig. 3, left panel) reflects the gradual decoupling of
QT from RR and respiration due to ANS denervation [11], [13],
[26]. However, such trend became less pronounced (especially
between ECAN and DCAN groups) and was not significantly
different between the groups for the ARXRR AR model without
any respiratory information. Only the EDR-based model could
successfully detect this deterioration of VR dynamics with CAN
progression in the current study. This indicates that the use
of respiratory information in terms of EDR as an exogenous
input significantly improves the modeling performance, which
established the respiration related effects on VR dynamics in
diabetic CAN participants.
The decrease in model fitting values might be the result of increased QT variability in diabetic CAN participants, which also

70

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE IV
COMPARING THE STRENGTH OF THE DIFFERENTIATION CAPABILITY USING
GOODNESS OF FIT BETWEEN EVERY TWO GROUP COMBINATIONS USING THE
P VALUES AND COHEN’S D IN TWO MODEL TYPES
Groups to compare

NCAN versus ECAN
NCAN versus DCAN
ECAN versus DCAN

ARXR R AR

ARXR R XE D R AR

p value

Cohen’s d

p value

Cohen’s d

0.05
0.06
0.84

0.56
0.56
0.009

0.01
0.008
0.45

0.76
1.18
0.15

indicates the increased risk of arrhythmogenesis in CAN participants [3], [4], [20], [33]. Porta et al. reported that a gradual
decoupling of QT and RR intervals occurred in healthy individuals with applied sympathetic activation by graded head up tilting
is due to the greater amount of vagal withdrawal rather than the
increase in sympathetic tone [38]. In our study, the model fitting values decrease rapidly from NCAN to the ECAN group,
which are characterized as having sympathetic over activation
due to early parasympathetic denervation [1]–[3]. Therefore,
the decoupling of QT from RR and respiration is mainly due to
sympathetic over activation in the early stage of CAN, which
is evident from the rapid decrease in model fit values. The RR
variance decreased and the QT variance and variability (i.e., SD
of QT) increased in the ECAN group compared to the NCAN
group, indicating the increase in sympathetic tone in the ECAN
group [33]. At the severe stage of CAN, both branches of the
ANS are denervated which causes more decoupling of RR and
respiration from QT as evidenced by the gradual decrease in
fit values. The unpublished results of this study indicated that
SDRR and RMSSD decrease rapidly like the variance of RR
more than the decrease in SDQT at the DCAN stage, indicating that these HRV indices, which measure mainly the effect
of parasympathetic nervous system input, affect the decoupling
more than the sympathetic branch of the ANS as reported by
Porta et al. [38]. This decoupling can only be detected by respiratory information-based models, which indicate that the coupling
between respiration and QT is also affected during progression
of CAN.
Another important finding of this study is that the addition of EDR as an exogenous input for dynamical analysis of
VR enhances the model capability to detect subclinical CAN
(i.e., ECAN), whereas a QT-RR model cannot (see Table IV
and Fig. 3, left panel). Analysis of effect size also strengthens our findings that the EDR-based model was more effective
(d > 0.75) in classifying ECAN and DCAN groups from the
NCAN group (see Table IV) than that of the models without
respiration. The large effect size indicates that this effect is
expected to be present in a larger population with same pathological characteristics [32]. Autonomic reflex tests proposed
by Ewing et al. [5] and traditional HRV-based techniques for
CAN detection are not very sensitive for the identification of
asymptomatic or subclinical CAN (i.e., ECAN) [6]. However,
identifying subclinical CAN is crucial in providing effective
timely treatment [2], [3]. Therefore, dynamical analysis of VR
by EDR-based modeling proves to be more sensitive than that

of a model without respiration, which can be used as an effective marker for subclinical CAN detection. The results of ROC
analysis showed that the classification efficiency of respirationbased modeling in case of NCAN versus DCAN (i.e., AUC =
0.75) is better than that of NCAN versus ECAN (i.e., AUC =
0.70), although the model can differentiate ECAN from NCAN
with reasonable accuracy.
In addition, the unpublished results of our study indicated that
only QTend interval-based models with respiratory information
could detect the presence and progression of CAN, whereas
QTp eak interval-based models could not. This finding establishes the importance of analyzing the total duration of ventricular depolarization and repolarization (i.e., QTend interval) from
the ECG in diagnosis of pathological conditions, which indicates
that Tp eak –Tend interval might contain important information
of VRV due to ANS modulation [4]. In summary, modeling dynamical changes of VR with CAN progression using RR, QTend ,
and EDR as surrogate respiratory information (i.e., QT-RR-EDR
model) can be used effectively for diabetic CAN classification.
The methodology of QT interval detection from ECG affects the
amount of QT variability included in the measured QT interval
series data [4], [39], which in turn can affect model performance. In our study, we used the slope intercept method for QT
interval detection after applying proper filtering techniques for
removing baseline wandering and broadband noise within the
ECG. This method of T-wave end detection is reported to be
more reproducible [40] and used successfully in several QT interval variability studies where correct QT interval detection is
critical [20], [21]. We prefer this method for QT interval detection in pathology other than the semiautomated template-based
methods of QT interval detection, where a number of beats are
rejected due to absence of normal sinus rhythm ECG and results in less variability of the QT interval, which might contain
prognostic information of disease [8]. It may also be necessary
to manually select QT intervals in certain patient cohorts for detecting pathology-related T-wave morphology, provided proper
ECG noise removal criteria are fulfilled and good quality ECGs
are available with clearly visible high-amplitude T waves.
A. Limitations
For the EDR-based model to be applied in characterizing the
VR dynamics in CAN progression, respiratory pathology has
to be absent and the ECG signal has to be recorded at stable
resting condition (e.g., supine or sitting). Our next experiments
will include patients with respiratory disease to elucidate the effect of respiratory pathology on modeling. In addition, the effect
of controlled breathing on the EDR-based VR dynamics modeling should be investigated if suitable respiratory recordings
will be available as it is difficult to record ECG and controlled
respiration signals simultaneously in severe CAN participants.
Although the effect size analysis supports our findings with
the small sample size, a larger population needs to be used
for further validation of the model performance. We carefully
selected age-matched participants so that the dynamics represented by the model actually represent the repolarization characteristics changes due to CAN as ageing was found to affect the

IMAM et al.: DETECTING SUBCLINICAL DIABETIC CARDIAC AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY BY ANALYZING VENTRICULAR REPOLARIZATION

model prediction capability in our previous study [11]. Further
studies should investigate the effectiveness of the EDR-based
model in analyzing ageing and duration of diabetes on CAN
prognosis.
V. CONCLUSION
Addition of respiratory information (i.e., EDR) with QT and
RR intervals in modeling VR variability proved its effectiveness in describing the increases in complexity of VR dynamics
in diabetic CAN participants with disease progression. EDRbased models can also detect subclinical CAN (ECAN), which
is crucial for better diagnosis of diabetic patients and treatment
outcomes. These results strongly suggest the use of respiratory
information in analyzing VR in both healthy and pathological
conditions, where an ECG signal is recorded with spontaneous
breathing, participants are in stable conditions without any postural maneuver, and any comorbid conditions that affect normal
respiratory effort are absent.

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank B. de Jong for the assistance
in obtaining the ECG recording and the Ewing battery results
and also the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments
that helped to improve the quality of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Kuehl and M. J. Stevens, “Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathies
as complications of diabetes mellitus,” Nature Rev. Endocrinol., vol. 8,
no. 7, pp. 405–416, Jul. 2012.
[2] V. Spallone, D. Ziegler, R. Freeman, L. Bernardi, S. Frontoni, R. PopBusui, M. Stevens, P. Kempler, J. Hilsted, S. Tesfaye, P. Low, P. Valensi,
and Toronto Consensus Panel on Diabetic, “Cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy in diabetes: Clinical impact, assessment, diagnosis, and management,” Diabetes Metabolism Res. Rev., vol. 27, pp. 639–653, Jun. 22,
2011.
[3] R. Pop-Busui, “Cardiac autonomic neuropathy in diabetes: A clinical
perspective,” Diabetes Care, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 434–441, Feb. 2010.
[4] J. P. Couderc, “Measurement and regulation of cardiac ventricular repolarization: from the QT interval to repolarization morphology,” Philos.
Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 367, no. 1892, pp. 1283–99, Apr. 13,
2009.
[5] D. J. Ewing, C. N. Martyn, R. J. Young, and B. F. Clarke, “The value of
cardiovascular autonomic function tests: 10 years experience in diabetes,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 491–498, Sep./Oct. 1985.
[6] C. K. Karmakar, A. H. Khandoker, H. F. Jelinek, and M. Palaniswami,
“Risk stratification of cardiac autonomic neuropathy based on multi-lag
Tone-Entropy,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 537–546,
May 2013.
[7] C. Voulgari, N. Tentolouris, and C. Stefanadis, “The ECG vertigo
in diabetes and cardiac autonomic neuropathy,” Exp. Diabetes Res.,
vol. 2011, art. no. 687624, 17 pages, 2011. doi:10.1155/2011/687624
[8] M. Malik, K. Hnatkova, D. Kowalski, J. J. Keirns, and E. M. van Gelderen,
“Importance of subject-specific QT/RR curvatures in the design of individual heart rate corrections of the QT interval,” J Electrocardiol., vol. 45,
no. 6, pp. 571–581, Nov./Dec. 2012.
[9] M. H. Imam, C. Karmakar, A. Khandoker, H. Jelinek, and M. Palaniswami,
“Detection of cardiac autonomic neuropathy using linear parametric
modeling of QT dynamics,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiology Conf., 2013,
pp. 1019–1022.
[10] R. Mukkamala, J. M. Mathias, T. J. Mullen, R. J. Cohen, and R. Freeman, “System identification of closed-loop cardiovascular control mechanisms: Diabetic autonomic neuropathy,” Am. J. Physiol., vol. 276, no. 3,
pp. R905–R912, Mar. 1999.
[11] M. H. Imam, C. K. Karmakar, A. H. Khandoker, and M. Palaniswami, “Effect of ECG-derived respiration (EDR) on modeling ventricular repolar-

[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

71

ization dynamics in different physiological and psychological conditions,”
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 851–860, Oct. 2014.
R. Almeida, S. Gouveia, A. P. Rocha, E. Pueyo, J. P. Martinez, and P.
Laguna, “QT variability and HRV interactions in ECG: Quantification
and reliability,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1317–1329,
Jul. 2006.
A. Porta, E. Tobaldini, T. Gnecchi-Ruscone, and N. Montano, “RT variability unrelated to heart period and respiration progressively increases
during graded head-up tilt,” Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circulatory Physiol.,
vol. 298, no. 5, pp. H1406–H1414, May 2010.
A. Porta, G. Baselli, E. Caiani, A. Malliani, F. Lombardi, and
S. Cerutti, “Quantifying electrocardiogram RT-RR variability interactions,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 27–34,
Jan. 1998.
B. Hanson, N. Child, S. Van Duijvenboden, M. Orini, Z. Chen, R. Coronel,
C. A. Rinaldi, J. S. Gill, J. S. Gill, and P. Taggart, (2014). “Oscillatory
behavior of ventricular action potential duration in heart failure patients at
respiratory rate and low frequency,” Front. Physiol., vol. 5, p. 414, 2014.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00414
H. F. Jelinek, C. Wilding, and P. Tinely, “An innovative multi-disciplinary
diabetes complications screening program in a rural community: A description and preliminary results of the screening,” Aust. J. Primary
Health, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 14–20, 2006.
J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
A. Yamada, J. Hayano, K. Horie, K. Ieda, S. Mukai, M. Yamada, and T.
Fujinami, “Regulation of QT interval during postural transitory changes
in heart rate in normal subjects,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 71, no. 11,
pp. 996–998, Apr. 15, 1993.
E. Lepeschkin and B. Surawicz, “The measurement of the QT interval of
the electrocardiogram,” Circulation, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 378–388, 1952.
A. H. Khandoker, M. H. Imam, J. Couderc, M. Palaniswami, and H. F.
Jelinek, “QT variability index changes with severity of cardiovascular
autonomic neuropathy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 5,
pp. 900–906, Aug. 2012.
M. Hinterseer, B.-M. Beckmann, M. B. Thomsen, A. Pfeufer, M. Ulbrich,
M. F. Sinner, S. Perz, H. Wichmann, C. Lengyel, and R. Schimpf, “Usefulness of short-term variability of QT intervals as a predictor for electrical
remodeling and proarrhythmia in patients with nonischemic heart failure,”
Am. J. Cardiology, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 216–220, 2010.
H. V. Huikuri, J. O. Valkama, K. E. Airaksinen, T. Seppänen, K. M.
Kessler, J. T. Takkunen, and R. J. Myerburg, “Frequency domain measures of heart rate variability before the onset of nonsustained and sustained ventricular tachycardia in patients with coronary artery disease,”
Circulation, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 1220–1228, Apr. 1, 1993.
G. B. Moody, R. G. Mark, M. A. Bump, J. S. Weinstein, A. D. Berman, J.
E. Mietus, and A. L. Goldberger, “Clinical validation of the ECG-derived
respiration (EDR) technique,” Comput. Cardiol., vol. 13, pp. 507–510,
1986.
Z. B. Khaled and G. Farges, “First approach for respiratory monitoring
by amplitude demodulation of the electrocardiogram,” in Proc. IEEE 14th
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Oct. 29, 1992–Nov. 1, 1992, vol. 6,
pp. 2535–2536.
L. Lennart, System Identification: Theory for the User. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1999.
A. Porta, T. Bassani, V. Bari, E. Tobaldini, A. C. M. Takahashi, A. M.
Catai, and N. Montano, “Model-based assessment of baroreflex and cardiopulmonary couplings during graded head-up tilt,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 298–305, 2012.
H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control, vol. AC-19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, Dec. 1974.
J. Theiler, S. Eubank, A. Longtin, B. Galdrikian, and J. Doyne Farmer,
“Testing for nonlinearity in time series: The method of surrogate data,”
Physica D, Nonlinear Phenom., vol. 58, nos. 1–4, pp. 77–94, Sep. 15,
1992.
L. Faes, G. D. Pinna, A. Porta, R. Maestri, and G. Nollo, “Surrogate data
analysis for assessing the significance of the coherence function,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 1156–1166, Jul. 2004.
J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil, “The meaning and use of the area under
a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve,” Radiology, vol. 143, no.
1, pp. 29–36, Apr. 1982.
J. Cohen, “A power primer,” Psychol. Bull., vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 155–159,
Jul. 1992.
H. Hentschke and M. C. Stüttgen, “Computation of measures of effect size for neuroscience data sets,” Eur. J. Neurosci., vol. 34, no. 12,
pp. 1887–1894, 2011.

72

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

[33] J. W. Sacre, B. Franjic, J. S. Coombes, T. H. Marwick, and M. Baumert,
“QT interval variability in type 2 diabetic patients with cardiac sympathetic
dysinnervation assessed by 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy,”
J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 305–313, Mar. 2013.
[34] G. G. Berntson, J. T. Cacioppo, and K. S. Quigley, “Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: autonomic origins, physiological mechanisms, and psychophysiological implications,” Psychophysiology, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 183–196,
Mar. 1993.
[35] J. Boyle, N. Bidargaddi, A. Sarela, and M. Karunanithi, “Automatic detection of respiration rate from ambulatory single-lead ECG,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 890–896, Nov. 2009.
[36] E. Helfenbein, R. Firoozabadi, S. Chien, E. Carlson, and S. Babaeizadeh,
“Development of three methods for extracting respiration from the surface
ECG: A review,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 819–825, Nov./Dec.
2014.
[37] V. Spallone and G. Menzinger, “Diagnosis of cardiovascular autonomic
neuropathy in diabetes,” Diabetes, vol. 46, pp. S67–S76, Sep. 1997.
[38] A. Porta, V. Bari, F. Badilini, E. Tobaldini, T. Gnecchi-Ruscone, and
N. Montano, “Frequency domain assessment of the coupling strength
between ventricular repolarization duration and heart period during graded
head-up tilt,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 662–668, 2011.
[39] M. Baumert, V. Starc, and A. Porta, (2012). “Conventional QT variability measurement versus template matching techniques: Comparison of
performance using simulated and real ECG,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 7,
p. e41920, 2012. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041920
[40] V. Salvi, D. R. Karnad, G. K. Panicker, M. Natekar, P. Hingorani, V. Kerkar,
A. Ramasamy, M. de Vries, T. Zumbrunnen, S. Kothari, and D. Narula,
“Comparison of 5 methods of QT interval measurements on electrocardiograms from a thorough QT/QTc study: Effect on assay sensitivity and
categorical outliers,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 96–104, 2011.

Mohammad Hasan Imam (S’12) received the
B.Sc.Eng. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2004. He
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia.
His research interests include cardiovascular system identification, heart rate variability (HRV) and
ventricular repolarization variability (VRV) analysis,
dynamical analysis techniques for HRV, respiration,
and VRV in the diagnosis of various pathological conditions, arrhythmia detection techniques from surface ECG.

Chandan K. Karmakar (S’07–M’11) received the
B.Sc.Eng. degree in computer science and engineering from the Shah Jalal University of Science and
Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh, in 1999, and the
Doctor of Engineering degree from the University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia, in 2012.
He is currently working as a Postdoctoral Research
Fellow with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne. He has
published one book and more than 40 peer-reviewed
journals and conference articles in the research field
of physiological signal processing and modeling. His research interests include
biomedical devices and signal processing, cardiovascular and neural system
related to sleep disordered breathing, human gait dysfunctions, cardiovascular
diseases, and diabetic autonomic neuropathy.

Herbert F. Jelinek (M’09) received the B.Sc. (Hons.)
degree in human genetics from the University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia in 1984, followed by
a Graduate Diploma degree in neuroscience from the
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
in 1986, and the Ph.D. degree in medicine from the
University of Sydney, Sydney in 1996.
He is an honorary Clinical Associate Professor
with the Australian School of Advanced Medicine,
Macquarie University, Sydney, and a Member of the
Center for Research in Complex Systems, Charles
Sturt University, Albury, Australia. He has been organizing a rural diabetes
complications screening research project for more than ten years in Australia and
has published widely on ECG signal processing and diabetic retinopathy image
analysis, as well as biomarkers associated with diabetes disease progression.
His current research interests include neurogenetics of diabetes and cognitive
function.
Dr. Jelinek is a Member of the IEEE Biomedical Engineering Society and
the Australian Diabetes Association.

Marimuthu Palaniswami (S’84–M’87–SM’94–
F’12) received the M.E. degree from the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India in 1977, the
M.Eng.Sc. degree from the University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia in 1983, and the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Newcastle, Callaghan,
Australia in 1987.
He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University
of Melbourne. He has published more than 400 refereed research papers and led one of the largest funded
Australian Research Council, Research Network on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor
Networks, and Information Processing program. He has been a Grants Panel
Member for NSF, an Advisory Board Member for the European FP6 Grant
Center, a Steering Committee Member for National Collaborative Research
Infrastructure Strategy, Great Barrier Reef Ocean Observing System, Smart Environmental Monitoring and Analysis Technologies, and a Board Member for
Information Technology and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Companies. He has been funded by several ARC and industry grants (over 40 m) to
conduct research in vector machines sensors and sensor networks, IoT, machine
learning, neural network, pattern recognition, signal processing, and control
areas. He is representing Australia as a core partner in European Union FP7
projects, such as SENSEI, Smart Santander, Internet of Things Initiative, and
SocIoTal.

Ahsan H. Khandoker (M’07–SM’12) received the
B.Sc. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 1996,
the M.Eng.Sc. degree from Multimedia University,
Malaysia, in 1999, and the M.Eng. and Doctor of Engineering degrees in physiological engineering from
the Muroran Institute of Technology, Muroran, Japan,
in 2001 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently working as an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Biomedical Engineering at
Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE. He is also working as a Senior Research
Fellow for Australian Research Council Research Networks on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing at the University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia. He has published 40 peer-reviewed journal
articles and more than 75 conference papers. His research field of interests include physiological signal processing and modeling in fetal cardiac disorders,
sleep disordered breathing, diabetic autonomic neuropathy, and human gait dysfunction, and is passionate about research helping clinicians to noninvasively
diagnose diseases at early stage. He has also worked with several Australian
Medical device manufacturing industries, as well as hospitals as a Research
Consultant focusing on the integration of technology in clinical settings.

