2498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Visual Servoed Three-Dimensional Cell
Rotation System
Zenan Wang∗ , Member, IEEE, Win Tun Latt, Member, IEEE, Steven Yih Min Tan, and Wei Tech Ang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Three-dimensional (3-D) positioning and orientation
of embryos/oocytes is necessary to facilitate micromanipulation
tasks such as cell injection and cellular structural biopsy commonly
performed under a microscope. Conventional cell orientation is
performed manually by using a vacuum equipped micropipette to
aspirate and release the cell, which is a trial-and-error approach.
The conventional method relies heavily on the skill of the operator;
it also suffers from low precision, low success rate and low controllability. These drawbacks illustrate the need for a systematic 3-D
cell rotational system to automate the cell orientation process. In
this paper, we present a noninvasive single cell rotation system that
can automatically orientate a zebrafish embryo to a desired position when both the cytoplasm and the yolk are in the focal plane. A
three-point-contact model for cell rotation that involves a customdesigned rotational stage is introduced to provide precise rotational
position control. A vision recognition algorithm is also proposed
to enable the visual servoing function of the system. Experimental
results show that the proposed system can achieve high success
rates of 92.5% (x-axis rotation with 40 trails) and 97.5% (about
the z-axis with 80 trails). The system can also successfully complete
3-D cell orientation at an average speed of 31 s/cell with a high inplane rotation accuracy of 0.3◦ . As a high precise, high controllable
and deterministic cell manipulating system, it provides a starting
point for automated cell manipulation for intracytoplasmic sperm
injection and embryo biopsy for preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
Index Terms—Cell manipulation, cell recognition, cell rotation,
embryo biopsy, visual servo.

I. INTRODUCTION
VER the past decade, biological cell manipulation has
been moving toward fully automated operation [1], [2].
Both cell injection and intracellular structure biopsy require cells
to be rotated in three-dimensional (3-D) space for targeted access of cellular structures. Orientation control of biological cells
plays a very important role in cell manipulation as it is necessary
for many biomedical researches, such as cell position control in
zebrafish embryo injection [3], polar body orientation in intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) [4]–[7], and perivitelline space
orientation in embryo biopsy for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) [8]–[10]. As applications that require rotational cell

O

Manuscript received January 21, 2015; revised April 8, 2015; accepted May
13, 2015. Date of publication May 15, 2015; date of current version September 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by Singapore Polytechnic, by
Nanyang Technological University, and by a grant from Ministry of Education
[MOETIF funding (MOE2013-TIF-2-G-014)]. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ Z. Wang and W. T. Ang are with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Ave, 639798
Singapore (e-mail: wang0682@e.ntu.edu.sg).
W. T. Latt and S. Y. M. Tan are with the School of Mechanical and Aeronautical Engineering, Singapore Polytechnic, 500 Dover Road, 139651, Singapore.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2434102

manipulation are getting more popular, an automated 3-D cell
rotation approach that allows high success rate, high precision
and high reproducibility becomes highly desirable.
The typical approach for cell rotation involves a skilled operator who will manually manipulate the cells via a glass micropipette [11] that is connected to a microinjector. The operator
rotates the cell randomly by repeatedly aspirating and releasing
the cell until the desired orientation is achieved. Manual cell manipulation requires extensive experience to conduct while still
suffering from low precision, low success rate and low controllability due to its trial-and-error nature. Any improvement to the
success rate and speed of operation largely depends on the skill
of the operator.
Several cell rotation approaches have been introduced in the
literature recently. Optical tweezers that utilizes a focused laser
beam to realize the rotation of microscopic objects [12] are increasingly used to orientate individual cells [13]–[17]. However,
this method is limited by its low controllability about the cells’
pitch axis, and a maximum size limit of micro objects that can be
manipulated [18]. A rotational stage and a through-hole embryo
holder facilitate polar body orientation in ICSI [2], [19], [20].
However, this system and technique is limited to rotation around
an axis perpendicular to the field of vision of the microscope.
Strong static magnetic fields [21], [22] were shown to be capable of rotating cells. However, the magnetic fields’ alignment
restricts the achievable cell orientations. Dielectrophoresis was
introduced to rotate cells by using a nonuniform electric field
[23]–[25]. However, the electric field required for cell rotation
can damage cells significantly [26]. Fluidic flow control was introduced to perform 3-D mouse oocyte rotation for polar body
orientation [27]. However, the actual forces applied on the object are difficult to predict, and this method is not a deterministic
approach to orientate a cell. Hence, the aforementioned methods
are incapable of producing predicable 3-D cell rotation, which
is essential for ICSI and PGD.
For an oocyte, its cellular structure can most easily be discerned with a particular cross-sectional view. The focal plane
of the microscope must thus be aligned with the cutting plane
of this cross section. This can be done by rotating the cell about
the axis lying within the focal plane. To automate this process, a
method that uses visual recognition and tracking of target cellular structures to recognize the moment that the cross section and
the focal plane have come into alignment needs to be developed.
In this paper, we propose a system that uses multiple
techniques to perform automated 3-D rotational control of a
zebrafish embryo. A three-point contact method that enables
3-D cell rotation is introduced. The system employs a customdesigned rotational microscopy device and a microscope stage

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOED THREE-DIMENSIONAL CELL ROTATION SYSTEM

2499

Fig. 3.
Fig. 1.

Schematic illustration of the 3-D cell rotation process.

Fig. 2.

Embryo manipulation system setup.

3-D model of the in-house made rotational stage.

motorized z-axis (Mrzhuser Wetzlar, ECO-MOT, Germany), a
custom-designed rotational stage, and a 659 × 490-pixel CCD
camera (Basler, scA640-74gc, Germany) for visual servo control of embryo position and orientation. The XY stage has 30 mm
travel range with 0.02 μm resolution and ±1 μm repeatability,
while the Z stage has 0.002 μm resolution. Images are taken
through objective lens with magnification factor of 4 and a
0.1 numerical aperture (Nikon, Plan Fluor, Japan), and were
processed by the computer in real time (30 Hz). A pair of micropipettes (Eppendorf; tip diameter: 10 μm, tilting angle: 35◦ )
are mounted on a pair of 3-DOF motorized stages (National
Aperture Inc., MM-4M-F, USA) for the establishment of the
rotational axis of the embryo. The linear micromanipulator has
0.1 μm resolution (0.124 μm per count) and 50 mm travel range.
B. Rotational Stage Design

to enable two dimensional cell rotations about the z-axis. Used
in conjunction with a pair of capillary glass pipettes, the contact points between cell and micropipettes and the contact point
between the cell and the bottom of the petri dish established
a three-point contact mechanism that allows the embryo to be
rotated in the third dimension. A pattern recognition algorithm
(dimension measurement) was developed and applied to test
the performance of the system. The visual servo control was
successful in orienting the zebrafish embryo such that the yolk
and the cytoplasm are viewed at the ideal cross section, with
the cytoplasm facing 3 o’clock direction. A schematic illustration of the process of rotating a cell in the three dimensions is
given in Fig. 1. Experimental results demonstrate that our system can provide a reliable, repeatable and highly precise 3-D
cell rotation.
II. SYSTEM DESIGN
A. System Setup
Fig. 2 shows the setup of the system, which consists of a standard upright microscope (Nikon, Eclipse FN1, Japan) equipped
with a motorized X-Y stage (Narishige, ITS-FN1, Japan), a

In order to realize the 3-D embryo rotation with the proposed
three-point contact approach, a rotational stage is required. In
order to meet the requirements of the micromanipulation system and suit the characteristics of the upright microscope, the
rotational stage conforms to the following requirements: 1) no
obstruction of the microscope’s field of view; 2) low height to
ensure that the sample is within the depth of field of the microscope and allow sufficient working space for operation; 3)
a compact structure to fit into the existing translational stage;
4) fast and smooth rotational motion. As no existing rotational
stage satisfies all of the requirements, it is necessary to customdesign the stage to realize the described cell rotation method.
A CAD image of the resulting rotational stage is shown in
Fig. 3. The rotational stage consists of a stepper motor with
planetary gearheads with reduction ratio of 275:1, a pair of
spur gears with gear ratio of 8.5:1 that transmits the rotational
motions, and a commercially available petri dish that loads the
sample cells. The height of the rotational stage (excluding the
petri dish) is 2 mm, which is the height of the loading plate
of the existing microscope platform. Thus, the introduction of
the rotational stage does not compromise the depth of field of
the microscope. Furthermore, since a commercially available
petri dish is installed on the stage, the image quality is ensured.
Fast and smooth rotational motion in compact structure was

2500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 5. Enlarged view of the contact forces and torque that act on the embryo.
O c and R are the center and radius of the cell, respectively. N, f, τ and α are
the normal contract force, friction force, axle torque and angular acceleration,
respectively. C is the effective point of contact, which has a distance D from
O c . x and r are the contact interference and radius of contact area, respectively.

Fig. 4. (a) Three contact points on the rotating cell and the angular change,
β, about the x-axis. (b) Determination of the coordinate of the axle points a and
b in xy plane and the distance R p between the cell center O c and the petri dish
center O p . (c) Determination of the coordinate of the axle point a and b in z-axis
by applying window 2 (green).

achieved by using the spur gear pair and a 0.3 mm Teflon washer.
The rotation stage can achieve a maximum rotational speed of
1440◦ /s with a high rotational positioning resolution of 0.02◦ .
C. Three-Point Cell Rotation Model
The three points of contact of the three-point cell rotation
model are illustrated in Fig. 4(a). Points a and b serve to immobilize the embryo along the x-axis. Point c (surface contact)
provides the torque to rotate the embryo. When an embryo is
positioned at the 3 or 9 o’clock position of the petri dish, the
friction force exerted on the point c of the embryo is perpendicular to the line that connects points a and b, and a torque to
rotate the embryo about the x-axis is generated.
1) Establishment of the Three Contact Points: To determine
the position of points a and b, the upper most and lower most
boundaries of the embryo are first recognized by computer vision, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The coordinate of points a and b
along the y-axis is the average of that of the two boundary lines.
A line parallel to the x-axis with the same y-coordinate intersects with the cell boundary at two points. The x-coordinates
of points a and b are the coordinate of those intersections ± l,
respectively, where l is less than 3 μm in this case.
The z-coordinates are found by applying an autofocusing algorithm to find the image plane with the best sharpness value.
The accuracy of the selected z-coordinate largely depends on the
type of computer vision used, and is important as an additional
push-down or lift-up force will be exerted on the cell during rotation if the contact points deviate too far from the center of the
cell. The most common window selection for autofocusing is to
draw a window that covers the entire target object. However, the

sharpness information derived from the internal cellular structure of the embryo tends to dominate that from the embryo’s
membrane. As the sharpness of the cell membrane provides the
most pertinent information about the appropriate z-coordinate
to use, the corona shape focusing window is selected as the area
around the cell membrane. Fig. 4(c) shows that the selection of
focusing windows affects the shape of the distribution curves
produced by the focusing measurement function. Window 2, a
coronal window, was found to be much more accurate in focusing on the embryo’s membrane.
2) Cell Rotation Model: Rolling friction is a key factor mediating the rolling motions of the embryo. Rolling friction on the
round object can be modeled by applying the ideas presented in
[28], [29]. Two factors are responsible for generating the frictional forces: the frictional torque about the axis opposing the
cell’s rotational motion, and the deformation of the cell. In our
experiment, the cell is assumed to be an elastic sphere. Since
the axle/micropipette does not penetrate the cell, and the micropipette is significantly thinner than the diameter of the cell
(≈1:120), the angular forces exerted on the cell due to contact
with the micropipettes are very small. Thus, the torque τ can be
safely neglected. Deformation is represented as the flattening
of the cell. The relation between rolling friction and angular
acceleration is derived as follows.
Fig. 5 shows the normal contact force, N, and torque, τ , that
act on the cell. Letting m be the mass of the cell and considering
the equilibrium condition in the vertical direction, the normal
contact force generated at the effective point of contact between
the cell and petri dish, C, can be evaluated to be
N = mg.

(1)

The frictional force tangent to the petri dish’s surface is then
f = ma = μN = μmg.

(2)

By Newton’s second law, the relation between angular acceleration and resulting torques is formulated and we get
a
2
mR2 ×
5
R
2
f
2
= mR ×
= Rf
5
m
5

N D + τ − f (R − x) = Iα =

(3)

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOED THREE-DIMENSIONAL CELL ROTATION SYSTEM

2501

where D is the perpendicular distance between the vector N and
the cell center, Oc ; D can be estimated to be half of the radius
of the contact interference, r.

R2 − (R − x)2
r
∼
(4)
D= =
2
2
x is the contact interference; R represents the radius of the cell;
I is the moment of inertia of the cell; and α is the angular
acceleration of the cell. Substituting (1), (2) and (4) into (3)
gives

R2 − (R − x)2
μr = μ =
.
(5)
2 × ( 75 R − x)
Note that μ is the coefficient of rolling friction, which can be
written as μr to avoid confusion. Hence, the rolling friction
coefficient, μr , can be found if x and R are known.
A zebrafish embryo on a petri dish can be considered to be
a spherical object that is pushed against a hard flat surface by
the force of gravity. In this process, the sphere may transition
between three different phases: the elastic compression phase,
the elasto-plastic compression phase and the restitution phase.
Since critical deformation of the embryo is not expected to occur,
the deformation of the embryo can be considered to be only the
result of elastic compression. When only elastic deformation
occurs, the Hertz law can be applied to obtain the pushing force
3

P = k1 x 2

(6)

where
4 √
E R
(7)
3
and E is the equivalent elastic modulus [30] that can be calculated from
k1 =

1
1 − v12
1 − v22
=
+
E
E1
E2

(8)

where E1 , E2 , v1 and v2 are the elastic moduli and the Poisson’s ratios of the sphere and the flat surface, respectively. The
equation of motion of the embryo can be given as
3

mẍ = mg − k1 x 2 .

(9)

When the acceleration of the embryo is zero, the equation can
be written as
3

mg = k1 x 2 .
Thus, by substituting (7) and (8) into (10) we obtain

2
3mg(E1 + E2 − v22 E1 − v12 E2 ) 3
√
x=
.
4E1 E2 R

(10)

(11)

The diameter of a zebrafish embryo, including the chorion, is approximately 1.2 mm; the density of a single cell is approximately
1.079 g/mL [31]. By using these figures, the approximate mass
of the embryo can be calculated. The Poisson’s ratio and Young’s
modulus of a zebrafish embryo are determined experimentally
to be 0.48 and 1.51 MPa, respectively [32], [33]. The equivalent
material properties of plastic are 0.35 and 2.6 GPa, respectively.
Taking 9.8 N/kg for g, the contact interference x is found to

Fig. 6.

Operation sequence for the cell rotation.

be 0.2816 μm. The value for μr can then be obtained. By substituting μr into (2) and (3), α is calculated to be 18.2 rad/s2 .
If the angular velocity of the cell is small, say 0.036 rad/s (the
angular velocity setting of our system), the time required for
acceleration is 0.003 s. Since the acceleration time period is
so short, we can assume the cell rolls immediately when the
rotational stage starts to rotate. Therefore, we can estimate the
relationship between angular change of cell, β, in the xz plane
and rotational stage angular change, γ [see Fig. 3(b)], as
β=

γRp
.
R

(12)

3) Operation Sequence for the Cell Rotation Control: Our
cell rotation control process is illustrated in Fig. 6. The cell
rotation process starts by aligning the rotational axis of the rotational stage with the center of the microscope’s field of view.
Next, the x-axis of the stage is moved in the positive direction
toward the 3 o’clock position. During batch cell manipulation,
fluid dispensed from a micropipette can be used to draw a circular cell loading area around the center of the petri dish, Op
[see Fig. 4(b)], by rotating the stage by 360◦ . The radius of the
circle is approximately Rp . In our experiment, we load a cell
at the 3 o’clock position, with the center of the cell a distance
Rp away from Op . Determination of the positions of points a
and b using the aforementioned technique (see Fig. 4) allows
the two micropipettes to move toward the corresponding points
by a distance of xd (see Fig. 7) to immobilize the target embryo
and establish the three-point contact structure for rotation.
Measurement of the cellular structure is used to determine if
the cell needs to be rotated about the x-axis or can proceed to adjusting in-plane orientation immediately. If the measurement of
the cellular structure does not meet the predefined requirement,
the rotational stage is activated to enable cell rotation about the
x-axis by closing switch S1 in Fig. 7. Visual servo is used to control the rotational stage to roll the cell until the measurement of
the cellular structure meets the imposed requirement. Once cell
rotation about the x-axis is completed, the cell is released from
the micropipettes. The cellular structure angle is measured and
checked against the predefined requirement to determine if cell
rotation about the z-axis should be performed. In-plane rotation
control involves the use of the micromanipulator for cell release,

2502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 7. System control architecture. The X-Y-Z manipulator is for rotational
supporting points positioning. X-Y stage is for translational motion. The rotational stage is for cell rotation about the x-axis (switch S1 ) and in-plane cell
orientation (switch S2 ). xd , O d , A d and θd are desired values for positions and
measurements.

the XY stage for translational motion and the rotational stage for
rotational motion (rotational stage is connected to switch S2 in
Fig. 7). The cellular structure is monitored visually to track its
angular position which will be used by the rotational stage for
angle control and the XY stage for cell translational displacement
tracking. Once the angle meets the user’s requirement (e.g. 0◦
or 3 o’clock position), the in-plane cell rotation process stops;
and the cell is ready for further operation, such as injection and
biopsy.
III. CELL ROTATION CONTROL
A. Cellular Structure Recognition
Orienting the internal cellular structure to a desired orientation is the main purpose of 3-D cell rotation technique. The
cellular structure can be the polar body of an oocyte [27], the
perivitelline space of an embryo [8], etc. In our experiment, the
target cellular structure is the yolk and the cytoplasm of a zebrafish embryo. Microinjection of zebrafish embryos typically
targets its yolk or cytoplasm [34]. Our system serves to orient
the yolk and the cytoplasm to facilitate the injection. Although
a precise orientation need not be achieved for microinjection of
zebrafish embryos to be successful, it may be more critical in
other microoperations, and hence the value of our 3-D rotation
technique. In this paper, work done on the zebrafish embryos
serve to validate the performance of the 3-D rotation system.
The cellular structure recognition algorithm identifies the current position of the embryo. If the embryo is properly oriented
around the x-axis with the ideal cross section aligned with the
focal plane, the system proceeds to perform cell rotation about
the z-axis. Otherwise, the necessary rotation about the x-axis is
performed before proceeding with the rest of the procedure.
A binary image of the embryo is obtained by applying adaptive Otsu thresholding on the original image. A series of morphology processing including image closing (dilation then erosion), boundary pixel elimination and image opening (erosion
then dilation) are applied to the binary image to eliminate boundary pixels, noises and small particles. The binary image of the

Fig. 8. Image segmentation of the target internal cellular structure. (a) Original
image. (b) Binary image. (c) Binary image after removal of chorion. (d) Morphological processing of (c) to obtain the area A. (e) Identification of CM1 , the
estimating center of the yolk and CM2 , the estimating center of the cytoplasm.
(f) Determination of direction of the cytoplasm, θ.

chorion is removed to form a binary image of the target internal
cellular structure by searching for the largest connected binary
component, as shown in Fig. 8(c). After image closing and the
filling of holes, the binary image of the yolk and the cytoplasm
is obtained. The center of mass of the yolk is estimated to be
the center of mass of the area of the hole in the binary image
in Fig. 8(c). The presence of the hole is due to strong light reflection off the yoke portion of the cell. The center of mass of
the cytoplasm is taken to be the center of mass of the remaining
portion of the binary image after dilating the hole in Fig. 8(c).
The area of (number of pixels covered by) the binary image
of the yolk and the cytoplasm is considered as cellular structure
measurement value, A. The value of A changes when the cell
is rotated about the x-axis and reaches a maximum magnitude
when the ideal cross section is aligned with the focal plane.
Our algorithm is designed to search for the largest A value. The
in-plane rotational angle, θ, is defined as the angle between the
x-axis and the line that connects CM1 and CM2 . Note that θ is
calculated after x-axis cell rotation has been completed and the
cell has been released by the micropipettes.
B. Cell Rotation About the x-Axis
The cell needs to be rotated about the x-axis to find the orientation at which A is at its maximum. As the micropipettes are
oriented with their lengths run parallel to the x-axis, the cell is
first loaded at the 3 o’clock or 9 o’clock position with a distance
Rp away from the center of the petri dish, such that a tangential
force along the y-axis can be generated from the contact with
the petri dish to cause a torque that effects the desired rotation,
as illustrated in Fig. 9. The micropipettes then move to points a
and b, as illustrated in Fig. 4, to establish the axis of rotation.
Experimental results proved that rolling friction was sufficient
to make the embryo roll on a dry petri dish when no buoyant force is present. However, when water is introduced to the
petri dish, the embryo experienced a buoyant force that significantly reduced the normal force generated at the contact surface,

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOED THREE-DIMENSIONAL CELL ROTATION SYSTEM

2503

Fig. 9. Diagram of cell rotation about the x-axis. (a) Top view. (b) Diagram
of cell rotation about the z-axis (Top view). (c) Front view.

leading to a significant reduction in rolling friction. In addition,
the thin water layer between the embryo and the petri dish provided lubrication that causes the real friction coefficient to be
smaller than μr . In order to generate sufficient deformation and
normal force, the embryo needs to be pushed downwards against
the petri dish. As the effect of this thin layer of water between
the embryo and the petri dish on the friction coefficient is difficult to be measured, we chose to push the embryo down by
twice the x value to compensate for the decrease in the friction
coefficient.
The desired angular velocity of the cell, ω, rolling about the
x-axis is 0.036 rad/s. The corresponding angular velocity of the
rotational stage, ωp is 43 r/min, obtained by using (12), with
Rp and R being 7 and 0.6 mm, respectively. The A value, which
is used to visually servo the rotational stage, is the input to
the rotation controller. A piecewise controller controls the realtime angular velocity of the rotational stage, ωr p , by switching
between a few states
⎧
ωp
if Am ax = Ap eak
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
k[Ai − 0.996 × Am ax ]ωp if Ai > 0.996 × Am ax
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
Ai ≤ Ai−1
ωrp =
⎪
⎪
0
if Ai ≤ 0.996 × Am ax
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
Ai ≤ Ai−1
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
−k[Am ax − Aend ]ωp
if Ai ≤ Am ax , Ai > Ai−1
(13)
where Am ax is the maximum value of Ai , Ap eak is the value of
A at the peak and Aend is the final A value when the rotational
stage stops. Am ax is set to be positive infinity till it receives
the first measured A value. The system starts the rotation of
the cell with an angular velocity of ωp to search for the first
peak of the plot of the Ai , as shown in Fig. 10. Once the first
peak value is found, the rotational motion slows down to an
angular velocity of k[Ai − 0.996 × Am ax ]ωp with the k adjusted
to a value of 0.0002. The rotational stage starts its motion in
the counterclockwise direction [see Fig. 11(a)–(c)]. As the cell
rotates, the control system continually notes the value of Ai , and
once its value drops below 0.996 × Am ax , the rotation stops [see

Fig. 10.

Plot of the A values with angular speed of the rotational stage.

Fig. 11. Cell rotation about the x-axis. (a) Initial position with A i = 3.27
× 104 pixel2 . (b)–(c) Cytoplasm is partially in the focal plane, thus the A i is
increasing from 3.48 × 104 to 3.70 × 104 pixel2 . (d) Cytoplasm is totally in
the focal plane and A i reaches it maximum, 3.81 × 104 pixel2 .

Fig. 11(d)]. A rotation with an angular velocity of −k[Am ax −
Ai ]ωp in the clockwise direction is initiated to compensate for
the overshoot.
In rare situations, the cell may not rotate with the rotational
stage due to insufficient rotational friction. When the computer
vision algorithm does not detect any changes in Ai and θi (do
not exceed certain threshold) for more than 2 s (60 frames), both
micropipettes are lowered along z-axis by 0.2 μm to provide the
friction necessary to effect the rotation. The situation in which
cell is perfectly aligned along the x-axis where no change in
area nor angle can be expected to be observed is deemed to be
extremely improbable and is not considered in our experiment.

2504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

is considered to have been completely released from the micropipettes. At this point, in-plane rotation of the cell can be
performed. The desired outcome is to orient the cytoplasm of
the cell to point in the 3 o’clock direction (i.e., θ in Fig. 8
equals to 0◦ ), as shown in Fig. 12(f)–(g). Prior to translational
and rotational position control, the system conducts coordinate
transformation calibration.
	 



	

	 
 	
Δx
x
cosθ −sinθ xc
+
(14)
=s
yc
Δy
y
sinθ cosθ
where (x, y)T is the target cell coordinate in world frame, s is
the scale factor, (xc , yc )T is the target cell coordinate in the rotational stage frame, and (Δx, Δy)T is the coordinate Op in the
world frame, as shown in Fig. 9(b). As the embryo is stationary
relative to the petri dish and the rotational stage is capable of
moving with high precision, open-loop control was applied to
move the X-Y stage and the rotational stage. Once the rotational
stage stops, the X-Y stage is moved to the coordinate found from
(14). The angular velocity of the rotational stage was set to be
4.17 × 10 −2 rad/s (equivalent to 15.02◦ per second), which is
also the angular velocity of the rotating zebrafish embryo. Thus,
the system takes approximately 12 s to complete a 180◦ cell
orientation with a resolution of 0.5◦ per frame when the stage
rotates at a constant speed.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
All zebrafish embryos used this experiment were collected
in accordance with standard embryo preparation procedures at
the blastula stage (2 h after placed in room temperature). The
petri dish was filled with water to a depth of about 5 mm.
A total of 20 and 40 Zebrafish embryos were used to evaluate
cellular structure recognition algorithm and the 3-D cell rotation,
respectively.

Fig. 12. (a)–(d) Process of cell release. Red arrows indicate motion direction of the micropipettes and rotational stage. (e) Initial cell position with cell
angle indication line. (f)–(g) Cell positions with angles of 36.8◦ and 21.6◦ ,
respectively. (h) Final cell position.

C. Cell Rotation About the z-Axis
When attempting to release the cell at the completion of cell
rotation about the x-axis, the cell may adhere to one of the
micropipettes when they are retracted, which causes in-plane
rotation of the cell when the rotational stage is activated. To
achieve successful cell release and a correct cell angular recognition, the micropipettes and the rotational stages are activated
simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 12(a)–(d). The successful release of the cell is verified using computer vision by determining
the cellular structure angle. The cellular structure angle is determined through image segmentation as described in Section III-A
[see Fig. 8(f)]. If the cell is in contact with one of the micropipettes, it will rotate about the contact point when the rotational stage is in motion. If the cellular structure angle does
not change significantly as the rotational stage rotates, the cell

A. Cellular Structure Recognition
The cellular structure recognition algorithm was evaluated
using 20 offline captured videos of rotating zebrafish embryos.
Fish embryos were rotated in three dimensions with manual
control of the angular velocity of the rotational stage. All operations, including cell rotation about the x-axis, cell releasing and
in-plane cell orientation, were captured in a video at 30 fps. The
algorithm is deemed to be successful if the algorithm is capable
of: 1) Indicating the frame in which the area of the yolk and the
cytoplasm from the binary image reaches its maximum value.
2) Monitoring the cellular structure angle changes during cell
release while providing the desired in-plane rotation angle θd ,
and recognizing the failure of the cell to rotate with the rotation
stage. The system was able to achieve a success rate of 100%
from our tests. The lighting of the microscope has significant
effects on the image processing of the cellular structure. A dark
lighting decreases the light reflection area, and can cause inaccurate or failure of angle detection. Therefore, the lighting of
the microscope requires proper calibration prior to conducting
the experiment.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOED THREE-DIMENSIONAL CELL ROTATION SYSTEM

2505

rotation, the slippery contact point problem does not affect the
predictability of our system.
The shortest and longest times required to properly orientate
the cell were 7 and 53 s. The average time required for a successful x-axis rotation is 21 s. The process can theoretically take up
to 88 s to complete, and this occurs when the ideal viewing cross
section happened to be oriented just shy of the initial orientation
of the cell, and the rotation used to find it was initiated in the
opposite direction. However, since we intentionally oriented the
cell away from the ideal viewing cross section, such a situation
did not occur in our experiment.
Fig. 13. Predictability evaluation: plot of A values with embryo images corresponding to the peak and valley values.

B. Cell Rotation About the x-Axis
For cell rotation about the x-axis, the success rate of rotating
the yolk and the cytoplasm into the xy plane, the predictability of
the procedure, and the amount of time required were evaluated.
The cell was positioned in the loading area with the ideal cross
section misaligned with the focal plane of the microscope. The
orientations used were random. Rotation about the x-axis was
considered to be successful if the system properly orient the cell
based on the maximum A value criterion. The sample size for
the validation of cell rotation about the x-axis was 40 embryos.
The system achieved a success rate of 92.5%. One of the failures occurred when the cytoplasm of the zebrafish embryo was
abnormally small, and the system was not able to identify a distinct maximum value of A. Instead of obtaining the maximum
A value from the binary image of the profile of the cytoplasm
and yolk as expected, the maximum A value was obtained from
the profile of the yolk alone. The other two failures occurred
when the embryo got detached from one or both micropipettes.
The accidental release of the embryo may be due to improper
alignment of the two micropipettes, or due to insufficient force
applied on the cell for axial immobilization.
The predictability of the system is defined as the ability of the
system to produce changes in the value of A in a deterministic
manner. In this case, a plot of the values of A should form a
sine-wave-like graph. Fig. 13 shows the plot of values of A over
cell rotation of 360◦ . The image frames possessing peak values
of A occur when the ideal cross section and the focal plane of
the microscope are aligned. Conversely, the minimum values of
A were obtained when the yolk and cytoplasm overlapped each
other in the line of sight of the microscope, i.e., the focal plane
was orthogonal to the ideal viewing cross section. 20 embryos
were used to evaluate the systems predictability with the camera
being set to a lower frame capturing rate. Experiment results
showed that all plots of 20 sets of A values are of a sine-wavelike form; and all the peak A values corresponded to images
where the internal cellular structures were in focus. To reduce
the invasiveness of the system, the force exerted on the cell by
the micropipettes were not strong. The loose contact points may
cause the cell to slip off the axis of rotation, leading to off-plane
rotation when the cell is rotated over more than 360◦ . However,
since the in-focus image can always be found within 180◦ of

C. Cell Rotation About the x-Axis
The success rate of the overall in-plane cell rotation system
is defined as the ability of the system to release the cell completely upon completion of x-axis rotation and to orientate the
cytoplasm to the target position, defined as 3 o’clock position
(i.e., θ equals to 0◦ ). In addition to the 40 trials following the
x-axis rotation, each of these 40 embryos was also used to perform an additional in-plane rotation test. Thus, a total of 40
and 80 trials were performed to evaluate the cell release system
and the in-plane rotational system, respectively. The rotational
direction of the in plane rotation stage is determined such that
if the initial position of the cytoplasm of the cell is in the first or
second quadrant, the cell is rotated in clockwise direction; otherwise, it is rotated in the counterclockwise direction. Out of the
80 trials, the shortest and longest time required for successful
cytoplasm orientation was 3 and 15 s, respectively. For the case
when 15 s was required, the cytoplasm’s position was opposite
of the desired position; the time the process took to complete
was longer than what was predicted theoretically as the latter
did not include the time for required acceleration and deceleration of the rotation stage. The average time required to rotate
the cytoplasm to the 3 o’clock position from its initial position
was 6 s. The average angular error of the final positions in the
80 trials was 0.3◦ , with a maximum error of 0.5◦ . Therefore, the
in-plane cell rotation function achieved a success rate of 100%.
The system was able to completely release 39 out of 40 cells,
which achieved an overall in-plane cell rotation system success
rate of 97.5%. Additional 20 cells were used to confirm the accuracy and repeatability of in-plane cell rotation by rotating the
cytoplasms of ten cells to the 12 o’clock position and another
ten cells to the 6 o’clock position. The direction of rotation was
decided by identifying the quadrant that the cytoplasm was in, as
described earlier. The average angular error of the final positions
of these 20 cells was 0.3◦ , with an average time consumption of
5 s. The results show no significant difference from the results
obtained from the previous experiment, which suggests that the
in-plane rotation function of the system is repeatable.
D. Discussion
Based on the average time required for individual tasks, the
total average time required for our 3-D system to achieve the
cell orientation is 31 s, including an average 4-s period needed
for cell releasing. The moment of inertia plays a very important
role in both rotation about the x-axis and in the xy plane. The

2506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

rotational speed about the x-axis was set through trial-and-error
to minimize the overshoot of the rolling motion due to the inertia of the cell. Since the medium, water, has low viscosity,
proper tuning of the angular acceleration, speed and deceleration was also critical to avoid overshoot for the in-plane rotation
due to the inertia of the water. The obtained operation speed
(31 s/cell) is faster than the speed of traditional manual operation (40 s/cell [27]). Furthermore, it should be noted that when
the viscosity of the culture medium is increased, the speed can
be further improved by increasing the speed of the rotational
stage to improve the in-plane rotation speed.
The safety aspect of the system was evaluated through carefully observing the membranes of 40 embryos at a higher magnification factor. Although zebrafish embryos are relatively large
in size, their membranes are fragile and can be damaged easily.
Out of the 40 embryos, no observable damage to their membranes had been found, and this suggests that our system is
noninvasive.
The precision and accuracy of the system is high enough
to extend its application to orientation of mouse or human
oocytes/embryos. Though the zebrafish embryo is large in size,
its 3-μm-thick membrane has a higher stiffness [35], which
makes it difficult to keep a stable axle for about-x-axis rotation.
In contrary, a much smaller mouse oocyte has an approximate
7-μm-thick zona pellucida [36], which is more porous and wrinkled [37]. The spongy structure of the zona pellucida results in
a lower stiffness [38], which allows deeper indent or partial
penetration that improves the stability of the structure of the
axle. In addition, the culture medium used to keep the human or
mouse oocytes/embryos is more viscous. The higher viscosity
of the medium makes the embryo more stable during in-plane
rotation, which leads to faster and more accurate vision tracking
thus improves the in-plane rotation speed.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an automated cell rotation system that manipulates a single cell by using a three-point-contact
mechanism. A high resolution in-house rotational stage and
cellular structure recognition algorithms were developed to facilitate the visual servo control. The system is able to orientate a zebrafish embryo to a position where the ideal viewing
cross section is aligned with the focal plane of the microscope.
The cellular structure recognition algorithm achieved a 100%
success rate with an image capturing rate of 30 fps. A threepoint-contact model enabled x-axis rolling motion of the cell
to achieve a success rate of 92.5%. The in-plane orientation of
the cell had a success rate of 97.5% and an average accuracy
of 0.3◦ . The success rate can be further improved by increasing the force on the cell-micropipette interface to prevent the
cell from accidental release. Vibrations can also be added to
the micropipette to improve the success rate of cell release. The
average processing speed was 31 s/cell. The system allows high
precise, high controllable, high reproducible and deterministic
3-D rotational control of single embryos/oocytes. Future work
will include other micromanipulation tasks, such as manipulation of human or mouse embryos/oocytes. The system also

provides a starting point for automating other cell manipulation
related tasks, such as ICSI and embryo biopsy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Singapore Polytechnic,
Nanyang Technological University, and the Ministry of Education for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Wang, et al., “A fully automated robotic system for microinjection of
zebrafish embryos,” PLoS ONE, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. e862–e868, Sep. 2007.
[2] L. Zhe, et al., “Robotic ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection),” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2102–2108, Jul. 2011.
[3] H. B. Huang, et al., “Robotic cell injection system with position and force
control: Toward automatic batch biomanipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot.,
vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 727–737, Apr. 2009.
[4] X. Liu, et al., “Orientation control of biological cells under inverted
microscopy,” IEEE Trans. Mechatron., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 918–924, Aug.
2011.
[5] P. Stein and R. M. Schultz, “ICSI in the mouse,” Methods Enzymology,
vol. 476, pp. 251–262, 2011.
[6] N. Yoshida and A. C. Perry, “Piezo-actuated mouse intracytoplasmic
sperm injection (ICSI),” Nature Protocols, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 296–304,
Mar. 2007.
[7] L. Van der Westerlaken, et al., “Intracytoplasmic sperm injection: Position of the polar body affects pregnancy rate,” Hum. Reprod., vol. 14,
no. 10, pp. 2565–2569, Oct. 1999.
[8] I. M. Bahadur and J. K. Mills, “Overview of the automation of embryo
biopsy for pre-implantation genetic diagnosis,” Int. J. Mechatron. Autom.,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 201–212, Jan. 2011.
[9] L. Gianaroli, “Preimplantation genetic diagnosis: Polar body and embryo
biopsy,” Hum. Reprod., vol. 15, no. suppl 4, pp. 69–75, Oct. 2000.
[10] P. Braude, et al., “Preimplantation genetic diagnosis,” Nature Rev. Genetics, vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 941–953, Feb. 2003.
[11] Y. H. Anis, et al., “Automated selection and placement of single cells
using vision-based feedback control,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 598–606, Jul. 2010.
[12] S. K. Mohanty and P. K. Gupta, “Laser-assisted three-dimensional rotation
of microscopic objects,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 2320–2322,
Jul. 2004.
[13] S. Bayoudh, et al., “Orientation of biological cells using planepolarized Gaussian beam optical tweezers,” J. Mod. Opt., vol. 50, no. 10,
pp. 1581–1590, Jul. 2009.
[14] Y. Liu and M. Yu, “Investigation of inclined dual-fiber optical tweezers for 3D manipulation and force sensing,” Opt. Exp., vol. 17, no. 16,
pp. 13624–13638, Aug. 2009.
[15] S. Sato, et al., “Optical trapping and rotational manipulation of microscopic particles and biological cells using higher-order mode Nd:YAG
laser beams,” Electron. Lett., vol. 27, no. 20, pp. 1831–1832, Sep. 1991.
[16] Y. L. Liang, et al., “Cell rotation using optoelectronic tweezers,” Biomicrofluidics, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 0430031–0430038, Dec. 2010.
[17] F. W. Sheu, et al., “Stable trapping and manually controlled rotation
of an asymmetric or birefringent microparticle using dual-mode splitbeam optical tweezers,” Opt. Exp., vol. 18, no. 14, pp. 14724–14729, Jul.
2010.
[18] M. C. Wu, “Optoelectronic tweezers,” Nature Photon., vol. 5, no. 6,
pp. 322–324, May, 2011.
[19] L. Zhe, et al., “Automated cell manipulation: Robotic ICSI,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2011, pp. 2540–2545.
[20] X. Liu and Y. Sun, “Visually servoed orientation control of biological
cells in microrobotic cell manipulation,” in Experimental Robotics. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2009, pp. 179–187.
[21] Y. Eguchi, et al., “Control of orientation of rat Schwann cells using an
8-T static magnetic field,” Neurosci. Lett., vol. 315, no. 2, pp. 130–132,
Nov. 2003.
[22] M. Ogiue-Ikeda and S. Ueno, “Magnetic cell orientation depending on cell
type and cell density,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3024–3026,
Jul. 2004.
[23] J. L. Sebastin, et al., “Electromechanical effects on multilayered cells in
nonuniform rotating fields,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 0119261–
0119269, Jul. 2008.

WANG et al.: VISUAL SERVOED THREE-DIMENSIONAL CELL ROTATION SYSTEM

[24] J. Park, et al., “An integrated bio cell processor for single embryo cell
manipulation,” in Proc. Intell. Robot. Syst., 2004, pp. 242–247.
[25] M. Nishioka, et al., “Evaluation of cell characteristics by step-wise orientational rotation using optoelectrostatic micromanipulation,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Appl., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1381–1388, Sep. 1997.
[26] D. Gray, et al., “Dielectrophoretic registration of living cells to a microelectrode array,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1765–1774,
Jul. 2004.
[27] C. Leung, et al., “Three-dimensional rotation of mouse embryos,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1049–1056, Jan. 2012.
[28] S. Krasner, “Why wheels work: A second version,” Phys. Teacher,
vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 212–215, Jan. 1992.
[29] A. Domnech, et al., “Introduction to the study of rolling friction,” Amer.
J. Phys., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 231–235, Mar. 1986.
[30] W. R. Chang, et al., “An elastic-plastic model for the contact of rough
surfaces,” J. Tribol., vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 257–263, Apr. 1987.
[31] W. H. Grover, et al., “Measuring single-cell density,” Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci., vol. 108, no. 27, pp. 10992–10996, May 2011.
[32] L. A. G. Lin, et al., “Non-contact measurement of Young’s modulus on
single living cells using hydrostatic pressure in a microchamber,” in Proc.
μTAS Conf., 2007, pp. 1354–1356.

2507

[33] D. H. Kim, et al., “Mechanical property characterization of the zebrafish embryo chorion,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2004,
pp. 5061–5064.
[34] Q. Xu, “Microinjection into zebrafish embryos,” in Methods in Molecular
Biology. New York, NY, USA: Humana, 1999, pp. 125–132.
[35] D. Kim, “Mechanical analysis of chorion softening in prehatching stages
of zebrafish embryos,” IEEE Trans. Nanobiosci., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 89–94,
Jun. 2006.
[36] P. M. Wassarman, “Zona pellucida glycoproteins,” J. Biol. Chem.,
vol. 283, no. 36, pp. 24285–24289, Sep. 2008.
[37] M. Papi, et al., “Mechanical properties of zona pellucida hardening,” Eur.
Biophys. J., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 987–922, May 2009.
[38] X. Liu, “In situ mechanical characterization of mouse oocytes using a cell
holding device,” Lab Chip, vol. 16, pp. 2154–2161, May 2010.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

