2402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Quantitative Analysis of Bladder Wall Thickness
for Magnetic Resonance Cystoscopy
Xi Zhang, Yang Liu, Zengyue Yang, Qiang Tian, Guopeng Zhang, Dan Xiao, Guangbin Cui, and Hongbing Lu∗

Abstract—Objective: To find an effective way for quantitative evaluation on wall thickness variation of human bladder
with/without bladder tumor, a novel pipeline of thickness measurement and analysis for magnetic resonance (MR) cystography
is proposed. Methods: After the acquisition of volumetric bladder
images with a high-resolution T2-weighted 3-D sequence, the inner
and outer borders of the bladder wall were segmented simultaneously by a coupled directional level-set method. Then, the bladder
wall thickness (BWT) was estimated using the Laplacian method.
To reducing the influence of individual variation and urine filling
on wall thickness, a thickness normalization using Z-score is
performed. Finally, a parametric surface mapping strategy was
applied to map thickness distribution onto a unified sphere surface, for quantitative intra- and intersubject comparison between
bladders of different shapes. Results: The proposed pipeline was
tested with a database composed of MR bladder images acquired
from 20 volunteers and 20 patients with bladder cancer. The
results indicate that the thickness normalization step using Z-score
makes the quantitative comparison of wall thickness quite possible
and there is a significant difference on BWT between patients
and volunteers. Using the proposed pipeline, we established a
thickness template for a normal bladder wall based on dataset of
all volunteers. Conclusion: As a first attempt to establish a general
pipeline for bladder wall analysis, the presented work provides an
effective way to achieve the goal of evaluating the entire bladder
wall for detection and diagnosis of abnormality. In addition, it
can be easily extended to quantitative analyses of other bladder
features, such as, intensity-based or texture features.
Index Terms—Bladder cancer, bladder wall segmentation,
bladder wall thickness (BWT), shape mapping, T2-weighted
magnetic resonance image (MRI), 3-D bladder template.

I. INTRODUCTION
CCORDING to the latest statistics from American Cancer
Society, urinary bladder cancer has become the fourth
most common cancer among males. Its incidence is about four
times higher in men than in women, making it the eighth leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States [1], [2]. Most
bladder cancers are originated in epithelial cells and treatable

A

Manuscript received November 30, 2014; revised March 29, 2015; accepted
April 25, 2015. Date of publication May 5, 2015; date of current version September 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science
Foundation of China under Grant 81230035, and in part by the Military Science
Foundation under Grant BWS14J038. X. Zhang and Y. Liu contributed equally
to this work. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Zhang, and D. Xiao are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University.
Z. Yang is with the he Departments of Urology, Tangdu Hospital.
Q. Tian and G. Cui are with the Departments of Radiology, Tangdu Hospital.
∗ H. Lu is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi’an 710032, China (e-mail: luhb@fmmu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2429612

if diagnosed prior to metastasis. It has been reported that half
of patients with bladder cancer were diagnosed while tumors
were in situ, for which the 5-year survival rate is 96% [1].
As the tumor infiltrates deeply into muscle layer, the 5-year
survival rate is declined greatly [2]. Therefore, early detection
of bladder cancer is crucial to prevent the progression of disease
and reduce the death rate. In addition, bladder cancer is quite
difficult to manage due to its high recurrence rate after tumor
resection. Patients with cancerous tissue confined to the mucosa
layer have an approximate probability of recurrence as high as
70% in 5 years after resection [3]. Therefore, a noninvasive
and convenient way for follow-up management is extremely
important.
Currently, optical cystoscopy is the most common diagnostic tool for bladder cancer. However, it is invasive, time consuming with some blind regions, and uncomfortable, with a
risk of 5–10% rate of urinary tract infection [4]–[6]. With recent advances in imaging and visualization techniques, virtual
cystoscopy (VCy), which is based on volumetric computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging data, has
revealed its potentials in noninvasive observations of the bladder
muscle and mucosa layer, the evaluation of urethral orifice, and
in patients with urethral stricture disease [4]–[6]. Compared to
CT imaging, the MR imaging modality, in which urine can be
used as endogenous contrast medium, turns out to be a better
choice for bladder evaluation [6]. Its superiority exists in the
completely noninvasive and radiation-free procedure, as well
as the high intensity-contrast between the bladder neoplasms,
the bladder wall, and urine exhibited on specific MR image
sequences.
As reported in [2], bladder cancerous tissue invades gradually
from the mucosa into the wall muscle, which may result in
morphological changes of inner and outer borders of the
bladder wall. Therefore, the bladder wall contains important
clinical information. It is hoped that the carcinoma and its stage
can be reflected by image geometry and intensity features of
the bladder wall. Preliminary studies indicated that the bladder
wall thickness (BWT) tends to be a good indicator of the occurrence of bladder abnormalities [7]–[9]. The tumor detection
method proposed in [8], which identified tumors as sections
of the patient bladder wall that exceed the mean thickness by
more than 2.5 standard deviations, has generated promising
results. However, since bladder shapes change complicatedly
with the urine volume inside the bladder and vary diversely
among the populations, it is quite difficult to compare bladder
thickness of the same subject at different filling states or those
from different subjects. A unified pipeline for wall thickness
measurement, analysis, and mapping based on MRIs of the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF BLADDER WALL THICKNESS FOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE CYSTOSCOPY

2403

TABLE I
PARAMETERS USED FOR MRI ACQUISITION
Parameter Name
Series Description
Acquisition Type
Acquisition Time (ms)
TR (ms)
TE (ms)
Slice Thickness (mm)
Spacing Between Slices (mm)
Pixel Size (mm)
Image Size

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed pipeline for thickness analysis of the
bladder wall.

moving, filling, and deforming bladder, is the first and critical
step for quantitative analysis of thickness variation caused
by bladder abnormalities. In this study, we first established
an entire pipeline for thickness analysis of the bladder wall,
which includes major steps of magnetic resonance image
(MRI) acquisition, automatic segmentation of bladder wall,
thickness estimation, thickness normalization, and standardized
wall mapping. Based on the proposed pipeline, statistical
analysis on wall thickness between volunteers and patients with
bladder cancer was performed. Based on volunteers’ datasets, a
thickness template for the normal bladder wall was established.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we present an overview of the proposed pipeline, followed by
detailed descriptions of major steps. In Section III, experimental results on thickness analysis based on MRI data acquired
from volunteers and patients with bladder cancer are presented.
Finally, in Section IV, we discuss the results of this study and
draw our conclusions.
II. METHODS
A. Overview of the Proposed Pipeline
Though BWT has been clinically as a persuasive indicator
for bladder abnormality, quantitative analysis on thickness variations is not a trivial task [10]. There have been several challenges
in BWT feature extraction in an objective or automated manner.
For example, segmentation of the entire bladder wall from the
original image volume data in an automated manner is a challenge [11]–[13]. Given the segmented inner and outer borders,
computing the thicknesses between the two arbitrary-shaped
surfaces is another challenge [14]. How to compare bladder
thickness of the same subject at different filling states or those
from different subjects for possible thickening is the third one.
A block diagram of the proposed pipeline for thickness analysis of the bladder wall is shown in Fig. 1. The pipeline starts with
MRI acquisition that aims to find a relatively optimal protocol
for bladder imaging to get better contrast between the bladder
wall and its surroundings without the use of any exogenetic
contrast agent. Then, the inner and outer borders of the bladder

Parameter Value
Ax Cube T2
3D
160456
2500
131.3310
1
1
1 ×1
512 × 512

wall are extracted automatically from MR bladder images to get
the 3-D wall model for further analysis. The Laplacian-based
method is used to estimate 3-D thickness of each voxel inside
the bladder wall. Since wall thickness varies at different filling
states or between subjects, thickness normalization is applied to
enable quantitative intra- and intersubject comparison. Finally, a
standardization step that maps the bladder wall and its thickness
onto a unified sphere model is performed to make the comparison of bladders with different shapes possible. The details of
each step are discussed in the following sections.
B. MRI Acquisitions
As described earlier, for a small bump protruding out of the
bladder wall, the measurement of its thickness as the distance
between the inner and outer borders tends to be a good indicator
of the occurrence of abnormalities [7]–[9]. To achieve it, accurate delineation of the wall inner and outer borders is essential.
This challenge gives rise to the task for image acquisition and
segmentation of the bladder wall, which is conventional for MR
Cystography paradigm.
1) Subjects: Forty male subjects including twenty patients
and twenty volunteers were recruited in this study. Twenty male
patients in whom findings from routine cystoscopy were positive
for tumors were referred from the urology department, Tangdu
Hospital, Xi’an, China. All the patients were confirmed of having urothelial carcinoma by postoperative pathological biopsy.
The average age of the patients group was 67. Twenty male volunteers were also recruited simultaneously as the control group.
They had no known history of bladder diseases, no bladder mass
observed during the ultrasound examination, and no hematuria.
The research trial has been approved by the Hospital Ethics
Committee and informed written consent was obtained from
each patient and volunteer.
2) Imaging Protocols: Previous MR Cystography studies
found that T1/T2—weighted rather than PD—weighted scanning protocol is favored for assessing the anatomical structures
or pathologies in the urinary bladder. In this study, a highresolution T2-weighted 3-D-cube sequence was adopted, considering its good tissue contrast and relatively fast acquisition.
All subjects were examined by a clinical whole-body scanner
(GE Discovery MR750 3.0 T) with a phased-array body coil.
Table I gives protocol parameters used in the sequence and the
average number of slices for each scan is about 86. Prior to the

2404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 2. MR bladder images acquired from a volunteer (left) and a patient
(right). The arrow indicates an abnormal region with tumor.

Fig. 4.

Two-dimensional (2-D) example of the Laplacian method.

the inner boundary to the outer boundary and stops for the
outer level-set surface [15]. In the second stage, the directional
gradient, local variance energy, and minimal thickness are integrated together as priori constraints to segment the inner and
outer boundaries simultaneously. The red and yellow contours
in Fig. 3 represent the inner and outer borders of a bladder wall,
respectively. The performance of the CDLS method has been
validated in [15] and [16].
D. Thickness Estimation of the Bladder Wall

Fig. 3.

Workflow of the CDLS method for bladder wall segmentation.

examination, each subject (patient or volunteer) was instructed
to drink enough mineral water, and then, waited for an adequate
time period so that the bladder was distended sufficiently. To
avoid the artifacts caused by respiratory movement and/or intestinal tract movement, all subjects were bound by a bellyband
during scan and all patients had their intestinal tracts cleaned
before the day of scanning (no dinner). Fig. 2 demonstrates sample 3-D T2-weighted images acquired from a patient and from
a volunteer, respectively.
C. Bladder Wall Segmentation
Accurate extraction of the inner and outer borders of the bladder wall is crucial for thickness evaluation and quantitative analysis. However, fully automatic segmentation of the bladder wall
from MRIs is quite challenging due to artifacts inside the bladder
lumen, weak boundaries in the apex and base regions, and complicated intensity distribution outside the bladder. To deal with
these difficulties, several methods utilizing coupled level-set
functions or based on the maximum a posteriori expectation–
maximization framework (MAP–EM) have been proposed for
the extraction of bladder wall [11]–[13]. In this study, an upgraded coupled directional level-set model (CDLS), which was
proposed by our group recently [15], [16], was adopted. The
3-D segmentation method can be roughly divided into two
stages: initialization and segmentation, as shown in Fig. 3. In
the initialization stage, the inner level-set surface (ILSS) is initialized first as the red circle, and then, expands with gradient
pointing inward. After the ILSS is obtained, it evolves from

The wall thickness can be reflected by the distance between
the inner and outer borders of the bladder. Some traditional distance metrics like Hausdorff distance and distance transform
(DT) filed model, have been used to define and estimate the
BWT. Though these metrics work well for general cases, they
may lead to failure of determining unique and nonintersecting paths between the borders with protruded lesions [14]. In
our previous work, the Laplacian method was utilized for cortical thickness estimation in patients with posttraumatic stress
disorder [17]. Considering its advantage in defining a unique
point-to-point reversible path between two curved surfaces and
providing consistent thickness estimation for all voxels along
the same streamline, the Laplacian method was utilized to estimate 3-D thickness of the bladder wall based on the segmented
inner and outer borders.
The Laplacian equation, as a second-order partial differential
equation, can be expressed as
∇2 ψ =

∂2 ψ ∂2 ψ ∂2 ψ
+
+
= 0.
∂x2
∂y 2
∂z 2

(1)

where Ψ is the scalar field. As shown in Fig. 4, the Laplace’s
equation is solved between surfaces S and S’, which have predetermined boundary conditions of 1 and 0 V, respectively (as
in an electric field). The length of the streamlines between the
two surfaces then defines the thickness.
In this study, the Laplacian equation was solved in the volume
of bladder wall by a numerical solution proposed for 3-D MRI,
which is accurate and computationally fast [18]. This method
is based on the representation of the 3-D potential function as
a simple linear combination of three 2-D potential functions.
Once the solution of Ψ in (1) is obtained, the thickness of
each voxel inside the bladder wall, defined by the length of the

ZHANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF BLADDER WALL THICKNESS FOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE CYSTOSCOPY

2405

streamline passing it (marked with arrowed lines in Fig. 4.), can
be estimated [19].
The performance of the Laplacian method has been validated
on digital phantoms before applying to subject datasets, in a way
similar to [14]. In their work, a thickness estimation method,
named electric-field line tracing (EFLT), was proposed, which
is similar to the Laplacian method and differs only in the way of
establishing the potential field. The EFLT method was validated
by the comparison with the DT model on thickness estimation of
the bladder wall. The similar study indicates that the Laplacian
method tends to be reliable and accurate in both phantom and
clinical data.
E. Thickness Normalization
According to previous BWT studies using ultrasound imaging, the thickness variation of a person is about 1 ∼ 5 mm, and
may vary from about 0.5 to 10 mm for different population
[20], [21]. This makes it difficult to compare the intrasubject
and/or intersubject difference in wall thickness quantitatively.
To normalize the thickness distribution, the widely used Z-score
of the BWT, ZBWT, was employed in this study. The ZBWT is
defined as
ZBWT =

BWT − μ
.
σ

(2)

where BWT is the thickness of each voxel on the bladder wall,
μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of wall thickness
of all voxels, respectively. It can effectively reflect the relative
position where the thickness value of a voxel is in the overall
thickness distribution of the bladder wall.

Fig. 5. Bladders with different shapes. (a) and (b) images acquired from
different individuals. (c) and (d) images of the same subject acquired at different
filling stages.

F. Standardized Wall Mapping
Bladder shapes vary significantly among different subjects.
Even for the same subject, it changes with urine filling accordingly. Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows bladder images from two
different subjects. Fig. 5(c) and (d) shows bladder images of the
same subject acquired at different filling states. It is essential
to find a way for possible quantitative comparison of thickness
distributions of different bladders. A straightforward means is
to map the bladder wall onto a standard model like a sphere and
an ellipsoid or a sphere, and then, rendering the model with the
thickness distribution.
For shape mapping, a global parametric mapping model has
been proposed by our group recently, which can effectively map
a bladder of arbitrary shape onto a unified model via the freeform deformation (FFD) [22]. As shown in Fig. 6, an ellipsoid
model is first initialized based on scattered points on the bladder surface, and then, deforms to fit the surface iteratively using
FFD. Then, the approximate surface model is obtained when the
average distance of the displacement field converges within a
preset threshold. Once the approximate surface model is established, each scattered point on the bladder surface is projected
onto the smooth surface model with its local information such as
thickness value. Then, the mapping relationship between each
scattered point and corresponding point on the ellipsoid model
is established. Then, bladder features such as wall thickness can

Fig. 6.

Basic scheme for the proposed parametric mapping model [22].

be projected onto the surface model or the ellipsoid using a color
map.
The deformation process can be performed on either the inner
or the outer surface of the bladder wall. The proposed method not
only provides a unified way to map bladders of different shapes
onto a standard 3-D model like a sphere, but also enables the
mapping of wall features such as thickness or texture, onto the
standard model, for quantitative evaluation of the entire bladder.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Experiments using MRI datasets acquired from patients and
volunteers were performed to validate the proposed pipeline
and to analyze the thickness distribution. To find thickness variations of the same subject and/or among different subjects, total

2406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 8.

Fig. 7. Mean BWT and ZBWT variations of volunteers at different filling
states. (a) Mean BWT distribution; (b) ZBWT distributions.

20 datasets of five volunteers acquired at four different filling
states were first acquired. Then, mean BWT and ZBWT of each
dataset were estimated to demonstrate thickness changes and
the effect of the normalization on thickness evaluation. Statistical analysis on wall thickness between patients and volunteers
was performed to see whether there was significant difference
between the two groups. In the last, based on bladder datasets
of 20 volunteers, a thickness template was established to reflect
the thickness distribution of a normal bladder. It may be used as
a standard template for the detection of thickness abnormality
later.
A. Thickness Distribution of the Bladder Wall
and ZBWT Normalization
As mentioned previously, wall thickness varies at different
filling states or between subjects. To demonstrate possible thickness distribution, total 20 MRI datasets of five volunteers at four
different filling states were acquired in this study. The relationship between the mean wall thickness and the bladder volume of
five volunteers is shown in Fig. 7(a). It indicates that the average

Mean thickness distribution of all subjects in two groups.

wall thickness of a normal bladder is around 3.5–4.6 mm and
the thickness values of different subjects at the same volume
has a wide range of variation. For each subject, the absolute
values of wall thickness vary with urine filling accordingly. But
for different subjects, the variation range is quite different. In
four out of five subjects, mean wall thickness decreases with the
increase of the bladder volume. However, for volunteer 3, the
mean thickness seems change little with the increase of bladder volume. These make it quite difficult to analyze or find any
abnormality by direct comparison of thickness values.
The ZBWT normalization was performed to reduce the impact of the intersubject difference in thickness on wall changing
over urine filling. The normalization in Fig. 7(b) corresponds to
the normalization over mean thickness values of four different
filling states for each subject. It is different from voxel-wise
normalization of the thickness. Fig 7(b) indicates that though
these volunteers may differ in mean thickness values and volume ranges, their changing ranges are quite similar, all within
the range of [−1.5, 1.5]. In addition, for different subjects, the
ZBWT values at the same filling state look more consistent in
Fig. 7(b) after the normalization.
These results indicated that the thickness normalization step
makes the quantitative comparison of wall thickness quite
possible.
B. Statistical Analysis of BWT
To find whether there was significant difference on BWT
between patients and volunteers, mean wall thickness of each
subject in two groups was obtained using the proposed pipeline,
and then, student’s t-test was performed. Fig. 8 gives scattered
points of mean thickness of two groups, which are depicted in
ascending order.
Prior to student’s t-test, the two independent samples (for patient group and volunteer group, respectively) were confirmed to
follow the normal distribution by using Kolmogorov–Smirnov
(K-S) normality test. The p-values for K-S test on volunteer
and patient groups were 0.777 and 0.723, respectively, larger
than the significant level (p > 0.05). It indicated that the null

ZHANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF BLADDER WALL THICKNESS FOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE CYSTOSCOPY

2407

TABLE II
STUDENT’S t-TEST ON TWO GROUPS

Test 1
Test 2
Test 3

Samples for Student’s t-test

N

μ±σ

p

Volunteer Group
Patient Group
Volunteer Group
Patient Group (With ZBWT ࣘ 2)
Volunteer Group
Patient Group (With ZBWT ࣘ 1)

20
20
20
20
20
20

3.9928 ± 0.2675
6.5019 ± 1.3875
3.9928 ± 0.2675
5.6245 ± 1.0356
3.9928 ± 0.2675
5.0051 ± 0.7571

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001

hypothesis of the K-S test was accepted, i.e., the thickness distribution of both volunteer and patient groups complied with the
normality assumption.
According to the t-test results shown in Table II (with significant level as p < 0.05), it indicates that there is a significant
difference on wall thickness between the patient and the volunteer group (p < 0.001, Test 1). Thickness values of the patient
group are much higher than those of volunteers.
Tumors on the bladder wall usually protrude out into the
lumen, which may lead to the increment of wall thickness in
related regions and consequently statistical bias. To reduce the
bias, two additional tests were performed on sorted thickness
values of patients. In Test 2, for each patient, a thickness threshold, μ + 2σ, was used, where μ and σ represent the mean and
standard deviation of the subject’s wall thickness, respectively.
Only a voxel of which the thickness value is less than the preset threshold was used to estimate mean thickness. According
to (2), it was equal to remove all voxels of which ZBWT were
larger than 2. In Test 3, the thickness threshold was set as μ + σ,
and accordingly, wall voxels of which ZBWT larger than 1 were
not included for the calculation of mean value. Fig. 8 gives mean
thickness values of patients obtained from Test 2 and Test 3, in
addition to original mean values of the two groups. Student’s
t-test between volunteers and sorted patient datasets from Test
2 and Test 3 indicates that, significant differences on wall thickness still exist between the two groups (p < 0.001). With the
exclusion of regions thicker than the preset thresholds (such as
regions with protruded tumors), thickness values of patients are
still higher than those of volunteers. These results suggest that
the bladder wall of patients seems thickened due to tumors, and
therefore, wall thickening may possibly be used as a candidate
for tumor detection.
C. Establishment of the Thickness Template for Normal
Bladder Wall
In this study, based on MRI bladder datasets of 20 volunteers acquired at relatively full filling stages, a standard template for wall thickness distribution of a normal bladder was
established. To build up the template, thickness distributions of
all 20 datasets were first calculated, and then, mapped to 20
ellipsoid models of different sizes, respectively. The iteration
number was empirically set as 10 to make each ellipsoid model
fit to the original scattered points on the bladder surface. After
wall mapping, affine transform was applied to convert each ellipsoid model to a standard sphere. To ensure the orientation of

Fig. 9.

Block diagram used to establish the thickness template.

all sphere models consistent during averaging, some important
anatomical landmarks (such as the ureterostoma and urethral
orifice) were marked on the bladder wall. With fixed positions
of the urethral orifice and two ureterostomas (the left and the
right one) on the ellipsoid model of each dataset, the orientation
of the model could be obtained. After the rotation and scale
transform, all the voxels representing the urethral orifice were
merged together. With simple averaging of thickness values of
voxels at the same position of sphere models, a thickness template for a normal bladder was established. The block diagram
shown in Fig. 9 summarizes the procedure used for template
generation, which can be treated as a simple affine registration
after the standardized wall mapping.
Fig. 10(a) gives 3-D visualization of the thickness template
established from normal bladders. Fig. 10(b) shows the frequency histogram of BWT values of the template. Fig. 10(c)
and (d) shows a bladder MRI and the sphere mapping model of
a patient with bladder tumors. The mean and standard deviation
of the template thickness is 3.7073 ± 0.9074. It reflects the distribution pattern of wall thickness of a health bladder and can
be used as a standard template for further analysis and detection
of bladder abnormalities.
IV. DISCUSSION
MRI-based VCy has demonstrated its potential to visualize
the entire bladder in a noninvasive manner. In this study, a novel
pipeline for thickness measurement and analysis of bladder wall
was proposed, as an attempt to establish a more general procedure to analyze bladder features like wall thickening. Preliminary experiments based on MR bladder images acquired from
20 volunteers and 20 patients with bladder cancer validated its
feasibility in wall thickness analysis.
Because locally thickened wall often appears around pathological abnormalities, BWT is regarded as a determinative feature for detection of bladder abnormalities [8], [9]. In addition to
the local thickening feature, the global pattern of the thickness
distribution on the entire wall can be another feature for early
sign of abnormalities. In this study, to analyze the intrasubject
and intersubject variations on wall thickness, the widely used
Z-score was employed to normalize the distributions. Fig. 7
shows that when using ZBWT, mean value of wall thickness

2408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

decreases with the increase of bladder volume. Though different subjects may have different volume ranges, for datasets
used in this study, the changing ranges (±1.5) of ZBWT are
quite similar. It indicates that compared to an absolute thickness
value, ZBWT may be a better indicator for the evaluation of
intrasubject and intersubject difference on wall thickness. More
effort should be devoted to see whether the changing range and
rate of ZBWT along with bladder volume are indicators for the
bladder functionality.
The average age of the patients group is 67-years old. There
may be the high potential coexistence of benign prostatic enlargement (BPE), and BPE may influence the BWT in some
local areas. By excluding voxels with ZBWT values larger than
the preset thresholds, the locally thickness influence of BPE
may exclude in this way meanwhile.
Based on the proposed pipeline and MRI data of 20 volunteers, a thickness template for a normal bladder was generated at
relatively full filling state. It approximates the thickness distribution of a health bladder and can be used as a standard template
for further analysis and detection of bladder abnormalities, especially for early sign of unexpected thickening. Since wall
thickness decreases with bladder volume, the effect of urine filling on the template should be considered during its construction.
With the increase of sample data from volunteers and rigid control of the registration procedure, the template would be more
statistically meaningful.
For the detection of abnormalities using bladder thickening,
one essential step is to find whether there is a difference on
wall thickness between patients’ bladders and healthy ones. In
this study, student’s t-test on thickness values of the patient
and volunteer groups indicates that the difference between the
two groups was significant. Considering that the existence of
tumors in the patient group could make the average thickness
larger, we excluded regions thicker than the preset threshold in
patient group for more reasonable results. Table II shows that
from results of Tests 2 and 3, thickness values of patients are
still higher than those of volunteers with the exclusion of regions
thicker than the preset thresholds. It indicates that the significant difference on BWT between two groups may be not caused
by the existence of tumors on patients’ bladder wall. It also
indicates that wall regions thicker than μ + s or with ZBWT
> 1 may be initial candidates for abnormality detection. Further investigation is required on broader patient samples to find
more reliable thickness indexes for bladder cancer detection,
and further, possible staging.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 10. Demonstration of the thickness template of a normal bladder and
the sphere mapping model of patient with bladder tumors. (a) 3-D visualization
of the thickness template established from normal bladders. (b) Frequency
histogram of BWT values of the template. (c) and (d) Bladder MRI and the
sphere mapping model of a patient with bladder tumors.

In summary, the pipeline proposed in this study provides an
effective way to analyze thickness variations of human bladder wall quantitatively. Preliminary experimental results have
demonstrated its potential in the evaluation of entire bladder
for possible detection of abnormalities and management of recurrence. In addition, it can be easily extended to quantitative
analyses of other wall features like intensity-based or texture
features. In the future work, more qualified subjects should
be recruited to perform statistical analyses for detection and

ZHANG et al.: QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF BLADDER WALL THICKNESS FOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE CYSTOSCOPY

diagnosis of abnormality based on wall templates and thickness
variations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all editors and the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful suggestions on the quality improvement of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] Cancer Facts and Figures 2014, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA,
USA, pp. 10–22, 2014.
[2] A. Stenzl et al., “Guidelines on bladder cancer: Muscle-invasive and
metastatic,” European Association of Urology , Arnhem, The Netherlands,
pp. 5–7, 2008.
[3] NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Bladder Cancer, National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Fort Washington, PA, USA,
pp. 30–33, 2013.
[4] A. Beer et al., “MR cystography for bladder tumor detection,” Eur Radiol.,
vol. 14, pp. 2311–9, Dec. 2004.
[5] E. Suleyman et al., “Bladder tumors: Virtual MR cystoscopy,” Abdom
Imag., vol. 31, pp. 483–9, Aug. 2006.
[6] M. Lämmle et al., “Reliability of MR imaging-based virtual cystoscopy
in the diagnosis of cancer of the urinary bladder,” Am. J. Roentgenol.,
vol. 178, pp. 1483–8, Jun. 2002.
[7] C. Duan et al., “Volume-based features for detection of bladder wall
abnormal regions via MR cystography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng,
vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2506–2512, Sep. 2011.
[8] S. Jaume et al., “Tumor detection in the bladder wall with a measurement
of abnormal thickness in CT scans,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 50,
no. 3, pp. 383–390, Mar. 2003.
[9] J. R. Fielding et al., “Tumor detection by virtual cystoscopy with color
mapping of bladder wall thickness,” J. Urol., vol. 167, pp. 559–562, Feb.
2002.
[10] M. Oelke et al., “Manual versus automatic bladder wall thickness
measurements: A method comparison study,” World J. Urol., vol. 27,
pp. 747–53, Dec. 2009.

2409

[11] C. Duan et al., “A coupled level set framework for bladder wall segmentation with application to MR cystography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 903–15, Mar. 2010.
[12] Z. Liang et al., “An EM approach to MAP solution of segmenting tissue
mixtures: A numerical analysis,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 297–310, Feb. 2009.
[13] H. Han et al., “A unified EM approach to bladder wall segmentation with
coupled level-set constraints,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 17, pp. 1192–205,
Dec. 2013.
[14] Y. Zhao et al., “Bladder wall thickness mapping for magnetic resonance
cystography,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, pp. 5173–92, Aug. 2013.
[15] X. Qin et al., “Coupled directional level set for MR image segmentation,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl., 2012, pp. 185–190.
[16] X. Qin et al., “Adaptive shape prior constrained level sets for bladder MR
image segmentation,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 5,
pp. 1707–16, Sep. 2014.
[17] Y. Liu et al., “Cortical thinning in patients with recent onset post-traumatic
stress disorder after a single prolonged trauma exposure,” PLoS One,
vol. 7, art. no. e39025, Jun. 2012, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039025
[18] H. Haidar et al., “New numerical solution of the Laplace equation for tissue
thickness measurement in three dimensional MRI,” J. Math. Modelling
Algorithms, vol. 4, pp. 83–97, 2005.
[19] A. J. Yezzi et al., “An Eulerian PDE approach for computing tissue thickness,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1332–1339, Oct. 2003.
[20] O. W. Hakenberg et al., “Bladder wall thickness in normal adults and men
with mild lower urinary tract symptoms and benign prostatic enlargement,”
Neurourol. Urodyn., vol. 19, pp. 585–593, 2000.
[21] A. Kuhn et al., “How should bladder wall thickness be measured? A
comparison of vaginal, perineal and abdominal ultrasound,” Neurourol.
Urodyn., vol. 29, pp. 1393–6, Nov. 2010.
[22] Y. Zhao et al., “Parametric mapping model for bladder using free-form
deformation,” in Proc. IEEE Nucl. Sci. Symp. Med. Imag. Conf., 2013,
pp. 1–4.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

