IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1567

Identifying Physical Activity Profiles in COPD
Patients Using Topic Models
Gabriele Spina, Pierluigi Casale, Paul S. Albert, Jennifer Alison, Judith Garcia-Aymerich, Richard W. Costello,
Nidia A. Hernandes, Arnoldus J. R. van Gestel, Jörg D. Leuppi, Rafael Mesquita, Sally J. Singh,
Frank W. J. M. Smeenk, Ruth Tal-Singer, Emiel F. M. Wouters, Martijn A. Spruit, and Albertus C. den Brinker

Abstract—With the growing amount of physical activity (PA)
measures, the need for methods and algorithms that automatically
analyze and interpret unannotated data increases. In this paper, PA
is seen as a combination of multimodal constructs that can cooccur in different ways and proportions during the day. The design
Manuscript received December 29, 2014; revised March 20, 2015; accepted
May 8, 2015. Date of publication May 12, 2015; date of current version September 1, 2015. This work was supported by the iCare4COPD Project of Agentschap
NL under Contract PNE101005.
G. Spina is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands, and also with the
Smart Professional Spaces Group, Philips Research, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The
Netherlands (e-mail: g.spina@tue.nl).
P. Casale is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands, and also
with the Holst Centre/IMEC, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
p.casale@tue.nl).
P. S. Albert is with the School of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool L9 7AL, U.K. (e-mail: paul.albert@
aintree.nhs.uk).
J. Alison is with the Clinical and Rehabilitation Sciences, The University
of Sydney, Syndey, N.S.W. 2006, Australia, and also with the Physiotherapy
Department, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, N.S.W 2050, Australia
(e-mail: jennifer.alison@sydney.edu.au).
J. Garcia-Aymerich is with the Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology, 08003 Barcelona, Spain, the CIBER Epidemiologia y Salud Publica,
08036 Barcelona, Spain, and also with the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08002
Barcelona, Spain (e-mail: jgarcia@creal.cat).
R. W. Costello is with the Department of Respiratory Medicine, Beaumont
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland (e-mail: rcostello@rcsi.ie).
N. A. Hernandes is with the Laboratory of Research in Respiratory Physiotherapy, Department of Physiotherapy, State University of Londrina, Londrina
86057-970, Brazil (e-mail: nyhernandes@gmail.com).
A. J. R. van Gestel is with the Pulmonary Division, University Hospital of
Zurich, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail: vrns@zhaw.ch).
J. D. Leuppi is with the Medical University Clinic, Cantonal Hospital
Baselland, Liestal and Medical Faculty, University of Basel, 4003 Basel,
Switzerland (e-mail: Joerg.Leuppi@ksbl.ch).
R. Mesquita and E. F. M. Wouters are with the Department of Research
and Education, CIRO+, 6085 NM Horn, The Netherlands, and with the Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center,
6211 LK Maastricht, The Netherlands (e-mail: rafaelmesquita@ciro-horn.nl;
e.wouters@mumc.nl).
S. J. Singh is with the NIHR EM CLAHRC—Centre for Exercise and Rehabilitation Science, University Hospitals, Leicester LE3 9QP, U.K. (e-mail:
sally.singh@uhl-tr.nhs.uk).
F. W. J. M. Smeenk is with the Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Catharina Hospital, 5623 EJ Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
frank.smeenk@catharinaziekenhuis.nl).
R. Tal-Singer is with GlaxoSmithKline R&D, King of Prussia, PA 19406
USA (e-mail: Ruth.M.Tal-Singer@gsk.com).
M. A. Spruit is with the Department of Research and Education, CIRO+,
6085 NM Horn, The Netherlands, and also with the REVAL/BIOMED, Hasselt
University, 3900 Diepenbeek, Belgium (e-mail: martijnspruit@ciro-horn.n).
A. C. den Brinker is with the Smart Professional Spaces Group,
Philips Research, 5656 AE Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail:
bert.den.brinker@philips.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2432033

of a methodology able to integrate and analyze them is discussed,
and its operation is illustrated by applying it to a dataset comprising data from COPD patients and healthy subjects acquired
in daily life. The method encompasses different stages. The first
stage is a completely automated method of labeling low-level multimodal PA measures. The information contained in the PA labels
are further structured using topic modeling techniques, a machine
learning method from the text processing community. The topic
modeling discovers the main themes that pervade a large set of
data. In our case, topic models discover PA routines that are active
in the assessed days of the subjects under study. Applying the designed algorithm to our data provides new learnings and insights.
As expected, the algorithm discovers that PA routines for COPD
patients and healthy subjects are substantially different regarding
their composition and moments in time in which transitions occur.
Furthermore, it shows consistent trends relating to disease severity
as measured by standard clinical practice.
Index Terms—Activity routine, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), topic models.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE prevalence of chronic diseases, in general, is rising due
to an ageing population, as well as due to environmental
and lifestyle changes. This is particularly true for respiratory diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
which is a progressive and irreversible disease that results in airflow limitation and significant extra pulmonary effects, which
limit physical activities [1]. Physical activity (PA), defined as
any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that requires energy expenditure (EE) [2], is known to be a relevant
indicator of COPD patients’ health status. Current COPD treatment guidelines strongly recommend pulmonary rehabilitation
programs with the intent of increasing PA and maintaining the
changes over time, including when patients are discharged to
home [3]. Although learning to exercise and maintaining exercising is really difficult, this is possibly less of an issue for other
effective behavioral changes like reducing the sedentary time.
New methodologies assessing PA and a better insight into
daily PAs of patients with COPD are needed to accurately characterize the disease and assist clinicians in designing targeted
therapeutic strategies and personalized coaching programs that
do not rely on a priori fixed objectives [4]. Since patients are
not able to accurately self-report their physical activities [5],
models describing PA should be learned in an unsupervised
fashion without the need of user annotations. Moreover, they
should be suitable to harmoniously integrate multiple low-level
PA measures (such as intensity levels of the activities performed
or step counts), and the associated physiological responses into

T

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1568

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

meaningful descriptors [6]. With recent improvements in
wearable sensor technologies, it becomes easier in daily life to
acquire massive amounts of different sensors data. At the same
time, however, it is difficult to combine and extrapolate meaningful information in absence of any supervision or annotation.
In this paper, measures of PA and physiological responses
are presented as the letters composing the words that describe
PAs. The cooccurrence of these words in different ways and
proportions during the day creates groups of PA constructs describing the main topics that pervade the day of a patient, i.e.,
PA routines. Routines could also occur at different times and in
different proportions across the day for different patients or subgroups of patients, thus characterizing their activity behavior. In
this work, we show that the low-level fusion of sensors data into
“words” combined with topic modeling holds the promise of
discovering new and clinically relevant insights. In particular,
this paper provides the following contributions.
(1) We propose a methodology to create a vocabulary of
meaningful words describing PA from a set of multimodal PA measures without the need of any supervision or parameter tuning. Using the generated vocabulary, we discover PA routines that pervade daily life of
healthy control subjects and a subgroup of COPD patients pairwise matched for age, gender, and body mass
index (BMI).
(2) We infer the underlying PA routine structure of the dataset
available (comprising more COPD patients) on day segments of 30 min and on the first 6 h at once describing,
respectively, the temporal regularities of the multimodal
PA measures, and the estimated time spent by the subjects
under study in each of the routines.
(3) Finally, we investigate for the first time whether discovered PA routines are related to disease severity, whether
they can be deployed to cluster subjects of the matched
dataset and, furthermore, to recognize from which group
each assessed day comes from.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. COPD Ambulatory Monitoring
The automatic monitoring and analysis of chronic diseases
has always been central in research on wearable sensors. Physical activities in patients with moderate to very severe COPD
has been objectively documented using motion sensors, which
provide more accurate, individualized, and detailed information
on body movement than questionnaires [7].
Liao et al. [8] provided a review focused on describing current
wearable technologies for measuring the PA level of COPD
patients. In particular, validated devices should be used, since
activity monitors can be less accurate in patients whose walking
speeds is as low as 0.5 miles/h.
The use of data from ten wearable sensors as indicator of
PA levels and physiological responses to recognize a set of 11
scripted activities is illustrated in [9]. In particular, a comparative
study of supervised machine learning techniques is presented
with emphasis placed on achieving high recognition accuracy.
The number of sensors and the complexity of the algorithms

are second to that objective. Research on PA levels of COPD
patients usually deploys one single activity monitor to minimize
obstructiveness.
B. COPD Physical Activities
It has been consistently shown that COPD patients have lower
PA levels than their healthy peers [10], and that reduced levels
of PA are related to an increased risk of hospital admission and
mortality [11]. Outcome variables related to this type of analysis
are focused mainly on amount and volume parameters, such as
number of steps, walking time, volume of PA as expressed by total number of counts, and total EE. Although these are important
health markers of patients suffering from COPD, interventions
thus far have failed to demonstrate important increases in these
outcome variables. Moreover, the relation with severity of the
disease, assessed by the forced expiratory volume in the first
second (F EV1 ), is not strong or not significant [12].
Bouts of PA described by their frequency, duration, and intensity were introduced by Gonzalez et al. [4] in order to explore
whether these patients meet the general guidelines for PA for
older adults. Information about physiological responses were
not considered in the analysis.
C. Symbolic Representation of Data
Alternatively to the selection of statistical attributes (such as
mean duration of activity bouts within a day or the time spent in
activity bouts of different intensities) which are mainly driven
by intuition and experience, other approaches can be used to
represent and analyze patient’s data. Symbolic representation of
continuous data offers several advantages, such as the possibility
to be used in combination of a wide set of algorithms from the
text processing community. Symbolic approaches like SAX [13]
have been proposed to reduce efficiently a time series to a set of
symbols of a vocabulary. In addition to the a priori fixed size
of the vocabulary, this method assumes a particular distribution,
which may not be always valid and may limit the performance
of series mining tasks [14], [15].
In order to construct features for discriminative tasks, Saria
et al. [16] proposed a method that discovers in a time-series
recurring subsequences having similar shape, but that, at the
same time, can exhibit significant variability (deformable motifs). Number and length of the motifs need to be specified
beforehand and, if applied to multidimensional time series, the
method assumes that motifs along all the dimensions are happening synchronously.
D. Probabilistic Unsupervised Modeling
A probabilistic approach for unsupervised mining of
electronic health data has been introduced by Schulam et al.
[17]. Time series of clinical markers were clustered taking
into account confounding factors that might affect data. In
line with the generative modeling of multidimensional time
series outlined by the authors and increasing the abstraction
level of the activity bouts, we might think of these constructs
as primitive descriptors of PA that are latently coupled to each

SPINA et al.: IDENTIFYING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PROFILES IN COPD PATIENTS USING TOPIC MODELS

other. Organizing bouts in higher level and coherent structures
that cooccur during a day, more informative PA constructs
could be described (i.e., PA routines). Topic models suit this
goal since they represent a class of algorithms able to discover
hidden structures in collections of documents. Due to their
pattern discovery capability, they have been explored in the
wearable sensor and activity recognition community.
Huynh et al. [18] showed that daily routines of activities
can be recognized as a probabilistic combination of activity
labels, such as walking, discussing at whiteboard, etc. They also
addressed the point of avoiding supervised learning approaches
by clustering raw sensor data in order to build the vocabulary
of activity primitives. Their approach was tested only on data
from one single subject, and the vocabulary of primitives had a
fixed size chosen a priori.
Seiter et al. [19] compared three topic model approaches and
analyzed three public datasets with different properties affecting
the discovery, such as primitive rate, activity composite specificity, primitive sequence similarity, and composite-instance ratio. These authors compared the activity composite discovery
performance against the performance of a k-means clustering
algorithm providing guidelines for optimal parameter selection.
Their results indicated that latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA)
shows higher robustness against noise compared to k-means
and other topic modeling approaches.
The application of a nonparametric framework to create the
vocabulary and discover human routines from sensor data was
investigated using a Dirichlet process Gaussian mixture model
(DPGMM) in [20]. Although this approach does not need to
specify the number of unique artificial words, it assumes that
data should come from the same distributions used to create the
mixture model. In the case of populations with different activity
behavior as healthy subjects and COPD patients at different
stages, this might not be true and the mapping of the raw sensor
data to vocabulary words might not be correct.

1569

Fig. 1. Graphical model for LDA. Each node is a random variable, edges
denote possible dependences. The only observed variables (shaded) are the
words (W ). The distribution of the words in a routine (β) and the distribution of
the routine in a document (θ) depend only on the topic hyperparameters η and
α that control the mean shape and sparsity of the distributions. Z represents the
word topic assignment.

the model) are composed by multimodal measures coming from
a body area sensor network. Each assessed day exhibits PA daily
routines in different proportion indicated as θ1:D , i.e., each day
has a different distribution over the routines that also follows a
Dirichlet distribution. In such a model, the N words (Wd,n 1 : N )
that compose the D documents are the only random variables
observed and depend on the per word topic assignment (Zd,n )
and all the βk . The daily routines then are composed indirectly
by low-level PA measures that belong, with a certain probability
distribution, to different thematic areas. Different routines will
have different PA measures with different probabilities.
Topic modeling algorithms calculate the hidden structure that
likely generated the observed collection of documents. In particular, for this analysis, we use variational inference to approximate the intractable posterior distribution over hidden variables
defined by LDA. In a nutshell, variational inference posits a
parametrized family of distributions over the hidden structure,
and then, finds the member of that family that is closest to
the posterior according to the Kullback–Leibler divergence. The
reader is invited to refer to [21] for an exhaustive explanation.

III. BACKGROUND

IV. METHODS

Topic models are algorithms for discovering the main themes
that pervade a large and unstructured collection of documents.
Data are treated as observations arising from a generative probabilistic process, in which hidden variables reflect the thematic
structure of a collection of documents. The intuition behind
using the LDA [21] to discover PA routines is that each day
is a mixture of thematically coherent PA measures just as a
text document is a mixture of thematically coherent words. The
graphical model for LDA is provided in Fig. 1. All the assessed
days (also called documents d1:D ) share the same set of daily
routines (also called topics β1:K ) that are defined as Dirichlet
distributions over the observed set of PA descriptors (also called
words W or terms of a fixed vocabulary).
Observing activities in patients is a difficult task since it is
time intensive and intrusive. At the same time, patients are not
able to accurately self-report their physical activities [5], and the
training of a classifier requires annotations that in a daily life
scenario are difficult to obtain. In order to make the methodology
fully unsupervised, we assume that the observed words (input of

In the application of LDA, a word, defined to be an instance
of a vocabulary, is considered as the basic unit of discrete data.
In this paper, multimodal monitoring signals, composed of PA
measures and physiological responses, are symbolized first as
letters. Our approach in selecting the letters and then the words
composing the vocabulary benefits from a methodology that
preserves the interpretability of the vocabulary and that allows
the generation of words that could also not appear in the current
documents. The multidimensional data space is first divided in
subspaces, and for each subspace, we use cluster analysis to
divide PA measures and physiological responses into discrete
clusters levels (letters) that are then combined to form words. We
use soft assignments to link an intensity bout (IB) with the words
in the vocabulary such that any bout has a probability to belong to
each of the terms created. We extract the vocabulary in a subset
of COPD and healthy patients and show that the vocabulary
chosen can fit the model on a larger cohort of patients. The
dataset and the methodology developed are described in detail
in the following sections.

1570

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I
SUBJECT GROUP CHARACTERISTICS

Male/Female (n )
Age (years)
BMI (Kg/m2 )
FEV1 (% predicted)
GOLD 1–2–3–4 (n )
Assessed days (n )
Weekend days (%)
Weekdays (%)
Days per subject
Minutes per subject

All COPD
n = 977

Matching healthy
n = 66

Matching COPD
n = 66

636/341
66 [61–72]
25.8 [22.5–29.4]
49 [34–64]
89–385–330–173
5846
33
67
6 [6–6]
982 [913–1060]

30/36
65 [61–70]
25.2 [23–27.3]
107 [97–117]
–
404
32.6
67.4
6 [6–6]
965 [918–1014]

30/36
65 [61–70]
25 [22.5–27.8]
42 [29–63]
8–16–23–19
395
33.6
66.4
6 [6–6]
972 [919–1035]

Data are summarized as absolute frequency (n ), relative frequency (%), or median and
quartiles [Q1–Q3].

A. Dataset
Data from 1001 patients suffering from mild to very severe
COPD were collected across ten countries (United Kingdom,
Ireland, The Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Spain,
The United States of America, Brazil, and Australia) as part of
previous studies (references are omitted for the sake of brevity)
without overlaps with the current post hoc analysis. Subjects
were included if they met the following inclusion criteria: COPD
with a postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in the first
1 s (FEV1 ) / forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio < 0.70 and stable
condition (i.e., no symptoms of increased shortness of breath
and sputum production compared to usual). The dataset comprises only baseline data, which means that the COPD patients
were not undergoing any specific intervention by the time of the
assessment. Centers from The Netherlands and UK also provided data on 66 healthy control subjects that were matched for
age, gender, and BMI with a subgroup of 66 COPD patients.
On the basis of a 1:1 multivariate matching, the closest possible
case:control matches were determined. Subjects matched exactly for age and gender, the median error between BMI values
of matching subjects was 0.58 [0.29–1.2] Kg/m2 . Subject group
characteristics are presented in Table I.
PAs of COPD and healthy subjects were assessed during daily
life by mean of the SenseWear Armband and SenseWear Mini
Armband activity monitors [22]. These devices combine an accelerometer with different physiological sensors: a heat flux sensor, a galvanic skin response (GSR) sensor, a skin temperature
(ST) sensor, and a near-body ambient temperature sensor. Data
are sampled in 1-min intervals and together with demographic
characteristics (such as gender, age, height, and weight) were
used to estimate EE and metabolic equivalent of task (MET) using proprietary algorithms developed by the manufacturer. The
use of multisensory data in combination with pattern recognition algorithms ensures that the MET estimation is insensitive
to noise and random motion artifacts [23]. For each minute, the
associated steps count (SC) and information about the sleeping
status of a subject (0 = awake, 1 = sleeping) are also provided
by the sensor. The SenseWear Armband has been shown to be
valid both in field [24] and in laboratory studies [25].

COPD patients and healthy subjects wore the sensor both
during daytime and nighttime so that continuous nonscripted
activities were recorded in a natural environment. A minimum
of four days (two weekdays + Saturday + Sunday) was considered acceptable to include a subject in the analysis [26], with
the device being used for at least 22 h/day. From the minutes
coded by the activity monitor as “sleeping,” the longest period
of night sleep was extracted, and the awakening point defined
as the time instant after such period. Brief awake periods (<10
min) of very light intensity (MET < 2.0) within time intervals
coded as “sleeping” longer than 2 h were considered part of the
sleeping time. Recorded days were synchronized according to
this point in order to minimize the intrinsic variability of the
data. Data prior to the awakening point were discarded from the
analysis. Subjects with at least 12 h of data after the awakening
point were included for a total of 977 COPD patients and 66
healthy controls. The median number of days analyzed per patient was 6 (four weekdays, two weekend days), resulting in a
total of 5846 valid PA days assessed, of which 3916 (67%) were
weekdays and 1930 (33%) weekend days. In median, 982 min
were analyzed per patient each day (992 weekdays, 961 weekend days). Ethics Board approval was obtained from the local
ethics committees, and written informed consent was provided
by participants.

B. Vocabulary
One of the most important choices one has to make when
applying LDA to activity data is the nature and number of terms
forming the vocabulary. In order to limit the heuristics, we used
a data-driven methodology to automatically create the vocabulary without specifying its size beforehand. Sensor data from
the 66 healthy subjects and the matched COPD patients subsample were used to automatically create the vocabulary of words
without specifying its size beforehand. Each 1-min data point
consists of a 7-D measurement vector comprising: MET, ST,
GSR, Longitudinal Acceleration (AccL ), Transversal Acceleration (AccT ), SC, and Sleeping Status (SL). AccL and AccT
were combined to compute vector magnitude (VM). METs data
were first divided into activity intensity categories (IC) using
the thresholds proposed by the American College of Sports
Medicine [27]: very light intensity (ICVL ), < 2.0 METs; light
intensity (ICL ), 2.0 to 2.9 METs; and moderate-to-vigorous intensity (ICMV ), ≥ 3.0 METs. Minutes marked by the sensor as
sleeping and with METs < 2.0 formed a separated category
named sleeping (ICS ). For simplicity, we will refer to the IC
only with subscripts S, VL, L, MV. Figure 2 shows an example of a one day METs data stream with the respective IC
superimposed.
Consecutive minutes exhibiting the same ICs are then grouped
together in IB of variable duration (d). In each IB, we calculated
the mean (μ) of ST, GSR, VM, and SC. The original sensor data
stream is then represented by a series of IBs, where each bout
is fully characterized by a six-elements feature vector Ṽ
Ṽ = [IC, d, μST , μGSR , μVM , μSC ].

(1)

SPINA et al.: IDENTIFYING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PROFILES IN COPD PATIENTS USING TOPIC MODELS

1571

TABLE II
FEATURES SELECTED FOR EACH INTENSITY AND ASSOCIATED LEVELS
Sleeping
d
L1 L2

Very light

μ GSR
L1 L2

μ VM
L1 L2 L3

Light
d
L1 L2

Fig. 2. Continuous data stream representing METs value (gray line) is first
quantized in IC (blue is sleeping, ciano is very light, green is light, and red
is moderate to vigorous intensity). IC of the same intensity form bouts. Features are computed within the bouts, and the most relevant for each intensity,
according to the feature selection procedure, will be combined to create PA
descriptors.

d
L1 L2

μ ST
L1 L2

Moderate to vigorous

μ ST
L1 L2 L3 L4

μ GSR
L1 L2

d
L1 L2

μ ST
L1 L2 L3

V = [IC, f1 , f2 , f3 ].

(2)

The features not selected by the feature selection algorithm can be interpreted as wildcard characters representing multiple terms in the vector space ([IC, f1 , f2 , f3 , f4 ] and
[IC, f1 , f2 , f3 , f4 , f5 ] are two such terms of [IC, f1 , f2 , f3 ]). As
intuitively explained later in this section, wildcarding and the
removal of frequent words help in generating sparse topics [21].
The selected features fj ∈{1,2,3} obviously might be different for
each intensity.
To generate the vocabulary of words, each of the selected
features was first standardized, and then, mapped into a set of
discrete levels (which could be interpreted as the letters of our
words) using a k-means clustering algorithm. The algorithm
automatically selects for each feature the number of levels K f j
in a way that the resulting clustering levels Lp∈{1:K } are the most
stable under small perturbations of the input dataset [29]. Levels
are sorted according to their mean value Lp in ascending order
such that the first level (L1 ) represents clusters with the smallest
feature values, and the last level (LK ) represents clusters with
the highest feature values. Features selected and levels are shown

μ VM
L1 L2

in Table II. Mean value and variance of the levels were stored
and used to create the documents as described in Section IV-D.
The vocabulary of terms was built by allowing all the possible
combinations between levels sharing the same IC. For the sleeping category, for example, the feature f1 = d, f2 = μGSR , and
f3 = μV M were selected and divided in K f 1 = K f 2 = 2 and
K f 3 = 3 levels, respectively. The N S (N S = K f 1 · K f 2 · K f 3 )
terms of the vocabulary describing the sleeping intensity category (tSi∈{1:N S } ) can be represented by a simplified feature vector
according to
, LVM
tS1 : [S, Ld1 , LGSR
1
1 ]
tS1 : [S, Ld1 , LGSR
, LVM
1
2 ]
..
.

Subsequently, for each intensity category (S, VL, L, and VL),
the most relevant subset of features was selected such that the
multicluster structure of the data can be best preserved. Features were selected using the Multi-Cluster Feature Selection
(MCFS) method that deploys spectral regression with l1 -norm
regularization in order to select features jointly instead of evaluating each feature independently [28]. The feature vector Ṽ can
then be simplified according to

μ VM
L1 L2

(3)

tS12 : [S, Ld2 , LGSR
, LVM
2
3 ].
The sum of terms across different activity levels is the total
number of words. In particular, a total of 48 terms were created
(12 for S, 8 for VL, 16 for L, and 12 for MV intensity). Note
that we did not need to specify the number of unique artificial
words (vocabulary size) beforehand.
As a last step, we weighted the informativeness of the words
in the vocabulary based on their inverse document frequency
(IDF) score. Those terms that have a high IDF are considered
more informative, because they rarely occur in the collection. In
particular, we removed the words occurring in at least 90% of the
documents since, occurring so frequently, they are more likely
to obscure than facilitate a meaningful decomposition of the
collection of documents. The term frequency (TF), usually used
in combination with IDF to form the TF-IDF score [30], was not
considered because it penalizes words that appear rarely within a
document such as words of moderate to vigorous intensity, these
words are important in the identification of routines correlated
VM
with the disease. The removed terms are [VL, Ld1 , LST
1 , L2 ],
d
ST
VM
d
ST
VM
[VL, L1 , L2 , L1 ] and [VL, L1 , L2 , L2 ]. The IDF score of
the words, and, subsequently, the set of removed words, are
related to the wildcarding procedure previously described. If
more letters are used, the words created will be more specific
with the consequence of a higher IDF score average for the
words in the vocabulary. On the other hand, a higher threshold on the IDF score (i.e., IDF equal to the one of the words
present in 70% of documents) could cause the removal of all the
terms useful to identify specific patients’ subtypes. Although a
rigorous methodology would be necessary to select the optimal

1572

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

combination of feature selected and words removed in order to
generate sparse topics, we empirically found out that setting a
strict threshold on the IDF (90% of documents) and performing
feature selection at the level of the letters works well for our
purpose.
C. Routine Discovery
For topic discovery, we used the LDA implementation of [21],
and we considered each day of assessment as a separate document. Each IB was mapped with an instance of the vocabulary
by associating the selected features in V with their closest levels and then concatenating the three closest levels found. The
distances for each bout between the feature point fj and all the
levels Lp are



f 
fj − Lp j 
j
dp (fj ) =
∀p = {1, . . . , K f }.
(4)
σp
Once that a term of the vocabulary was assigned to each IB,
documents were created by constructing for each day a histogram of terms. We chose the number of routines (R) equal
to 15, and set the hyperparameter α equal to 0.01 as in [18].
Empirically we found that a number of routines greater than
15 led to duplicated routines. Hyperparameters are optimized
with a variational expectation maximization algorithm initialized by randomly choosing a small number of “seed” documents
[30]. We selected 18 seeds (nine from healthy subjects and nine
from COPD patients). Routines did not change in their overall
composition with different seed sets.
D. Routine Inference
Once the routines were calculated, first, we inferred day
segments (i.e., in this case, a day segment is considered as the
equivalent of a text document) in order to know which routines
are active during different parts of the day. For this, we used
sliding windows of T = 30 min of duration as suggested in
[19]. From the observations (the bouts) in a sliding window,
a histogram of terms has to be created as input for the topic
inference. This means that the bouts in the window have to
be mapped to terms from the dictionary. We did this by soft
assignment as follows. For each bout described by feature
vector V , the distances dp (fj ) of each particular feature fj to
f
the cluster levels Lp j were determined. These distances were
converted to feature weights according to
e−d p
.
wp (fj , Lp ) =  f j
K
−d p
p=1 e

(5)

Thus, smaller distances imply higher feature weights, and the
sum of the feature weights over the different clusters equals 1.
We then create the term weights by summing all the feature
weights. The final normalized term weight Wt is the term weight
divided by the sum of all term weights. The normalized term
weights are, thus, values between 0 and 1. Normalized term
weights of terms associated with other intensity categories were
set to 0. Finally, we use the normalized term weights to create

Fig. 3.

Distribution of the routines over the terms of the vocabulary.

the histogram. For each term in the dictionary, we sum all the
weights stemming from the all the bouts in the window.
Second, we applied routine inference on the first 6 h of the
assessed days in order to estimate the minutes spent in each
routine during the most active part of the day. The same mapping
procedure described for sliding windows of 30 min was applied
in the case of a unique fixed window of 6 h.
V. RESULTS
Since PA measures during the weekdays and the weekend
days are known to be different [26] results were computed separately. Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA test and Dunn’s multiple comparisons test were used to determine significance of the results.
A value of P < 0.05 was considered significant. Pearson’s coefficient was used to investigate correlations in the entire dataset of
977 COPD patients. The findings are organized as follows. First,
an interpretation of the discovered routines using the dataset of
matched COPD and healthy subjects is given to highlight differences in intensity composition of routines and associated
physiological responses. Second, results from the inference on
window segments of 30 min are presented to qualitatively show
two examples of daily routines patterns from a healthy subject and a COPD patient. Discovered routines are successively
inferred on the first 6 h of all the assessed days of 66 healthy subjects and 977 COPD patients to quantitatively assess differences
between selected groups of subjects and trends across different
stages of COPD. Finally, the dataset of matched pairs is used
to evaluate the routines in discriminative tasks, such as dividing
healthy from patients and recognizing to which population each
of the assessed days belongs.
A. Routine Interpretation
Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of the discovered routines β1,..,15 over the terms of the vocabulary. Three routines
related to low intensity levels (R2, R8, R9), nine routines
related to moderate-high intensity levels (R1, R3, R4, R5, R6,

SPINA et al.: IDENTIFYING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PROFILES IN COPD PATIENTS USING TOPIC MODELS

TABLE III
ROUTINES MATRIX
R1

%

MV 1 2 2 0.40
L 1 2 1 0.39
L 1 3 1 0.07
R6

%

R2
L131
VL 2 2 2
L121
R7

%

%

L 1 3 2 0.62 VL 1 1 1 0.41
MV 1 3 2 0.14 MV 1 2 1 0.21
L 2 3 2 0.06 L 1 2 1 0.15
R11
S113
S112
S111

%

R12

R3

%

R4

%

R5

%

0.39 L 1 1 2 0.31 L 1 3 1 0.53 L 1 2 2 0.37
0.31 MV 1 1 2 0.22 MV 1 3 2 0.23 MV 1 2 2 0.23
0.10 L 1 2 2 0.16 L 1 4 1 0.11 L 1 3 2 0.12

%

R8

%

R9

L131
L121
L231

0.57
0.12
0.07

L121
VL 1 1 1
L221

R13

%

R14

%

R10

%

0.70 L 1 4 2 0.70
0.08 MV 1 3 1 0.09
0.08 MV 1 3 2 0.07
%

R15

%

0.27 L 1 1 1 0.55 MV 1 3 2 0.81 MV 1 1 2 0.43 L 1 4 1 0.68
0.21 MV 1 1 2 0.15 MV 1 3 1 0.13 L 1 1 1 0.19 MV 1 3 1 0.09
0.17 MV 1 1 1 0.09 MV 2 3 2 0.02 MV 1 2 2 0.14 MV 1 3 2 0.08

The three dominant words for each of the 15 discovered routines.

R10, R12, R14, R15) and one routine composed by a combination of VL, L, and MV descriptors (R7) were discovered in
data from 66 COPD patients and 66 healthy subjects. Two separate routines characterizing, respectively, the sleeping behavior
(R11) and high intensity levels (R13) were also found. Each of
these routines is characterized by the probability over the terms,
where each term is defined by a certain combination of feature
levels. For each routine, the three most important terms (i.e.,
terms of highest probabilities in this routine) can be found in
Table III. The words composing a particular routine are listed
together with their occurrence probability (e.g., the first word
of R1: [MV 1 2 2] refers to a simplified feature vector V given
by [MV, Ld1 , LS2 T , LV2 M ] and has occurrence probability equal
to 40%). Routines, that might be considered similar by only
looking at their intensity composition, are different at the level
of the descriptors. As an example, Fig. 3 shows that R3 and R5
are formed for the 20% by MV descriptors and for the 50% by
L descriptors. Analyzing the letters that compose the descriptors shows that both the MV descriptor and the L descriptors of
R5 have higher values in the feature level corresponding to the
ST (second letter, see Table III). This illustrates that some routines differ depending on physiological responses. In absence
of appropriate labels for these topics, such insights into routines are relevant for interpreting the inferences of topics per
subject.

1573

short duration, high μST , and low μGSR . The graph also shows
that the patient slept in the afternoon for about 1 h (probably he
rested after having lunch), and after that he continued with the
same behavior of the morning. After 14 h from the awakening
of the subject, R2 starts decreasing and R11, that characterizes
the sleeping behavior, starts to become the most active routine.
On the other hand, the day of the healthy subject shows a larger
variety of active routine patterns. The bottom plot of Fig. 4 shows
that the routines R15, R12, R14, R1, R15, R13, and R8 are
sequentially active. Around 9 h after his awakening, just before
the evening, this subject assumes a behavior similar to his COPD
match, i.e., routine R2 becomes the dominant routine until the
sleeping time. From the examples, it can be deduced that this
particular day of the COPD patient is more static compared to the
one of the healthy subject if the number of transitions between
the most active routines is considered. Although we did not use
the trajectories of the routines as in Fig. 4 in our further analysis
they can be used for classification tasks by modeling the trends
of routines activation with multitask Gaussian processes [31] or
using sequential patterns [32].
In order to extract cumulative (over several days of assessment) characteristics of a subject we, instead, inferred the routines on the first 6 h of the days of each subject as if it was one
day segment. On the right side of Fig. 4 the star plots describe
the averages of the routines’ activation probabilities across the
assessed days of the same two subjects when the inference is
performed on the first 6 h after their awakenings. In this case,
routines’ activation probabilities can also be considered as an
estimate of the time spent in each routine during the most active
part of the day. The subjects are represented as a star whose
each spoke length is proportional to the average time spent in
the associated routine over the assessed weekdays. For clarity,
only the most active routines over the assessed days are shown.
We see that the shapes of the stars are remarkably different.
Routines R11 and R2 were the most active for the COPD patient while, in contrast, the healthy subject spent most of his
time performing more active routines such as R1, R12, and
R14. Differences in the shapes of the star plot (i.e., time spent
in different routines) are consistent across healthy and COPD
patients and will be discussed in the next section.
C. Trends in Routines Activation

B. Daily Pattern of Routines
Figure 4 illustrates the activation probabilities of the extracted
routines when day segments of 30 min are sequentially inferred.
The inference on sequential day segments provides a qualitative
representation of the temporal behavior of the routines. The top
and the bottom plots show the routine patterns for a COPD
and a healthy subject, respectively. It can be seen that three
PA routines (R2, R11, and R9) pervade the day of a COPD
patient (see top plot of Fig. 4). In particular, this patient spent
most of his time performing activities that involve a L intensity
descriptor of short duration, with high μST , and low μGSR and
a VL intensity descriptor of long duration, with high μST and
high μVM . Three hours after the patient awoke, R9 becomes
dominant for about 3 h. This routine includes a L descriptor of

Figure 5 shows the average values of the estimated time spent
in each routine for all the 977 COPD patients, the matched
66 COPD patients, the matched 66 healthy subjects, and for the
977 COPD patients stratified according to their disease severity,
where GOLD1 and GOLD4 indicate, respectively, the least and
most severe stage of COPD. Each point in the figure identifies
the mean over all the subjects of each group, where each subject
is represented by the mean of the time spent in the different
routines over the assessed weekdays (left) and weekend days
(right). Comparison between the time spent in each of the 15
routines in the 977 COPD patients and the subgroup used to
extract the routines (see inside the green dashed rectangles in
Fig. 5) shows that there are no statistical differences (p > 0.2)
in the time spent in each routine between the two groups in both

1574

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 4. Left: Routine activation probabilities determined from a particular day of a COPD patient (top) and a healthy subject (bottom). Only topics with a
maximum activation larger than 0.1 are shown. Right: Star plots illustrating the average time spent on the three most active routines of the same COPD patient and
healthy subject during the first 6 h of their assessed days. R2, R11, R12 and R1, R12, R14 are, respectively, the three most active routines for the COPD patient
(top) and the healthy subject (bottom).

Fig. 5. Activation topic averages during weekdays (left) and weekend days (right). The green dashed rectangles indicate the comparison between all the COPD
patients (n = 977), and the COPD subset used to generate the routines (n = 66). The red rectangles indicate the comparison between the matched COPD patients
(n = 66) and the matched healthy subjects (n = 66). The dashed blue rectangles indicate the comparison between the healthy subjects (n = 66), GOLD1 (n = 89),
GOLD2 (n = 385), GOLD3 (n = 330), and GOLD4 (n = 173). Inference was performed in the first 6 h after the awakenings from the night sleep.

assessed weekdays and weekend days. This indicates that the
model is able to generalize across many COPD patients.
When matched COPD and healthy subjects are compared (see
inside the red rectangles in Fig. 5), we found statistical differences between the two groups (p < 0.05) during weekdays in
R2, R3, R5, R10, R11, R12, R14, R15. During weekend days,
statistical differences were found in R3, R4, R7, R14, R15. A
reduced number of statistical differences in the weekend days
indicates that the two groups assume a more similar behavior
during these days. This might be due to the fact that healthy subjects could still be active workers or that they perform weekly
activities such as grocery shopping. On the contrary, they might
use the weekend days to sleep more and rest. These assumption could be confirmed by an increased value of the time spent

in R2 and R11 during the weekend days of healthy subjects.
High values of these two routines characterize only the COPD
patients group during the weekdays.
Comparing healthy subjects and the four different COPD
groups (see inside the dashed blue rectangles in Fig. 5), we
observe five main trends over the different stages of the disease both in weekdays and weekend days. R2 and R11 are
increasing with the increase of COPD severity. R2 represents
a medium-inactive PA routine composed for the 39% by [L,
GSR
GSR
] and by the 31% by [V L, Ld2 , LST
]. The
Ld1 , LST
3 , L1
2 , L2
first PA descriptor represents light intensity movements characterized by short duration that cause a high increase of the
temperature. The second term represents very light intensity
movements of long duration that cause a moderate increase of

SPINA et al.: IDENTIFYING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PROFILES IN COPD PATIENTS USING TOPIC MODELS

physiological responses (high body temperature and high GSR).
The positive trend is interrupted in the most severe group of patients that compensate a smaller value for R2 with a higher
value of R11 and R15. A high value of the time spent in R11
could be associated with the most severe patients since their
conditions might force them to spend more time in bed. R15 is
characterized mainly by light intensity PA terms characterized
by higher physiological responses if compared with R2. This
might indicate a bigger effort in performing activities. The increased value of R2 for healthy subjects during weekend days
has been discussed previously. Another rising trend is shown by
R11 representing the time spent, while performing very inactive behavior (mainly sleeping). On the other hand, we note that
R3, R12, and R14 decrease with an increase in COPD severity. These three routines indicate movements performed with
medium-high activity intensities characterized by small physiological responses. Of particular, interest are R3, R12 since they
are weakly, but significantly correlated with FEV1 , %predicted
(ρ = 0.3, p = 2× 10−23 , ρ = 0.2, p = 5.8× 10−11 , respectively),
and R14 weakly correlated with FEV1 (ρ = 0.2, p = 3×10−5 ).
No correlation was found with age and BMI indicating that these
discovered routines are decoupled from these variables. Statistical differences (p < 0.0001) have been found in the percentage
of activation of R3 and R14 between healthy subject and all the
COPD severity classes (both weekdays and weekend days). For
R3 statistical differences (p < 0.0001) were also found between
the first two stage of the disease (GOLD1, GOLD2) and the
last two stages (GOLD3 and GOLD4) during the weekdays. For
weekend, only between GOLD1 and the last two stage of disease
(GOLD3 GOLD4) and between GOLD2 and GOLD4. For R12,
statistical differences (p < 0.0001) have been found between
healthy subject and GOLD2, GOLD3, GOLD4 (both weekdays
and weekend days). Between the GOLD1 and GOLD3–4 (also
during the weekend days), between GOLD2 and GOLD4 (also
weekend).
D. Discriminatory Power of Routines
In order to further validate the findings shown in Fig. 5 and
assess the discriminatory power of PA routines, we first clustered the 66 patient:control matches and, subsequently, their assessed weekdays. For the first clustering experiment, each of the
66 healthy subjects and 66 matching COPD patients was represented by the average time spent in each routine over the assessed
weekdays as symbolically shown in the star plots of Fig. 4.
Distance-based features were extracted using only R3, R12, and
R14 because of their correlation with the FEV1 , %predicted and
FEV1 : variables used to assess airway obstruction in the current clinical setting. In particular, we calculated the pairwise
Kullback–Leibler pairwise distances between all the subjects
represented by the averaged time spent in R3, R12, and R14.
Using Kruskal’s normalized stress1 criterion, we created a set
of locations in three dimensions whose interpoint distances approximate the routine dissimilarities between subjects. We finally clustered the subjects such represented using a k-mean
clustering algorithm with k = 2 achieving 86% accuracy in
dividing the two groups.

1575

For the second experiment, we clustered the 536 assessed
weekdays (273 for healthy subjects, 263 for COPD patients),
which were represented by the associated daily time spent by
the subjects in R3, R12, R14. After extracting the same typology of features, we clustered the days in k = 2 groups achieving
82% of accuracy in discriminating between days that belong
to healthy subjects and days belonging to COPD patients. This
shows that activity biomarkers derived from routines can potentially be used in diagnostic decision support systems, but also
in monitoring systems providing feedback on a daily basis.
VI. CONCLUSION
Unsupervised discovery of latent structures in data from activity monitors is becoming more relevant due to the increasing
amount of available multimodal data. Using relatively simple
assumptions and settings, we have shown that interpretable and
consistent results can be obtained from a large set of unannotated real-life data concerning a large population of COPD
and healthy subjects. We have shown that PA routines can be
used effectively to integrate and represent the underlying structure of PA measures and physiological responses that characterize the activities of the subjects under study. In particular, it
is shown that PA routines in COPD patients and healthy subjects are considerably different regarding their composition and
that they show certain consistent trends depending on COPD
clinical characteristics. The discovered PA routines were found
suitable to label, in an unsupervised way, subjects and assessed
days. Moreover, inferring the routine structure on day segments
of relatively short duration, it was possible to model PA routine patterns across the day and to identify moments in time
in which transitions of the most active routines occur. Some
methodological considerations need to be taken into account.
First, demographics information (such as working activities)
and comorbidities were not available which could influence PA.
Second, the routines identified would benefit from a sensitivity study using a new sample of COPD-healthy pairs matching
with the same characteristics. Although a more detailed clinical
interpretation of the discovered routines is extremely interesting and planned as follow-up of this study, the discovered PA
routines apparently reflect the stage of the disease as measured
by common clinical practice and could be valid constructs to
quantify PA behavior change in patient with limited exercise
capacity such as with COPD. As such, it is an encouraging step
into the direction of practical applications of these techniques
in daily life to design, for instance, interventions and coaching
systems with realistic goals for this population.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. M. Polkey, for supplying
the data collected by his group.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Graat-Verboom, B. E. E. M. van den Borne, F. W. J. M Smeenk, M. A.
Spruit, and E. F. M. Wouters, “Osteoporosis in COPD outpatients based
on bone mineral density and vertebral fractures,” J. Bone Mineral Res.,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 561–568, 2011.

1576

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

[2] C. J. Caspersen, K. E. Powell, and G. M. Christenson, “Physical activity, exercise, and physical fitness: Definitions and distinctions for healthrelated research,” Public Health Rep., vol. 100, no. 2, pp. 126–131, 1985.
[3] ATS/ERS Task Force on Pulmonary Rehabilitation, “An official European
respiratory society statement on physical activity in COPD,” Eur. Respir.
J, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 1521–1537, Dec. 2014.
[4] D. Donaire-Gonzalez, D. Gimeno-Santos, E. Balcells, D. A. Rodrguez,
E. Farrero, J. de Batlle, M. Benet, A. Ferrer, J. A. Barber, and J. Gea,
“Physical activity in COPD patients: Patterns and bouts,” Eur. Respir. J,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 993–1002, 2013.
[5] F. Pitta, T. Troosters, M. A. Spruit, M. Decramer, and R. Gosselink “Activity monitoring for assessment of physical activities in daily life in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.,
vol. 86, pp. 1979–1985, 2007.
[6] J. B. J. Bussmann and R. J. G. van den Berg-Emons, “To total amount of
activity ..... and beyond: Perspectives on measuring physical behaviour,”
Front. Psychol., vol. 4, art. no. 463, pp. 1–6, 2013.
[7] F. Pitta, T. Troosters, V. S. Probst, M. A. Spruit, M. Decramer, and R.
Gosselink, “Quantifying physical activity in daily life with questionnaires
and motion sensors in COPD,” Eur. Respir. J., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1040–
1055, 2006.
[8] S. Liao, R. Benzo, A. L. Ries, and X. Soler, “Physical activity monitoring in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Dis., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 155–165, 2014.
[9] S. Patel, C. Mancinelli, P. Bonato, J. Healey, and M. Moy, “Using wearable sensors to monitor physical activities of patients with COPD: A comparison of classifier performance,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable
Implantable Body Sensor Netw., Jun. 2009, pp. 234–239.
[10] S. N. W. Vorrink, H. S. M. Kort, T. Troosters, and J. W. J. Lammers,
“Level of daily physical activity in individuals with COPD compared with
healthy controls,” Respir. Res., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 12–33, 2011.
[11] E. Gimeno-Santos, A. Frei, C. Steurer-Stey, J. de Batlle, R. A. Rabinovich,
Y. Raste, N. S. Hopkinson, M. I. Polkey, H. van Remoortel, T. Troosters,
K. Kulich, N. Karlsson, M. A. Puhan, J. Garcia-Aymerich, and on behalf of PROactive consortium. “Determinants and outcomes of physical
activity in patients with COPD: A systematic review,” Thorax, vol. 69,
pp. 731–739, 2014.
[12] P. Fabio, M. Y. Takaki, N. H. de Oliveira, T. J. P. Sant’Anna, A. D. Fontana,
D. Kovelis, C. A. Camillo, V. S. Probst, and A. F. Brunetto, “Relationship
between pulmonary function and physical activity in daily life in patients
with COPD,” Respir. Med., vol. 102, no. 8, pp. 1203–1207, 2008.
[13] J. Lin, E. Keogh, S. Lonardi, and B. Chiu, “A symbolic representation
of time series, with implications for streaming algorithms,” in Proc. 8th
ACM SIGMOD Workshop Res. Issues Data Mining Knowledge Discovery,
2003, pp. 2–11.
[14] M. M. M. Fuad, “Genetic algorithms-based symbolic aggregate approximation,” in Data Warehousing Knowledge Discovery (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science), vol. 7448. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012, pp.
105–116.
[15] N. Y. Hammerla, Y. Nils, R. Kirkham, P. Andras, and T. Ploetz, “On
preserving statistical characteristics of accelerometry data using their empirical cumulative distribution,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wearable Comput.,
2013, pp. 65–68.
[16] S. Saria, A. Duchi, and D. Koller, “Discovering deformable motifs in
continuous time series data,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2011,
vol. 22, pp. 1465.

[17] P. Schulam, F. Wigley, and S. Saria, “Clustering longitudinal clinical
marker trajectories from electronic health data: Applications to phenotyping and endotype discovery,” in Proc. 29th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015,
pp. 2956–2964.
[18] T. Huynh, M. Fritz, and B.Schiele, “Discovery of activity patterns using
topic models,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Comput., 2008, pp.
10–19.
[19] J. Seiter, O. Amft, M. Rossi, and G. Troster, “Discovery of activity composites using topic models: An analysis of unsupervised methods,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., 2014.
[20] F. Sun, Y. Yeh, H. Cheng, C. Kuo, and M. Griss, “Nonparametric discovery
of human routines from sensor data.,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive
Comput. Commun., 2014, pp. 11–19.
[21] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent Dirichlet allocation,” J.
Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, pp. 993–1022, 2003.
[22] BodyMedia SenseWear. (2015). [Online]. Avilable: http://sensewear.
bodymedia.com/
[23] T. Troosters, F. Sciurba, S. Battaglia, D. Langer, S. R. Valluri, L. Martino,
R. Benzo, D. Andre, I. Weisman, and M. Decramer, “Physical inactivity in
patients with COPD, a controlled multi-center pilot-study,” Respir. Med.,
vol. 104, no. 7, pp. 1005–1011, 2010.
[24] L. H. Colbert, C. E. Matthews, T. C. Havighurst, K. Kim, and D. A.
Schoeller, “Comparative validity of physical activity measures in older
adults,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., vol. 43, pp. 867–876, 2011.
[25] K. Hill, T. E. Dolmage, L. Woon, R. Goldstein, and D. Brooks, “Measurement properties of the sensewear armband in adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,” Thorax, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 486–491, 2010.
[26] H. Watz, B. Waschki, T. Meyer, and H. Magnussen, “Physical activity in
patients with COPD,” Eur. Respir. J., vol. 33, pp. 262–272, 2009.
[27] C. E. Garber, B. Blissmer, M. R. Deschenes, B. A. Franklin, M. J. Lamonte,
I. M. Lee, D. C. Nieman, and D. P. Swain, “American college of sports
medicine position stand. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor
fitness in apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing exercise,”
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., vol. 43, pp. 1334–1359, 2011.
[28] D. Cai, C. Zhang, and X. He, “Unsupervised feature selection for multicluster data,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
2010, pp. 333-342.
[29] U. von Luxburg, “Clustering stability: An overview,” Found. Trends Mach.
Learn., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 235–274, 2010.
[30] D. M. Blei and J. D. Lafferty, “Topic models,” Text Mining, Classification,
Clustering Appl., vol. 10, pp. 71–94, 2009.
[31] M. Ghassemi, M. A. F. Pimentel, T. Naumann, T. Brennan, D. A. Clifton,
P. Szolovits, and M. Feng, “A multivariate timeseries modeling approach
to severity of illness assessment and forecasting in ICU with sparse, heterogeneous clinical data,” in Proc. 29th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015,
pp. 446–453.
[32] S. Ghosh, M. Feng, H. Nguyen, and J. Li, “Risk prediction for acute hypotensive patients by using gap constrained sequential contrast patterns,”
in Proc. AMIA Annu. Symp., 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

