2568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Heart Rate Detection During Sleep Using a Flexible
RF Resonator and Injection-Locked PLL Sensor
Sung Woo Kim, Soo Beom Choi, Yong-Jun An, Byung-Hyun Kim, Student Member, IEEE,
Deok Won Kim, Life Member, IEEE, and Jong-Gwan Yook∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Novel nonintrusive technologies for wrist pulse detection have been developed and proposed as systems for sleep
monitoring using three types of radio frequency (RF) sensors. The
three types of RF sensors for heart rate measurement on wrist are
a flexible RF single resonator, array resonators, and an injectionlocked PLL resonator sensor. To verify the performance of the new
RF systems, we compared heart rates between presleep time and
postsleep onset time. Heart rates of ten subjects were measured
using the RF systems during sleep. All three RF devices detected
heart rates at 0.2 to 1 mm distance from the skin of the wrist over
clothes made of cotton fabric. The wrist pulse signals of a flexible RF single resonator were consistent with the signals obtained
by a portable piezoelectric transducer as a reference. Then, we
confirmed that the heart rate after sleep onset time significantly
decreased compared to before sleep. In conclusion, the RF system
can be utilized as a noncontact nonintrusive method for measuring
heart rates during sleep.
Index Terms—Heart rate, radio frequency, sleep, wearable sensors, wrist pulse.

I. INTRODUCTION
EART rate monitoring is currently considered as one of
the most challenging functions to achieve with wearable
devices, like a smart watch (e.g., Galaxy Gear, G Watch R, Apple watch) [1]. Heart rate is modulated on a beat-to-beat basis
by the combined effects of the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems on the sinoatrial node, and is a one of the vital
signals utilized for detection of arrhythmia (e.g., bradycardia,
tachycardia) [2]. Heart rate varies with sleep stages, and normal
heart rate variability (HRV) is affected by some sleep diseases,
such as sleep apnea. Apneic events are usually accompanied by
a reduction in blood oxygen saturation, and are defined as the
cessation of airflow for at least 10 s resulting in a dramatically
decreased heart rate [3]. As a result, HRV may be a satisfactory tool for discriminating healthy subjects from patients with
obstructive sleep apnea using differences in HRV.

H

Manuscript received December 19, 2014; revised April 6, 2015 and May 28,
2015; accepted May 28, 2015. Date of publication June 5, 2015; date of current
version October 16, 2015. This work was the result of a joint research project
between LG Electronics and Yonsei University. This work was supported in
part by a grant from the Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea supported by the Ministry of Education, Science,
and Technology (No. 2010-0022374). Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
S. W. Kim is with the Future IT R&D Laboratory, LG Electronics.
S. B. Choi and D. W. Kim are with the Department of Medical Engineering,
Yonsei University College of Medicine.
Y. J. An and B.-H. Kim are with the Yonsei University.
∗ J. G. Yook is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea (e-mail: jgyook@yonsei.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2439681

Several physiological sensing methods have been widely used
to measure heart rate, including electrocardiography (ECG),
impedance plethysmography, ballistocardiography, as well as
piezoelectrography. Because these methods use electrode-based
sensors on the skin surface which are heavily intrusive, they
are infrequently applied in a long-term sleep monitoring, such
as polysomnography. Photoplethysmography (PPG) is used to
measure arterial oxygen saturation or heart rate using LED sensors. While the decreasing size of pulse oximeters over recent
years has broadened their spectrum of use [4], the PPG sensor is
clip-type, which has to be directly contacted to the skin surface,
and is considerably sensitive to motion artifacts [5].
In addition, participants often suffer from sleep disturbances
in the unfamiliar surroundings of polysomnography, due to the
numerous wired communication systems used for multichannel monitoring, including electroencephalogram (EEG), ECG,
chin electromyogram, respiration, and pulse oximetry, as well
as snoring, and sleep position. Due to these inconvenient disturbances, the evaluation of sleep quality (e.g., sleep efficiency,
sleep latency, and sleep period time) can be biased resulting
in an inaccurate sleep analysis or diagnostic polysomnographic
reports.
According to previous studies, continuous-wave (CW)
Doppler radar operating in far field at 2.4 or 10 GHz can detect heart rates at a distance of around 100 cm away from the
chest [6]–[9]. However, the output signal of this system is significantly affected by motion artifacts; the reflected heart beat
signal can be masked by random body movements due to the
nature of the Doppler radar. Considering this, we have taken different approaches to measure heart rate at very short distances
(about 2 to 5 cm) away from the chest, which allows the device
to be embedded into clothing or a blanket. Our devices detect
heart rate based on a noncontact sensing method in the near field
[10]. We have also applied an RF sensor with a demodulation
method using a near-field antenna effect to detect wrist pulse
(i.e., the pulse of the radial or ulnar artery) [11].
A. Doppler Radar in the Far Field
Vital sign detection using a Doppler radar has been previously
studied as a method for detecting the heartbeat and breathing of
a survivor located behind a block wall or buried underground
(e.g., an X-band life-detection system) [12]. In early 2000, many
studies for home healthcare systems were presented, which focused on sensing vital signals using Doppler radar at 2.4-GHz
employing industrial scientific medical bands [13], [14].
In the past two decades, other Doppler radar noncontact vital sign detection schemes have been reported under different

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KIM et al.: HEART RATE DETECTION DURING SLEEP USING A FLEXIBLE RF RESONATOR AND INJECTION-LOCKED PLL SENSOR

2569

environments for different applications [15]–[18]. A critical
problem that has prevented these technologies from being
widely used is the noise produced by the random body motion. For example, when the radar has been used for an overnight
monitoring of sleep apnea in a clinical environment, the detected
vital sign signal will be interrupted when the subject under test
rolls over on the bed producing a false alarm.
B. RF Resonator Sensor in the Near Field
An RF resonator sensor can be utilized to measure the near
field effect using a 1-port resonator located in proximity to a
human chest. It can detect the change in phase of reflection coefficient using a vector network analyzer (VNA), and gather a
record of the heart rate for cardiopulmonary monitoring [19].
This technique was improved for another application, the microwave stethoscope coupler, using a particular resonator design
[20], [21]. However, these methods require an expensive VNA to
measure the change in phase, and exhibit very low-performance
sensitivity in heart rate detection.
In this study, we propose a novel RF sensor system to enhance both sensitivity and stability using a free-running voltagecontrolled oscillator (VCO). The oscillation circuit of the proposed sensor system is realized by a planar resonator, which
functions as a positive-feedback element, as well as a near-field
radiator to sense vital signals. A surface acoustic wave filter
and a power detector are used to increase the sensitivity of the
system, as well as to transform the frequency variation into a
voltage waveform. In addition, the relation of the frequency deviation of the oscillator and the Q value of the resonator was
analyzed to enhance the system sensitivity [10].
In this paper, a wrist-type wearable sensor system using a
flexible RF resonator for wrist pulse detection is proposed, and
was applied as a noncontact and nonintrusive heart rate measurement method during sleep. We further aimed to demonstrate
the feasibility of heart rate measurement on the wrist using various RF sensors, such as a flexible RF single resonator, array
resonators, and an injection-locked phase-locked loop (PLL)
resonator sensor.
II. RF SENSOR DESIGN
The RF sensor system can be divided into two parts: the RF
resonator and the detection circuit. The RF resonator part should
be located on the wrist close to the arteries in order to detect
pulses, and the detection circuit then converts the variation of the
reflection coefficient of the resonator resulting from pulse motion into very low-frequency dc-level variations. The sensitivity
of the RF resonator and the detection circuit are important factors in detecting pulses on the wrist. In this section, a few kinds
of pulse detection methods based on microwave techniques are
introduced.
A. Flexible RF Resonator
For wearable applications, such as a smart watch, a wrist
pulse detection system incorporating an RF sensor resonator
and detection circuits should be small and flexible, and have

Fig. 1.

Designed resonator structure with hand wrist model.

Fig. 2.

Simulation condition with the flexible resonator.

low-power consumption as well. To comply with the size and
flexibility requirements, the resonator was designed as a planar inverted-F antenna (PIFA) structure and implemented on a
0.25-mm-thick Teflon substrate. The PIFA, similar in shape to
an inverted-F, has a low profile, omnidirectional radiation pattern, and relatively small size, because it resonates at quarter
wavelength.
To predict the reflection coefficient of the resonator, a
3-D electromagnetic full-wave solver was utilized. For realistic
human-skin modeling, the permittivity and conductivity were
chosen to be 37 and 1.7 S/m, respectively, at 2.4 GHz [22]. In
general, the resonant frequency of a resonator is downshifted
when a high-permittivity material is closely located. Considering the frequency-shifting phenomenon, the length of the resonator was set to 19.8 mm, which is less than quarter wavelength
at 2.4 GHz.
Also, to increase the frequency deviation of the resonator,
that is, the sensitivity of the sensor, a slit was inserted into the
conventional PIFA structure. The size of the designed resonator
was 5 mm × 15 mm. The substrate size, which was not relevant
to the electrical performance of the sensor system, was selected
to be 20 mm × 160 mm, long enough to wrap around the whole
wrist. A conceptual drawing of the flexible resonator is shown
with a hand model in Fig. 1.
Because the size of the resonator is small, a box with a tissue
property, like human skin, was placed in front of the resonator
at a distance (see “h” in Fig. 2) ranging from 0.25 to 2 mm,
and the space was filled with a preventive layer (εr = 3.2). The
simulation condition is shown in Fig. 2. The simulation and

2570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Simulated and measured S-parameters. 3-D EM simulation and measurement results with preventive layers.

Fig. 5. Reflective-type wrist pulse detection system using the array RF
resonator.

Fig. 4. Reflective-type wrist pulse detection system using a single RF
resonator.

measurement results are illustrated in Fig. 3. The tendency of
the measurement result in Fig. 3 shows very similar behavior to
the simulation result. When there was less than 1.0-mm spacing
between the resonator and human skin in the measurement, appropriate pressure was applied to compare measurement result
with the resonance frequency changes of the simulation.
A block diagram of the reflective-type wrist pulse detection
system is shown in Fig. 4. The system is a kind of reflectometer,
detecting the magnitude of the reflection coefficient with enhanced sensitivity [23]. When a planar RF resonator is located
close to the artery, the reflection coefficient of the resonator is
affected by the motion of the artery due to the fluidic nature of
the blood. To detect the variation of the reflection coefficient,
a very sensitive RF near-field detection system is utilized. The
transmitted CW signal from the signal source is reflected from
the resonator, where the reflected signal is modulated by the
mechanical movement of the artery [24].
The reflected signal can be expressed as
Vreﬂect = Vt · (ΓC ) · (1 + γ (t)) · cos (ωt + ∠ (ΓC + γ (t)))
(1)
where Vt is the transmitted signal, Γc and γ(t) are a constant,
and the time-variant reflection coefficient of the resonator, respectively, ω is the signal frequency, and t is time of signal. In
this system, γ(t) has information which contains the wrist pulse.
The transmitted signal is coupled to the variable attenuator, and the reflected signal is coupled to the phase shifter
by the directional coupler in Fig. 4. The transmitted signal is
attenuated by a variable attenuator to have the same magnitude

Fig. 6.

Block diagram of a proximity-coupling RF sensor.

as the reflected signal, while the reflected signal is phase shifted
to be out of phase with the transmitted signal using a phase
shifter. Each of the signals is combined with a power combiner,
it means that the same magnitude and out of phase are used for
a cancellation of the time constant term Γc .
The combined signal can be expressed as
Vcomb = Vt · Γc · γ (t) · cos (ωt + ∠ (ΓC + γ (t))) .

(2)

Because the combined signal only has the wrist-pulse
dependent-variant component γ(t) of the reflection coefficient,
the combined signal provides much higher sensitivity than the
reflected signal itself [23]. In addition, wrist pulses can be detected well by an RF near-field detection system, which has a
flexible resonator and substrate [24].
B. Flexible RF Array Resonators (Demodulation)
Recently, to increase the detection range of the wrist sensor, the single resonator was substituted with the array of RF
resonators, and the performance of the array of resonators was
studied as shown in Fig. 5 [25]. Because the array was designed
with an RF single-pole four-throw switch, the array could cover
most of the wrist and its various arteries. Depending on the

KIM et al.: HEART RATE DETECTION DURING SLEEP USING A FLEXIBLE RF RESONATOR AND INJECTION-LOCKED PLL SENSOR

2571

Fig. 7. Flowchart of the experimental protocol. The shaded area indicates that
wrist pulses were measured by the flexible RF single resonator for each 5-min
segment.

Fig. 8. Photograph of the pulse detection RF circuitry. The size of the RF
circuit board is 93 mm × 40 mm.

switching method, the array detection system can detect wrist
pulses on a single artery or it can simultaneously detect pulses
on multiple arteries. The only increased cost compared to the
single system is the RF switch, which has almost zero power
consumption.
C. Proximity-Coupling RF Sensor (Injection-Locked PLL)
The block diagram shown in Fig. 6 is a wrist pulse detection
system based on a PLL, VCO, and sensor oscillator. This system
was designed to utilize existing communication systems having
VCOs and PLLs and communication antennas. After passing the
N-counter, the signal from the VCO is compared to that from
a reference oscillator having extremely high stability (such as
crystal oscillators) by the phase-frequency detector (PFD). The
PFD produces a dc voltage proportional to the phase difference
between those signals, and then the loop filter integrates the
signal from the PFD. Note that the type of loop filter used in
this study is a second-order differential active type [26]. Finally,
the dc voltage from the loop filter controls the VCO to fix the
frequency of the VCO to N times the frequency of the reference
oscillator.
At the same time, digital signal processing is used to digitize
the loop control voltage for ADC postprocessing [27]. When
an external signal having a frequency similar to the VCO is
injected, such as the wrist pulses, the VCO tends to be locked by
this external signal. Then, the PLL generates a control voltage
to the VCO to return to the original frequency of the VCO.
Therefore, the VCO frequency is fixed, but the control voltage
is continuously varying with the external signal. Note that the
sensor oscillator behaves like the external signal in this system.
The sensor oscillator in this study consists of an interdigital planar resonator and a buffer amplifier. Interdigital is just
the name of the resonator used in the “proximity-coupling RF

Fig. 9. Comparison of wrist pulses obtained with RF single resonator and
piezoelectric transducer. (a) Detected pulse waveform of the flexible RF single
resonator and pulse pressure of the piezoelectric transducer as a reference signal.
(b) power spectrum results of the RF single resonator and the piezoeletric
transducer.

sensor.” This terminology comes from its structure (i.e., finger
like, periodic, and parallel pattern), and this type of resonator
has been used to sense variations in the dielectric constant of
material under test nondestructively [28]. When this resonator
approaches the wrist where the radial artery passes, the fringing
field of the resonator is affected by the periodic variation of
the radial artery; hence, the oscillating condition of the sensor
oscillator is changed.
This sensor system has several advantages: 1) The proposed
system can be easily integrated into existing communication
systems, such as Bluetooth, WiFi, or 4 G mobile communication
systems, by adding an injection port to the PLL circuit, whereas
other demodulation methods are designed to be independent of
existing communication systems for the purpose of tracking vital

2572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 10. Four signals are simultaneously detected using the RF array resonators on switching mode.

signs. 2) The sensor system does not interfere with other external
communication systems, in contrast to transmit/receive signalbased systems, such as Doppler radar. 3) It has high degrees
of freedom since there are various design parameters, which a
designer can control, such as VCO gain, VCO power, injection
power from the sensor oscillator, and the Q of the resonator.
III. MEASUREMENT AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
As shown in Fig. 7, which describes our experimental protocol, the heart rates of ten healthy subjects (age: 31.8 ± 6.2 years,
eight males and two females) were measured before sleep and
after sleep onset time. To prepare for the measurements, the
subjects wore a convenient EEG headband (Zeo Sleep Manager, Zeo Inc, Boston, MA, USA), which provided a reference
for sleep stage, and the flexible RF single resonator before lying
down on the bed. For comparison with the wrist pulse signal obtained from the flexible RF single resonator, we used a portable
piezoelectric transducer (UFI-1010, UFI Serving Science Inc,
Morro Bay, CA, USA) as a heart rate reference.
The changes of resonant frequency, magnitude, and phase of
the reflected microwave, used for wrist pulse detection, were
detected by our sensor. In Fig. 8, the RF circuit of the implemented system was used to measure wrist pulse using an
external dc power supply. The output of the flexible RF single
resonator and the reference signal were obtained by a 24-bit
NI DAQ, and these were converted into voltage signals. We
used MATLAB 2012 a (Mathworks Inc. Natick, MA) with signal processing toolbox for data analysis. All statistical analyses
were performed using the Statistical Package for the social sci-

Fig. 11. Comparison of wrist pulses obtained by RF PLL sensor and reference.
(a) Time-domain data. (b) Spectral data using FFT.

ences software (version 20, IBM SPSS Statistics; IBM Corp.,
Armonk, NY, USA).
After 30-min resting period, the test subjects’ heart rate was
recorded for 5 min using the flexible RF single resonator and
piezoelectric transducer, and then the subject was instructed to
sleep. When the Zeo sleep manager indicated that the sleep stage
of the subject was light sleep during the first sleep onset time,
the second heart rate measurement was started. We obtained
heart rate values at 30-s intervals for 5 min for each participant.
Fig. 9(a) demonstrates the wrist pulse signal, which was measured by the flexible RF single resonator, and the signal which
was obtained by the piezoelectric sensor as a reference in time
domain. A Butterworth fourth filter was used to conduct a bandpass filtering (cut-off frequencies of 0.5 and 20 Hz) of the output
of the flexible RF single resonator. Therefore, the filtered output removed dc (baseline) drift and high-frequency noise in the
time domain. The peak intervals of the two methods used for
measuring wrist pulse were perfectly the same. The signal of
the flexible RF single resonator demonstrated the pulse wave in
compliance with the radial or ulnar artery, and the waveform was
similar to the piezoelectric signal (reference). In Fig. 9(b), these
signals were transferred by the fast Fourier Transform, and the
main frequencies of both the flexible RF single resonator and
piezoelectric signal were exactly overlapped at 1.319 Hz. Consistent characteristics also appeared in the frequency domain,
including harmonic frequencies.
The experimental results for the flexible RF array resonators
are shown in Fig. 10. Four resonators were sequentially scanned
for 5 s with 100 ms of sampling period. The S1 is the detected
pulse signal from the radial artery, while S4 is from the ulnar

KIM et al.: HEART RATE DETECTION DURING SLEEP USING A FLEXIBLE RF RESONATOR AND INJECTION-LOCKED PLL SENSOR

2573

TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL RESULT OF THE FLEXIBLE RF SINGLE RESONATOR
Heart rate (beats/min)
Presleep
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total

c

Min

d

57
63
65
69
73
77
70
62
74
73

Post sleep onset

Max

Mean (SD)

Min

Max

Mean (SD)

72
69
70
76
79
84
75
70
81
76

62.6 (5.8)
66.4 (2.3)
68.2 (1.5)
71.6 (2.2)
76.3 (2.3)
79.7 (2.0)
71.8 (1.7)
65.8 (2.5)
78.0 (3.1)
74.3 (1.3)
71.5 (5.7)

53
58
63
66
70
75
61
57
69
68

56
62
65
71
75
79
66
63
74
70

53.6 (0.8)
59.5 (1.4)
63.9 (0.8)
68.4 (1.5)
72.0 (1.5)
76.8 (1.1)
63.0 (1.6)
58.8 (1.8)
71.1 (1.5)
69.1 (0.7)
65.6 (7.1)

a

P-value

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.003
< 0.001
0.004
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001

b

P-value
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.008
0.006
0.012
0.005
0.005
0.008
0.005
0.005

a

P-values were calculated by paired t-test.
P-values were calculated by paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
c
Min: Minimum. d Max: Maximum.
b

artery. S2 and S3 are detected signals from the middle of the
wrist. It is clear that the detected wrist pulses at S1 and S4 appear
to be much more accurate, while the signals from S2 reveal weak
signal amplitude, and a quite noisy signal from S3. This suggests
that the array sensor system provides broad detection coverage
on a wrist, and the potential ability to acquire accurate pulse
information at multiple locations and for different arteries on a
wrist.
The other experimental results, from a proximity coupled
RF sensor with injection-locked PLL, are shown in Fig. 11(a)
in conjunction with reference time-domain piezoelectric sensor
data. They show exactly the same number of peaks in a given
period. After filtering out the dc offset component from the
raw data, both signals were transformed to frequency domain as
shown in Fig. 11(b). They revealed identical frequency behavior
with the strongest peak at 1.01 Hz and multiple harmonics. It
is clear that the frequency of the sensor oscillator changes with
the periodicity of the wrist pulse, and due to the injection of
the output signal from the sensor into the VCO in PLL, this
frequency variation can be reflected in the form of dc voltage
variation (i.e., VCO control voltage). We compared the first
measurement before sleep with the second one after sleep onset
time. Table 1 describes the experimental results of the flexible
RF single resonator, and exhibits the significant difference in
the mean of heart rate between presleep and postsleep onset
states, by paired t-test and paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The
mean of heart rate in postsleep onset was significantly decreased
relative to presleep. Moreover, the standard deviations of heart
rate during 5 min in postsleep onset decreased as compared to
those in presleep.

pulse through clothes made of cotton fabric. This noncontact and
nonintrusive measurement of wrist pulse makes comfortable
long-term monitoring possible for polysomnography.
We were able to measure heart rates on the wrist during
sleep and waking states using the flexible RF sensor system.
We confirmed that the heart rate significantly decreased during
sleep. Our results on the differences of heart rate during sleep
are similar to results in related previous studies [29]–[32]. In a
previous study of cardiovascular activity during sleep, heart rate
showed a decrease during the transition from pre to postsleep
onset [29]. According to the sleep study, one of the functions
of sleep is to give the heart a chance to rest from the constant
demands of waking life [30]. Therefore, heart rate and blood
pressure showed significant reduction during sleep as compared
to wakefulness [31].
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, it was demonstrated that an RF system could
measure heart beat signals using a noncontact nonintrusive
method, and that the heart rate during sleep significantly decreased. Moreover, we newly proposed three types of RF sensor
for heart rate measurement on the wrist, namely the flexible
RF single resonator, array resonators, and injection-locked PLL
resonator sensor. Therefore, our RF system could be a useful
method for measuring heart rate during long-term monitoring,
because it has the advantage of being a less intrusive measurement method, using a noncontact approach rather than traditional electrodes and PPG sensors. Our future study will be to
measure heart rates in far field during sleep based on the three
RF systems proposed in this study.

IV. DISCUSSION
This is the first study to succeed in detecting heart rates at 0.2to 1-mm distance from the skin of the wrist during sleep using
an RF system. Heart rate monitoring in polysomnography has
previously been conducted by measuring ECG, which is quite
intrusive and constrained due to the electrodes and lead wires
attached to patients. In contrast, the RF system can measure wrist

REFERENCES
[1] Z. Zhang et al., “TROIKA: A general framework for heart rate monitoring
using wrist-type photoplethysmographic (PPG) signals during intensive
physical exercise,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 522–531,
Feb. 2014.
[2] P. K. Stein and Y. Pu, “Heart rate variability, sleep and sleep disorders,”
Sleep Med. Rev., vol. 16, pp. 47–66, 2012.

2574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

[3] M. J. Lado et al., “Detecting sleep apnea by heart rate variability analysis:
Assessing the validity of databases and algorithms,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 473–481, 2011.
[4] N. Netzer et al., “Overnight pulse oximetry for sleep-disordered breathing
in adults: A review,” Chest, vol. 120, no. 2, pp. 625–633, 2001.
[5] J. Y. A. Foo et al., “Motion artifact reduction of the photoplethysmographic
signal in pulse transit time measurement,” Australas. Phys. Eng. Sci. Med.,
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 165–173, 2004.
[6] Y. J. An et al., “Detection of human vital signs and estimation of direction
of arrival using multiple Doppler radars,” J. Korean Inst. Electromagn.
Eng. Sci., vol. 10, pp. 250–255, 2010.
[7] A. D. Droitcour et al., “A microwave radio for Doppler radar sensing of
vital signs,” in Proc. IEEE MTTS Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., May 2001,
pp. 175–178.
[8] L. Changzhi and L. Jenshan, “Random body movement cancellation in
Doppler radar vital sign detection,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.,
vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 3143–3152, Dec. 2008.
[9] Y. J. An et al., “Comparative study of 2.4 GHz and 10 GHz vital signal
sensing Doppler radars,” in Proc. 40th Eur. Microw. Conf., Sep. 2010,
pp. 501–504.
[10] S. G. Kim et al., “Compact vital signal sensor using oscillation frequency
deviation,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 393–400,
Feb. 2012.
[11] Y. J. An et al., “Vital sign detection for handheld communication device
using antenna mismatching effect,” in Proc. IEEE MTTS Int. Microw.
Symp. Dig., Jun. 2013, pp. 2–7.
[12] K. M. Chen et al., “An X-band microwave life-detection system,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-33, no. 7, pp. 697–701, Jul. 1986.
[13] V. Lubecke et al., “A compact low-cost add-on module for Doppler radar
sensing of vital signs using a wireless communications terminal,” in Proc.
IEEE MTTS Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Jun. 2002, pp. 1767–1770.
[14] A. D. Droitcour et al., “Range correlation and I/Q performance benefits in
single-chip silicon Doppler radars for noncontact cardiopulmonary monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 838–848,
Mar. 2004.
[15] B. J. Jang et al., “A 2.4 GHz bio-radar system with small size and improved
noise performance using single circular-polarized antenna and PLL,” J.
Korea Electromagn. Eng. Soc., vol. 20, pp. 1325–1332, 2009.
[16] B. K. Park et al., “Arctangent demodulation with dc offset compensation in
quadrature Doppler radar receiver systems,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1073–1079, May 2007.
[17] W. Fu-Kang et al., “Mutual injection-locked SIL sensor array for vital
sign detection with random body movement cancellation,” in Proc. IEEE
MTTS Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Jun. 2011, pp. 1–4.
[18] A. Boothby et al., “Accurate and continuous non-contact vital signs monitoring using phased array antennas in a clutter-free anechoic chamber,”
in Proc. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Conf., Jul. 2013, 2862–2865.
[19] A. A. Serra et al., “A single on-body antenna as a sensor for cardiopulmonary monitoring,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 930–933, Oct. 2010.
[20] R. Gagarin et al., “Microwave stethoscope, a new noninvasive multiple
vital signs sensor: Human clinical trials,” in Proc. Antennas Propag. Conf.,
Jul. 2012, pp. 1–2.
[21] R. Gagarin et al., “Microwave stethoscope: A new method for measuring human vital signs,” in Proc. Antennas Propag. Conf., Jul. 2011,
pp. 404–407.
[22] S. Gabriel et al., “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,” Phy. Med. Biol.,
vol. 41, pp. 2251–2269, 1996.
[23] Y. J. An et al., “Vital sign detection for handheld communication device
using antenna mismatching effect,” in Proc. IEEE MTTS Int. Microw.
Symp. Dig., Jun. 2013, pp. 2–7.
[24] Y. J. An et al., “Wrist pulse detection system based on changes in the
near-field reflection coefficient of a resonator,” IEEE Microw. Wireless
Compon. Lett., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 719–721, Oct. 2014.
[25] Y. J. An et al., “Flexible non-constrained RF wrist pulse detection sensor
based on array resonators,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., 2015, to
be published.
[26] D. Banerjee, PLL Performance, Simulation, and Design, 4th ed. New York,
NY, USA: Dog Ear, Aug. 2006.
[27] Y. Hong et al., “Noncontact proximity vital sign sensor based on PLL
for sensitivity enhancement,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 584–593, Aug. 2014.
[28] A. V. Mamishev et al., “Interdigital sensors and transducers,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 808–845, May 2004.

[29] M. De Zambotti et al., “Sleep onset and cardiovascular activity in primary
insomnia,” J. Sleep Res. vol. 20, pp. 318–325, 2011.
[30] Division of sleep medicine at harvard medical school. (2007). The
characteristics of sleep. A Resource From the Division of Sleep
Medicine at Harvard Medical School and WGBH Educational Foundation. [Online]. Available: http://healthysleep.med.harvard.edu/healthy/
science/what/characteristics
[31] P. Van de Borne et al., “Effects of wake and sleep stages on the 24-h
autonomic control of blood pressure and heart rate in recumbent men,”
Amer. J. Physiol. vol. 266, pp. H548–H554, 1994.
[32] F. Lombardi and G. Parati, “An update on: Cardiovascular and respiratory
changes during sleep in normal and hypertensive subjects,” Cardiovasc.
Res., vol. 45, pp. 200–211, 2000.

Sung Woo Kim was born in Incheon, Korea. He received the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering
from Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, in 2015. Since
2010, he has been a Senior Research Engineer with
the Future IT R&D Laboratory, LG Electronics Inc.
From 2004 to 2008, he was a Research Assistant
with the Yonsei Biomedical Informatics Laboratory,
Department of Medical Engineering, Yonsei University College of Medicine. His main research interest
includes the wearable biomedical technology, mobile
healthcare solution, and intelligent assistive device
for disabilities/elders using rehabilitation engineering.

Soo Beom Choi received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea, in 2008 and the M.S. degree in Brain Korea 21
Project for Medical Science from Yonsei University,
Seoul, Korea, in 2015. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in the Department of Medical Engineering, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. His research interest includes the biomedical
signal processing, machine learning, and disease prediction.

Yong-Jun An was born in Seoul, Korea. He received
the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and electronic
engineering from Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, in
2009 and 2015, respectively.
His research interests include remote wireless vital
signal monitoring sensors, RF passive circuits, and
radars.

Byung-Hyun Kim (S’12) was born in Incheon, Korea. He received the B.S. degree in electrical and electronics engineering from Yonsei University, Seoul,
Korea, in 2012, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronics
engineering.
He received the Spring 2012 UndergraduatePre-graduate (BS/MS) Scholarship from the IEEE
Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTTS). His main research interests include the
microwave/millimeter-wave component/systems, vital sign sensors, RF biosensors, and gas sensors.

KIM et al.: HEART RATE DETECTION DURING SLEEP USING A FLEXIBLE RF RESONATOR AND INJECTION-LOCKED PLL SENSOR

Deok Won Kim (S’85–M’87–LM’06) was born in
Seoul, Korea, in 1952. He received the B.S.E. degree from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea,
in 1976, the M.S. degree in electrical engineering
from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA,
and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from
the University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA, in 1980
and 1986, respectively.
He is currently a Professor in the Medical Engineering Department, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea, where he has been since
1987. His areas of research interest are electromagnetic field hazards and multiple classification using machine learning in medicine.

2575

Jong-Gwan Yook (M’97–SM’12) was born in Seoul,
Korea. He received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics engineering from Yonsei University, Seoul,
Korea, in 1987 and 1989, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, in 1996.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University. His main research interests include the areas
of theoretical/numerical electromagnetic modeling
and characterization of microwave/millimeter-wave
circuits and components, design of radio frequency integrated circuits and monolithic microwave integrated-circuit, analysis and optimization of high-frequency
high-speed interconnects, including RF microelectromechanical systems, based
on frequency as well as time-domain full-wave methods, and development
of numerical techniques. Recently, his research team is developing various
biosensors, such as carbon-nano-tube RF biosensor for nanometer size antigenantibody detection as well as remote wireless vital signal monitoring sensors.

