IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1879

Toward Ubiquitous Blood Pressure Monitoring
via Pulse Transit Time: Theory and Practice
Ramakrishna Mukkamala∗ , Member, IEEE, Jin-Oh Hahn, Member, IEEE, Omer T. Inan, Member, IEEE,
Lalit K. Mestha, Fellow, IEEE, Chang-Sei Kim, Member, IEEE, Hakan Töreyin, Member, IEEE,
and Survi Kyal, Member, IEEE
(Invited Review)

Abstract—Ubiquitous blood pressure (BP) monitoring is needed
to improve hypertension detection and control and is becoming
feasible due to recent technological advances such as in wearable
sensing. Pulse transit time (PTT) represents a well-known potential
approach for ubiquitous BP monitoring. The goal of this review is
to facilitate the achievement of reliable ubiquitous BP monitoring
via PTT. We explain the conventional BP measurement methods
and their limitations; present models to summarize the theory of
the PTT–BP relationship; outline the approach while pinpointing
the key challenges; overview the previous work toward putting the
theory to practice; make suggestions for best practice and future
research; and discuss realistic expectations for the approach.
Index Terms—Cuff-less blood pressure (BP), pulse transit time
(PTT), pulse wave velocity (PWV), review, ubiquitous sensing,
wearable.

I. INTRODUCTION
BIQUITOUS blood pressure (BP) monitoring is on the
horizon for two reasons. One reason is a profound need.
Hypertension is a major cardiovascular risk factor that is treatable, yet high BP detection and control rates are abysmally low,
especially in low resource settings [1], [2]. Ubiquitous BP monitoring is expected to improve hypertension detection by providing serial out-of-clinic measurements [3] in the mass population
and could even enhance hypertension control by providing continual feedback to the patient [4]. The second reason is feasibility. There have been many relevant technological advances in the
recent past, such as in wearable sensing, miniaturization, pervasive computing, and smartphones [5]. Further, there is mounting
evidence that pulse transit time (PTT, i.e., the time delay for the
pressure wave to travel between two arterial sites) can provide

U

Manuscript received January 31, 2015; revised April 22, 2015; accepted May
24, 2015. Date of publication June 5, 2015; date of current version July 15,
2015. This work was supported in part by the National Institute of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, under Grant U01
EB018818. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ R. Mukkamala is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA (e-mail:
rama@egr.msu.edu).
J.-O. Hahn and C.-S. Kim are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland.
O. T. Inan and H. Töreyin are with the School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology.
L. K. Mestha and S. Kyal are with the Palo Alto Research Center East (a
Xerox Company), Webster.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2441951

the basis for convenient cuff-less BP measurement. While major
progress on PTT-based BP monitoring has been made, research
is still needed to best realize this approach. The objective of
this review is to facilitate the achievement of reliable ubiquitous
BP monitoring via PTT. We begin by describing the existing BP
measurement methods and their limitations. We then summarize
foundational work to explain the theory of the PTT–BP relationship. After discussing the PTT-based approach for BP monitoring and its challenges, we review previous work toward putting
the theory to practice while making recommendations for best
practice. We conclude by suggesting future research directions.
II. EXISTING BP MEASUREMENT METHODS
AND THEIR LIMITATIONS
Several BP measurement methods are now available. The
main methods include catheterization, auscultation, oscillometry, volume clamping, and tonometry.
Catheterization is the gold standard method [6]. This method
measures instantaneous BP by placing a strain gauge in fluid
contact with blood at any arterial site (e.g., radial artery, aorta).
However, the method is invasive.
Auscultation, oscillometry, and volume clamping are noninvasive methods. These methods employ an inflatable cuff.
Auscultation is the standard clinical method [7]. This method
measures systolic and diastolic BP by occluding an artery with
a cuff and detecting the Korotkoff sounds using a stethoscope
and manometer during cuff deflation. The first sound indicates
the initiation of turbulent flow and thus systolic BP, while the
fifth sound is silent and indicates the renewal of laminar flow
and thus diastolic BP.
Oscillometry is the most popular noninvasive, automatic
method [8], [9]. This method measures mean, diastolic, and
systolic BP by also using a cuff but with a pressure sensor inside it. The measured cuff pressure not only rises and falls with
cuff inflation and deflation but also shows tiny oscillations indicating the pulsatile blood volume in the artery. The amplitude
of these oscillations varies with the applied cuff pressure, as the
arterial elasticity is nonlinear. The BP values are estimated from
the varying oscillation amplitudes by using the empirical fixedratios principle. When evaluated against auscultation using an
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation
(AAMI) protocol, some oscillometric devices achieve BP errors
within the AAMI limits of 5 mmHg bias and 8 mmHg precision [10]. However, oscillometry is unreliable in subjects with

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

certain conditions such as atrial fibrillation, stiff arteries, and
preeclampsia [11].
Volume clamping is a noninvasive, automatic method used in
research [12], [13]. This method measures instantaneous (finger)
BP by using a cuff and a photoplethysmography (PPG) sensor to
measure the blood volume (see Section V-A). The blood volume
at zero transmural pressure is estimated via oscillometry. The
cuff pressure is then continually varied to maintain this blood
volume throughout the cardiac cycle via a fast servo-control
system. The applied cuff pressure may thus equal BP. Volume
clamping devices also achieve BP errors within AAMI limits
when evaluated against auscultation and near AAMI limits when
evaluated against radial artery catheterization [14].
However, cuff use has several drawbacks. In particular, cuffs
are cumbersome and time consuming to use, disruptive during
ambulatory monitoring, especially while sleeping, and do not
readily extend to low resources settings.
Tonometry is another noninvasive method used in research
that, in theory, does not require an inflatable cuff [15], [16]. This
method measures instantaneous BP by pressing a manometertipped probe on an artery. The probe must flatten or applanate
the artery so that its wall tension is perpendicular to the probe.
However, manual and automatic applanation have proven difficult. As a result, in practice, the measured waveform has been
routinely calibrated with cuff BP whenever a BP change is anticipated [17].
In sum, the existing BP measurement methods are invasive,
manual, or require a cuff. So, none are suitable for ubiquitous
(i.e., ultraconvenient, unobtrusive, and low cost) monitoring.

III. THEORY OF THE PTT–BP RELATIONSHIP
PTT is the time delay for the pressure wave to travel between
two arterial sites. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the pressure wave can
be visualized as acute dilation of the arterial wall and typically
moves much faster than blood [18]. As shown in Fig. 1(a) and
(b), PTT is often inversely related to BP and can be estimated
simply from the relative timing between proximal and distal
waveforms indicative of the arterial pulse. Hence, PTT could
permit noninvasive, automatic, and cuff-less BP monitoring.
The PTT–BP relationship has been studied by many investigators over many decades (see, e.g., references within this section).
We use models in an attempt to summarize—in a mechanistic
way—the large body of experimental work on this relationship.
We present both models of arterial wall mechanics and wave
propagation in the arteries. The arterial wall models establish
the relationship between BP and arterial elasticity. The arterial
wave propagation models establish the relationship between arterial elasticity and PTT. Note that these models account for the
crucial facets of the physiology rather than all known behaviors.
Based on the models, we then draw conclusions on the optimal
arterial sites to measure PTT for cuff-less BP monitoring, the
fundamental limitation of the approach, and exactly how to measure PTT from the waveforms. Readers who are knowledgeable
or uninterested in the detailed physiology may move directly to
Section III-C.

A. Arterial Wall Models
The composition of the arterial wall and the function of its
components are well understood [19]–[23]. We briefly outline
the most salient information here. The arterial wall is composed
of four major components: endothelium, elastin, collagen, and
smooth muscle (SM). Endothelium is a single cell layer that
provides a smooth wall for blood flow and helps regulate SM
contraction. However, it contributes little to arterial wall mechanics. Elastin is highly extensible (about a magnitude more
than rubber) and produces tension as soon as the arterial wall
expands. Collagen is much (about 400 times) stiffer than elastin
and does not exert tension until the arterial wall is stretched.
So, elastin determines arterial elasticity at low BP, whereas collagen significantly contributes to the elasticity at high BP. SM
produces tension when contracted via physiologic control or
medication and can thereby modulate arterial elasticity. It also
makes the arterial wall viscous in addition to elastic. Note that
inertial effects of the wall may be negligible. The relative contributions of these components differ throughout the arterial tree.
Elastin is more abundant in the central arteries (hence the name
“elastic” arteries), while SM is most prevalent in the peripheral
arteries (hence the name “muscular” arteries). Further, it is well
known that aging alters the composition in the central arteries
but not the peripheral arteries [24]–[26]. A hallmark change with
aging is the replacement of elastin with collagen. This change
contributes to arteriosclerosis—the process of wall thickening
and stiffening as well as lumen dilation. Note that arteriosclerosis can occur independently of atherosclerosis, which is a
more well-known disease, wherein plaque builds up inside the
arteries. We will first discuss elastic properties alone and then
consider viscoelastic properties. We will, thereafter, describe
the mechanical properties with aging and disease.
1) Elastic Properties: We employ a Maxwell-type model
from the literature [27] to illustrate the elastic properties of the
central and peripheral arterial walls. As will be seen, the models
for the two walls differ. We hypothesized the differences by assimilating experimental data from a review [19], in vitro animal
studies [20], [28], [29], and an in vivo human study [27].
Fig. 2(a)–(d) shows the central arterial wall model. Here,
elastin is modeled as Ne · 400 springs, each with elastic modulus Ee . Collagen is represented with a disconnecting hook model
in which springs with higher elastic modulus Ec (= 400 · Ee )
are recruited as the wall extends (parallel collagen) or as SM
contracts (series collagen). (So, in Fig. 2, one elastin spring has
the same elastic modulus as one collagen spring.) The elastic
modulus of the parallel and series collagen is Ec times the number of recruited fibers Np c and Nsc , respectively. As indicated,
series collagen is recruited more easily than parallel collagen.
SM is assumed to 1) bear no stress and freely extend when relaxed and 2) elongate the series collagen, while bearing the same
stress, when contracted. A model of the SM is a strain generator in series with a spring with variable elastic modulus VEsm ,
which increases with strain generation (i.e., Fig. 4(a) without
the dashpot). When relaxed, no strain is generated on the series
collagen and VEsm is small such that the SM freely extends.
When contracted, strain is generated on the series collagen and

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

1881

Fig. 1. PTT provides a basis for ubiquitous BP monitoring. (a) PTT is the time delay for the pressure wave to travel between two arterial sites and can be
estimated simply from the relative timing between proximal and distal arterial waveforms. (b) PTT is often inversely related to BP.

Fig. 2. Arterial wall models predict that central arterial elasticity is dependent on BP, but peripheral arterial elasticity is dependent on BP and SM contraction.
(a)–(d) Model of the central arterial wall in low- and high-extension states during SM relaxation (a), (b) and contraction (c), (d). (e) Model of the peripheral arterial
wall in low-extension state during SM relaxation.

VEsm is large such that series collagen determines the elasticity.
In general, both VEsm and strain generation increase with SM
contraction.
Fig. 2(a) and (b) shows the model during SM relaxation. Here,
the strain generated on the series collagen εsc is zero, so none
of these fibers are recruited. Fig. 2(a) shows that in the lowextension state, the wall stress σw and strain εw increase but not
enough to recruit any parallel collagen. So, elastin determines
the incremental elastic modulus Einc of the arterial wall in this
“hypotensive” state. Fig. 2(b) shows that in the high-extension
state, the wall stress σw and strain εw increase considerably so

as to recruit all of the parallel collagen. Hence, Einc increases,
and parallel collagen in addition to elastin contribute in this
“hypertensive” state.
Fig. 2(c) and (d) shows the model in the same two states but
during SM contraction. Here, εsc increases so as to recruit all
of the series collagen. Also, due to the isotonic conditions, εw
decreases (but not as much as εsc increases) to maintain σw .
Fig. 2(c) shows that in the low-extension state, there is again
no parallel collagen recruitment, so elastin and series collagen
determines Einc . Fig. 2(d) shows that in the high-extension state,
there is some parallel collagen recruitment, Einc increases, and

1882

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

all three components contribute. Importantly, Einc and εw do not
change much compared to the corresponding states during SM
relaxation. The reason is that Nsc is not large, as central arteries
are relatively sparse in SM. In addition, in the high-extension
state, the reduction in εw causes a decrease in Np c , which fully
offsets the increase in Nsc .
In conclusion, central arterial elasticity is determined by BP
but not SM contraction. Fig. 3(a) shows exemplary experimental
data indicating that pressure–diameter relationships of a central
artery (thoracic aorta) are indeed similar in the relaxed and
contracted states [28].
Fig. 2(e) shows the peripheral arterial wall model. Compared
to the central arterial wall model, Ne is smaller, whereas Nsc
is much larger, due to the different wall compositions. (Note
that the number of hooks and springs in these models represent
relative amounts and the number of hooks indicates recruitable
rather than total fibers.) Hence, during SM relaxation, Einc is
smaller compared to the central arterial wall model in the hypotensive state but similar in the hypertensive state. During SM
contraction, unlike the central arterial wall model, Einc and εw ,
respectively, increase and decrease to a significant extent. The
reason is that Nsc is larger. In addition, Np c is smaller than Nsc
such that the decrease in Np c cannot fully offset the increase in
Nsc in the high-extension state.
In conclusion, peripheral arterial elasticity is determined by
BP and SM contraction. Fig. 3(b) shows exemplary experimental
data indicating that pressure–diameter relationships of a peripheral artery (renal artery) are indeed different in the relaxed and
contracted states [28]. That is, the pressure–diameter relationship in the contracted state is shifted far to the left (i.e., reduced
εw ) and the slope of this relationship is often higher (i.e., higher
Einc ). Note that the gap between the pressure–diameter relationships in the two states decreases with increasing diameter. One
reason is that the slope indicates arterial compliance rather than
Einc (see Section III-B). Another reason is that SM contraction
may actually decrease over high diameters [30].
2) Viscous Properties: We include viscosity in the arterial
wall models to arrive at unified viscoelastic models. We likewise
hypothesized these models based on a review [19], in vitro
animal studies [29], [31], [32], in vivo animal studies [22], and
an in vitro human study [33].
Fig. 4(a) shows that viscosity is specifically introduced in
the SM model by including a dashpot with variable viscosity
V ηsm in parallel with the spring. When relaxed, V ηsm is small
such that the wall is purely elastic. When contracted, V ηsm
is large such that the wall is viscoelastic (i.e., has frequencydependent elastic modulus). In general, V ηsm increases with
SM contraction.
Fig. 4(b) shows the complete viscoelastic model of either
arterial wall for a fixed SM contraction and small changes in
εw such that the number of recruited fibers remains constant. In
response to a step increase in εw , the stress is immediately borne
by elastin and all recruited collagen. The dashpot then gradually
extends until the stress is equally shared by the SM and series
collagen. Hence, the stress decreases to a nonzero value with a
time constant governed by these two components. The elastic
modulus (magnitude) as a function of frequency may thus be

Fig. 3. Experimental data show that central arterial elasticity is dependent
on BP and age, while peripheral arterial elasticity is dependent on BP and SM
contraction. (a) and (b) Pressure–diameter relationship of a central artery and
peripheral artery during SM changes [28]. (c) Volume–pressure relationship of
a central artery as a function of age [36].

obtained and is shown in Fig. 4(c). The low-frequency elastic
modulus is Ee−p c + Esc · Esm /(Esc + Esm ), while the high
frequency elastic modulus is Ee−p c + Esc , which is larger than
its low-frequency counterpart. The lowest frequency for which
the higher elastic modulus is reached (“corner frequency”) is
(Esc + Esm )/ηsm . Esm and ηsm are assumed to be larger for

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

1883

Fig. 4. Models and experimental data indicate that the central arterial wall is mainly elastic, while the peripheral arterial wall is viscoelastic. (a) Viscoelastic
model of SM. (b) Complete viscoelastic model of central and peripheral arterial walls for a fixed SM contraction and small changes in εw . (c) Model predicted
elastic modulus (magnitude) as a function of frequency. (d) Experimental elastic moduli (magnitudes) as a function of frequency for central and peripheral
arteries [31].

peripheral arteries than central arteries due to the differences
in SM composition. Since Esc is small in the central arterial
wall model, the elastic modulus does not change much with
frequency. By contrast, Esc is large in the peripheral arterial wall
model, so the elastic modulus has greater frequency dependence.
Further, since all three terms in the corner frequency change
concomitantly with either arterial site or SM contraction, this
frequency is nearly invariant.
In conclusion, central but not peripheral arterial viscosity is
small. Fig. 4(d) shows exemplary experimental data indicating
that experimental elastic modulus magnitudes indeed have little frequency dependence for central arteries but not peripheral
arteries [31]. The corresponding phases were small in both arteries (not shown). Other exemplary studies indicate that the
corner frequency is around 1 Hz and indeed insensitive to SM
contraction [29], [33]. But, in contrast to the model prediction, one of these studies suggests that the elastic modulus
of peripheral arteries may actually increase above the corner
frequency [33].
3) Impact of Aging and Disease on Mechanical Properties: We again employ the Maxwell-type model to illustrate
the mechanical properties of the central arterial wall during
age-induced arteriosclerosis or disease-induced arteriosclerosis
(i.e., atherosclerosis). We similarly hypothesized the model from

reviews [24], [25], in vitro animal studies [32], [34], an in vivo
animal study [35], an in vitro human study [36], and an in vivo
human study [33].
Fig. 2(a) shows the basic model. As arteriosclerosis progresses, Ne decreases and Np c increases but Nsc does not
change. So, Einc becomes smaller in the hypotensive state but
larger in the hypertensive state. Also, regardless of the degree of
arteriosclerosis, Einc and εw change little during SM contraction, and viscous effects are small.
In conclusion, central arterial wall elasticity is also determined by age and disease. Fig. 3(c) shows exemplary experimental data indicating that volume–pressure relationships of a
central artery (thoracic aorta) indeed markedly differ based on
age [36]. Other exemplary studies suggest that aging 1) may
cause SM contraction to contribute even less to central arterial
elasticity [32], [34], [35] and 2) does not alter central arterial
viscoelasticity (e.g., the corner frequency of around 1 Hz is
maintained) [33].
B. Arterial Wave Propagation Models
Pressure waves propagate along arterial vessels with the
aforesaid wall properties. We employ basic models of arterial
wave propagation to relate wall elasticity to PTT.

1884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

By applying the conservation of mass and momentum, while
assuming that variations in A are minor (i.e., no tapering and
small changes with P), the following model equations result:
Q (x) − Q (x + dx) +
→

d (Adx)
=0
dt

∂Q
∂P
+ C (P )
=0
∂x
∂t

A [P (x) − P (x + dx)] = ρdx

(2a)
dQ
∂P
∂Q
→
+L
= 0.
dt
∂x
∂t
(2b)

Here, x and t refer to space and time, Q is volume flow rate,
ρ is blood density, L = ρ/A is a constant that represents the
arterial inertance per unit length (i.e., the pressure required to
accelerate blood [37]), while C is a function of P. C generally
decreases as P increases. For example, C has been shown to be
related to P for central arteries as follows:
Am

C (P ) =
(3)
2 

P −P 0
πP1 1 +
P1

Fig. 5. PTT through central arteries as estimated via the foot-to-foot time
delay between proximal and distal waveforms is a good marker of diastolic BP
for time periods shorter than aging and disease processes. (a) Model of wave
propagation in a central artery. (b) Same model with a terminal wave reflection site predicting that BP waveforms are amplified with increasing distance
from the heart. (c) Experimental BP waveforms confirming this prediction and
showing that diastolic BP (i.e., the waveform feet) is less impacted by wave
reflection [18].

Fig. 5(a) shows the arterial vessel model as an elastic cylindrical tube. Here, viscous effects are neglected. The ignored
effects include both wall viscosity and resistance to blood flow,
which goes with the inverse fourth power of the lumen radius
r and is, thus, small in central and peripheral arteries [37]. The
elasticity of the tube is characterized in terms of compliance C,
which is defined as the change in tube cross-sectional area A
divided by the change in pressure in the tube P (i.e., dA/dP).
Compliance is determined by the geometry of the tube in addition to the elastic modulus of the tube wall E. For example,
by invoking Laplace’s law for a cylindrical tube and assuming
constant E, C = 2πr3 /(E · h), where h is the wall thickness
[37]. Of course, E is not constant but rather increases with P.
For example, E has been shown to be related to P for central
arteries as follows:
E(P ) =E0 eα P

(1)

where E0 and α > 0 are subject-specific parameters [38]. E
is also dependent on SM contraction and aging. However, E is
assumed to only depend on P here. Note that this assumption,
with the exception of aging, and the omission of wall viscosity
are tenable for central arteries but not for peripheral arteries.

where Am , P0 , and P1 are subject-specific parameters [39].
The equations of continuity and motion [see (2)] are identical
to the equations governing an ideal lossless transmission line but
with voltage-dependent capacitors (see [40, Ch. 3]). Pressure
waves propagating on this line take the following form:



P (x, t) = f x ± t/ LC (P )
(4)
(see [40, Ch. 3] for derivation). Hence, the velocity of propagation (i.e., pulse wave velocity (PWV)) is [L · C(P )]−1/2 , where
C and P are again inversely related. So, the peak of the pressure
wave moves faster than its trough (which could lead to pressure
discontinuities or “shock waves”; see [40, Ch. 3]). The time for
the wave to travel along the tube length l (i.e., PTT) is thus

(5)
PTT = l LC (P ).
In conclusion, under the above assumptions, PTT and BP are
precisely related in an inverse fashion. Experimental data indicate that PWV, in fact, continuously varies with BP throughout
the cardiac cycle [41], [42]. However, for a fixed l, experimentally measured PTT generally decreases with increasing BP,
SM contraction, distance from the heart, heart rate (due to wall
viscosity), and age.
Note that if C is assumed to be constant, the PWV formula
reduces to


AdP
Eh
1
=
.
(6)
=
PWV = √
ρdA
2rρ
L·C
These formulas are the well-known Bramwell–Hill and Moens–
Korteweg equations, which relate wall elasticity in terms of C
and E to PWV, respectively [18].
The actual arterial system is obviously not a simple tube
but rather branches, tapers (elastically and geometrically), and
terminates with the microcirculation. Wave reflection occurs at
all of these sites of impedance mismatch but is most pronounced

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

at the arterial terminations [24], [35], [43]. One reason is that
these sites are where the lumen radius changes most abruptly.
Another reason is that tapering tends to be offset by branching
in the forward direction so as to achieve relative impedance
matching.
Fig. 5(b) shows the same tube model but with a terminal
load representing the microcirculation. Here, C is assumed to
be constant for the sake of simplicity. When the heart ejects
blood, a pressure wave is initiated that travels along the tube.
When this wave reaches the tube end, part of the wave is reflected back toward the heart. As a result, the BP waveform at
a given tube site arises as the sum of the forward and backward traveling waves at that site. (Note that the backward wave
is related to the forward wave via the reflection coefficient:
Γ(f ) = (Zl (f )–Zc )/(Zl (f ) + Zc ), where f is frequency, Zl (f )
is the load impedance, and Zc = [L/C]1/2 is the tube characteristic impedance [18].) Since wave reflection occurs at the tube
end, there is no time delay between the forward and backward
waves at this point. So, adding the backward wave to the forward
wave increases peripheral pulse pressure (i.e., systolic minus diastolic BP). On the other hand, the forward and backward waves
at the tube entrance are shifted by the time it takes for the wave
to travel to the tube end and back (i.e., 2·PTT). So, summing
the backward wave with the forward wave has much less effect
on central pulse pressure. For this reason, pulse pressure should
become amplified with increasing distance from the heart.
In conclusion, wave reflection profoundly impacts the shape
of BP waveforms. Fig. 5(c) shows exemplary experimental data
indicating that waveforms indeed become progressively amplified with increasing distance from the heart [18]. Note that the
increasing distortion in shape may also be due to other mechanisms including BP-dependent compliance. Hence, proximal
and distal waveforms generally do not differ simply by a single
time delay. Any time delay determined from the waveforms is
contaminated by wave reflection and thus does not truly reflect
PTT. However, as indicated in Fig. 5(c), diastolic BP changes
little with arterial site. So, wave reflection interference is small
at the minima or feet of the BP waveform [18].
C. Conclusions Drawn From the Models
Based on these models, PTT can be used to effectively monitor the BP (i.e., (5) is valid) if the following conditions are met:
1) SM contraction and viscous effects are negligible; 2) aging
and disease do not alter arterial elasticity; and 3) wave reflection interference is absent. These conditions are best satisfied
by measuring PTT through central arteries and via the foot-tofoot time delay between the proximal and distal waveforms and
limiting the monitoring duration to a period shorter than aging
and disease processes (e.g., perhaps up to a few years). Since
the level of the waveform feet is diastolic BP, such PTT measurements may best correspond to diastolic BP [44], [45]. Note
that condition 2 sets the fundamental limitation of the approach,
namely that PTT cannot be used for chronic BP monitoring
without periodic recalibration (see Section IV).
These conclusions are supported by experimental data from
several studies in which PTT through central arteries was

1885

TABLE I
CORRELATION BETWEEN PTT—THROUGH CENTRAL ARTERIES AND
ESTIMATED VIA THE FOOT-TO-FOOT TIME DELAY BETWEEN INVASIVE
PROXIMAL AND DISTAL BP WAVEFORMS—AND DIASTOLIC BP IS HIGH
Ref #

Subjects

Underlying BP Range [mmHg]

Correlation with BP

[47]
[49]
[48]
[46]

10 Dogs
3 Dogs
10 Dogs
12 Dogs

15–250
53±12
Control 115±13 / Intervention 106±45
67±14

r = 0.76–0.86
r = 0.96–0.99
r = 0.91–0.98
r = 0.94

measured as the foot-to-foot time delay between invasive proximal (e.g., aortic, carotid artery) and distal (e.g., iliac, femoral
artery) BP waveforms during large acute BP changes and then
correlated with diastolic BP [46]–[49]. Table I shows high correlation (see Fig. 1(b) for a visual example).
IV. OVERVIEW AND CHALLENGES OF THE PTT-BASED
APPROACH FOR BP MONITORING
The PTT-based approach for cuff-less BP monitoring thus
involves the following three steps: 1) measurement of proximal and distal arterial waveforms; 2) estimation of PTT from
the waveforms; and 3) calibration of PTT (in units of ms) to
BP (in units of mmHg). There are several challenges in successfully implementing these steps. The greatest challenge is
calibration. According to (5), the calibration curve relating PTT
to BP is dependent on the distance between the waveform measurement sites (l), blood density (ρ, which is close to that of
water), the average cross-sectional area of the arteries between
the measurement sites (A), and the precise function relating BP
to compliance (C(P)). Except for blood density, these parameters are all subject specific. Experimental data indeed confirm
the dependence of the calibration curve on the subject [50].
Hence, a calibration curve that is tailored to each subject would
be optimal. However, constructing such a curve would appear
to require cuff BP measurements from the subject, and the calibration curve would have to be updated at a rate faster than the
arteriosclerotic process (e.g., up to a few years at a time). Another major challenge is convenient waveform measurement. If
the waveforms are not significantly easier to measure than cuff
BP, then the PTT-based approach is obviously not worthwhile.
But, in general, the more convenient the waveform measurement is, the more noise contamination can be expected [51]–
[62]. Hence, an ancillary challenge is artifact-robust estimation
of PTT. A final major challenge is independent determination of
both systolic BP and diastolic BP. This challenge is important,
as isolated systolic hypertension often occurs in the elderly [63].
However, as we have explained, conventionally estimated PTT
may only be a marker of diastolic BP.
V. PUTTING THE THEORY TO PRACTICE
The PTT-based approach for cuff-less BP monitoring has
captured the interest of many investigators. Much of the previous research represents a balance between theory and practice.
We summarize this paper, explain the underlying principles,
make suggestions for best practice, and include efforts that could

1886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 6. Few waveform measurement methods have been commonly used for cuffless BP monitoring and noninvasive and automated cardiovascular monitoring.
(a) PPG, in transmission- and reflectance-mode, for measuring proximal and distal waveforms from various body sites. (b) ICG for measuring a proximal waveform
that may permit estimation of PTT through central arteries. (c) Innovative ECG systems for conveniently measuring a surrogate of the proximal waveform [5, 215].

potentially be employed as a part of the approach. Our review
is categorized in terms of the three aforementioned steps and
concludes with a summary of the results obtained to date.
A. Waveform Measurement
We first review waveform measurement methods that have
been commonly employed for cuff-less BP monitoring and automated and noninvasive cardiovascular monitoring in general.
We then briefly introduce potential methods for more convenient contact or even noncontact measurement. Note that we
have restricted this review to those methods that are described
in peer-reviewed publications and are automated and noninvasive. So, for example, ultrasound which generally requires a
skilled operator is not discussed. Importantly, while the theory of the PTT–BP relationship outlined above is based on the
BP waveform measurement, most of the described methods do
not measure such waveforms. Rather, as explained below, they
measure related waveforms.
1) Classical Waveform Measurement Methods: PPG, electrical bioimpedance (EBI)/impedance cardiography (ICG), and
electrocardiography (ECG) have been the most popular methods. These methods are based on either optical or electrical
principles, as shown in Fig. 6.
PPG: This method is the basis of pulse oximeters, which
are widely used in clinical practice to measure arterial oxygen
saturation. (Note that commercial pulse oximeters may not be
suitable for PTT estimation, as they heavily process the PPG
waveform [64].) It employs optical transmittance or reflectance
to measure waveforms indicative of proximal and distal blood
volumes [65]. Several reviews have been written on PPG in the
past decade [64], [66]–[68]. We summarize the relevant points.
As shown in Fig. 6(a), a light-emitting diode (LED) is paired
with a photodetector (PD); a small volume of tissue is illuminated by the LED; and the light transmitted through, or reflected
back from, the tissue is measured by the PD. The measured light
intensity is reduced and includes both dc and ac components.
The dc component mainly indicates light absorption by nonpulsatile blood, skin, bone, and other tissues. The ac component

represents light absorption by mostly pulsatile arterial blood but
also venous blood. (PPG systems usually output only the ac component.) According to the Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law, as light
of a given intensity (I0 ) is incident on a volume, the transmitted
light (I(t))—assuming a nonscattering homogeneous medium—
is given as follows:

ln

I (t)
I0

	
= −εCV

(7)

where ε is the absorption coefficient, C is the concentration of
the chromophore, and V is the volume of the medium. Hence,
the ac component of I(t) is inversely related to the instantaneous
arterial blood volume. Blood volume is, in turn, related to BP
via the viscoelastic properties of the arterial wall (see above). In
this way, PPG is useful for PTT estimation. Note that the main
light absorber in blood at wavelengths typically used in PPG is
hemoglobin [65].
Transmission-mode and reflectance-mode PPG offer different
advantages. The advantage of reflectance-mode PPG is that it
is less restrictive in terms of measurement locations [66], [67],
[69]. Transmission-mode PPG measurements are mainly limited
to the earlobe, fingertip, and toe. By contrast, reflectance-mode
PPG is applicable to additional locations including the forehead,
forearm, supraorbital artery, under the legs, and the wrist. We
refer to a tutorial on how to place PPG sensors on the finger, toe,
or ear [70]. The finger, palm, face, and ear represent the best
locations for maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [71].
However, the disadvantage of reflectance-mode PPG is that the
SNR is typically lower for any common location, since tissue is
highly forward scattering such that the reflected energy back to
the PD is low [72]. Furthermore, reflectance-mode PPG is more
prone to motion artifact and varies more with sensor positioning
and distance between the light source and the sensor [69], [73]. If
the sensor location is not a factor, we suggest using transmissionmode PPG. Transmission-mode PPG at the fingertip has been
the most widely used method for obtaining the distal waveform
(see Section V-D).

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

Infrared (IR) and red optical wavelengths should be used
for transmission-mode PPG due to the “optical water window”
[66] and higher tissue penetration depth [66], [67], [74]. IR
wavelengths may be preferred, as they are less sensitive to the
oxygen content of hemoglobin and, thus, yield waveforms that
are more stable over time [64]. For reflectance-mode PPG, the
green wavelength produces greater signal amplitude and lower
motion artifact than IR and red [69], [75]–[77]. However, the
shorter green wavelength is only able to penetrate the skin rather
than deeper in the tissue wherein larger arteries reside. Since the
green wavelength waveform reflects skin blood flow, it does not
exhibit features that are as well-defined as IR and red waveforms [76] and is more influenced by ambient temperature than
these waveforms [78]. To the best of our knowledge, the various
wavelengths have not been compared in the context of PTT estimation. If a reduced SNR can be tolerated, we suggest using an
IR wavelength for reflectance-mode PPG applications to obtain
the timing of pulses in the larger arteries rather than from the
skin, wherein cutaneous vasodilation/vasoconstriction and ambient temperature changes are of concern. The IR wavelength
has often been used for PTT estimation (see, e.g., references in
Table II).
The contact pressure between the PPG sensor and the skin
is often overlooked but greatly influences the amplitude and
shape of the waveforms [67], [68], [76], [79], [80]. The contact pressure required to maximize the amplitude is near the
mean BP (i.e., a transmural pressure of zero). However, a much
lower pressure should be applied to avoid tissue/vessel damage
and discomfort to the user, especially for long-term application
[67], [73]. A disadvantage of most reflectance-mode PPG systems is that the contact pressure is essentially zero, which both
reduces the measured amplitude and preserves venous pulsation
[68], [79]. At the same time, the fact that these systems are not
perturbing the physiology may also be considered an advantage
[68]. Note that the impact of contact pressure on amplitude and
shape is more pronounced for shorter wavelengths (e.g., green)
compared to longer wavelengths (e.g., red or IR), since the tissue volume being probed includes only the superficial region
for the former and the deeper arteries for the latter [76]. The
contact pressure may also influence the PTT estimate. Indeed,
PTT was shown to increase with contact pressure, reaching a
maximum at zero transmural pressure and remaining at a constant level at negative transmural pressures [81]. However, the
optimal contact pressure for cuff-less BP monitoring via PTT
has not been examined. We suggest adhering the PPG sensor to
the body with a contact pressure that exceeds the venous pressure (to obtain a pure arterial waveform) but not tight enough
to be uncomfortable for the user. Placing the sensor so that it
does not fall off should meet this requirement. We also suggest
using a clip sensor so that the contact pressure can be better
maintained, if it does fall off or is temporarily removed.
In general, PPG waveforms can be well measured from a variety of healthy subjects and patients with cardiovascular disease.
However, the waveform becomes unreliable during peripheral
hypo-perfusion (e.g., due to cold temperature).
EBI/ICG: EBI exploits the electrical conductivity of blood
to measure waveforms indicative of proximal and distal blood

1887

volumes. ICG is a type of EBI that measures electrical blood
conductivity in the thorax and, thus, a proximal waveform. ICG
is often used to estimate cardiac output, and many reviews have
been written on this method [82]–[84]. We likewise summarize
the relevant information.
As shown in Fig. 6(b), in EBI/ICG, surface electrodes are
placed on a volume of tissue; a tiny, high-frequency electrical
current is injected typically into the outer electrodes; and the resultant differential voltage is measured usually across the inner
electrodes and then demodulated synchronously with the excitation frequency. Since blood is an excellent electrical conductor,
the current tends to travel through paths filled with blood. So, the
ac component of the measured impedance (voltage divided by
current) represents the pulsatile blood volume within the tissue.
The parallel-column model relates quantitatively the EBI measurement to blood volume based on the assumption that the tissue volume consists of two parallel conducting paths. One path
is cylindrical and represents the pulsatile blood (ac impedance
component), while the other path represents all other tissues including bone, fat, muscle, and nonpulsatile fluids (dc impedance
component) [85], [86]. Under this and other assumptions, blood
volume changes (ΔV) are related to the ac component of EBI
(ΔZ) as follows:
ΔV = −ρ

L2
ΔZ
Z02

(8)

where ρ is the resistivity of blood, L is the length of the cylinder,
and Z0 is the dc component of EBI. Hence, ΔZ is inversely
related to ΔV. Since blood volume is again related to BP via the
viscoelastic properties of the arterial wall, EBI/ICG is useful for
PTT estimation.
ICG is the most popular EBI measurement. The main reason, as mentioned above, is that it permits estimation of cardiac
output specifically from the derivative of the impedance with
respect to time (dZ/dt) [82]–[84]. Another reason is that it offers
systolic time intervals [82]–[84]. For cuff-less BP monitoring,
ICG has been used to measure a proximal waveform for estimation of PTT through central arteries (see references in Section
V-D3).
In theory, the injected electrical current travels through the
blood-filled aorta, as shown in Fig. 6(b), so ICG indicates the
pulsatile aortic blood volume. However, ICG pioneers showed
that changes in blood volume in intrathoracic cardiovascular
structures other than the aorta (e.g., atria) are likely to play a
major role in the genesis of the ICG waveform [87]. They even
showed that aortic blood volume changes can contribute < 30%
of the measured waveform. Further, the measured impedance
via ICG rises with inspiration and falls with expiration, as air is
a poor electrical conductor. In fact, the respiratory component
of the ICG waveform is 10–100 times greater in magnitude than
the cardiac component. (EBI is, therefore, often used to measure respiration in clinical practice; this approach is referred
to as impedance pneumography.) However, respiratory activity
is usually slower than cardiac activity, so the respiratory component of the ICG waveform can be mitigated via high-pass
filtering.

1888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

In ICG, the applied electrical current is typically in the 10–
100 kHz and 1–5 mA range [82]–[84], [88], [89]. The cardiac
component relative to the respiratory component increases with
decreasing excitation frequency [62]. The overall ICG amplitude
increases with the excitation amplitude. We, thus, recommend
around 10 kHz and 5 mA for the applied current. Traditionally,
“band” electrodes were used to inject the current and measure the impedance. These electrodes wrap around the tissue
volume, enabling both low skin–electrode interface impedance
and uniform excitation of the tissue volume. However, due to
their inconvenience, modern systems typically use silver/silverchloride (Ag/AgCl) gel electrodes, which are commonly used
for ECG measurements [84]. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the standard configuration is two electrode pairs at the neck and two
electrode pairs at the upper abdomen. Other configurations such
as forehead to lower torso, limb-to-limb, or upper arm to upper
calf have also been demonstrated [83], [90]. The positioning of
these electrodes may be critical for estimating cardiac output but
is likely less important for PTT estimation. To our knowledge,
the optimal number and position of the electrodes for cuff-less
BP monitoring has not been determined.
EBI can also be used for measuring a distal waveform by
appropriate positioning of the electrodes [86]. This approach
is also referred to as impedance plethysmography. A tetrapolar
configuration is commonly used, with all four electrodes positioned locally on a limb such as the lower leg or forearm. Similar
to ICG, the electrodes must be positioned along the length of
the limb such that blood is flowing from one set of electrodes
to the other. The frequency ranges and currents used in these
configurations are similar to ICG [88], [89], [91]. Note that
the respiratory component is minimal; however, EBI has been
applied to measure the distal waveform [92].
Unlike PPG, EBI can yield low-quality waveforms in many
subjects. Examples include obese individuals, critically ill patients, heart failure patients, patients with aortic/mitral valve
problems, or other patients with generally weak circulations
[82]–[84]. Electrical bioreactance (the phase of the impedance
rather than its magnitude) may improve the SNR [93].
ECG: This method provides the timing of cardiac electrical activity, which precedes the arterial pulse. The time delay
between the ECG waveform and a distal arterial waveform has
been called the pulse arrival time (PAT) [47], m-pulse wave transit time [48], or simply PTT [94]. For convenience, we adopt the
PAT nomenclature. PAT is equal to the sum of PTT and the preejection period (PEP) [44]. PEP is determined by the ventricular
electromechanical delay (VEMD) and isovolumic contraction
period [95], which is, in turn, determined by ventricular and arterial pressures [96]. More specifically, PEP may be expressed
as follows:
PEP = VEMD + (DP − VEDP) /dVICP

(9)

where VEDP and dVICP are the ventricular end-diastolic pressure and the average slope of ventricular isovolumic contraction
pressure, respectively, and DP is diastolic BP. Note that the
maximum slope of ventricular pressure, which may be nearly
equal to dVICP, is a well-known index of ventricular contractility [97]. Also note that ventricular contractility and VEDP may

be modulated by short-term physiologic control and medication
[96]. PEP is a significant fraction of PAT, as indicated in Section V-B, and indeed varies considerably (e.g., 10 to 35% of
PTT) [98]. Hence, PAT does not have a precise relationship to
BP in the manner of (5). Even so, the ECG waveform has been
widely used as a surrogate proximal waveform due to the ease
of measurement and robustness to artifact (see, e.g., references
in Table II). In addition, as discussed in Section V-D, this waveform happens to allow for better tracking of systolic BP. Lead I
or II is a reasonable choice for electrode placement, as the QRS
axis normally aligns with these leads [96].
There has been a tremendous evolution in sensing technologies, which has driven ECG instrumentation from bulky benchtop systems into miniature devices based on smart patches or
integrated into smartphones and clothing, as shown in Fig. 6(c).
We refer to a recent review for more on advances in ECG and
other sensing technologies [5].
2) Potential Waveform Measurement Methods: A number of
other waveform measurement methods are available. Some have
been studied for decades. However, for the most part, they have
yet to be demonstrated in the context of cuff-less BP monitoring.
We describe a few such methods here including both contact and
noncontact methods.
Contact Methods: Ballistocardiography (BCG) measures the
reactionary forces of the body in response to cardiac ejection of
blood into the aorta [99]–[101]. This method has been recently
implemented using inexpensive and convenient instrumentation
such as chairs [102], beds [103], weighing scales [104], and onbody accelerometers [105]. Although BCG provides a proximal
waveform [106], [107], it can be applied at a distal location (e.g.,
from the feet with a weighing scale [104] or the wrist with an
accelerometer [108]). Flexible strain or pressure sensors placed
over a superficial artery can measure waveforms indicative of
BP via the tonometric principle [109]–[112]. While such “electronic skin” is convenient, applanation will likely be challenging. Note that while phonocardiography can measure a proximal
waveform via the first heart sound, it neither eliminates PEP nor
is more convenient than ECG.
Noncontact Methods: Videoplethysmography (VPG) employs a regular camera to measure arterial waveforms from the
skin. The principle is the same as the reflectance-mode PPG
but with ambient/external light serving as the excitation source.
The instantaneous blood volume is registered as a subtle color
change in each pixel of the camera [113]–[119]. Both proximal and distal waveforms can be obtained from, for example,
the face and hand [120], [121]. IR thermal imaging employs a
highly sensitive camera to likewise measure arterial waveforms
from the skin [122], [123]. However, the principle is that the
measured skin temperature changes with pulsatile blood flow
due to heat exchange between vessels and surrounding tissue.
Both proximal and distal waveforms have been obtained from
the neck and wrist. Radar-based detection of chest movement
due to the heartbeat, which provides a proximal waveform, has
also been demonstrated [124], [125]. Recent developments of an
ultrawideband (UWB) class of radars are portable and inexpensive. Higher frequency ranges are more suitable for measuring
cardiac activity. Measuring relative displacements of arterial

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

1889

walls at different locations with UWB could potentially be used
for measuring both proximal and distal waveforms.
B. PTT Estimation
We first review classical PTT estimation methods that employ feature detection and have been applied for cuff-less BP
monitoring. We then briefly mention potential methods that are
based on arterial tree models.
1) Classical Feature Detection Methods: These methods estimate PTT using the following steps: 1) sampling and filtering
the proximal and distal waveforms; 2) detecting the beats in the
waveforms; 3) detecting the feet or other features within the
beats; and 4) calculating PTT as the time delay between the features. Handling artifact in the waveforms (e.g., due to motion) is
also crucial in practice, yet often not mentioned. The detection
of beats and artifact are significant enterprises by themselves.
Full discussion of these steps is, thus, worthy of its own review.
We simply provide references for these steps while discussing
the remaining steps in detail for the commonly measured waveforms.
Aortic PTT (in the form of PWV = l/PTT) is often determined
from proximal and distal BP waveforms for large artery stiffness
quantification and improved cardiovascular risk stratification
[126]. Hence, much of our knowledge of PTT estimation stems
from these waveforms.
BP Waveforms: For cuff-less BP monitoring (e.g., via uncalibrated BP waveforms obtained with electronic skin), we suggest
a sampling rate of 1 kHz, which would yield a BP measurement
resolution of about 1.5 mmHg or less for calibration curves reported in the literature (see Section V-C). (Note that this BP
measurement resolution was derived by dividing the slopes of
the calibration curves reported therein by the sampling rate.)
The 1-kHz sampling rate is actually suitable for all waveforms
discussed below. We also suggest subsequent application of a
low-pass filter with cutoff frequency of 15–20 Hz (or lower
for artifact suppression), as BP energy almost entirely resides
within this frequency even for heart rates up to 180 beats/min.
Alternatively, a lower sampling rate may be used to acquire the
waveform (e.g., 40 Hz), and the BP measurement resolution
may then be improved by digitally upsampling the waveform
to 1 kHz or averaging the PTT estimates over many beats. We
also make reference to a few methods for BP beat and artifact
detection [127]–[131].
As discussed above, the BP waveform foot represents the
preferred feature for detection, since it is minimally impacted by
wave reflection. The foot location may be strictly defined as the
diastolic minimum time [43], [47], [132], [133]. However, other
definitions of the foot location have also been used, including
the time of 1) the maximum (or a fraction of the maximum) first
derivative with respect to time between the diastolic minimum
and systolic maximum [48], [133]; 2) the maximum second
derivative with respect to time between the diastolic minimum
and maximum first derivative with respect to time [134]; 3) a
fraction of the pulse pressure [49], [135]; and (d) the intersection
of the horizontal line through the minimum and the tangent line
fitted through points near the maximum first derivative with

Fig. 7. Feature detection methods are classically applied to proximal and
distal waveforms to estimate PTT and PAT. PEP is the preejection period.

respect to time (i.e., intersecting tangent method) [43], [45],
[134].
As with any type of waveforms, PTT is then estimated by
subtracting the distal foot time from the proximal foot time
of the same beat. Averaging or taking the median of the PTT
estimates over a number of beats is often employed to mitigate
the effects of measurement and physiologic (e.g., respiratory)
artifact as well as erroneous beat detections [136], [137].
The various foot definitions have been compared in terms
of the consistency of the PTT estimates [134] and correlation
between PTT and BP [46]. Overall, the intersecting tangent
method, as shown in Fig. 7, revealed the best PTT–BP correlation and robustness to artifact. Note that PTT determined from
carotid and femoral artery BP waveforms ranges from about 30
(old and hypertensive) to 90 ms (young and optimal BP) at rest
[138], [139].
PPG Waveforms: These waveforms are morphologically similar to BP waveforms, so many of the methods used for the latter
have been applied to the former. But, as is typical of noninvasive measurements, PPG waveforms are highly susceptible to
measurement (e.g., motion) and physiologic (e.g., respiratory)
artifact [51]–[56], [140]. We, thus, suggest heavy band-pass filtering (low and high cutoff frequencies of about 0.5 and 10
(or even lower) Hz) prior to beat detection and make reference
to several PPG beat detection and artifact handling methods
[51]–[56], [140], [141]. Similar foot location definitions have
been applied to PPG waveforms, including the 1) diastolic minimum time [142]–[144], 2) intersecting tangent method [98],
3) times of maximum derivatives with respect to time [145]–
[148], and 4) time to reach a fraction of the pulse height [143],
[147]. Some studies have compared the efficacy of such definitions, but the overall results are inconclusive [143], [149], [150].
The definitions were also studied for blood volume waveforms
measured via ultrasound rather than PPG, and the intersecting

1890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

tangent method (see Fig. 7) and the time to reach 20% of the
pulse height performed best in terms of consistency of the PTT
estimates [151]. The most popular definitions for PPG foot detection, however, appear to be the diastolic minimum time and
the times of maximum derivatives with respect to time (see Table II). Interestingly, the systolic maximum time has also been
successfully used as a feature [143]. By contrast, the peak-topeak time delay between BP waveforms is often a poor marker
of BP and can even be negative due to wave reflection (see, e.g.,
[18, Fig. 4.23]). The timing of the PPG foot referenced to the
ECG R-wave (PAT in Fig. 7) at rest typically ranges from 180 to
260 ms (finger) [98], [147], [148], [152], [153], 125 to 155 ms
(ear) [152], [153], and 180 to 330 ms (toe) [144], [152], [153].
ICG Waveforms: As alluded to above, the ICG waveform is
usually given as the derivative of the thoracic impedance with
respect to time (dZ/dt). The “B-point” of the dZ/dt waveform
represents the onset of cardiac ejection. The most popular definition of the B-point time is the location of zero-crossing prior
to the maximum dZ/dt as shown in Fig. 7 [83]. Since the B-point
can occur after this zero-crossing, another definition is the time
where dZ/dt reaches 15% of its maximal value [154]. However,
both of these definitions do not consider respiration, which can
cause baseline shifts in dZ/dt [83]. In general, ICG waveforms
are heavily corrupted by artifact similar to PPG waveforms [57]–
[62]. As indicated above, respiration is particularly problematic.
We, thus, suggest heavy band-pass filtering prior to beat detection [57]–[62]. Since differentiation amplifies high-frequency
noise, another possibly more effective approach is to first integrate dZ/dt and then process the waveform along the lines of
PPG waveforms. Note that the timing of the B-point referenced
to the ECG R-wave (PEP in Fig. 7) typically ranges from 80 to
140 ms at rest [62].
Noisy Waveforms: Straightforward application of the above
feature definitions to noisy waveforms has been shown to result in unreliable PTT estimates [134]. One possible method to
improve noise robustness is to represent the upstroke of each
beat with a parametric model, estimate the model parameters
by fitting the model to the waveform, and then detect the foot
time using a model parameter [155]. Another potential method,
which is applicable to proximal and distal waveforms of the
same type, is to extract the upstroke of the distal waveform,
shift this upstroke leftward in time until the squared error between it and the normalized proximal waveform is minimized
(or until the cross correlation between it and the normalized
proximal waveform is maximized), and then select this “least
squares” time shift as the foot-to-foot time delay [43]. Other
possible methods are described below.
ECG Waveforms: These waveforms are different in shape
from arterial waveforms. An advantage of using ECG waveforms is that they facilitate detection. That is, R-waves are easier
to detect than waveform feet due to their unique, high-frequency
nature. A number of effective R-wave detection methods have
been described, with the most popular being the Pan and Tompkins method [156]. Note that R-wave detection eliminates the
need to locate the beats of the distal waveform. We also make
reference to a few ECG artifact handling methods [157]–[159].
While the R-wave location has been most widely used to define

ECG timing [47], [155], other features such as the Q-wave time
[160] and the time of the maximum derivative of ECG with respect to time [146], [148] have also been employed. As shown
in Fig. 7, the R-wave is the peak of the QRS complex, while
the Q-wave is defined as the minimum in the complex before
the occurrence of the R-wave [161]. Since the Q-wave indicates
the start of the VEMD and this delay may be relatively constant
[162], detection of this feature may reduce the PEP variability.
Further, the Q-wave is less sensitive to electrode positioning
[146]. But, R-wave detection is easier.
2) Potential Arterial Model-Based Methods: Recently, and
as indicated in the next paragraph, methods based on arterial
tree models have been proposed in an attempt to improve the
PTT estimation. The crux of these methods is to estimate PTT
from the entire waveforms rather than just a single feature by
mathematically eliminating the reflected wave. These methods
may, thus, provide an artifact-robust estimate of the true PTT
(i.e., PTT in the absence of wave reflection) without requiring
the need for beat detection. However, the methods have been
tested mostly on invasive BP waveforms only. Further, they carry
great complexity, which may increase the PTT error variance.
These methods model the arterial tree using a transfer function. The transfer function is either defined by 1) a black-box
model [163], [164] or 2) a physics-based model of wave propagation and reflection [such as the one shown in Fig. 5(b)],
wherein the model parameters include the true PTT [46], [165],
[166]. The transfer function is identified for each individual by
optimally coupling one waveform to the other waveform. For the
black-box models, PTT is then derived as the slope of the phase
response [163], the average of the phase response [167], or the
time delay of the impulse response (time domain version of the
transfer function) [163], [164]. For the physics-based models,
PTT is given as the corresponding subject-specific parameter.
One of the methods is able to track PTT from just two distal
waveforms [168]. This method defines the transfer functions
relating the proximal waveform to each distal waveform by the
model of Fig. 5(b) and then estimates the model parameters per
individual using multichannel blind system identification.
C. Calibration of PTT to BP
We first review the standard method for calibrating PTT estimates to BP values. We then describe less investigated methods
that could improve upon the standard method.
1) Standard Calibration Method: The standard method for
constructing a calibration curve from PTT to BP is shown in
Fig. 8(a) and is employed as follows: 1) define a mathematical
model to relate PTT to BP in terms of (typically) two unknown
parameters; 2) measure PTT and cuff BP from a subject during
interventions that perturb BP and thereby obtain multiple pairs
of PTT and BP values; and 3) estimate the parameters for that
subject by fitting the model to the PTT–BP measurements [38],
[94], [135], [143], [145], [150], [155], [169]–[186]. While the
model may be fitted to arrive at separate parameter estimates for
calibrating PTT to diastolic, mean, and systolic BP, calibration
of a single PTT estimate to multiple BP values cannot be effective when these values are not varying in the same direction. BP

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

1891

Fig. 8. Calibration of PTT estimates to BP values typically involves one-time (or periodic) cuff BP measurements and interventions to perturb BP. (a) Standard
calibration method. (b) Well-known interventions for perturbing BP. SP and DP are systolic and diastolic BP.

values may then be monitored from the subject without a cuff
by obtaining PTT estimates and invoking the calibration curve.
This curve is periodically updated to account for changes due to
aging and disease or errors in the curve. We elaborate on these
steps.
Step 1: The mathematical relationship from PTT to BP has
been defined using physical models and empirical regression
models. Most of the physical models are based on the Moens–
Kortweg and Bramwell–Hill equations [see (6)] with an assumed function to relate the elastic modulus or compliance to
BP [94], [169], [171], [173], [175]–[177], [187], [188]. A popular physical model, which may be derived by substituting (1)
into (6), is given as follows:
BP = K1 ln (PTT) + K2

(10)

where Ki are unknown subject-specific parameters. Another
popular physical model, which may be derived by substituting
(3) into (5) and assuming (P –P0 ) > P1 (i.e., collagen recruitment has initiated), is given as follows:
K1
+ K2 .
(11)
PTT
Experimental studies have indeed shown that 1/PTT, rather
than PTT, is linearly related to BP over a wide BP range [see
Fig. 1(b)] [44], [45], [179]. Further, one study did indicate that
this model fitted BP-PTT data better than (10) [179]. Note that
other physical models have also been derived from (5) and (6) by
invoking a sigmoidal compliance-BP relationship [188], assuming the elastic modulus to be a function of pulse pressure [94],
BP =

or accounting for the changes in arterial vessel radius [175].
However, the physical models of (10) and (11) are not satisfying asymptotically (i.e., as PTT approaches 0 or ). A more
recent physical model based on (6) is able to predict reasonable
asymptotic behavior and is given as follows:
BP =

K1
+ K3
(PTT − K2 )2

(12)

[187]. Regression models based on experimental PTT–BP data
from the literature have been more popular [143], [145], [150],
[155], [170], [172], [174], [178]–[180], [182]–[184], [187].
Many of these studies assume that PTT is related to BP via
a line with a slope and intercept. However, some studies have
used quadratic and other nonlinear functions [145], [179], [184].
Nonlinear models including (12) may afford reasonable asymptotic behavior and greater accuracy overall. However, they are
generally characterized by more than two unknown parameters, which carry the burden of requiring more PTT–BP pairs
for their estimation (see Step 3 below). Further, since practical interventions may not markedly change BP [see Fig. 8(b)],
the parameters of a linear model may be all that is possible to
estimate. Taking all factors into consideration, we recommend
(11) for the mathematical model, with some care to preclude
nonphysiologic BP values.
Step 2: To estimate the parameters in the calibration curve
accurately, PTT and BP should be simultaneously obtained over
a wide range of BP values. A commonly employed intervention to acutely increase BP has been exercise (e.g., climbing

1892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

steps, cycling on an ergometer) [145], [150], [174], [175], [180].
Some other interventions for perturbing BP that have been performed include postural changes (i.e., seated, supine, standing)
to increase and decrease BP [183], [184], sustained handgrip
to increase BP [155], and the Valsalva maneuver to transiently
decrease BP [184]. Fig. 8(b) shows the extent to which these
and other well-known interventions perturb BP as well as their
limitations, with references providing further information on
the interventions [189]–[200]. As can be seen, inducing appreciable steady-state BP changes, especially reductions in BP,
is challenging. We can at least recommend cold pressor and
mental arithmetic to increase BP. Note that other interventions
for perturbing BP that have been employed include anesthesia induction [178], surgery [169], and ICU therapies [143],
[172]. While these methods produce major BP changes [171],
they are limited to hospitalized subjects and are, therefore, not
very germane to hypertension management. Further note that
these interventions induce BP changes via different physiologic
mechanisms. Hence, a calibration curve constructed via one
intervention may not be effective when tested during another
intervention.
Step 3: To estimate the model parameters, the number of
measured PTT–BP pairs must obviously exceed the number of
parameters. Further, the accuracy of the parameter estimates
generally improves with the ratio of the number of data pairs
to the number of parameters. Straightforward least squares regression has been the most commonly employed method for
parameter estimation [143], [145], [155], [172]–[175], [181],
[183]. More sophisticated methods, such as maximum likelihood estimation, could also be employed. However, we doubt
that the improved parameter estimation accuracy would make a
difference overall, as there are far greater sources of error in the
PTT-based approach for cuff-less BP monitoring. Some calibration curves reported in the literature are as follows: diastolic BP
= m·PTT+b, where m = –1.4, –0.5, –1.6 mmHg/ms and b =
197, 164, 125 mmHg for an animal (see Fig. 1), healthy human
[98], and inpatient [134], respectively.
Calibration Frequency: The calibration curve has been constructed both one time at the beginning of a study [94],
[145], [155], [170], [173]–[176], [179], [180] and periodically
throughout a study [143], [169], [172], [177], [178], [182]. However, in most of the one-time calibration studies, it was mentioned that periodic calibration should be considered to improve
the BP measurement accuracy. Amongst the periodic calibration studies, the period between calibrations was always within
2 h. The very short periods (i.e., far less than the time constants
governing aging and disease) may possibly be due to the fact
that PTT values have most commonly been obtained as PAT
through peripheral arteries, which is affected by PEP and SM
contraction changes (see Section V-D).
2) Potential Calibration Methods: A few methods for improving the accuracy of calibration have been proposed. These
methods all involve including covariates in addition to PTT in
the mathematical model so as to better predict BP. The additional covariates that have been employed include heart rate
[172], [182] and short-term PTT variability as a marker of neural control [183]. These and other covariates may be particularly

useful for calibrating PAT through peripheral arteries to BP by
mitigating the effects of PEP and SM contraction. Note, however, that heart rate and PEP may not correlate well [95].
Several methods for improving the convenience of calibration have been proposed. These methods attempt to eliminate
the need for interventions to perturb BP and/or cuff BP measurements.
One relatively popular method uses a population average
value for one model parameter while estimating the other parameter from one cuff BP measurement [94], [145], [185]. In this
way, a BP perturbation is avoided. However, using population
averages can yield less accurate BP values.
Another method exploits the cuff deflation to both perturb and
measure BP [170]. In particular, average BP is lowered along
the length of the arm by the cuff deflation; the amount of the BP
decrease is estimated using a finger-cuff PPG sensor; and PTT
is estimated before cuff deflation and during the BP decrease.
A calibration curve may then be defined from the two resulting
PTT–BP pairs. However, the requirement of a finger-cuff PPG
is a disadvantage.
A third method capitalizes on the natural pulsatile variation
in BP (i.e., BP nominally varies from 80 to 120 mmHg with
each heartbeat [181]). That is, the parameters of a nonlinear
arterial model are estimated by optimal coupling of a proximal
BP waveform to a distal BP waveform. The parameter estimates
then define the calibration curve. However, the BP waveform
requirement is a drawback.
A fourth method exploits the hydrostatic effect on BP [173].
More specifically, PTT is obtained while the subject’s hand is
lowered and then raised by a known amount. In this way, the
corresponding BP change may be determined without a cuff as
ρgh, where ρ is blood density, g is gravity, and h is the vertical
displacement of the hand raise. However, this method is only
applicable to PTT estimates from the hand.
A final method employs subject anthropomorphic data to determine the model parameters [171]. More specifically, multiple
calibration curves are constructed using the standard method for
groups of subjects of similar age and gender, and the appropriate
calibration curve is subsequently determined for a new subject
from just this information. However, a vast amount of data is
required for this “universal calibration” method to be effective.
D. Summary of Results
We summarize the results of studies performed to date that
have applied the PTT-based approach for measuring BP values
and/or tracking BP changes (i.e., excluding the calibration step).
Our summary includes only those studies that have employed
continuous and noninvasive waveform measurement methods
(see Section V-A) and reported quantitative results on experimental data. About four-fifths of these studies employed ECG to
obtain a surrogate of the proximal waveform; about three-fifths
of the studies employed PPG at the finger to measure the distal
waveform; and about half the studies used both ECG and finger
PPG to measure the proximal and distal waveforms.
1) Studies Employing ECG and Finger PPG: Table II provides a summary of the methods and results of each study. While

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

1893

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF METHODS AND RESULTS OF STUDIES THAT HAVE EMPLOYED ECG AND FINGER PPG (RMSE IS ROOT-MEAN-SQUARED ERROR; LOA
IS LIMITS-OF-AGREEMENT)
Results
Correlation (r Value or RMSE [mmHg])

Calibration Error (Various Metrics) Mean
(SD)

REF #

Waveform Detection

Calibration (Model/BP
Perturbation/Period)

Evaluation (# of
Subjects/Interventions)

SP

MP

DP

SP

MP

DP

[169]

R→Minimum

20/Surgery

-

-

-

-

R→Threshold

85/Natural Variability
(Weeks)

-

-

-

RMSE 3.7
(1.9)
0.6 (9.8)

-

[94]

-

0.9 (5.6)

[142]

R→Minimum

Linear in PTT Change
Surgery/5 min
Log & Quadratic in
PTT−1 Population
Parameter/One-Time
-

0.73–0.92

−

−

−

−

−

[98]
[179]
[170]

R→Minimum
R→Max Tangent
R→Maximum

10 Normal/LBNP - Hand
Grip
12/Hemodynamic Drugs
18/Exercise
11/Exercise

0.62
RMSE 3.6
−

0.28
−
−

0.14
−
−

−
−
−

−
−
4.5 (6.6)

−
−
−

[148]

Max Deriv→Max Deriv

14/Exercise

0.90

−

0.34

−

First: 0.0 (2.9)
Repeat
:2.1(7.3)

[92]
[172]

R→Minimum
R→Max Deriv

First: 0.0
(5.3)
Repeat: 1.4
(10.2)
−
−0.4 (7.8)

−
−

−
−0.1 (5.0)

[180]

SP: R→Max Deriv DP:
Diastole Duration
R→Max 2nd Deriv
R→Minimum

Absolute%
9–14
−
LOA
–13/+13
(ST)
–17/+13
(MT)
−
−
−
−
−
LOA
−20/+20

−
−
−

Absolute%
4–11
−
LOA−11/+11
(ST)–
12/11(MT)

−
−
−
−
−
−

−
−
−
−
−
−

[208]
[174]

[149]

[145]

R→Minimum
R→10% Height
R→Max Deriv
R→90% Height
R→Maximum
R→Max Deriv

[143]

R→Minimum

[185]

R→50% Height
R→Maximum
R→Maximum

R→Maximum

[150]

R→Maximum

[182]

R→Max second Deriv
R→Minimum
R→50% Height

[183]

R→Maximum

[184]

R→Max Deriv

[209]
[187]

R→Maximum
R→Max Deriv

−
−
Linear in PTT Cuff
Deflation/One-Time
Linear in PTT
Exercise/One-Time
−
Linear in PTT & HR
ICU/60 min
Linear in PTT Step
Climbing/One-Time
−
Linear in PTT−1
Exercise/One−Time

22/ICU
25/ICU

0.43
−

0.42
−

0.37
−

5/Step Climbing

0.74–0.89

−

0.44–0.74

18/Exercise
33/Exercise

RMSE 4.1
0.79

−
−

RMSE 2.3
0.77

−

10/ICU

Nonlinear in PTT−1
Population
Parameters/One-Time
Linear in PTT
ICU/60 min

63/Exercise

−
−
−
−
−
0.75–0.99

0.45
0.39
0.27
0.33
0.32
−

−
−
−
−
−
−

25/ICU

0.09

−

−0.02

3.1 (6.3)

−

1.9 (3.9)

0.32
0.71
−

−
−
−

0.22
0.69
−

1.0 (2.4)

−

−

−

−

-

1.1 (9.7)

−

−

−

−

−

0.0 (12.0)

−

−

-

RMSE 1.0

Linear in PTT Change
Population
Parameter/6 min
Log & Quadratic in
PTT−1 Population
Parameter/8 min
Linear in PTT
Exercise/One-Time

Linear in PTT & HR
Natural Variability
(Hours)/∼110 min
Linear in PTT−1 & PTT
Variations Posture
Change/One-Time
Linear or Nonlinear in
PTT−1
Valsalva/One-Time
−
−

15/Natural Variability
(Minutes)

5/Exercise

10/Natural Variability
(Hours)

−

−

−

1.8 (14.0)
5.2 (40.4)
RMSE 1.7

30/Posture Holding
(Sitting)

−

−

−

−0.2 (2.4)

−

−0.5 (3.9)

4/Valsalva

−

−

−

RMSE
12.6–15.4

−

−

25/Step Climbing
20/Exercise

0.90 (0.03)
0.93–0.99

−
−

0.82 (0.04)
0.10–0.89

−

−

−

1894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

these studies are common in terms of the waveform measurement methods, they are methodologically different otherwise.
Hence, this table should be interpreted with caution. First, the
reported results via correlation and Bland–Altman analyses are
dependent on the investigated BP range. In particular, the correlation coefficient is often higher for wider BP ranges, whereas
the root-mean-squared error (RMSE) is typically lower for narrower BP ranges [201], [202]. Note that, in many of the studies,
the diastolic BP range was narrower than the systolic BP range.
Second, the degree of difficulty of the evaluation varied considerably from easy (e.g., calibration curve constructed and tested
on the same subjects using the same intervention or frequent recalibrations) to hard (e.g., ICU subjects with wide BP changes).
So, while we do not advice direct comparisons of the results of
different studies in the table, we do attempt to make some useful observations regarding the results in the table on the whole
below.
Several of the studies in Table II report correlation coefficients between finger PAT (or some transformation thereof) and
BP values. Hence, we aggregated their results by computing
a simple average of the mean correlation coefficient of each
study. For the study in which multiple PAT estimates were reported [143], we used the highest correlation coefficient. The
resulting correlation coefficients were 0.58 ± 0.09 (mean ± SE)
for diastolic BP and 0.79 ± 0.05 for systolic BP. So, finger PAT
correlated well with systolic BP while showing some relationship to diastolic BP.
Finger PAT is affected by SM contraction, as it includes PTT
through peripheral arteries, and by PEP. Yet, the correlation between finger PAT and systolic BP in particular was fairly good.
Although systolic BP generally varied more than diastolic BP
in these studies, we believe that there are other reasons for this
result. One such reason could be that the ventricle and arteries are common determinants of PAT and systolic BP (which
equals pulse pressure plus diastolic BP). Another reason is that,
for ethical considerations, the testing was often conducted only
over limited physiologic conditions in each subject. For example, several of the studies employed exercise wherein both PEP
and PTT may decline while systolic BP rises. Invasive animal
studies conducted over a wide BP range have indeed shown that
PAT correlates much less with both systolic BP [44], [45] and
diastolic BP [44], [45] than PTT. However, ECG can be easily
and robustly measured, which is a great advantage in practice.
For the studies employing periodic calibration, the calibration
periods ranged from 5 to ∼110 min. Not surprisingly, onetime calibration studies generally showed higher errors than
these studies. The average BP RMSE of the one-time calibration
studies was about 8 mmHg. Further, in contrast to the correlation
results, diastolic BP appears to have been consistently measured
with greater accuracy than systolic BP on the whole. However,
this finding could again be due to the fact that diastolic BP often
changed less than systolic BP.
We also point out two unique studies [94], [185] in the table.
One of these studies [185] provided an independent assessment
of two PTT-based BP monitoring methods in terms of the required period for calibration. It was concluded that one of the
methods [169] could provide very accurate BP measurements

for calibration periods up to 6 min, while the other method [94]
better reflected BP changes. The other study [94] was the only
one in the table to employ an AAMI protocol and reported BP
errors near AAMI limits.
2) Studies Employing ECG and Other Distal Waveform Measurement Methods: We classify these studies into two groups
based on the distal waveform measurement site. In the first
group, the site was an arm location other than the finger [92],
[133], [176], [203]–[206]. In the second group, the site was the
head or lower body [175], [204], [207].
In the first and larger group of studies, the distal waveform
was measured by placing a nonflexible pressure sensor over
the radial artery [133], [203], [204], [206], reflectance-mode
PPG sensor on the brachial artery [176], [205], or EBI electrodes around the brachial artery [92]. Various PAT estimation
methods were used similar to Table II. Since these studies all estimated PAT through the arm, we likewise computed aggregate
correlation coefficients between the arm PAT estimates and BP
values. The resulting correlation coefficients were 0.72 ± 0.07
for systolic BP and 0.43 ± 0.09 for diastolic BP. Not surprisingly, these values are similar to those obtained from finger PPG
(see above). Despite their methodological differences, the studies largely yielded similar results. The one exception was the
study employing EBI, which reported a correlation coefficient
of only up to 0.28.
In the second group of studies, the distal waveform was measured by placing a nonflexible pressure sensor over the temporal
artery (forehead) [204], a transmission-mode PPG sensor on the
earlobe [175], or a reflectance-mode PPG sensor on the buttocks
(via a toilet seat) [207]. PAT was likewise estimated. The first
and third studies reported correlation coefficients of about 0.80
for systolic BP, while the second study showed a systolic BP
RMSE of 8.6 mmHg via a one-time calibration and exercise.
While these results are comparable to those obtained from arm
distal waveforms, the number of studies is so small that it is
difficult to draw any conclusions on the best distal waveform
measurement site when ECG is used for proximal waveform
measurement.
3) Studies Employing Actual Proximal Arterial Waveform
Measurement Methods: We also classify these studies into two
groups based on where PTT was estimated. In the first group,
PTT was estimated through peripheral arteries and the arm in
particular [92], [98], [178], [206], [210]. In the second group,
PTT was estimated through central arteries [155], [171].
The first group comprised most of the studies. One of these
studies offered a unique assessment of PTT estimates by employing hemodynamic drugs in healthy subjects so as to vary
BP over a wide range [98]. ICG and finger PPG were employed to obtain the proximal and distal waveforms, and PTT
was estimated as the time delay between the standard B-point
definition of the ICG waveform and the minimum of the PPG
waveform. PAT to the finger was also estimated. Compared
to these estimates, the PTT estimates showed higher correlation with diastolic and mean BP (0.66 versus 0.21) but comparable correlation with systolic BP (0.60). In contrast, two of
the studies reported that PAT estimates provided better correlation to BP values than PTT estimates [92], [206]. One of the

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

studies employed ICG and ECG to obtain proximal waveforms
and finger PPG and brachial EBI to obtain distal waveforms from
ICU patients [92]. Standard foot definitions were employed to
estimate various time delays. All resulting PTT and PAT estimates showed relatively low correlation with BP values. The
best correlation was between finger PAT estimates and systolic
BP values (0.43). The other study used nonflexible pressure
sensors on the brachial, radial, and dorsal pedal arteries as well
as ECG and standard foot definitions to estimate various time
delays during a sustained handgrip and exercise. In contrast to
any of the PTT estimates (e.g., from brachial to radial arteries),
the radial PAT estimates showed good correlation to systolic BP
(0.73) during both interventions. The final pair of studies in the
first group did not perform any comparisons with PAT estimates
[178], [210]. One of these studies applied BCG (with a cushion
seat form factor) and finger PPG to measure proximal and distal
waveforms [210]. PTT was estimated as the time delay between
the J-point of the BCG waveform and the peak of the PPG waveform. A subject-specific calibration curve was constructed via
a linear model in PTT and exercise. The diastolic BP RMSE
was small but only determined from five data points. The other
study employed ear and finger PPG to obtain the waveforms and
estimate PTT in patients undergoing anesthesia induction [178].
A calibration curve was constructed and updated in every 5 min
using a reference BP measurement. Diastolic BP was estimated
best, with limits-of-agreement of –14.7 to 14.7 mmHg. Given
the variability in the studies, it is difficult to conclude whether
proximal arterial waveforms offer value over ECG waveforms
when the distal waveform is measured from the arm.
There were two studies in the second group. One study employed ear and toe PPG and standard foot definitions to estimate
PTT during surgery [171]. First, multiple calibration curves for
different age (young/old) and gender groups were formed via
an exponential model and training data from patients. The calibration curves for the different age and gender groups were
noticeably different. Then, using an AAMI protocol, BP was
measured from a new set of young and old patients by obtaining
PTT estimates from these subjects and invoking the appropriate
calibration curve. The diastolic BP error was 1.4 ± 7.5 mmHg,
which is within AAMI limits. The second study employed ICG
and applied four reflectance-mode PPG sensors on the chest
to obtain the proximal and distal waveforms [155]. PTT was
estimated as the time delay between the standard B-point definition of the ICG waveform and a robust feature of the PPG
waveform derived via parametric modeling (see Section V-B). A
one-time calibration curve was constructed using a linear model
in PTT and a sustained handgrip. The mean BP error was –0.8 ±
5.1 mmHg for measurements made during the same intervention but two weeks after the construction of calibration curve.
However, neither of these studies reported systolic BP errors.
VI. CONCLUSION
A. Summary
In summary, there is a mismatch between the theory and
current practice of PTT-based monitoring of BP. The theory indicates that diastolic BP may be tracked for periods in the order

1895

of months to a few years by estimating PTT through central
arteries via the foot-to-foot time delay between proximal and
distal waveforms (see Section III). However, for convenience,
common practice has been to employ ECG to measure a surrogate of the proximal waveform, obtain the distal waveform from
the arm via mainly finger PPG, and detect the R-wave-to-foot
(or sometimes even the R-wave-to-peak) time delay between
these waveforms (see Section IV-D). The resulting PAT estimates through peripheral arteries correlate well with systolic
BP, rather than diastolic BP, and can require recalibration with
a cuff on the order of just minutes to hours for accurate BP
readings (see Table II). In fact, we found only two out of about
40 studies aiming to achieve noninvasive, automated, and cuffless BP monitoring that estimated PTT through central arteries
[155], [171]. Both of these studies happened to report promising
accuracy in measuring diastolic and mean BP, which often correlate tightly. However, due to the paucity of studies, there is no
proof that strict following of the theory affords greater accuracy
than taking practical deviations from the theory.
B. Suggested Future Research
There are a number of directions for future research on the
PTT-based approach for cuffless BP monitoring. We suggest a
few that we feel would be particularly fruitful.
Research is needed to establish more convenient methods for
measuring the proximal arterial waveforms. The ECG waveform as a surrogate of the proximal waveform has at least three
important advantages. In particular, it is easy to measure, robust against artifact, and uniquely affords tracking of systolic
BP. However, this waveform introduces PEP, which may be a
major confounding factor [see (9)] that necessitates frequent
recalibration. By contrast, ICG can measure an actual proximal waveform but not with enough convenience. Some possible
methods for investigation include BCG, electronic skin, and
imaging modalities such as VPG and UWB radar. However, use
of such ultraconvenient methods may bring up more problems.
Likely problems include waveform artifact and measurement of
systolic BP. These problems could be at least partially solved
using improved PTT estimation methods based on arterial modeling or advanced signal processing.
Basic scientific studies are needed to understand the limitations of PPG. This method appears to be quite effective in
measuring the requisite waveforms. In particular, it can provide distal waveforms from the finger or toe, the latter of which
would permit PTT estimates through central arteries, and a proximal waveform from the ear. Further, PPG may have unknown
potential. However, one concern is as follows. PPG and BP
waveforms obtained from the same arterial site are not time
aligned. Rather, the PPG waveform often lags behind the BP
waveform. This viscoelastic delay could vary with BP and SM
contraction. One study showed that, for the same BP level, PAT
estimates via finger PPG were larger during exercise than recovery [211]. This finding could be due to a variable viscoelastic
delay (though other causes are also possible). Hence, this phenomenon should be carefully investigated. The impact of PPG
contact pressure on PTT estimates also deserves more attention.

1896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Studies are needed to determine if arrhythmias adversely impact PTT estimates. We specifically suggest a systematic comparison of PTT estimates during normal sinus rhythm and atrial
fibrillation, which is a common arrhythmia.
Research is surely needed to improve the calibration of PTT
to BP in terms of accuracy and convenience. Methods involving
a BP perturbing intervention or frequent recalibrations with a
cuff may not be adopted. One potential method is universal
calibration, wherein the parameters of the model relating PTT
to BP are determined simply from the subject’s age, gender, and
other such information including cardiovascular risk factors.
To enhance the accuracy without significantly compromising
convenience, a single cuff BP measurement could be obtained
from the subject every so often. However, to implement this
method, the following steps would first have to be performed:
1) collection of training data comprising pairs of PTT estimates
and BP values during a set of BP varying interventions per
subject from a vast number of diverse subjects; 2) estimation of
the parameters of a calibration model for each subject; and 3)
regression of these parameters on simple subject information.
Collecting the necessary training data is a serious endeavor but
may be the best way to popularize the PTT-based BP monitoring
approach.
Research is needed to enable independent determination of
systolic and diastolic BP. As mentioned above, a single PTT
estimate cannot indicate these two BP values when they are not
varying in the same direction (e.g., isolated systolic hypertension). This problem could be addressed by including additional
simple covariates, such as heart rate, in the calibration model
[172], [182] or by estimating multiple PTT values per beat via
arterial modeling [46]. Note that PTT estimates should correlate
better with BP values than these covariates do to offer any real
value.
Finally, research is needed to find the right compromise between accuracy and convenience. We hypothesize that accuracy
will increase, but convenience will decline, with greater adherence to the theory. Studies should be performed to compare the
accuracy of methods of increasing compliance to the theory. A
plot of accuracy versus adherence to theory may show a monotonic relationship. However, the “knee of the curve” would indicate the optimal balance between theory and practice. Ideally,
these and other studies would obtain reference BP measurements via expert-operated auscultation rather than oscillometry,
which can be inaccurate in subjects with certain conditions (see
Section II) [11].
C. Expectations for PTT-Based BP Monitors
Our expectations for a useful PTT-based BP monitor for hypertension management are as follows. In terms of usability, the
monitor must be noninvasive and automated. Further, the form
factor should be easier-to-use than a cuff, else it will not be
adopted. A single sensor unit form factor such as a smartphone
or wearable would be ideal. Note that the monitor must also
account for hydrostatic effects, which can greatly impact BP
[212]. In terms of accuracy, our expectations for initial monitors are tempered by the reality that there are a number of
significant sources of error in the approach. We would hope that

first-generation monitors could do at least one of the following:
1) reliably estimate aortic PWV in order to assess cardiovascular risk independent of BP more conveniently than traditionally
employed tonometry [126]; 2) track BP changes (rather than BP
levels) to help control BP in patients with known hypertension;
and 3) indicate whether BP levels are not of concern or should
be measured with a cuff to better detect hypertension. If serious
innovations can be made, it may then be reasonable to expect
that second-generation monitors and beyond would be able to
reliably measure both absolute BP levels and BP changes in subjects with a broad array of conditions. In addition, we hope that
all monitors would comply with the AAMI standard [10], the
British Society of Hypertension standard [213], and/or the new
IEEE Standard for Wearable Cuff-less BP Monitoring Devices
(IEEE Standard 1708) [214].
In conclusion, while much progress has been made on ubiquitous BP monitoring via PTT, significant work is still needed to
best realize this approach in practice. We hope that this review
facilitates future advances in this area.
REFERENCES
[1] V. L. Burt et al., “Prevalence of hypertension in the us adult population:
Results from the third national health and nutrition examination survey,
1988–1991,” Hypertension, vol. 25, pp. 305–313, 1995.
[2] (2005). Affordable technology: Blood pressure measuring devices for
low resource settings. [Online]. Available: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2005/9241592648.pdf
[3] T. G. Pickering et al., “Ambulatory blood-pressure monitoring,” New
Engl. J. Med., vol. 354, pp. 2368–2374, 2006.
[4] R. Agarwal et al., “Role of home blood pressure monitoring in overcoming therapeutic inertia and improving hypertension control: A systematic
review and meta-analysis,” Hypertension, vol. 57, pp. 29–38, 2011.
[5] Y. L. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for health
informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 1538–1554,
May 2014.
[6] B. H. McGhee and E. J. Bridges, “Monitoring arterial blood pressure:
What you may not know,” Crit. Care Nurse, vol. 22, pp. 60–79, 2002.
[7] D. Perloff et al., “Human blood pressure determination by sphygmomanometry,” Circulation, vol. 88, pp. 2460–2470, 1993.
[8] B. S. Alpert et al., “Oscillometric blood pressure: A review for clinicians,” J. Am. Soc. Hypertension, vol. 8, pp. 930–938, 2014.
[9] G. Drzewiecki et al., “Theory of the oscillometric maximum and the
systolic and diastolic detection ratios,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 22,
pp. 88–96, 1994.
[10] Electronic or Automated Sphygmomanometers. ANSI/AAMI Standard
SP10-192, ed. Arlington, VA, USA, 1993.
[11] M. Forouzanfar et al., “Coefficient-free blood pressure estimation based
on pulse transit time-cuff pressure dependence,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1814–1824, Jul. 2013.
[12] B. P. M. Imholz et al., “Fifteen years experience with finger arterial
pressure monitoring,” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 38, pp. 605–616, 1998.
[13] K. H. Wesseling et al., “Physiocal, calibrating finger vascular physiology
for Finapres,” Homeostasis, vol. 36, pp. 67–82, 1995.
[14] B. Silke and D. McAuley, “Accuracy and precision of blood pressure determination with the Finapres: An overview using re-sampling statistics,”
J. Hum. Hypertension, vol. 12, pp. 403–409, 1998.
[15] G. M. Drzewiecki et al., Deformational Forces in Arterial Tonometry.
New York, NY, USA: IEEE Press, 1984, vol. 28, pp. 642–645.
[16] J. S. Eckerle, “Tonometry arterial,” in Encyclopedia of Medical Devices
and Instrumentation, J. G. Webster, Ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley,
1988.
[17] S. Hansen and M. Staber, “Oscillometric blood pressure measurement
used for calibration of the arterial tonometry method contributes significantly to error,” Eur. J. Anaesthesiol., vol. 23, pp. 781–787, 2006.
[18] W. W. Nichols et al., McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries. Theoretical,
Experimental, and Clinical Principles. London, U.K.: Hodder Arnold,
2011.
[19] A. C. Burton, “Relation of structure to function of the tissues of the wall
of blood vessels,” Physiol. Rev., vol. 34, pp. 619–642, 1954.

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

[20] M. L. R. Harkness et al., “The collagen and elastin content of the arterial
wall in the dog,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B, Biol. Sci., vol. 146, pp. 541–551,
1957.
[21] R. L. Armentano et al., “Smart smooth muscle spring-dampers,” IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 62–70, Jan./Feb. 2007.
[22] R. L. Armentano et al., “Arterial wall mechanics in conscious dogs:
Assessment of viscous, inertial, and elastic moduli to characterize aortic
wall behavior,” Circulation Res., vol. 76, pp. 468–478, 1995.
[23] L. H. Peterson et al., “Mechanical properties of arteries in vivo,” Circulation Res., vol. 8, pp. 622–639, 1960.
[24] A. U. Ferrari et al., “Invited review: Aging and the cardiovascular system,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 95, pp. 2591–2597, 2003.
[25] E. G. Lakatta and D. Levy, “Arterial and cardiac aging: Major shareholders in cardiovascular disease enterprises: Part I: Aging arteries: A “set
up” for vascular disease,” Circulation, vol. 107, pp. 139–146, 2003.
[26] M. F. O’Rourke and J. Hashimoto, “Mechanical factors in arterial aging:
A clinical perspective,” J. Am. College Cardiol., vol. 50, pp. 1–13, 2007.
[27] A. J. Bank et al., “Contribution of collagen, elastin, and smooth muscle to in vivo human brachial artery wall stress and elastic modulus,”
Circulation, vol. 94, pp. 3263–3270, 1996.
[28] R. H. Cox, “Regional variation of series elasticity in canine arterial
smooth muscles,” Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 234,
pp. H542–H551, 1978.
[29] M. Wurzel et al., “Smooth muscle contraction and viscoelasticity of
arterial wall,” Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., vol. 48, pp. 510–523, 1970.
[30] P. B. Dobrin and A. A. Rovick, “Influence of vascular smooth muscle on
contractile mechanics and elasticity of arteries,” Am. J. Physiol. Legacy
Content, vol. 217, pp. 1644–1651, 1969.
[31] D. H. Bergel, “The dynamic elastic properties of the arterial wall,” J.
Physiol., vol. 156, pp. 458–469, 1961.
[32] M. L. Cohen and B. A. Berkowitz, “Vascular contraction: Effect of age
and extracellular calcium,” J. Vascular Res., vol. 13, pp. 139–154, 1976.
[33] B. M. Learoyd and M. G. Taylor, “Alterations with age in the viscoelastic properties of human arterial walls,” Circulation Res., vol. 18,
pp. 278–292, 1966.
[34] J. H. Fleisch et al., “Beta-receptor activity in aorta: Variations with age
and species,” Circulation Res., vol. 26, pp. 151–162, 1970.
[35] M. A. Gaballa et al., “Large artery remodeling during aging: Biaxial
passive and active stiffness,” Hypertension, vol. 32, pp. 437–443, 1998.
[36] P. Hallock and I. C. Benson, “Studies on the elastic properties of human
isolated aorta,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 16, pp. 595–602, 1937.
[37] N. Westerhof et al., Snapshots of Hemodynamics. An Aid for Clinical Research and Graduate Education. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag,
2010.
[38] D. J. Hughes et al., “Measurements of young’s modulus of elasticity of
the canine aorta with ultrasound,” Ultrasonic Imag., vol. 1, pp. 356–367,
1979.
[39] G. J. Langewouters et al., “The static elastic properties of 45 human
thoracic and 20 abdominal aortas in vitro and the parameters of a new
model,” J. Biomech., vol. 17, pp. 425–435, 1984.
[40] M. Remoissenet, Waves Called Solitons. Concepts and Experiments.
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1994.
[41] E. Hermeling et al., “Noninvasive assessment of arterial stiffness should
discriminate between systolic and diastolic pressure ranges,” Hypertension, vol. 55, pp. 124–130, 2010.
[42] E. Hermeling et al., “The change in arterial stiffness over the cardiac
cycle rather than diastolic stiffness is independently associated with left
ventricular mass index in healthy middle-aged individuals,” J. Hypertension, vol. 30, pp. 396–402, 2012.
[43] N. R. Gaddum et al., “A technical assessment of pulse wave velocity
algorithms applied to non-invasive arterial waveforms,” Ann. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 41, pp. 2617–2629, 2013.
[44] L. Geddes et al., “Pulse transit time as an indicator of arterial blood
pressure,” Psychophysiol., vol. 18, pp. 71–74, 1981.
[45] G. Zhang et al., “Pulse arrival time is not an adequate surrogate for pulse
transit time as a marker of blood pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 111,
pp. 1681–1686, 2011.
[46] M. Gao et al., “Improved pulse wave velocity estimation using an arterial
tube-load model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 848–858,
Mar. 2014.
[47] L. A. Geddes et al., “Pulse arrival time as a method of obtaining systolic and diastolic blood pressure indirectly,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 19, pp. 671–672, 1981.
[48] R. Ochiai et al., “The relationship between modified pulse wave transit
time and cardiovascular changes in isoflurane anesthetized dogs,” J. Clin.
Monit. Comput., vol. 15, pp. 493–501, 1999.

1897

[49] J. D. Pruett et al., “Measurement of pulse-wave velocity using a beatsampling technique,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 16, pp. 341–347, 1988.
[50] N. R. Gaddum et al., “Altered dependence of aortic pulse wave velocity
on transmural pressure in hypertension revealing structural change in the
aortic wall,” Hypertension, vol. 65, pp. 362–369, 2015.
[51] M. J. Hayes and P. R. Smith, “A new method for pulse oximetry possessing inherent insensitivity to artifact,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48,
no. 4, pp. 452–461, Apr. 2001.
[52] B. S. Kim and S. K. Yoo, “Motion artifact reduction in photoplethysmography using independent component analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 566–568, Mar. 2006.
[53] H. Lee et al., “The periodic moving average filter for removing motion artifacts from PPG signals,” Int. J. Control Autom. Syst., vol. 5,
pp. 701–706, 2007.
[54] F. Peng et al., “Motion artifact removal from photoplethysmographic
signals by combining temporally constrained independent component
analysis and adaptive filter,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 13, art. no. 50,
pp. 1–4, 2014.
[55] K. A. Reddy et al., “Use of fourier series analysis for motion artifact reduction and data compression of photoplethysmographic signals,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1706–1711, May 2009.
[56] R. Krishnan et al., “Two-stage approach for detection and reduction of
motion artifacts in photoplethysmographic data,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1867–1876, Aug. 2010.
[57] A. K. Barros et al., “Filtering noncorrelated noise in impedance cardiography,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 324–327, Mar.
1995.
[58] G. Cybulski et al., “Ambulatory monitoring device for central hemodynamic and ECG signal recording on PCMCI flash memory cards,” in
Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 1995, pp. 505–507.
[59] S. M. M. Naidu et al., “Automatic detection of characteristic points in
impedance cardiogram,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2011, pp. 497–500.
[60] T. Ono et al., “Beat-to-beat evaluation of systolic time intervals during
bicycle exercise using impedance cardiography,” Tohoku J. Exp. Med.,
vol. 203, pp. 17–29, 2004.
[61] T. Sebastian et al., “Wavelet based denoising for suppression of respiratory and motion artifacts in impedance cardiography,” in Proc. Comput.
Cardiol., 2011, pp. 501–504.
[62] G. H. M. Willemsen et al., “Ambulatory monitoring of the impedance
cardiogram,” Psychophysiology, vol. 33, pp. 184–193, 1996.
[63] S. S. Franklin et al., “Predominance of isolated systolic hypertension
among middle-aged and elderly us hypertensives: Analysis based on
national health and nutrition examination survey (NHANES) III,” Hypertension, vol. 37, pp. 869–874, 2001.
[64] K. H. Shelley, “Photoplethysmography: Beyond the calculation of arterial oxygen saturation and heart rate,” Anesthesia Analgesia, vol. 105,
pp. S31–S36, 2007.
[65] J. G. Webster, Design of Pulse Oximeters. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC
Press, 2002.
[66] J. Allen, “Photoplethysmography and its application in clinical physiological measurement,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 28, pp. R1–R39, 2007.
[67] T. Tamura et al., “Wearable photoplethysmographic sensors—Past and
present,” Electronics, vol. 3, pp. 282–302, 2014.
[68] A. Reisner et al., “Utility of the photoplethysmogram in circulatory
monitoring,” Anesthesiology, vol. 108, pp. 950–958, 2008.
[69] Y. Maeda et al., “Relationship between measurement site and motion
artifacts in wearable reflected photoplethysmography,” J. Med. Syst.,
vol. 35, pp. 969–976, 2011.
[70] (2011). Using the pulse oximeter: Tutorial 2, advanced. [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/pulse_oximetry/
who_ps_pulse_oxymetry_tutorial2_advanced_en.pdf
[71] E. Tur et al., “Basal perfusion of the cutaneous microcirculation: Measurements as a function of anatomic position,” J. Invest. Dermatol.,
vol. 81, pp. 442–446, 1983.
[72] K. Li and S. Warren, “A wireless reflectance pulse oximeter with digital baseline control for unfiltered photoplethysmograms,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 269–278, Jun. 2012.
[73] H. H. Asada et al., “Mobile monitoring with wearable photoplethysmographic biosensors,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 28–40, May/Jun. 2003.
[74] R. R. Anderson and J. A. Parrish, “The optics of human skin,” J. Invest.
Dermatol., vol. 77, pp. 13–19, 1981.
[75] J. Lee et al., “Comparison between red, green and blue light reflection photoplethysmography for heart rate monitoring during motion,”
in Proc. IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013,
pp. 1724–1727.

1898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

[76] J. Spigulis et al., “Simultaneous recording of skin blood pulsations at
different vascular depths by multiwavelength photoplethysmography,”
Appl. Opt., vol. 46, pp. 1754–1759, 2007.
[77] W. Cui et al., “In vivo reflectance of blood and tissue as a function of light
wavelength,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 632–639, Jun.
1990.
[78] L. G. Lindberg and P. A. Oberg, “Photoplethysmography. Part 2. Influence of light source wavelength,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 29,
pp. 48–54, 1991.
[79] K. H. Shelley et al., “The effect of venous pulsation on the forehead pulse
oximeter wave form as a possible source of error in Spo2 calculation,”
Anesthesia Analgesia, vol. 100, pp. 743–747, 2005.
[80] A. Dassel et al., “Reflectance pulse oximetry at the forehead improves
by pressure on the probe,” J. Clin. Monit., vol. 11, pp. 237–244, 1995.
[81] X.-F. Teng and Y.-T. Zhang, “Theoretical study on the effect of sensor
contact force on pulse transit time,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54,
no. 8, pp. 1490–1498, Aug. 2007.
[82] R. Patterson, “Fundamentals of impedance cardiography,” IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 35–38, Mar. 1989.
[83] A. Sherwood et al., “Methodological guidelines for impedance cardiography,” Psychophysiology, vol. 27, pp. 1–23, 1990.
[84] L. A. Critchley, “Impedance cardiography. The impact of new technology,” Anaesthesia, vol. 53, pp. 677–84, 1998.
[85] R. Patterson et al., “Development of an electrical impedance plethysmography system to monitor cardiac output,” in Proc 1st Annu. Rocky
Mountain Bioeng. Symp., 1964, pp. 56–71.
[86] J. Nyboer et al., “Electrical impedance plethysmography a physical and
physiologic approach to peripheral vascular study,” Circulation, vol. 2,
pp. 811–821, 1950.
[87] R. P. Patterson et al., “Studies on the effect of controlled volume change
on the thoracic electrical impedance,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 16,
pp. 531–536, 1978.
[88] D. Hill and H. Lowe, “The use of the electrical-impedance technique for
the monitoring of cardiac output and limb bloodflow during anaesthesia,”
Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 534–545, 1973.
[89] F. Risacher et al., “Impedance plethysmography for the evaluation
of pulse-wave velocity in limbs,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 31,
pp. 318–322, 1993.
[90] B. H. Brown et al., “Cardiac and respiratory related electrical impedance
changes in the human thorax,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 41, no. 8,
pp. 729–734, Aug. 1994.
[91] S. Bang et al., “A pulse transit time measurement method based on
electrocardiography and bioimpedance,” in Proc. IEEE Biomed. Circuits
Syst. Conf., 2009, pp. 153–156.
[92] C. Douniama et al., “Blood pressure tracking capabilities of pulse transit times in different arterial segments: A clinical evaluation,” in Proc.
Comput. Cardiol., 2009, pp. 201–204.
[93] H. Keren et al., “Evaluation of a noninvasive continuous cardiac output
monitoring system based on thoracic bioreactance,” Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circulatory Physiol., vol. 293, pp. H583–H589, 2007.
[94] C. C. Y. Poon and Y. T. Zhang, “Cuff-less and noninvasive measurements
of arterial blood pressure by pulse transit time,” in Proc. 27th Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2005, pp. 5877–5880.
[95] W. S. Harris et al., “Effects of adrenergic receptor activation and blockade
on the systolic preejection period, heart rate, and arterial pressure in man,”
J. Clin. Invest., vol. 46, pp. 1704–1714, 1967.
[96] J. E. Hall and A. C. Guyton, Textbook of Medical Physiology, 12th ed.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Saunders Elsevier, 2010.
[97] A. M. Katz, Physiology of the Heart, 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010.
[98] R. A. Payne et al., “Pulse transit time measured from the ECG: An
unreliable marker of beat-to-beat blood pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol.
100, pp. 136–141, 2006.
[99] I. Starr et al., “Studies on the estimation of cardiac ouptut in man, and of
abnormalities in cardiac function, from the heart’s recoil and the blood’s
impacts; the ballistocardiogram,” Am. Physiol. Legacy Content, vol. 127,
pp. 1–28, 1939.
[100] I. Starr and A. Noordergraaf, Ballistocardiography in Cardiovascular
Research: Physical Aspects of the Circulation in Health and Disease,
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Lippincott, 1967.
[101] O. T. Inan et al., “Ballistocardiography and seismocardiography: A review of recent advances,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., 2014, to be
published.
[102] H. J. Baek et al., “A smart health monitoring chair for nonintrusive measurement of biological signals,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 150–158, Jan. 2012.

[103] C. Bruser et al., “Adaptive beat-to-beat heart rate estimation in ballistocardiograms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 5,
pp. 778–786, Sep. 2011.
[104] O. T. Inan et al., “Robust ballistocardiogram acquisition for home monitoring,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30, pp. 169–185, 2009.
[105] P. Castiglioni et al., “Wearable Seismocardiography,” in Proc. IEEE 29th
Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2007, pp. 3954–3957.
[106] M. Etemadi et al., “Rapid assessment of cardiac contractility on a home
bathroom scale,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 6,
pp. 864–869, Nov. 2011.
[107] A. Lindqvist et al., “Static-charge-sensitive bed ballistocardiography in
cardiovascular monitoring,” Clin. Physiol., vol. 16, pp. 23–30, 1996.
[108] A. Wiens and O. T. Inan, “A novel system identification technique for
improved wearable hemodynamics assessment,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1345–1354, May 2015.
[109] H. Sorvoja et al., “Use of EMFi as a blood pressure pulse transducer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 2505–2512, Dec.
2005.
[110] F. Clemente et al., “A piezo-film-based measurement system for global
haemodynamic assessment,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 31, pp. 697–714,
2010.
[111] J. McLaughlin et al., “Piezoelectric sensor determination of arterial pulse
wave velocity,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 24, pp. 693–702, 2003.
[112] G. Schwartz et al., “Flexible polymer transistors with high pressure sensitivity for application in electronic skin and health monitoring,” Nature
Commun., vol. 4, art. no. 1859, pp. 1–8, 2013.
[113] P. Pelegris et al., “A novel method to detect heart beat rate using a mobile
phone,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2010,
pp. 5488–5491.
[114] M.-Z. Poh et al., “Advancements in noncontact, multiparameter physiological measurements using a webcam,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 7–11, Jan. 2011.
[115] W. Karlen et al., “Design challenges for camera oximetry on a mobile
phone,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 2448–2451.
[116] G. R. Tsouri et al., “Constrained independent component analysis approach to nonobtrusive pulse rate measurements,” J. Biomed. Opt.,
vol. 17, pp. 0770111–0770114, 2012.
[117] Y. Sun et al., “Noncontact imaging photoplethysmography to effectively
access pulse rate variability,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 18, art. no. 6, pp. 1–9,
2013.
[118] S. Kyal et al., “A method to detect cardiac arrhythmias with a webcam,”
presented at the IEEE Signal Process. Med. Biol. Symp., Brooklyn, NY,
USA, 2013.
[119] L. K. Mestha et al., “Towards continuous monitoring of pulse rate in
neonatal intensive care unit with a webcam,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 3817–3820.
[120] M. Yoshizawa et al., “A great impact of green video signals on telehealthcare in daily life, especially for rural or disaster areas,” Trans. Jpn.
Soc. Med. Biol. Eng., vol. 51, p. M–55, 2013.
[121] L. K. Mestha and S. Kyal, “Deriving arterial pulse transit time from a
source video image,” U.S. Patent 8 838 209, Sep. 16, 2014.
[122] N. Sun et al., “Imaging the cardiovascular pulse,” in Proc. IEEE Comput.
Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2005, pp. 416–421.
[123] M. Garbey et al., “Contact-free measurement of cardiac pulse based on
the analysis of thermal imagery,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54,
no. 8, pp. 1418–1426, Aug. 2007.
[124] K. M. Chen and H. R. Chuang, “Measurement of heart and breathing
signals of human subjects through barriers with microwave life-detection
systems,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1988,
vol. 3, pp. 1279–1280.
[125] E. F. Greneker, “Radar sensing of heartbeat and respiration at a distance with applications of the technology,” in Proc. Radar Conf., 1997,
pp. 150–154.
[126] S. Laurent et al., “Expert consensus document on arterial stiffness:
Methodological issues and clinical applications,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 27,
no. 21, pp. 2588–2605, 2006.
[127] S. Asgari et al., “A robust approach toward recognizing valid arterialblood-pressure pulses,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 166–172, Jan. 2010.
[128] Q. Li et al., “Artificial arterial blood pressure artifact models and an
evaluation of a robust blood pressure and heart rate estimator,” Biomed.
Eng. Online, vol. 8, art. no. 13, pp. 1–15, 2009.
[129] W. Zong et al., “Reduction of false arterial blood pressure alarms using
signal quality assessement and relationships between the electrocardio-

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

[130]
[131]
[132]
[133]
[134]
[135]
[136]
[137]
[138]

[139]
[140]
[141]
[142]

[143]
[144]
[145]
[146]
[147]
[148]

[149]
[150]

[151]
[152]
[153]
[154]

gram and arterial blood pressure,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 42,
pp. 698–706, 2004.
W. Zong et al., “An open-source algorithm to detect onset of arterial
blood pressure pulses,” in Proc. Comput. Cardiol., 2003, pp. 259–262.
M. Aboy et al., “An automatic beat detection algorithm for pressure
signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 1662–1670, Oct.
2005.
E. J. Kim et al., “Relationship between blood pressure parameters and
pulse wave velocity in normotensive and hypertensive subjects: invasive
study,” J. Hum. Hypertension, vol. 21, pp. 141–148, 2006.
J. D. Lane et al., “Pulse transit time and blood pressure: An intensive
analysis,” Psychophysiology, vol. 20, pp. 45–49, 1983.
Y. C. Chiu et al., “Determination of pulse wave velocities with computerized algorithms,” Am. Heart J., vol. 121, pp. 1460–1470, 1991.
B. Gribbin et al., “Pulse wave velocity as a measure of blood pressure
change,” Psychophysiology, vol. 13, pp. 86–90, 1976.
R. Asmar et al., “Assessment of artieral distensibility by automatic pulse
wave velocity measurement: Validation and clinical application studies,”
Hypertension, vol. 26, pp. 485–490, 1995.
W. Lu et al., “Research on the main elements influencing blood pressure
measurement by pulse wave velocity,” Front. Med. Biol. Eng., Int. J. Jpn.
Soc. Med. Electron. Biol. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 189–199, 1992.
P. Boutouryrie and S. J. Vermeersch, “Determinants of pulse wave velocity in healthy people and in the presence of cardiovascular risk factors: ‘Establishing normal and reference values’,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 31,
pp. 2338–2350, 2010.
J. Sugawara et al., “Carotid–femoral pulse wave velocity: Impact
of different arterial path length measurements,” Artery Res., vol. 4,
pp. 27–31, 2010.
M. R. Ram et al., “A novel approach for motion artifact reduction in PPG
signals based on AS-LMS adaptive filter,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1445–1457, May 2012.
H. S. Shin et al., “Adaptive threshold method for the peak detection
of photoplethysmographic waveform,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 39,
pp. 1145–1152, 2009.
C. Ahlstrom et al., “Noninvasive investigation of blood pressure changes
using the pulse wave transit time: A novel approach in the monitoring of hemodialysis patients,” J. Artif. Organs, vol. 8, pp. 192–197,
2005.
Y. Choi et al., “Noninvasive cuffless blood pressure estimation using
pulse transit time and Hilbert–Huang transform,” Comput. Electr. Eng.,
vol. 39, pp. 103–111, 2013.
M. Nitzan et al., “The difference in pulse transit time to the toe and
finger measured by photoplethysmography,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 23,
pp. 85–93, 2002.
H. Gesche et al., “Continuous blood pressure measurement by using the
pulse transit time: Comparison to a cuff-based method,” Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 112, pp. 309–315, 2012.
J. R. Jago and A. Murray, “Repeatability of peripheral pulse measurements on ears, fingers and toes using photoelectric plethysmography,”
Clin. Phys. Physiol. Meas., vol. 9, pp. 319–330, 1988.
X. F. Teng and Y. T. Zhang, “The effect of applied sensor contact force
on pulse transit time,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 27, pp. 675–684, 2006.
M.-M. Wong et al., “An evaluation of the cuffless blood pressure
estimation based on pulse transit time technique: A half year study
on normotensive subjects,” Cardiovascular Eng., vol. 9, pp. 32–38,
2009.
D. Spulak et al., “Parameters for mean blood pressure estimation based
on electrocardiography and photoplethysmography,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Appl. Electron., 2011, pp. 1–4.
I. Jeong et al., “Using individualized pulse transit time calibration to
monitor blood pressure during exercise,” in Studies Health Technology
and Informatics, J. Mantas and A. Hasman, Eds. Burke, VA, USA: IOS
Press, 2013, vol. 190.
E. Hermeling et al., “Measurement of local pulse wave velocity: Effects of signal processing on precision,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 33,
pp. 774–781, 2007.
J. Allen and A. Murray, “Variability of photoplethysmography peripheral
pulse measurements at the ears, thumbs and toes,” IEE Proc. Sci., Meas.
Technol., vol. 147, no. 6, pp. 403–407, Nov. 2000.
J. Allen and A. Murray, “Age-related changes in peripheral pulse timing characteristics at the ears, fingers and toes,” J. Hum. Hypertension,
vol. 16, pp. 711–717, 2002.
W. G. Kubicek et al., “Impedance cardiography as a noninvasive
method of monitoring cardiac function and parameters of the cardiovascular system,” Ann. New York Acad. Sci., vol. 170, pp. 724–732,
1970.

1899

[155] J. Sola et al., “Noninvasive and nonocclusive blood pressure estimation via a chest sensor,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 12,
pp. 3505–3513, Dec. 2013.
[156] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. BME-32, no. 3, pp. 230–236, Mar. 1985.
[157] P. S. Hamilton et al., “Effect of adaptive motion-artifact reduction on
QRS detection,” Biomed. Instrum. Technol. Assoc. Adv. Med. Instrum.,
vol. 34, pp. 197–202, 2000.
[158] M. Z. U. Rahman et al., “Cancellation of artifacts in ECG signals using
block adaptive filtering techniques,” in Software Tools and Algorithms
for Biological Systems. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2010,
pp. 505–513.
[159] N. V. Thakor and Z. Yi-Sheng, “Applications of adaptive filtering to
ECG analysis: noise cancellation and arrhythmia detection,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 785–794, Aug. 1991.
[160] D. B. Newlin, “Relationships of pulse transmission times to pre-ejection
period and blood pressure,” Psychophysiology, vol. 18, pp. 316–321,
1981.
[161] L. S. Costanzo, Physiology. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Saunders, 2003.
[162] R. Kettunen et al., “Electromechanical delay in the intact dog heart,” Int.
J. Cardiol,, vol. 9, pp. 161–171, 1985.
[163] T. W. Latson et al., “Effect of nitroglycerin on aortic impedance, diameter,
and pulse-wave velocity,” Circulation Res., vol. 62, pp. 884–90, 1988.
[164] D. Xu et al., “Improved pulse transit time estimation by system identification analysis of proximal and distal arterial waveforms,” Am. J. Physiol.
Heart Circulatory Physiol., vol. 301, pp. H1389–H1395, 2011.
[165] M. Abdollahzade et al., “Data-driven lossy tube-load modeling of arterial
tree: In-human study,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 136, no. 10, pp. 101011-1–
101011–7, 2014.
[166] M. Rashedi et al., “Comparative study on tube-load modeling of arterial
hemodynamics in humans,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 135, no. 3, pp. 0310051–031005–9., 2013.
[167] A. Meloni et al., “Robust estimation of pulse wave transit time using
group delay,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 39, pp. 550–558, 2014.
[168] J.-O. Hahn et al., “Estimation of pulse transit time using two diametric blood pressure waveform measurements,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 32,
pp. 753–759, 2010.
[169] W. Chen et al., “Continuous estimation of systolic blood pressure using the pulse arrival time and intermittent calibration,” Med. Biol. Eng.
Comput., vol. 38, pp. 569–574, 2000.
[170] Y. S. Yan and Y. T. Zhang, “A novel calibration method for noninvasive blood pressure measurement using pulse transit time,” in Proc.
IEEE/EMBS 4th Int. Summer School Symp. Med. Devices Biosens., 2007,
pp. 22–24.
[171] Y. Chen et al., “Continuous and noninvasive blood pressure measurement: A novel modeling methodology of the relationship between
blood pressure and pulse wave velocity,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37,
pp. 2222–2233, 2009.
[172] F. S. Cattivelli and H. Garudadri, “Noninvasive cuffless estimation of
blood pressure from pulse arrival time and heart rate with adaptive calibration,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable Implantable Body Sensor
Netw., 2009, pp. 114–119.
[173] D. B. McCombie et al., “Motion based adaptive calibration of pulse
transit time measurements to arterial blood pressure for an autonomous,
wearable blood pressure monitor,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf.
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2008, pp. 989–992.
[174] M. Masè et al., “Feasibility of cuff-free measurement of systolic and
diastolic arterial blood pressure,” J. Electrocardiol., vol. 44, pp. 201–
207, 2011.
[175] G. Lopez et al., “Continuous blood pressure monitoring in daily life,” J.
Adv. Mech. Des., Syst., Manuf., vol. 4, pp. 179–186, 2010.
[176] P. Rai et al., “Smart healthcare textile sensor system for unhinderedpervasive health monitoring,” in Proc. SPIE, Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2012,
pp. 83440E-1–83440E-10.
[177] B. M. McCarthy et al., “An investigation of pulse transit time as a noninvasive blood pressure measurement method,” J. Phys., Conf. Series,
vol. 307, no. 1, art. 012060, pp. 1–5, 2011.
[178] C. Young et al., “Clinical evaluation of continuous noninvasive blood
pressure monitoring: Accuracy and tracking capabilities,” J. Clin. Monit.,
vol. 11, pp. 245–252, 1995.
[179] J. Muehlsteff et al., “Cuffless estimation of systolic blood pressure for
short effort bicycle tests: The prominent role of the pre-ejection period,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006,
pp. 5088–5092.
[180] Y. Yoon et al., “Non-constrained blood pressure monitoring using ECG
and PPG for personal healthcare,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 261–266,
2009.

1900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

[181] M. Gao and R. Mukkamala, “Perturbationless calibration of pulse transit
time to blood pressure,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2012, pp. 232–235.
[182] A. Jadooei et al., “Adaptive algorithm for continuous monitoring of blood
pressure using a pulse transit time,” in Proc. IEEE 33th Int. Sci. Conf.
Electron. Nanotechnol., 2013, pp. 297–301.
[183] H. T. Ma, “A blood pressure monitoring method for stroke management,”
BioMed Res. Int., vol. 2014, art. no. 571623, pp. 1–7, 2014.
[184] S. S. Thomas et al., “BioWatch 2014; A wrist watch based signal acquisition system for physiological signals including blood pressure,” in Proc.
IEEE 36th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 2286–2289.
[185] B. M. McCarthy et al., “An examination of calibration intervals required for accurately tracking blood pressure using pulse transit time
algorithms,” J. Hum. Hypertension, vol. 27, pp. 744–750, 2013.
[186] C. Douniama et al., “Acquisition of parameters for noninvasive continuous blood pressure estimation—Review of the literature and clinical
trial,” in World Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, September 7 - 12, 2009, Munich, Germany, O. Dössel and
W. Schlegel, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2010, vol. 25/4,
pp. 2151–2154.
[187] T. Wibmer et al., “Pulse transit time and blood pressure during cardiopulmonary exercise tests,” Physiol. Res., vol. 63, pp. 287–296, 2014.
[188] C. C. Y. Poon et al., “Modeling of pulse transit time under the effects
of hydrostatic pressure for cuffless blood pressure measurements,” in
Proc. IEEE/EMBS 3rd Int. Summer School Med. Devices Biosens., 2006,
pp. 65–68.
[189] E. A. Hines, Jr., and G. E. Brown, “The cold pressor test for measuring
the reactibility of the blood pressure: Data concerning 571 normal and
hypertensive subjects,” Am. Heart J., vol. 11, pp. 1–9, 1936.
[190] J. S. Petrofsky and A. R. Lind, “Aging, isometric strength and endurance,
and cardiovascular responses to static effort,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 38,
pp. 91–95, 1975.
[191] C. E. Martin et al., “Autonomic mechanisms in hemodynamic responses
to isometric exercise,” J. Clin. Invest., vol. 54, pp. 104–115, 1974.
[192] C. F. Liao et al., “Determinants of pressure wave reflection: Characterization by the transit time-independent reflected wave amplitude,” J.
Hum. Hypertension, vol. 25, pp. 665–671, 2011.
[193] G. Mancia et al., “Circulatory reflexes from carotid and extracarotid
baroreceptor areas in man,” Circulation Res., vol. 41, pp. 309–315, 1977.
[194] B. S. Bevegård and J. T. Shepherd, “Circulatory effects of stimulating
the carotid arterial stretch receptors in man at rest and during exercise,”
J. Clin. Invest., vol. 45, pp. 132–142, 1966.
[195] M. Al’Absi et al., “Cardiovascular and neuroendocrine adjustment to
public speaking and mental arithmetic stressors,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 34, pp. 266–275, 1997.
[196] C. N. Joseph et al., “Slow breathing improves arterial baroreflex sensitivity and decreases blood pressure in essential hypertension,” Hypertension, vol. 46, pp. 714–718, 2005.
[197] G. Parati et al., “Comparison of finger and intra-arterial blood pressure
monitoring at rest and during laboratory testing,” Hypertension, vol. 13,
pp. 647–55, 1989.
[198] J. H. Currens, “A comparison of the blood pressure in the lying and standing positions: A study of five hundred men and five hundred women,”
Am. Heart J., vol. 35, pp. 646–654, 1948.
[199] V. F. Froelicher and J. Myers, Exercise and the Heart, 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Saunders, 2006.
[200] J. S. Petrofsky et al., “Comparison of physiological responses of women
and men to isometric exercise,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 38, pp. 863–868,
1975.
[201] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “A note on the use of the intraclass correlation coefficient in the evaluation of agreement between two methods
of measurement,” Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 20, pp. 337–340, 1990.
[202] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Applying the right statistics: Analyses of measurement studies,” Ultrasound Obstetrics Gynecol., vol. 22,
pp. 85–93, 2003.
[203] A. Steptoe et al., “Pulse wave velocity and blood pressure change: Calibration and applications,” Psychophysiology, vol. 13, pp. 488–493, 1976.
[204] P. A. Obrist et al., “Pulse transit time: Relationship to blood pressure
and myocardial performance,” Psychophysiology, vol. 16, pp. 292–301,
1979.
[205] Y. L. Zheng et al., “An armband wearable device for overnight and cuffless blood pressure measurement,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61,
no. 7, pp. 2179–2186, Jul. 2014.
[206] G. V. Marie et al., “The relationship between arterial blood pressure and
pulse transit time during dynamic and static exercise,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 21, pp. 521–527, 1984.

[207] J. S. Kim et al., “A new approach for non-intrusive monitoring of blood
pressure on a toilet seat,” Physiological Meas., vol. 27, pp. 203–211,
2006.
[208] S. -Y. Ye et al., “Estimation of systolic and diastolic pressure using the
pulse transit time,” World Acad. Sci., Eng. Technol., vol. 67, pp. 726–731,
2010.
[209] M. A. Younessi Heravi et al., “Continuous and cuffless blood pressure
monitoring based on ECG and SpO2 signals by using microsoft visual c
sharp,” J. Biomed. Phys. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 27–32, 2014.
[210] Z. Chen et al., “Noninvasive monitoring of blood pressure using optical ballistocardiography and photoplethysmograph approaches,” in Proc.
IEEE 35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 2425–2428.
[211] Q. Liu et al., “Attenuation of systolic blood pressure and pulse transit
time hysteresis during exercise and recovery in cardiovascular patients,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 346–352, Feb. 2014.
[212] P. A. Shaltis et al., “Cuffless blood pressure monitoring using hydrostatic pressure changes,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 6,
pp. 1775–1777, Jun. 2008.
[213] E. O’Brien et al., “The British hypertension society protocol for the
evaluation of blood pressure measuring devices,” J. Hypertension,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. S43–S63, 1993.
[214] Standard for Wearable Cuffless Blood Pressure Measuring Devices, IEEE
Standard P1708/D02, 2014.
[215] L. A. Saxon, “Ubiquitous wireless ECG recording: A powerful tool
physicians should embrace,” J. Cardiovascular Electrophysiol., vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 480–483, 2013.

Ramakrishna Mukkamala (M’02) received the
B.S.E. degree in biomedical/electrical engineering
from Duke University, Durham, NC, USA, in 1993,
and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, in 1995
and 2000, respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow/Research Engineer
at the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, from 2000 to
2002. Since then, he has been on the faculty of the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA, where he is currently a Professor. His research
interests include biomedical signal processing and identification, modeling of
physiologic systems, cardiovascular physiology, and patient monitoring.
Dr. Mukkamala received the AHA Scientist Development Grant, an US
National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award, and an MSU TeacherScholar Award. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, the Editor of the Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems
Engineering Theme of the IEEE EMBS Conference Proceedings, and a Member of the IEEE EMBS Technical Committee on Cardiopulmonary Systems.

Jin-Oh Hahn (M’08) received B.S. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea, in 1997 and 1999, and the
Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA, in 2008.
He is currently with the University of Maryland,
College Park, MA, where he is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering.
His current research interests include systems and
controls approach to health monitoring, diagnostics,
and maintenance of dynamic systems.
Dr. Hahn received the Young Investigator Program Award from the Office
of Naval Research in 2014, and the Young Investigator Grant Award from the
Korean-American Scientists and Engineers Association in 2013.

MUKKAMALA et al.: TOWARD UBIQUITOUS BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING VIA PULSE TRANSIT TIME: THEORY AND PRACTICE

Omer T. Inan (S’06–M’09) received the B.S., M.S.,
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2004,
2005, and 2009, respectively.
He joined ALZA Corporation (A Johnson and
Johnson Company) in 2006, where he designed micropower circuits for iontophoretic drug delivery. In
2007, he joined Countryman Associates, Inc., Menlo
Park, CA, USA, where he was a Chief Engineer, involved in designing and developing high-end professional audio circuits and systems. From 2009–2013,
he was also a Visiting Scholar in the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Stanford University. Since 2013, he has been an Assistant Professor of electrical and computer engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA, USA. He is also an Adjunct Assistant Professor in the Wallace H. Coulter
Department of Biomedical Engineering. His research interests include noninvasive physiologic monitoring for human health and performance, and applying
novel sensing systems to chronic disease management and pediatric care. He has
published more than 50 technical articles in peer-reviewed international journals
and conferences, and has three issued and three pending patents. He received
the Gerald J. Lieberman Fellowship (Stanford University) in 2008–2009 for
outstanding scholarship.
Dr. Inan is an Associate Editor of the IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics, an Associate Editor for the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Conference, an Invited Member of the IEEE Technical Committee on
Translational Engineering for Healthcare Innovation, and Technical Program
Committee Member or the Track Chair for several other major international
biomedical engineering conferences.

Lalit K. Mestha received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Bath, England,
U.K., in 1985.
He is a Research Fellow at the Palo Alto Research
Center (PARC East) in Webster, NY, USA.
He has broad background and experience in spectral imaging, signal processing, advanced control theory and systems. Since 2011, he has been working on
wearable and video-based low cost sensing systems
for health monitoring at wide range of wavelengths.
He has 340+ technical publications including issued
patents (205), pending applications (78) and papers (66), a coauthored book
“Control of Color Imaging Systems”, and two book chapters. He taught over
24 graduate courses. He created and delivered numerous controls and sensing
technologies that are now deployed in particle accelerator systems in Fermilab,
KEK, CERN and in imaging products (iGen3/4, DocuColor series and Xerox
Color 800/1000 presses with spectral sensors developed and marketed by Xerox). These technologies have generated large revenues to Xerox.
Dr. Mestha received the 2014 Engineer of the Year Award by the Rochester
Engineering Society.

1901

Chang-Sei Kim (M’14) received the B.S. degree in
control and mechanical engineering from Pusan National University, Busan, Korea, in 1998, the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea, in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Pusan National
University in 2011.
He is currently a Research Associate at the University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. His
research interests include modeling and control with
applications to biomedical systems and industrial
automation

Hakan Töreyin received the B.S. degree in electrical and electronics engineering from the Middle East
Technical University, Ankara, Turkey, and the M.S.
and the Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2007, 2008, and 2014, respectively.
Since 2014, he is a Postdoctoral Researcher in
the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology. During his Master.s,
he was a Fulbright Scholar. His research interests include energy-efficient circuits and systems for wearable and prosthetic biomedical applications.
Dr. Treyin received the Chih Foundation Research Award in 2012. For his
paper entitled “A Low-Power, Time-Division-Multiplexed Vector-Matrix Multiplier for a Vestibular Prosthesis,” he was recognized as the North America
Geographic Finalist and received third prize at the EMBC 2014 Student Paper
Competition

Survi Kyal received the B.E. degree from India, and
the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY,
USA.
She was a Research Engineer at PARC for about
3 years since 2012. She is currently working as a
DSP Engineer at Bose Corporation, New Delhi, India. Her research interests include signal processing,
machine learning, algorithm development and implementation. She holds five U.S. patents, and has published about seven journal and conference papers

