IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1557

Data-Driven Rule Mining and Representation of
Temporal Patterns in Physiological Sensor Data
Hadi Banaee and Amy Loutfi

Abstract—Mining and representation of qualitative patterns is
a growing field in sensor data analytics. This paper leverages from
rule mining techniques to extract and represent temporal relation
of prototypical patterns in clinical data streams. The approach is
fully data-driven, where the temporal rules are mined from physiological time series such as heart rate, respiration rate, and blood
pressure. To validate the rules, a novel similarity method is introduced, that compares the similarity between rule sets. An additional aspect of the proposed approach has been to utilize natural
language generation techniques to represent the temporal relations
between patterns. In this study, the sensor data in the MIMIC online database was used for evaluation, in which the mined temporal rules as they relate to various clinical conditions (respiratory
failure, angina, sepsis, ...) were made explicit as a textual representation. Furthermore, it was shown that the extracted rule set for
any particular clinical condition was distinct from other clinical
conditions.
Index Terms—Data-driven modeling, health informatics, linguistic representation, pattern abstraction, physiological sensor
data, sensor data analysis, temporal rule mining.

I. INTRODUCTION
ITH the increase of wearable sensor technology in both
clinical and at home settings, the accumulation of physiological sensor data requires a concentrated effort on the analysis and modeling of this data [1]. Via sensor data analysis
and eventual modeling, it is possible to achieve a deeper understanding of the correlations between long-term measurements of
physiological parameters and medical conditions. Typically, this
process implies using diverse data mining techniques on sensor
data in order to acquire patient-specific models [2], [3]. In general, such approaches are either knowledge- or data-driven. Using a knowledge-driven approach leads to a supervised model of
information extraction, but information is restricted with expert
domain knowledge [4]. On the other hand, data-driven methods
enable us to discover hidden and potentially useful information
through the physiological sensor data and to build models based
on the experimental data [3]. In order to leverage from datadriven approaches, a solution whereby hidden patterns can be
captured and made explicit in human consumable terms, i.e.,
semantics, is very useful. Such an approach would not only
facilitate automatic monitoring but contribute to a deepening

W

Manuscript received December 30, 2014; revised April 15, 2015; accepted
May 19, 2015. Date of publication June 1, 2015; date of current version September 1, 2015.
The authors are with the Department of Science and Technology, Centre
for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems, Örebro University, Örebro 70182,
Sweden (e-mail: hadi.banaee@oru.se; amy.loutfi@oru.se).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2438645

and betterment of our knowledge in understanding the relation
between specific ailments and large scale physiological time series and continuous data. This paper addresses this challenge by
proposing an approach to mine temporal rules from the physiological sensor data in an unsupervised manner and to represent
such rules on a semantic level. The temporal rules are found
by first determining prototypical patterns in physiological time
series data. These prototypical patterns are then used to capture
a temporal relationship between each other. The temporal relationships between such patterns are represented as rules and
elaborated upon using natural language generation techniques
in order to be made explicit to the user.
Recently, temporal association rule mining methods have
been applied on clinical data stream to identify complex relationships of the physiological sensor observations. Sacchi et al.
[5] presented a knowledge-based approach for rules mining from
temporal labeled patterns in biomedical data. In [6], the authors
present temporal rule extraction for physiological data and address the problem of visually analyzing this kind of data. The
study in [7] proposed a novel multivariate association rule mining based on change detection for complex dataset including numerical data streams. The authors in [8] introduce an approach
to generate the rules automatically from the linguistic data of
coronary heart disease using subtractive clustering and fuzzy
inference. In [9], a temporal technique for discovering frequent
temporal patterns is proposed to extract well-known patterns of
sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome. Although these systems have
used rule mining techniques for health monitoring, none of them
have focused on modeling the individual behavior, along with a
descriptive approach to represent the output of the system.
The approach introduced in this paper presents a descriptive
model of temporal rule mining to generate meaningful rules for
physiological sensor data in a clinical setting. This modeling
also underlines the uniqueness of the rule sets for considering
cases, which means each provided rule set contains distinct rules
that are unique for their model. The validation of our proposed
approach is examined for the vital signs of individual subjects
(patients in ICU) suffering from distinct clinical conditions such
as angina, sepsis, respiratory failure, and brain injury [10]. To
evaluate the uniqueness of rule sets provided for each clinical
category, a similarity function between a pair of rule sets is
proposed. This method calculates the occurrence ratio of rules
from one rule set in another. While a preliminary version of
the proposed framework has been presented in [11], this study
has expanded the approach to involve more precise temporal relations between the prototypical patterns. These new temporal
relations lead to achieve a greater distinction between clinical
conditions. In addition, the text representation technique for the

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1558

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

extracted rules has been improved to provide a better linguistic characterization for the new temporal rules. Moreover, this
paper includes a new evaluation for individual patients, which
compares the rule sets of subjects with the rule sets of their corresponding clinical conditions to enrich the assessment of the
proposed similarity.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the
background approaches for rule mining in sequential data. In
Section III, the preparation of dataset is described. Section IV
presents the methodology to achieve a set of temporal rules
in physiological sensor data. A similarity method to compare
the rule sets, as well as a rule representation technique is also
introduced in this section. The results of rule sets for clinical
conditions are presented in Section V, following by the results
to assess the uniqueness of rule sets per clinical conditions. This
section also includes the textual outputs for the provided temporal rules. Finally, Section VI concludes with the discussions
and the direction of future work.
II. BACKGROUND
The proposed approach is novel in the medical domain in that
it addresses the temporal relation of patterns in physiological
data together with an application of natural language generation
(NLG). Still, some aspects of the proposed approach have been
studied in isolation and will be discussed here.
One of the objectives of this paper is to find prototypical
patterns in sequential data. This is usually related to the general task of pattern abstraction [12]. The main objective of
the prototypical pattern abstraction is to provide a set of representative patterns from raw time series data, which includes
two phases: 1) discretization and 2) clustering. Discretization or segmentation is a solution to transform a time series
t = (t1 , . . . , tn ) with n time points into a discrete sequence
of segments S(t) : s1 s2 . . . sm , where generally m  n. Within
different approaches for time series discretization [12], a sliding window method is the most commonly used algorithm. In a
sliding window approach, a time series t is discretized to a set of
segments S(t) by sliding a window of size w with a given overlap
on two consecutive windows. Each segment si = (ti 1 , . . . , ti w )
is a subsequence of the time series t, (1 ≤ i ≤ m). Clustering
techniques are used for categorizing the subsequences of time
series, in order to exploit a reasonable number of representative
patterns from numerous segments. The advantage of using a
clustering algorithm is that the prototypical patterns are provided
in a data-driven way without involving any domain knowledge
to customize the typical patterns. Applying a mean normalization on each segment is a part of clustering progress to minimize
the effect of amplitudes of segments. Clustering subsequences
of time series is a challenging matter discussed in the literature
[13] and dependent on the discretization algorithm and distance
method. Several clustering algorithms (e.g., k-means, hierarchical, DBscan, etc.) along the various distance methods [14] can
be applied on the data to cluster all the subsequences si ∈S(t)
of time series t into a specific number of clusters (k). Cluster
centres are considered as the prototypical patterns of the time
series. In other words, these patterns are captured by averaging

on the subsequences of clusters. Suppose Ct = {c1 , . . . , ck } is
the set of prototypical patterns (clustering centres) of time series t, in which a prototypical pattern cj = (tj 1 , . . . , tj w ) is not
necessarily an exact subsequence of time series t. Thus, in the
sequence of segments S(t), by replacing each segment si with
its cluster centre, the corresponding sequence of prototypical
patterns P (t) is generated as: P (t) : p1 . . . pm , where pi ∈Ct .
Another related field is temporal rule mining, which is a
promising approach to generate meaningful rules from sequential data [15]. Suppose I = {i1 , . . . , id } is a set of items (e.g.,
all the products in a store), and D = {d1 , . . . , dN } is a transactional database with N transactions (e.g., all the shopping lists
in a year). The support of an itemset A ⊂ I is the frequency
of the occurrence of A in all the transactions of D. The standard association rule mining provides a set of rules in form of
A ⇒ B. In this rule, A is antecedent and B is the consequent,
which are disjoint itemsets. Generally, a rule like A ⇒ B means
if the items of A occur in a transaction di , then the items of
B also will plausibly appear in di . Typical measures to show
the strength of a rule are support (sup) and confidence (conf).
Support of a rule shows how often the rule itemsets occur in the
database. Further, the confidence of rule A ⇒ B determines how
frequently the itemset B occurs in transactions, which contain
itemset A. Let PD (A) be the probability of the occurrence of an
itemset A in D. Then, support and confidence are defined [16]
as follows:
sup(A ⇒ B) = PD (A ∪ B),
conf(A ⇒ B) = pD (A|B) = sup(A ⇒ B)/pD (A).
The rules with sufficient support and confidence are typically known as strong rules. The values of minsup and minconf are specified as the thresholds for strong and meaningful
rules. Several versions of association rule mining algorithms
have been introduced to deal with sequential items (i.e., time
series) in order to give temporal rules [17]. These algorithms
adapt the definition of elements in association rules based on
the time-stamped data to involve temporal constraints between
the antecedent and the consequent of a rule. As in the case of
T
A ⇒ B, which intends “If A happens, B will happen within
time T ” [18]. Defining the temporal rules needs a fairly good
understanding of time-dependent relations between the temporal observations [19]. Based on the Allen’s temporal logic [20],
13 possible relationships between each pair of temporal patterns can be specified. For association rule mining of temporal
data, the abstracted patterns from time series are defined as the
items. Then, the set of transactions in rule mining method is constructed by all the combinations of Allen’s operations between
temporal patterns. For instance, suppose two time series t1 and
t2 , with the prototypical patterns Ct 1 and Ct 2 , also sequences
of prototypical patterns P (t1 ) : p1 . . . pm and P (t2 ) : q1 . . . qm .
To find the coincident rules between t1 and t2 , the set of items
is I = Ct 1 ∪ Ct 2 , and the set of transactions D is constructed
with all pairs of di : (pi , qi ) according to the “equal” operation
(1 ≤ i ≤ m). The next step would be to apply the described association rule mining algorithm on the provided transactions D
and items I. The output of rule mining is a set of temporal rules
ρ
R = {r1 , r2 , . . . }, where each rule ri : A ⇒ B represents the

BANAEE AND LOUTFI: DATA-DRIVEN RULE MINING AND REPRESENTATION OF TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN PHYSIOLOGICAL SENSOR DATA

1559

TABLE I
CLINICAL CONDITIONS AND THEIR SUBJECTS IN MIMIC DATABASE, AFTER
REMOVING UNRELIABLE MEASUREMENTS
Clinical
Conditions
Resp. failure
Bleed
CHF
Brain injury
Sepsis
MI
Angina
Postop Valve
Postop CABG

No. of Subjects
(Records)

No. of Male/
Female

10 (17)
2 (4)
13 (17)
2 (3)
4 (5)
6 (8)
2 (4)
2 (5)
3 (3)

7/3
1/1
6/7
1/1
3/1
2/4
1/1
0/2
1/2

Age: [min,max] Average Length
average
of records
[38,90] 67
[45,70] 57
[54,92] 75
[68,75] 70
[27,88] 64
[63,80] 68
[67,68] 67
[49,67] 58
[49,80] 66

32 h 25 m
44 h 45 m
33 h 15 m
21 h 30 m
31 h 20m
42 h 35 m
41 h 10 m
40 h 45 m
40 h 20 m

repetitive relation of itemsets A and B along the operation ρ,
where A, B ⊂ I and ρ∈{‘equal’, ‘start’, ‘meet’, . . .}. While
these approaches have been applied to physiological data [6],
[21], they lack comparing the provided rule sets in various medical conditions. This comparison can reveal important insights
about the data, and the approach presented in this paper attempts
to address this problem.
III. DATA DESCRIPTION
A challenge in the evaluation is to find reliable datasets consisting of long-term measurements of physiological parameters (vital signs) where such sensor data are annotated with
ground-truth information about patients’ conditions. Although
the proposed approach is applicable to a variety of settings (ICU,
ambulatory, at-home monitoring), established benchmarks are
more readily available from sensor datasets in a clinical setting.
Thus, a dataset of physiological sensor data from the online
PhysioNet database is used [22].
Throughout this paper, the numeric dataset of multiparameter
intelligent monitoring for intensive care (MIMIC) database1 is
used. This dataset contains periodic numeric measurements of
physiological variables, such as heart rate, blood pressure, respiration rate, and oxygen saturation, obtained from bedside ICU
monitors [10]. The entire database includes multiple recordings
with various lengths of measurements (from 1 to 77 h), which
are acquired from 90 subjects (patients) with different ages and
genders. The subjects in this database have been manually labeled into different clinical categories related to their medical
problems. In this study, the numeric records of the subjects
from nine major clinical conditions have been selected to be analyzed and modeled. The considered clinical conditions include
respiratory failure, bleed (loss of blood from the circulatory
system), chronic heart failure (CHF), brain injury, sepsis, myocardial infarction, (MI, i.e., heart attack), Angina, postop valve
(heart valve surgery), and postop coronary artery bypass grafting surgery (CABG). General properties of the nine clinical
conditions and the information about the selected subjects are
listed in Table I. Here, the subjects with records consisting of
at least 12 h of continuous readings are considered in order to
1 physionet.org/physiobank/database/mimicdb/numerics

Fig. 1. Example of the raw sensor data from variables heart rate (HR), mean
of blood pressure (BP), and respiration rate (RR).

facilitate the identification of patterns over longer time horizons.
Three physiological variables have been chosen to be processed:
heart rate (HR), mean of blood pressure (BP), and respiration
rate (RR). Each measurement consists of long-term sequential
data (i.e., time series) with a resolution of 1 Hz. As an example,
Fig. 1 shows 7 h of sensor readings from the raw sensor data
of a patient suffering from the CHF condition for variables HR,
BP, and RR.
Working with the clinical measurements in the MIMIC
database is challenging, due to dealing with incomplete, sparse,
nonuniform, and irregular raw data [23]. Before analyzing the
records of the subjects, the measurements are preprocessed in
the following manner: 1) the sensor readings with unreliable
values (e.g., zero values for heart rate) are discarded2 ; and 2)
a local regression method (LOESS) as a smoothing function
[24] is applied on readings to reduce the amount of noisy data.
After cleansing the dataset, 45 subjects in 9 clinical conditions
are chosen to be analyzed, which include reliable measurements
with all three variables.
IV. METHODOLOGY
The general methodology of this study is to apply temporal rule mining on physiological sensor data. This methodology
provides a descriptive model of rule mining, which underlines
the uniqueness of distinct rule sets, along with a textual representation of them. This section presents the way of characterizing the approaches discussed in Section II to generate temporal
rules for physiological time series data. Fig. 2 shows the general
phases of the proposed methodology, which are described in the
following sections.
A. Temporal Rules in Physiological Sensor Data
To apply an association rule mining approach on each clinical condition from the MIMIC dataset, all the selected records
of the subjects with the same condition are analyzed together.
The considered measurement for each condition includes three
mentioned variables HR, BP, and RR. Suppose three time series
tHR , tBP , and tRR , with the same length of n corresponded to the
measurements in HR, BP, and RR, respectively. The rule mining algorithm is applied to these time series in following steps:
prototypical pattern abstraction, and temporal rule mining.
2 The ranges of accepted values for three health parameters are:
20<H R<200, 30<BP <220, and 5<RR<100.

1560

Fig. 2.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

General methodology for temporal rule mining in sensor data.

1) Prototypical Pattern Abstraction: In order to provide the
sequence of prototypical patterns for each time series, the algorithm starts with the discretization method, introduced in Section
II. The first step is to determine the size of sliding window (w).
The length of overlap of two consecutive windows is set to half
of window’s size. By applying the discretization method to the
time series tHR , tBP , and tRR , the sequences of segments will
be obtained for physiological variables as S(tHR ), S(tBP ), and
S(tRR ), where |S(tv )| = 2×(n/w)−1, and v∈{HR, BP, RR}.
The next phase is to extract the prototypical patterns of each
time series using clustering methods. Here, a k-means clustering is applied to each set of segments, in order to categorize
the segments into a set of clusters (k). In this algorithm, k
segments are selected as initial centres. Then, other segments
are assigned to these centres based on their similarity and the
centre of each cluster is updated. This process is repeated until the centres do not change [25]. To optimize the number of
clusters [26], a range of values is validated by considering the
modeling results (described in Section V-A). Before applying
clustering, each subsequence is prepared as follows: If there are
several artifacts in a subsequence, then this subsequence is not
considered for further processing. The maximum number of allowed artifacts in a subsequence should be less than half of the
length of the subsequence. After that, each segment si ∈S(tv )
(with the average value μs i ) is normalized to get zero mean. This
normalization will invalidate the amplitude of segment values.
The k-means algorithm classifies the preprocessed segments of
S(tv ) into k clusters, with the set of centres Ct v . Then, the corresponding sequence of the prototypical patterns P (tv ) is defined
as: P (tv ):p1 . . . p|S (t v )| , where pi ∈Ct v and 1≤i≤|S(tv )|. It is
worth noting that applying various distance functions implies
various amount of computational effort. The Euclidean distance
is employed in the clustering algorithm, since it provides an
effective computation of distances between segments. An example of prototypical patterns from a sensor reading is shown
in Fig. 3(a), which depicts the cluster centres obtained from
HR sensor data in CHF condition (w = 180, k = 7). Fig. 3(b)

Fig. 3. Example of prototypical patterns for HR data in CHF condition. (a)
Cluster centres (C t H R ) as prototypical patterns, (b) Sequence of prototypical
patterns (P t H R : p 1 . . . p m )

presents the sequence of prototypical patterns (Pt HR ) for the first
2 h of HR data shown in Fig. 1.
2) Temporal Rule Mining: So far, the sequences of patterns
P (tHR ), P (tBP ), and P (tRR ), with size of m, are obtained from
the prototypical pattern abstraction. Association rule mining is
a suitable approach to discover the coherence relations between
the patterns occurred among the multivariables. In this study, the
focus is on the association rules between two pairs of physiological time series, i.e., heart rate with blood pressure (HR&BP),
and heart rate with respiration rate (HR&RR), although, more
compound relations are also applicable by applying complex
temporal abstraction techniques [27]. As discussed in Section
II, the main requirement for association rule mining is to identify the set of items I and the set of transactions D. While
considering the relation of HR and BP patterns, the set of items
I includes all the prototypical patterns in both Ct HR and Ct BP .
Different temporal relations can be defined on the discovered
patterns to specify the transactions, but in this study, a modified
set of relations between the patterns in physiological data are
specified. Consider two multivariate signals HR and BP with the
sequences of patterns P (tHR ) and P (tBP ), respectively. Let P1
represents one pattern in P (tHR ) and P2 represents at most two
patterns in P (tBP ). Three temporal relations between P1 and
P2 are considered: “P1 equals P2 ”, “P1 before P2 ”, and “P1
after P2 ”. It is worth noting that further temporal relations such
as meets and overlaps are only slightly different with before
and after relations. Likewise, the relations during, starts, and
finishes are mostly covered by equals relation. So, for all the
patterns in the sequences P (tHR ) and P (tBP ), three corresponding transactions for ‘equals’, ‘before’, and ‘after’ relations are
defined as follows:
pi equals qi :

dei =(pi , qi )

pi before qi+1 , qi+2 :
pi after qi−1 , qi−2 :

dbi =(pi , qi+1 ), (pi , qi+2 )
dai =(pi , qi−1 ), (pi , qi−2 )

where pi ∈P (tHR ) and qi ∈P (tBP ). Note that the relation “P1
before P2 ” is equivalent to the relation “P2 after P1 ”, which

BANAEE AND LOUTFI: DATA-DRIVEN RULE MINING AND REPRESENTATION OF TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN PHYSIOLOGICAL SENSOR DATA

1561

Fig. 4. Three temporal relations between one pattern P 1 in P (tHR ) and at
most two patterns P 2 in P (tBP ).

means the opposite relations between BP and HR are also covered by this definition. Fig. 4 shows the relational positions
of patterns pi , and qi−2 . . . qi+2 in their corresponding pattern
sequences for three defined temporal relations.
The Apriori algorithm introduced in [28] is an efficient algorithm for association rule mining from a set of transactions
D, which initializes all possible itemsets from the items I, and
then, generates a set of sufficient rules like A⇒B based on the
cooccurrence of A and B in the transactions. This algorithm is
based on the symbolic order of items, which can destroy the
temporal relations in sequential data. However, in our approach,
the temporal relations of the patterns are implicitly specified in
the definition of the introduced transactions. In other words, the
Apriori algorithm is applied, but with an adapted set of transactions Dρ including defined temporal relations as their items:
Dρ = {dei , dbi , dai |1≤i≤|P (tHR )|}. Using the defined set of temporal transactions and the set of items (prototypical patterns), the
ρ
generated rule is formulated as: r:A ⇒ B, where the antecedent
(A) and consequent (B) can be any of two subsequences P1
and P2 that are cooccurred in Dρ . The rule r also expresses
additional information about the temporal relation ρ between
p and q, such that ρ∈{‘equal’, ‘before’, ‘after’}. Applying the
Apriori algorithm with accurate values for minsup and minconf
leads to have a set of temporal rules R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rn } as a
result. This rule set consists of the main repetitive relations of
physiological data in sensor observations.
B. Temporal Rule Set Similarity
In this paper, a similarity function is proposed to compute a
ratio between the number of rules from one rule set that occur
in another rule set. The provided temporal rules can be extended to represent the individual behavior of vital signs in a
given condition. This similarity function can evaluate the distinction of temporal rule sets. Suppose there are two rule sets
R1 = {r1 , . . . , rn 1 } and R2 = {r1 , . . . , rn 2 } including m and
n rules, respectively. The overlapping ratio of rule sets is a basic
measure to investigate the common properties of rule sets with
the same sets of items [29]. The overlapping ratio as a similarity function between a pair of rule sets is typically defined as:
Overlap(R1 , R2 ) = |R1 ∩R2 |/|R1 ∪R2 |.
In a standard rule association mining with a constant database
of items, counting the intersection of the rules in R1 and R2 is
straightforward, since it is easy to check the equivalence of rules.
Two rules ri :A⇒B and rj :C⇒D are equivalent if their corresponding itemsets are equal: A = C and B = D. However,
the main issue in temporal rule sets produced in our approach
is that the sets of items in different rule sets are completely

distinct. In other word, for different cases, there are different
sets of prototypical patterns (items), and consequently, different
itemsets in the final rules. Thus, finding the overlap of temporal rule sets with this function is infeasible and we propose an
alternative solution as follows.
Occurrence Ratio: Suppose IR 1 and IR 2 are the most likely
distinct sets of items (patterns) for the temporal rule sets R1 and
ρ
R2 , respectively. To find the equivalent rule to ri :A ⇒ B∈R1
in rule set R2 (if exists), the approach searches for the most
ρ

analogous rule rj :A ⇒ B  ∈R2 , which is sufficiently similar to
ri . Here, the similarity of itemsets is measured through the use
of the pattern matching algorithms to find the best matched
patterns [30]. If rj exists, then one overlap is found between R1
and R2 , which means A ≈ A , B ≈ B  , and ρ = ρ . It is notable
that the corresponding itemsets need to be approximately equal,
whereas the temporal relations have to be exactly the same.
Searching for the occurrence of one rule in a rule set is presented in Algorithm 1. This algorithm shows how to find the
most analogous rule from R to an input rule r (with the assumption of r∈R).
/
If such a matched rule rm can be detected
in R, it derives that the rule r most likely appears in R as well.
The next step is to measure how strong a rule occurs in another
rule set. The method for checking the occurrence of a rule in
another rule set leads to define a non-symmetric similarity measure, called OccurrenceR 1 (R2 ), the Occurrence ratio of R1 in
R2 (previously called Appearance ratio in [11]). This measure
represents how often rules with high support and confidence
that appear in R1 also occur in R2 , considering their strength
in R2 . It means that while finding the closest rules of R2 to the
rules in R1 , the values of support and confidence of matched
rules are also considered in the occurrence ratio. Algorithm 2
presents the details of the computing occurrence ratio measure,

1562

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE II
TEXTUAL REPRESENTATION OF RULES WITH TEMPORAL RELATIONS
ρ

P 1 equals P 2
P 1 before P 2
P 1 after P 2

ρ

P1 ⇒ P2

P2 ⇒ P1

when [P 1 ], at the same time [P 2 ].
when [P 1 ], after that [P 2 ].
when [P 1 ], before that [P 2 ].

when [P 2 ], at the same time [P 1 ].
when [P 2 ], before that [P 1 ].
when [P 2 ], after that [P 1 ].

which is scaled by the summation on the support and confidence
of the rules in R2 . Evidently, if the occurrence ratio of a rule set
in another is considerably high, it shows these two rule sets are
meaningfully associated. In contrast, if the ratio is substantially
low, it indicates of few connections between rule sets, in a sense
that two rule sets are distinct.
C. Temporal Rule Representation
One descriptive way of representing the rules is to generate
a textual representation of them for the end user of the system.
Simple representation of a typical rule, r:A⇒B in natural language text is to put the relation and the definition of the itemsets
as the antecedent and consequent in a textual format such as:
“When (If, while) A occurs (happens), then (after that, at the
same time) B will occur.” For instance, in the example of market
basket [31], a rule could be explained as: “Customers who buy
bread and cheese are likely to buy milk.” The main challenge
ρ
in textual representation of the temporal rules as r:A ⇒ B is to
involve the temporal relation (ρ) into the rule representation. As
mentioned before, for two subsequences of patterns P1 and P2
ρ
ρ
with the relation ρ, both temporal rules P1 ⇒ P2 and P2 ⇒ P1
can be generated through the association rule mining method.
Although the temporal relation is same for these two rules,
the meaning and interpretation of them are practically different, because the roles of antecedent and consequent have been
swapped. For this reason, a linguistic mapping from temporal
rules to their messages should be defined. Table II illustrates a
mapping for these two rules with the itemsets P1 and P2 while
considering the defined temporal relations ρ∈{‘equal’, ‘before’,
‘after’}.
Another challenge of textual rule representation while dealing
with patterns is how to explain the antecedent and consequent
patterns as temporal subsequences in a meaningful way. Since
the prototypical patterns are extracted by a data-driven approach,
there is no predefined characterization of them by the expert.
Therefore, a linguistic description of the prototypical patterns
of the subsequences P1 and P2 should be generated in the place
holders denoted by [P1 ] and [P2 ] in Table II. For instance, an
output text like “After a gradual decrease in pattern P1 , then
pattern P2 has a big rise and then a sharp drop” is understandable, in order to interpret the behavior of patterns in discovered
rules for the end user. A text generation method proposed in
[32] provides a framework to detect and represent partial trends
in sequential patterns. This approach employed the common architecture of NLG [33] in order to generate natural text from
numeric data. The method first detect the partial trends of an
input time series based on their numeric features such as slope

and duration. Then, it characterizes the partial trends in a textual
form using a mapping function between numeric and symbolic
terms such as: sudden increase, steady decay, much fluctuated,
and so on. By employing this method, the patterns in a temporal
rule can be described based on their partial trends. Basically,
the benefit of using natural language generation to represent the
trends is that all the temporal rules from a set of physiological
time series data could be summarized in a textual output, which
helps the end user to get a global perspective of the repetitive
patterns and their temporal correlations in a massive amount of
measurements.
V. RESULT AND EVALUATION
This section presents the experimental results of the rule sets
in clinical settings from MIMIC database records, with evaluating the uniqueness of the generated rules for each clinical
condition. In addition, the occurrence ratios of rule sets from
individual subjects in clinical conditions are also tested to assess the closeness of the rules provided from the subjects and
their corresponding conditions. Finally, this section is followed
by a sample output of natural language generation to represent
textual characterization of the provided temporal rules.
A. Temporal Rules in Clinical Setting
As discussed in Section III, the raw data are fetched from
MIMIC database. The records of three health parameters heart
rate (HR), blood pressure (BP), and respiration rate (RR) are
considered from clinical conditions, along a number of patients
within these conditions. The average length of available measurements for each clinical condition in the dataset is about
250 h and the average for each subject is around 50 h. Based on
the phases shown in Fig. 2, the temporal rule mining approach
is applied on two pairs of sensor data: HR&BP and HR&RR, to
nine clinical conditions described in Table I. The output model
of the rule mining approach would be thus a collection of rule
sets for clinical conditions.
Parameter Selection: To select the optimal values during pattern abstraction and rule mining phases, a voting approach is
used considering the strength of the generated rules. Four parameters are optimized: window size, number of clusters, with
considering the best thresholds for support and confidence. The
window size is applied between 1 and 5 min and for cluster
numbers are set between 5 and 9. Due to the small number
of patients in the dataset, optimizing the parameters by applying rule mining on whole the records will lead to overfit the
model and does not give an indication of how well the method
will generalize to unknown datasets. So, to avoid overfitting the
model, a leave-one-out cross-validation approach [34] is used
for finding the best parameters. In this approach, for each clinical condition, we leave out a patients records in each fold of the
validation as hold-out set and model the rest of the patients as
train set. After generating the models for both train and holdout sets for each combination of parameters, the validation of
parameters are examined with two measures: Interest and Jmeasure, which indicate the quality of rules in different aspects
[35]. By voting between the top rules with the highest values in

BANAEE AND LOUTFI: DATA-DRIVEN RULE MINING AND REPRESENTATION OF TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN PHYSIOLOGICAL SENSOR DATA

1563

Fig. 5. Result of cross-validation approach on a selected iteration for MI
condition. The diagram shows the values of measures Interest and J-measure
for various values of parameters w and k in both train set and holding set.

these measures on the hold-out sets in all the iterations (folds),
this approach is able to find the parameters that make the best
average results. More precisely, with different values of w and
k, all the models (on the train and test datasets) are generated
in each clinical condition. Then, with different thresholds on
support and confidence, the measures Interest and J-measure
are calculated. By voting on the highest results of measures in
whole the models, the best values of parameters are selected
as: w = 180 and k = 7. These values are obtained with the
best cut-off values minsup = 0.05 and minconf = 0.45. Fig. 5
depicts an example of applying the cross validation approach
on MI clinical condition. This run includes six iterations (folds)
for six patients in MI condition. But just to illustrate the values
of two measures for each parameter, the figure shows the results of just one iteration. As shown in Fig. 5, the best values of
measures Interest and J-measure are achieved by the mentioned
values of w and k for a selected hold-out set.
The preliminary results of rule sets in clinical conditions have
been presented in [11], considering just the after relation in patterns of HR and the other two variables. In order to compare
the results in this extended version, the previous work is called
TRM-ρ1 (temporal rule mining with 1 relation) and the current
study TRM-ρ3 (temporal rule mining with three relations). It is
worth mentioning that the number of temporal relations is just
one aspect of the distinctions between these two approaches.
Fig. 6 shows the number of rules provided in both TRM-ρ1 and
TRM-ρ3 approaches in relation to the multivariate time series
HR&BP and HR&RR in each clinical condition. The output sets
of temporal rules indicate a collection of data-driven features
that are independently able to describe their corresponding clinical conditions. In order to illustrate the variation of prototypical
patterns among the temporal rules, a selection of distinct temporal rules from different rule sets with different temporal relations
is represented in Fig. 7.
B. Evaluation of Rule Set Similarity in Clinical Conditions
This section evaluates the uniqueness of rule sets for clinical
conditions. For this reason, the new evaluation method based
on the similarity function proposed in Section IV-B is applied

Fig. 6. Number of rules for clinical conditions in TRM-ρ3 and TRM-ρ1 methods, in relation to the multivariate time series HR&BP and HR&RR.

Fig. 7. Selection of distinct temporal rules generated from physiological data
in clinical conditions using TRM-ρ3 approach. (a) Bleed, ‘equal’, sup=30%,
conf=55%, (b) MI, ‘equal’, sup=25%, conf=64%, (c) Angina, ‘before’,
sup=90%, conf=88%, (d) Valve, ‘before’, sup=80%, conf=83%, (e) MI, ‘after’, sup=60%, conf=70%, (f) Sepsis, ‘after’, sup=50%, conf=86%.

to measure the occurrence ratio of rules in other rule sets. This
evaluation is first applied on the rule sets of clinical conditions
to show the distinctness of rule sets. In addition, the rule sets for
a selection of subjects in the same dataset are compared with all
the clinical conditions to consider the closeness of subjects to
their corresponding conditions.
1) Occurrence Ratio of Rule Sets in Clinical Conditions:
Based on the rule sets achieved from the TRM-ρ3 method for
clinical conditions, the evaluation approach is applied to each
pair of rule sets. For nine clinical categories, the occurrence
ratios for temporal rule sets are calculated. As an example of
output ratios, the matrix in Table III shows the obtained values of
the occurrence ratio for temporal rule sets in HR&RR time series.

1564

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE III
OCCURRENCE RATIOS OF RULE SETS FOR EACH PAIR OF CLINICAL CONDITIONS
IN MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES HR&RR, USING TRM-ρ 3

Resp.
failure
Bleed
CHF
Brain
injury
Sepsis
MI
Angina
Postop
valve
Postop
CABG

Resp.
failure

Bleed

CHF

Brain Sepsis
injury

MI

Angina Post-op Post-op
Valve CABG

–

67%

0.2%

0%

3%

3%

2%

3%

7%

61%
8%
11%

–
4%
8%

1%
–
0%

6%
1%
–

8%
3%
0%

2%
16%
1%

8%
3%
0.5%

3%
0%
2%

0.5%
38%
13%

3%
2%
1%
12%

3%
14%
49%
2%

3%
27%
5%
1%

0%
4%
1%
10%

–
0%
0.1%
1%

0%
–
1%
16%

1%
3%
–
9%

0%
32%
3%
–

0%
15%
27%
55%

1%

0.5%

32%

41%

0.5%

6%

14%

65%

–

Fig. 8. Boxplot diagram of the occurrence ratios between one clinical condition’s rule set and the other conditions with TRM-ρ3 (each row in Table III), in
comparison with the results of TRM-ρ1 .

Since the occurrence ratio is a nonsymmetric similarity function, the values in Table III are not symmetric. For instance, the
OccurrenceR MI (RCHF ) is 27%, whereas OccurrenceR CHF (RMI ) is
16%. The main reason for this variation is that the occurrence
ratio is a weighted function that is calculated based on the support and confidence of the rules but in the second rule set. So, a
subset of temporal rules with strong support and confidence values in their own rule set may appear in another rule set, but with
weak corresponding support and confidence in second one. The
results in the matrix show the low occurrence ratios between the
rule sets of clinical conditions.
In comparison with the former method TRM-ρ1 , the proposed approach for temporal rule mining TRM-ρ3 is also providing much lower values of occurrence ratios between clinical
conditions, since the temporal rules are more specialized using
extra temporal relations. Fig. 8 depicts a graphical comparison
between the results of the occurrence ratios based on two approaches TRM-ρ1 and TRM-ρ3 in a boxplot diagram. This figure
presents that most of the values are close to the zero ratio, but
much closer in for the TRM-ρ3 method. More precisely, for the
occurrence ratios in clinical conditions for time series, more
than 90% of all occurrence ratios are lower than 30%, besides,
83% of them are lower than 15% (in TRM-ρ1 it was 70% lower

TABLE IV
SUBJECTS WITH THE SAME CONDITION IN THEIR NEAREST RULE SETS
Selected Clinical
Condition

CHF
MI
Resp. failure
Sepsis

No. of Subjects

No. of Nearest
Conditions With
Same Label

Percentage (%)

13
6
10
4

11
5
6
3

85%
83%
60%
75%

than 15%). So, this evaluation guarantees that the temporal rule
mining methods generate distinctive rule sets, which the rules
in one category of clinical condition can sufficiently provide an
individual behavior of its vital signs.
2) Occurrence Ratio of Subjects in Clinical Conditions: Another aspect to validate the performance of rule set similarity
measure is to show the robustness of this measure for analogous
rule sets. For this reason, a number of individual subjects with
certain clinical condition labels is considered through the use of
TRM-ρ3 . The temporal rule set of each subject is then compared
with the rule sets of each clinical category via measuring their
occurrence ratio in the rule sets of clinical conditions, using a
leave-one-out method to avoid overfitting the modeling and the
comparison of rule sets. If the occurrence ratio of a subject is
higher in its corresponding clinical condition, rather than other
conditions, then it will show the closeness of the subject’s rule
set and its corresponding condition’s model. Since the number of subjects in some clinical conditions are not enough, to
avoid having bias results, the subjects with four major clinical
labels, respiratory failure, CHF, MI, sepsis (33 subjects in total)
are tested. The other clinical conditions do not have enough
subjects to perform this evaluation. The rule set of a subject
sbj is compared with every rule set achieved from nine clinical
conditions Ci through the calculation of OccurrenceR sbj (RC i ),
where 1 ≤i ≤ 9. For each subject, two clinical conditions with
top occurrence ratios have been selected as nearest conditions
to the subject. If the nearest conditions to a subject involve
the same clinical label as the subject’s label, it shows a rich
similarity between the rule sets of subject and its corresponding clinical condition. The number of subjects with the same
clinical label in their nearest conditions can indicate the correctness of the proposed evaluation. Table IV shows the three
major clinical conditions, with the number of subjects in each
of them, in which their clinical labels have been revealed as one
of their nearest conditions. For the subjects in CHF, MI, and
sepsis conditions, most of the rule sets were significantly close
to their clinical model. However, the behavior of rule sets for
respiratory failure condition and its subjects are not adequately
similar.
C. Textual Representation of Temporal Rules
As described in Section IV-C, the significant tasks in temporal rule representation are 1) characterizing the main trends in
each of antecedent and consequent as patterns and 2) realizing
the form of temporal relation in a provided rule (see Table II).

BANAEE AND LOUTFI: DATA-DRIVEN RULE MINING AND REPRESENTATION OF TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN PHYSIOLOGICAL SENSOR DATA

TABLE V
TEXTUAL REPRESENTATION OF THE ACQUIRED RULES IN FIG. 7
Rules in
Fig. 7

Textual Representation

Rule (a)

In bleed condition, occasionally when the heart rate normally rises (7 beats)
and steadily decreases (4 beats), at the same time the blood pressure
normally rises (10 units).
In MI condition, usually when the respiration rate decays and rises in a very
small range, simultaneously the heart rate decays and rises very slowly.
In angina condition, most frequently if the heart rate sharply decreases (10
beats) and suddenly rises (13 beats), later, the blood pressure reduces very
slowly.
In postop valve condition, most of the time the respiration rate sharply
increases (7 breaths) and steadily reduces (3 breaths, just before that, the
heart rate decreases in a very small range.
In MI condition, usually after the heart rate steadily increases (5 beats) and
normally reduces (2 beats), the blood pressure fluctuates in a very small
range.
In sepsis condition, most of the time before the respiration rate normally rises
(2 breaths) and suddenly decreases (5 breaths), the heart rate steadily
decreases (6 breaths).

Rule (b)
Rule (c)

Rule (d)

Rule (e)

Rule (f)

The partial trends in the patterns of a temporal rule are textually
represented based on their numeric features and conduct, which
is proposed in [32]. The linguistic demonstration of the temporal relation between the antecedent (here, HR) and consequent
(here, BP and RR) of a rule is provided by a variety of words that
are employed from expert knowledge. For instance, the equal
relation is presented with the terms “at the same time, simultaneously, concurrently, etc.” or the relations before and after
are shown with “before that, earlier, just after that, later, afterwards, etc.” Moreover, the strength of a temporal rule based on
its support and confidence values, can be also represented in the
corresponding sentence. It provides a meaningful impression
about the rule strength for the reader of the textual messages.
Various terms and phrases for the values of support and confidence can be used. As an example the sentence of a temporal
rule with a high confidence value will be started with the terms
like: “most of the time” or “commonly”. Table V shows the
generated textual representation of the acquired temporal rules
in Fig. 7. In these output examples, each sentence describes a
discovered temporal rule to specify the temporal relation inside
the rule with the partial trends in each of the appeared prototypical patterns, following by corresponding clinical condition.
An advantage of generating final output in natural language is
a textual description that is understandable and interpretable by
the end user of the system.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper has presented an approach for automatic rule mining and representation from physiological sensor data considering the uniqueness of rules in clinical conditions. The main role
of rule mining as a data-driven method is to model the behavior
of temporal patterns in physiological data streams to produce a
qualitative rule set in a clinical setting. The proposed approach
has considered nine clinical conditions such as angina, sepsis,
and respiratory failure, along with three physiological sensor
data (i.e., heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration rate). This
study has addressed 1) data-driven rule mining for temporal

1565

patterns, 2) distinctive modeling of the rule sets of clinical conditions, and 3) textual representation of the models in a human
readable output. To evaluate the uniqueness of the provided rule
sets, a rule set similarity, called occurrence ratio, has been introduced, which measure the occurrence of rules in other rule
sets. The resulting, rule mining proposed in this paper has revealed meaningful correlations of temporal patterns in sensor
data. Although the prototypical patterns extracted from different
physiological time series are rather similar, temporal rule mining provides a model to extract condition specific rules which
can be computed using the occurrence ratio as a measure. Comparing to the previous study [11], this approach was able to
extract more distinctive rule set, which most likely is related to
the expression of richer temporal relations.
The advantage of providing distinctive rules for clinical conditions is to enable physicians to discover specific behaviors of
vital signs, which are not necessarily recorded in medical ontologies. The proposed approach is able to exploit unseen and
distinctive information per patient or condition. This information can be used by clinicians for individual decision making.
Some critical points in this study involve filtering specific rules
truly capturing only the end user relevant information. This so
far has not been done, and consequently, the resulting natural language expressions would need to undergo a proper and
rigorous user evaluation. Nevertheless, extra effort has been
placed on making a general approach that is suitable for different datasets of sensor data, in order to quantify the specific
behavior of involving cases such as patients in a clinical setting
or elderly at home healthcare. Another contribution has been
applying natural language generation techniques for rule representation. Although it should be noted that at this stage of the
work, the semantic model used to improve the quality of text
is limited. In the future, the text output of temporal rules will
need experimental evaluations in order to perform an adequate
assessment of the outputted text. Moreover, an eventual line
of development would be to focus on finding deviations from
temporal rule sets where these rules can capture a personalized
representation of a patient, thereby enabling a system that can
detect an individual’s deviation from their own rule set.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Chen, S. S. Fuller, C. Friedman, and W. Hersh, Medical Informatics:
Knowledge Management and Data Mining in Biomedicine. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2006, vol. 8.
[2] D. Sow, D. S. Turaga, and M. Schmidt, “Mining of sensor data in healthcare: A survey,” in Managing and Mining Sensor Data. New York, NY,
USA: Springer, 2013, pp. 459–504.
[3] H. Banaee, M. U. Ahmed, and A. Loutfi, “Data mining for wearable
sensors in health monitoring systems: A review of recent trends and challenges,” Sensors, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 17 472–17 500, 2013.
[4] I. Yoo, P. Alafaireet, M. Marinov, K. Hernandez, R. Gopidi, J.-F. Chang,
and L. Hua, “Data mining in healthcare and biomedicine: A survey of the
literature,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 2431–2448, 2012.
[5] L. Sacchi, R. Bellazzi, C. Larizza, R. Porreca, and P. Magni, “Learning
rules with complex temporal patterns in biomedical domains,” in Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2005, pp. 23–32.
[6] C. Combi and A. Sabaini, “Extraction, analysis, and visualization of
temporal association rules from interval-based clinical data,” in Artificial Intelligence in Medicine. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2013,
pp. 238–247.

1566

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

[7] J. He, Y. Zhang, G. Huang, Y. Xin, X. Liu, H. L. Zhang, S. Chiang,
and H. Zhang, “An association rule analysis framework for complex
physiological and genetic data,” in Health Information Science. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2012, pp. 131–142.
[8] L. Muflikhah and Y. Wahyuningsih, “Fuzzy rule generation for diagnosis
of coronary heart disease risk using substractive clustering method,” Softw.
Eng. Appl., vol. 6, pp. 372–378, 2013.
[9] M. R. Álvarez, P. Félix, and P. Cariñena, “Discovering metric temporal
constraint networks on temporal databases,” Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 58,
no. 3, pp. 139–154, 2013.
[10] G. B. Moody and R. G. Mark, “A database to support development and
evaluation of intelligent intensive care monitoring,” in Proc. Comput.
Cardiol., 1996, pp. 657–660.
[11] H. Banaee, M. U. Ahmed, and A. Loutfi, “Descriptive modelling of clinical
conditions with data-driven rule mining in physiological data,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Health Informat., 2015, pp. 103–113.
[12] T.-C. Fu, “A review on time series data mining,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 164–181, 2011.
[13] A. M. Denton, C. A. Besemann, and D. H. Dorr, “Pattern-based timeseries subsequence clustering using radial distribution functions,” Knowl.
Inf. Syst., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2009.
[14] T. W. Liao, “Clustering of time series data survey,” Pattern Recog.,
vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1857–1874, 2005.
[15] T. Schluter and S. Conrad, “About the analysis of time series with temporal association rule mining,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Data
Mining, 2011, pp. 325–332.
[16] P.-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar, Introduction to Data Mining.
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2006, vol. 1.
[17] S. Kotsiantis and D. Kanellopoulos, “Association rules mining: A recent
overview,” GESTS Int. Trans. Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 32, pp. 71–82, 2006.
[18] G. Das, K.-I. Lin, H. Mannila, G. Renganathan, and P. Smyth, “Rule
discovery from time series,” in Proc. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
1998, vol. 98, pp. 16–22.
[19] L. Sacchi, C. Larizza, C. Combi, and R. Bellazzi, “Data mining with temporal abstractions: learning rules from time series,” Data Mining Knowl.
Discovery, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 217–247, 2007.
[20] J. F. Allen, “Towards a general theory of action and time,” Artif. Intell.,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 123–154, 1984.
[21] M. Ohsaki, Y. Sato, H. Yokoi, and T. Yamaguchi, “A rule discovery support
system for sequential medical data, in the case study of a chronic hepatitis
dataset,” in Proc ECML/PKDD Discovery Challenge Workshop, 2002,
pp. 154–165.
[22] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff, P. C. Ivanov,
R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C.-K. Peng, and H. E. Stanley,
“Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet components of a new research
resource for complex physiologic signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23,
pp. e215–e220, 2000.
[23] B. M. Marlin, D. C. Kale, R. G. Khemani, and R. C. Wetzel, “Unsupervised pattern discovery in electronic health care data using probabilistic
clustering models,” in Proc. 2nd ACM SIGHIT, 2012, pp. 389–398.
[24] J. E. Gentle, W. K. Härdle, and Y. Mori, Handbook of Computational
Statistics: Concepts and Methods. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2012.
[25] D. Goldin, R. Mardales, and G. Nagy, “In search of meaning for time series
subsequence clustering: Matching algorithms based on a new distance
measure,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. inform. Knowl. Manage., 2006,
pp. 347–356.
[26] A. K. Jain, “Data clustering: 50 years beyond k-means,” Pattern Recog.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 651–666, 2010.

[27] Y. Shahar, “A framework for knowledge-based temporal abstraction,”
Artif. Intell., vol. 90, no. 1, pp. 79–133, 1997.
[28] R. Agrawal, T. Imieliński, and A. Swami, “Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Rec.,1993,
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 207–216.
[29] D. Dudek, “Measures for comparing association rule sets,” in Artificial
Intelligence and Soft Computing, New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2010,
pp. 315–322.
[30] Y. Chen, M. A. Nascimento, B. C. Ooi, and A. K. Tung, “Spade: On
shape-based pattern detection in streaming time series,” in Proc. IEEE
Data Eng., 2007, pp. 786–795.
[31] C. Silverstein, S. Brin, and R. Motwani, “Beyond market baskets: Generalizing association rules to dependence rules,” Data Mining Knowl.
Discovery, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 39–68, 1998.
[32] H. Banaee, M. U. Ahmed, and A. Loutfi, “A framework for automatic text
generation of trends in physiological time series data,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., 2013, pp. 3876–3881.
[33] E. Reiter, “An architecture for data-to-text systems,” in Proc. 11th Eur.
Workshop Natural Language Generation, 2007, pp. 97–104.
[34] G. C. Cawley and N. L. Talbot, “Efficient leave-one-out cross-validation
of kernel fisher discriminant classifiers,” Pattern Recog., vol. 36, no. 11,
pp. 2585–2592, 2003.
[35] P.-N. Tan, V. Kumar, and J. Srivastava,, “Selecting the right objective
measure for association analysis,” Inf. Syst., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 293–313,
2004.

Hadi Banaee received the MSc degree, in Computer
Science from the Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), Iran. working torwards
the Ph.D degree at Örebro University, AASS, since
September 2012. His current research includes the
data mining and health informatics, rule mining in
physiological sensor data and semantic modelling to
exploit a linguistic representation of data streams.
His interests include wearable sensor data mining,
symbolic representation of time series, and natural
language generation.

Amy Loutfi received the BSc degree, in Electrical
Engineering in 2001 from the University of New
Brunswick, Canada and a Ph.D. degree in Computer Science at Örebro University in 2006. Her general interests include robotics and intelligent systems
and more specifically the machine olfaction including mobile robot olfaction, knowledge representation,
reasoning for sensor systems and humanrobot interaction and social robotic telepresence. She has been
working in anchoring symbols to sensors data both in
the olfaction domain and in the domain of intelligent
homes.

