IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

2535

Generator and Setup for Emulating Exposures of
Biological Samples to Lightning Strokes
Matej Reberšek, Igor Marjanovič, Samo Beguš, Flavien Pillet, Marie-Pierre Rols,
Damijan Miklavčič, and Tadej Kotnik∗

Abstract—Goal: We aimed to develop a system for controlled
exposure of biological samples to conditions they experience when
lightning strikes their habitats. Methods: We based the generator
on a capacitor charged via a bridge rectifier and a dc–dc converter,
and discharged via a relay, delivering arcs similar to natural lightning strokes in electric current waveform and similarly accompanied by acoustic shock waves. We coupled the generator to our
exposure chamber described previously, measured electrical and
acoustic properties of arc discharges delivered, and assessed their
ability to inactivate bacterial spores. Results: Submicrosecond discharges descended vertically from the conical emitting electrode
across the air gap, entering the sample centrally and dissipating
radially toward the ring-shaped receiving electrode. In contrast,
longer discharges tended to short-circuit the electrodes. Recording at 341 000 FPS with Vision Research Phantom v2010 camera
revealed that initial arc descent was still vertical, but became accompanied by arcs leaning increasingly sideways; after 8–12 μs,
as the first of these arcs formed direct contact with the receiving
electrode, it evolved into a channel of plasmified air and shortcircuited the electrodes. We eliminated this artefact by incorporating an insulating cylinder concentrically between the electrodes,
precluding short-circuiting between them. While bacterial spores
are highly resistant to electric pulses delivered through direct contact, we showed that with arc discharges accompanied by an acoustic shock wave, spore inactivation is readily obtained. Conclusion:
The presented system allows scientific investigation of effects of arc
discharges on biological samples. Significance: This system will allow realistic experimental studies of lightning-triggered horizontal
gene transfer and assessment of its role in evolution.
Index Terms—Electroporation, electrotransformation, evolution, exposure system, horizontal gene transfer (HGT), lightning.

I. INTRODUCTION
ATURAL lightning strokes are unpredictable, uncontrollable, and impossible to ignore; they turn sand into glassy
mineral tubes (fulgurites), damage electrical equipment, and
harm living organisms.

N

Manuscript received March 23, 2015; revised May 13, 2015; accepted May
20, 2015. Date of publication May 25, 2015; date of current version September
16, 2015. This work was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency under
Grant P2-0249, with research conducted in the scope of LEA EBAM European
Associated Laboratory and within networking efforts of COST Action TD1104
that also supported the visit of F. Pillet under Grant STSM-TD1104-120514041258. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. Reberšek, I. Marjanovič, S. Beguš, and D. Miklavčič are with the Faculty
of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana.
F. Pillet and M.-P. Rols are with the Institute of Pharmacology and Structural
Biology and the University of Toulouse.
∗ T. Kotnik is with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia (e-mail: tadej.kotnik@fe.uni-lj.si).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2437359

A number of emulators and standards have been developed
for testing the robustness of devices that can get exposed to
lightning strokes in their operating environment [1]–[3]. Realistic testing of such robustness is particularly important in aircraft
industry, and modern lightning emulators designed for such
testing can reproduce the electric currents of natural lightning
strokes, with peak amplitudes of up to 200 kA, and with waveforms emulating those in lightning strokes: zero-to-peak time
of several microseconds and decay time in tens to hundreds of
microseconds [4], [5]. This allows us to emulate the effect of
the stroke current proceeding in its entirety through the device,
which has to withstand this without any loss of functionality.
While lightning also strikes natural habitats of many living
organisms, scientific interest in studying the effects of such exposures has until recently been scarce. A likely contributor to
this was the prevailing view that a stroke can only harm the
organisms, and the mechanisms of inflicted damage—thermal
(degradation of biomolecules), electrical (electroporation of
cells’ membranes and resulting leakage of intracellular material), and mechanical (pressure shock due to the strong acoustic
waves accompanying a stroke)—are generally rather well understood.
Cell membrane electroporation caused by high-voltage shortduration electric pulses can be irreversible, killing the cells, but
it can also be reversible, with the exposed cells remaining viable, which is increasingly exploited to introduce into living
cells various active substances that cannot permeate an intact
membrane, particularly anticancer drugs and genetic material
[6], [7]. Taking the latter fact into account, there were several studies focusing on—or at least touching upon—the possibility of electroporation-based gene transfer triggered naturally by lightning strokes [8]–[10]. Still, the exposures used in
these experiments were produced by electric pulse generators in
which neither the current’s peak nor its time course parameters
(zero-to-peak time, peak-to-half time) were similar to those of
lightning strokes. Moreover, the current was always delivered
through electrodes in direct contact with the sample, thus lacking the acoustic shock wave characteristic of strokes and more
generally of electric arcs.
In the last two decades, sequencing of genomes gradually
started revealing that biological evolution, particularly in unicellular organisms, is influenced significantly by horizontal gene
transfer (HGT)—uptake of genetic material from their environment or other organisms, and its integration into the new host’s
genome [11]. The well-recognized biochemical mechanism of
uptake from the environment is termed natural competence (or
natural transformation), and it was recently demonstrated that

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2536

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

this mechanism functions even with highly fragmented and
damaged DNA [12]. Still, as natural competence is based on
a complex system of proteins [13], it must itself have developed
during a certain stage of evolution, and how DNA uptake from
the environment could have proceeded before this is an open
question.
Furthermore, natural competence is found in some bacteria
and in rare archaea [14], but there are no known naturally competent eukaryotes (organisms whose cells’ genetic material is
contained in a nucleus), yet during the last five years the scientists are increasingly acknowledging the evolutionary importance of HGT also in eukaryotes [15]. The currently recognized
mechanisms of HGT in eukaryotes are gene transfer from their
intracellular symbionts [16] and from infecting viruses [17],
but it has been demonstrated that the most important genes
transferred into eukaryotes by HGT stem from archaea [18],
and whether these can all be attributed to transfer from endosymbionts (which are overwhelmingly bacteria, not archaea)
or viruses is highly questionable.
We have recently posited that a possible answer to both earlylife and modern gene transfer into organisms lacking natural
competence lies in physical (as opposed to biochemical) mechanisms of DNA release and uptake, which could have functioned
from the very beginning of cell-based life, and which also function in eukaryotes. We have argued that a particularly promising such mechanism, with both theoretical and indirect empirical support, is lightning-triggered HGT—DNA transfer enabled
by lighting-induced cell membrane electroporation, and possibly augmented by lightning-driven electrophoretic motion of
DNA [19].
For realistic experimental studies of the feasibility of
lightning-triggered HGT, the conditions have to be as close to
natural ones as possible. Organisms exposed should be chosen
among those living in habitats accessible to lightning strokes,
the lab exposure environment should emulate that habitat (e.g.,
marine bacteria should be exposed in a medium resembling seawater), and only natural DNA should be used (in biotechnological applications, DNA molecules are often artificially modified
to increase their stability and transferability). At least as important is a realistic emulation of the lightning stroke; the current
should be delivered through an actual electric arc proceeding
from the emitting electrode through air into the sample, and
the time course of the current should resemble that of a typical
lightning stroke.
With tests of aircraft robustness, where the whole lightning
stroke current can proceed through one of its devices, both the
current amplitude and its waveform delivered in testing have
to be equal to those of actual strokes. Partly in contrast, in exposure systems designed for studying lightning-triggered HGT,
the electric current waveform should also equal to that of a
stroke with respect to the time scale (i.e., it should have similar zero-to-peak and decay times), yet its amplitude can be
downscaled without any essential loss of emulation consistency.
Namely, upon its entry from the air into the ground, the lightning stroke’s current always dissipates, and thus, a downscaling
of current amplitude in exposure systems merely reduces the
size of concentric areas subjected to various ranges of current

density and resulting effects on exposed sample. Obviously, the
very highest current densities of lightning strokes are absent in
downscaled exposure systems, but those are lethal to all living
organisms, while the conditions of reversible electroporation,
and thus favourable for HGT, are reached even with downscaling of the stroke current by a factor of 104 [20].
We have previously reported on our design of an exposure
system that provides easy sample insertion and removal, protection from airborne particles, observability during the exposure,
accurate discharge positioning, and delivery into the sample
through an arc with an adjustable air gap [21]. In its initial testing, we connected the system to a taser gun confirming that
for discharges lasting ∼0.5 μs, the conical emitting electrode
delivers the current across an air gap centrally downward into
a disk-shaped sample, and that the ring-shaped receiving electrode ensures radial current dissipation through the sample [21].
Here, we describe our design and testing of a generator delivering discharges similar to those of natural strokes both in its
duration and its waveform of the electric current (zero-to-peak
time of ∼5 μs, peak-to-half time of ∼75 μs), and also similarly
accompanied by an acoustic shock wave.
We first describe the design of the generator circuit for delivery of arc discharges. We then show how with the exposure
system outlined above a transition from short discharges (up to
several microseconds) to those with durations characteristic of
lightning strokes (tens or hundreds of microseconds) alters the
current flow radically, with eventual short-circuiting between
the electrodes proceeding through the air plasmified by the discharge current. We present the details of this artefact through
photographs taken at 341 thousand frames per second with Vision Research Phantom v2010, one of the fastest currently commercially available cameras, and we describe a modification of
the exposure system that eliminates this artefact. We tested our
generator and setup by exposing the spores of Bacillus pumilus
to the discharges, attaining consistent and reproducible irreversible electroporation of spores; in contrast, no such effect
was obtained with classical-type exposure in which the discharges were delivered through electrodes in direct contact with
the sample so that an arc and the accompanying acoustic shock
wave were absent.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Generator Design and Functioning
The schematic diagram of the pulse generator we developed
is shown in Fig. 1. We opted for a capacitor discharge circuit
[22] as the waveform of its output current is very similar to
those of lightning strokes [20]. For safety reasons and to minimize leakage current, we isolated the output of the generator
from the line voltage by an isolation transformer (T; 18 V, 60
VA, ELMA, Slovenia). A high-voltage direct current converter
(HV dc–dc; RB60-6P, Matsusada, Japan) was used to supply the
output stage of the generator. The output voltage of the converter
was set by a potentiometer (P) in the range from 0 to 5 kV, and
monitored by a voltmeter (V). We used two 200-kΩ resistors
(R) to separate the converter from the output. The 1-μF capacitor (C; MOP105-5MN, Condenser Products, USA) stored the

REBERŠEK et al.: GENERATOR AND SETUP FOR EMULATING EXPOSURES OF BIOLOGICAL SAMPLES TO LIGHTNING STROKES

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the pulse generator for lightning emulation. U:
grid power supply. T: isolation transformer. B: bridge rectifier. HV dc–dc: highvoltage dc–dc converter. P: linear potentiometer. R: resistors (200 kΩ each). C:
capacitor (1 μF, 5 kV). S: high-voltage relay. V: digital voltmeter.

energy for the pulse during the charging phase, and the highvoltage relay (S; RL 42, SPS electronic, Germany) released this
energy into the load during discharge phase. As the impedance
of the exposure system was approximately 100 Ω, the 1-μF capacitance of the capacitor C was chosen so that its discharge
generated an arc current with a time constant of exponential
decay of ∼100 μs, similar to those of natural lightning strokes.
During the first batch of our experiments, the discharge generator was connected to the exposure system as described previously [21]. Later, as we discovered that discharges longer than
8–12 μs gradually deviate from a vertical path into a diagonal one and short-circuit the electrodes (see Section III-A), we
modified the setup by enclosing the emitting electrode with an
inner concentric Plexiglas cylinder reaching down to the sample
surface, thus forcing the discharge current to flow through the
sample and thus avoiding the short-circuiting.
Capacitor C was charged to 5 kV and discharged through
the high-voltage relay S, proceeding from the conical emitting electrode vertically downward into the sample, and hence,
horizontally radially through the sample into the ring-shaped
receiving electrode, thus emulating the exposure of the sample
to a lightning stroke.
B. Monitoring and Measurements
Evolution of the discharge arc was imaged by a high-speed
camera (Phantom v2010, Vision Research, USA) with fixed focal length lens (EF 50 mm f/1.8, Canon, Japan), either with or
without a welding protection glass (90 × 110 mm Shade 11,
Technolit, Germany) placed between the arc and the camera
lens. During the experiment, the image frames were being acquired continuously by the high-speed camera with 256 × 128
resolution and 12 bits per pixel at 341 000 frames per second
(2.93 μs per frame, consisting of 2.55-μs-exposure time and
0.38-μs-interframe delay). Acquisition was triggered by the oscilloscope as it detected the onset of the electric current, with
the first frame marked as time zero (0 μs).
Time courses of voltage and electric current of the discharge
were measured by a voltage probe, a current probe, and an
oscilloscope (PPE6kV, AP015, and WavePro 7300A; all from
LeCroy, USA) isolated from the line voltage by an isolation
transformer KDVP-23499 (Elma TT, Slovenia). In cases of
short-circuiting between the electrodes, current was measured
by CWT 150B Mini current probe (Powertek, U.K.).
Acoustic shock wave was measured with a sound pressure
level (SPL) meter with an attenuator (2230 and ZF 0020; both

2537

from Brüel & Kjær, Denmark), and by a microphone with a
preamplifier and an amplifier (4191, 2669, and Nexus; all from
Brüel & Kjær, Denmark), and a sound card (E-MU 0404 USB,
Creative, USA). Measurement system was calibrated with a
pistophone (124 dB). The measurements were taken at 1-m
distance from the exposure system, both with and without the
outer Plexiglas cylinder enclosing the exposure system, and both
with and without the inner Plexiglas cylinder used to prevent
short-circuiting between the electrodes. The frequency spectrum
of the acoustic shock wave was computed using the fast Fourier
transform in MATLAB R2014 (MathWorks, Natick, USA).
C. Experiments
Sporulation of Bacillus pumilus (ATCC 27142) was performed for five days at 37 °C in Difco sporulation medium [23].
Residual vegetative bacteria were removed by heat shock (80 °C
for 20 min) and lysozyme digestion (50 μg/ml of lysozyme in
50-mM Tris-HCl at pH 6.2; for 1 h at 37 °C). Spores were
purified by centrifugation (5 min, 10 000 g) and cleaning (by
0.05% SDS, then three times by deionized water), and spread
onto agar on 90-mm petri dishes. Inactivation was performed
by delivering an arc discharge centrally into the petri dish. Inactivation rate was evaluated by comparison between the number
of colonies in the area of interest before and after exposure to
electric arcs.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Design and Testing of the Generator and Setup
The most challenging choice we had to make in the design
of the generator was that of the most appropriate output switch.
The options considered were an insulated-gate bipolar transistor
(IGBT), a spark gap, and a relay [24], [25]. All these options
are commercially available for 5 kV as the maximum output
voltage we opted for, but IGBTs are rather limited in their maximal current and their rise times, prone to irreparable damage,
and furthermore, they are the most expensive of the considered
options. We, thus, opted for a commercial relay, with the air
gap between the emitting electrode and the sample in our exposure system forming the spark gap to which this relay delivers
a discharge.
In our initial tests, we connected the generator shown in Fig. 1
to the exposure chamber that we have previously described and
tested with short discharges (∼0.5 μs) delivered by a taser gun
[21]. For such short discharges, the arc of the discharge always
descends roughly vertically from the tip of the conical emitting
electrode into the sample, and then dissipates through the sample
radially toward the ring-shaped receiving electrode (see e.g., [21,
Figs. 3(a) and 4(a)]).
In contrast, as shown in Fig. 2, when we delivered a discharge designed to decay exponentially with a time constant
of ∼100 μs, during the first ∼0.5 μs the discharge and its arc
behaved as predicted, with the electric current rising to ∼50 A
and voltage gradually decreasing from the initial ∼5 kV, but
then the current kept rising, first at a decreasing rate, yet after
∼8 μs increasing very rapidly to almost 1400 A, thus almost

2538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Fig. 2. Time course of voltage (black) and current (red) of the discharge
delivered by the generator shown in Fig. 1 connected to our exposure chamber
described and illustrated in detail in [21]. The dashed curve sketches the time
course of the electric current expected of a discharge without short-circuiting
between the electrodes (see Fig. 5).

instantaneously discharging the capacitor, followed by further
∼35 μs of strong current and voltage oscillations, likely attributable to the inductance of the wires connected to the generator’s rapidly discharging capacitor.
Visually, we observed a very bright arc formed along the
shortest path between the tip of the conical emitting electrode
and the ring-shaped receiving electrode, proceeding entirely
through plasmified air, thus short-circuiting the electrodes and
evading the sample. Still, it was clear that due to the extreme
brightness of this arc, the transient phenomenon preceding this
short-circuiting was concealed from the naked eye. To investigate this transient phenomenon, we utilized the Vision Research Phantom v2010, the fastest currently commercially available camera kindly provided by Vision Research Europe, and
recorded the events at 341 000 FPS (one frame per 2.93 μs),
with the relevant frames shown in Fig. 3.
As Fig. 3 shows, the arc first descended vertically into the
sample. Within ∼3 μs, the vertical arc became accompanied
by several radial arcs proceeding partly through the sample, but
gradually ascending into the plasmified air above it. After ∼9 μs
(in this case, and generally 8–12 μs), a significant initial segment
of the radial arcs was already above the sample, and their visible
endpoints, still in the sample, were rapidly approaching the
receiving electrode at sample’s outer edge. As one of these
arcs came into direct contact with the receiving electrode, it
transformed into a channel of plasmified air short-circuiting the
electrodes, drawing almost all current of the discharge through
this channel and thus enhancing its plasmification, glowing so

Fig. 3. Evolution of the discharge arc delivered by the generator shown in
Fig. 1 connected to our exposure chamber described and illustrated in [21];
the frame timing is at the left, with the arc formation serving as the trigger.
(a) Frames taken without a filter. (b) Frames taken through a welding protection
glass. The three asterisks (∗∗∗ ) indicate skipped frames.

REBERŠEK et al.: GENERATOR AND SETUP FOR EMULATING EXPOSURES OF BIOLOGICAL SAMPLES TO LIGHTNING STROKES

2539

Fig. 4. Time course of current (black) and voltage (red) of the discharge delivered by the generator shown in Fig. 1 connected to our exposure chamber modified by addition of an inner insulating cylinder preventing the short-circuiting
and formation of a plasma channel between the electrodes.

bright as to saturate the frames unless they were photographed
through a welding protection glass (see the frames in Fig. 3
from 11.72 μs onward). The frames at the bottom of the left row
of Fig. 3 show that even after the electric current ceased, the
plasmified air continued to glow visibly for further ∼200 μs.
In natural lightning strokes, there is no equivalent to the discrete receiving electrode of our exposure system, so there is
also no counterpart to the short-circuiting effect described and
depicted above, which thus represents an artefact resulting from
system’s design. As long as the current dissipates through the
sample roughly radially outward into the receiving electrode,
this is an adequate emulation of the stroke current’s dissipation
in the ground [26], but after radial arcs emerge largely into the
air above the sample, and particularly as one of these arcs shortcircuits the metallic electrodes, such an “emulation” loses all
resemblance to lightning strokes.
To eliminate this artefact, we modified the exposure system,
incorporating an additional, inner Plexiglas cylinder placed concentrically between the emitting electrode and the receiving
electrode so as to form a tight contact with the surface of the
sample, thus precluding the discharge from evading the sample
from above and short-circuiting the electrodes. We first tested
this solution with a cylinder almost as wide as the sample (inner
and outer radius of 35 and 40 mm, respectively, while the receiving electrode had an inner radius of 41 mm; see the top of Fig. 5).
As Fig. 4 shows, this resulted in the discharge current evolving
largely as initially envisaged, reaching the peak of ∼50 A in
∼5 μs and then decaying exponentially with a peak-to-half time
of ∼65 μs. As revealed by Fig. 5, the radial rays still evolved
sideways, but more gradually and only until reaching the inner
edge of the newly incorporated insulating cylinder.
Inside the cylinder, the rays still gradually emerged into the
air above the sample, reaching their maximal luminosity after
15–25 μs and then gradually fading, with only a central glow
persisting for further ∼100 μs (in later experiments, we used
narrower cylinders to force the discharge current to flow almost
entirely through the sample—see e.g., Fig. 8).

Fig. 5. Evolution of the discharge arc delivered and recorded as in Fig. 3(a), but
with an inner insulating cylinder preventing the short-circuiting and formation
of a plasma channel between the electrodes. Frame timing is at the left, and
three asterisks (∗∗∗ ) indicate skipped frames.

2540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

Here, we should address a possible concern regarding the
considerable downscaling in the electric current of a discharge
delivered by our exposure system (e.g., as shown in Fig. 4) with
respect to lightning strokes; while their waveforms are very similar, the amplitudes differ by a factor of ∼600 (peak current of
∼50 A as opposed to ∼30 kA). Yet both with the lightning
stroke and with the arc discharge delivered by our system, once
the electric current enters from the air into a conductive medium,
it dissipates through this medium roughly radially away from
its point of entry. Thus, in both cases, as the distance r from
the point of discharge’s entry increases, the current density J
and the electric field E it induces decrease in a monotonic and
continuous manner. As a consequence, the same values of J
and E caused in a given medium by a lightning stroke’s current at a given r1 are also caused in this same medium by a
discharge current downscaled in amplitude at some r2 > r1 .
For example, for a lightning stroke current of 30 kA dissipating
three-dimensionally in the ground, J = 50 A/cm2 is reached at
r = 9.77 cm, while for a discharge with a peak current of 50
A dissipating two-dimensionally in a disk-shaped sample 5-mm
thick, the same value of J (and, if the medium is the same, also
the same value of E) is reached at r = 3.18 mm.
It is true that the very highest values of J and E caused by
lightning strokes do not occur in downscaled exposure systems,
yet under such extreme conditions, all living matter is damaged
lethally and through mechanisms that are now rather well understood: resistive heating, irreversible electroporation of cell
membranes, and irreversible electroconformational changes in
membrane proteins [27], [28], as well as electrolytic contamination and degradation, including formation of gas bubbles in
cells and tissues [29].
These considerations show that with the exception of the most
extreme (and destructive) conditions, the setup as described
above—necessarily with an inner cylinder installed as to prevent short-circuiting between the electrodes—can emulate the
electrical conditions of an exposure to a lightning stroke current quite adequately. While most natural lightning strokes are
unipolar, there are also bipolar strokes, exhibiting polarity reversals during a single flash [30], and our setup could, with a
suitable polarity switch or an adapted generator, also be used to
deliver bipolar discharges. With respect to unipolar discharges,
bipolar ones of the same amplitude and duration do not differ in
the degree of resistive heating, but cause a detectably increased
extent of cell membrane electroporation [31] and decreased extent of electrolysis [32], [33].
In lightning strokes, electric current’s exponential decay from
the peak amplitude often slows down (after ∼7–40 μs) into a
much more gradual descent that continues for tens of hundreds
of milliseconds, with the current of up to several hundred amperes; this is attributed to a persistence of some electric charge in
the cloud and some electric conductivity of the lightning channel between the cloud and the ground [34], [35]. This level of
current is of two orders of magnitude lower than its preceding
peak value; hence, so is the electric field it induces, which can
thus cause electroporation of membranes and electroconformational changes in proteins only in a very limited volume that has
already been subjected to much more intense effects of this kind

in the earlier stage of the stroke’s current. In contrast, resistive
heating and electrolysis can still be prominent, as this phase
of the current lasts much longer than the preceding rapid decay, but as stated above, these effects are rather well understood
both theoretically and empirically. The generator presented in
this paper does not emulate the transition of the electric current
from the exponential decay into a slow descent, but could be
adapted to also emulate the latter phase, e.g., by incorporating
another capacitor in series with a resistor of sufficiently high
impedance, and connecting this RC element to the electrodes
at the desired time during the fading discharge of the original
capacitor; if the conductivity of the air channel would prove insufficient to sustain this current, it could also be injected directly
into the sample below from a programmable current generator.
Lightning strokes are accompanied by thunder, and the arc
discharges delivered by our system were also accompanied by
a loud sound, so we analyzed the similarities of the acoustic
shock waves generating them.
A high-pressure shock wave is formed in plasmified air during the lightning stroke, which travels faster than the speed of
sound [36]. The shock wave expands roughly cylindrically away
from typical plasma channels of lightning strokes, while for
downscaled laboratory arc discharges the expansion is roughly
spherical [37]. With expansion, the shock wave slows down,
and upon reaching the speed of sound, it transforms into an
acoustic wave (known as thunder in lightning strokes) with a
characteristic frequency spectrum. The distance at which this
occurs is referred to as the relaxation radius rR of the shock
wave, and for typical lightning strokes it is at ∼40 cm, where
the peak sound pressure is ∼200 kPa (200 dB) [36]. At r > rR ,
the acoustic wave of a stroke (the thunder) has a distinctive frequency spectrum with two most prominent acoustic frequencies
at ∼200 and ∼800 Hz. Close to rR , the two peaks are of similar
magnitude, but the higher frequency is attenuated more rapidly,
so that farther away the frequency at ∼200 Hz prevails in the
spectrum, and it characterizes the sound heard most dominantly
in a typical thunder [38].
The arc discharge delivered by our setup is also consistently
accompanied by a shock wave. To estimate its strength and
relaxation radius, we measured its actual sound pressure (see
Fig. 6) and frequency spectrum (see Fig. 7) with the outer Plexiglas cylinder of our system removed, as it would attenuate the
pressure and distort the spectrum. Measured at 1 m from the
arc, the peak sound pressure was 255 Pa (142 dB) and the peak
frequency ∼3400 Hz when the short-circuiting plasma channel
was formed (i.e., with also the inner Plexiglas cylinder absent),
and 63 Pa (130 dB) with peak frequency of ∼1800 Hz when
short-circuiting was prevented by adding the inner cylinder. Using the equations from [36] and [39], the relaxation radius of our
arc discharge without short-circuiting is at ∼15 cm, where the
peak sound pressure is in the range between ∼420 Pa (146 dB)
and ∼2.8 kPa (163 dB), with the lower bound corresponding to
cylindrical, and the upper bound to spherical expansion of the
shock wave.
With the outer cylinder reinstalled, the SPL at 1 m was attenuated to 23.8 Pa (121.5 dB) and 6.47 Pa (110.2 dB) with the
inner cylinder absent and present, respectively.

REBERŠEK et al.: GENERATOR AND SETUP FOR EMULATING EXPOSURES OF BIOLOGICAL SAMPLES TO LIGHTNING STROKES

Fig. 6. Acoustic shock wave (time course of the SPL) accompanying the
discharge arc delivered by our setup, as measured 1 m from the arc, without the
outer Plexiglas cylinder enclosing the exposure system. (a) Without the inner
Plexiglas cylinder added to prevent short-circuiting between the electrodes;
(b) with this inner cylinder.

These measurements show that compared to natural lightning strokes, the arc discharges delivered by our setup generate
acoustic shock waves at roughly the same order of magnitude
of downscaling in the sound pressure as in the total electric current, electric current density, and electric field. Still, the acoustic spectrum of the setup’s arcs differs from that of a lightning
stroke, in particular it is characterized by a higher peak frequency (1800 Hz, as opposed to 200 and 800 Hz in natural
strokes), and a potential importance of this difference remains
to be investigated.
B. Application in Biological Experiments
We tested the use of our generator and setup by delivering various discharges to a sample of Bacillus pumilus spores. Bacterial
spores are known to be highly resistant to “classical” electroporation protocols in which the discharges are delivered through
electrodes in direct contact with the sample, where the electric

2541

Fig. 7. Frequency spectrum of the acoustic shock wave shown in Fig. 6.
(a) Without the inner Plexiglas cylinder; (b) with this inner cylinder.

arc does not proceed through the air, and the accompanying
acoustic shock wave is thus absent [40]. In Fig. 8, we demonstrate successful killing of these spores by discharges delivered
into the spore-containing sample as arcs through an air gap and
thus accompanied by an acoustic shock wave. Panels (b) and
(c) clearly illustrate the difference between the effect of pulses
short enough (0.5 μs) for the discharge arc to remain vertically
descending, and pulses long enough (20 μs) for the arc to start
and complete its migration from the vertical path to the diagonal path between the electrodes, finally evading the sample.
Comparison of panels (d) and (e) shows that consecutive discharges tend to form plasma channels in directions proximate
to the direction of the first discharge, yet gradually scattering.
Panel (f) demonstrates that spore killing is also significant when
short-circuiting between the electrodes and, thus, plasmification
of the air above the spores is prevented.
In this paper, we included the experiment on bacterial spores
primarily as an example of our system’s use, but in experiments
aimed at elucidating the (bio)physical, (bio)chemical, and biological effects of arc discharges on living matter, considerable

2542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

tic shock wave, can cause killing of the generally extremely
resilient bacterial spores.
Moreover, as outlined in Section I, there is ample motivation
for systematic studies of lightning-triggered HGT among microorganisms, with potential implications for their evolution—
both early and modern. The tests of our generator and the exposure system described here, together with the calculated estimates presented, show that this setup is adequate for emulation
of lightning strokes entering natural habitats, and should thus
act as an essential piece of equipment for realistic experimental
studies of the feasibility of lightning-triggered HGT.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Vision Research Phantom v2010 camera was kindly provided
by Vision Research Europe.
REFERENCES

Fig. 8. Areas of Bacillus pumilus spore killing with various number, type,
and duration of arc discharges delivered with our setup into petri dishes with
a radius of 45 mm. (a) Control (no discharges delivered). (b)–(e) Discharges
delivered without the inner Plexiglas cylinder added to prevent short-circuiting
between the electrodes: (b) 200 discharges of 12 kV, 0.5 μs; (c) 1 discharge of
5 kV, 20 μs; (d) 20 discharges of 5 kV, 20 μs; (e) 50 discharges of 5 kV, 20 μs.
(f) 50 discharges of 5 kV, 100-μs time constant, with the inner cylinder present
(its inner radius was 22 mm, outer radius 26 mm, and its position is revealed by
the ring-shaped imprint in the agar at the outer rim of the inactivation area).

attention will have to be devoted to distinguish between the
effects of the electric field and those of the phenomena that accompany this field when it is delivered through a discharge arc:
the mechanical (acoustic) pressure wave [41], possible cavitation due to this pressure [42], as well as formation of plasma
near the arc and its rays [43], and the ultraviolet light emitted
by the arc [44].
IV. CONCLUSION
We have developed and tested a discharge generator that can
be used with the previously described exposure system to expose biological samples to controlled and reproducible arc discharges, thus allowing to study the effects of such discharges on
living organisms. In particular, we have demonstrated that such
arcs, in which the electric field is accompanied by an acous-

[1] D. W. Clifford et al., “Lightning simulation and testing,” IEEE Trans.
Electromagn. Compat., vol. EMC-24, no. 2, pp. 209–224, May 1982.
[2] I. Smith and H. Aslin, “Pulsed power for EMP simulators,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 53–59, Jan. 1978.
[3] Electromagnetic Environmental Effects Requirements for Systems,” US
Dept. Defense, MIL-STD-464C.
[4] J. A. Plumer, “Laboratory test results and natural lightning strike effects:
How well do they compare,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Lightning Protection,
Sep. 2012, pp. 1–17.
[5] N. Kamihara and Y. Kamino, “Development of a high-current generator to
comply with aircraft lightning environments and related test waveforms,”
Mitsubishi Heavy Ind. Tech. Rev., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 51–53, Dec. 2011.
[6] M. L. Yarmush et al., “Electroporation-based technologies for medicine:
Principles, applications, and challenges,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol.
16, no. 1, pp. 295–320, Jul. 2014.
[7] D. Miklavčič et al., “Electrochemotherapy: From the drawing board into
medical practice,” Biomed. Eng. OnLine, vol. 13, no. 29, pp. 1–20, Mar.
2014.
[8] J. Pfau and P. Youderian, “Transferring plasmid DNA between different bacterial species with electroporation,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 18,
no. 20, p. 6165, Oct. 1990.
[9] S. Demaneche et al., “Laboratory-scale evidence for lightningmediated gene transfer in soil,” Appl. Environ. Microbiol., vol. 67,
no. 8, pp. 3440–3444, Aug. 2001.
[10] H. Ceremonie et al., “Natural electrotransformation of lightningcompetent Pseudomonas sp. strain N3 in artificial soil microcosms,” Appl.
Environ. Microbiol., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 2385–2389, Apr. 2006.
[11] M. Syvanen, “Evolutionary implications of horizontal gene transfer,”
Annu. Rev. Genet., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 341–358, Dec. 2012.
[12] S. Overballe-Petersen et al., “Bacterial natural transformation by highly
fragmented and damaged DNA,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 110, no.
49, pp. 19860–19865, Dec. 2013.
[13] I. Chen and D. Dubnau, “DNA uptake during bacterial transformation,”
Nat. Rev. Microbiol., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 241–249, Mar. 2004.
[14] O. Johnsborg et al., “Natural genetic transformation: Prevalence, mechanisms and function,” Res. Microbiol., vol. 158, no. 10, pp. 767–778, Dec.
2007.
[15] L. Boto, “Horizontal gene transfer in the acquisition of novel traits by
metazoans,” Proc. Roy. Soc. B, vol. 281, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2014.
[16] J. Huang, “Horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotes: The weak-link model,”
BioEssays, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 868–875, Jul. 2013.
[17] A. Monier et al., “Horizontal gene transfer of an entire metabolic pathway
between a eukaryotic alga and its DNA virus,” Genome Res., vol. 19, no.
8, pp. 1441–1449, Aug. 2009.
[18] J. A. Cotton and J. O. McInerney, “Eukaryotic genes of archaebacterial
origin are more important than the more numerous eubacterial genes,
irrespective of function,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 107, no. 40,
pp. 17252–17255, Oct. 2010.
[19] T. Kotnik, “Lightning-triggered electroporation and electrofusion as possible contributors to natural horizontal gene transfer,” Phys. Life Rev.,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 351–370, Sep. 2013.

REBERŠEK et al.: GENERATOR AND SETUP FOR EMULATING EXPOSURES OF BIOLOGICAL SAMPLES TO LIGHTNING STROKES

[20] T. Kotnik, “Prokaryotic diversity, electrified DNA, lightning waveforms,
abiotic gene transfer, and the Drake equation: Assessing the hypothesis of
lightning-driven evolution,” Phys. Life Rev., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 384–388,
Sep. 2013.
[21] I. Marjanovič and T. Kotnik, “An experimental system for controlled
exposure of biological samples to electrostatic discharges,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 79–86, Dec. 2013.
[22] M. Reberšek and D. Miklavčič, “Advantages and disadvantages of different concepts of electroporation pulse generation,” Automatika, vol. 52, no.
1, pp. 12–19, Mar. 2011.
[23] P. Schaeffer et al., “Catabolic repression of bacterial sporulation.,” Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 704–711, Sep. 1965.
[24] M. Reberšek and D. Miklavčič, “Concepts of electroporation pulse generation and overview of electric pulse generators for cell and tissue electroporation,” in Advanced Electroporation Techniques in Biology and Medicine,
A. G. Pakhomov et al., Eds. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2010, pp.
323–339.
[25] M. Reberšek et al., “Cell membrane electroporation-Part 3: The equipment,” IEEE Electr. Insul. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 8–18, May 2014.
[26] E. P. Krider, “On lightning damage to a golf course green,” Weatherwise,
vol. 30, no. 3, p. 111, Jun. 1977.
[27] R. C. Lee et al., “Biophysical injury mechanism in electrical shock
trauma,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 477–509, Aug. 2000.
[28] M. Bier et al., “Biophysical injury mechanisms associated with lightning
injury,” Neurorehabilitation, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 53–62, Mar. 2005.
[29] B. K. Kleinschmidt-DeMasters, “Neuropathology of lightning-strike injuries,” Seminars Neurol., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 323–328, Dec. 1995.
[30] V. A. Rakov, “A review of positive and bipolar lightning discharges,” Bull.
Am. Meteorol. Soc., vol. 84, no. 6, pp. 767–775, Jun. 2003.
[31] T. Kotnik et al., “Cell membrane electropermeabilization by symmetrical
bipolar rectangular pulses. Part I. Increased efficiency of permeabilization,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 83–90, Aug. 2001.
[32] T. Kotnik et al., “Cell membrane electropermeabilization by symmetrical
bipolar rectangular pulses. Part II. Reduced electrolytic contamination,”
Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 91–95, Aug. 2001.
[33] M. B. Fox et al., “Electroporation of cells in microfluidic devices:
a review,” Anal. Bioanal. Chem., vol. 385, no. 3, pp. 474–485,
Jun. 2006.
[34] N. Kitagawa et al., “Continuing currents in cloud-to-ground lightning
discharges,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 637–347, Feb. 1962.
[35] T. Shindo and M. A. Uman, “Continuing current in negative cloud-toground lightning,” J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., vol. 94, no. D4, pp. 5189–
5198, Apr. 1989.
[36] A. A. Few, “Acoustic radiations from lightning,” in The Earth’s Electrical
Environment. Washington, DC, USA: National Academy Press, 1986,
pp. 46–60.
[37] M. A. Uman, “Comparison of lightning and a long laboratory spark,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 457–466, Apr. 1971.
[38] O. Yuhua and Y. Ping, “Audible thunder characteristic and the relation
between peak frequency and lightning parameters,” J. Earth Syst. Sci.,
vol. 121, no. 1, pp. 211–220, Feb. 2012.
[39] P. Depasse, “Lightning acoustic signature,” J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., vol.
99, no. D12, pp. 25933–25940, Dec. 1994.
[40] Y. Yonemoto et al., “Resistance of yeast and bacterial spores to high
voltage electric pulses,” J. Ferment. Bioeng., vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 99–102,
Feb. 1993.
[41] L. Edebo and I. Selin, “The effect of the pressure shock wave and some
electrical quantities in the microbicidal effect of transient electric arcs
in aqueous systems,” J. Gen. Microbiol., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 253–259,
Feb. 1968.
[42] N. Boussetta et al., “A study of mechanisms involved during the extraction of polyphenols from grape seeds by pulsed electrical discharges,”
Innovative Food Sci. Emerg. Technol., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 124–132,
Jul. 2013.
[43] D. Dobrynin, “Physical and biological mechanisms of direct plasma interaction with living tissue,” New J. Phys., vol. 11, no. 115020, pp. 1–26,
Nov. 2009.
[44] L. Edebo, “The effect of the photon radiation in the microbicidal effect
of transient electric arcs in aqueous systems,” J. Gen. Microbiol., vol. 50,
no. 2, pp. 261–270, Feb. 1968.

2543

Matej Reberšek was born in 1979. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from the University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in 2008.
He is currently a Scientific Associate at the Laboratory of Biocybernetics,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana. He is the author
of more than 15 articles in SCI-ranked journals cited more than 200 times to
date. His current research interests include development of biomedical devices
especially pulse power devices for electroporation, and study of biological
responses to electrical pulses.

Igor Marjanovič was born in 1984. He received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering from the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia, in 2010, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree at the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Electrical Engineering.
His scientific research interests include the study of electroporation, electrofusion and gene electrotransfer of prokaryotic organisms and their relation to
the horizontal gene transfer and biotic evolution.

Samo Beguš was born in 1977. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from the University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in 2007.
His research interests include electrical measurements, precision magnetic
measurements, optical magnetometers, sensors, audio signal processing, and
audio measurements.

Flavien Pillet was born in 1982. He received the Ph.D. degree in 2010 from the
Institut National des Sciences Appliquées, Toulouse, France.
Since April 2013, he has been a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale, Toulouse, in the Cellular Biophysics group. His
main research interests include the study of biomolecular interaction by surface
plasmon resonance, the microorganism survey by atomic force microscopy, and
the influence of pulse electric fields on microorganisms and model membrane
vesicles.

Marie-Pierre Rols was born in 1962. She received the Ph.D. degree in cell
biophysics from the University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, in 1989.
She is currently the Director of Research at the IPBS-CNRS Laboratory,
Toulouse, and the Head of the group Cellular Biophysics. Her main research
interests include the fields of membrane electropermeabili-zation in vitro and in
vivo (from the mechanisms to the clinics).
Dr. Rols received a joint prize of the Midi-Pyrénées region in 2006 and the
Galvani Prize of the Bioelectrochemical Society in 2009.

Damijan Miklavčič was born in 1963. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from the University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, in 1993.
He is currently a Full Professor, the Head of the Laboratory of Biocybernetics,
and the Head of the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the Faculty of
Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana. During the last few years, his
research interests include electroporation-based gene transfer and drug delivery,
development of electronic hardware, and numerical modeling of biological
processes.

Tadej Kotnik was born in 1972. He received the Ph.D. degree in biophysics
from University Paris XI, Paris, France, in 2000.
He is currently the Vice Dean for Research and a Scientific Councillor at the
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
His scientific research interests include membrane electrodynamics, membrane
electroporation and gene electrotransfer, as well as computational research in
analytic number theory.
Dr. Kotnik received the Galvani Prize of the Bioelectrochemical Society in
2001.

