IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1549

Quantifying and Reducing Posture-Dependent
Distortion in Ballistocardiogram Measurements
Abdul Qadir Javaid, Student Member, IEEE, Andrew D. Wiens, Student Member, IEEE,
Nathaniel Forrest Fesmire, Student Member, IEEE, Mary Ann Weitnauer, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Omer T. Inan, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Ballistocardiography is a noninvasive measurement
of the mechanical movement of the body caused by cardiac
ejection of blood. Recent studies have demonstrated that ballistocardiogram (BCG) signals can be measured using a modified
home weighing scale and used to track changes in myocardial contractility and cardiac output. With this approach, the BCG can
potentially be used both for preventive screening and for chronic
disease management applications. However, for achieving high signal quality, subjects are required to stand still on the scale in an
upright position for the measurement; the effects of intentional
(for user comfort) or unintentional (due to user error) modifications in the position or posture of the subject during the measurement have not been investigated in the existing literature. In this
study, we quantified the effects of different standing and seated postures on the measured BCG signals, and on the most salient BCGderived features compared to reference standard measurements
(e.g., impedance cardiography). We determined that the standing
upright posture led to the least distorted signals as hypothesized,
and that the correlation between BCG-derived timing interval features (R-J interval) and the preejection period, PEP (measured
using ICG), decreased significantly with impaired posture or sitting position. We further implemented two novel approaches to
improve the PEP estimates from other standing and sitting postures, using system identification and improved J-wave detection
methods. These approaches can improve the usability of standing
BCG measurements in unsupervised settings (i.e., the home), by
improving the robustness to nonideal posture, as well as enabling
high-quality seated BCG measurements.
Index Terms—Ballistocardiogram (BCG), home monitoring,
sensor informatics.

I. INTRODUCTION
OME monitoring of cardiovascular health has gained a
great deal of attention in the past decade. According to
a report from the American Heart Association, almost 25%
of all deaths in America are caused by heart disorders each
year. The prevalance of heart disease is expected to rise in the
coming years and 40.5% of Americans are projected to suffer
from cardiovascular disorders by 2030 [1]; this would further

H

Manuscript received January 1, 2015; revised April 15, 2015; accepted May
26, 2015. Date of publication June 4, 2015; date of current version September
1, 2015. The work of A. D. Wiens and O. T. Inan was supported in part
by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, National
Institutes of Health, under Grant U01 EB018818.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail:
aqjavaid@gatech.edu; andrew.wiens@gatech.edu; forrest.fesmire@gmail.com;
maweit@gatech.edu; inan@gatech.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2441876

increase the already-skyrocketing costs of healthcare and lead
to a shortage in the number of healthcare providers per patient.
There is thus a compelling need to disseminate the diagnostics
and screening technologies from the centralized clinic to the
homes of patients for increasing the accessibility and decreasing
the overall cost of care.
Two archetypal examples of clinical problems requiring improved continuous monitoring capability are heart failure (HF)
and hypertension. HF is a disorder where the heart cannot supply sufficient blood to meet the demand of the tissues and organs
[2], [3]—accordingly, monitoring HF patients at home would
require the ability to measure cardiac output and myocardial
contractility. Hypertension is defined as elevated blood pressure
above 140 mmHg (systolic) and/or 90 mmHg (diastolic) [4], and
would thus require the measurement of pressures. For such diseases and conditions related to the mechanical health of the heart
and vasculature, there are few—if any—commercially available
solutions for patients that are accurate and also convenient for
serial measurements at home [5].
In the research domain, one measurement modality that has
gained some interest recently for such applications is ballistocardiography: the measurement of the reactionary forces of
the body to cardiac ejection of blood into the vasculature [6],
[7]. The ballistocardiogram (BCG) signal has been measured
using instrumented chairs [8]–[10], weighing scales [11]–[13],
beds [14]–[16], and force plates [17], [18], all of which can
potentially be integrated into patients’ homes. Additionally, researchers have demonstrated that the BCG signals contain clinically relevant information regarding cardiac output (based on
the rms power of the BCG [12]) and myocardial contractility
(based on the R-J interval, the time delay between the electrocardiogram, ECG, R-wave and the BCG maximum peak, the
J-wave [19], [20]).
In particular, our team has focused on the weighing scale
form factor, which offers many potential benefits including 1)
the fact that other sensors can be integrated into the same scale
for multimodal patient monitoring, 2) weighing scales are already prevalent in millions of households in the U.S., and (3)
the sensors already inside of most electronic weighing scales
are sufficiently sensitive for BCG measurement, thus reducing
the potential barrier to translation into the commercial domain.
Unfortunately, one disadvantage for the scale platform is that
the subjects must stand still in an upright posture for the measurements. In addition to a subject accidentally slouching for a
measurement, it is possible that some subjects will have reduced
physical strength, and thus the measurements must be taken in a

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1550

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 1. Block diagram illustrating the transfer function relating central cardiac
(hemodynamic) forces to BCG signals measured with a modified weighing scale.
The posture can both affect the source (via changes in angle) and system.

seated position instead. Studies have noted that the BCG signal
can be affected by posture, using various measurement hardware
such as fiber optic sensors [21], [22]. However, these postural
effects have not been studied in depth.
The objective of this paper is to 1) investigate the changes
in the BCG signal and derived parameters under different postures and positions, and 2) demonstrate novel methods based
on our recent work [23], [24] to improve the system performance for these other postures. We hypothesize a framework
for understanding BCG measurement, and the effects of subject posture/position, as summarized in Fig. 1. Specifically, we
focus on improving the estimation of R-J intervals from the
ECG and BCG, as a surrogate measure of contractility [19],
[20] and evaluate our results based on standard measurements
of the preejection period (PEP) from the impedance cardiogram
(ICG) signals [25]–[27].
These novel methods can improve the usability of the BCG
scale in unsupervised settings (i.e., the home), by improving
robustness to nonideal posture, as well as enabling high-quality
seated BCG measurements which would expand the available
patient population.
II. METHODS
A. Protocol
Data were collected from each subject in five different postures/positions, Pi , as illustrated in Fig. 2. Three standing and
two seated postures were investigated. The first posture involved
standing in an upright posture as delineated in previous studies
[13], [19], [28], [29]. Two more standing postures were considered in which subjects were asked to stand in a slouched
posture. The angle θS made by tangent to the thoracic spine
(more specifically the tangent to the T 2–T4 vertebrae) with the
perpendicular was measured in both positions. The last phase
of the project involved two sitting positions and, in this case,
both positions were specified by the angle θK made by the knee
joint. Each subject was asked to keep his or her back in an upright position for the two seated postures. Thus the five postures
considered in the study are specified below:

1) Posture 1 (P1 ): Upright standing position θS ≈ 0◦ .
2) Posture 2 (P2 ): Slightly slouched standing position θS =
20 − 40◦ .
3) Posture 3 (P3 ): Heavily slouched standing position where
θS = 40 − 60◦ .
4) Posture 4 (P4 ): Seated position where knee angle θK ≈
90◦ .
5) Posture 5 (P5 ): Seated position where knee angle is θK =
60 − 80◦ .
The standing upright posture provides the best coupling of
vertical (head-to-foot) cardiac forces to the scale as shown in
previous studies [7], [11]–[13]. Postures P2 and P3 were considered since they would simply represent the user accidentally
taking measurements without standing completely upright or
due to back problems. P4 represented the upright sitting condition and was considered since some patients are not able to
stand still on the scale. Such seated BCG measurements have
been considered in the literature [11], [30], but this important
comparison of signal quality and feature accuracy has not been
conducted to date. Finally, the reason for including P5 in this
study was to explore the increase in pressure wave reflections
at the femoral bifurcation and how these reflections affect the
BCG.
Data were collected from 13 subjects (12 male and one female, 26 ± 4 years, 75 ± 10 kg, 177 ± 7.7 cm height) under a
protocol approved by the Georgia Institute of Technology Institutional Review Board. In postures P1 − P3 , the subjects were
asked to stand on the BCG weighing scale; in postures P4 and
P5 , the BCG scale was placed on a flat solid stool and subjects
were asked to sit on the platform. The ECG and ICG data were
simultaneously captured along with the BCG data. In P1 and
P4 , each subject was asked to breathe normally in a resting state
for 30 s, perform a Valsalva maneuver for 15 s, and then remain
still on the scale for 30–40 s [29], [31], [32]. In P2 , P3 , and P5 ,
each subject was asked to breathe normally in a resting state for
30–40 s and no Valsalva maneuver was performed. The values
of θS for slouched standing positions in the measured data for
13 subjects were θS = 35◦ ± 3◦ for P2 and θS = 52◦ ± 4.5◦ for
P3 . Similarly, for P5 , the knee angle θK = 70◦ ± 3◦ .
B. Hardware Design
The ECG and ICG signals were measured using the BNEL50 and BN-NICO wireless measurement modules (BIOPAC
Systems, Inc., Goleta, CA, USA), then transmitted wirelessly
to the data acquisition system (MP150WSW, BIOPAC Systems,
Inc., Goleta, CA) for subsequent digitization at 1 kHz. The BCG
was measured using a custom analog amplifier as described in
previous work [24].
C. Preliminary Data Processing
1) ECG, BCG, and ICG Signal Processing: The ECG signal
was passed through a finite impulse response (FIR) bandpass
filter (cutoff frequencies 2.5–40 Hz, Kaiser window) and the
BCG and ICG signals through FIR filters (Kaiser window, cutoff frequencies 0.8–15 Hz for BCG and 0.8–35 Hz for ICG).
The R-peaks, Rr (r was the peak index), in the ECG signal were

JAVAID et al.: QUANTIFYING AND REDUCING POSTURE-DEPENDENT DISTORTION IN BALLISTOCARDIOGRAM MEASUREMENTS

1551

Fig. 2. (a) Block diagram of the setup. (b) Sample waveforms for ECG and BCG in different postures. The R-peak in ECG is used as a reference point for the
extraction of BCG waveforms in every heartbeat.

automatically detected with a QRS complex detection algorithm
and used as fiduciary points for segmenting the BCG data: signals in Rr + 600 ms frames or “heartbeats” following each
R-peak were extracted over the entire data period and aligned to
form a collection or an ensemble. Let Bkj be the matrix that represented this collection for the jth subject in posture k and each
row of Bkj was denoted by bjk ,m [l] and represented the lth sample of the mth frame / heartbeat of the BCG signal (Bkj ∈ RM ×d
and bjk ,m ∈ Rd , where k ∈ [1, 2, ..., 5], j ∈ [1, 2, ..., J], J = 13
subjects, d = 600 samples and M represented the number of
heartbeats / BCG frames for a given subject j in posture k). For
the ICG data, again the R-peaks Rr from the ECG were used
as reference points and the ICG signals were extracted from
Rr + 500 ms for each subject in each posture to form an en
semble Ikj (Ikj ∈ RM ×d , d = 500 samples). Let the average of
all rows in each of the BCG and ICG data matrices be denoted
by bold letters Bjk and Ijk , respectively.
2) Parameter Extraction: The R-J intervals and PEP were
calculated for each subject in all postures. The BCG and ICG
heartbeats / rows of matrices Bkj and Ikj in the resting state were
partitioned into subensembles of 5-s periods. All the rows from
the BCG or ICG data matrix in each 5-s period were averaged
to form subensemble averaged waveforms. Since the 15-s postValsalva period was also included in the data for P1 and P4 for
all subjects, the heartbeats from the post-Valsalva 15-s period
were also divided into subensembles.
The J-peak in the BCG ensemble averaged waveform was
detected as the global peak in the first 400 ms portion of the
signal. Apart from the R-J interval, the R-K and the R-I intervals
were also calculated. However, the R-J interval measurement
was a more consistent feature in the BCG signal and the J-wave
was larger in amplitude than either the I- or the K-wave. Thus
the J-peak was more easily identifiable as it was less corrupted

by noise and motion artifacts. Additionally, the R-J interval had
been shown in previous papers [13], [19], [29] to be correlated to
the PEP both for subjects at rest and with the use of physiological
perturbations.
PEP is defined as the time elapsed from the Q-point in the
ECG to the B-point on the ICG signal. However, it is not always
easy to detect the Q-point in the ECG and the B-point in the ICG.
In our analysis, we used the R-peak in the ECG as a reference
and for finding the B-point of the ICG, the ensemble averaged
signal was filtered twice with a Savitzky Golay differentiator
filter (21 taps) [19]. The peak of the differentiated signal was
then selected as the B-point and PEP was estimated as the R-B
interval.
D. Time-Domain Posture-Induced Differences
To capture possible posture-induced differences in the time
domain, we calculated for each subject and posture the root
mean square (RMS) difference between each normalized BCG
frame and its corresponding average Bjk over the entire BCG
data matrix. We interpreted this difference as an “error.” The
normalization was simply a scaling factor calculated for each
frame that minimized this RMS error. Because of this normalization, the RMS error quantified shape distortion that could
not be corrected by a scaling factor. For the mth unnormalized
BCG frame bjk ,m for subject j in posture k and average Bjk , the
amplitude scaling factor am was calculated for each individual
beat [28] by the formula
am =

Rb j

k ,m

B jk

RB j B j
k

(1)

k

where R was the cross-correlation operator. The RMS error ejk
between individual beats weighted by am and the average for

1552

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

that posture was then calculated by


d
M 
 1 
j
ek = 
(Bjk [l] − am bjk ,m [l])2
M d m =1

(2)

l=1

where l indicated the sample index. The RMS errors thus calculated by (2) for postures P2 , P3 , P4 and P5 for each subject
were then normalized by division from the corresponding error
in posture P1 for that subject. Let ėjk represented this normalized
error for jth subject in posture k and let εk represented the array of errors for all subjects in posture k (εk = [ė1k , ė2k , ..., ėJk ]).
The mean (με k ) and the standard deviation (σε k ) of εk were
calculated for all postures.
E. Frequency-Domain Posture-Induced Differences
The power spectral density (PSD) was estimated using the
discrete Fourier transform of BCG average Bjk in each of the
standing postures (P1 , P2 , and P3 ). The PSD estimates were
interpolated to increase the resolution by four times. Let Xkj [f ]
denoted the PSD estimate, where k denoted the posture (k ∈
[2, 3]), j represented the subject number and f represented the
frequency index. The mean and the standard deviation of PSD
for f = 0 → 14 Hz were calculated for each of the standing
posture for all the subjects.
F. Methods for Improved Estimation of BCG Parameters
1) System Identification: The BCG signal from the weighing scale was believed to originate from cardiac ejection of
blood. Let HW S be the transfer function for the system that represented a transformation between these central cardiac forces
and the corresponding BCG signal on the weighing scale in

the upright standing position. Also let HW
S be the analogous
functions in the slouched standing postures. The aim was to
design a linear transformation that mapped the slouched standing posture BCG ensemble average to the good-posture BCG
ensemble average assuming that there was no morphological
change in cardiac forces between these postures, but only in the
transfer function mapping these central forces to the peripheral
BCG measurement site. The transformation could not be exact
and hence, formed an estimator of the good posture BCG waveform, when the observation was the slouched-standing posture
j
BCG waveform. In symbols, given Bij , the transformation Hi,1
 j in the form B
j = H j Bj . A
produced the optimal estimate B
1
1
i,1 i
similar system identification approach had been demonstrated
in our prior work for investigating the relationship between the
wearable BCG and the weighing scale BCG [23], [24].
For every subject, two transformation functions were obtained
converting the BCG signals in postures P2 and P3 to posture
j
denoted the transformation from any posture i to
P1 . Let Hi,k
posture k for the jth subject. Fig. 3 shows the block diagram
j
and the
for the design part of the transformation function Hi,k
analysis part which used these transfer functions for analyzing
the improvement in estimates of BCG derived parameters. These
transformation functions were obtained by training on the first
20 s of the BCG data using 5×2-fold cross validation [33]. In

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the system identification. H W S represented the
transformation between heart’s mechanical action and BCG signal obtained

from the scale in upright posture and H W
S in slouched standing postures. The
system was trained on extracted heartbeats from postures P i and P k . In the
analysis part, the individual beats were transformed using H ij, k , obtained from
design step, followed by ensemble averaging and parameter estimation.

j
order to obtain a transformation Hi,k
from posture i to posture
k, the following procedure was adopted:
1) The heartbeats in the first 20 s of the BCG data matrices
Bij and Bkj were randomly partitioned into two folds in
each iteration of 5×2-fold cross validation. Let u1 and u2
be ensemble averages of two folds from Bij and v1 and
v2 from Bkj .
2) Let u1 and v1 be the input and output data vectors for the
training phase and u2 and v2 for the validation phase in
one iteration of 5×2-fold cross validation. The transformation functions were obtained by training and validation
on ensemble averages.
3) The length of the FIR filter was determined using a sweep
of filter lengths from 1 to 600 samples and number of
samples before the R-peak in ECG and the values of these
two parameters corresponding to the minimum error from
cross validation were found.
4) The coefficients for the FIR filter impulse response were
then determined by least-squares regression.
In general, if an input signal x is transformed in a linear
system by a transfer function A, then the output signal y is
given by

y = Ax.

(3)

The Covariance Method [34] was used in this project for
estimating the FIR filter coefficients. In the Covariance Method
the matrix for linear system’s function A was composed of
samples from the input data. The variable x then took the form
of 1-D FIR filter coefficients. For the data variables defined
earlier, the output signal y was made up of samples v1 [l] and
matrix A was composed of samples of the input data vector u1 [l]
j
[l], where l indicated the
while x had the filter coefficients Hi,k
sample index. For a filter of order t, the explicit forms of y, x

JAVAID et al.: QUANTIFYING AND REDUCING POSTURE-DEPENDENT DISTORTION IN BALLISTOCARDIOGRAM MEASUREMENTS

and A are given by
T

y = v1 [t] v1 [t + 1] ... v1 [d]
	

T
j
j
j
x = Hi,k
[1] Hi,k
[2] ... Hi,k
[t]
⎡
⎤
u1 [t]
u1 [t − 1] ...
u1 [1]
⎢
⎥
⎢ u1 [t + 1]
⎥
u1 [t]
...
u1 [2]
⎢
⎥
⎥.
A=⎢
⎢
⎥
..
..
.
.
..
..
⎢
⎥
.
.
⎣
⎦
u1 [d]
u1 [d − 1] ... u1 [d − t + 1]

(4)
(5)

(6)

The least-squares solution x̂ to (3) that minimizes the l2 -norm
of error in (7) is given by the expression in (8).
min  y − Ax 22

(7)

x̂ = (AT A)−1 AT y.

(8)

x∈RN

In order to avoid overfitting and inaccurate components in
the solution provided by (8) due to mild noise, Tikhonov regularization [35] was used to improve accuracy. This involved
penalizing the residual error by a regularization term δ in (7).
The least-squares solution with Tikhonov regularization is given
by (9) and (10):
min  y − Ax 22 +δ  x 22

x∈RN

x̂ = (AT A + δI)−1 AT y.

(9)
(10)

The least-squares solution x̂, thus formed the FIR filter coefficients and the impulse response of the transformation function
j
Hi,k
. Once these subject specific transformation functions were
generated in the training phase, the remaining portion of the
BCG data for each subject in P2 and P3 , not processed in trainj
. The R-J intervals were then
ing phase, was filtered with Hi,k
estimated from 5-s filtered subensembles and correlated with
PEP.
2) Modified R-J Estimation using Polynomial Fitting: The
J-wave amplitude and morphology for the seated BCG signals
was significantly different from the standing measurements from
the same subjects. Specifically, as found in previous studies, the
seated BCG amplitudes overall were much lower than for the
corresponding standing measurements from the same subjects.
Accordingly, to improve the noise reduction performance of the
ensemble averaging, we employed weighted averaging techniques as described in [36]. Additionally, we found that the
J-wave could split into two smaller peaks, and thereby lead to
peak detection errors. To mitigate this problem – which was only
found in the seated BCG measurements for our dataset—we devised a simple algorithm for consistent J-wave peak detection
based on low order polynomial fitting. The global peak p in the
weighted ensemble averaged BCG waveform was detected as
the highest peak between 150 and 400 ms portion of the waveform. The zero-crossings before and after p were determined
and a polynomial of order 2 was fitted across the waveform
between these zero-crossings containing p . The highest peak
in the fitted waveform was then detected as the J-peak and the

1553

R-J interval was estimated as the time period between the newly
detected J-peak and the ECG R-peak.
3) Statistical Analysis: In order to analyze the improvement
with the above two methods, a paired t-test was conducted on
absolute values of residuals of PEP from the regression line
before and after the application of system identification or the
polynomial fitting method. To remove the outliers in the linear
model fitting the R-J interval to PEP from all subjects in the ith
posture, the data points for which either the PEP values or the R-J
intervals were beyond μP E P ± 2σP E P or μR −J ± 2σR −J were
removed from the analysis. This was followed by the removal
of the data points for which the squared Mahalanobis distance
[37] was greater than χ20.95 . The reason for implementing this
two-step outlier detection was that Mahalanobis distance, which
finds outliers in multivariate regression, depended on the joint
mean of the multivariate data and was affected by one or two
erroneous points occurring at the extremes. Since the paired
t-test required equal number of data points, the union set of
outliers were removed from the R-J intervals and PEP data points
before and after the application of improvement methods.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Time- and Frequency-Domain Distortion Analysis
It was observed that the mean (με k ) and the standard deviation
(σε k ) of the normalized error εk exhibited an increasing trend
across postures indicating more shape distortion in the measured
BCG for slouched standing and seated postures. The slouched
postures P2 and P3 showed με k of 0.85 and 1.1 with σε k of 0.25
and 0.5 respectively. The seated postures P4 indicated more
shape distortion than standing postures (με 4 = 1.7 and σε 4 =
1.1) while P5 showed the most distortion (με 5 = 2.5 and σε 5 =
1.8). Fig. 4 shows the average PSDs and standard deviations for
P1 , P2 and P3 for all subjects. The plots indicated the appearance
of an additional peak after the global peak in the power spectra of
P2 and P3 beyond 6 Hz. The peak became more prominent in P3
indicating more distortion was present in BCG signal at higher
frequencies for nonupright standing postures. These additional
peaks indicated the appearance of other modes of vibration as
the standing posture became more slouched. A similar effect
had been observed in seated body vibrations in prior literature
[38], [39].
B. PEP and R-J Interval Correlation
Correlation coefficients and linear regression were calculated
between the R-J intervals and PEP for all subjects in each posture. Fig. 5 shows five correlation plots for all the standing and
seated postures. The results corroborated the findings in [19]
that standing upright posture (P1 ) gave the best correlation and
best linear fit between PEP and the R-J intervals with a value
of r2 = 0.72. The slightly slouched position P2 showed a correlation of 0.4, while the heavily slouched position indicated
a degraded performance. The seated position (P4 ) showed the
second best results (r2 = 0.71) with modified R-J estimation.
The method also provided good estimation for P5 . The outliers,

1554

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 4. Average power spectrum with standard deviations for all subjects. (a) Upright standing posture P1 . (b) Slightly slouched standing posture P 2 . (c) Heavily
slouched standing posture P 3 .

Fig. 5. Correlation linear regression plots for standing and seated positions. The plots for the seated BCG postures P4 and P 5 involve R-J intervals estimation
using polynomial fitting method.‘N’ is the total number of data points obtained from all subjects in a posture in the study and ‘n’ represents the number of data
points used in the correlation and regression analysis after outlier removal. The outliers were not included in analysis.

detected by the method explained earlier, were not shown in the
correlation plots.
C. Improvement in Estimation of BCG Parameters
Two methods have been discussed to assess the improvement
in estimation of BCG parameters. The system identification
approach was used for slouched standing postures P2 and P3 .
The system identification method improved correlation between

the R-J intervals and PEP for P2 from 0.5 to 0.74 and this
increase was statistically significant (p < 0.05). However, for
P3 , there was no statistically significant increase in correlation
as r2 went from 0.5 to 0.49 after system identification.
The polynomial fitting method was used for improved estimation of BCG parameters in the two seated postures. Since
no training or testing was done in this method, all the beats of
BCG and ICG data matrices in the seated postures were available for analysis. The method increased r2 for P4 from 0.5 to

JAVAID et al.: QUANTIFYING AND REDUCING POSTURE-DEPENDENT DISTORTION IN BALLISTOCARDIOGRAM MEASUREMENTS

0.71 (p < 0.05) but did not yield any statistically significant
improvement for P5 (r2 changed from 0.43 to 0.49).

[6]

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have shown in several ways that posture has a significant
impact on the BCG signal and on the R-J interval’s correlation
with the PEP (a known clinically significant marker for HF).
These ways include showing posture-induced differences in the
BCG signals in both the time and frequency domains. The PSD
of the BCG frames in slouched-standing postures indicates the
existence of more than one mode of vibration of the body caused
by ejection of blood. In future work, these changes in the PSD
can be used to automatically differentiate changes in physiology
from changes in user posture. We further demonstrated that
when the posture is nonideal, the estimation of the R-J intervals
can be improved by system identification or polynomial fitting
based approaches. An important limitation of this study that
should be noted is the relatively small sample size of only 13
subjects. Nevertheless, the trends are observed in all subjects,
and statistically significant differences are observed. Another
limitation is the use of linear modeling for estimating the transfer
function mapping one posture to another.
Because this paper found that postural changes affect the BCG
signal morphology, future work can focus on training machine
learning algorithms to automatically identify—from the measured distortion in the time or frequency domain for the BCG—
that the user is standing in a nonideal posture. This will require
the collection of larger datasets, including serial measurements
taken over the course of weeks or months. Furthermore, once
a nonideal posture is detected, the mapping function trained
on the first day can be employed to correct for the nonideal
posture and preserve the signal quality of the measured BCG.
This can potentially lead to improved long-term monitoring accuracy for BCG signals in unsupervised settings. Future work
should also focus on employing nonlinear modeling techniques,
such as Hammerstein–Wiener models, for obtaining the transfer functions. The simple methods for improvement presented
in this paper could readily be implemented in an inexpensive
embedded systems platform in real-time on the scale itself, thus
potentially accelerating the transition of the technology to patients’ homes.

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

REFERENCES
[1] P. A. Heidenreich, J. G. Trogdon, O. A. Khavjou, J. Butler, K. Dracup,
M. D. Ezekowitz, E. A. Finkelstein, Y. Hong, S. C. Johnston, A. Khera,
D. M. Lloyd-Jones, S. A. Nelson, G. Nichol, D. Orenstein, P. W. F. Wilson,
and Y. J. Woo, “Forecasting the future of cardiovascular disease in the
united states a policy statement from the American Heart Association,”
Circulation, vol. 123, no. 8, pp. 933–944, 2011.
[2] J. O. Davis, “The physiology of congestive heart failure,” Handbook Physiol., vol. 3, pp. 2071–122, 1965.
[3] R. M. Berne and M. N. Levy, Cardiovascular Physiology, 7th ed. Saint
Louis, MO, USA: Mosby-Year Book, 1997.
[4] J. E. Hall, J. P. Granger, J. M. Carmo, A. A. Silva, J. Dubinion, E. George,
S. Hamza, J. Speed, and M. E. Hall, “Hypertension: physiology and pathophysiology,” Comprehensive Physiol., vol. 2, pp. 2393–2442, 2012.
[5] J.-M. Kim, J.-H. Hong, M.-C. Cho, E.-J. Cha, and T.-S. Lee, “Wireless biomedical signal monitoring device on wheelchair using noncontact

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]

1555

electro-mechanical film sensor,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 2007, pp. 574–577.
I. Starr and H. A. Schroeder, “Ballistocardiogram. ii. normal standards,
abnormalities commonly found in diseases of the heart and circulation, and
their significance,” J. Clinical Investigation, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 437–450,
1940.
O. T. Inan, P. F. Migeotte, K.-S. Park, M. Etemadi, K. Tavakolian,
R. Casanella, J. Zanetti, J. Tank, I. Funtova, G. K. Prisk, and M. Di
Rienzo, “Ballistocardiography and seismocardiography: A review of recent advances,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. PP, no. 99,
pp. 1–1, 2014.
T. Koivistoinen, S. Junnila, A. Varri, and T. Koobi, “A new method for
measuring the ballistocardiogram using EMFi sensors in a normal chair,”
in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Sep. 2004,
vol. 1, pp. 2026–2029.
H. J. Baek, G. S. Chung, K. K. Kim, and K. S. Park, “A smart health
monitoring chair for nonintrusive measurement of biological signals,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 150–158, Jan. 2012.
L. Dziuda, F. Skibniewski, M. Krej, and J. Lewandowski, “Monitoring
respiration and cardiac activity using fiber Bragg grating-based sensor,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1934–1942, Jul. 2012.
O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, R. M. Wiard, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A.
Kovacs, “Robust ballistocardiogram acquisition for home monitoring,”
Physiol. Meas., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 169–185, 2009.
O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, A. Paloma, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. A. Kovacs,
“Non-invasive cardiac output trending during exercise recovery on
a bathroom-scale-based ballistocardiograph,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30,
no. 3, pp. 261–274, 2009.
R. Gonzlez-Landaeta, O. Casas, and R. Palls-Areny, “Heart rate detection
from an electronic weighing scale,” Physiological Meas., vol. 29, no. 8,
pp. 979–988, 2008.
C. Bruser, K. Stadlthanner, S. de Waele, and S. Leonhardt, “Adaptive
beat-to-beat heart rate estimation in ballistocardiograms,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 778–786, Sep. 2011.
J. H. Shin, Y. J. Chee, D.-U. Jeong, and K. S. Park, “Nonconstrained sleep
monitoring system and algorithms using air-mattress with balancing tube
method,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 147–156,
Jan. 2010.
D. Mack, D. Mack, J. Patrie, P. Suratt, R. Felder, and M. Alwan, “Development and preliminary validation of heart rate and breathing rate
detection using a passive, ballistocardiography-based sleep monitoring
system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 111–120,
Jan. 2009.
K. Yamakoshi, M. Kuroda, S. Tanaka, I. Yamaguchi, and A. Kawarada,
“Non-conscious and automatic acquisition of body and excreta weight
together with ballistocardiogram in a lavatory,” in Proc. 18th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Oct. 1996, vol. 1, pp. 67–68.
K. Tavakolian, B. Ngai, A. Blaber, and B. Kaminska, “Infrasonic cardiac
signals: Complementary windows to cardiovascular dynamics,” in Proc.
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 2011, pp. 4275–4278.
M. Etemadi, O. T. Inan, L. Giovangrandi, and G. T. Kovacs, “Rapid
assessment of cardiac contractility on a home bathroom scale,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 864–869, 2011.
A. Lindqvist, K. Pihlajamäki, J. Jalonen, V. Laaksonen, and J. Alihanka,
“Static-charge-sensitive bed ballistocardiography in cardiovascular monitoring,” Clin. Physiol., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 23–30, 1996.
Ł. Dziuda and F. W. Skibniewski, “A new approach to ballistocardiographic measurements using fibre Bragg grating-based sensors,” Biocybern. Biomed. Eng., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 101–116, 2014.
M. Krej, L. Dziuda, and F. Skibniewski, “A method of detecting heartbeat
locations in the ballistocardiographic signal from the fiber-optic vital signs
sensor,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1,
2015.
A. D. Wiens and O. T. Inan, “A novel system identification technique
for improved wearable hemodynamics assessment,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1345–1354, May 2015.
A. Wiens, M. Etemadi, S. Roy, L. Klein, and O. Inan, “Towards continuous, non-invasive assessment of ventricular function and hemodynamics: Wearable ballistocardiography,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat.,
vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2014.
M. T. Allen, J. Fahrenberg, R. M. Kelsey, W. R. Lovallo, and L. J. Doornen,
“Methodological guidelines for impedance cardiography,” Psychophysiology, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 1990.
L. Critchley, “Impedance cardiography: The impact of new technology,”
Anaesthesia, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 677–684, 1998.

1556

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

[27] A. Sherwood(Chair), M. T. Allen, J. Fahrenberg, R. M. Kelsey,
W. R. Lovallo, and L. J. van Doornen, “Methodological guidelines for
impedance cardiography,” Psychophysiology, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–23,
1990.
[28] O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, R. M. Wiard, G. T. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi,
“Novel methods for estimating the ballistocardiogram signal using a simultaneously acquired electrocardiogram,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2009, pp. 5334–5347.
[29] O. T. Inan, M. Etemadi, R. M. Wiard, G. T. A. Kovacs, and L. Giovangrandi, “Non-invasive measurement of valsalva-induced hemodynamic
changes on a bathroom scale ballistocardiograph,” in Proc. 30th Annu.
Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 2008, pp. 674–677.
[30] E. Pinheiro, O. Postolache, and P. Girao, “Study on ballistocardiogram
acquisition in a moving wheelchair with embedded sensors,” Metrology
Meas. Syst., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 739–750, 2012.
[31] V. Ermishkin, E. Lukoshkova, E.-Y. Bersenev, M. Saidova, V. Shitov,
O. Vinogradova, and V. Khayutin, “Beat-by-beat changes in pre-ejection
period during functional tests evaluated by impedance aortography: A
step to a left ventricular contractility monitoring,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf.
Elect. Bioimpedance/8th Conf. Elect. Impedance Tomography, 2007, pp.
655–658.
[32] J. C. Greenfield, R. L. Cox, R. R. Hernandez, C. Thomas, and F. W.
Schoonmaker, “Pressure-flow studies in man during the valsalva maneuver
with observations on the mechanical properties of the ascending aorta,”
Circulation, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 653–661, 1967.
[33] M. Stone, “Cross-validatory choice and assessment of statistical predictions,” J. Royal Statist. Soc. Ser. B (Methodological), pp. 111–147, 1974.
[34] T. K. Moon and W. C. Stirling, Mathematical Methods and Algorithms
for Signal Processing, vol. 1. New York, NY, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2000.
[35] A. N. Tihonov, “Solution of incorrectly formulated problems and the
regularization method,” Sov. Math. Dokl, vol. 4, pp. 1035–1038, 1963.
[36] L. Sörnmo and P. Laguna, Bioelectrical Signal Processing in Cardiac and
Neurological Applications. New York, NY, USA: Academic, 2005.
[37] V. J. Hodge and J. Austin, “A survey of outlier detection methodologies,”
Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 85–126, 2004.
[38] S. Kitazaki and M. J. Griffin, “Resonance behaviour of the seated human
body and effects of posture,” J. Biomechanics, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 143–149,
1997.
[39] Y. Matsumoto and M. Griffin, “Dynamic response of the standing human
body exposed to vertical vibration: Influence of posture and vibration
magnitude,” J. Sound Vibration, vol. 212, no. 1, pp. 85–107, 1998.
Abdul Qadir Javaid (S’13) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees from the University of Engineering and
Technology, Lahore, Pakistan, and Newcastle University, Tyne and Wear, U.K., in 2007 and 2008, respectively.
He worked briefly in the Electrical Engineering
Department, National University of Computer and
Emerging Sciences, Lahore, from 2010 to 2011. He
joined Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
USA, in 2011 and have been working in Smart Antenna Research Laboratory under Dr. Mary Ann Weitnauer’s supervision since Fall 2012. He has been collaborating with Dr. O. T.
Inan on various projects since Summer 2014. His current research interests
include biomedical devices, signal processing algorithms for biosignals, and
machine learning.
Andrew D. Wiens (S’10) received the B.S. degree
(Hons.) in electrical engineering and computer engineering from Washington University in St. Louis, St.
Louis, MO, USA, in 2013. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
He joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
as a Teaching Assistant in digital signal processing
in 2013, and in 2014, he became a Teaching Assistant in electromagnetics. He is currently a Research
Assistant in Dr. Omer Inan’s lab. His current research interests include bioengineering, signal processing, machine learning, and techniques for noninvasive
physiological measurements.
Mr. Wiens received the Presidents Scholarship in 2013 from the Georgia
Institute of Technology.

Nathaniel Forrest Fesmire (S’15) received the B.S.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
USA, in May 2015, where he is currently working
toward the M.S. degree in electrical and computer
engineering. He is originally from Chattanooga, TN,
USA.

Mary Ann Weitnauer (SM’03) received the B.E.E.
and Ph.D. degrees from the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech), Atlanta, GA, USA, in 1983
and 1989, respectively.
In 1989, she joined the faculty of the School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Tech,
where she is currently a Professor. Her early research
areas were optical communications and radar systems. In 1997, she established the Smart Antenna
Research Laboratory (SARL) at Georgia Tech, which
applies real and virtual array antennas to wireless networks and radar systems. She held the Georgia Tech ADVANCE Professorship
for the College of Engineering from 2006 to 2012. She was a Visiting Professor
at Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark, in the summers of 2006–2008 and at
Idaho National Labs in 2010. The SARL performs system analysis and design,
channel measurement, and prototyping relating primarily to wireless local area,
ad hoc and sensor networks, with focus on the lower three layers of the protocol stack. SARL has also recently developed signal processing algorithms for
impulse radio ultrawideband for noncontact vital signs measurement. She has
authored or co-authored more than 170 referred journal and conference papers,
including four conference papers that have won Best Paper awards.

Omer T. Inan (S’06–M’09) received the B.S., M.S.,
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2004,
2005, and 2009, respectively.
He joined ALZA Corporation (A Johnson and
Johnson Company) in 2006 as an Engineering Intern in the Drug Device Research and Development Group, where he designed micropower, highefficiency circuits for iontophoretic drug delivery,
and researched options for closed-loop drug delivery
systems. In 2007, he joined Countryman Associates,
Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA, where he was the Chief Engineer, involved in
designing and developing high-end professional audio circuits and systems.
From 2009 to 2013, he was also a Visiting Scholar in the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University. Since 2013, he has been an Assistant
Professor of electrical and computer engineering, and Program Faculty in the
Interdisciplinary Bioengineering Graduate Program, at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. He has published 40 technical articles in peerreviewed international journals and conferences and has two issued and three
pending patents. His research interests focus on noninvasive physiologic monitoring for human health and performance, and applying novel sensing systems
to chronic disease management and pediatric care.
Dr. Inan is an Associate Editor of the IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND
HEALTH INFORMATICS, Associate Editor for the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Conference, Member of the IEEE Technical Committee on Translational Engineering for Healthcare Innovation, and Technical Program Committee Member or Track Chair for several other major international biomedical
engineering conferences. He received the Gerald J. Lieberman Fellowship (Stanford University) in 2008–2009 for outstanding scholarship, teaching, and service. He is a Three-Time National Collegiate Athletic Association All-American
in the discus throw, and a former co-captain of the Stanford University Track
and Field Team.

