2620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Automated Assembly of Vascular-Like Microtube
With Repetitive Single-Step Contact Manipulation
Huaping Wang, Qiang Huang∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, Qing Shi, Tao Yue, Shaoqi Chen, Masahiro Nakajima,
Masaru Takeuchi, and Toshio Fukuda, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Fabricated vessel-mimetic microtubes are essential
for delivering sufficient nutrient to engineered composite tissues.
In this paper, vascular-like microtubes are engineered by automated assembly of donut-shaped micromodules that embed fibroblast cells. A microrobotic system is set up with dual manipulators
of 30-nm positioning resolution under an optical microscope. The
system assembles the micromodules by repeated single-step pickup motions. This process is specifically designed to avoid human
interference and ensure high reproducibility for automation. We
optimized the single-step motion by calibrating the key parameters (the micromodule dimensions) in a force analysis. The optimal
motion achieved a 98% pick-up success rate. The automated repetitive single-step assembly is achieved by an algorithm that acquires
the 3-D location and tracks the micromanipulator without being
affected by low contrast. The accuracy of the acquired 3-D location was experimentally determined as approximately 1 pixel
(2 μm under 4× magnification), and the tracking under different
observation conditions is proved effective. Finally, we automatically assembled microtubes at 6 micromodules/min, sufficiently
fast for fabricating macroscopic vessel-mimetic substitutes in biological applications.
Index Terms—Automated micromanipulation, cell assembly,
image processing, microrobotic, tissue engineering.

I. INTRODUCTION
ASCULATURE is a critical access for gas, nutrient, and
molecule exchange in thick three-dimensional (3-D) composite tissues fabricated in tissue engineering [1]. Because exchange is diffusion limited to scales of 100–200 μm, generating
small-caliber vasculature has become indispensable for engineering large tissues of clinical value [2], [3]. Currently, vascular networks are fabricated by top-down scaffold and bottom-up
microfluidic-based systems [4]. Porous scaffolds serve as artificial extracellular matrixes, providing an optimal cellular environment for penetration, ingrowth, and vascularization [5], [6].

V

Manuscript received January 12, 2015; revised April 3, 2015 and May 14,
2015; accepted May 22, 2015. Date of publication June 1, 2015; date of current
version October 16, 2015. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 61433010 and Grant 61375108, “111
Project” under Grant B08043. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
H. Wang, Q. Shi, S. Chen, and T. Fukuda are with the Intelligent Robotics
Institute, School of Mechatronical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Biomimetic
Robots and Systems, Beijing Institute of Technology, Ministry of Education.
∗ Q. Huang is with the Intelligent Robotics Institute, School of Mechatronical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Biomimetic Robots and Systems, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail:
qhuang@bit.edu.cn).
T. Yue is with The Ohio State University.
M. Nakajima and M. Takeuchi are with the Institute for Advanced Research,
Nagoya University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2437952

However, because relatively large structures are difficult to manipulate to cellular scale precision, the microstructural features
are sacrificed. Lacking the microstructure for diffusion, the cells
primarily populate the periphery of the scaffold instead of uniform distribution [7], [8]. To improve the scaffold properties, microstructural features can be introduced by new techniques such
as stereolithography, which creates an interconnecting internal
channel network for cell ingrowth and perfusion [9]. From a
fluidic point of view, microfluidic systems provide more precise
manipulation through the vascular-mimetic patterning with fluidic forces, optical tweezers, and DEP to assemble the microvessel from the bottom-up [10]–[12]. Previously, we combined all
the fabrication procedures into a four-layer microfluidic device,
and demonstrated self-assembly of microtubes [13]. However,
because of the strict operation requirements and closed-system
environment, this method could not manipulate every micromodule respectively during 3-D structure assembly. Native vessels are not readily remodeled by fabricated microvasculatures
incorporating microchannels with rectangle cross section and
demand a more flexible assembly method [14].
Flexible, high-precision microrobotic assembly can be realized by contact micromanipulation techniques because mechanical contact with the microstructure is established without
electrical or optical interference by the ambient environment
[15]–[17]. Kimura et al. [18] developed one of the earliest contact micromanipulation systems for cell injection, and Dario
et al. [19] proposed a prototype of microassembly system
for medical microdevices. To eliminate fatigue during timeconsuming tasks, Nelson et al. [20] exploited machine vision
and virtual reality technology to develop semiautomated teleoperated micromanipulation [21]–[23]. Currently, the microrobotic assembly systems have already achieved a good level of
automation and been widely used in manufacturing and biomedical research. However, there still exists some complicated
microassembly tasks which need to be done with separate subtasks. To achieve these subtasks, the human intervention may be
needed which sometimes influences the throughput and reproducibility during such complicated assembly process [24], [25].
To design the customized strategies, the automated microrobotic
system for complicated assembly tasks may simplify the human
intervention and assure the consistence and repeatability. It is
also an optimal choice for bioassembly tasks which assemble
cellular microstructures into macrostructures through repeated
consistent pick-and-place motions within a limited time, while
ensuring cell viability.
Another large challenge in automated bioassembly by contact micromanipulation is visual detection and tracking of the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: AUTOMATED ASSEMBLY OF VASCULAR-LIKE MICROTUBE WITH REPETITIVE SINGLE-STEP CONTACT MANIPULATION

end-effector in 3-D space. Many efforts have been done to acquire 3-D position of the end-effector, especially the position
along optical axis, through analyzing status change of endeffector tip during defocus or contact [26], [27]. Meanwhile,
dexterous manipulation requires the accurate tracking of the
end-effector under complicated circumstances, such as occlusion by the surroundings [28], [29]. Because the occlusion region is typically low contrast (i.e., of comparable intensity to
the end-effector), it is difficult to acquire the edge information
of the end-effector and extract it from the background. Many
model-based and model-free algorithms have been developed
for extracting static and dynamic objects under different occlusion situations [30], [31]. To avoid human involvement and ensure performance consistency during customized bioassembly
tasks, we should combine the advantages of various state-ofthe-art methods into a simplified algorithm that continuously
tracks the moving micromanipulator.
This paper presents a novel microrobotic assembly method
that engineers vascular-like microtubes by automated assembly of cell-embedded micromodules. To assemble the micromodules, the system simply repeats a programmed single-step
pick-up motion with one manipulator. The proposed system
requires no frequent alignment of end-effectors and is highly
reproducible. The fully automated assembly motion ensures
performance consistency, and the end-effector is continuously
monitored by a visual tracking algorithm that reconfigures the
contour around the occlusion region by line fitting. The system setup and basic assembly concept is presented in Section II.
Section III develops the novel single-step assembly method, and
Section IV presents the vision-based micromodule detection and
the 3-D tracking of the micromanipulator. In Section V, donutshaped micromodules (DSM) are automatically assembled into
a vascular-like microtube, which can be used for nutrients perfusion in further engineered thick composite tissues. Conclusions
are presented in Section IV.

II. OVERVIEW OF ASSEMBLY SYSTEM
A. System Framework
Fig. 1 shows the proposed assembly system. The dual micromanipulators are restricted to the rail and integrated under an
optical microscope (OM) (IX81, Olympus, Inc.,). Each 3-DOF
micromanipulator is configured with prismatic joints along the
X-, Y-, and Z-axes and is driven by piezo motors (model 8353,
New Focus, Inc.,) with 30-nm positioning resolution. The rail
is driven by a stepping motor (model PG15S-D20, MINEBEA,
Inc.,), which guides the manipulators into a concentric movement that rotates the end-effector. In this way, the manipulator orientation can be roughly adjusted prior to assembly. The
end-effector is a glass micropipette (G-1000, Narashige, Inc.,),
heated and pulled into micrometer dimensions (P-2000, Sutter,
Inc.,). Visual feedback in the automated assembly is provided
by a digital camera (DP21, Olympus, Inc.,) mounted on the
OM. Through the visual feedback, the microrobotic system realizes the target location and motion control of the microtube
assembly.

2621

Fig. 1. Microrobotic system for automated assembly. (a) Schematic of the
system. (b) System setup under an OM.

B. Overview of Repetitive Single-Step Assembly (RSA) Process
RSA by the microrobotic system was inspired by the repetitive stacking of scaffold sheets in the macroscopic world. Instead
of building the whole microvasculature, the microrobotic system picks up the two-dimensional (2-D) micromodules layer by
layer, and assembles them into the desired 3-D microstructure
by a repetitive single-step squeezing motion that pushes the micromodule into the micropipette shaft. We refer this process as
RSA.
The building block of the vascular-like microtube is a DSM.
The stacked DSMs closely resemble the axially symmetric rodshaped structure of the circular lumen. The DSM fabrication
is based on the patterning of photocrosslinkable hydrogel [32].
A cell-mixed hydrogel is patterned with a donut-shaped mask
and exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Consequently, the
hydrogel solidifies as a donut and simultaneously embeds the
surrounding cells.
The microtube fabrication by the RSA process is shown in
Fig. 2. The main manipulator presses one side of the DSM and

2622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. Schematic of microtubule fabrication by RSA. (a) Single step pickup. (b) Repetition of pick-up. (c) Consolidation of microtube. (d) Release of
microtube.

squeezes it into the manipulator shaft, which is rotated around
the pivot, as shown in Fig. 2(a). The squeezing motion of the
new DSM pushes the prepicked DSMs up the shaft, as shown
in Fig. 2(b). Once the RSA process has collected the specified number of DSMs, the picked-up DSMs remain separated
on the shaft of the main manipulator without bonding to adjacent DSMs. To integrate the collected DSMs into a microtube,
we expose the DSMs to a second dose of UV, which solidifies
the unreacted crosslinkable hydrogels remaining on the surface,
thereby connecting the adjacent DSMs into a whole unit [see
Fig. 2(c)]. Finally, the DSM assemblage on the pipette shaft is
released by cooperation with the submanipulator, as shown in
Fig. 2(d). Because the dimension of every DSM is scalable, the
whole 3-D structure benefits from both the microstructural features and the integrated mechanics. In the next section, the RSA
process is automated to improve the repeatability and efficiency
of microtube fabrication.
III. DEVELOPMENT OF RSA
A. Overall Automated RSA Procedure
Clearly, RSA avoids frequent alignment of manipulators during assembly, since it only incorporates single manipulator to
pick-up DSMs. Fig. 3 is a flowchart of the automated RSA
process. Once the DSMs are collected into a petri dish, automated RSA starts to acquire the micropipette tip position.
Through the vision-based tip identification to get the lateral
components and the contact detection to get the vertical components as mentioned in Section IV-B, the homing of micropipette
tip is established based on the determined relative 3-D position.
Meanwhile, the disqualified DSMs with undesirable posture for
pick-up are screened and the target DSM is located. The micropipette tip is then driven to a pick-up point in the horizontal
plane and picks up the target DSM by a vertical single-step
squeezing motion, as mentioned in Section III-B. The tip with
its captured DSM retreats upward from the substrate and moves
to the next pick-up point. The pick-up motion is repeated until
a specified number of DSMs have been collected. If there are
no qualified DSMs in the field of view, the microscope stage

Fig. 3.

Flowchart of automated RSA procedure.

Fig. 4. Analysis of forces during pick-up of DSM. (a) Forces on the DSM
prior to rotation (t = 0). (b) Forces acting on the rotating DSM (t > 0).

brings a new batch of DSMs into view, and the system repeats
the homing and screening operations in the new view. Once the
automated RSA has collected the required number of DSMs,
the DSMs are consolidated into a single microtube under UV
light as mentioned in Section II-B. Finally, the submanipulator
releases the microtube from the main manipulator.
B. Mechanical Analysis of Single-Step Motion
As mentioned above, the repetitive single-step pick-up motion sequentially squeezes the DSMs onto the main manipulator
stacking them into a microtube. The squeezing motion relies on
controlled mechanical contact between the microrobotic endeffector and the DSM. Therefore, we analyze the mechanism
during direct contact and optimize the important parameters
influencing the pick-up success rate.
Referring to Fig. 4(a), during the squeezing process, the
micropipette horizontally approaches an appropriate pick-up
point, then vertically approaches the target at constant velocity until contact is made. Because the DSMs are assembled
in a buffer solution, adhesion forces on the system can be neglected. The glass pipette contacts the DSM at t = 0, and begins
pressing it at contact point B. The applied pressing force Fp is

WANG et al.: AUTOMATED ASSEMBLY OF VASCULAR-LIKE MICROTUBE WITH REPETITIVE SINGLE-STEP CONTACT MANIPULATION

perpendicular to the glass pipette. We denote the gravitational
force and the normal force to the substrate by G and N1 , respectively. f1 and f2 are the friction forces with frictional coefficients
μ1 and μ2 , respectively. At t = 0, the force balance equations in
the horizontal and vertical directions are easy to be determined.
To rotate and squeeze the DSM onto the micropipette shaft,
the mechanical system must meet the following three conditions:
1) contact excites the kinetic moment, initiating rotation; 2)
the induced kinetic moment overcomes the rolling-resistance
moment; 3) the DSM does not slip on the substrate during
rotation to keep statically determinate. To satisfy condition 1,
we consider the geometric structure of the DSM
tan α > d/h

2623

TABLE I
DIMENSIONS OF DSMS IN THE PICK-UP ANALYSIS
Test group

1
2
3

Outer diameter inner diameter
O.D. (μm)
I.D. (μm)
100
200
400

60
140
280

Thickness d
(μm)

Height H (μm)

20
30
60

40, 60, 80
40, 60, 80
40, 60, 80

(1)

where α is the contact angle of the micropipette, and d and
h are the thickness and height of the DSM, respectively. To
guarantee the static determinacy for condition 3, we stipulate
that the friction between the DSM and substrate cannot exceed
the maximum friction, given as
f1 ≤ f1m ax = μ1 N1 .

(2)

Since the gravitational force G is several orders of magnitude
smaller than the pressing force, it can be neglected in the rotation evaluation. According to the force balance equations, we
rewriting (2) as
μ1 + μ2
.
tan α ≤
1 − μ1 μ2

(3)

The total moment is determined by pressing force, normal
forces, and friction forces. To provide sufficient kinetic moment
for condition 2, we yield the following inequality based on force
balance conditions and total moment

 



tanα
1
−1
+ f2
MA 0 = Fp tanα +
tanγ
tanγ
·hcosα > 0
tanγ = h/(r − d).

(4)
(5)

Referring to (1), (3), and (4), we observe that the important
parameters are the dimensions (d, h) of the DSM and the contact
angle of the glass pipette α. The values of these parameters must
be chosen to satisfy the three conditions of successful initial
rotation.
Fig. 4(b) shows the force situation after the initial rotation
(t > 0). Here, the DSM rotates and is squeezed onto the shaft
part of the glass pipette. θ is the rotation angle. Thus, when t >
0, the kinetic equation for the modeling is expressed in terms of
the simplified total moment

MA t = Jdonut θ̈ = Fp · Ksin (α + θ + β)
(6)

where K = (μ22 + 1) (h2 + d2 ), and β = tan−1 μμ22 h+d
d−h . Note
that both K and β are constants that depend on the DSM dimensions. Jdonut is the rotational inertia of the DSM. Because K
is greater than zero, the total moment increases after the initial
rotation while the rolling-resistance moment decreases, so the
DSM continues rotating until it is squeezed onto the upper side
of the micropipette.

Fig. 5.

Pick-up success rate analysis.

By analyzing the mechanics at different stages, we conclude
that single-step motion is theoretically feasible if the DSM dimensions and contact angle are designed to meet the aforementioned constraints.
C. Optimizing the DSM Dimensions
As successful pick-up depends on the DSM dimensions, we
vary the DSM dimensions and evaluate the pick-up success
rate. The aim of this investigation is to improve the assembly
efficiency.
We fabricated nine types of DSMs with different dimensions
and divided them into three groups (see Table I). Each group
comprised three types of DSMs with the same thickness and
different heights. According to condition 2 in Section III-B, the
contact angle should be larger rather than smaller. However, a
higher contact angle may cause slippage of the DSM on the
substrate [see (5)]. To simultaneously meet the constraints of
condition 2 and (5), we select the contact angle as 30°.
For each type of DSM, we conducted triplicate experiments,
with 20 pick-up motions in a single experiment. If a DSM was
collected by a single-step motion of the micropipette, the pickup was deemed successful. Fig. 5 shows the success rates of
different test groups. Group 1 always yielded very high success
rates; conversely, the success rates in group 3 were very low.
However, the success rates also varied among DSMs with the
same diameter but different heights (see results for group 2).
Referring to (1), we understand that the success rate correlates
with the thickness-to-height ratio of the DSM. At a contact
angle of 30°, this ratio should be below 0.57. Thus, despite
meeting the aforementioned constraints, DSMs with thicknessto-height ratios exceeding 0.57 yielded a low success rate. From
this analysis, we conclude that the optimum d is below 0.57h

2624

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Detection of DSMs and target location.

Fig. 8. Micropipette tracking during occlusion. (a) Failed contour detection.
(b) Line fitting, regarding the micropipette as a triangle. (c) Corner detection
before thresholding. (d) Corner detection after thresholding. (g) and (h) Line
fitting based on feature points.

Fig. 7. Contact detection analysis. (a) Downward movement prior to contact.
(b) Downward movement after the contact.

at a contact angle of 30°, and we adopt this condition in the
microtube assembly experiment.
IV. IMAGE PROCESSING IN THE AUTOMATED RSA
A. DSMs Detection and Micropipette
3-D Location Acquisition
To provide real-time information for the automated RSA, the
DSMs are visually detected and the DSMs leaning in the petri
dish are discarded. As shown in Fig. 6, after the basic image
processing, the contours of all the DSMs and the micropipette
are detected. All the ineligible DSMs are screened based on
the minimum enclosing rectangle method. With the specified
area criterion, the micropipette is discriminated from the DSMs
and the lateral components of the micropipette tip location are
determined.
We acquire the relative vertical position of the tip by contact
detection along the Z-axis, which requires no additional sensors. To detect the behavior along the Z-axis, Wang and Sun
[26] developed their basic method under a stereomicroscope
with a long focal length. Here, we modify their method for
compatibility with an inverted OM, which has a lower depthof-field for contact detection. Before contact, the micropipette
tip vertically approaches the substrate at constant velocity [see
Fig. 7(a)]. Adopting the imaging principle, the motion A0 A

of the tip translates to a smoothly decreasing horizontal motion B0 B. Further approach of the contacted tip causes surface
deformation, which manifests as a sharp decrease of the x coordinate relative to its previous value. In Fig. 7(b), this motion
is represented by D0 D. Because the horizontal shift caused by
tip deformation occurs at larger velocity than the shift caused
by the imaging principle, a sudden change in the x-coordinate
velocity precisely determines the contact point. Other relative
positions along the Z-axis can then be calculated from the determined initial contact point. After the system has acquired the
3-D location by contact detection, the micropipette is initialized
to the predefined home position.
B. Micropipette Tracking During Occlusion
As one kind of contact micromanipulation, occlusion between
the micropipette and DSMs is inevitable. If uncorrected, the micropipette tip will approach the wrong pick-up point. Because
the end-effector and the other objects in the background have
similar feature information, acquiring the edge information of
the micropipette tip and extracting it from the low-contrast occlusion region is a challenging task.
As shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b), when the main part of the
micropipette merges with a DSM, we regard the micropipette
as a triangle and utilize line fitting by joining the end points to
reconfigure the micropipette contour. When the micropipette tip
almost reaches the pick-up point, the occlusion makes the loss of
tip point and leaves insufficient endpoints for the triangular line
fitting. Because the dimensions of the micropipette and DSMs
are largely different, the occlusion area is always characterized
by sharp corners. These corner points provide new features,
and can be detected by Harris corner detection (HCD). HCD

WANG et al.: AUTOMATED ASSEMBLY OF VASCULAR-LIKE MICROTUBE WITH REPETITIVE SINGLE-STEP CONTACT MANIPULATION

2625

recognizes that a shift of an occlusion image I(x, y) in any
direction always yields a large intensity change at the corner
points. Thus, by analyzing the intensity change over the whole
image, we can find the occlusion region and detect the corresponding corner points. As expressed by (7), we shift the image
I(x, y) for (u, v) and calculate the intensity change E(x, y) at
every point (x, y). To increase the significance of the occlusion
region and eliminate noising of other regions for the intensity
evaluation, we experimentally determine an appropriate value
of the window function W for computing the weighted sum of
different areas in the image
E(x, y) =



W (x, y)[I(x + u, y + v) − I(x, y)]2 (7)

x,y

Fig. 9.

1
2
2
2
W =
· e−(x +y )/2σ .
2
2πσ

(8)

Calibration of the corner response score threshold.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Contact Detection Effectiveness

Equation (7) can be simplified by a Taylor expansion
E(x, y) =




W (x, y)

x,y

dI
dI
·x+
·y
dx
dy

2

= Ax2 + By 2 + 2Qxy.

(9)

Rewriting (9) as

E(x, y) = (x y)

A

Q

	
 
x

Q B

y

= (x y) · H ·


 
x
y

. (10)

H is an autocorrelation matrix related to E(x, y) and reflects
the change in the image intensity. Thus, instead of using E(x, y)
directly, the HCD method determines the corner points through
H. The corner response of every pixel is calculated by (11),
which assigns a Harris score S to each point
S=

det(H)
.
trace(H)

(11)

To determine the expected corner points around the occlusion
region, the corner response score S needs to be experimentally
calibrated. This calibration identifies the threshold that excludes
ineligible points with out-of-range corner response.
As shown in Fig. 8(c), before calibrating the window function W and setting the S threshold, there are ineligible points
unexpectedly detected which caused by the irregularity of the
image. To acquire expected corner points, we first calibrated the
σ in W at fixed S referring to (8) and found that the noise is
minimized at σ = 0.9. Having determined σ, we adjusted the
reference score of S as shown in Fig. 9. S = [206 000, 227 200]
was identified as the optimum threshold, since only the two
expected corner points are exactly recognized as the feature
points. After acquiring the new feature points, the other endpoints are determined by contour detection for the line fitting
[see Fig. 8(e)]. Finally, the amended line fitting is established
and the merged micropipette tip is again tracked [see Fig. 8(f)].

To verify whether the contact detection acquires the proper
relative position along the Z-axis, we experimentally contacted
the micropipette tip to the substrate and determined the exact
contact point based on the vision feedback.
We repeated the up-and-down motion of the micropipette
tip in 100 experimental trials. In each trial, the micropipette
was set to the same height and moved at a constant vertical
velocity of 20 μm/s to establish the substrate contact. After a
certain time, the micropipette tip deformed under the motion
and retreated to its original position. As shown in Fig. 10(a),
the displacement of the x-coordinate was measured during five
experimental trails of up-and-down motion, and recorded under
4× magnification. Clearly, the x-coordinate decreased smoothly
at the beginning, but drastically decreased after contact. The
contact is distinguished by a turning point. Fig. 10(b) shows the
determination of the contact point during one contact trial. The
turning point (corresponding to the contact point) was found
by line fitting of the x-coordinate data before and after contact.
Throughout the 100 experimental trials, the contact detection
error was approximately ±1 pixel (2 μm at 4×), acceptable for
the assembly of DSMs with height around 60 μm.
B. Micropipette Tip Tracking Accuracy During Occlusion
To evaluate the performance of the HCD-based micropipette
tip tracking algorithm during occlusion, we varied the illumination intensity and microscope magnification, and evaluated the
effects of these parameters on the tracking accuracy. Following
the HCD-based line fitting, we calculated the Euclidean distance
error between the detected tip location and a reference position,
as shown in Fig. 11. The reference was carefully input by a user
via a mouse click on the estimated tip location.
As shown in Table II, micropipette tip detection during occlusion was evaluated under three magnifications and three types of
illumination intensities. For each situation, we computed the Euclidean distance error and its standard deviation (SD) from the
results of 50 experimental trials. All errors are expressed in micrometer. The algorithm detected the micropipette tip more accurately as the illumination intensity increased in an acceptable

2626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 12.

Fabrication of cell-embedded 2-D modules.

range because higher illumination provides more details of the
image features around the occlusion region. The detection accuracy was also improved at higher magnification for similar
reasons; higher magnification provides more detailed edge information for the line fitting. Therefore, we confirmed the effectiveness of the proposed HCD-based tip tracking algorithm.
C. Assembly of Vascular-Like Microtube

Fig. 10.

Contact detection for system initiation.

Fig. 11.
tips.

Measured Euclidean distance between the detected and reference

TABLE II
MICROPIPETTE TIP TRACKING DISTANCE ERROR
Illumination intensity
Mag.
4×
10×
20×

Error evaluation (μm)

Low

Medium

High

Distance error
SD of distance error
Distance error
SD of distance error
Distance error
SD of distance error

7.445
1.238
6.949
1.058
5.992
0.977

5.383
1.195
5.102
1.101
4.838
0.799

4.786
1.134
4.601
0.904
4.163
0.719

As shown in Fig. 12, the DSMs were fabricated in a microfluidic channel. The crosslinkable hydrogel was mixed with cells
and injected into the channel. Following UV-exposure patterning with a donut-shaped mask, the fabricated DSMs embedded
the surrounding cells. Because the exposed part was fully penetrated by the UV light, through controlling the depth of the
designed microfluidic channel, the DSM height is scalable.
In this experiment, NIH/3T3 cells were mixed with
poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (molecular weight 700, Sigma
Aldrich), a biocompatible crosslinkable hydrogel. NIH/3T3
cells are fibroblasts forming the outer layers of vessels. Prior to
experiment, NIH/3T3 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Sigma Aldrich) with 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum (Sigma Aldrich) for 72 h, then suspended in Phosphate
Buffered Saline (PBS, Wako) at 107 cells/mL. The experimental solution contained 272-μL PBS cell solution, 120-μL
poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate, and 8-μL photoinitiator
(Irgacure 2959, Ciba).
The inner diameter, outer diameter, and height of the fabricated DSMs were 400, 270, and 120 μm, respectively. To confirm the competency of the proposed method in biological application, we performed a viability assay of the cells embedded in
DSMs. The DSM-embedded cells were stained by a mixed solution of 10-μL calcein AM (1 mg/mL, Wako), 15-μL propidium
iodide (PI, 1 mg/mL, Wako), and 5-mL PBS. Under excitation
light (490 and 530 nm), the relative cell viability was revealed
to exceed 80%, indicating that the assembly method is suitable
for biological applications. The cell viability results are imaged
in Fig. 13.
Through the DSM detection and continuous tracking of the
micromanipulator, the vascular-like microtubes were automatically assembled by RSA. The pick-up success rate of the system
was approximately 98%. This high rate is attributed to the singlestep motion, which requires no frequent alignment or human

WANG et al.: AUTOMATED ASSEMBLY OF VASCULAR-LIKE MICROTUBE WITH REPETITIVE SINGLE-STEP CONTACT MANIPULATION

2627

designed contact manipulation strategy. This microrobotic assembly system can potentially construct 3-D structures of perfusion microchannels embedded with various cell types, cell
densities, and micromodule dimensions. Therefore, it presents
as a promising tool in future biological applications.

REFERENCES
Fig. 13.

Cell viability analysis.

Fig. 14.

Assembly of cell-embedded microtube.

manipulation. The average assembly speed was approximately
6 donuts/min, implying that within 3 h one microrobotic system
can assemble a macrostructure with the dimension of (4 × 4 ×
4) mm3 and desired number of microtubes for perfusion. A cellembedded microtube (approximate length = 1.4 mm) assembled
by the proposed method is imaged in Fig. 14. These images
(acquired by a confocal laser scanning microscope; A1Rsi-N,
Nikon) show the circular lumen of the microtube and the uniform distribution of the embedded cells. This microrobotic system can competently assemble macroscale microtubes with high
efficiency, and is, thus, suitable for fabricating vessel-mimetic
microtubes in biological applications.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper reported a microrobotic system that fabricates
vascular-like microtubes by automated pick-up of cellular micromodules. Our novel repetitive single-step method assembled
the DSM with a pick-up success rate approximating 98%. The
system uses vision-based position control. The visual tracking
algorithm accurately tracked the micromanipulator, even when
the micropipette tip was occluded by the background. The automated assemblage of vascular-like microtubes was experimentally validated by embedding live cells in the micromodules. The
cell viability was higher than 80%. The assembly speed was approximately 6 donuts/min, and was sufficiently reproducible to
assemble microtubes with macroscopic lengths. Unlike other
assembly methods, RSA is sufficiently flexible and controllable
to assemble many single micromodules, by virtue of a newly

[1] L. G. Griffith et al., “Tissue engineering—Current challenges and expanding opportunities,” Science, vol. 295, pp. 1009–1016, Feb. 2002.
[2] M. D. James et al., “Analysis of cell growth in three-dimensional scaffolds,” Tissue Eng., vol. 12, pp. 706–716, Apr. 2006.
[3] J. Malda et al., “Oxygen gradients in tissue-engineered PEGT/PBT cartilaginous constructs: Measurement and modeling,” Biotechnol. Bioeng.,
vol. 86, pp. 9–18, Apr. 2004.
[4] J. W. Nichol et al., “Modular tissue engineering: Engineering biological
tissues from the bottom up,” Soft Matter, vol. 5, pp. 1312–1319, 2009.
[5] P. J. Schaner et al., “Decellularized vein as a potential scaffold for vascular
tissue engineering,” J. Vasc. Surg., vol. 40, pp. 146–153, Jul. 2004.
[6] J. S. Miller et al., “Rapid casting of patterned vascular networks for
perfusable engineered three-dimensional tissues,” Nature Mater., vol. 11,
pp. 768–774, Sep. 2012.
[7] C. J. Galban et al., “Analysis of cell growth kinetics and substrate diffusion
in a polymer scaffold,” Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 65, pp. 121–132, Oct.
1999.
[8] A. McGuigan et al., “Vascularized organoid engineered by modular
assembly enables blood perfusion,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 103,
pp. 11461–11466, Aug. 2006.
[9] D. Du et al., “Fabrication and perfusion culture of anatomically shaped
artificial bone using stereolithography,” Biofabrication, vol. 6, pp. 1–11,
2014.
[10] P. J. Hung et al., “Continuous perfusion microfluidic cell culture array for
high-throughput cell-based assays,” Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 89, pp. 1–8,
Jan. 2005.
[11] T. Ju et al., “Rapidly exploring random tree algorithm-based path planning
for robot-aided optical manipulation of biological cells,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 649–657, Jul. 2014.
[12] A. P. McGuigan et al., “The thrombogenicity of human umbilical
vein endothelial cell seeded collagen modules,” Biomaterials, vol. 29,
pp. 2453–2463, Jun. 2008.
[13] T. Yue et al., “On-chip self-assembly of cell embedded microstructures to
vascular-like microtubes,” Lab Chip, vol. 14, pp. 1151–1161, 2014.
[14] J. T. Borenstein et al., “Functional endothelialized microvascular networks with circular cross-sections in a tissue culture substrate,” Biomed.
Microdevices, vol. 12, pp. 71–79, Feb. 2010.
[15] P. Saketi et al., “A flexible microrobotic platform for handling microscale
specimens of fibrous materials for microscopic studies,” J. Microsc.,
vol. 248, pp. 163–171, Nov. 2012.
[16] Y. A. Du et al., “Sequential assembly of cell-laden hydrogel constructs
to engineer vascular-like microchannels,” Biotechnol. Bioeng., vol. 108,
pp. 1693–1703, Jul. 2011.
[17] A. A. Ramadan et al., “Developmental process of a chopstick-like hybridstructure two-fingered micromanipulator hand for 3-D manipulation of
microscopic objects,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1121–
1135, Apr. 2009.
[18] Y. Kimura et al., “Intracytoplasmic sperm injection in the mouse,” Biol.
Reprod., vol. 52, pp. 709–720, Apr. 1995.
[19] P. Dario et al., “Flip chip microassembly of a silicon triaxial force sensor
on flexible substrates,” Sensor Actuators A, Phys., vol. 142, pp. 421–428,
Mar. 2008.
[20] B. J. Nelson et al., “Manufacturing of a hybrid acoustic transmitter using
an advanced microassembly system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56,
no. 7, pp. 2657–2666, Jul. 2009.
[21] A. Ferreira et al., “Micro-to-nano biomechanical modeling for assisted
biological cell injection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 9,
pp. 2461–2471, Sep. 2013.
[22] Q. Xu et al., “Design, fabrication, and visual servo control of an XY
parallel micromanipulator with piezo-actuation,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 710–719, Oct. 2009.
[23] A. Bolopion et al., “Haptic teleoperation for 3-D microassembly of spherical objects,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 116–127,
Feb. 2012.

2628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

[24] P. R. Ouyang et al., “Overview of the development of a visual
based automated bio-micromanipulation system,” Mechatronics, vol. 17,
pp. 578–588, Dec. 2007.
[25] A. G. Banerjee et al., “Research in automated planning and control for
micromanipulation,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 3, pp.
485–495, Jul. 2013.
[26] W. H. Wang et al., “Contact detection in microrobotic manipulation,” Int.
J. Robot. Res., vol. 26, pp. 821–828, Aug. 2007.
[27] J. Liu et al., “Locating end-effector tips in robotic micromanipulation,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 125–130, Feb. 2014.
[28] K. Hashimoto, “A review on vision-based control of robot manipulators,”
Adv. Robot., vol. 17, pp. 969–991, 2003.
[29] X. P. Zhang et al., “Controlled aspiration and positioning of biological cells in a micropipette,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 4,
pp. 1032–1040, Apr. 2012.
[30] M. Salah et al., “Model-free, occlusion accommodating active contour
tracking,” ISRN Artif. Intell., vol. 2012, pp. 1–15, 2012.
[31] N. Vaswani et al., “Deform PF-MT: Particle filter with mode tracker for
tracking nonaffine contour deformations,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 841–857, Apr. 2010.
[32] V. Chan et al., “Three-dimensional photopatterning of hydrogels using
stereolithography for long-term cell encapsulation,” Lab Chip, vol. 10,
pp. 2062–2070, 2010.

Tao Yue received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from
Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2007 and 2010
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan, in 2014.
He is currently working as a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
His research interests include micro/nanorobotics,
Bio-MEMS/NEMS, microfluidic devices, 3-D artificial tissue construction, and single-cell analysis.

Shaoqi Chen received the B.S. degree in mechatronics from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing,
China, in 2012, where he is currently working toward
the Master’s degree at the School of Mechatronical
Engineering.

Masahiro Nakajima received the B.S. degree from
Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Japan, in 2001, and
the M.S. and Dr. Eng. degrees from Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan, in 2003 and 2006, respectively.
He was an Assistant Professor with the Department of Micro-Nano Systems Engineering from April
2007 to September 2009, and he is currently an Assistant Professor at the Center for Micro-Nano Mechatronics since October 2009. His research interests
include applications of micronanomanipulation system for micronanoassembly, micronanofabrication,

Huaping Wang received the B.S. degree in mechatronics from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2010, where he is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering
at the School of Mechatronical Engineering.
His research interests include applications of micronanorobotics and micronanoassembly.
and micronanobiology.

Qiang Huang (SM’14) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, China, and the Ph.D. degree from Waseda
University, Tokyo, Japan, in 1986, 1989, and 1996,
respectively.
In 1996, he joined the Mechanical Engineering
Laboratory, Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Tsukuba, Japan, as a Research Fellow. He
was a Researcher of Core Research for Evolutional
Science and Technology of the Japan Science and
Technology Corporation with the University of Tokyo
from 1999 to 2000. Currently, he is a Professor and the Director of Intelligent
Robotics Institute, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, and the Director of the Key Laboratory of Biomimetic Robots and Systems, Ministry of
Education of China, and a Vice-Director of the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Control and Decision of Complex System, China. His research interests include
biped walking robots, humanoid and mobile manipulators.

Qing Shi received the B.S. degree in mechatronics
from the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing,
China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical
engineering from Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan,
in 2012.
He had been a Research Associate at the GCOE
Global Robot Academia of Waseda University from
2009 to 2013. Since 2013 he has been a Full-time
Lecturer at the Beijing Institute of Technology. His
research interests include biorobotics, mechatronic
systems, computer vision, and micro/nanorobotics.

Masaru Takeuchi withdrew the bachelor degree program of Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan, to skip
a grade in 2008. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in engineering from Nagoya University in 2010
and 2013, respectively.
From April 2013 to June 2014, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Department of
Micro-Nano Systems Engineering, Nagoya University. Since July 2014, he has been an Assistant Professor at the Department of Micro-Nano Systems Engineering, Nagoya University.

Toshio Fukuda (F’95) received the B.S. degree from
Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan, in 1971, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, in 1973 and 1977, respectively.
From 1977 to 1982, he was with the National Mechanical Engineering Laboratory, Tsukuba, Japan.
From 1982 to 1989, he was with the Science University of Tokyo. Starting in 1989, he was with Nagoya
University, Nagoya, Japan, where he was a Professor
with the Department of Micro System Engineering.
He is currently a Professor (1000 Foreign Experts
Plan) with the Intelligent Robotics Institute, School of Mechatronic Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, where he is mainly involved
in the research fields of intelligent robotic systems, cellular robotic systems,
mechatronics, and micro/nanorobotics.
Prof. Fukuda was the President of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society
during 1988–1999, an Editor-in Chief of the IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON
MECHATRONICS during 2000–2002, the Director of the Division X, Systems and
Control during 2001–2002, the IEEE Founding President of Nanotechnology
Council during 2002–2003, and 2005, and the Director of the Region 10 during
2013–2014.

