2674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

The Feasibility of a Smart Surgical Probe
for Verification of IRE Treatments Using
Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy
Mohammad Bonakdar, Student Member, IEEE, Eduardo L. Latouche, Roop L. Mahajan,
and Rafael V. Davalos∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Significance: Irreversible electroporation (IRE) is
gaining popularity as a focal ablation modality for the treatment of
unresectable tumors. One clinical limitation of IRE is the absence of
methods for real-time treatment evaluation, namely actively monitoring the dimensions of the induced lesion. This information is
critical to ensure a complete treatment and minimize collateral
damage to the surrounding healthy tissue. Goal: In this study, we
are taking advantage of the biophysical properties of living tissues
to address this critical demand. Methods: Using advanced microfabrication techniques, we have developed an electrical impedance
microsensor to collect impedance data along the length of a bipolar
IRE probe for treatment verification. For probe characterization
and interpretation of the readings, we used potato tuber, which is a
suitable platform for IRE experiments without having the complexities of in vivo or ex vivo models. We used the impedance spectra,
along with an electrical model of the tissue, to obtain critical parameters such as the conductivity of the tissue before, during, and
after completion of treatment. To validate our results, we used a
finite element model to simulate the electric field distribution during treatments in each potato. Results: It is shown that electrical
impedance spectroscopy could be used as a technique for treatment
verification, and when combined with appropriate FEM modeling
can determine the lesion dimensions. Conclusions: This technique
has the potential to be readily translated for use with other ablation
modalities already being used in clinical settings for the treatment
of malignancies.
Index Terms—Ablation monitoring, electrochemotherapy
(ECT), focal ablation, impedance sensor, irreversible electroporation (IRE), microfabrication.

I. INTRODUCTION
INIMALLY invasive energy-based focal ablation techniques have received much attention throughout the
last few decades, particularly for the treatment of aberrant
masses. Radiofrequency ablation, microwave ablation, and
high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation are among the most
commonly used therapies for the management of cancerous tis-

M

Manuscript received February 21, 2015; revised May 22, 2015; accepted
May 26, 2015. Date of publication June 4, 2015; date of current version October
16, 2015. M. Bonakdar and E. L. Latouche contributed equally to this work.
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under
Award IIP-1026421, the Virginia Center for Innovative Technology under Award
MF13-034-LS, and the Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science
of Virginia Tech. All authors have patents pending in this technology. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
M. Bonakdar, E. L. Latouche, and R. L. Mahajan are with Virginia Tech.
∗ R. V. Davalos is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering and Mechanics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060 USA (e-mail: davalos@vt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2441636

sue [1]. More recently, the phenomenon of electroporation (EP)
has opened new windows in the field of focal ablation. EP is a
method used to increase the permeability of cell membranes to
ions and macromolecules by exposing them to short yet intense
pulsed electric fields (PEFs) [2]. EP has been around for decades
for in vitro applications but it is gaining strength for drug delivery and tumor treatment at the tissue level [3], [4]. During
EP, a series of short PEFs (70–100 μs) are delivered to the cell
population. These pulses affect the transmembrane potential of
the cell that can create nanoscale pores on the cell membrane
[5]. Depending on the pulse parameters (electric field magnitude, pulse length, number of pulses, etc.), the phenomenon can
be either reversible, which is useful for cell transfection, or irreversible, which results in cell death [6]. Therefore, EP gave
birth to three treatment modalities: electrochemotherapy (ECT)
[7], [8], electrogene therapy (EGT) [9], [10], and irreversible
electroporation (IRE) [11], [12].
IRE is a new minimally invasive procedure for the ablation of
undesirable tissue [5]. The procedure uses two or more surgical
probes (electrodes) to deliver low quantities of energy into the
tissue with minimal Joule heating effects and thermally-induced
cell death in the region of interest [13]. IRE lesions typically
present submillimeter margins between dead and live tissues
due to the rapidly decaying electric field surrounding the electrodes [14]. Unlike high-energy thermal-based therapies, IRE
spares critical blood vessels and nerves in the periphery as well
as the overall stroma surrounding the electrodes [15]. In clinical
settings, surgeons have the option to use several imaging techniques such as computer tomography and ultrasound to actively
monitor the position of the electrodes in the patient as well as
to visualize posttreatment results [16]–[18].
During any focal ablation therapy, the ability to verify the
lesion size is critical [19]. A small lesion may not enclose the
whole tumor volume and a large one can damage the surrounding
healthy tissue. For most thermal-based tissue ablation mechanisms, the created lesions are commonly monitored through
ultrasound, magnetic resonance, or computer tomography imaging systems, which are not accurate in the description of the area
of treatment nor do they provide information in an active manner
[19]. Although IRE has seen great success in the treatment of
inoperable tumors, IRE lesions are moderately hard to predict
due to electric field distortion caused by the heterogeneity of
most tissues [20]. Currently, treatment planning is performed
by finite element models (FEMs) of tissue and electric field distribution with a priori information about the tissue of interest

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

BONAKDAR et al.: FEASIBILITY OF A SMART SURGICAL PROBE FOR VERIFICATION OF IRE TREATMENTS

to adjust the pulse magnitude for a proper lesion size [6]. Several groups have developed numerical models of electric field
distribution during IRE treatment, taking into account the variation of tissue conductivity due to EP and temperature [21]–[23].
Despite all the advancements in modeling, this method could
be challenging when the volume to be treated contains complex heterogeneous structures. Some complex tissues such as
the pancreas introduce additional challenges, which can lead to
high patient to patient variability and result in undertreatment
or skip ablations. This highlights the importance of a real-time
feedback system for monitoring the progress of the treatment.
Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been traditionally used in electrochemical systems for applications such
as corrosion monitoring [24], coating evaluation [25], and
semiconductor characterization. However, in recent years, this
method is widening its application to the characterization of biological systems as a minimally invasive method. These include
applications in tissue engineering, cell culture monitoring, and
disease diagnosis. At the cell level, EIS has been used to monitor
the electrical properties of single cells [26] and cell cultures in
2-D and 3-D [27]. Electric cell-substrate impedance spectroscopy is a popular technique for monitoring the growth,
motion, integrity, and permeability of 2-D cell cultures [28],
[29].
Recent studies have shown that healthy and cancerous tissues
have different dielectric properties [30]–[32], leading to the application of EIS for cancer diagnosis. EIS could also be applied
to the EP-based treatments. EP affects the dielectric properties
of cells and tissues due to the alteration in transmembrane pathways and the conductance of interstitial fluid. Several studies
have shown the effect of EP on the passive electrical properties
of single cells [33]–[35], cell suspension [36]–[38], adherent
cell cultures [39], [40], and living tissues [41]. These studies
have unveiled the potential application of EIS for active monitoring of tissue lesions during IRE treatments. Some previous
studies exist using electrical impedance tomography (EIT) and
magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography (MREIT)
to produce an image of the electroporated area ex vivo [41]–[43].
EIT requires the implementation of several electrodes around the
treatment zone, which makes it difficult for clinical applications.
Ivorra et al. [44], [45] used plate electrodes to electroporate rat
liver in vivo and measure the impedance spectrum of the tissue in
between the pulses. They found that the conductivity of the liver
tissue increases by 9% and 43% after reversible and irreversible
electroporation, respectively. Although this method is effective
for determining the changes in tissue properties after uniform
IRE treatment, it does not provide information about the geometry of the ablated tissue. In general, EIT is difficult to implement
because it requires utilizing a large number of external electrodes
which must surround the area of interest. MREIT requires no
additional electrodes and is not limited to the boundaries of the
object of interest, which provides an image with better spatial
resolution compared to EIT. However, MREIT adds at least 15 s
between EP pulses to reconstruct the images making it difficult
to use during clinical IRE treatments that commonly utilize five
times more pulses than EP treatments [43], [46]. Monitoring the
conductivity of the tissue during EP is also possible by mea-

2675

suring the electric current passing through the tissue during the
treatment [47]. This method is easy to implement and less invasive since no additional electrodes are needed for impedance
measurement. However, using this method only gives the conductivity of the tissue in the vicinity of the pulsing leads, and
no information is obtained regarding other areas of the tissue.
Although this measurement could provide some insight about
the treatment at the point of pulsing, it does not reveal detailed
information regarding the geometry of the lesion.
In the last decade, with the advancement of microfabrication
techniques, microelectrodes are becoming more available for
biomedical applications. These include microelectrode arrays
for neural recording and interference [48]–[52], and electrical
impedance microsensors for monitoring tissue properties in different situations [53]. Electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity microsensors have also been fabricated for the purpose
of monitoring tissue properties during RF ablation [54], [55].
In this paper, we address the feasibility of using a custommade microelectrode array along a bipolar IRE probe to actively
monitor the changes in the impedance of tissue during IRE, and
use that information to verify the extent of ablation. The flexible
sensor array is made out of biocompatible materials and can be
installed on probes of small diameter (∼1 mm) without causing any constriction during the operation. We have developed
a computational model, taking into account the change in the
conductivity of the tissue during treatment. This model is used
to predict the electric field distribution for different treatment
procedures. Measurements taken through our microelecrode array match the expected results from our computational model,
which suggests that the proposed electrode array may be used to
verify the expected outcome from treatment planning protocols.
We believe that this method can impact the outcome of ablation
therapies in the field of surgical oncology by providing surgeons
with real-time information about the status of the therapy.
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
A. EP Setup
To show the principles of sensor operation and be able to use
relevant FEM modeling, we had to use an ideal domain for the
experiments to factor out parasitic effects which exist in real
tissue such as tissue heterogeneity, anisotropy, blood flow, and
many other factors. For these reasons, potato tuber has been
chosen as the platform for treatment. Potatoes are a relevant
platform and well-accepted model for running EP experiments
[56]–[58]. Despite biological differences, the main similarity
between potato and organs, which makes these experiments relevant, is that potato cells respond to EP in a similar manner
as mammalian cells. That similarity also facilitates the analogy
in EIS as potato and tissue share the common equivalent circuit model. The PEFs were generated using an ECM 830 pulse
generator (Harvard apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) and delivered to the tissue through a commercially available IRE bipolar
probe (AngioDynamics, Latham, NY, USA). The general geometry of the probe presented a diameter of 1.63 mm with two
conductive leads at the tip, each 7 mm in length, separated by
an 8-mm-long spacer. Based on clinically established protocols,

2676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

all the treatments were performed delivering square pulses of
100 μs in length at a repetition rate of 1 pulse/s [14], [59]. Treatments were delivered by applying 10, 30, and 100 pulses of 600,
1000, and 1500 V magnitude to the pulsing leads (total of nine
parameters).
B. Impedance Sensor Fabrication
The fabrication of the microsensor array was carried out at
the Micro and Nano Fabrication Laboratory, Virginia Tech. A 4
Si wafer was used as the temporary substrate for the fabrication.
The wafer was cleaned with acetone, Isopropyl alcohol, and
DI water. Polyimide (PI) solution, PI2525 (HD Microsystems,
Parlin, NJ, USA) was spin-coated on the Si wafer at 2000 rpm
to yield a 13-μm-thick PI base layer. To evaporate the solvent,
the wafer was soft-baked on a flat hotplate at 120 °C for 30 s
followed by 150 °C for another 30 s. For complete curing of the
PI the wafer was transferred to a furnace. The temperature was
ramped up to 200 °C in air environment at a rate of 4 °C/min.
After 30 min, a flow of nitrogen was applied at 10 L/min and
the temperature was ramped up to 300 °C. After 1 h, the furnace was turned off and let to cool down to room temperature.
Slow heating and cooling rates were necessary to avoid cracking
the PI layer. The adhesion between the PI layer and Si wafer
is weak, which facilitates detachment of the structure from the
wafer after fabrication but can also cause premature detachment
in the middle of the fabrication steps. To avoid the latter, an
adhesion promoter, VM651 (HD Microsystems, Parlin, NJ) was
used at the edges of the wafer prior to spinning the PI solution
to keep the PI layer attached without interfering with the probe
structures. A 30-nm-thick Cr layer was deposited as an adhesion layer followed by a 100-nm-thick gold layer using E-beam
evaporation (Kurt Lesker, Clairton, PA. USA). The metal layers were photolithographically patterned using AZ9260 positive
photoresist (AZ Electronics, Germany) and chemically etched
with Cr and gold etchants (Transene, Danvers, MA) to form
the conductive structures containing bonding pads, wires, and
sensors. As an insulation, a second layer of PI was spin-coated
to 7 μm thickness and cured using the aforementioned technique. The top PI layer on the bonding pads and sensors were
etched down to the gold to expose them. All other PI layers
except the designated areas for the probes were etched away to
release the individual probes from the wafer. PI dry etching was
performed through a titanium mask. 100-nm-thick Ti film was
deposited and patterned using E-beam evaporation and buffered
oxide etch (BOE), respectively. PI etching was performed in
oxygen plasma with 30 mL/min oxygen flow rate and 50 W of
forward power. Finally, to remove the Ti layer and release the
structures, the wafer was dipped into BOE for few seconds. The
fabricated sensor was installed on the IRE probe and wires were
soldered to the bonding pads. Fig. 1 illustrates the fabrication
steps along with the final product.
C. Probe-Sensor Assembly and Calibration
After fabrication, the impedance sensor was installed on the
existing IRE probe and connected to the impedance analyzer.
The materials and methods developed in this study resulted in a

Fig. 1. Probe fabrication steps. (a) Spin PI solution on 4 Si wafer and cure
PI. (b) Deposit Cr/gold thin film using E-beam evaporation. (c) Pattern the
gold film by photolithography and chemical wet etching to form the electrodes.
(d) Spin second PI layer and cure. (e) Evaporate titanium thin film. (f) Pattern
Ti film by photolithography and chemical wet etching to form the mask for dry
etching of PI. (g) Dry etching of PI layers in oxygen plasma. (h) Removing Ti
mask and releasing the structure from substrate wafer. (i) Fabricated impedance
probe. (j) Impedance probe installed on IRE bipolar probe. Size is compared
with a dime.

BONAKDAR et al.: FEASIBILITY OF A SMART SURGICAL PROBE FOR VERIFICATION OF IRE TREATMENTS

Fig. 2.

2677

Impedance measurement and modeling. (a) Equivalent circuit model of tissue. (b) Schematic of experimental setup for 1-D IRE response.

20-μm-thick impedance probe, which is thin enough to facilitate
its wrapping around the IRE probe without a significant increase
in the diameter.
To relate the microsensor readings to the actual conductivity
of the medium, a calibration experiment was performed. The
probe was immersed into salt solutions of known conductivities in the vicinity of the physiological conductivity of tissues,
ranging from 2 to 20 mS/cm, and the impedance curves were
acquired. The resistance was then extracted from the impedance
curve by fitting to an appropriate model and a linear regression
analysis was performed to find the calibration equation.

D. Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy
The microsensor array is comprised of five individual working electrodes (WEs), which are located 2.2 mm apart along
the probe. The impedance is measured between the consecutive WEs. The chosen electrode placement made it possible to
monitor the growth of the lesion up to 1 cm beyond the pulsing
leads, which corresponds to clinically relevant lesions when using a bipolar EP probe. The impedance spectrum was measured
using a Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat/galvanostat (Gamry,
Warminster, PA) in the frequency range of 1 Hz–1 MHz at ten
points per decade. The impedance probe was connected to the
impedance analyzer through a custom-made multiplexer which
enables switching between different sensors along the probe.
The impedance analyzer and the multiplexer were controlled using Gamry Framework 6.12 data acquisition software (Gamry,
Warminster, PA). To extract quantitative information about the
desired electrical properties of the tissue from the impedance
spectrum, it is necessary to fit the spectrum to an equivalent circuit model of the electrode/tissue system. For the best results,
the model should contain elements taking into account the effect of electrode/tissue interface, intracellular and extracellular
pathways. The Cole–Cole model [60], [61] has been previously
used for impedance spectroscopy of tissues during EP [44], [62].
In this study, the parallel Cole model is adopted with addition
of a constant phase element (CPE) to account for electrode–
tissue interface [see Fig. 2(a)]. The CPE is usually described as
a capacitance which is frequency dependent with its impedance

given by
Z=

1
(jwC)α

(1)

√where ω is the angular frequency, j is the imaginary number
−1, and C and α are empirical parameters. The α parameter
lies between 0.5 and 1, with 1 corresponding to an ideal capacitance. The physical meaning of the CPE is a matter of debate.
However, α could be regarded as a measure of a distribution
of the resistance–capacitance combination and is related to the
morphology of the extracellular space [63]. After impedance
measurement, the Gamry Echem Analyst software is used to fit
the model to the acquired data and get the values for the above
parameters.
The Cole–Cole model takes into account the intracellular and
extracellular current pathways. Before EP, the cell membrane
capacitance prevents the low-frequency current from passing
through the intracellular space. After EP, the membrane capacitance is shunted by the induced membrane pores, resulting in
a lower cell resistance. At tissue level, not all cells undergo EP
at the same time; hence, instead of a sudden shift in impedance,
a transition in impedance spectrum is observed. In this case,
the parameters Ric and Rec are no longer representative of pure
intracellular and extracellular resistivities, but they include the
effect of membrane permeabilization as well. However, as previous studies have shown, the Cole–Cole model is still valid for
impedance analysis after EP.
E. 1-D IRE Treatments
To characterize the electrical properties of potato in response
to EP, and to find the IRE threshold for different number of
pulses, a set of 1-D experiments were performed similar to the
procedure implemented in [57], in which cylindrical samples
of potato are exposed to uniform PEFs between two parallel
plate electrodes and the impedance is measured across the same
electrodes before and after treatment [see Fig. 2(b)]. In addition
to that, all samples were quantitatively assessed based on the
darkening of the sample with respect to its initial color.
Potato tuber tissue was removed using a surgical biopsy
needle resulting in cylindrical samples of 6 mm in diameter
and 5 mm in height. Potato samples were exposed to uniform

2678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

PEFs using parallel aluminum plate electrodes. Connected to
the impedance analyzer, the same electrodes were also used for
impedance measurements pre- and post-EP. A variety of pulse
numbers and magnitude permutations were applied to the samples with n = 4 for each combination. Resistance values from
the impedance measurements were solved for using an equivalent circuit model previously described and used to solve for
conductivity of tissue by using
L
(2)
Aσ
where R is the resistance value obtained from impedance measurements, L is the length of the cylindrical sample, A is the
cross-sectional area of the sample, and σ is the conductivity of
the potato.
In order to assess EP, treated samples were stored in petri
dishes for 12 h at which point the samples were placed on
a white background and a picture was taken using a digital
CCD camera (Canon PowerShot SX110is). All images were
converted to grayscale and assessed based on the darkening of
the sample with respect to its initial color (control sample) using
ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).
R=

F. Derivation of Dynamic Conductivity Function
The results of the 1-D experiments were used to find a model
for the variation of conductivity as a function of electric field
magnitude and the number of pulses, i.e., σd (E). For this purpose, a sigmoidal equation was developed for each particular
number of pulses by fitting to the experimentally obtained conductivity values. Sigmoid functions have been used in the past
to describe the change in tissue conductivity due to EP [64]. We
found that the following equation fits our impedance data very
well:


(3)
σd = σ0 + a exp −eb(c−E ) .
In this equation, σ0 is the conductivity of the nonelectroporated tissue and E is the applied electric field. The values for
parameters a, b, and c were obtained following the best fit of the
equation to the experimentally obtained data points for conductivity. Parameter a is the amplitude of the change in conductivity
for irreversibly electroporated tissue, b is a constant regulating
the growth rate, and c is the location of the transition zone.
G. Finite Element Analysis (FEA)
A FEM was developed in COMSOL Multiphysics V4.3
(COMSOL, Stockholm, Sweden) to find the electric field distribution inside the tissue for each treatment. A 2-D axisymmetric
platform was used to develop a model that mimics our experimental setup. The geometry used to obtain numerical results
was comprised of an ellipsoid with the average dimensions of
all treated potatoes along with a simplified geometry of the experimental bipolar probe with both geometries sharing center of
mass at the origin. In order to keep the problem general, it was
further assumed that the tissue is isotropic and macroscopically
homogeneous. The physics involved in solving for the elec-

TABLE I
TISSUE PROPERTIES AND CONSTANTS USED IN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL
Material
Potato

Electrode

Insulation

Property

Symbol

Value

Ref

Heat capacity, J/(kg·K)
Density, kg/m3
Thermal conductivity, W/(m·K)
Electrical conductivity, (S/m)
Heat capacity, J/(kg·K)
Density, (kg/m3)
Thermal conductivity, W/(m·K)
Electrical conductivity, (S/m)
Heat capacity, (J/kg·K)
Density, (kg/m3)
Thermal conductivity, (W/m·K)

cp
ρp
kp
σe
ce
ρe
ke
σi
ci
ρi
ki

3033
1040
0.552
2.22E6
500
7900
15
1.0E-5
3400
800
0.01

[67]
[67]
[67]
[66]
[66]
[66]
[66]
[66]
[66]
[66]
[66]

tric field distribution is governed by the following differential
equation:
∇ · (σd ∇ϕ) = 0

(4)

where σd represents the electrical conductivity of the tissue as
described by (3) and ϕ is the electric potential [6]. EP-induced
changes in the conductivity were considered as reported by
Neal et al. [65]. The conductivity range was determined from
impedance spectroscopy data collected in 1-D IRE experiments.
Boundary conditions for the electrode–tissue interface were set
to ϕ = V0 on one electrode, while setting the other electrode
boundary to ϕ = 0. All boundaries with no direct contact with
an electrode were assumed thermally and electrically insulative.
Thermal effects during pulsing were modeled by the following Joule heating equation:
∂T
σd |∇ϕ|2 · d
= ρcp
(5)
τ
∂t
where kp is the thermal conductivity, T is the temperature, cp
is the specific heat capacity, and ρ is the density of the potato
(tissue). The Joule heating term σd |∇ϕ|2 · d is simplified by
using a scale factor directly related to the ratio of pulse duration
d and pulse interval τ . This simplification exemplifies a duty
cycle approach in which the total energy delivered to the tissue
is averaged throughout the duration of the treatment [66]. IRE
is expected to take place in potato tissue exposed to a marginal
electric field threshold, which was found by matching experimental lesion dimensions to electric field values from our FEM
modeling [57]. A 2-D axisymmetric model is used for the FEM
analysis. Table I shows the material properties used in making
the FEM model.
∇ · (kp ∇T ) +

H. Lesion Monitoring During IRE Treatment
The impedance spectrum is measured between consecutive
sensors of the impedance probe before and after applying a
total number of 10, 30, and 100 pulses for each potato. The
impedance spectra before and after pulsing at each sensor are
fitted to the equivalent circuit model of Fig. 2(a) to find the circuit parameters. The tissue resistance Rec is then converted into
conductivity using the calibration equation. Geometrical factors
as well as electrical heterogeneity across different potatoes induce differences in the measured impedance before running any

BONAKDAR et al.: FEASIBILITY OF A SMART SURGICAL PROBE FOR VERIFICATION OF IRE TREATMENTS

2679

Fig. 4. (a) Comparison of impedance spectra of potato tuber samples after exposure PEFs of 400 V/cm magnitude and increasing number of pulses.
(b) Electrical conductivity of potato as a function of electric field for different
pulse numbers. The inflection points are shown with hollow circles.

Fig. 3. (a) Potato tuber samples. (b) Normalized contrast after 12 h posttreatment. Data are shown as average ±SD.

treatment. For this reason, the tissue resistances were normalized to their initial values for better comparison.
III. RESULTS
A. Determination of Dynamic Conductivity
Fig. 3 shows the results from the visual inspection of samples after 1-D EP experiments. Potato samples exposed to a
uniform electric field presented the expected change in color
when a sufficiently high-electric field or number of pulses was
delivered. The parallel plate electrodes ensure a uniform electric
field across the sample, which results in a uniform treatment. As
shown in Fig. 3(a) the color of the treated samples serves as an
indication for the occurrence of IRE. The colors of the potato
samples were quantitatively analyzed in ImageJ and the normalized contrast with respect to the fully electroporated sample is
plotted in Fig. 3(b).

The rapid change in the color of potato samples after even a
small number of pulses makes it difficult to use the color criterion to find the IRE threshold. It is believed that the electrical
conductivity of the tissue increases significantly after IRE treatment. Hence, the increase in the electrical conductivity value is
used as the criterion for determination of the IRE threshold.
The shifting in the electrical impedance spectra of potato
samples exposed to PEFs of 400 V/cm magnitude and increasing pulse numbers is shown in Fig. 4(a) as an example. For all
samples, the impedance spectra are analyzed using the equivalent circuit model of Fig. 2(a). After fitting, the Rec resistance
is extracted as a measure of the sample resistance at low frequency [53]. The obtained resistance is then converted to electrical conductivity using (2). The fact that EP pulses are short dc
pulses justifies using the low-frequency electrical conductivity
for modeling purposes. Fig. 4(b) shows the data points and the
fitted σd (E) functions as in (3) for 10, 30, and 100 pulses. The
inflection point of each curve corresponds to the electric field
threshold for the occurrence of EP [56], [57], which are found
to be 581, 298, and 227 V/cm for 10, 30, and 100 pulses, respectively. The inflection points are shown with hollow circles
on the graph.

2680

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

FEM results for electric field distribution along the length of the probe for different pulse parameters.

Fig. 6. (a) Change in tissue resistivity at different points along the probe during treatment with different number of pulses. (b) The ablated areas inside the
potatoes after treating with 10, 30, and 100 pulses of 1500 V.

B. Electric Field Distribution From FEA
The computational model is solved for 10, 30, and 100 consecutive pulses of 100, 600, and 1500 V to the pulsing leads
(total of nine analyses). Fig. 5 shows the induced electric field
magnitude along the length of the IRE probe for each treatment.
Generally, the electric field magnitude decreases slightly by increasing the number of applied pulses which is attributed to the
increased tissue conductivity during EP treatments as shown in
Fig. 4(a). Each graph also shows the IRE threshold for each
number of pulses, as obtained from the dynamic conductivity
function. For each number of pulses, the areas of the potato with
a higher electric field magnitude than the indicated threshold become irreversibly electroporated. For instance, for ten pulses of
1500 and 1000 V, the lesion grows 1.5 and 0.6 mm beyond probe
1, respectively. Ten pulses of 600 V will not create any ablation

beyond probe 1. By increasing the number of pulses, a lower
threshold is needed for IRE, as proved by 1-D experiments and
shown in Fig. 4(b). Thirty pulses of 1500, 1000, and 600 V will
create lesions 3, 1.8, and 0.6 mm, respectively, beyond probe 1.
In this case for 1500 V, the lesion boundary is located halfway
between probe 2 and 3 and for 1000 V, the lesion is very close
to probe 2. For 100 pulses of 1500, 1000, and 600 V, the lesion
grows 4, 2.5, and 1 mm, respectively, beyond probe 1. In this
case for 1500 and 1000 V pulses, the lesion grow close to probe
3 and probe 2, respectively.
C. Impedance Monitoring During IRE Treatment of Potato
Fig. 6(a)
ity between
gram shows
tain number

shows the percent change in tissue conductivsensor pairs for different treatments. Each diathe change in conductivity after applying a cerof pulses with different magnitudes. It should be

BONAKDAR et al.: FEASIBILITY OF A SMART SURGICAL PROBE FOR VERIFICATION OF IRE TREATMENTS

noted that potatoes are heterogeneous and as revealed by our
measurements, the conductivity of potato varies up to 24% at
different points in different potatoes. Hence, instead of the absolute value of the conductivity, the relative change in tissue
conductivity is plotted, which is obtained by normalizing the
conductivity after each treatment to the conductivity of bare
potato at the same point. As shown in Fig. 6(a), depending on
the applied pulse number and magnitude, certain sensors along
the probe undergo a significant increase in the measured electrical conductivity. The results from the 1-D experiments, as
shown in Fig. 4(b), show how a certain increase in electrical
conductivity could be related to the occurrence of IRE for the
case of homogeneous treatment. However, during the treatment
with the bipolar probe, due to the nonuniform electric field, both
the ablated and nonablated areas of the tissue contribute to the
impedance measurement, hence a lower increase in electrical
conductivity is expected at sensors within the same electric field
compared to the 1-D experiment. As shown in Fig. 6(a), for
each number of pulses, the normalized conductivity decreases
by moving away from the pulsing leads. This value is equal to
100% (i.e., no increase) for points sufficiently away from the
lesion.
Fig. 6(b) shows the induced lesion in potato after 10, 30, and
100 pulses of 1500 V. It is shown that for 10 and 30 pulses,
the lesion edge is located between probes 1 and 2 and 2 and 3,
respectively. For 100 pulses, the lesion has grown up to probe
3. These results are consistent with the FEM results presented
in Fig. 5.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Color of Electroporated Tissue
As shown in Fig. 3, an acute contrast can be observed between
samples exposed to 100 V/cm and the rest of the samples. This
is in agreement with the data in Fig. 4(b), as 100 V/cm is located
below the inflection points of all curves for different number of
pulses. The sharp contrast between electroporated and nonelectroporated samples is in agreement with the lesions observed
inside the treated potatoes as shown in Fig. 6(b).
B. Interpretation of the Impedance Spectrum
Based on the equivalent circuit model of Fig. 2(a), the
impedance spectrum can be divided into three frequency intervals. At low frequencies (f < 1 kHz), the impedance spectrum is dominated by the capacitive behavior of electric double
layer at the electrode–tissue interface, which is shown by the
linearly decreasing impedance magnitude in Fig. 4(a). At very
high frequencies (f > 100 kHz), the impedance of all capacitive elements vanish [see (1)], simplifying the equivalent circuit model of Fig. 2(a) to the parallel combination of Ric and
Rec as verified by the resistive characteristics of the impedance
spectrum at this range. As depicted in Fig. 4(a), EP does not
change the high- and low-frequency regions of the spectrum.
The electric double layer at the electrode interface is not affected by EP, resulting in the same capacitance and the same
impedance at low-frequency range. At high frequency, the cell
membrane capacitance is bypassed and the effect of EP on

2681

the membrane resistance is not reflected in this part of the
spectrum. On the other hand, the combination of cytoplasmic
and the extracellular resistances, which contribute to the highfrequency impedance, do not change after EP, resulting in the
same impedance at high frequency. At mid-frequency range
(1 kHz < f < 100 kHz), the electrode effects are vanished; however, the existing cell membrane capacitance results in part of
the intracellular current to pass through the induced membrane
pores. Hence, this part of the spectrum is mostly affected by the
membrane resistance and undergoes the most significant shift in
magnitude after EP due to the decreasing resistance of the cell
membrane.
C. Dynamic Conductivity Function
Fig. 4(b) shows how the electrical conductivity increases after exposure to different pulse numbers of increasing electric
field magnitude. It is shown that the transition zone between
initial and final conductivity values narrows down as the number of pulses increase, resulting in a sharp increase in electrical
conductivity for 100 pulses. But the transition for ten pulses
happens gradually. It should be noted that the inflection points
of all three curves correspond to the same conductivity value
(∼0.22 S/m).
D. Correlation of Impedance Data and Lesion Size
As shown in Fig. 6(b), the lesion starts in an elliptical shape
around the pulsing leads of the bipolar probe which grows into
a circular shape after applying sufficient number of pulses (i.e.,
100 in this case). This behavior which is confirmed by our FEM
modeling is a result of the change in conductivity after EP.
The impedance data give feedback about the size of the lesion in both axial and perpendicular directions of the probe.
This feedback is quantitative and accurate for determining lesion size in the axial direction yet it allows for qualitative interpretation of lesion growth in the perpendicular direction. In
general sensors which are embedded deeper into the lesion show
a higher increase in the measured conductivity. According to the
impedance data and depicted lesions in Fig. 6, sensors which
read a doubling in the measured conductivity are located at the
lesion boundary along the probe. For example in case of ten
pulses of 1500 V, E12 and E23 measurements show 100% and
50% increase in conductivity, respectively. This means that the
lesion has reached E1 but not E2. In case of 30 pulses of 1500 V,
E23 and E34 measure 150% and 50% increase in conductivity,
respectively, which corresponds to the lesion growing up to E2.
In case of 100 pulses of 1500 V, E34 and E45 measure 100%
and 30% increase in conductivity, respectively, which corresponds to the lesion growing close to E4. These measurements
are in agreement with the observed lesions in Fig. 6(b) and the
predicted lesion size by FEM (see Fig. 5).
Lesion growth in the perpendicular direction of the probe
is also reflected in the impedance measurement by the probe.
For example, it is predicted by FEM model (see Fig. 5, solid
line) and observed in Fig. 6(b) that for 30 and 100 pulse treatments, E1 and E2 would fall within the lesion. However, the
corresponding impedance measurement shows 400% and 500%
increase in conductivity for 30 and 100 pulses, respectively. This

2682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

difference is attributed to the depth of the lesion in the perpendicular direction. For the case of ten pulses of 1500 V, the small
depth of the lesion in perpendicular direction and the marginal
location of E2 compared with the lesion results in 100% increase in conductivity for E12 measurement. For all treatments,
the measurements showing 0% increase in conductivity correspond to electrodes completely outside of the lesion. The results
show that the impedance probe is not only capable of monitoring the lesion length along the probe, but also gives relevant
information regarding its other dimensions. In this study, the
correlation of lesion depth and impedance data is shown more
qualitatively; however, this information when combined with
FEM modeling can give accurate shape and size of the lesion in
all dimensions.
The FEM model was developed under the assumption of
isotropic domains, which is relevant in case of a potato tuber.
However, some tissues like skeletal muscles are anisotropic,
showing different electrical conductivities and IRE thresholds
in different directions. This behavior affects the distribution of
the electric field within the tissue and consequently the ablated
area, as shown in previous studies [68]. However, we believe that
when combined with the proper FEM model, the same electrode
setup could be used for anisotropic tissue as well. This issue is
out of the scope of this paper and will be addressed in our future
studies.
In our experiments, acquisition of the complete impedance
spectrum took about 20 s. However, the ten points per decade
resolution of the obtained spectra is far beyond the requirement
for fitting the data to the model of Fig. 2(a). Our results indicate that only a few impedance measurements distributed along
the frequency range (depending on the shape of the spectrum)
could give us an accurate fitting to the model, reducing the measurement time to a fraction of a second. Therefore, the entire
impedance measurement sequence can fit in the interpulse time
gap of 1 s, facilitating real-time monitoring during the treatment.
E. Possibility of Using a Passivation Layer Over the Sensor
During the EP experiments in highly conductive medium, it
was noted that long treatments with relatively high pulse magnitudes may result in high currents and sparking between the
leads. In some instances, the sparking resulted in the delamination of the gold from the sensor area close to the pulsing
leads. To resolve this issue, a 100-nm-thick SiO2 passivation
layer was deposited on the sensing area of the impedance probe
using E-beam evaporation. The passivation layer acts as a small
capacitor which blocks the large dc currents from entering the
electrodes and damaging them. The characteristics of this probe
is slightly different than the one without the passivation layer
due to the existence of the capacitance at the interface, however
the overall functionality remains the same. (Data not presented
here.)

ing homogeneous tissue, a symmetric lesion will be induced and
measuring at one side of the IRE leads would suffice for accurate
size determination. However, in the case of heterogeneous tissue, the induced lesion is not symmetric and the measurements
made by the probe will just be valid for one side of the lesion.
This is still useful feedback which can be used for pretreatment
planning verification.
At low EP levels, a small error is observed among the measured conductivity values. However, the relative error increases
at high EP levels which is apparent from the large error bars
in Fig. 6(a) for the case of N = 100. We noted that during EP
treatments, interstitial fluid is forced out of the potato along the
length of the probe. This interstitial fluid has a different electrical conductivity than bulk potato tissue and when in contact with
the impedance probe may cause some variations in the reading
from the actual value, which can lead to large error bars. The
temperature increase due to Joule heating happening close to
EP leads is also another source of error. We believe the heating
effects would be less significant for in vivo EP thanks to heat
sink effects from blood circulation.
The spatial resolution of the probe for lesion size determination is a function of interelectrode distance. Generally, the
closer the electrodes, the more accurate the measurements become. This parameter can be adjusted and optimized according
to the treatment protocol and the expected accuracy.
V. CONCLUSION
Taking advantage of the characteristic changes in conductivity during IRE, we have created a sensor that can be used to
collect impedance data during treatments in potato tuber. We
performed experiments applying a uniform electric field across
cylindrical tissue samples to characterize the IRE thresholds
and bulk conductivity changes during treatments. The results
from our computational model, which was constructed based
on uniform electric field data, correlated well with the lesion
dimensions. Using advanced microfabrication techniques, we
fabricated a 20-μm-thick flexible impedance microsensor array.
We used impedance data collected through the sensor array to
estimate the extent of insult to the tissue for a variety of treatments. Finally, agreement between the FEM and impedance
data collected through the sensor array was verified by physically measuring the induced lesion which showed excellent
agreement for different protocols.
The system presented herein can be adapted for intrapulse
measurements, which could potentially eliminate overtreatment
of tissue and reduce unnecessary thermal effects. Furthermore,
the device presented in this study could be readily implemented
in the clinic as the proposed microsensor is fabricated from
biocompatible materials and is relatively easy to manufacture.
Finally, this method of active ablation monitoring could potentially be translated for use with other therapies involving probes
as energy foci.

F. Limitations and Sources of Error
One of the limitations of the current technique is that the
measurements are taken at one side of the lesion. This is a consequence of the fact that the technique is minimally invasive and
no other incision is required into the tissue. In the case of treat-

REFERENCES
[1] K. F. Chu and D. E. Dupuy, “Thermal ablation of tumours: Biological mechanisms and advances in therapy,” Nat. Rev. Cancer, vol. 14,
pp. 199–208, Mar. 2014.

BONAKDAR et al.: FEASIBILITY OF A SMART SURGICAL PROBE FOR VERIFICATION OF IRE TREATMENTS

[2] A. Ivorra and B. Rubinsky, “Historical review of irreversible electroporation in medicine,” in Irreversible Electroporation, B. Rubinsky, Ed. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag , 2010, pp. 1–21.
[3] L. M. Mir et al., “Electrochemotherapy potentiation of antitumour effect
of bleomycin by local electric pulses,” Eur. J. Cancer, vol. 27, pp. 68–72,
1991.
[4] L. C. Heller and R. Heller, “In vivo electroporation for gene therapy,”
Hum. Gene Ther., vol. 17, pp. 890–897, Sep. 2006.
[5] R. V. Davalos et al., “Tissue ablation with irreversible electroporation,”
Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, pp. 223–231, Feb. 2005.
[6] J. F. Edd and R. V. Davalos, “Mathematical Modeling of irreversible
electroporation for treatment planning,” Technol. Cancer Res. Treat.,
vol. 6, pp. 275–286, Aug. 2007.
[7] M. L. Yarmush et al., “Electroporation-based technologies for medicine:
Principles, applications, and challenges,” Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 16, pp. 295–320, 2014.
[8] D. Miklavčič et al., “Electrochemotherapy: from the drawing board into
medical practice.,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 29, 2014.
[9] D. A. Dean, “Nonviral gene transfer to skeletal, smooth, and cardiac
muscle in living animals,” Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol., vol. 289,
pp. C233–C245, Aug. 2005.
[10] M. Jaroszeski et al., “Delivery of genes in vivo using pulsed electric
fields,” in Electrochemotherapy, Electrogenetherapy, and Transdermal
Drug Delivery, M. Jaroszeski, R. Heller, and R. Gilbert, Eds. New York,
NY, USA: Humana, 2000, vol. 37, pp. 173–186.
[11] C. L. Jiang et al., “A review of basic to clinical studies of irreversible
electroporation therapy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62, no. 1,
pp. 4–20, Jan. 2015.
[12] H. J. Scheffer et al., “Irreversible electroporation for nonthermal tumor
ablation in the clinical setting: A systematic review of safety and efficacy,” J. Vascular Interventional Radiol., vol. 25, pp. 997–1011, Jul.
2014.
[13] P. A. Garcia et al., “Non-thermal irreversible electroporation (N-TIRE)
and adjuvant fractionated radiotherapeutic multimodal therapy for intracranial malignant glioma in a canine patient,” Technol. Cancer Res.
Treat., vol. 10, pp. 73–83, Feb. 2011.
[14] B. Al-Sakere et al., “Tumor ablation with irreversible electroporation,”
Plos One, vol. 2, no. 11, p. e1135, 2007.
[15] B. Rubinsky, “Irreversible electroporation in medicine,” Technol. Cancer
Res. Treat., vol. 6, pp. 255–259, Aug. 1, 2007.
[16] E. W. Lee et al., “Imaging guided percutaneous irreversible electroporation: Ultrasound and immunohistological correlation,” Technol. Cancer
Res. Treat., vol. 6, pp. 287–293, Aug. 2007.
[17] B. Rubinsky et al., “Irreversible electroporation: A new ablation
modality—Clinical implications,” Technol. Cancer Res. Treat., vol. 6,
pp. 37–48, Feb. 2007.
[18] E. W. Lee et al., “Advanced hepatic ablation technique for creating
complete cell death: Irreversible electroporation,” Radiology, vol. 255,
pp. 426–433, May 2010.
[19] S. N. Goldberg et al., “Thermal ablation therapy for focal malignancy:
A unified approach to underlying principles, techniques, and diagnostic
imaging guidance,” AJR Am. J. Roentgenol., vol. 174, pp. 323–331, Feb.
2000.
[20] C. Daniels and B. Rubinsky, “Electrical field and temperature model
of nonthermal irreversible electroporation in heterogeneous tissues,” J.
Biomech. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 131, no. 7, p. 071006, 2009.
[21] R. E. Neal et al., “Experimental characterization and numerical modeling
of tissue electrical conductivity during pulsed electric fields for irreversible
electroporation treatment planning,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 4, pp. 1076–1085, Apr. 2012.
[22] S. Corovic et al., “In vivo muscle electroporation threshold determination:
Realistic numerical models and in vivo experiments,” J. Membr. Biol., vol.
245, pp. 509–520, Sep. 2012.
[23] R. V. Davalos and B. Rubinsky, “Temperature considerations during irreversible electroporation,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, vol. 51, pp. 5617–
5622, Nov. 2008.
[24] Y. Chen and W. P. Jepson, “EIS measurement for corrosion monitoring
under multiphase flow conditions,” Electrochimica Acta, vol. 44, pp. 4453–
4464, Jul. 1999.
[25] F. Mansfeld and C. H. Tsai, “Determination of coating deterioration
with EIS: I. Basic relationships,” Corrosion, vol. 47, pp. 958–963, Dec.
1991.
[26] T. Sun et al., “Broadband single cell impedance spectroscopy using maximum length sequences: Theoretical analysis and practical considerations,”
Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 18, pp. 2859–2868, Sep. 2007.

2683

[27] A. H. Kyle et al., “Characterization of three-dimensional tissue cultures using electrical impedance spectroscopy,” Biophysical J., vol. 76,
pp. 2640–2648, May 1999.
[28] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “Use of electric fields to monitor the dynamical
aspect of cell behavior in tissue culture,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. BME-33, no. 2, pp. 242–247, Feb. 1986.
[29] C. Tiruppathi et al., “Electrical method for detection of endothelial cell
shape change in real time: Assessment of endothelial barrier function,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 89, pp. 7919–7923, Sep. 1, 1992.
[30] J. Estrela da Silva et al., “Classification of breast tissue by electrical
impedance spectroscopy,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 38, pp. 26–30,
Jan. 2000.
[31] J. Jossinet, “Variability of impedivity in normal and pathological breast
tissue,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 34, pp. 346–350, Sep. 1996.
[32] S. Laufer et al., “Electrical impedance characterization of normal and
cancerous human hepatic tissue,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 31, pp. 995–1009,
Jul. 2010.
[33] Y. Huang and B. Rubinsky, “Micro-electroporation: improving the efficiency and understanding of electrical permeabilization of cells,” Biomed.
Microdevices, vol. 2, pp. 145–150, Mar. 1999.
[34] A. Meir and B. Rubinsky, “Electrical impedance tomographic imaging of
a single cell electroporation,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 16, pp. 427–437,
Jun. 2014.
[35] R. Davalos et al., “Electroporation: Bio-electrochemical mass transfer at
the nano scale,” Microscale Thermophysical Eng., vol. 4, pp. 147–159,
2000.
[36] M. Pavlin et al., “Effect of cell electroporation on the conductivity of a
cell suspension,” Biophysical J., vol. 88, pp. 4378–4390, Jun. 2005.
[37] J. Zhuang et al., Pulsed electric field induced dielectric evolution of
mammalian cells, in Proc. IEEE Int. Power Modulator High Voltage Conf.,
2012, pp. 106–109.
[38] J. Zhuang et al., “Dielectric evolution of mammalian cell membranes after
exposure to pulsed electric fields,” IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insulation,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 609–622, Apr. 2012.
[39] J. A. Stolwijk et al., “Impedance analysis of adherent cells after in situ
electroporation: Non-invasive monitoring during intracellular manipulations,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 26, pp. 4720–4727, Aug. 2011.
[40] T. Garcı́a-Sánchez et al., “A new spiral microelectrode assembly for electroporation and impedance measurements of adherent cell monolayers,”
Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 16, pp. 575–590, Aug. 2014.
[41] R. V. Davalos et al., “Electrical impedance tomography for imaging tissue
electroporation,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 761–767,
May 2004.
[42] Y. Granot et al., “In vivo imaging of irreversible electroporation by means
of electrical impedance tomography,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 4927–
4943, Aug. 21, 2009.
[43] M. Kranjc et al., “Magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography
for measuring electrical conductivity during electroporation,” Physiol.
Meas., vol. 35, pp. 985–996, Jun. 2014.
[44] A. Ivorra and B. Rubinsky, “In vivo electrical impedance measurements
during and after electroporation of rat liver,” Bioelectrochemistry, vol. 70,
pp. 287–295, May 2007.
[45] A. Ivorra et al., “In vivo electrical conductivity measurements during and
after tumor electroporation: Conductivity changes reflect the treatment
outcome,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, pp. 5949–5963, Oct. 7, 2009.
[46] R. C. G. Martin, “Irreversible electroporation of locally advanced pancreatic head adenocarcinoma,” J. Gastrointestinal Surg., vol. 17, pp. 1850–
1856, Oct. 2013.
[47] E. M. Dunki-Jacobs et al., “Evaluation of resistance as a measure of successful tumor ablation during irreversible electroporation of the pancreas,”
J. Am. College Surgeons, vol. 218, pp. 179–187, Feb. 2014.
[48] Y.-H. Kim et al., “Robust and real-time monitoring of nerve regeneration
using implantable flexible microelectrode array,” Biosens. Bioelectron.,
vol. 24, pp. 1883–1887, 2009.
[49] P. Norlin et al., “A 32-site neural recording probe fabricated by DRIE
of SOI substrates,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 12, pp. 414–419,
2002.
[50] A. L. Owens et al., “Multi-electrode array for measuring evoked potentials
from surface of ferret primary auditory cortex,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol.
58, pp. 209–220, 1995.
[51] I. P. Clements et al., “Regenerative scaffold electrodes for peripheral
nerve interfacing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 554–566, Jul. 2013.
[52] J. Ordonez et al., “Thin films and microelectrode arrays for neuroprosthetics,” MRS Bull., vol. 37, pp. 590–598, 2012.

2684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

[53] A. Ivorra et al., “Minimally invasive silicon probe for electrical impedance
measurements in small animals,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 19, pp. 391–
399, 2003.
[54] Y. Ming et al., “Micromachined hot-wire thermal conductivity probe
for biomedical applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56, no. 10,
pp. 2477–2484, Oct. 2009.
[55] M. Yi et al., “Micromachined electrical conductivity probe for RF ablation of tumors,” in Proc. ASME Int. Mech. Eng. Congr. Expo., 2005,
pp. 53–56.
[56] R. E. Neal et al., “Experimental characterization and numerical modeling
of tissue electrical conductivity during pulsed electric fields for irreversible
electroporation treatment planning,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59,
no. 4, pp. 1076–1085, Apr. 2012.
[57] A. Ivorra et al., “Electric field redistribution due to conductivity changes
during tissue electroporation: Experiments with a simple vegetal model,”
in Proc. World Congress Med. Phys. Biomed. Eng., 2009, vol. 25/13,
pp. 59–62.
[58] M. Hjouj and B. Rubinsky, “Magnetic resonance imaging characteristics
of nonthermal irreversible electroporation in vegetable tissue,” J. Membr.
Biol., vol. 236, pp. 137–146, Jul. 2010.
[59] M. Bower et al., “Irreversible electroporation of the pancreas: Definitive local therapy without systemic effects,” J. Surg. Oncol., vol. 104,
pp. 22–28, Jul. 1, 2011.
[60] K. S. Cole, “Permeability and impermeability of cell membranes for ions,”
in Proc. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 1940, pp. 110–122.
[61] O. G. Martinsen and S. Grimnes, Bioimpedance and Bioelectricity Basics.
New York, NY, USA: Academic, 2011.
[62] R. V. Davalos et al., “A feasibility study for electrical impedance tomography as a means to monitor tissue electroporation for molecular
medicine,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 400–403, Apr.
2002.
[63] A. Ivorra et al., “Bioimpedance dispersion width as a parameter to monitor
living tissues,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 26, pp. S165–S173, 2005.
[64] P. A. Garcia et al., “A numerical investigation of the electric and thermal
cell kill distributions in electroporation-based therapies in tissue,” Plos
One, p. e103083, 2014.
[65] R. E. Neal, 2nd, et al., “In vivo characterization and numerical simulation of prostate properties for non-thermal irreversible electroporation
ablation,” Prostate, vol. 74, pp. 458–68, May 2014.
[66] P. A. Garcia et al., “A parametric study delineating irreversible electroporation from thermal damage based on a minimally invasive intracranial
procedure,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 34, 2011.
[67] M. Rao et al., “Thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity of process
variety squash and white potatoes,” Trans. Amer. Soc. Agriculture Eng.,
vol. 18, pp. 1188–1192, 1975.
[68] S. Čorović et al., “The influence of skeletal muscle anisotropy on electroporation: In vivo study and numerical modeling,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
vol. 48, pp. 637–648, 2010.

Mohammad Bonakdar (S’15) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from Sharif
University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2004 and
2007, respectively. He is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
He served as a Research Assistant with the
Center for Intelligent Materials Systems and Structures and Bioelectromechanical Systems Laboratory
at Virginia Tech. His research interests include bioMEMS, microfluidics, biosensors, electroporation,
and organs-on-chip.

Eduardo L. Latouche received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA, in 2013, and is currently working
toward the M.S. degree in engineering mechanics.
After receiving the B.S. degree, he joined the Bioelectromechanical Systems Laboratory at Virginia
Tech as a Research Assistant. His research interests include development of medical devices, pulsed
electric fields technologies, physics-based therapies,
treatment planning, and MEMS.

Roop L. Mahajan received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering from Punjab Engineering College, Punjab, India, and the Ph.D. degree
in mechanical engineering from Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA, in 1977.
He is currently the Lewis E. Hester Chair Professor and the Director of the Institute for Critical
Technology and Applied Science at Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA, where he also concurrently
holds a joint appointment as a Tenured Professor
with the departments of Mechanical Engineering and
Biomedical Engineering and Mechanics.

Rafael V. Davalos (M’05) received the B.S. degree
from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
He is a Professor of Biomedical Engineering and
Mechanics at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
He also holds Adjunct Appointments in Mechanical
Engineering, the Wake Forest Comprehensive Cancer Center and at the Wake Forest Institute of Regenerative Medicine. Prior to his career as a Faculty
Member, he was employed at Sandia National Laboratories and departed as a Principal Member of Technical Staff.
Dr. Davalos received the 2006 HENAAC Award for the Nation’s Most
Promising Engineer and the 2009 Award from the Virginia Tech College of Engineering for Outstanding Assistant Professor. In 2012, he received the award
for the Most Outstanding Dissertation Advisor at Virginia Tech and was recently
named a Wallace H. Coulter Fellow.

