2526

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

A 3-D Level Set Method for Microwave
Breast Imaging
Timothy J. Colgan∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Susan C. Hagness, Fellow, IEEE, and Barry D. Van Veen, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: Conventional inverse-scattering algorithms
for microwave breast imaging result in moderate resolution images
with blurred boundaries between tissues. Recent 2-D numerical
microwave imaging studies demonstrate that the use of a level set
method preserves dielectric boundaries, resulting in a more accurate, higher resolution reconstruction of the dielectric properties
distribution. Previously proposed level set algorithms are computationally expensive, and thus, impractical in 3-D. In this paper, we
present a computationally tractable 3-D microwave imaging algorithm based on level sets. Methods: We reduce the computational
cost of the level set method using a Jacobian matrix, rather than an
adjoint method, to calculate Frechet derivatives. We demonstrate
the feasibility of 3-D imaging using simulated array measurements
from 3-D numerical breast phantoms. We evaluate performance by
comparing full 3-D reconstructions to those from a conventional
microwave imaging technique. We also quantitatively assess the
efficacy of our algorithm in evaluating breast density. Results: Our
reconstructions of 3-D numerical breast phantoms improve upon
those of a conventional microwave imaging technique. The density estimates from our level set algorithm are more accurate than
those of the conventional microwave imaging, and the accuracy is
greater than that reported for mammographic density estimation.
Conclusion: Our level set method leads to a feasible level of computational complexity for full 3-D imaging, and reconstructs the
heterogeneous dielectric properties distribution of the breast more
accurately than conventional microwave imaging methods. Significance: 3-D microwave breast imaging using a level set method
is a promising low-cost, nonionizing alternative to current breast
imaging techniques.
Index Terms—Breast density, level set method, microwave
imaging.

I. INTRODUCTION
ICROWAVE imaging of the breast is an exploratory
imaging modality that offers several potential advantages over x-ray mammography, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), and provides complementary information to ultrasound.
Microwave imaging via inverse scattering involves reconstructing the 3-D distribution of the breast dielectric properties from
scattered fields measured in the microwave frequency range using an antenna array surrounding the breast. Microwave imaging

M

Manuscript received October 26, 2014; revised March 16, 2015 and April
27, 2015; accepted May 4, 2015. Date of publication May 20, 2015; date of
current version September 16, 2015. This work was supported by the National
Institutes of Health under Grant R21 CA161369 awarded by the National Cancer
Institute and by the National Science Foundation under Grant 1128049. Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
∗ T. J. Colgan is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA (e-mail:
tcolgan@wisc.edu).
S. C. Hagness, and B. D. Van Veen are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2435735

does not involve painful compression or ionizing radiation, unlike x-ray mammography. The equipment used in microwave
imaging is also portable and low cost; thus, microwave tomography has the potential to be more widely available and cost
effective than MRI.
In the microwave frequency range, there is a moderate to large
contrast between the dielectric properties of different breast
tissue types [1], [2]. This contrast reflects both the type and
physiological state of the tissue. Hence, the dielectric properties distribution within the breast conveys clinically relevant
anatomical and functional information. Reconstructions of the
dielectric properties are potentially useful for several clinical
applications including density estimation, tumor detection, and
treatment monitoring. However, the inverse scattering problem
is ill posed, so microwave imaging performance depends heavily on the algorithm used to reconstruct the dielectric properties
of the breast. Many common microwave imaging algorithms
are based on iteratively solving a least-squares problems with
Tikhonov–Philips regularization (e.g., [3]) which results in oversmoothing or blurring of the boundaries between tissues of contrasting dielectric properties.
Level set algorithms [4]–[6] for microwave imaging have
yielded high-resolution reconstructions of dielectric properties.
An algorithm for imaging several 3-D, homogeneous, nonoverlapping targets is described in [6], but the only level set algorithms suitable for imaging the spatially complex and heterogeneous tissue structure of the breast are applied to 2-D numerical
breast phantoms [4], [5]. These 2-D level set algorithms have
a high computational cost and are impractical for 3-D breast
imaging. They involve a large number of iterations (over 100)
[4], with each iteration requiring multiple runs of a computational electromagnetics simulation that can be time consuming
for large domain sizes [5].
In this paper, we present a computationally feasible level set
method for 3-D microwave breast imaging. Our algorithm requires only one electromagnetics simulation per iteration and
fewer overall iterations than previously proposed level set approaches. The effectiveness of our algorithm is demonstrated
by comparing our 3-D level set reconstructions of anatomically
realistic MRI-derived numerical phantoms [7] to those from the
distorted Born iterative method (DBIM) [8].
We quantitatively evaluate the performance of our level set
method in the context of breast density estimation—a promising
application for microwave imaging. Current imaging modalities for 3-D breast density evaluation have shortcomings in
terms of accuracy and cost. High volumetric breast density,
defined as a large percentage of fibroglandular tissue, is one
of the strongest predictors of breast cancer risk [9]. Hence,
breast density estimation can play an important role in assessing

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

COLGAN et al.: 3-D LEVEL SET METHOD FOR MICROWAVE BREAST IMAGING

breast cancer risk, as described by Harvey and Bovbjerg [10], as
well as monitoring preventative interventions designed to lower
breast density and the consequent cancer risk. We use density estimation as a biologically relevant performance metric
for the reconstructions obtained with our level set method. The
high resolution images produced by our level set method yields
more accurate breast density estimates than those obtained with
Tikhonov-regularized Gauss–Newton methods. The accuracy of
our density estimates also exceeds that reported previously for
mammographic density estimation [11], [12].
The next section presents the physical relevance of the
level set technique for representing the dielectric properties of
breast tissue. We also introduce a single parameter dispersion
model that significantly reduces computational requirements.
Our level set model for dielectric properties and the optimization algorithm we use for imaging are presented in Section III.
Section IV describes the implementation details of our algorithm and Section V presents the results from our imaging study
using numerical phantoms. A discussion of our results is found
in Section VI and the conclusions are presented in Section VII.
Throughout this study boldface symbols represent vectors or
matrices and superscript T represents matrix or vector transpose. The symbol ∇ represents the Fréchet derivative, whereas
∂
∂ x represents the partial derivative with respect to variable x.
A preliminary version of this study was reported in [13].

2527

Fig. 1. Linear Debye-parameter relationship of (2), shown by the black curve,
compared to the Debye parameters that correspond to the 25th, 50th, and 75th
percentile values [8] of measured dielectric properties [1]. (a) Infinite permittivity and static conductivity versus static permittivity of adipose tissue. (b) Infinite
permittivity and static conductivity versus static permittivity of fibroglandular
tissue.

We further reduce the number of unknowns by exploiting the
following linear relationship between the three unknown Debye
parameters:

II. DIELECTRIC PROPERTIES OF BREAST TISSUE
Previous studies have shown that there exists a large contrast
in the dielectric properties of different types of healthy breast
tissues at microwave frequencies [1]. The dielectric properties
of fibroglandular tissue, which consists of epithelial and connective tissue, are significantly higher than those of adipose (fatty)
tissue. The contrast ratio of fibroglandular tissue to adipose tissue is large in both permittivity and effective conductivity [1].
This contrast in properties suggests using level sets to represent
the distinctly different adipose and fibroglandular tissue types.
The microwave inverse scattering problem is ill posed, as the
number of unknowns is much larger than the number of electric field measurements. The ill posedness of the microwave
breast imaging problem is reduced by using a dispersive model
for the tissue dielectric properties and making measurements at
multiple frequencies. Throughout the frequency range of interest (0.5–3 GHz), the dispersive nature of breast tissue is well
approximated by a single-pole Debye model for the complex
permittivity [14].
(ω) = ∞ +

σs
Δ
+
.
1 + jωτ
jω0

∞ = 0.3265s + 1.6326

(2a)

σs = 0.0151s − 0.0365.

(2b)

The aforementioned linear model well approximates the underlying dispersion curves for both adipose and fibroglandular
tissue as demonstrated in Fig. 1. Fig. 1 compares the linear relationship in (2) to the Debye parameters that correspond to the
25th, 50th, and 75th percentile values [8] of measured dielectric properties of breast tissue [1]. The resulting linear model
reduces the number of unknowns in the imaging problem to one
parameter, s , per voxel. Reduction to a single unknown parameter at each voxel significantly reduces the complexity of the
multifrequency microwave breast imaging problem. Once s is
reconstructed throughout the imaging domain, the frequencydependent dielectric properties of each voxel may be calculated
according to the relationship in (2) and the Debye model of (1).
III. LEVEL SET METHOD FOR MICROWAVE IMAGING
A. Mathematical Model for Permittivity

(1)

The only parameters in the Debye model that are assumed to be
spatially varying are Δ, ∞ , and σs . The parameter Δ is the
difference between static permittivity (s ) and infinite frequency
permittivity (∞ ). The static conductivity of the material is σs .
A fixed, spatially invariant relaxation time constant (τ ) of 15 ps
is used for all tissue types. This Debye model results in three
unknown parameters per voxel in the imaging domain.

The breast is composed of distinct healthy tissue types,
namely adipose (fatty) tissue and fibroglandular tissue. On a
microscopic (cellular) scale, there are clear-cut natural boundaries between these different tissues. On a macroscopic scale,
these distinct boundaries persist, albeit in a spatially complex
manner due to the inherent heterogeneity of the mammary network. Nevertheless, level sets can accommodate such spatial
complexity. Thus, level sets are indeed well defined for this
problem.

2528

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

properties, (r):
2

F
M 

1    t
t

E
(r
,
ω
)
−
E
,
ω
,
(r)
r
C() =
m
f
m
f
m
r


2
m =1
f =1

2
FM
1  
Ri .
=
2 i=1  

Fig. 2. 2-D example of a single level set φ segmenting a sample domain into
distinct regions. Sections with (φ > 0) have dielectric properties that correspond to fibroglandular tissue, and regions with (φ ≤ 0) have dielectric properties that correspond to adipose tissue.

In this paper, we use a single level set to represent the distribution of healthy tissue throughout the breast. A level set is a
real valued function that is defined everywhere in the imaging
domain. An example of a single level set segmenting a domain
into distinct regions is shown in Fig. 2, where sections with
(φ > 0) have dielectric properties that correspond to fibroglandular tissue, and regions with (φ ≤ 0) have dielectric properties
that correspond to adipose tissue. This representation gives rise
to the following model for complex permittivity in the imaging
domain, as follows:





(r) = f (r)H φ(r) + a (r) 1 − H φ(r) .

(3)

Here, φ(r) is our level set, H(·) is the Heaviside or unit step
function, f (r) is the complex permittivity inside the region
corresponding to fibroglandular tissue, and a (r) is the complex
permittivity inside the region corresponding to adipose tissue.
The static permittivity in the fibroglandular and adipose regions,
fs (r) and as (r), respectively, are used to calculate the complex
permittivity in each region by substituting (2) into (1). The level
set function segments the imaging domain into arbitrarily shaped
regions of fibroglandular and adipose tissue. We note that this
inherent segmentation makes breast density estimation a trivial
calculation based on the level set function itself. The complex
permittivities f (r) and a (r) may be spatially varying inside
the regions; they may also incorporate any a priori information
about the statistical distribution of the dielectric properties of
tissue.

B. Level Set Optimization
We use an iterative approach to reconstruct the level set and
corresponding permittivities of an unknown object from a set
of electric fields measured with the unknown object present.
The following least-squares cost function is used to assess how
t
(rm , ωf ) is to the total
similar the measured electric field Em
t
electric field Er (rm , ωf , (r)) computed for the reconstructed

(4)

The location of the receiver for one of the M transmit–receive
pairs is denoted by rm , while ωf is one of the F frequencies
being used. The residual Ri is defined as the difference between
the measured and reconstructed electric fields for a transmit–
receive pair at a given frequency.
We iteratively optimize the least-squares cost function with
respect to (r) as follows. An initial guess for (r) is made,
then a forward solution is computed to obtain the corresponding electric fields. A search direction is identified, based on
the difference between the reconstructed and measured electric
fields, and is used to update each dielectric properties voxel.
The search direction used in other level-set-based microwave
imaging algorithms [4] is based on an adjoint solution [5]. This
adjoint solution incurs a considerable computational burden, on
the order of another forward simulation.
We avoid this computational cost by calculating the Jacobian
matrix instead. The Jacobian matrix of the least-squares cost
function in (4) is calculated using only the Green’s function and
total field simulated inside a known permittivity distribution, as
derived in [15], as follows:
Gr (r|r ) ◦ Etr (r ) = J()
⎤
⎡
∇R1T
⎥
⎢
⎢ ∇R2T ⎥
⎥
⎢
⎥
=⎢
⎥
⎢
..
⎥
⎢
.
⎦
⎣
T
∇RM
.
F

(5)

Here, Gr (r|r ) is the M F × K Green’s function matrix, where
K is the number of imaging voxels. Each row in this matrix represents the Green’s function, as it varies across the K imaging
voxels, for a particular channel and freq ωf for a medium with
permittivity . In the M F × K total field matrix Etr (r ), each
row represents the total electric field for a particular channel calculated at each of the K imaging voxels for a specific frequency
ωf . The Jacobian matrix for the least-squares cost function evaluated for a specific permittivity is the element-by-element multiplication (Hadamard product) of the Green’s function matrix
and the total field matrix. Each row of the Jacobian matrix is
interpreted as the Fréchet derivative of the residuals in (4) with
respect to the complex permittivity .
The finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method is used to
compute the total electric fields necessary to evaluate the Jacobian at each iteration. The Green’s function matrix is calculated
from FDTD simulations of the total field [16] assuming each
source excitation is a z-directed current source, Iz , of known
length, L. Each row in the Green’s function matrix is calculated

COLGAN et al.: 3-D LEVEL SET METHOD FOR MICROWAVE BREAST IMAGING

as follows:

2529

IV. ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Gr (rm |r, ω) =

j
E t |z (r|rm , ω).
ωμ0 LIz r

(6)

This Green’s function calculation is described in detail in [8].
The Fréchet derivative of our cost function with respect to
permittivity is calculated using the Jacobian matrix from (5)
and the cost function in (4) as follows [17]:
∇C() = J()T R().

(7)

Calculating the Fréchet derivative in this manner greatly reduces
the computational complexity compared to the adjoint method
[18]. Using our method requires only one FDTD simulation,
whereas the adjoint method requires two electromagnetics simulations to obtain this derivative at every iteration. Therefore,
our method of calculating the derivative using the Jacobian reduces our computational burden by half at every iteration.
The partial derivatives of (3) with respect to φ, as , and fs are
computed as follows:

 

∂
f
a
=  (r) −  (r) δ φ(r)
(8a)
∂φ

 f
∂
∂
= H φ(r)
(8b)
f
∂s
∂fs


 a
∂
∂
=
1
−
H
φ(r)
(8c)
∂as
∂as
where ∂f /∂fs and ∂a /∂as are derivatives of the complex
permittivity in (1) with respect to the static permittivity with the
linear model of (2) substituted for the ∞ and σs parameters.
The partial derivatives of the cost function with respect to the
level set parameters are obtained using the chain rule to combine
(8) with the Fréchet derivative in (7), as follows:
∂
∂C
= ∇C()
∂φ
∂φ
∂C
∂fs

= ∇C()

(9a)

∂

(9b)

∂fs

∂C
∂
= ∇C() a .
a
∂s
∂s

∂C
∂φ

fs ,n +1 = fs ,n − α f
+1
= a,n
− α a
a,n
s
s

∂C
∂fs
∂C
∂as

The partial derivative with respect to the level set is only
defined at the boundary between tissue types due to the delta
function in (8a). Choosing a suitable region around the boundary to extend the derivative is often referred to as choosing an
extension velocity [18]. There are many choices for extension
velocities but here we simply extend the derivative to the entire
imaging domain. Consequently, the level set function is updated
everywhere in the imaging domain at each iteration, according
to (10a). The permittivities for the two different regions do not
need an extension velocity and are updated everywhere in the
imaging domain according to (10b) and (10c).

B. Step Size Selection
We determined appropriate step sizes αφ , α f , and α a in (10)
based on a priori information about the statistical distribution
of dielectric properties for the two tissue types. The step sizes
are also chosen to take into account the general behavior of the
optimization algorithm. The step size of the level set function αφ
is chosen to allow a fixed percentage of the estimated number of
fibroglandular voxels to change from adipose to fibroglandular
(negative value to positive value) or vice versa. This step size
prevents the algorithm from taking erroneously large steps that
add too many fibroglandular or adipose voxels in one step.
The step size for the region corresponding to fibroglandular
tissue α f is larger than the step size for the region corresponding to adipose tissue α a to account for the larger variation in
complex permittivity of fibroglandular tissue than adipose tissue as reported by Lazebnik et al. [1]. These step sizes can be
increased or decreased to encourage more or less heterogeneity
within tissue types. At each iteration, the static permittivity fs
of the fibroglandular region is restricted to the range 20–65, and
the static permittivity as of the adipose region is constrained
to be in the range 2–10 based on the expected values for the
measured tissue properties [1].

(9c)
C. Multiple Frequency Approach

These partial derivatives are used to obtain a gradient-based
descent optimization approach, as follows:
φn +1 = φn − αφ

A. Extension Velocity

(10a)
(10b)
(10c)

where n is the iteration number. The step sizes αφ , α f , and
α a are chosen independently to control the descent of each
parameter while taking into account any a priori information
about the tissue types and their structure.

We use several frequencies independently in our algorithm in
a frequency hopping fashion similar to the algebraic reconstruction technique (also known as the Kaczmarz method) [19]. One
frequency is used to update every parameter (φ, fs , as ) for multiple iterations, and then, we switch to the next frequency and
so forth until the algorithm converges. This strategy of iterating
through the frequencies is an attempt to avoid any local minima
that might exist at one frequency but not at other frequencies.
This approach prevents the steepest descent algorithm from getting stuck in the nearest local minimum associated with any
individual frequency. We terminate the iterative process when
the change in the cost function is less than 1% of the initial cost,
after ensuring that each frequency is given the same number of
iterations.

2530

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

data at four frequencies: 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 GHz. The fields received at the antennas were computed using a 2-mm FDTD grid.
Gaussian noise was added to obtain a 30-dB SNR, where SNR
is defined as the ratio of total nonmonostatic received power to
total noise power.
V. RESULTS
Fig. 3. (a) Coronal cross section of static permittivity from a DBIM reconstruction. (a) Thresholded version of the DBIM reconstruction where fibroglandular tissue is represented by s = 49.1 (i.e., red) and adipose tissue is
represented by s = 4.8 (i.e., dark blue). (b) Initial guess of the level set obtained using the DBIM reconstruction. Voxels in the level set are assigned a value
based on the distance from the boundary between tissue types, with negative
distance used for the region corresponding to adipose tissue.

D. Initial Parameter Generation
Many different biologically relevant initial guesses may be
used with the level set method. The initial guess we chose in
this study is based on a DBIM reconstruction obtained using
the approach outlined in Shea et al. [8]. The boundary of the
level set is chosen by thresholding the DBIM reconstruction
with the threshold set midway between the 50th percentile for
static permittivity of fibroglandular tissue and the 50th percentile for static permittivity of adipose tissue [1]. Inside each
region the level set function takes on a value corresponding
to the signed Euclidean distance from the boundary. Level set
voxels corresponding to fibroglandular tissue assume a value of
the Euclidean distance from the boundary, whereas those corresponding to adipose tissue are the negative of the distance to the
boundary as shown in Fig. 3. Using the Euclidean distance effectively reduces the likelihood of the algorithm changing voxels
in the interior of the two initial guess regions. This strategy was
chosen because DBIM reconstructions approximate the rough
shape of the different regions well, but tend to blur boundaries,
reducing confidence in the initial guess near those boundaries.
The initial values for the permittivity in the region corresponding to fibroglandular tissue fs (·) and adipose tissue as (·) are
homogeneous and set to the 50th percentiles as reported by
Lazebnik et al. [1].
E. Numerical Phantoms
We tested our level set method using nine MRI-derived numerical breast phantoms from the UWCEM online repository
[20]. These 3-D phantoms span the four breast density classes
defined by the American College of Radiology Breast Imaging
Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) Atlas. The BI-RADS
denotes Class 1 as mostly adipose, Class 2 as scattered fibroglandular, Class 3 as heterogeneously dense, and Class 4 as
very dense. The phantoms are surrounded by an oil immersion
medium and a cylindrical array of 40 dipole antennas, arranged
in five rings of eight antennas, as described in Shea et al. [8]. The
location of the skin, its thickness, and its dielectric properties
were assumed known for all reconstructions. The antennas were
excited with an ideal wideband current source, and we record

We begin by comparing reconstructions obtained with our
level set method to those obtained with the DBIM algorithm.
Figs. 4 and 5 present reconstructions of Class 3 and Class 4
phantoms, respectively. The first row shows the phantom properties, the second row shows the reconstruction using the DBIM
algorithm described in Shea et al. [8], and the third row shows
the reconstruction after 80 iterations of our level set method.
The cross sections shown represent regions of the breast contained within the span of the rings of the antenna array. The
eight coronal cross sections are spaced every 8 mm for both
the Class 3 and Class 4 phantom, where the base of the breast
phantom is nearest to the first column of images (far left). All
the cross sections are of static permittivity. Images of the other
Debye parameters (static conductivity and infinite permittivity)
are similar due to the linear relationship of (2) and are omitted
for brevity.
The proposed level set method more accurately reconstructs
breast tissue structure than conventional microwave imaging
methods. For example, the DBIM reconstruction misses fibroglandular tissue in the fifth and sixth columns of Fig. 4 that is
accurately reconstructed by the level set method. The level set
method also identifies the small regions of fibroglandular tissue
extending from the bottom of the large fibroglandular tissue region in the second column of Fig. 5; this feature is not present
in the DBIM reconstruction. The average absolute errors of the
reconstructed Debye parameters using DBIM and the level set
method are shown in Table I for the adipose and fibroglandular regions of the Class 3 and 4 phantoms (see Figs. 4 and 5).
While the average absolute errors in adipose tissue properties
are comparable between the two methods, the absolute error in
fibroglandular properties is consistently smaller for the level set
method.
Next we compare the density of the phantom to the densities estimated from the DBIM and level set method reconstructions. All three densities are determined by comparing the static
permittivity at each voxel to a threshold. Static permittivity is
chosen because it exhibits the largest difference between fibroglandular and adipose tissue types. The threshold is chosen
to account for the variance in measured static permittivity by
fitting Weibull distributions [21] to the adipose and fibroglandular properties, respectively, reported in Lazebnik et al. [1].
The threshold is chosen as the value giving equal area under
the two distributions. Adipose tissue was modeled as a Weibull
distribution with λ = 7 and K = 1.63, and fibroglandular tissue
was modeled as a Weibull distribution with a λ = 51.82 and a
K = 4.29. We used the coefficient of determination (R2 value)
to assess the fit of these models to the 25th, 50th, and 75th
percentiles of the Lazebnik et al. study [1]. The coefficient of
determination was 0.91 for the fit to adipose tissue and 0.95 for

COLGAN et al.: 3-D LEVEL SET METHOD FOR MICROWAVE BREAST IMAGING

2531

Fig. 4. Coronal cross sections of static permittivity from a Class 3 phantom (top) and the corresponding cross sections from the 3-D DBIM reconstruction
(middle) and the 3-D level set method reconstruction (bottom). The coronal cross sections are taken every 8 mm between the top and bottom rings of antennas with
the cross sections closest to the phantom base shown at the far left.

Fig. 5. Coronal cross sections of static permittivity from a Class 4 phantom (top) and the corresponding cross sections from the 3-D DBIM reconstruction
(middle) and the 3-D level set method reconstruction (bottom). The coronal cross sections are taken every 8 mm between the top and bottom rings of antennas with
the cross sections closest to the phantom base shown at the far left.

the fit to fibroglandular tissue. These models lead to a threshold of 18.8 for static permittivity. Any static permittivity values
greater than 18.8 were classified as fibroglandular tissue and
any values less than or equal to 18.8 were classified as adipose
tissue.
The breast density estimates (volumetric percentages) for the
nine phantoms of the UWCEM repository [20] are shown in Table II. Applying the static permittivity threshold of 18.8 to the
level set method reconstructions gives the exact same density
estimate as the level set segmentation itself. This occurs because
the level set method reconstruction forces all voxels in the fibroglandular region to have a static permittivity greater than 20
and all voxels in the adipose region less than 10, as noted in
Section IV-B.

TABLE I
AVERAGE ABSOLUTE ERROR IN DEBYE PARAMETERS WITH THE TWO
RECONSTRUCTION TECHNIQUES
DBIM

Class 3
Class 4

Adipose
Fibroglandular
Adipose
Fibroglandular

Level Set Method

s

∞

σs

s

∞

σs

6.3
16.2
7.2
16.4

2.3
5.4
2.7
5.6

0.09
0.29
0.11
0.27

6.3
15.0
7.2
16.3

2.1
4.7
2.4
5.1

0.09
0.24
0.11
0.26

The quantitative density estimates shown in Table I reveal
that the level set method outperforms the DBIM for the higher
density classes, and performs similarly to the DBIM for the

2532

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

TABLE II
VOLUMETRIC PERCENT DENSITY ESTIMATES FOR THE NINE PHANTOMS AND
THE TWO RECONSTRUCTION TECHNIQUES
Breast Density (%)

Class 1
Class 2

Class 3

Class 4

Phantom 1
Phantom 2
Phantom 1
Phantom 2
Phantom 3
Phantom 1
Phantom 2
Phantom 3
Phantom 1

Phantom

Level Set Method

DBIM

2.6
2.9
5.0
6.4
4.5
29.5
24.2
23.0
33.4

1.6
1.4
2.8
3.8
2.9
28.7
22.9
19.9
33.4

1.7
0.6
2.1
4.7
2.6
36.5
33.2
25.9
42.7

lower density phantoms. The level set density estimates for the
Class 3 and Class 4 phantoms, the two density classes with
the highest cancer risk, have an average error of 1.3 percentage
points or a 5% relative error. This performance is much better
than the average error of 7.1 percentage points or 25% relative
error of the DBIM reconstructions. The density estimation performance of our level set method is also better than the 5–10
percentage points [11] or 10–15% relative error [12] reported
for mammographic density estimation.
We calculated density estimates in each cross section to further investigate imaging performance and evaluate whether the
reconstructed fibroglandular tissue was being spatially localized
correctly. Fig. 6 compares the fibroglandular tissue volume in
sequential 2-mm cross sections of the phantom to that of the
DBIM and level set method reconstructions. The error bars in
Fig. 6 represent the standard deviation of the density estimates
over ten different noise realizations with the same SNR.
The sensitivity of our level set method to errors in the assumed
skin properties was also tested. This represents a realistic error
that might occur in a clinical application. We introduced 10%
error in the dielectric properties of the reconstructed skin properties and compared the density estimates to reconstructions
without errors. A 10% error in skin properties resulted in less
than a 0.5% change in the overall density estimates reported
in Table II. Furthermore, the volume of fibroglandular tissue in
individual cross sections changed less than 0.2 cm3 from the
mean values shown in Fig. 6. This demonstrates our level set
method is robust to noise and assumed skin properties, both of
which are potential sources of error in clinical application.
The results shown in Fig. 6 indicate that for the highest density
classes [see Fig. 6(c) and (d)], the level set method accurately
reconstructs the tissue throughout the breast. The DBIM overestimates the volume of fibroglandular tissue near the base and
underestimates it in the apical coronal cross sections. Overall the
fibroglandular tissue distribution of the level set method tracks
the profile of the phantom confirming the spatial accuracy of the
reconstruction.
VI. DISCUSSION
Current level set imaging algorithms for 2-D microwave
breast imaging have a high computational cost that make them

impractical for 3-D imaging. Level set algorithms like the one
developed by Irishina et al. [4] use an adjoint method [18]
that requires two electromagnetics simulations to calculate the
Fréchet derivative at each iteration. The algorithm of [4] also
follows a staged approach that does not update every parameter
at each iteration, which results in a large number of iterations
(over 100) in 2-D imaging. Our level set method utilizes the
Jacobian matrix to calculate the Fréchet derivative, which only
requires one electromagnetics simulation per iteration, effectively cutting our computational burden in half. Our algorithm
also updates every level set parameter each iteration, utilizes
frequency hopping across different iterations, and incorporates
a priori information to determine step sizes and bounds for
the properties of the different tissue regions. This optimization
strategy gives our algorithm a faster convergence rate than other
level set algorithms and results in fewer iterations (≈80) in 3-D
imaging.
We selected DBIM as our benchmark instead of other microwave breast imaging algorithms for several reasons. The
DBIM, a well-known technique that is equivalent to the Gauss–
Newton algorithm [22], has Tikhonov regularization when
implemented using conjugate gradient least squares [23] as
described in Shea et al. [8]. It is able to localize coarse features
of the breast, which motivates the use of DBIM for generating an
initial guess of the level set. Robustness of the level set method
to the initial guess was not investigated in this study. Certainly
other initial guesses (for example, Kurrant et al. [24]) could be
employed for the level set method.
In this study, we used breast density evaluation to quantitatively assess the efficacy of our level set method for 3-D microwave imaging. Conventional microwave imaging algorithms
often use a minimum norm regularizer to select a unique solution
to the ill-posed inverse problem. Minimum norm regularizers are
known to blur the tissue structure of the breast and produce misleading density estimates as illustrated by the DBIM results in
Table II. This blurring inhibits the detection of small tissue features, especially in regions with less fibroglandular tissue, such
as the apical coronal cross sections of the breast. This blurring
effect also erroneously extends the size of large tissue features
like those near the base of the breast. Both of these effects are
apparent in Fig. 6(c) and (d), and their impact on the overall density estimate is clearly evident in Table II. Our level set method
does not suffer from these blurring effects since it incorporates
a priori information about the tissue properties and preserves
distinct boundaries between tissues. Requiring the solution to
contain two tissue types constrains the set of possible solutions
and forces the algorithm to produce physically meaningful results. This results in a more accurate boundary between tissue
types. Consequently, our level set method improves upon the
reconstructed tissue structure of the DBIM and results in better localization and identification of the fibroglandular tissue as
shown in Fig. 6 and Table II.
The level set method presented here was formulated with a
single level set to accommodate two types of tissue: adipose and
fibroglandular tissue. This formulation is relevant to imaging
healthy breast tissue, as is the case for breast density estimation.

COLGAN et al.: 3-D LEVEL SET METHOD FOR MICROWAVE BREAST IMAGING

2533

Fig. 6. Volume of fibroglandular density in 2-mm thick coronal cross sections as a function of cross-sectional position (distance from the base of the phantom).
The markers represent the mean value in the reconstructed cross section. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the estimates over ten noise realizations. (a)
Class 1 phantom, (b) Class 2 phantom, (c) Class 3 phantom, and (d) Class 4 phantom.

An additional level set can be added to the model in (3) to
represent cancerous tissue in a manner similar to that presented
by Irishina et al. [4]. This addition would allow the application
of the algorithm to tumor detection.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have developed a level set method that requires fewer iterations and fewer electromagnetics simulations per iteration than
other level-set-based implementations and leads to a feasible
level of computational complexity for full 3-D imaging. Reconstructions of anatomically realistic numerical breast phantoms
demonstrate the ability of the proposed algorithm to reconstruct
the tissue structure better than conventional microwave imaging approaches. The entire-breast density estimates as well as
the sequence of coronal cross section density estimates demonstrate the high accuracy that our level set method achieves in
reconstructing the actual tissue structure of the phantom.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave
dielectric properties of normal breast tissue obtained from reduction surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 2637–2656, Apr. 2007.
[2] M. Lazebnik et al., “A large-scale study of the ultrawideband microwave
dielectric properties of normal, benign, and malignant breast tissues obtained from cancer surgeries,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 52, pp. 6093–6115,
2007.
[3] T. Rubaek et al., “Nonlinear microwave imaging for breast-cancer screening using Gauss-Newton’s method and the CGLS inversion algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 2320–2331, Aug. 2007.
[4] N. Irishina et al., “Structural level set inversion for microwave breast
screening,” Inverse Probl., vol. 26, no. 3, 2010.
[5] O. Dorn et al., “A shape reconstruction method for electromagnetic tomography using adjoint fields and level sets,” Inverse Probl., vol. 16,
pp. 1119–1156, 2000.
[6] M. R. Hajihashemi and M. El-Shenawee, “Level set algorithm for shape
reconstruction of non-overlapping three-dimensional penetrable targets,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 75–86, Jan. 2012.
[7] E. Zastrow et al., “Development of anatomically realistic numerical breast
phantoms with accurate dielectric properties for modeling microwave interactions with the human breast,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55,
no. 12, pp. 2792–2800, Dec. 2008.

2534

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2015

[8] J. D. Shea et al., “Three-dimensional microwave imaging of realistic
numerical breast phantoms via a multiple-frequency inverse scattering
technique,” Med. Phys., vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 4210–4226, Aug. 2010.
[9] K. Kerlikowske et al., “Longitudinal measurement of clinical mammographic breast density to improve estimation of breast cancer risk,” J.
Natl. Cancer Inst., vol. 99, no. 5, pp. 386–395, 2007.
[10] J. A. Harvey and V. E. Bovbjerg, “Quantitative assessment of mammographic breast density: Relationship with breast cancer risk,” Radiology,
vol. 230, pp. 29–41, Jan. 2004.
[11] O. Pawluczyk et al., “A volumetric method for estimation of breast density on digitized screen-film mammograms,” Med. Phys., vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 352–364, Mar. 2003.
[12] S. van Engeland et al., “Volumetric breast density estimation from fullfield digital mammograms,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 273–282, Mar. 2006.
[13] T. J. Colgan et al., “3-D microwave imaging using a level set method
for breast density evaluation,” presented at USNC-URSI National Radio
Science Meeting, Boulder, CO, USA, Jan. 2013.
[14] M. Lazebnik et al., “Highly accurate Debye models for normal and
malignant breast tissue dielectric properties at microwave frequencies,”
IEEE Microw. Wireless Compon. Lett., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 822–824, Dec.
2007.
[15] A. Franchois and C. Pichot, “Microwave imaging—Complex permittivity
reconstruction with a Levenberg-Marquardt method,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 203–215, Feb. 1997.
[16] T. J. Cui et al., “Low-frequency detection of two-dimensional buried
objects using high-order extended Born approximations,” Inverse Probl.,
vol. 20, pp. S41–S62, 2004.
[17] J. Nocedal and S. Wright, Nonlinear Optimization, 2nd ed. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2006.
[18] O. Dorn and D. Lesselier, “Level set methods for inverse scattering,”
Inverse Probl., vol. 22, pp. R67–R131, 2006.
[19] K. T. Ladas and A. J. Devaney, “Generalized ART algorithm for diffraction
tomography,” Inverse Probl., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 109–125, 1991.
[20] M. Lazebnik, L. McCartney, D. Popovic, C. B. Watkins, M. J. Lindstrom,
J. Harter, S. Sewall, A. Magliocco, J. H. Booske, M. Okoniewski, and
S. C. Hagness,” UWCEM numerical breast phantom repository. (2014).
[Online]. Available: http://uwcem.ece.wisc.edu
[21] A. Papoulis and S. U. Pillai, Probablity, Random Variable, and Stochastic
Processes, 4th ed. Boston, MA, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
[22] R. F. Remis and P. M. van den Derg, “On the equivalence of the NewtonKantorovich and distorted Born methods,” Inverse Probl., vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. L1–L4, Feb. 2000.
[23] P. C. Hansen, Rank-deficient and Discrete Ill-posed Problems: Numerical
Aspects of Linear Inversion. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, 1998.
[24] D. Kurrant and E. Fear, “Regional estimation of the dielectric properties
of inhomogeneous objects using near-field reflection data,” Inverse Probl.,
vol. 28, pp. 075001-1–075001-27, 2012.

Timothy J. Colgan (S’04) received the B.S. degree
with highest honors and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Wyoming,
Laramie, WY, USA, in 2005 and 2007, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 2015
from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI, USA.
From 2006 to 2008, he was with Inter-Mountain
Laboratories Inc., Sheridan, WY as an R&D Software
Engineer. From 2007 to 2010, he was with a Software
Engineer with Rockwell Collins, Cedar Rapids, IA,
USA. He is currently working as a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the Liver
Imaging Research Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison. His current research interests include microwave breast imaging, medical imaging, and signal
processing applications in biology and medicine.

Susan C. Hagness (S’91–M’98–SM’04–F’09) received the B.S. degree with highest honors and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA, in 1993 and
1998, respectively.
Since 1998, she has been with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA, where she
is currently the Philip D. Reed Professor and serves
as Associate Dean for Research and Graduate Affairs
in the College of Engineering. She is also a faculty
affiliate of the Department of Biomedical Engineering and a member of the
UW Carbone Cancer Center. Her current bioelectromagnetics research interests
include microwave breast imaging, microwave thermotherapy, nanoparticles as
electromagnetic theranostic agents, and computational electromagnetics theory
and applications in biology and medicine.
Dr. Hagness served as an elected member of the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society (AP-S) Administrative Committee from 2003 to 2005 and as an
Associate Editor for the IEEE ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS PROPAGATION LETTERS from 2002 to 2007. She also served as the Chair of Commission K of the
United States National Committee (USNC) of the International Union of Radio
Science (URSI) from 2009 to 2011; the Technical Program Chair of the 2012
IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation and USNC/URSI
National Radio Science Meeting; a Member (2009), the Vice-chair (2010–12),
and the Chair (2013-14) of the IEEE AP-S Fellows Committee; and a Member
of the IEEE AP-S Awards Committee (2011–13). She received the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE) presented by
the White House in 2000. In 2002, she was named one of the 100 top young
innovators in science and engineering in the world by the MIT Technology Review magazine. She also received the UW-Madison Emil Steiger Distinguished
Teaching Award (2003), the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Early Career Achievement Award (2004), the URSI Isaac Koga Gold
Medal (2005), the IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering Outstanding
Paper Award (2007), the IEEE Education Society Mac E. Van Valkenburg Early
Career Teaching Award (2007), the UW System Alliant Energy Underkofler
Excellence in Teaching Award (2009), the Physics in Medicine and Biology
Citations Prize (2011), the UW-Madison Kellett Mid-Career Award (2011), and
the UW-Madison College of Engineering Benjamin Smith Reynolds Award for
Excellence in Teaching Engineers (2014).

Barry D. Van Veen (S’81–M’86-SM’97–F’02) was
born in Green Bay, WI, USA. He received the
B.S. degree from Michigan Technological University,
Houghton, MI, USA, in 1983 and the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA,
in 1986, both in electrical engineering.
He was an ONR Fellow while working on the
Ph.D. degree. He has been with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA,
since 1987 and is currently the Lynn H. Matthias
Professor of electrical and computer engineering. His research interests include
signal processing for sensor arrays and biomedical applications of signal processing.
Dr. Van Veen received the 1989 Presidential Young Investigator Award from
the National Science Foundation and a 1990 IEEE Signal Processing Society
Paper Award. He served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON SIGNAL PROCESSING and on the IEEE Signal Processing Society’s Statistical
Signal and Array Processing Technical Committee and the Sensor Array and
Multichannel Technical Committee. He received the 1997 Holdridge Teaching
Excellence Award from the ECE Department, the 2014 Spangler Award for
Technology Enhanced Instruction from the College of Engineering, and the
2015 Chancellors Distinguished Teaching Award at the University of Wisconsin. He coauthored “Signals and Systems,” ( New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1st
ed. 1999, 2nd ed. 2003) with Simon Haykin.

