2724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Measurement Issues in Galvanic Intrabody
Communication: Influence of Experimental Setup
M. Amparo Callejón, Javier Reina-Tosina∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, David Naranjo-Hernández, Member, IEEE,
and Laura M. Roa, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Significance: The need for increasingly energyefficient and miniaturized bio-devices for ubiquitous health
monitoring has paved the way for considerable advances in the investigation of techniques such as intrabody communication (IBC),
which uses human tissues as a transmission medium. However,
IBC still poses technical challenges regarding the measurement of
the actual gain through the human body. The heterogeneity of experimental setups and conditions used together with the inherent
uncertainty caused by the human body make the measurement
process even more difficult. Goal: The objective of this study, focused on galvanic coupling IBC, is to study the influence of different measurement equipments and conditions on the IBC channel.
Methods: Different experimental setups have been proposed in order to analyze key issues such as grounding, load resistance, type
of measurement device and effect of cables. In order to avoid the
uncertainty caused by the human body, an IBC electric circuit
phantom mimicking both human bioimpedance and gain has been
designed. Given the low-frequency operation of galvanic coupling,
a frequency range between 10 kHz and 1 MHz has been selected.
Results: The correspondence between simulated and experimental results obtained with the electric phantom have allowed us to
discriminate the effects caused by the measurement equipment.
Conclusion: This study has helped us obtain useful considerations
about optimal setups for galvanic-type IBC as well as to identify
some of the main causes of discrepancy in the literature.
Index Terms—Electric circuit phantom, experimental setup,
gain, galvanic coupling, grounding, intrabody communication,
load resistance.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE new paradigms of personalized medicine and e-health
systems pursue the ubiquitous monitoring of the user’s
condition for a preventive care [1]. This is accomplished through
the deployment of wireless body area networks, which connect
different biosensors located in, on or near the human body [2].
In this scenario, the use of human tissues as a transmission

T

Manuscript received February 18, 2015; revised May 15, 2015; accepted June
9, 2015. Date of publication June 12, 2015; date of current version October 16,
2015. This work was supported in part by Consejerı́a de Economı́a, Innovación y
Ciencia, Government of Andalucı́a, under Grants P08-TIC-04069 and P10-TIC6214, Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, under
Grant PI11/00111, and CIBER-BBN under Grant PLADEBACT. CIBER-BBN
is an initiative funded by the VI National R&D&i Plan 2008–2011, Iniciativa
Ingenio 2010, Consolider Program. CIBER Actions are funded by Instituto
de Salud Carlos III with assistance from the European Regional Development
Fund. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. Reina-Tosina is with the Department of Signal Theory and Communications, University of Seville, Seville 41092, Spain (e-mail: jreina@us.es).
M. A. Callejón, D. Naranjo-Hernández, and L. M. Roa are with the University
of Seville and CIBER de Bioingenierı́a, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2444916

medium for electric signals, originally designated as intrabody
communication (IBC) [3], has raised a great interest during recent years [4]. Since body tissues show high conductivity, lowpower signals can be transmitted at lower frequencies without
the need for using antennas, making consumption reduction and
size minimization possible [5]. In addition, the signal is mainly
confined to the human body surface, presenting greater robustness against external interferences. These advantages have led
IBC to be included in the IEEE 802.15.6 standard as a third physical layer designated as human body communication (HBC) [6].
The influence of different parameters on IBC/HBC performance, such as channel length, frequency or coupling
type have been widely studied, leading to power-saving IBC
transceivers [5], [7]–[9]. However, while it is undeniable that
IBC research has considerably advanced over the past few years,
it is also true that there are still some technical challenges regarding the experimental characterization of the human body
channel. In fact, there exist discrepancies observed between experimental results reported by different authors, often making it
difficult for any firm comparison to be drawn. For instance, while
some experimental results showed a maximum gain between 10
and 100 kHz for galvanic coupling type [10], [11], other results
presented just the opposite response, with gain curves increasing
with frequency [12]. Furthermore, a difference of up to 20 dB
in magnitude can be observed among results reported in [10],
[12] and [13]. In a previous work, the authors carried out an
exhaustive study analyzing key IBC parameters such as channel
length, interelectrode distance, frequency range, subject, part of
the body and anthropometrical characteristics, evidencing that
these have a considerable effect on IBC gain and might be one
of the possible causes of the discrepancies observed [14]. However, there is another important source of discrepancy that has
not been covered in depth in the IBC literature and which is
indeed related to the effects caused by the measurement equipment. Different measurement devices such as signal generators
and oscilloscopes [11], [13], [14], spectrum and network analyzers [15], [16] and battery-powered transceivers [17], have
been used interchangeably. However, each of these devices has
its own electronic characteristics, which have to be taken into
account. For example, oscilloscopes usually have a high input resistance in the range of megohms, while network analyzers present 50-Ω matched ports, which may considerably
affect channel gain, and therefore, should be carefully considered. On the other hand, baluns have been commonly used
when earth-grounded equipment is utilized [14], [15], [18], [19],
even though, except for a few works focused on capacitive coupling [20], [21], a comprehensive study of their effects has yet

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CALLEJÓN et al.: MEASUREMENT ISSUES IN GALVANIC INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: INFLUENCE OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

to be conducted. Some authors have alternatively proposed the
use of battery-powered transceivers [17], [22], [23]. However,
they are often constrained to a single or a reduced range of frequencies, thus not permitting the wideband characterization of
the IBC channel. In fact, possibly due to electronic limitations
inherent to the experimental setups used, there is a diversity of
frequency ranges for IBC research, thus making the establishment of an optimum frequency band even more difficult.
The main objective of this paper is to study the influence of
different measurement schemes on the gain measured. Therefore, a set of experimental setups for IBC galvanic coupling is
proposed with the aim of analyzing key issues such as the differences when using baluns or battery powered devices; the effect
of the load resistance; the use of several types of measurement
equipment (signal generator, oscilloscope, network and spectrum analyzer, etc.) and the effects caused by different cables
and connections.
It must be noticed that an added problem concerning the IBC
measurement is the inherent source of uncertainty introduced by
the human body [24]–[27], whose influence on the experimental
characterization of IBC gain is not completely known. This fact,
together with the difficulty of reproducing identical experimental conditions over several measurement sets (e.g., over different
days) [11], [14], make it especially difficult to distinguish the effects caused by the measurement equipment from those caused
by the human body itself. In order to solve this inconvenience,
a simplified IBC electric circuit phantom mimicking both the
human bioimpedance and gain properties has been specifically
designed in this study. An added value of this approach is that,
since the experimental gain obtained with this phantom can be
easily corroborated with computational simulations based on
the equivalent circuit model, this serves as a pattern in order to
analyze and detect the diverse effects and artifacts introduced
by the measurement equipment, avoiding the uncertainty introduced by the human body. Finally, a comparative analysis of
the gain obtained for different setups using this phantom will
allow us to draw important conclusions in order to discriminate
optimum measurement conditions for galvanic-type IBC.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the
main characteristics of the IBC electric circuit phantom used in
this study. Subsequently, Section III presents the experimental
setups proposed by scanning technical issues such as grounding, load resistance and type of measurement device. Finally,
Section IV shows the results found and Section V summarizes
the conclusions of this paper.
II. IBC ELECTRIC CIRCUIT PHANTOM
The IBC electric circuit phantom proposed in this study is
based on a simplified electric circuit model emulating galvanic
current transmission through two electrode pairs located on the
human body. The reason for such simplicity is that our primary
objective is not to obtain an electric model that faithfully reproduces IBC phenomenon, but instead one serving as a simplified
prototype with which the validity of different measurement setups can be analyzed, avoiding the uncertainty introduced by the
human body.

2725

Fig. 1. (a) Simplified circuit model emulating transverse and longitudinal
current flows in IBC galvanic coupling. (b) Debye model for transverse and
longitudinal impedances. (c) Diagram of the resultant IBC circuit model. (d)
Implemented IBC electric circuit phantom.

A. Simplified IBC Circuit Model
Since the operation mode of the galvanic coupling technique
is mainly based on the coupling of electric currents through human tissues, e.g., injected on the upper limbs as suggested in
the cylinder-like sketch of Fig. 1(a), the frequency range of this
study has been established from 10 kHz up to 1 MHz, where the
quasi-static approximation of the electric field is valid and inductive and wave propagation effects can be negligible [11], [19]. In
this frequency range, a useful, intuitive and simple way to emulate the electric properties of the human body is that based on
tissue biompedance. Fig. 1(a) shows the proposed circuit model
consisting of four complex impedances: While Za and Zc model
the transverse current flow between the same electrode pair, Zb
and Zd emulate the longitudinal current flow through the transmitter (TX) to the receiver (RX) site. For the sake of simplicity
and given the four-electrode scheme of galvanic coupling, a
symmetric and reciprocal circuit network has been considered
(i.e., Za = Zc and Zb = Zd ). As was found in [30], the arm tissue bioimpedance presents a dominant dispersion up to 1 MHz,
therefore, Za and Zb have in turn been represented through
a single-dispersion Debye model [see Fig. 1(b)] consisting of
an extracellular resistance Rext , an intracellular resistance Rint
and a membrane capacitance Cm , according to the following
equation:
Z{a,b} =

1
j ω C m, {t , l } )
1
Rint,{t,l} + j ω C m,
{t , l }

Rext,{t,l} (Rint,{t,l} +
Rext,{t,l} +

(1)

where suffixes t and l refer to transverse and longitudinal flows,
respectively. The full model is shown in Fig. 1(c). It can be
noticed that the circuit diagram proposed in this model presents
some similarities with the lattice structure proposed in [13]
and [15], [17]. However, without loss of generality, we have
omitted the diagonal paths and the electrode-skin interface,
given the aforementioned simplification objectives. Finally, a

2726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Gp (dB) = Gv + 10log10

Re(Zin )
Re(Zin ) + RL

(3)

where VTX is related to the voltage source, Vs , to RL , Rs and
to the input impedance Zin as
VTX = Vs

Zin RL
.
Zin RL + Rs (Zin + RL )

(4)

The input impedance seen at the TX site, Zin takes the form of
the shunt association of the transverse impedance Za and the
loop impedance of the circuit model
Zin =

Za (Zb + Zc + Zd )
Za + Zb + Zc + Zd

(5)

and the voltage at the RX site can be expressed as
VRX = RL I3

Fig. 2. Equivalent circuit model with internal resistances of the signal generator (R s ) and measurement device (R L ): (a) when the voltage measured is
V T X and (b) when the voltage measured is V R X .

(6)

where I3 is the output current (see Fig. 2).
(2)–(6) are obtained from a loop analysis of the circuit depicted in Fig. 2 and they were simulated using Matlab.
C. Identification of Circuit Model Parameters

picture of the implemented IBC electric circuit phantom can be
seen in Fig. 1(d).
B. IBC Gain Definition
There is still no consensus regarding the characterization of
the IBC channel in terms of gain. One expression commonly
used in the literature is that based on the ratio between the
voltages at the RX and TX sites, Gv . From an experimental
viewpoint, in order to quantify these voltages, the measurement
device used will inevitably have an effect on the gain measured.
This effect needs to be somehow emulated by the model, and
therefore, both the output resistance of the signal generator, Rs ,
and the load resistance of the measurement equipment, RL ,
have been considered. The equivalent circuit model obtained
is shown in Fig. 2. Notice that this configuration corresponds
to the case in which an oscilloscope probe is placed at the TX
and RX ports to calculate the transmitted and received voltages,
VTX and VRX , respectively. However, other devices frequently
used by authors, such as vector network analyzers (VNA) and
spectrum analyzers, make use of a tracking generator configuration to perform a transmission measurement in terms of a power
gain, Gp . The correspondence between the voltage gain measured with oscilloscopes and that obtained through VNA and
spectrum analyzers has not always been carefully considered,
and might be another cause of discrepancy. Given the fact that
an impedance mismatch could exist between the load resistance
of the measurement device and that of the human body, Gv
can considerably differ from Gp . Even when these considerations seem to be obvious, they will be relevant when different
measurement schemes are compared in the following sections.
According to Fig. 2, both voltage and power gain can be derived
by applying Kirchhoff’s laws as
Gv (dB) = 20log10

|VRX |
|VTX |

(2)

Once the circuit model was theoretically conceived, its parameters were sought in order to approximately emulate two
different specifications for IBC galvanic coupling, such as the
human arm impedance modeled through Zin and gain.
1) Transverse Parameters Rext,t , Rint,t and Cm,t : Regarding the transverse path, impedance Zin seen between the TX
electrodes was determined according to previous results both
found in the literature [15], [28], [29] and simulated by the authors in [30]. Specifically, these results have shown that this
bioimpedance has a decreasing characteristic with frequency,
presenting values in the range of kilo-ohms at low frequencies as kilohertz and values near hundreds of ohms at higher
frequencies in the range of megahertz. According to Fig. 1(c),
impedance Zin is primarily influenced by the transverse parameters of the model Rext,t , Rint,t and Cm,t . This implies that term Zb
in (5) was considered to be predominant over Za , i.e., Zin ≈ Za .
According to the Debye model, the resistance at zero frequency,
R0 , is equivalent to the extracellular resistance Rext,t , while the
resistance at infinite frequency R∞ , is equal to the shunt association of the extracellular and intracellular resistances (i.e.,
R∞ = Rint,t Rext,t ). In this way, parameters Rext,t and Rint,t
determine the values to which the bioimpedance tends respectively at low and high frequencies. On the other hand, parameter
Cm,t is related to the time constant of Za and therefore controls
its dynamics over frequency [31]. Subsequently, their values
were chosen in order to emulate approximately a frequency
response similar to that found in the literature. In this way,
Rext,t was chosen as 2 kΩ and Rint,t as 1 kΩ, which means that
R0 = Rext,t = 2 kΩ and R∞ = Rint,t Rext,t  600 Ω. Finally,
regarding Cm,t , a value of 470 pF was selected.
2) Longitudinal Parameters Rext,l , Rint,l and Cm,l : The IBC
galvanic signal is attenuated as it passes through the longitudinal path between the TX and RX electrodes. Therefore, the
longitudinal parameters of the model were determined in order to approximately emulate some of the gain characteristics

CALLEJÓN et al.: MEASUREMENT ISSUES IN GALVANIC INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: INFLUENCE OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

2727

TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF DEBYE MODEL FOR THE IBC ELECTRIC CIRCUIT PHANTOM
Parameter

Transversal Path

Longitudinal Path

Extracellular resistance
Intracellular resistance
Membrane capacitance

R ext, t = 2 kΩ
R int, t = 1 kΩ
C m, t = 470 pF

R ext, l = 20 kΩ
R int, l = 10 kΩ
C m, l = 330 pF

found in previous results reported by the authors in [14]. We
have observed that the range of losses obtained is related to the
difference in magnitude between the resistive parameters in the
longitudinal path with respect to the transverse path. This means
that the range of losses can be modeled through a constant k1
in such a way that Rext,l = k1 Rext,t and Rint,l = k1 Rint,t . In this
way, in order to emulate previous experimental results of gain
in the range of −30 and −20 dB, a value of 10 was assigned
to k1 . On the other hand, another important outcome reported
in [14] was a peak in gain between 10 and 100 kHz. We have
now found that this peak appears when the capacitance Cm,l
in the longitudinal path is selected as k2 times the capacitance
in the transverse path (Cm l = k2 Cm t ), in such a way that constant k2 modulates the frequency in which this peak is observed.
Therefore, in order to obtain this peak in the frequency range
desired, a constant k2 near 0.7 was selected, which in turn led
to a value of Cm,l equal to 330 pF. Finally, all these values are
summarized in Table I.

Fig. 3. Experimental setups and equivalent circuit diagrams proposed for the
study of different grounding strategies using earth-grounded equipment.

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUPS PROPOSED
With the objective of analyzing issues such as grounding, load
resistance, effect of cables and type of measurement device, a
variety of experimental setups have been proposed in this study.
They have all been tested by measuring the known gain of an IBC
electric circuit phantom previously designed with this purpose.
A. Grounding
When earth-grounded equipment is used, a cabled path between the internal grounds of the measurement devices appears,
leading to erroneous measurements of IBC gain. Therefore, a
grounding strategy is needed in order to avoid this undesired
effect. In the literature, baluns have often been used to isolate
both the TX and RX ports from the common internal ground.
However, to the authors’ knowledge, an exhaustive analysis
of their effects on galvanic coupling performance has never
been conducted so far. In addition, a comparison between this
and other alternatives, such as the use of portable devices, has
neither been carried out. Figs. 3 and 4 show the different setups proposed in this study in order to further analyze different grounding schemes: Setup A comprises four alternatives
(A1–A4), all of them making use of earth-grounded equipment, specifically, a 33500B signal generator to inject the signal
and an MSO6032A digital oscilloscope to measure the voltage
waveform, both of them of Agilent Technologies Inc. Alternatively, Setup B was implemented using battery-powered devices.
More detailed characteristics of these setups are summarized as
follows:

Fig. 4. Experimental setup and equivalent circuit diagram proposed for the
study of different IBC grounding strategies using battery-powered equipment.

1) Setup A: Setup A1 (earth-grounded) was conceived to
analyze and quantify the effect of not using a grounding
strategy in IBC gain. Therefore, a common internal ground
is shared between the signal generator and the oscilloscope
in this case. Regarding the electric circuit model, this
implies that setup A1 corresponds to a scheme in which
Zb = Zd , and in fact Zd has been shorted. Setups A2,
A3 and A4 were implemented in order to study different
configurations using baluns. In Setup A2 (balunTX), the
balun has been placed only at the TX site, while in Setup
A3 (balunRX), it is located at the RX site. In the case
of Setup A4 (balunTX&RX), they have been introduced
at both ports. Given the frequency range of study, a pair
of PT4 balun transformers of Oxford Electrical Products
presenting a bandwidth of 2 MHz were used.
2) Setup B (battery-powered) was implemented in order
to eliminate the influence of the external ground at
both the TX and RX sites without the need for using
baluns. Specifically, a portable signal transmission generator was designed and implemented with this purpose.
The basis of this experimental instrument was a frequency

2728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

direct digital synthesizer (DDS) chip (AD9834 of Analog
Devices), which was configured through a microcontroller
(PIC18LF2431 of Microchip Corp.) to generate the transmitted signals. In order to provide a constant voltage level
at the output of the DDS, an amplifier stage based on
operational amplifiers was added. Regarding the voltage
measurement, a portable oscilloscope Handyscope HS3 of
TiePie Engineering connected to a battery-powered laptop
was used.
For the sake of clarification, the cables and connections used
for each setup are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. In addition, an input signal voltage of 3 Vpp , which was well below the safety
recommendations provided in [32], [33], was applied.
B. Cables and Connections
Cables and connections have an unavoidable effect on the
measurement process. Their discontinuities are usually prone
to attenuating and radiating at higher frequencies, limiting the
range of study of the IBC channel for galvanic coupling [27].
It is therefore desirable that their effect be minimized as much
as possible and optimum cables be used in terms of IBC performance. However, it is not uncommon for the effect produced by
the cables to combine with that produced by the human body,
thus making it difficult to distinguish between the effects caused
by each. As already explained, we have taken advantage of using an electric circuit phantom with a known response in order
to validate the effect of different types of cables and connectors.
Specifically, an oscilloscope probe (10073C Probe of Agilent),
a coaxial cable and customized short insulated single conductor wires were tested at the RX site of Setup A1. The reason
why this setup was chosen in this case is that since it does not
use baluns, the frequency constraint (2 MHz) associated with
these is removed and the performance of cables can be tested
at higher frequencies, which is an interesting condition in order
to discriminate from which frequency they start to introduce
artifacts in the measurement. Therefore, in this special case, the
frequency of study ranged from 10 kHz to 10 MHz. In addition, two different load resistances of 50 Ω and 1 MΩ were
considered.
C. Load Resistance
Another open question in the experimental characterization
of the IBC channel concerns the input resistance of the measurement devices and transceivers used. In the literature, experimental setups using both 1 MΩ and 50 Ω have indistinctly been
reported [14], [15], even when this could considerably affect the
measured gain. It might be noticed that in the specific case of galvanic IBC, the impedance seen before and after the measurement
device is that presented by the human body through the electrode interface, which is indeed dependent on frequency [28],
[30]. Therefore, using 50-Ω equipment to characterize the IBC
channel might not be the most suitable choice. Taking these
considerations into account, it can be concluded that this is an
important issue that needs to be carefully addressed in order
to obtain an optimum signal coupling and avoid an undesired
impedance mismatch. In the case of the digital oscilloscope used

Fig. 5. Setups C and D using a spectrum analyzer and a VNA, respectively,
both with 50-Ω matched ports. Each setup was in turn configured using different
grounding strategies, i.e., without baluns, with a balun only placed at the TX
site and with two baluns at both the TX and RX sites. These three alternatives
have been designed with labels 1), 2) and 3).

in this study, RL is a configurable parameter that can be chosen
by the user between two different values of 50 and 1 MΩ. In
order to shed some light onto this issue, Setup A2 was used
to study the effect of the load resistance on the gain measured,
considering both voltage and power gain definitions.
D. Spectrum and VNAs
RF spectrum analyzers and VNAs have often been used in the
literature to characterize the IBC channel, especially in the case
of capacitive coupling, but also for galvanic coupling [15]. For
this last technique, other experimental setups using signal generators and oscilloscopes have also been proposed [11], [13],
[14]. One main difference between them lies in the fact that
VNAs present 50-Ω matched ports and oscilloscopes usually
exhibit higher load resistances of 1 MΩ. In addition, gain is
usually computed through a voltage and a power ratio, respectively. In order to compare results, the gain of the proposed IBC
electric circuit phantom has been experimentally obtained using a spectrum analyzer and a VNA, allowing us to compare the
performance derived when an oscilloscope is used. In addition,
since the spectrum analyzer and the VNA used in this study are
earth-grounded devices, different grounding strategies with and
without baluns have also been tested. Specifically, Fig. 5 shows
the setups used: Setup C (spectrumanalyzer) uses the tracking generator mode of an FSL Spectrum Analyzer of Rohde
&amp; Schwarz, while Setup D (VNA) uses a 8712ES VNA
of Hewlett-Packard, both with 50-Ω input and output ports. Due
to the operation range of this device, which starts from 300 kHz,
a pair of FTB-1-1*C15+ baluns of Minicircuits Inc., with a frequency range from 0.2 to 500 MHz, were chosen. An available
power of 0 dBm was configured and a pair of coaxial cables with
SMA connectors were used. In addition, a response calibration
was carried out in order to normalize the insertion losses of the
baluns and the coaxial cables used.

CALLEJÓN et al.: MEASUREMENT ISSUES IN GALVANIC INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: INFLUENCE OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

2729

Fig. 6. Experimental results for voltage gain measured with the proposed circuit phantom (solid line) and on the human arm (markers) for two different load
resistances of 1 MΩ and 50 Ω, respectively. Measurement testbed corresponds
to setup A2.

Fig. 7. Comparison between computational simulations (solid lines) and experimental results (markers) obtained with the IBC electric circuit phantom for
setups A and B using diverse grounding strategies. The load resistance considered in these experiments was R L = 1 MΩ.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Therefore, these results show the applicability of the phantom
proposed in order to evaluate different types of experimental
setups, as can be seen in the following sections.

In this section, a set of on-body measurements are first
presented with the aim of validating the IBC electric circuit
phantom. Once validated, the results obtained for the measurement setups proposed using this phantom are shown and compared with computational simulations with the equivalent circuit
model to reveal the actual influence of the measurement configurations and equipments on IBC gain. For the sake of clarity,
results have been organized according to the following sections.
A. On-Body Measurements
With the aim of validating the IBC electric circuit phantom
proposed, a set of experiments was carried out on the human
arm. A female volunteer with anthropometrical characteristics
such as: height (1.57 m), weight (50 kg), arm length (50 cm) and
arm diameter (4.3 cm), was recruited for this study. Four square
copper electrodes with an area of 2 cm × 2 cm were placed on
the left upper arm of the subject with a channel length of 5 cm
and an interelectrode distance of 12 cm. In order to avoid any
discrepancy associated with these parameters, this configuration
was the same for all the experiments performed. Specifically,
seven measurements over different days were obtained and both
the average and standard deviation were calculated in order
to provide a higher statistical significance. Regarding Setup
A2 used in this case, not only was it chosen with the aim of
validating the simulated results of voltage gain obtained with the
electric circuit phantom, but also with the objective of analyzing
the effect of the load resistance RL . The experimental results for
the circuit phantom and the human arm are compared in Fig. 6.
Notice that in spite of the simplicity of the proposed circuit, there
is a reasonable correspondence with the on-body measurements,
notwithstanding the dispersion found between different days,
which is within the range found in previous works [11], [14].

B. Grounding
The results for the experimental setups A and B, which use
different grounding strategies, can be seen in Fig. 7. The two
solid lines represent the computational simulation responses of
voltage gain according to (2), one when there is a common
ground, and another when this ground has been isolated. In this
case, the load resistance RL of MSO6032A digital oscilloscope
was configured as 1 MΩ in Setups A1–A4. A first result is that
the frequency characteristic of both responses follow the same
trend, except for a constant difference in magnitude of about
5 dB, leading to a more optimistic result of gain when a coupled
ground exists. This result was expected since a cabled path
between the TX and RX ports appears in this case. In addition,
it can be seen that setups A1, A2 and B obtained experimental
results that successfully fitted the computational simulations
in the frequency range studied, thus confirming their validity.
Therefore, the use of a single balun at the TX site (Setup A2) is a
good alternative in order to isolate the internal ground (GND) of
the earth-grounded equipment, leading to similar results to those
obtained with battery-powered devices (Setup B). However, as
can be seen in Fig. 7, setups A3 and A4 present a divergence
with respect to simulated results up to 70 kHz, with a maximum
error near 18 dB at 10 kHz. A common characteristic of these
two setups is that they both present a balun at the RX site, which
can be the cause of the deviation observed.
C. Cables and Connections
The results obtained for Setup A1 using three different types
of cables and connections is summarized in Fig. 8. It can be

2730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Comparison between computational simulations (solid lines) and experimental results (markers) obtained with the IBC electric circuit phantom for
Setup A1 using three different types of cables.

Fig. 9. Comparison between computational simulations (solid lines) and experimental results (markers) obtained with the IBC electric circuit phantom for
Setup A2 using two different load resistances R L of 1 MΩ and 50 Ω.

seen that their performance is satisfactory up to 1 MHz, and
that a discrepancy about 10 dB starts to be noticed from 4 MHz,
suggesting that great part of the injected signal is dramatically
attenuated from this frequency. This effect is even higher for the
coaxial cable used when a load resistance of 1 MΩ is selected,
reaching a maximum deviation of 20 dB at 20 MHz. These results evidence the importance of testing the performance of the
cables used before making IBC in vivo measurements, for example with a circuit phantom such as that proposed in this study,
with the aim of avoiding any confusion with some other effects
associated with the IBC channel itself. In conclusion, we have
corroborated that up to the frequency limit of 1 MHz, previously
selected in order to comply with the quasi-static approximation
assumed, the cables and connectors used behave well and offer
results that satisfactorily agree with computational simulations.

define the IBC galvanic channel gain. The results show that the
curve obtained with 1 MΩ offers a better value of voltage gain,
with a difference in magnitude of about 20 dB in the frequency
range studied with respect to that obtained with 50 Ω. An explanation to this is that the impedance of the human body Zin is not
near 50 Ω, but is in fact higher, especially at lower frequencies.
Therefore, the shunt association of this with a load resistance
RL of 50 Ω leads to a lower value of voltage at the RX end, thus
decreasing Gv considerably. Furthermore, Gv presents a maximum in the range between 10 and 100 kHz for 1 MΩ, while
when 50 Ω is selected, this maximum does not appear and Gv
presents an inverse characteristic, increasing with frequency. In
Fig. 10, computational simulations of both voltage and power
gain varying the resistance RL from 10 Ω to 1 MΩ for three
different frequencies (10, 100 and 1000 kHz) are presented. Experimental results have also been obtained with the IBC electric
circuit phantom and presented in this figure. It can be seen that
Gv and Gp tend to the same value for load resistances below
the range of tens of ohms. From the perspective of voltage gain,
the optimal RL would be one with 1 MΩ. From the perspective
of power gain, the optimal RL would be one that approximates
the resistive component of Zin at the corresponding frequency.
Therefore, taking into account these considerations, the measurement with a load resistance of 50 Ω is neither optimal in
terms of voltage nor power gain.

D. Load Resistance
Setup A2 was chosen to study the influence of the load resistance RL in the IBC gain, considering two different values of
1 MΩ and 50 Ω. Alternatively, both voltage and power gains,
according to (2) and (3), have been computed for the sake of
comparison. The results obtained are shown in Fig. 9. For an
RL of 50 Ω, Gp is equal to Gv , however, for an RL of 1 MΩ, a
difference of about 30 dB can be seen between them. This difference is related to the second term in (3), and will eventually
depend on the values of both Zin and RL . It must be noticed that
an IBC electric circuit phantom with a known Zin is being used
in this case, which allows Gp to be easily computed according to (3). However, when on-body measurements are carried
out, the actual bioimpedance Zin is unknown and has seldom
been calculated by authors in their works [15]. In addition, since
galvanic coupling is based on electric current conduction phenomena, the highest voltage level is usually sought at the RX
site. These arguments support the preference of voltage ratio to

E. Spectrum and VNAs
The experimental results obtained using RF equipment (spectrum analyzer and VNA), are shown in Fig. 11. As has previously been mentioned, the frequency from which these are valid
is about 300 kHz, which is the lower frequency recommended
by the manufacturer. Again, the difference found between coupled and isolated ground modes was about 5 dB, similar to
the results obtained with oscilloscopes. However, no difference

CALLEJÓN et al.: MEASUREMENT ISSUES IN GALVANIC INTRABODY COMMUNICATION: INFLUENCE OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

2731

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 10. Computational simulations of voltage gain G v (solid lines) and power
gain G p (dashed lines) versus load resistance R L for three different frequencies
of 10, 100 and 1000 kHz (red, blue and green, respectively). Experimental results
with IBC phantom are represented with markers.

Fig. 11. Equivalence between experimental results of power gain G p obtained
with setups C and D (markers) and computational simulations of gain (G p = G v
in this case since R L = 50 Ω) for both coupled and isolated ground modes
(solid lines).

concerning the position of baluns was observed in this case, and
both options 2) and 3) shown in Fig. 5 led to equivalent results.
Nevertheless, the most interesting conclusion that can be drawn
from Fig. 11, is that the experimentally measured gain with RF
equipment fitted well the simulations obtained when both VTX
and VRX are considered to be calculated using an oscilloscope
with a load resistance RL of 50 Ω (notice that Gp = Gv in this
case). In this way, a correspondence between these measurement setups, using different devices such as a VNA, a spectrum
analyzer and an oscilloscope can be established.

Technical issues such as grounding, effect of cables, load
resistance and influence of the measurement equipment have
been analyzed in this study. The results obtained allowed us
to draw useful conclusions toward the design of more accurate
measurements setups for IBC galvanic coupling:
1) A grounding strategy is required if earth-grounded equipment is used. Our results suggest that a single balun in the
TX site is a good alternative (Setup A2), showing similar results to those obtained with battery-powered devices
(Setup B). On the contrary, setups A3 and A4, which use
a balun in the RX port, have been discarded due to the
deviations found compared with simulations.
2) The importance of testing the frequency from which radiation and attenuation effects associated with cables and
connections start to predominate has been evidenced in
this study, since this will constrain the operation range of
the experimental setups proposed.
3) For a given Zin , Gp tends to Gv for load resistances in
the range of tens of ohms. In fact, an equivalence between
them using both RF-equipment and oscilloscopes can be
established for an RL of 50 Ω.
4) If a voltage gain is to be measured with an oscilloscope,
an optimal value is obtained when load resistances in the
range of 1 MΩ are selected. However, an optimal value for
Gp is only obtained with load resistances that are matched
to those presented by the human body. In this sense, the
use of RF equipment such as spectrum analyzer and VNA,
which have 50-Ω ports, may not be a good choice, since
the measurement with a load resistance of 50 Ω is not
optimal neither in terms of voltage nor power gain.
It must be also noticed that some differences obtained are in
the range of those found in the literature, thus suggesting that the
variety of experimental setups used could be the cause, among
others, of the discrepancies observed between results reported
by different authors. The need for evaluating the validity of
the experimental setups used before carrying out experiments
directly on the human body should be highlighted. This would
help discriminate the artifacts associated with the measurement
equipment, which in turn can lead to misleading IBC results, as
has been shown in this study.

REFERENCES
[1] Y.-L. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for health
informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1538–1554,
May 2014.
[2] S. Movassaghi et al., “Wireless body area networks: A survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1658–1686, Jul.–Sep.
2014.
[3] T. G. Zimmerman, “Personal area networks: Near-field intrabody communication,” IBM Syst. J., vol. 35, no. 3–4, pp. 609–617, 1996.
[4] M. Seyedi et al., “A survey on intrabody communications for body
area network applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 8,
pp. 2067–2079, Aug. 2013.
[5] J. Bae et al., “A 0.24-nJ/b wireless body-area-network transceiver with
scalable double-FSK modulation,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47,
no. 1, pp. 310–322, Jan. 2012.
[6] (2015). Body area networks (BAN) [Online]. Available: http://www.
ieee802.org/15/pub/TG6.html

2732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

[7] H. Wang et al., “A 5.4-mW 180-cm transmission distance 2.5-Mb/s advanced techniques-based novel intrabody communication receiver analog
front end,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., 2015, in
press.
[8] Ho Chee Keong et al., “High bandwidth efficiency and low power
consumption Walsh code implementation methods for body channel
communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 62, no. 9,
pp. 1867–1878, Sep. 2014.
[9] H. Cho et al., “A 37.5 body channel communication wake-up receiver
with injection-locking ring oscillator for wireless body area network,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1200–1208,
May 2013.
[10] M. Callejón et al., “Distributed circuit modeling of galvanic and capacitive coupling for intrabody communication,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3263–3269, Nov. 2012.
[11] S. H. Pun et al., “Quasi-static modeling of human limb for intra-body
communications with experiments,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 870–876, Nov. 2011.
[12] M. S. Wegmueller et al., “An attempt to model the human body as a
communication channel,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 1851–1857, Oct. 2007.
[13] Y. Song et al., “The simulation method of the galvanic coupling intrabody
communication with different signal transmission paths,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1257–1266, Apr. 2011.
[14] M. A. Callejon et al., “A comprehensive study into intrabody communication measurements,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 62, no. 9,
pp. 2446–2455, Sep. 2013.
[15] B. Kibret et al., “Investigation of galvanic-coupled intrabody communication using the human body circuit model,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Inform., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1196–1206, Jul. 2014.
[16] X. M. Chen et al., “Study of channel characteristics for galvanic-type intrabody communication based on a transfer function from a quasi-static field
model,” Sensors, vol. 12, pp. 16433–16450, 2012.
[17] M. S. Wegmueller et al., “Signal transmission by galvanic coupling
through the human body,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 59, no. 4,
pp. 963–969, Apr. 2010.
[18] Z. Lucev et al., “A capacitive intrabody communication channel from
100 kHz to 100 MHz,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 61, no. 12,
pp. 3280–3289, Dec. 2012.
[19] J. Bae et al., “The signal transmission mechanism on the surface of human
body for body channel communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 582–593, Mar. 2012.
[20] Z. Lucev et al., “On the transformer effects in the measurements of capacitive intrabody communication transmission characteristics using grounded
instruments,” in Proc. 6th Eur. Conf. Int. Federation Med. Biol. Eng., 2015,
pp. 260–263.
[21] J. Sakai et al., “Balun’s effect on the measurement of transmission characteristics for intrabody communication channel,” in Proc. IEEE MTT-S
Int. Microw. Workshop Series RF Wireless Technol. Biomed. Healthcare
Appl., 2013, pp. 1–3.
[22] R. Xu et al., “Equation environment coupling and interference on the
electric-field intrabody communication channel,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 2051–2059, Jul. 2012.
[23] N. Zedong et al., “An investigation on dynamic human body communication channel characteristics at 45 MHz in different surrounding environments,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 13, pp. 309–312, Feb.
2014.
[24] T. Ogasawara et al., “Human body communication based on magnetic
coupling,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 804–813,
Feb. 2014.
[25] M. Seyedi and D. Lai, “Effect of limb joints and limb movement on
intrabody communications for body area network applications,” J. Med.
Biol. Eng., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 276–283, 2014.
[26] G. Koutitas, “Multiple human effects in body area networks,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1080–1086, May 2007.
[27] N. Cho et al., “The human body characteristics as a signal transmission medium for intrabody communication,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Techn., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1080–1086, May 2007.
[28] D. Muramatsu et al., “Input impedance analysis of wearable antenna and
its experimental study with real human body,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Consumer Electron., 2014, pp. 151–152.
[29] J. Rosell et al., “Skin impedance from 1 Hz to 1 MHz,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 649–651, Aug. 1988.
[30] M. Amparo Callejon et al., “Galvanic coupling transmission in intrabody
communication: a finite element approach,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 775–783, Mar. 2014.

[31] L. M. Roa et al., “Applications of bioimpedance to end stage renal disease (ESRD),” in Modelling and Control of Dialysis Systems, Studies in
Computational Intelligence. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2013,
pp. 689–769.
[32] International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, “Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic fields (up to 300 GHz),” Health Phys., vol. 74, no. 4,
pp. 494–522, 1998.
[33] International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, “Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric and magnetic fields
(1 Hz-100 kHz),” Health Phys., vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 818–836, 2010.

M. Amparo Callejón was born in Huelva, Spain.
She received the Telecomm.Eng. degree in 2009 from
the University of Seville, Seville, Spain, where she
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the
Biomedical Engineering Group.
Her current research interests include intrabody
communication, body sensor networks and bioelectromagnetics.

Javier Reina-Tosina (S’99–M’06–SM’09) was born
in Seville, Spain. He received the Telecomm.Eng.
and Doctor degrees from the University of Seville,
Seville, in 1996 and 2003, respectively.
Since 1997, he has been with the Department of
Signal Theory and Communications, University of
Seville, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include the integration of
information technologies in biomedicine, intelligent
devices for homecare, and bioelectromagnetics.

David Naranjo-Hernández (S’10–M’12) was born
in Azuaga, Spain. He received the Telecomm.Eng.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Seville,
Seville, Spain, in 2007 and 2014, respectively.
Since 2007, he has been a research member of
the Biomedical Engineering Group, University of
Seville. His current research interests include body
sensor networks, bioimpedance and bioelectromagnetics.

Laura M. Roa (M’93–SM’96–F’03) received the
Ph.D. degree (cum laude) from the University of
Seville, Seville, Spain.
She is a Full Professor at the University of Seville,
where she founded the Biomedical Engineering Research Group and is currently in charge of this group.
Her research interests include multiscale computational modeling, architectures for the integration of
social/health services, intelligent devices for ambient
assisted living, and bioelectromagnetics.
Dr. Roa is a Fellow of the American Institute for
Medical and Biological Engineering, the International Academy for Medical
and Biological Engineering and the European Alliance for Medical and Biological Engineering and Science.

