2850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Dual-Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry
for Measurement of Phalangeal Bone
Mineral Density on a Slot-Scanning Digital
Radiography System
Ronald Dendere, J. Herman Potgieter, Stefan Steiner, Sarah P. Whiley, and Tania S. Douglas∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: In this paper, we assess the feasibility of
using two detectors in a slot-scanning digital radiography system
to acquire images for measuring bone mineral density (BMD) of
the middle phalanx of the middle finger using dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DXA). Methods: Simulations were used to evaluate the spectral separation of the low- and high-energy spectra and
detective quantum efficiency was used for assessing image quality.
Scan parameters were chosen to optimize spectral separation, image quality, and radiation dose. We introduce the measurement of
volumetric BMD (vBMD) using basis material decomposition. We
assess the accuracy of our methods by comparing measurements
taken using bone images against reference data derived from subsequent incineration of the bones. In vivo scans were conducted to
evaluate the system precision (repeatability) and agreement with a
clinical densitometer. Results: Average errors for bone mineral content (BMC), areal BMD (aBMD), and vBMD were 4.85%, 5.49%,
and 12.77%, respectively. Our system had good agreement with a
clinical densitometer based on concordance correlation coefficient
values of 0.92 and 0.98 for aBMD and BMC, respectively. Precision studies yielded coefficient of variation (CV) values of 1.35%
for aBMD, 1.48% for BMC, and 1.80% for vBMD. The CV values
of all measurements were within 2%, indicating that the methods have clinically acceptable precision. Conclusion: We conclude
that our techniques yield bone measurements with high accuracy,
clinically acceptable precision, and good agreement with a clinical
densitometer. Significance: We have shown the clinical potential
of phalangeal DXA measurements of aBMD and vBMD on a slotscanning digital radiography system.
Index Terms—Absorptiometry, bone mineral density (BMD),
dual-energy, osteoporosis, X-ray.

Manuscript received December 5, 2014; revised April 15, 2015; accepted June
9, 2015. Date of publication June 19, 2015; date of current version November
20, 2015. This study was supported by Lodox Systems (Pty) Ltd., the Technology and Human Resources for Industry Program of the National Research
Foundation in South Africa, the University of Cape Town, and the South African
Medical Research Council. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
R. Dendere is with the MRC/UCT Medical Imaging Research Unit and Division of Biomedical Engineering, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7935,
South Africa (e-mail: rdendere@gmail.com).
J. H. Potgieter is with Lodox Systems.
S. Steiner is with the MRC/UCT Medical Imaging Research Unit and
Division of Biomedical Engineering, University of Cape Town, and also with
Lodox Systems.
S. P. Whiley is with the MRC/UCT Medical Imaging Research Unit and
Division of Biomedical Engineering, University of Cape Town.
∗ T. S. Douglas is with the Division of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Observatory 7935, South Africa
(e-mail: tania@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2447575

I. INTRODUCTION
STEOPOROSIS is a common disease that affects the
skeletal system. It is characterized by low bone mass
and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture
[1]. The definition of osteoporosis is based on the comparison
of patients’ bone mineral density (BMD) at one of the common
fracture sites (lumbar spine, hip, or forearm) with the mean
value expected in young healthy adults using a T-score [2]. A
patient is classified as having osteoporosis if the T-score is −2.5
or less, while a patient has osteopenia if the T-score is between
−1 and −2.5. T-scores above –1 indicate normal BMD [1].
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is the most common
technique, and is considered the gold standard, for the measurement of BMD due to its low radiation dose and proven ability
to evaluate fracture risk [3].
Identifying individuals at risk of fracture and placing them
on preventative treatment is an effective method for reducing
the occurrence of fractures [4]. While DXA examination of the
axial skeleton remains the most widely accepted technique for
diagnosis of osteoporosis, its use for mass screening is not recommended as it is relatively expensive [5]–[7] and traditional
BMD measurements should be restricted to those at high risk
of osteoporosis as indicated by clinical risk factors [8]. Therefore, low-cost solutions for mass screening have been suggested.
These include clinical decision tools based on machine learning
techniques [5], questionnaires, and scanning of the peripheral
skeleton using DXA and other techniques [9]. A significant development in this regard is the fracture risk assessment tool
(FRAX), which enables physicians to use information about a
patient’s clinical risk factors to assess the ten year probability
of fracture [3], [10].
Osteoporosis is a systemic disease that affects the entire
skeleton [8]; therefore, any skeletal site can be used to evaluate the initial fracture risk for the common fracture sites [11].
Taking BMD measurements at peripheral sites, like the hand
or the heel, that are distant from highly radiosensitive internal
organs would result in reduced effective radiation dose. DXA
has been used for accurate estimation of BMD in hand bones
[12]–[14]. The phalanges, which have little soft tissue surrounding the bone, are a particularly useful site because soft tissue
reduces the accuracy of BMD measurements [11]. Phalangeal
bone measurements obtained using single- and dual-energy radiographic techniques are highly correlated to ash weight of the

O

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DENDERE et al.: DUAL-ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENT OF PHALANGEAL BMD

2851

bones [15], [16]. Such measurements are also highly correlated
to axial BMD, can be used to identify individuals with reduced
axial BMD and can predict major osteoporotic fractures [13],
[17]–[21]. Furthermore, it has been shown that the highest rates
of major osteoporotic fractures occur in patients with low phalangeal bone mass measured using X-ray absorptiometry and
high fracture probability as determined by the FRAX tool [9].
Phalangeal BMD measurements, therefore, have potential use
for clinical screening and diagnosis of osteoporosis [13], [18],
[19].
In this paper, we assess the feasibility of generating dualenergy images by including a second detector in an existing
digital slot-scanning X-ray system, and estimate the mineral
content and density of the middle phalanx of the left-hand middle finger using DXA. We also propose the use of basis material
decomposition to measure the volumetric BMD (vBMD) of the
bone. We evaluate our results through bone incineration and
compare our results with those from a clinically established
DXA machine.
Fig. 1.

Schematic diagram of scan set-up for the HE image.

II. METHODS
A. Materials and Subjects
The DXA technique was implemented on the Lodox Statscan
(Lodox Systems, South Africa) digital linear slot-scanning radiography (LSSR) machine. The entrance dose was measured
using a Radcal Model 9010 (Radcal Corporation, CA, USA)
dosimeter with a 60 cm3 ionization chamber. Nineteen excised
bones for evaluating the accuracy of bone measurements were
harvested from bodies donated to the Department of Human
Biology at the University of Cape Town. Participants for the
in vivo comparison and precision studies were university students and staff members. BMD from a Hologic Discovery W
DXA machine (Hologic Systems, MA) was used as a reference
against which to compare BMD measurements from LSSR. Approval for the study was obtained from the university’s Human
Research Ethics Committee. All image processing was carried
out using MATLAB R2012a (Mathworks, USA).
B. Determination of Scan Parameters
The Lodox Statscan has preset scan parameters for different
regions of the body according to patient size. In the current
system, the source-to-detector distance is fixed at 1300 mm, and
the detector length and width are 690 and 15 mm, respectively.
While values for source voltage and tube current are dependent
on patient size, settings for collimator width, focal spot size,
pixel size, spatial resolution, and scan speed are dependent on
body region and the following are the preset values for the hand:
1) Collimator width: 0.4 mm.
2) Focal spot size: 0.6×0.6 mm.
3) Spatial resolution: 4.16 lp/mm.
4) Scan speed: 70 mm/s.
5) Pixel size: 120 μm.
DXA exploits the difference in attenuation coefficients of
bone and soft tissue in the diagnostic X-ray energy range. Two
scans of the anatomical site under examination are acquired at

different energies; this enables the suppression of the attenuation
caused by one tissue type and quantitative assessment of the
remaining tissue. The generation of the two energy spectra for
the scan is generally achieved by K-edge filtration or source
voltage switching [3], [22]. K-edge filtration employs K-edge
absorption filters made from rare earth materials to separate the
polyenergetic X-ray beam emitted from the tube into high (HE)and low-energy (LE) components [22]. Systems based on this
method require two detectors that are selectively sensitive to
HE and LE photons. Voltage switching techniques produce a
dual-energy beam by alternating the X-ray generator between
high and low source voltages in sync with the ac power supply;
such systems use a single detector [22].
In this study, we propose to include an additional detector
above the one already available in a slot-scanning radiography
system to capture dual-energy images. In such an arrangement,
the first detector captures the LE image, while the second detector captures the HE image. In order to assess the feasibility of
the proposed two-detector system without having to construct
it in its entirety, we acquired the dual-energy images in two
separate scans. The LE image was acquired during the first scan
using the normal detector setup for slot-scanning radiography
with an added filter (prefilter). The purpose of the prefilter is to
reduce patient dose by removing LE photons that are unlikely
to penetrate the patient.
The detector arrangement for the HE scan was adapted from
the method of Seely et al. [23] and is shown in Fig. 1. For the HE
scan, the top scintillator (Scintillator1) simulates the presence of
the first detector which, in a two-detector system, would capture
the LE image. Scintillator1 absorbs the LE photons, converting
them into light photons while allowing HE photons to pass
through to the second scintillator. The visible light photons may
be transferred to a charge coupled device (CCD) using a fiber
optic device (represented here by glass). In this study, however,

2852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

light from Scintillator1 was not captured in the dual-scintillator
setup; rather, the data were captured from Scintillator1 in a
separate scan. Scintillator1 effectively acts as a filter for the
HE beam by absorbing the LE photons. The postfilter removes
any residual LE photons and also prevents any visible light
photons emitted by Scinitillator1 from reaching Scintillator2.
Scintillator2 would absorb the HE photons and similarly convert
them into light photons, which are transferred to a second CCD
that records the HE image.
Scanning parameters were chosen to balance entrance dose,
image quality, and mean spectral energy separation. Entrance
surface dose is the measure of radiation exposure at the point
where the X-ray beam enters the anatomical site under investigation and is the standard for setting dose levels for common radiographic procedures [24]. Detective quantum efficiency (DQE)
is regarded as the best metric for evaluating image quality in
digital detectors [25] and was used to assess the image quality.
DQE requires measurements of the system’s modulation transfer function (MTF) and noise power spectrum (NPS), which describe the system’s spatial resolution and noise characteristics,
respectively. These parameters were measured and calculated
according to the IEC 62220-1 standard methodology [26] and
the DQE was calculated as follows:
MTF2 (f )
DQE (f ) =
NNPS (f ) · q · X

(1)

where NNPS is the normalized NPS, q is the signal-to-noise ratio
per exposure, and X is the air Kerma at the detector surface. The
DQE was calculated as an average of the DQE in the slot and
scan directions.
In an initial experiment, imaging of a cadaver hand provided
an indication of how image quality varies with source voltage.
Numeric simulations were carried out using the tungsten anode
spectral model using the interpolating polynomials algorithm
[27] to assess the difference between the mean energies of the
HE and LE spectra for different voltage and filter settings.
C. Segmentation
Precise segmentation of the region of interest (ROI) in
X-ray images is crucial for accurate BMD measurement using DXA [28]. Automatic segmentation of the bone of interest
is a key factor in the automation of a BMD measurement system
for screening a large population and achieving this is a highly
challenging task [29]. We used an active shape model (ASM)
for segmenting the bone of interest in this study. The ASM was
trained using shapes extracted from scans of 30 excised bones
and tested on scans of 66 bones.
The first step in the segmentation of the bone was to identify
and isolate the middle finger from the entire image. This was
achieved by thresholding the image and calculating the area of
each detected object. The middle finger was identified as the
object with the largest area. An estimate of the centroid of the
middle phalanx was determined using a heuristic search method
[30]; accurate segmentation using an ASM depends on precise
location of this centroid. The ASM was then initialized and a
multiresolution search for the bone shape was carried out [31].

Fig. 2. ASM segmentation and identification of soft tissue adjacent to middle
phalanx: (a) LE image; (b) ASM initialization; (c) detected bone border—cross
indicates the centroid of the bone; (d) adjacent soft tissue. (Contrast has been
enhanced for visualization).

An example of applying the segmentation scheme is illustrated
in Fig. 2.
D. Generation of Bone Attenuation Image
The localization of the bone in the finger allowed the
surrounding soft tissue to be identified as the area outside the
bone in the detected finger as illustrated in Fig. 2. We assume
that soft tissue thickness surrounding the bone is uniform, i.e.,
thickness adjacent to the bone in the image is a representative
of soft tissue thickness around the bone. By multiplying the
HE image with a constant β so that the difference between the
HE and LE images in the soft tissue regions adjacent to the
bone becomes zero, the attenuation caused by the soft tissue
surrounding the bone can be removed [32]:
Ib = Il − βIh

(2)

where Ib is the resulting bone-only image in which soft tissue
attenuation has been suppressed, and Il and Ih are the LE and
HE images, respectively. β is computed as a ratio of the mean
gray level of the adjacent soft tissue regions in the LE and HE
images
β = I l(st) /I h(st) .

(3)

It was found that the constant β requires an adjustment to
ensure that all the surrounding soft tissues are removed. This
may be due to the assumption that the soft tissue in the finger
is homogeneous. However, the adjustment required was small,
i.e., an adjustment of 3% of β was empirically determined as
sufficient to remove all adjacent soft tissue for the images that
were used. This adjustment may also have had the effect of
removing the attenuation due to the nonmineral component of
bone and the marrow in the marrow compartment. Therefore,
as a result of the adjustment, the image Ib can be considered to
represent attenuation caused by the mineral content of bone. An
example of a bone-only image is shown in Fig. 3.
The BMD of the bone was computed pixel-by-pixel using
the calibration function described in the following section. The

DENDERE et al.: DUAL-ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENT OF PHALANGEAL BMD

Fig. 3. Generation of bone-only image: (a) LE image; (b) HE image; (c)
bone-only image. (Contrast has been enhanced for visualization).

pixel-by-pixel bone mineral content (BMC) was computed as a
product of BMD and pixel area. The global BMD was subsequently computed using total bone area and total BMC.
E. Calibration
A custom-designed phantom was made from Perspex and
known amounts of calcium hydroxyapatite (CHA). Perspex has
X-ray attenuation characteristics similar to soft tissue [33], [34],
while CHA is the major mineral component of bone [22]. HE and
LE images of the phantom were acquired using the technique
described previously and analyzed to examine the relationship
between the density of CHA and the gray-level value in an X-ray
image. A nonlinear least squares fit operation was carried out in
order to establish a mapping function between the CHA density
and pixel gray level in the form
I = Ae−bx + C

(4)

where A, b, and C are constants, I is the detected gray-level
intensity, and x is the known density of the CHA. The calibration
phantom was scanned to calibrate the system before subjects
were scanned, rather than scanning the phantom together with
the test subject, as done in other studies [13], [35]. This should
not cause any errors, provided the scanning conditions (kVp,
mA, source-detector distance, etc.) used during calibration and
subject scanning remain constant [36].
F. Volumetric Bone Density
To find the vBMD of a bone, basis material decomposition
was applied. The technique is commonly used for DXA calibration and has been used for assessing the thickness of calcified atherosclerotic plaques in arterial specimens [33]. Radiographic images lack depth information, which is needed in
the computation of volume. The basis material decomposition
technique decomposes a pair of dual-energy images into images
of equivalent basis material thickness using polynomials determined through a calibration process that uses the known thicknesses of the basis materials. The basis materials should have

2853

attenuation properties similar to the constituent tissue of the
anatomy being examined. Perspex and aluminum are suitable
materials and are commonly used in bone densitometry measurements, also because of their low cost [37]. The assumption
is that within the diagnostic X-ray range, the attenuation of any
biological tissue can be represented by a linear combination of x
thickness of aluminum and y thickness of Perspex. We hypothesize that, with careful and accurate calibration, the thickness
of bone and soft tissue can be estimated from the dual-energy
images and used to calculate the bone volume, enabling the
computation of vBMD.
We chose CHA, the major mineral component of bone, and
Perspex as basis materials for this study. The CHA had a maximum thickness of 12 mm with seven calibration points, while the
Perspex had a maximum thickness of 18 mm with seven calibration points; similar values have been used previously for hand
densitometry [13]. The different basis material thicknesses were
combined to give a total of 49 combinations. However, instead of
producing a square-crossed wedge like other published studies,
we produced Perspex blocks, each with seven CHA- filled holes
of different thickness. The Perspex blocks were placed in single
file at the center of the fan beam and scanned to produce dual
energy images of the different CHA/Perspex combinations. This
was done to ensure that all the calibration data were exposed to
the same X-ray intensity since, due to the fan beam geometry
of the slot-scanning system [38], X-ray photons traverse an increased distance through the object as distance from the center
of the beam increases. Each Perspex–CHA combination had a
pair of associated equations, the basis material decomposition
equations, giving the thicknesses of Perspex and CHA. This
yielded 49 simultaneous equations for the CHA thicknesses and
49 simultaneous equations for the Perspex thicknesses
T1 = k11 + k12 log Ih + k13 log Il + k14 log2 Ih
+k15 log2 Il + k16 log Ih log Il + · · ·

(5)

Tm = k21 + k22 log Ih + k23 log Il + k24 log2 Ih
+k25 log2 Il + k26 log Ih log Il + · · ·

(6)

where T1 and Tm are the known thicknesses of the Perspex and
CHA, respectively, Il and Ih are the LE and HE image gray
levels, respectively, and kij are coefficients determined through
a linear least squares fit during calibration.
To find the volume of a bone, the bone was divided into a large
number of tiny regions of known cross-sectional area (pixels)
and the thickness of the bone in each region was found using
the basis material decomposition equations.
Bone is a composite tissue with mineral as the major component and small amounts of collagen and water. Finger bones
also have bone marrow in the marrow compartment. In an X-ray
image of a finger, the attenuation measured in the region that
contains bone will be an aggregate of attenuation caused by the
mineral component of bone, the nonmineral component of bone
(collagen + water + bone marrow in the marrow cavity) and
soft tissue surrounding the bone (see Fig. 4). Applying the basis
material decomposition equations to the dual-energy images of
the finger will yield the thickness of soft tissue (T1 ) and the

2854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 4. Cross section of finger showing the tissues involved in the computation
of bone volume. T a s is the thickness of soft tissue adjacent to the bone; T b s is
the thickness of the nonmineral component of bone; T m is the thickness of the
mineral component of bone.

thickness of the mineral component of bone (Tm ) at every pixel
position. In the bone region of the finger, the thickness of soft
tissue given by T1 is the sum of soft tissue surrounding the
bone and nonmineral component of bone, whereas in the region
adjacent to the bone the equation gives only the thickness of
soft tissue adjacent to the bone. Assuming, again, that the soft
tissue adjacent to the bone is the same as that surrounding the
bone, subtracting this soft tissue from the finger leaves behind
soft tissue that is the nonmineral component of bone. In other
words, the computed thickness of soft tissue is greater in the
bone region of the finger than in the region adjacent to the bone,
and the difference is caused by the nonmineral component of
bone. Therefore, subtracting the adjacent soft tissue thickness
from the soft tissue computed in the bone region gives the thickness of the nonmineral component of bone. The thickness of the
soft tissue adjacent to the bone is computed as the average of
the pixel-wise thicknesses in the region. The sum of the mineral
and nonmineral components of bone gives the total thickness
of bone which can then be used to compute the volume of the
bone.
The thickness of the bone (mineral component + nonmineral
component) at each pixel i, T(x,y )i , is given by
T(x,y )i = (T(m )i + T(1)i ) − Tas

(7)

where T(m )i is the thickness of the mineral component of bone,
T(1)i is the thickness of the soft tissue, and Tas is the average of
the pixel-wise thickness of the soft tissue adjacent to the bone.
A summation of the product of the pixel area (120 μm ×
120 μm) and the bone thickness T(x,y )i at every pixel position
(N pixels) in the ROI gives the total bone volume V:
V =

N


T(x,y )i p2 .

(8)

i=1

The vBMD can now be computed as follows:
vBMD = BMC/V.

(9)

G. Accuracy and Precision
Accuracy describes how closely a measurement represents
the true value of the quantity being measured. To evaluate
the accuracy of bone measurements, phantoms of known BMC
and BMD [13], [34] or cadaver specimens may be used [15].

Cadaver studies for evaluating bone measurements typically
use 10–20 subjects [3]. Fresh cadavers are normally used for
evaluating densitometry techniques. However, for this project,
fresh cadavers were not available. It was noted that the soft tissue in cadavers that are not fresh, though preserved, becomes
hardened, particularly on palmar side. In some cases, the attenuation recorded in the soft tissue regions was almost equal
to that recorded in the bone regions and it was assumed that
this could distort BMD measurements. Therefore, 19 excised
bones were imaged together with a soft tissue-equivalent material to simulate the presence of surrounding soft tissue, and
their BMDs and BMCs were evaluated. Scanning human bones
in the presence of material representing soft tissue can be used
in evaluating BMD measurements [39], and phantoms based on
this technique are commercially available. The bones were subsequently incinerated and the resulting ash was weighed. The
ash weight was used to generate the reference data for evaluating
the accuracy of the measurements from images. The reference
areal BMD (aBMD) was derived by dividing the ash weight
by the reference area for each bone determined by performing
manual segmentation in the DXA images. The reference volume
of each bone was measured by placing the bone in a measuring
cylinder containing a preset amount of water and noting volume
of water displaced, which is equal to the volume of the bone.
This method only provided a rough estimate of the bone volume
since the smallest division on the cylinder was 1 cm3 and, therefore, the volume could only be estimated to the nearest 0.5 cm3 .
The reference vBMD for evaluating the algorithm-determined
vBMD was generated by dividing the ash weight by the reference volume. Accuracy was expressed as the percentage error
as follows:
|Measured value − reference value|
× 100.
Error (%) =
Reference value
(10)
An in vivo evaluation study was conducted in order to
compare the agreement between the Lodox Statscan measurements and those of an established clinical densitometer, as well
as to evaluate the system precision. Lodox Statscan aBMD measurements on the left hand in 44 participants (19 males and
25 females) were compared to those from the Hologic Discovery W DXA machine. The subjects had their third middle
phalanx aBMD and BMC measured on the system developed in
this project and on a Hologic Discovery DXA machine which
provided a reference for comparison. Note that only aBMD and
BMC were compared since the Hologic system cannot provide
vBMD values. The Hologic machine is designed for femoral and
spinal aBMD measurements. However, according to technicians
at Hologic, either the software used for forearm aBMD or that
used for rat whole body analysis may be used for measuring
aBMD of the fingers; we, therefore, used the forearm software
for phalangeal measurements.
Some studies use the Pearson product-moment correlation
coefficient or linear regression analysis when assessing the degree of agreement between machines [39]–[41]. However, the
use of the correlation coefficient in such cases is misleading
as the correlation coefficient is a measure of the relationship
between the two sets of measurements and may mask

DENDERE et al.: DUAL-ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENT OF PHALANGEAL BMD

Fig. 5.

Variation of DQE with source voltage.

systematic differences [42]. Other studies have used the Bland–
Altman plot as a measure of agreement between two densitometry machines [43], [44] although without a stated criterion for
good agreement. The Bland–Altman plot is produced by plotting the difference of each measurement pair against their mean.
In this project, the Bland–Altman plot was used to determine,
visually, whether the difference between the two machines was
heteroscedastic. The concordance correlation coefficient [45]
was used as a measure of agreement between the machines.
This technique quantifies how far matched pairs of measurements are from the line of equality [44], [45]. The criterion for
good agreement using this technique is a concordance correlation coefficient that is greater than 0.9 [44].
Precision refers to the repeatability of a measurement
technique. To evaluate the short-term precision of a densitometry technique, it is recommended to take two measurements
per individual in a minimum of 30 subjects or three measurements per individual in a minimum of 14 subjects and computing the coefficient of variation (CV) [46], [47]. In this study,
three measurements were taken of 17 volunteers to evaluate the
in vivo BMC, aBMD, and vBMD precision. The CV was calculated as the root-mean-square average of standard deviations of
the repeated measurements using a spreadsheet precision tool
provided by the International Society for Clinical Densitometry [47]. The CV, expressed as a percentage, of a measurement
technique should be less than 2% for the technique to have medical prognosis value [29]. We also compare our system’s aBMD
precision with reported values obtained using computed digital
absorptiometry (CDA) and radiographic absorptiometry (RA).
III. RESULTS
A. Determination of Scan Parameters
An initial experiment using a cadaver hand showed that source
voltages less than 70 kVp produce HE images that are unacceptably grainy. The maximum source voltage on the Lodox Statscan
is 150 kVp. However, in order to limit the risk of arcing the tube,
the maximum voltage was avoided, and therefore, the source
voltage was restricted to the 80–140 kVp range. Aluminum and
copper are the only materials that have been tested for dose reduction on the Lodox Statscan. An earlier study on this machine
concluded that including an additional 1.8-mm aluminum filter

Fig. 6.

2855

DQE for various tube currents at 140 kVp tube voltage.

at 80 kVp can reduce the dose without adversely affecting the
image quality [48], and therefore, 1.8 mm additional aluminum
filtration was included for source voltages up to 100 kVp. Another study showed that an additional 0.1-mm copper filter has
a similar effect for source voltages of 110 kVp and higher [49].
We, therefore, included 0.2 mm of copper filtration for source
voltages of 110 kVp and above for greater dose reduction—the
difference in image quality was negligible when compared with
0.1 mm copper.
Assessment of DQE showed that for a fixed tube current,
image quality increased with source voltage, and for a fixed
source voltage, image quality increased with current. Fig. 5
illustrates the increase in DQE with voltage at a fixed current of
50 mA, while Fig. 6 shows how the DQE increases with current
at a fixed tube voltage of 140 kVp; the DQE plots shown are for
the HE images (a similar trend was observed in the LE images).
Simulations showed that the mean energies of the HE and LE
spectra as well as the separation of the two spectra increased with
increasing tube voltage, as summarized in Table I. Including a
postfilter also increases the mean energy of the HE spectrum by
filtering out LE photons. Increasing the thickness of the postfilter
would raise the spectral separation even further. However, only a
0.1-mm copper postfilter was considered due to the limited space
in the detector unit slot, which in addition to the two scintillators
and the glass strip, could not accommodate a thicker postfilter.
The spectral ratio should be about 1.5 for useful spectral
separation [50]; this effectively ruled out 80 kVp whose ratio is
close to 1. A tube voltage setting of 140 kVp was chosen for the
study as it had the highest DQE and yielded the highest mean
spectral separation (16.81 keV).
The next task was to select the current setting by balancing
image quality and dose. Fig. 7 shows how the entrance dose
varies with current at 140 kVp. A current setting of 50 mA was
chosen. The entrance dose at this setting is 38.1 μGy which is
comparable to the entrance dose for a spine or femur scan on
the Hologic Discovery which is quoted as 40 μGy [51]. Thus,
the dose was chosen to match that of the Hologic Discovery
DXA machine, the clinical densitometer used for the comparison study, which uses the same HE voltage setting used in this
project (140 kVp).
High-resolution images of the left hand were taken starting
from the middle of the proximal phalanx to the tip of the middle
finger, with the hand placed palm down on the table and the

2856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

TABLE I
AVERAGE ENERGIES OF VARIOUS X-RAY SPECTRA (AL = ALUMINUM, CU = COPPER, HE = HIGH ENERGY, LE = LOW ENERGY)
Voltage (kVp)
Prefilter
Postfilter
HE (keV)
LE (keV)
HE–LE Separation (keV)
Spectral ratio (HE/LE)

80

100

120

140

1.8 mm Al
None
0.1 mm Cu
49.49
50.93
47.58
47.58
1.91
3.35
1.04
1.07

1.8 mm Al
None
0.1 mm Cu
59.48
61.86
53.76
53.76
5.72
8.10
1.11
1.15

0.2 mm Cu
None
0.1 mm Cu
76.20
78.21
65.79
65.79
10.42
12.43
1.16
1.19

0.2 mm Cu
None
0.1 mm Cu
84.99
87.00
70.19
70.19
14.79
16.81
1.21
1.24

The Bland–Altman plots for BMC and aBMD, shown in
Fig. 8, did not show any evidence of heteroscedasticity, i.e.,
there is no relationship between the differences in measurements
of the two machines and their averages. Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient with 95% confidence interval for the BMD
pairs was 0.92 (0.85–0.95), while that for the BMC pairs was
0.98 (0.93–0.99).
The precision of the system was evaluated by performing
three measurements in 17 subjects and computing the rootmean-square percentage CV of the measurements. The CV values for BMC, aBMD, and vBMD were 1.48%, 1.35%, and
1.80%, respectively. Table III summarizes the comparison of
CV values reported in different studies.
Fig. 7.

Variation of current with dose at 140 kVp tube voltage.

IV. DISCUSSION

middle finger aligned with the center of the X-ray beam. There
is no magnification in the scan direction and in a previous study
[16], using an aluminum step wedge of known dimensions, we
observed that the magnification in the central region of the slot
direction is negligible if the narrow object of interest is aligned
with the center of the X-ray beam. Once the LE and HE images
had been acquired, BMC and aBMD were computed.

B. Accuracy and Precision
Initial evaluation of the system performance was made by
measuring the BMC of 19 excised phalangeal bones. The average BMC error was 4.85%. The average error in the detected
bone area was 3% and the average aBMD error was 5.49%. The
computed bone volumes ranged between 0.96 and 2.72 cm3 ,
and the average error of the computed bone volume was 10.91%
(standard deviation of 6.49%). The average error of the vBMD
was 12.77%. This error is higher than that registered for the
aBMD (5.49%). A possible explanation for this is the large
uncertainty in the reference volume estimates.
After evaluation using excised bones, in vivo evaluation was
carried out by taking measurements in human subjects to evaluate system precision and to compare measurements on the system and those taken on a densitometer found in clinical practice.
Table II summarizes the results of the measurements taken on
the two machines. The average entrance dose for the scans was
38.1 μGy on the Statscan, while the average dose for the Hologic
was 45.81 μGy.

In this study, we have assessed the feasibility of acquiring
dual-energy images of the hand using two detectors on a slotscanning radiography system. An advantage of this technique
is that it does not require pulse counting detectors, which are
required by some systems that use K-edge filtration. Pulse counting detectors carry out pulse height analysis of each incoming
photon in order to determine whether the photon is counted as
a HE or LE photon. One of the major problems associated with
systems based on pulse counting is detector pile-up [32], the
phenomenon of a photon reaching the detector while the detector is still processing another photon. This problem is more
pronounced when examining thin body regions due to higher
pulse rates.
A drawback of the technique employed in this study is that
it has lower spectral separation than the K-edge filtration technique. Some published studies that address dual-energy imaging emphasize the need for high spectral separation between the
dual-energy spectra [13], [50]. However, Gulam et al. [13] point
out that the DXA technique works equally well with low spectral
separation. Modern Hologic DXA machines, which use source
voltage switching, rapidly alternate the source voltage between
100 and 140 kVp [22]. Norland devices, which are based on
K-edge filtration, have a constant source voltage of 80 kVp
[22]. Gulam et al. [13] implemented DXA on a clinical digital radiographic machine by acquiring the dual-energy images
using two successive scans at different source voltages. They
used 40 kVp, 318 mA and 125 kVp, 28 mA for the LE and
HE images, respectively. Our method uses a source voltage of
140 kVp which satisfies the need for sufficient spectral separation while achieving acceptable image quality.

DENDERE et al.: DUAL-ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENT OF PHALANGEAL BMD

2857

TABLE II
RESULTS OF In Vivo aBMD AND BMC MEASUREMENTS ON THE LODOX STATSCAN AND HOLOGIC DISCOVERY; STD = STANDARD DEVIATION
Variable

Lodox Statscan

Mean aBMD (Std) (g/cm2 )
Mean BMC (Std) (g)

Male (19)
0.346 (0.035)
1.022 (0.188)

Hologic Discovery
Female (25)
0.317 (0.032)
0.772 (0.156)

Male (19)
0.339 (0.033)
1.047 (0.200)

Female (25)
0.313 (0.028)
0.796 (0.159)

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF PRECISION IN PHALANGEAL BONE MEASUREMENTS
Author
This study
Bouxsein et al. [15]
Yang et al. [52]
Sotoca et al. [29]
Gulam et al. [13]

Fig. 8. Bland–Altman plots for (a) BMC and (b) aBMD measurements on
the Lodox Statscan (BMClo d , aBMDlo d ) and Hologic Discovery (BMCh o l ,
aBMDh o l ).

Beam hardening and scatter have been cited as sources of
error in bone densitometry [32], [37], [52]. The errors caused
by beam hardening depend on the composition and thickness of
the anatomical site under examination, as well as on the beam
energy [37]. A major advantage of measuring finger BMD is
the significant reduction of the effects of beam hardening and
scatter [47]. The effects of scatter are further minimized by the
slot-scanning geometry which is characterized by significantly

Technique

BMC CV (%)

BMD CV (%)

DXA
CDA
RA
RA
DXA

1.48
1.36
1.0

1.35
0.7
0.60
0.91
0.67

0.75

lower scatter-to-primary ratio compared to conventional radiography [38]. Also, in this study, we have used relatively hard
beams for assessing fingers, which have smaller amounts of
overlying soft tissue compared to the femur or lumbar spine.
We do not expect the small amount of soft tissue around the
finger bones to absorb many of the photons at the low end of the
X-ray beam to cause significant beam hardening.
A limitation of DXA is that it provides only an areal density
with units of g/cm2 instead of the true volumetric density with
units of g/cm3 [53]. aBMD is highly dependent on bone size.
Thus, if two bones have the same vBMD, the larger bone will
have a higher aBMD [54]. This drawback is usually addressed
by QCT, albeit at the expense of high radiation dose. Assessment of vBMD distribution from a single pair of DXA images
has been carried out using templates constructed from examples generated using QCT data for the femur [53]. vBMD for
hand bones has been measured using arbitrary units and assuming cylindrical shapes of the bones [13], [55], [56]. We have
proposed, using basis material decomposition, a technique normally used for calibrating DXA systems to measure the volume
of the bone from a pair of dual-energy images to produce the
vBMD of the middle phalanx bone. We used basis material decomposition to compute the thickness of the bone at each pixel
point (the missing information in a 2-D image). Sas et al. [55]
measured phalangeal vBMD in a group of young girls using two
perpendicular scans. Their technique has the disadvantages of
using two scans, which translates into more examination time,
and the use of a lateral scan of the index finger in calculating
the vBMD of the middle finger; it is difficult to differentiate the
finger bones in a lateral scan. Gulam et al. [13] also attempted
phalangeal vBMD measurements using RA by assuming a circular cross section for each phalanx in each transverse section
of the RA analysis. However, neither study reported on the accuracy of their methods.
We have evaluated our method using bone incineration.
We found that the DXA technique as implemented here can
accurately measure the mineral content, aBMD and vBMD
of the middle phalanx as indicated by the low errors in the

2858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

estimated values. Acceptable accuracy has been achieved despite the low-mean spectral energy difference between the HE
and LE spectra. However, the error in the computation of vBMD
(12.77%) was much higher than that for aBMD (5.49%). This
larger error may have resulted from the uncertainty (0.5 cm3 )
in the method used for deriving the reference volume for each
bone which was then used for computing the reference vBMD.
To overcome this drawback, the reference vBMD could be
determined through peripheral quantitative CT or the volume
of the bone could be measured using a bone histomorphometry
technique followed by derivation of the vBMD through dividing
the ash weight by that volume.
The measurements for aBMD and BMC obtained on the Lodox Statscan were compared to those obtained on a Hologic
DXA machine. Historically, DXA machines from different manufacturers have been known to give different measurements for
the same subject [57]. The differences between measurements
on machines from different manufacturers may be explained by
the differences in scanning techniques (tube voltage, filtration,
etc.), calibration, and segmentation of the bone of interest. The
machines in this study have shown good agreement for aBMD
measurements.
The CV values of 1.48% and 1.35% for BMC and aBMD,
respectively, we have achieved in this study are higher than those
that have been reported for similar phalangeal measurements.
A CV value of 1.80% for vBMD was achieved in this project.
Sas et al. [55] state that their method of using two perpendicular
RA scans for vBMD has a CV value that is less than 1%. Gulam
et al. [13], who compute vBMD by assuming a circular crosssection for bones, do not report on the precision of their vBMD
technique. The higher CV values may be attributed to the fact
that in our study calibration was carried out prior to scanning
test subjects, whereas calibration data in the other studies were
simultaneously acquired during the scanning of the test subjects.
The dose levels may differ across scans and may be different
from the levels to which the calibration device was exposed
during calibration. We expect the precision to improve if the
calibration device is scanned simultaneously with a test subject;
this would, however, increase the scan duration since the calibration device is in the form of blocks arranged in single file
which, in a slot-scanning system, would require a longer scan
time due to the larger ROI. However, our values are less than
the 2% threshold required for a method to be clinically useful.
This means that phalangeal BMD measurements on the Lodox
Statscan have potential for clinical use in the management of
osteoporosis.
This study has shown that phalangeal DXA measurements
on a slot-scanning radiography system (Lodox Statscan) have
the accuracy and precision required in a densitometry machine,
paving the way for further studies to determine whether such
measurements are able to discriminate patients with reduced
axial BMD from those with normal (or above normal) BMD
as defined by the T-score system of the WHO. Such studies
would also help to establish whether the vBMD measured by the
method described in this paper offers improved discrimination
between the two groups of patients (those with reduced axial
BMD and those with normal BMD) compared to the aBMD.

V. CONCLUSION
We have explored the possibility of acquiring dual-energy
images on a slot-scanning radiography machine using a twodetector arrangement. We used such images for measurement
of BMD in vivo and on excised bones. We have also proposed
a method to measure vBMD, an entity which is not dependent
on bone size. The accuracy of the measurements was evaluated
using excised bones, and in vivo measurements were used to
evaluate precision and to compare the performance of our machine with that of a commercial DXA machine. The technique
proved to be accurate, as shown by the low errors, with acceptable precision for clinical utility. Our BMD measurements
also agreed well with those from a DXA machine. These results
show the clinical potential of phalangeal DXA measurements
of aBMD and vBMD on a slot-scanning digital radiography
system.
REFERENCES
[1] WHO, “Prevention and management of osteoporosis,” World Health Org.
Tech. Rep. Ser., vol. 921, pp. 1–164, 2003.
[2] J. A. Kanis et al., “European guidance for the diagnosis and management of
osteoporosis in postmenopausal women,” Osteoporosis Int., vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 23–57, Jan. 2013.
[3] G. M. Blake and I. Fogelman, “An update on dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry,” Seminar Nuclear Med., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 62–73, 2010.
[4] J. Damilakis et al., “An update on the assessment of osteoporosis using
radiologic techniques,” Eur. Radiol., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1591–1602, Jun.
2007.
[5] S. K. Kim et al., “Osteoporosis risk prediction using machine learning
and conventional methods,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Jul.
2013, vol. 2013, pp. 188–191.
[6] S. Nayak et al., “Cost-effectiveness of different screening strategies for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women,” Ann. Intern. Med., vol. 155, no. 11,
pp. 751–761, Dec. 2011.
[7] P. Pisani et al., “Screening and early diagnosis of osteoporosis through
X-ray and ultrasound based techniques,” World J. Radiol., vol. 5, no. 11,
pp. 398–410, Nov. 2013.
[8] S. H. Ralston, “Bone densitometry and bone biopsy,” Best Pract. Res.
Clin. Rheumatol., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 487–501, Jun. 2005.
[9] T. Friis-Holmberg et al., “Fracture risk prediction using phalangeal bone
mineral density or FRAX-A Danish cohort study on men and women,” J.
Clin. Densitometry, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 7–15, Jan.–Mar. 2014.
[10] FRAX-WHO. (2013, Dec. 7). FRAX WHO Fracture Risk Assessment Tool.
[Online]. Available http://www.who-frax.org/
[11] R. D. Wasnich, “Perspective on fracture risk and phalangeal bone mineral
density,” J. Clin. Densitometry, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 259–268, Fall 1998.
[12] A. A. Deodhar et al., “Measurement of hand bone mineral content by
dual energy x-ray absorptiometry: Development of the method, and its
application in normal volunteers and in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,”
Ann. Rheumatic Dis., vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 685–690, Oct. 1994.
[13] M. Gulam et al., “Bone mineral measurement of phalanges: Comparison of radiographic absorptiometry and area dual X-ray absorptiometry,”
Radiology, vol. 216, no. 2, pp. 586–591, Aug. 2000.
[14] C. L. Hill et al., “Measurement of hand bone mineral density in early
rheumatoid arthritis using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry,” Int. J.
Rheumatic Dis., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 230–234, Aug. 2010.
[15] M. L. Bouxsein et al., “Precision and accuracy of computed digital absorptiometry for assessment of bone density of the hand,” Osteoporosis
Int., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 444–449, Sep. 20, 1997.
[16] R. Dendere et al., “Computed digital absorptiometry for measurement
of phalangeal bone mineral mass on a slot-scanning digital radiography
system,” Osteoporosis Int., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2625–2630, Nov. 2014.
[17] K. Alioglu et al., “Hand bone mineral density reference values in a Turkish
healthy female population,” Int. J. Rheumatic Dis., Oct. 16, 2013.
[18] A. Dhainaut et al., “Phalangeal densitometry compared with dual energy X-ray absorptiometry for assessment of bone mineral density in
elderly women,” J. Women’s Health, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1789–1795, Dec.
2011.

DENDERE et al.: DUAL-ENERGY X-RAY ABSORPTIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENT OF PHALANGEAL BMD

[19] T. Friis-Holmberg et al., “Phalangeal bone mineral density predicts incident fractures: A prospective cohort study on men and women—Results
from the Danish Health Examination Survey 2007–2008 (DANHES 2007–
2008),” Arch. Osteoporosis, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 291–299, Dec. 2012.
[20] R. Patel et al., (2011, Mar). “Peripheral X-ray absorptiometry in the management of osteoporosis,” National Osteoporosis Society, UK. [Online].
Available: https://www.nos.org.uk/document.doc?id=850
[21] I. Buch et al., “Radiographic absorptiometry for pre-screening of osteoporosis in patients with low energy fractures,” Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest.,
vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 269–274, Jul. 2010.
[22] T. F. Lang, “Bone mineral assessment of the axial skeleton: Technical aspects,” in Contemporary Endocrinology: Osteoporosis: Pathophysiology
and Clinical Management, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Humana, 2010,
pp. 23–50.
[23] J. F. Seely et al., “Dual energy X-ray densitometry apparatus and method
using single X-ray pulse,” U.S. Patent 378/98.9, Sep. 4, 2001.
[24] R. Mooney and P. S. Thomas, “Dose reduction in a paediatric X-ray
department following optimization of radiographic technique,” Brit. J.
Radiol., vol. 71, no. 848, pp. 852–860, Aug. 1998.
[25] M. B. Williams et al., “Digital radiography image quality: Image acquisition,” J. Am. Coll. Radiol., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 371–388, Jun. 2007.
[26] Medical Electrical Equipment-Characteristics of Digital X-Ray Imaging
Devices: Part 1. Determination of the Detective Quantum Efficiency, International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, Switzerland, Standard
IEC 62220-1, 2003.
[27] J. M. Boone and J. A. Seibert, “An accurate method for computergenerating tungsten anode x-ray spectra from 30 to 140 kV,” Med. Phys.,
vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1661–1670, 1997.
[28] J. W. Kwon et al., “Noise reduction in DEXA image based on system noise
modeling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biomed. Pharm. Eng., Singapore, 2009,
pp. 1–6.
[29] J. M. Sotoca et al., “Hand bone segmentation in radioabsorptiometry
images for computerised bone mass assessment,” Comput. Med. Imaging
Graph., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 459–467, 2003.
[30] R. Dendere et al., “Model-based segmentation of the middle phalanx in digital radiographic images of the hand,” in Proc. IEEE
35th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Osaka, Japan, 2013,
pp. 3702–3705.
[31] T. F. Cootes et al., “Active shape models: Evaluation of a multi-resolution
method for improving image search,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 1994,
pp. 327–336.
[32] H. W. Wahner and I. Fogelman, The Evaluation of Osteoporosis: Dual
Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry in Clinical Practice. London, U.K.: Martin
Dunitz, 1994, ch. 3.
[33] M. Moreau et al., “Dual-energy x-ray imaging technique for in vitro tissue
composition measurement,” Med. Phys., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1807–1815,
Nov. 1994.
[34] S. A. Steel et al., “A phantom for evaluating bone mineral density of the
hand by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 233–240, Aug. 1997.
[35] N. Chuaychunu et al., “Bone mineral density and bone mineral content
estimation using low-cost x-ray detector,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Inf.
Commun. Signal Process., Singapore, 2007, pp. 1–4.
[36] E. L. Gingold and B. H. Hasegawa, “Dual-energy X-ray processing for
quantitative projection imaging,” in Proc. IEEE Nuclear Sci. Symp. Conf.
Rec., Including Sessions Nuclear Power Syst. Med. Imag. Conf., 1990,
pp. 1147–1150.
[37] E. L. Gingold and B. H. Hasegawa, “Systematic bias in basis material
decomposition applied to quantitative dual-energy x-ray imaging,” Med.
Phys., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 25–33, Jan./Feb. 1992.
[38] B. J. Irving et al., “Radiation dose from a linear slit scanning X-ray machine with full-body imaging capabilities,” Radiat. Protection Dosimetry,
vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 482–489, 2008.

2859

[39] S. Hagiwara et al., “Dual x-ray absorptiometry forearm software: Accuracy and intermachine relationship,” J. Bone Mineral Res., vol. 9, no. 9,
pp. 1425–1427, Sep. 1994.
[40] L. A. Rhodes et al., “Cross-calibration of a GE iDXA and prodigy for
total and regional body bone parameters: The Importance of using crosscalibration equations for longitudinal monitoring after a system upgrade,”
J. Clin. Densitometry, vol. 17, pp. 496–504, Oct.–Dec. 2014.
[41] G. M. Blake et al., “Dual X-ray absorptiometry: Clinical evaluation of a
new cone-beam system,” Calcified Tissue Int., vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 113–120,
Feb. 2005.
[42] J. M. Bland and D. G. Altman, “Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement,” Lancet, vol. 1,
no. 8476, pp. 307–310, Feb. 1986.
[43] S. Gillette-Guyonnet et al., “Comparison of bone mineral density and
body composition measurements in women obtained from two DXA instruments,” Mech. Ageing Develop., vol. 124, no. 3, pp. 317–321, Mar.
2003.
[44] E. Nalda et al., “Assessment of the Stratos, a new pencil-beam bone densitometer: dosimetry, precision, and cross calibration,” J. Clin. Densitometry,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 395–406, Oct.–Dec. 2011.
[45] L. I. Lin, “A note on the concordance correlation coefficient,” Biometrics,
vol. 56, pp. 324–325, 2000.
[46] A. El Maghraoui and C. Roux, “DXA scanning in clinical practice,” QJM,
vol. 101, no. 8, pp. 605–617, 2008.
[47] International Society for Clinical Densitometry. (2014, Jul. 19). Calculators. [Online]. Available: http://www.iscd.org/resources/calculators/
[48] T. D. Perks et al., “Filtration to reduce paediatric dose for a linear slotscanning digital X-ray machine,” Radiat. Protection Dosimetry, Nov. 27,
2014.
[49] C. Trauernicht et al., “Dose reduction and image preservation after the
introduction of a 0.1 mm cu filter into the LODOX statscan unit above
110 kVp,” presented at the Proc. 13th Int. Congr. Int. Radiat. Protection
Assoc., Glasgow, U.K., 2012.
[50] J. A. Skipper and T. N. Hangartner, “Optimizing X-ray spectra for dualenergy radiographic bone densitometry,” in Proc. 15th Southern Biomed.
Eng. Conf., Dayton, OH, USA, 1996, pp. 297–300.
[51] Dotmed. (2014, Feb. 6). Hologic Discovery Bone Densitometer. [Online].
Available: http://www.dotmed.com/virtual-trade-show/category/BoneDensitometer/Bone-Densitometer/Models/Hologic/Discovery/15693
[52] S. O. Yang et al., “Radiographic absorptiometry for bone mineral measurement of the phalanges: Precision and accuracy study,” Radiology,
vol. 192, no. 3, pp. 857–859, Sep. 1994.
[53] T. Whitmarsh et al., “Reconstructing the 3D shape and bone mineral
density distribution of the proximal femur from dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 2101–2114,
Dec. 2011.
[54] B. Srinivasan et al., “Relationship of femoral neck areal bone mineral
density to volumetric bone mineral density, bone size, and femoral strength
in men and women,” Osteoporosis Int., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 155–162, Jan.
2012.
[55] T. C. Sas et al., “Bone mineral density assessed by phalangeal radiographic
absorptiometry before and during long-term growth hormone treatment in
girls with Turner’s syndrome participating in a randomized dose-response
study,” Pediatric Res., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 417–422, Sep. 2001.
[56] P. Ross, “Radiographic absorptiometry for measuring bone mass,” Osteoporosis Int., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 103–107, May 1, 1997.
[57] R. B. Mazess et al., “Calibration of dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry for
bone density,” J. Bone Mineral Res., vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 799–806, Aug. 1991.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

