IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

1637

A Global Covariance Descriptor for Nuclear Atypia
Scoring in Breast Histopathology Images
Adnan Mujahid Khan, Korsuk Sirinukunwattana, and Nasir Rajpoot, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Nuclear atypia scoring is a diagnostic measure commonly used to assess tumor grade of various cancers, including
breast cancer. It provides a quantitative measure of deviation in
visual appearance of cell nuclei from those in normal epithelial
cells. In this paper, we present a novel image-level descriptor for
nuclear atypia scoring in breast cancer histopathology images. The
method is based on the region covariance descriptor that has recently become a popular method in various computer vision applications. The descriptor in its original form is not suitable for
classification of histopathology images as cancerous histopathology
images tend to possess diversely heterogeneous regions in a single
field of view. Our proposed image-level descriptor, which we term
as the geodesic mean of region covariance descriptors, possesses
all the attractive properties of covariance descriptors lending itself
to tractable geodesic-distance-based k-nearest neighbor classification using efficient kernels. The experimental results suggest that
the proposed image descriptor yields high classification accuracy
compared to a variety of widely used image-level descriptors.
Index Terms—Generalized geometric mean, histopathology images analysis, nuclear atypia (NA) scoring, region covariance (RC)
descriptor, Riemannian manifold.

I. INTRODUCTION
ISTOLOGICAL tumor grade is the description of a tumor based on how much the tumor cells differ from the
cells of the normal tissue when examined under a microscope.
Clinicians use the histological grade, among other factors, to
give an estimate of the patients prognosis, i.e., the likely outcome or the course of cancer. Moreover, tumor grade is used
to develop patient-specific treatment plans. If a tumor is well
differentiated, i.e., the size of tumor cells and organization of
tumor tissue resemble normal cells and tissues, it is likely to
grow at a slower rate and generally has a better survival rate.
Likewise, undifferentiated and poorly differentiated tumors have
abnormal-looking cells and are likely to grow at a much higher
rate with fairly low survival rates.

H

Manuscript received December 31, 2014; revised June 9, 2015; accepted
June 12, 2015. Date of publication June 18, 2015; date of current version
September 1, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Qatar National
Research Fund under Award NPRP 5-1345-1-228. The work of A. M. Khan
was supported by the Warwick Postgraduate Research Scholarship Program
and the Department of Computer Science at the University of Warwick, U.K.
The work of K. Sirinukunwattana was supported in part by the Department
of Computer Science, University of Warwick, U.K. Adnan Mujahid Khan and
Korsuk Sirinukunwattana are co-first authors.
A. M. Khan is with the Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG,
U.K. (e-mail: adnan.khan@icr.ac.uk).
K. Sirinukunwattana and N. Rajpoot are with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar, and also the
Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry CV47AL,
U.K. (e-mail: sirinukun.korsuk@gmail.com; Nasir.Rajpoot@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2447008

Histological factors used to determine tumor grade can vary
between different types of cancers. In breast cancer, for example, the most widely used tumor grading system is the modified
Scarf–Bloom–Richardson grading system, also referred to as the
Nottingham breast cancer grading system [1]. It consists of three
components: degree of tubule formation, mitotic index, and nuclear atypia (NA) (sometimes also referred to as nuclear pleomorphism). Tubule formation assesses what percentage of the
tumor forms normal duct structures. The more regular the duct
structures, the lower grade the cancer. Mitotic index assesses
the number of dividing cells seen in ten high-power microscope
fields. The larger the number of dividing cells, the higher grade
the cancer. NA assesses the deviation in appearance of cell nuclei from those in normal breast duct epithelial cells. The larger
the deviation, the higher grade the tumor. Fig. 1 shows some
example images of NA in breast histopathology images.
Recently, some algorithms for IHC scoring [2], [3] and mitotic cell detection [4]–[9] have been proposed in the literature,
but NA scoring in breast cancer histopathology images has not
received much attention. To the best of our knowledge, two
existing methods for NA scoring can be found in the literature. Cosatto et al. [10] perform nuclear segmentation by first
detecting seed points using the difference of Gaussian operator followed by the Hough transform to delineate the nuclei
boundaries. Next, they compute a set of shape, size, and texture
features to train a classifier for NA scoring. Dalle et al. [11]
employ a similar approach as well by first performing nuclear
segmentation followed by fitting a Gaussian mixture model on
the features computed from the segmented nuclei. Nuclei segmentation is performed by detecting regions of interest using
intensity thresholding followed by fitting a line to the distance
transform of this region in polar space where the round nuclei shapes form a curve. Both existing methods rely heavily
on the accurate segmentation of cell nuclei. However, nuclei
segmentation in histopathology images remains a challenging
problem in high-grade tumors, where nuclei are often hollow
inside with broken cell membrane or weakly stained with unpacked chromatin structures [12]. Moreover, due to occlusion
or overlapping nuclei, it can be challenging to segment nuclei
leading to erroneous segmentation which may affect the predicted NA score. Therefore, despite good results obtained on
a limited dataset, techniques that rely heavily on the accurate
nuclear segmentation run the risk of overfitting on the limited
training data.
In August 2014, an NA scoring contest was organized in conjunction with the International Conference on Pattern Recognition, where a dataset consisting of 300 hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) stained breast cancer histopathology images obtained

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1638

Fig. 1.

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Sample images of NA scores 1 (left), 2 (middle), and 3 (right) in breast cancer histopathology images.

from 11 patients was made available to the contest participants
along with the ground truth NA score from two expert pathologists. The discordant images annotated as different NA scores
by the two experts were presented to a third expert and the
majority vote was considered. Due to the challenging nature
of the problem (as can be seen in Fig. 1), we take a holistic
approach and pose the NA scoring as an image classification
problem. The results generated using the algorithm presented in
this paper were ranked first in the contest [13], [14].
A range of image descriptors (e.g., Haralick [15], local binary
patterns [16], Gabor [17], and region covariance (RC) descriptor [18]) have been proposed in the literature for performing a
variety of tasks. Among these image descriptors, the RC descriptor is relatively recent and offers some desirable theoretical
properties—for instance, RC descriptors are symmetric positive
definite (SPD) matrices lending themselves to tractable optimization. Furthermore, they are also relatively low-dimensional
descriptors extracted from several different features computed
at the level of regions, consequently leading to a reduction in the
computational cost of classification. However, the conventional
RC descriptor is only a descriptor of the regional characteristics
of an image. Due to the heterogeneity of tumor microenvironment [19], it is highly likely that no single region in a microscopic field of view will contain cellular architecture that would
be morphologically similar to other regions in the same field of
view. Therefore, applying the RC descriptor on the whole image
level may not be worthwhile.
In this paper, we combine the RC descriptors computed over
different regions in an image into a single image-level descriptor
of the entire image by using the geodesic geometric mean of the
RC, termed as the gmRC, descriptors. Since the RC descriptor
is an SPD matrix, RC descriptors computed from subimages are
points lying on the Riemannian manifold of SPD matrices, and
the image-level descriptor given by the gmRC is a representative
of potentially different covariance matrices. The gmRC matrix
is calculated using the geodesic connected to affine-invariant
Riemannian metric [20]. We utilize geodesic k-nearest neighbor

(GkNN) approach to assign labels to a test input image. In order
to improve the computational efficiency of computing geodesic
distances, which cause nontrivial numerical burden, we use the
kernel trick that results in comparable accuracy and statistically
significant reduction in execution time. The main contributions
of this paper are as follows:
1) We present a novel image descriptor, gmRC, that summarizes the locally heterogeneous contents of an image, and
demonstrate its usefulness in the context of a histopathology image analysis application in NA scoring.
2) We employ a GkNN-based classification approach to assign labels to a test input image and demonstrate its effectiveness in exploiting the Riemannian structure of the
SPD manifold of local RC descriptors.
3) We show that Stein-kernel-based GkNN can yield a performance boost by a factor of 25 in terms of computational
time taken for assigning label to an unseen test image
as compared to the standard log-Euclidean-metric-based
GkNN while producing statistically similar classification
performance (t-test at significance level 0.01).
In Section II, the proposed gmRC descriptor is motivated
and described mathematically, followed by a description of
how Stein-kernel-based GkNN is employed in our classification
framework for NA scoring. In Section III, we present a comparison of the proposed framework with two baseline texture-based
image classification techniques that compute a library of texture
features and employ a range of classifiers to perform NA scoring, to demonstrate the effectiveness of the gmRC descriptor for
NA scoring in breast histopathology images. A range of experiments is also presented to evaluate the performance in terms of
computational time and the usefulness of preprocessing steps
like stain normalization [21] and tumor segmentation [22], [23]
incorporated in our NA scoring algorithm.
II. PROPOSED DESCRIPTOR FOR NA SCORING
Fig. 2 presents the proposed framework for image classification using the RC and the gmRC descriptors. An image

KHAN et al.: GLOBAL COVARIANCE DESCRIPTOR FOR NUCLEAR ATYPIA SCORING IN BREAST HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGES

1639

Fig. 2. Illustration of the overall classification framework using (Top) the RC and (Bottom) generalized geometric mean of RC descriptors. The generalized
geometric mean is calculated using (2), while the classification is achieved using a GkNN classifier. N is the number of pixels in the image, N R K is number
of pixels in region R K , n is number of features, fi , j is the feature j at pixel location i, and cp , q and c̄p , q are (p, q) elements of RC and gmRC descriptors,
respectively.

is divided into small nonoverlapping regions due to heterogeneity in tumor microenvironment. For each region,
pixel-level features are collected to form an RC descriptor. RC
descriptors of different regions are then summarized into a single gmRC descriptor, by calculating the generalized geometric
mean of RC descriptors. A GkNN classifier, which utilizes the
known structure of the Riemannian manifold of SPD matrices,
is then employed to assign the NA scores (1, 2, or 3) to test
images.
In the following sections, we first describe the RC descriptor
for the sake of completeness, followed by a description of our
novel global covariance descriptor for the whole image. We then
describe the GkNN classifier along with various distance metrics
used for computing geodesic distance. Finally, we present a
description of the kernel trick that is employed to circumvent
the complexity issues that arise by employing computationally
intensive geodesic distance metrics.
A. RC Descriptor
The RC descriptor initially proposed by Tuzel et al. [18]
has emerged in recent years as a powerful yet simple way
to represent image contents in an efficient manner. The RC
descriptor can be computed by first characterizing an image
I with a set of pixel-level n-dimensional features f (x, y) =
{f1 (x, y), f2 (x, y), . . . , fn (x, y)} for all (x, y) image coordinates. These pixel-level characterizations may be intensity values (red, green, blue, gray), gradients, Hessian, filter responses,
etc. If {fi }i∈R denotes the pixel-level n-dimensional feature
vector for region R in image I, the RC descriptor can be

represented as
CR =

1 
(fi − μ) (fi − μ)T
N −1

(1)

i∈R

where CR is the n × n covariance matrix, μ is the mean of all
fi , i ∈ R, and N = |R| is the cardinality of R.
The RC descriptor has some desirable properties. For instance, as the diagonal entries of the covariance matrix represent the variance of each feature and nondiagonal entries are the
respective correlations, RC descriptor provides a succinct way
of aggregating features that might be correlated. If the features
are carefully chosen, these descriptors can be made invariant to
rotations, and changes in scales and illuminations mainly because the descriptor is independent of the number of points in
the region and ordering of the points. The RC descriptor is a relatively low-dimensional descriptor as the size N of the region is
generally much higher than the dimensionality n of the features.
Moreover, due to the symmetric nature of SPD matrices, only
n (n +1)
upper diagonal half of the matrix entries can be chosen,
2
which further decreases the size of the descriptor.
The RC descriptor has been demonstrated to achieve state-ofthe-art performance in many computer vision tasks, including
face recognition [24], pedestrian detection [25], tracking [26],
and texture classification [27]. Recently, it has been used for
medical image analysis by Keskin et al. [28] for classification
of cultured cancer cells in vitro . However, Keskin et al. [28] do
not utilize the differential geometry structure of the space of RC
descriptors.

1640

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

B. Generalized Geometric Mean of SPD Matrices
as an Image Descriptor
The idea of covariance descriptors has been quite successful in representing regional contents for the purposes of object
detection and tracking [25], [26], [29]. A major assumption in
using this idea, however, for image-level classification is that
the image contains more or less homogeneous contents. This
assumption does not hold true in several real-world application
including ours, where heterogeneity of tumor microenvironment
plays a major role in nonhomogeneous nature of various parts
of the tissue specimen [30].
We address this limitation by proposing an image descriptor
that divides an image into regions, calculates an RC descriptor
for each region, and combines the region-level RC descriptors to
generate an image-level descriptor. More specifically, an image
I is divided into K small nonoverlapping regions {R1 , . . . , RK }
and an RC descriptor is computed in each region {CR k , k = 1,
. . ., K} using (1). The RC descriptors from a single image are
SPD matrices that can be considered as points on a Riemannian
SPD manifold M, and therefore, a generalized geometric mean
of these points on the manifold can be computed using the
Fréchet mean of the RC descriptors [31].
Fréchet mean is the point X on the manifold M which minimizes the sum of squared Riemannian distances to all the points
CR k on M. Using this definition, an empirical estimate of the
Fréchet mean given a collection of observations (CR k ) on the
manifold M can be given by
M(I) = arg min
X∈M

K


dist2 (X, CR k )

(2)

k =1

where dist(·, ·) is the distance metric on M, and M is the space
of SPD matrices. Note that (2) is generic, e.g., if M is a Euclidean space equipped with the usual Euclidean distance, this
equation calculates arithmetic mean. The Fréchet mean is calculated by performing optimization of (2), using the Riemannian
trust-region solver [32].
The gmRC descriptor calculated in this way is the generalized
geometric mean and is, therefore, a representative of potentially
different covariance matrices calculated from heterogeneous regions of each image. The gmRC descriptors are themselves
SPD matrices, which form a space of SPD matrices (Sn+ ) with
each point in this space representing an image-level covariance
descriptor generated by calculating the generalized geometric
mean of several region-level covariance matrices as described
above.
C. Nearest Neighbour Classification on Riemannian Manifold
of SPD Matrices
An n × n gmRC is a member of the space Sn+ of n × n
SPD matrices, which is an open convex subset of the Euclidean
space. However, Sn+ is not a vector space with usual addition
and scalar multiplication as, for example, it is not closed under
negative scalar multiplication. Analyzing SPD matrices under
usual Euclidean geometry would fail to capture the nonlinearity
of Sn+ . Therefore, the space Sn+ of n × n SPD matrices is mostly

studied when endowed with Riemannian metric and, thus, forms
a Riemannian manifold [20]. In such a case, the geodesic
distance1 induced by Riemannian metric is a more appropriate measure of distance than the Euclidean distance.
A number of metrics on the space of Sn+ have recently been
proposed, but not all of them induce a true geodesic distance.
The two most suitable distance measures are the affine-invariant
distance [20] and the log-Euclidean distance [33], as they induce the true geodesic distance by a Riemannian metric. In fact,
Sn+ forms a Riemannian manifold with negative curvature when
endowed by affine invariant metric [20], and a Riemannian manifold with null curvature when endowed by the log-Euclidean
metric [33].
Kernel methods are commonly used in machine learning and
computer vision areas to explore nonlinear structures present in
the data. The basic idea of kernel methods is to map the input
data to a high-dimensional feature space to obtain a richer representation of data distribution. This basic idea can be translated to
generalized nonlinear manifolds as well. Jayasumana et al. [34]
present a framework that maps a point on a nonlinear manifold
Sn+ using the so-called Stein kernel. In this paper, we compute
geodesic distances based on affine-invariant, log-Euclidean, and
Stein kernel metric due to the Riemannian manifold structure of
the space of SPD matrices.
Let X, Y ∈ Sn+ be two SPD matrices. Following list gives a
brief overview of the distance measures used in this paper.
1) Affine-Invariant Metric: The metric calculates distance
between two SPD matrices lying on a Riemannian manifold
[20], [35], [36] as follows:
dist(X, Y) = Log(X−1/2 YX−1/2 )F
= Log(Y−1/2 XY−1/2 )F

(3)

where  · F denotes the Frobenius norm and Log(·) denotes
the matrix logarithm.
2) Log-Euclidean Metric: The log-Euclidean metric uses
logarithmic mapping to map the points X and Y lying on the
Riemannian manifold Sn+ to the Euclidean space [33]. Once the
points are mapped to the Euclidean space, standard Euclidean
norm is computed to calculate the distance between the two
points
dist(X, Y) = Log(X) − Log(Y)F
= Log(Y) − Log(X)F

(4)

where Log(·) denotes the matrix logarithm.
3) Positive Definite Kernel: Computation of geodesic distance in (3) and (4) involves nonlinear Log operator which can
result in nontrivial numerical burden. Motivated by this fact, we
employ a kernel-based approach which defines an embedding
function φ : Sn+ → H in order to map the SPD matrices into the
high dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) H.
Since the RKHS is an inner product space, dissimilarity measure between two points φ(X), φ(Y) ∈ H for any X, Y ∈ Sn+
can simply be calculated by their inner product which is defined
1 Geodesic distance between two points on a manifold is the length of the
shortest curve connecting the two points.

KHAN et al.: GLOBAL COVARIANCE DESCRIPTOR FOR NUCLEAR ATYPIA SCORING IN BREAST HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGES

in the form of a positive definite kernel k(X, Y) : Sn+ × Sn+ →
R [37]
k(X, Y) = e−σ S (X,Y )

(5)

n −1
where σ ∈ { 12 , 22 , . . . , n −1
2 } ∪ {τ ∈ R : τ > 2 } is a scaling
factor, and



X+Y
1
S(X, Y) ≡ log det
− log (det (XY)) (6)
2
2

is a symmetric Stein divergence which behaves similarly to the
geodesic distance as in (3) induced by affine-invariant metric
within a tight bound [37], and det(·) is the determinant operator.
The positive-definite kernel distance of (5) behaves similar
to the true geodesic distance in the GkNN classifier. The value
of the kernel function ranges between 0 and 1. The higher the
value of the kernel function, the smaller the distance between
the two SPD matrices.
The GkNN classifier performs nearest neighbor classification
similar to standard kNN classification. The only difference is
that in standard kNN classification, Euclidean distances between
two points is used to find the k-nearest neighbors. However, in
case of GkNN, geodesic distances induced by affine-invariant
metric (3), log-Euclidean metric (4), or Stein kernel (5) are
used instead. Since the GkNN classifier explicitly exploits the
structure of Riemannian manifold of the SPD matrices through
the use of geodesic distances, we expect to achieve superior
performance in terms of classification accuracy.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP, RESULTS, AND DISCUSSION
A. Materials
We perform all experiments on the publicly available MITOSAtypia2 dataset, which is an extension of the publicly available
MITOS dataset [38]. The dataset is a part of a contest on NA
scoring in breast cancer histopathology images. The dataset consists of H&E stained slides from 11 different invasive breast carcinoma patients. Each slide is scanned using two different slide
scanners: Aperio Scanscope XT and Hamamatsu Nanozoomer
HT. From the tumor regions of tissue slides, a total of 300 frames
are extracted at ×20 magnification. Each frame is independently
scored for NA by two expert pathologists. The score assigned
to each frame is a discrete number between 1 and 3. Score 1
represents the low-grade NA and Score 3 the high-grade NA.
In approximately 15% of the cases, the two experts disagreed.
For these conflicting cases, a third pathologist scored the slides
independently and majority vote was used as the final NA score.
B. Traditional Texture Classification Framework
for Comparison
To evaluate the performance of our proposed method, we implement a traditional texture-based image classification framework that calculates a set of texture features, perform feature
selection in order to remove the redundant and nondiscriminative features, and perform classification using a machine learning framework. The reason behind choosing this framework is
2 http://mitos-atypia-14.grand-challenge.org/

1641

three-folded: 1) Our approach to NA scoring is quite similar to
this framework of NA scoring in that it is also holistic in nature
as we compute an image descriptor and use it in the classification framework; 2) the source codes of existing algorithms for
NA scoring in the literature are not available; 3) this framework
is popular in the generic image classification literature [39]–
[41] as well as the histopathology image classification literature
[6], [42].
The framework consists of three steps: feature extraction, feature selection, and classification. We use two widely used texture descriptors: LBP and Haralick cooccurrence features. Redundant and nondiscriminatory features are removed in feature
selection step. Finally, we perform classification using classifiers from four different classification paradigms: decision trees
(DT), ensemble learning, k-nearest neighbors, and discriminant
classifiers.
C. Experimental Setup
For computation of the RC and gmRC descriptors, texture features are calculated by applying the maximum response (MR8)
filter bank [43] on the grayscale image. Filter-bank-based texture features are quite popular in image analysis applications
for quantifying structural attributes as shown in [44] and [45].
In [43], a variety of filter bank approaches [45]–[48] were compared for the task of texture classification and the MR8 filter
bank was shown to perform best among all competing filter
banks. Many researchers have employed MR8 filter bank in a
variety of histological image analysis applications [49]–[51].
Besides, MR8 filter bank produces a relatively small set of responses which helps us to keep the size of our proposed gmRC
descriptor to a manageable size. A separate investigation may
be carried out to quantify the effects of various filter banks on
the performance of the gmRC descriptor. However, we consider
that investigation to be beyond the scope of this paper.
The MR8 filter bank consists of 38 filters: two isotropic filters
(Gaussian and a Laplacian of Gaussian), an edge filter at three
scales and six orientations, and a bar filter at three scales and six
orientations. At each scale, only the maximum response across
all six orientations of edge and bar filters is measured which
reduces the number of responses from 12 (six responses for
edge filters and six responses for bar filters) to 2 (one response
for edge filter and one response for bar filters). This generates six edge and bar filter responses at three scales. Adding
two isotropic filter responses to this set produces eight filter
responses on the whole.
In order to compute covariance descriptors (both RC and
gmRC), we append L, a, b, and blue ratio3 (BR) intensities along
with the eight texture filter responses to generate a 12 × 12 covariance matrix. The value of σ for GkNN-Stein was determined
empirically (σ = 1) by splitting the training data into training
and validation parts and was kept fixed for the test data. The
number of nearest neighbors are fixed to 5 for both Euclidean
and geodesic nearest neighbor algorithms. In order to perform
256
3 BR = 1 0 0 ×B ×
1+ R + G
1 + B + R + G , where R, G, and B are red, green, and blue
channels of an RGB image.

1642

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Comparative classification accuracy of NA scoring on traditional texture features computed on Aperio (left) and Hamamatsu (right) images using four
different classification paradigms: DT, ensemble learning, nearest neighbors, and discriminant classifiers. The p -values were computed from two-tailed t -test of the
mean difference between results produced by G k NN-Stein and other classifiers. Note that, at significance level 0.01, there was no statistically significant difference
between the classification accuracy of Stein kernel metric and affine/log-Euclidean distance metrics. However, there was statistically significant difference between
results of G k NN-Stein and those of other classical machine learning frameworks on both Aperio and Hamamatsu datasets.

classification on classical machine learning techniques (DT,
RUSBoost, kNN, linear discriminant analysis (LDA), and
quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA)), SPD matrices are
mapped to high-dimensional Euclidean space. This mapping
is also referred to as flattening of the manifold in the literature
[33], [34], [37]. Since SPD matrices are symmetric, therefore
we use n (n2+1) values from upper (or lower) half the matrix
as input feature vectors. A multiclass classification strategy is
employed to learn all pattern classification models.
D. Comparative Results
In order to keep the comparison fair, we compute traditional
texture features on grayscale images as well. For traditional texture LBP features, we compute 59-bin LBP histogram descriptor
which is in line with the number of bins suggested by Heikkila
and Ahonen [52]. For computation of 14 Haralick features, we
use five displacements (1, 2, . . . , 5) and concatenate the 14 descriptors from each displacement to generate a 70-D Haralick
descriptor for each image. In all our experiments, we perform
fivefold cross validation. Moreover, each experiment is repeated
ten times and average accuracies are reported.
Fig. 3 shows the experimental results for NA subtypes classification using the traditional texture and the proposed NA
scoring frameworks, respectively. We observe that classical texture descriptors like LBP and Haralick do not perform well for
the task of NA scoring in breast cancer histopathology images
as compared to RC and gmRC descriptors, even if a mix of
complementary texture features are used in conjunction with a
range of linear and nonlinear machine learning techniques. Both
LBP and Haralick are image-level descriptors, therefore these

descriptors fail to capture the heterogeneity that is distributed
across different regions of the histopathology image. Best performance on traditional texture features was obtained using the
LDA classifier on images from both Aperio and Hamamatsu
scanners. The LDA classifier performed best when a combination of LBP and Haralick features were used. The DT classifier though demonstrated relatively small resubstitution error as
compared to the LDA classifier on traditional texture features,
yet it demonstrated significantly higher cross-validation error.
This shows that the DT classifier may be overfitting which is a
significant practical difficulty for decision tree models.
Worst performance on the traditional texture features was
obtained using RUSBoost. Fig. 1 presents a comparison of the
performance of the three classifiers (DT, RUSBoost, and LDA)
using Haralick features. It can be observed in Table I(b) that
the RUSBoost achieves high sensitivity on minority classes but
at the same time demonstrates significantly lower sensitivity on
the majority class. Due to poor sensitivity on majority class, the
overall performance of RUSBoost is significantly lower than the
rest of the competing machine learning techniques. In contrast,
LDA achieves relatively higher sensitivity on majority class at
the cost of relatively lower sensitivity on minority classes [see
Table I(c)]. DT performs comparable to LDA on majority class,
however it demonstrates relatively lower sensitivity on both
minority classes when compared against LDA [see Table I(a)].
Fig. 3 presents the comparative results of classification accuracy of the RC and gmRC descriptors, when evaluated on a range
of classification platforms. It can be observed that the RC and
gmRC descriptors do not perform well on classical machine
learning techniques (DT, RUSBoost, and k NN) as compared
to GkNN, independent of the distance metric used in GkNN

KHAN et al.: GLOBAL COVARIANCE DESCRIPTOR FOR NUCLEAR ATYPIA SCORING IN BREAST HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGES

1643

TABLE I
CONFUSION MATRICES OBTAINED WHEN HARALICK DESCRIPTOR WAS USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH (A) DT, (B) RUSBOOST, AND (C) LDA CLASSIFIERS

Note that Gk NN classifier does not require training and uses entire training dataset for finding the nearest neighbor. S 1 , S 2 , and S 3
refers to the three NA scores.

TABLE II
(TOP) DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN PATHOLOGISTS ON THREE NA SCORES (S 1 ,
S 2 , S 3 ); (BOTTOM) CONFUSION MATRIX REPRESENTING MISCLASSIFICATIONS
USING OUR PROPOSED ALGORITHM

Fig. 4. Effect of varying patch sizes on the classification performance of the
proposed gmRC descriptor. This was evaluated on a small scale cross-validation
experiment conducted on a subset of training dataset to empirically estimate the
optimum patch size. Note that, patch size of 192 × 192 was used in all the
experiments.

classifier. This is in line with the argument presented in Section II-C that covariance matrices do not form a vector space
and, therefore, are not suitable for classical machine learning
techniques. Since there is no such mapping that can globally
preserve the distance between the points on the manifold after flattening, a classifier trained on the flattened manifold does
not reflect the global structure of the manifold. This essentially
refers to the fact that Euclidean kNN classifier is not appropriate for classification of covariance matrices as it does not take
into account the structure of manifold while finding the nearest
neighbors. Thus, we can conclude that the space of SPD matrices can be best formulated as a connected Riemannian manifold
and, therefore, a classifier which utilities the known structure
of the Riemannian manifold will be a suitable machine learning
paradigm for the RC and gmRC descriptors.
Another important aspect that can be observed from Figs. 3
and 4 is that the regional statistics are more effective in small
neighborhoods as compared to on the whole image where the
heterogeneity in various parts of the image may negatively influence the performance of the descriptor. This can be observed
from the results of the RC descriptor, which is calculated at the
whole image level and does not perform well as compared to
gmRC descriptor which is calculated on subimage level. Regardless of the classification framework used, the performance
of gmRC descriptor is always better than the RC descriptor on
images from both Aperio and Hamamatsu scanners.

In Table II, we present a comparison of disagreement regarding the NA scoring between three expert pathologists (top) and
the proposed system (bottom). It can be observed that misclassification rate of the proposed system for S3 is higher than 30%,
which may seem to be high. However, it is worth noting that the
pathologists exhibit a very similar rate of disagreement (28.8%)
on S3 . This can be attributed to the very challenging nature of
the problem, whereby the boundary between S2 and S3 is not
very well defined and even expert pathologists tend to disagree
about this boundary much more than the boundary between S1
and S2 . The bottom line, however, is that none of the S 3 cases
has been classified as S 1 (a much more serious type of misclassification error) and vice versa, which vindicates the proposed
computational model.
Fig. 5 shows two images which are often mispredicted by
the proposed NA scoring framework. Two expert pathologists
scored the left image in Fig. 5 as NA score-1 and the right
image as NA score-2. However, the proposed system predicts
score-1 for both images. The overall appearance of both images
is quite similar, e.g., the staining characteristics, distribution of
nuclei in the image (formation of nexus of nuclei), appearance
of nuclei, even sizes of nuclei are quite similar in both images,
particularly from a Layman’s perspective. Therefore, one can
appreciate the challenging nature of this NA scoring in breast
cancer histopathology images.

1644

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. Two sample images from MITOS-Atypia dataset scanned using Aperio scanner. Note that the textural attributes of the two images are quite similar,
however image on left is score-1 NA, whereas image on right is score-2 NA, based on the consensus of three expert pathologists.

E. Comparison of the Computational Efficiency
In this section, we present a comparison of the computational
efficiency of various feature descriptors and classifiers used in
this paper. All results are generated on a 12-core Mac Pro with
64 GB RAM using 64-bit MATLAB 2014a. For computation
of the LBP descriptor, we use the implementation provided by
Heikkila and Ahonen.4 For computation of the Haralick descriptor, we use our own MATLAB implementation. For the computation of the gmRC, we use the manopt toolbox for optimization
on manifolds [32]. For classical machine learning techniques
(DT, RUSBoost, kNN, LDA, and QDA), we use MATLAB’s
built-in implementations.
Table III presents the average execution time required by various descriptors and classifiers for NA scoring in breast cancer
histopathology images. In terms of execution time, Haralick and
LBP descriptors, respectively, lie on the high and low ends of
the spectrum, while the RC and gmRC descriptors lie in between. Note that the Haralick descriptor is being computed at
five displacements, which means that time to compute Haralick
descriptor for one displacement should be roughly five times
less. Note also that the time reported for the RC and gmRC descriptors also includes time required to generate and apply the
MR8 filter bank.
Among various classifiers, RUSBoost was found to be most
computationally expensive in terms of training time. However,
we can ignore the time required to train a classifier as the training operation is generally performed off-line and the time incurred is usually not counted toward the execution time of the
algorithm. In terms of evaluation time, again RUSBoost was
found to be computationally most expensive. Among different
distance metrics of GkNN, log-Euclidean and affine-invariant
metrics were found to be computationally demanding. Again,
this is in line with our argument presented in Section II-C that
computation of (4) involves nonlinear Log operator which car4 http://www.cse.oulu.fi/MVG/Research/LBP

ries a nontrivial numerical burden. Similarly, the distance metric
used in affine-invariant GkNN classifier requires calculation of
eigenvalue decomposition to compute the logarithm of symmetric matrix. This is computationally demanding operation which
requires O(n3 ) arithmetic operations. Performing this operation for each data point in training data is significantly time
consuming, not to mention that the execution time will grow
exponentially with the increase in size of the training data.
Stein kernel distance metric, on the other hand, was found
to be computationally most efficient as it requires ≈ 7 ms to
label a test sample on average as compared to ≈ 187 ms using
log-Euclidean metric and ≈ 19 ms using affine-invariant metric.
Thus, Stein kernel provides 26.32× and 2.64× improvement
compared to log-Euclidean and affine-invariant metrics, respectively. This is a significant improvement in computational efficiency. Two-tailed t-tests of the mean differences between the
results given by Stein kernel metric and those produced by
affine-invariant and log-Euclidean metrics are carried out. At
significance level 0.01, the tests indicate no statistically significance difference between the classification accuracy of Stein
kernel metric and the other metrics. Adaptation of more advanced data structures like the k-d trees [53] may help to further
reduce the nearest neighbor retrieval cost. However, in order to
utilize k-d trees data structure in its current form, manifold flattening will have to be performed, which in the light of argument
presented in Section III-D, may not be a very sensible choice to
make.
F. Effect of Preprocessing on the Performance on the
Proposed Framework
In this experiment, we added an extra layer of preprocessing
in the proposed NA scoring framework to assess if performing
preprocessing steps, stain normalization [21], and tumor segmentation [22], improve the performance of the proposed NA
scoring framework. For this purpose, we manually selected an
image from dataset and stain normalized all the images with

KHAN et al.: GLOBAL COVARIANCE DESCRIPTOR FOR NUCLEAR ATYPIA SCORING IN BREAST HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGES

1645

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY OF VARIOUS DESCRIPTORS AND CLASSIFIERS USED FOR NA SCORING

Time (in seconds) for computing a particular descriptor on an image is reported in the table on the left, whereas time for classifying a
test image is reported in the table on the right. All experiments were executed ten times and the average of ten runs is reported in this
table. Computations are performed on a 12-core Mac Pro with 64 GB DDR3 RAM using 64-bit MATLAB 2014a.

respect to this reference image. For stain normalization, we
used [21] with default parameters. Tumor segmentation [22]
was then performed on stain normalized images using default
set of parameters. Nontumor areas were ignored while calculating the RC descriptor. Only the windows, with more than
50% of tumor regions, were used for calculating the gmRC
descriptor. It is worth mentioning that the tumor segmentation
algorithm [22] was developed on 40× images. The same algorithm, without any further parameter retuning was utilized on
20× images. Unlike the MITOS dataset, where we had ground
truth-marked tumor regions in each HPF, we did not have ground
truth markings for the MITOS-Atypia images. Therefore, we did
not quantitatively evaluate the performance of our tumor segmentation algorithm on MITOS-Atypia images. After manual
evaluation by Khan and Sirinukunwattana, approximately 20%
of segmentations were dropped as the tumor segmentation algorithm seemed to fail completely on those images. For those
images, whole image was considered as tumorous and no stromal masking was performed. It should be noted that these image
were a typical example of autolytic artifacts which appear if the
image is not fixed properly. Vesicular regions (white artifacts)
make the appearance of various structures present in such a
tissue not suitable for automated analysis using [22].
Table IV(a) and (b) presents the results of NA scoring before
and after performing preprocessing on the Aperio and Hamamatsu images, respectively. It can be observed that preprocessing helps to marginally improve the classification accuracy of
almost all competing methods in Table IV(a) and (b). The maximum improvement of 3.02% was seen in the case of RUSBoost classifier with RC descriptor on Aperio images. With
the gmRC descriptor, maximum improvement was seen in the
case of log-Euclidean GkNN on Hamamatsu images, where the
overall improvement was 2.02%. The main reason for marginal
improvement in performance can be attributed to the holistic
nature of the proposed solution. As the descriptor is computed
on the whole image, the color variation is not making significant
impact on the classification performance of the proposed system. Similarly, the texture features in stromal regions may also
be of interest for classification, as argued in [54], and therefore,

TABLE IV
EFFECT OF PREPROCESSING STEPS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF NA SCORING
FRAMEWORK ON (A) APERIO AND (B) HAMAMATSU IMAGES

Mean accuracies are reported. Best result is shown in bold. No-PP means no postprocessing and PP means postprocessing.

their removal from the calculation of image descriptor may not
be adding significant improvement to the classification framework.
G. Evaluation of the Proposed Framework on Two
Unseen Datasets
In this experiment, we evaluate the proposed framework using training and test dataset from different patients ( strong
cross validation). Dataset described above in Section III-A is
used for training and an independent dataset obtained from
five unseen patients (124 images at 20× magnification) is used
for evaluation. The training and test datasets are a part of the

1646

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2015

cancer. They would also like to thank the organizers of the
MITOS-ATYPIA 2014 challenge contest, especially L. Roux
and D. Racoceanu, for their organization of the contest whose
dataset was used in this paper.

REFERENCES

Fig. 6. Comparison of performance scores for various NA scoring algorithms
on Aperio and Hamamatsu datasets according to the MITOS-ATYPIA 2014
contest criterion. Our results are shown as Warwick.

MITOS-ATYPIA 2014 contest. The evaluation criterion used in
this experiment is similar to the one used during the contest, i.e.,
a correct prediction is given a score of +1, an incorrect prediction is given a score of 0 if the absolute difference between the
predicted NA grade and the ground truth is 1, and an incorrect
prediction is given a score of −1 score when the absolute difference between the predicted NA score and the ground truth is 2.
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed NA
scoring framework on unseen dataset, we selected the model
that performed best in our cross-validation experiments (see
Section III-D). See Fig. 6 for the results of competing algorithms
in the contest. Note that these results are reproduced here from
the contest website5 with permission of the contest organizers.
It shows that our algorithm can yield the highest classification
accuracy as compared to all other competing algorithms for this
dataset.
IV. CONCLUSION
We presented the generalized geometric mean of RC descriptor as an image-level descriptor along with the GkNN classifier
for NA scoring in breast cancer histopathology images. Extracting RC descriptors locally allows better representation of
regional heterogeneity in histopathology images. Generalized
geometric mean offers an effective way of aggregating multiple
regional descriptors. GkNN was utilized to perform classification. Various distance metrics for computing geodesic distance
were evaluated. The Stein kernel distance metric was found to
be computationally the most efficient as compared to affineinvariant and log-Euclidean metrics, without compromising the
classification accuracy. Experimental results demonstrated that
the proposed geodesic mean of RC descriptor outperforms the
standard RC descriptor and other conventional textural descriptors for NA scoring in breast cancer histological images.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. N. Chachlani for several
useful discussions on the problem of nuclear atypia in breast
5 http://mitos-atypia-14.grand-challenge.org/results2/

[1] C. W. Elston and I. O. Ellis, “Pathological prognostic factors in breast
cancer. I. The value of histological grade in breast cancer: Experience
from a large study with long-term follow-up,” Histopathology, vol. 19,
no. 5, pp. 403–410, 1991.
[2] A. M. Khan, A. F. Mohammed, S. A. Al-Hajri, H. M. A. Shamari,
U. Qidwai, I. Mujeeb, and N. M. Rajpoot, “A novel system for scoring of hormone receptors in breast cancer histopathology slides,” in Proc.
IEEE 2nd Middle East Conf. Biomed. Eng., 2014, pp. 155–158.
[3] A. Khan, “Algorithms for breast cancer grading in digital histopathology
images,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Warwick, Coventry,
U.K., 2014.
[4] A. M. Khan, H. ElDaly, and N. Rajput, “A Gamma-Gaussian mixture
model for detection of mitotic cells in breast cancer histopathology images,” J. Pathol. Informat., vol. 4, no. 11, 2013.
[5] M. Veta, P. J. V. Diest, S. M. Willems, H. Wang, A. Madabhushi,
A. Cruz-Roa, F. Gonzalez, A. B. L. Larsen, J. S. Vestergaard, A. B. Dahl,
D. C. Cirean, J. Schmidhuber, A. Giusti, L. M. Gambardella, F. B. Tek,
T. Walter, C.-W. Wang, S. Kondo, B. J. Matuszewski, F. Precioso, V. Snell,
J. Kittler, T. E. de Campos, A. M. Khan, N. M. Rajpoot, E. Arkoumani,
M. M. Lacle, M. A. Viergever, and J. P. Pluim, “Assessment of algorithms
for mitosis detection in breast cancer histopathology images,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 20, pp. 237–248, 2014.
[6] H. Irshad, “Automated mitosis detection in histopathology using morphological and multi-channel statistics features,” J. Pathol. Informat., vol. 4,
2013.
[7] D. C. Cireşan, A. Giusti, L. M. Gambardella, and J. Schmidhuber, “Mitosis
detection in breast cancer histology images with deep neural networks,”
in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2013,
pp. 411–418.
[8] K. Sirinukunwattana, A. M. Khan, and N. M. Rajpoot, “Cell Words: Modelling the visual appearance of cells in histopathology images,” Comput.
Med. Imag. Graph., vol. 42, pp. 16–24, 2014.
[9] N. A. Aloraidi, K. Sirinukunwattana, A. M. Khan, and N. M. Rajpoot, “On
generating cell exemplars for detection of mitotic cells in breast cancer
histopathology images,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., 2014, pp. 3370–3373.
[10] E. Cosatto, M. Miller, H. P. Graf, and J. S. Meyer, “Grading nuclear
pleomorphism on histological micrographs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern
Recog., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[11] J.-R. Dalle, H. Li, C.-H. Huang, W. K. Leow, D. Racoceanu, and
T. C. Putti, “Nuclear pleomorphism scoring by selective cell nuclei detection,” presented at the IEEE Workshop Applied Computing, Visualization,
Snowbird, UT, USA, 2009.
[12] H. Irshad, A. Veillard, L. Roux, and D. Racoceanu, “Methods for nuclei
detection, segmentation and classification in digital histopathology: A
review. Current status and future potential,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 7, pp. 97–114, Apr. 2014.
[13] L. Roux, F. Capron, J. Calvo, E. Attieh, G. Le Naour, A. Gloaguen, and
D. A. Racoceanu. (2014, Dec. 21). MITOS & ATYPIA 14 Contest.
[Online]. Available: http://mitos-atypia-14.grand-challenge.org/
[14] A. M. Khan, K. Sirinukunwattana, and N. Rajpoot, “Geodesic geometric
mean of regional covariance descriptors as an image-level descriptor for
nuclear atypia grading in breast histology images,” in Proc. Mach. Learn.
Med. Imag., 2014, pp. 101–108.
[15] R. M. Haralick, K. Shanmugam, and I. H. Dinstein, “Textural features for
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern., vol. SMC-3, no. 6,
pp. 610–621, Nov. 1973.
[16] T. Ojala, M. Pietikainen, and T. Maenpaa, “Multiresolution gray-scale and
rotation invariant texture classification with local binary patterns,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 971–987, Jul. 2002.
[17] J. G. Daugman, “Uncertainty relation for resolution in space, spatial frequency, and orientation optimized by two-dimensional visual cortical filters,” J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, vol. 2, pp. 1160–1169, 1985.
[18] O. Tuzel, F. Porikli, and P. Meer, “Region covariance: A fast descriptor
for detection and classification,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2006,
pp. 589–600.

KHAN et al.: GLOBAL COVARIANCE DESCRIPTOR FOR NUCLEAR ATYPIA SCORING IN BREAST HISTOPATHOLOGY IMAGES

[19] M. Allinen, R. Beroukhim, L. Cai, C. Brennan, J. Lahti-Domenici,
H. Huang, D. Porter, M. Hu, L. Chin, A. Richardson, S. Schnitt,
W. R. Sellers, and K. Polyak, “Molecular characterization of the tumor
microenvironment in breast cancer,” Cancer Cell, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 17–32,
2004.
[20] X. Pennec, P. Fillard, and N. Ayache, “A Riemannian framework for tensor
computing,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 41–66, 2006.
[21] A. M. Khan, N. Rajpoot, D. Treanor, and D. Magee, “A non-linear mapping approach to stain normalisation in digital histopathology images
using image-specific colour deconvolution,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1729–1738, Jun. 2014.
[22] A. M. Khan, H. El-Daly, E. Simmons, and N. M. Rajpoot, “HyMaP: A
hybrid magnitude-phase approach to unsupervised segmentation of tumor
areas in breast cancer histology images,” J. Pathol. Informat., vol. 4, no.
2, pp. 1–7, 2013.
[23] A. M. Khan, H. El-Daly, and N. Rajpoot, “RanPEC: Random projections with ensemble clustering for segmentation of tumor areas in breast
histology images,” in Proc. Med. Image Understanding Anal., 2012,
pp. 17–23.
[24] H. Qin, L. Qin, L. Xue, and C. Yu, “Gabor-based weighted region covariance matrix for face recognition,” Electron. Lett., vol. 48, no. 16,
pp. 992–993, 2012.
[25] O. Tuzel, F. Porikli, and P. Meer, “Pedestfrian detection via classification on Riemannian manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1713–1727, Oct. 2008.
[26] F. Porikli, O. Tuzel, and P. Meer, “Covariance tracking using model update
based on Lie algebra,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recog., 2006, vol. 1, pp. 728–735.
[27] R. Sivalingam, D. Boley, V. Morellas, and N. Papanikolopoulos, “Tensor
sparse coding for region covariances,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2010, pp. 722–735.
[28] F. Keskin, A. Suhre, K. Kose, T. Ersahin, A. E. Cetin, and R. CetinAtalay, “Image classification of human carcinoma cells using complex
wavelet-based covariance descriptors,” PloS One, vol. 8, no. 1, p. e52807,
2013.
[29] S. Paisitkriangkrai, C. Shen, and J. Zhang, “Fast pedestrian detection using
a cascade of boosted covariance features,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video
Technol., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1140–1151, Aug. 2008.
[30] B. Marte, A. Eccleston, and D. Nath, “Molecular cancer diagnostics,”
Nature, vol. 452, no. 7187, pp. 547–547, 2008.
[31] H. Karcher, “Riemannian center of mass and mollifier smoothing,” Commun. Pure Appl. Math., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 509–541, 1977.
[32] N. Boumal, B. Mishra, P.-A. Absil, and R. Sepulchre, “Manopt, a Matlab
toolbox for optimization on manifolds,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15,
pp. 1455–1459, 2013.
[33] V. Arsigny, P. Fillard, X. Pennec, and N. Ayache, “Geometric means in
a novel vector space structure on symmetric positive-definite matrices,”
SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 328–347, 2007.
[34] S. Jayasumana, R. Hartley, M. Salzmann, H. Li, and M. Harandi, “Kernel methods on the Riemannian manifold of symmetric positive definite
matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2013,
pp. 73–80.
[35] R. Bhatia, Positive Definite Matrices. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton Univ.
Press, 2009.
[36] N. Boumal and P.-A. Absil, “A discrete regression method on manifolds
and its application to data on SO(n),” in Proc. 18th IFAC World Cong.,
2011, vol. 18, pp. 2284–2289.
[37] S. Sra, “A new metric on the manifold of kernel matrices with application
to matrix geometric means,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst.,
2012, pp. 144–152.

1647

[38] L. Roux, D. Racoceanu, N. Loménie, M. Kulikova, H. Irshad, J. Klossa,
F. Capron, C. Genestie, G. Le Naour, and M. Gurcan, “Mitosis detection
in breast cancer histological images,” J. Pathol. Informat., vol. 4, no. 8,
pp. 2–8, 2013.
[39] S. Liao and A. C. Chung, “Texture classification by using advanced
local binary patterns and spatial distribution of dominant patterns,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2007, vol. 1,
pp. 1221–1224.
[40] A. Vedaldi, V. Gulshan, M. Varma, and A. Zisserman, “Multiple kernels
for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2009,
pp. 606–613.
[41] A. Porebski, N. Vandenbroucke, and L. Macaire, “Haralick feature extraction from LBP images for color texture classification,” in Proc. IEEE 1st
Workshop Image Process. Theory, Tools Appl., 2008, pp. 1–8.
[42] J. Kong, O. Sertel, H. Shimada, K. L. Boyer, J. H. Saltz, and M. N. Gurcan,
“Computer-aided evaluation of neuroblastoma on whole-slide histology
images: Classifying grade of neuroblastic differentiation,” Pattern Recog.,
vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1080–1092, 2009.
[43] M. Varma and A. Zisserman, “A statistical approach to texture classification from single images,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 62, nos. 1/2, pp. 61–81,
2005.
[44] M. Varma and A. Zisserman, “Texture classification: Are filter banks
necessary?” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2003, vol.
2, pp. 691–698.
[45] M. Varma and A. Zisserman, “Classifying images of materials: Achieving
viewpoint and illumination independence,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2002, pp. 255–271.
[46] T. Leung and J. Malik, “Representing and recognizing the visual appearance of materials using three-dimensional textons,” Int. J. Comput. Vis.,
vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 29–44, 2001.
[47] C. Schmid, “Constructing models for content-based image retrieval,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2001, vol. 2,
pp. II-39–II-45.
[48] O. G. Cula and K. J. Dana, “3d texture recognition using bidirectional
feature histograms,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 33–60, 2004.
[49] A. N. Basavanhally, S. Ganesan, S. Agner, J. P. Monaco, M. D. Feldman,
J. E. Tomaszewski, G. Bhanot, and A. Madabhushi, “Computerized
image-based detection and grading of lymphocytic infiltration in HER2+
breast cancer histopathology,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 642–653, Mar. 2010.
[50] M. Veta, P. van Diest, and J. Pluim, “Detecting mitotic figures in breast cancer histopathology images,” Proc. SPIE Med. Imag. vol. 8676, p. 867 607,
2013.
[51] J. Galaro, A. Judkins, D. Ellison, J. Baccon, and A. Madabhushi, “An
integrated texton and bag of words classifier for identifying anaplastic
medulloblastomas,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011,
pp. 3443–3446.
[52] T. Ahonen, A. Hadid, and M. Pietikäinen, “Face recognition with local
binary patterns,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2004, pp. 469–481.
[53] J. L. Bentley, “K-D trees for semidynamic point sets,” in Proc. 6th Annu.
Symp. Comput. Geom., 1990, pp. 187–197.
[54] A. H. Beck, A. R. Sangoi, S. Leung, R. J. Marinelli, T. O. Nielsen,
M. J. van de Vijver, R. B. West, M. van de Rijn, and D. Koller, “Systematic
analysis of breast cancer morphology uncovers stromal features associated
with survival,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 3, no. 108, pp. 108ra113, 2011.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

