IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

2709

An Automated Method for Landmark Identification
and Finite-Element Modeling of the Lumbar Spine
Julius Quinn Campbell∗ and Anthony J. Petrella

Abstract—Goal: The purpose of this study was to develop a
method for the automated creation of finite-element models of the
lumbar spine. Methods: Custom scripts were written to extract
bone landmarks of lumbar vertebrae and assemble L1–L5 finiteelement models. End-plate borders, ligament attachment points,
and facet surfaces were identified. Landmarks were identified to
maintain mesh correspondence between meshes for later use in
statistical shape modeling. Results: 90 lumbar vertebrae were processed creating 18 subject-specific finite-element models. Finiteelement model surfaces and ligament attachment points were reproduced within 1e-5 mm of the bone surface, including the critical
contact surfaces of the facets. Element quality exceeded specifications in 97% of elements for the 18 models created. Conclusion:
The current method is capable of producing subject-specific finiteelement models of the lumbar spine with good accuracy, quality,
and robustness. Significance: The automated methods developed
represent advancement in the state of the art of subject-specific
lumbar spine modeling to a scale not possible with prior manual
and semiautomated methods.
Index Terms—Automation, finite-elements, lumbar spine
subject-specific.

I. INTRODUCTION
UBJECT-SPECIFIC and probabilistic finite-element (FE)
models have a variety of clinical and research applications.
Lumbar spine applications include preclinical evaluation of new
devices, planning and evaluation of surgical procedures (e.g., fusion, discectomy, total disc replacement), studies of disc biomechanics and degeneration, prediction of hard and soft tissue
mechanics during activities of daily living, and analysis of the
biomechanical impact of anatomical variations (e.g., disc height,
facet orientation, cartilage thickness, annulus fiber orientation).
In spite of strong motivation for the use of these modeling methods in such a long list of compelling applications, the complexity of model generation remains an obstacle. In a recent review,
Sarkalkan et al. [1] noted that “only a limited number of such FE
models can be generated, because the process of generating individualized FE models involves several laborious and complex
steps that cannot be easily automated.” The development of automated methods for creating such models is the topic of this paper.

S

Manuscript received February 26, 2015; revised May 21, 2015 and June 8,
2015; accepted June 9, 2015. Date of publication June 11, 2015; date of current
version October 16, 2015. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National
Science Foundation under Grant 846845. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. Q. Campbell is with the Computational Biomechanics Group, Colorado
School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401 USA (e-mail: jucampbe@minesedu).
A. J. Petrella is with the Computational Biomechanics Group, Colorado
School of Mines.
This paper contains supplemental materials available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size 8 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2444811

Several subject-specific models have been created for the
lumbar spine [2]–[5], but the complex shape of lumbar vertebrae makes them tedious to mesh manually in large numbers.
Dai et al. [5] reported a semiautomated method for lumbar FE
mesh creation and Lalonde et al. [2] described a method based
on Kriging, but both approaches require substantial manual intervention and are not easily scaled to numerous specimens. Additionally, we are not aware of any published method for the generation of lumbar spine FE models that strictly enforces feature
correspondence across specimens (e.g., same node # in same
anatomical position for every specimen). Such a method is necessary for the creation of a statistical shape model (SSM), which
facilitates probabilistic variation of anatomical shape across a
virtual (FE) population of specimens [6]–[8].
To date, most probabilistic models of the lumbar spine have
evaluated variation in implant placement/alignment or material properties, since these parameters are easily accessible.
Niemeyer et al. [9] examined anatomical variation in the L3–L4
functional spinal unit by constructing the model with geometric
primitives, which are easily parameterized but lack fidelity to
the natural geometry of the spine. The authors are not aware
of a study reporting the use of an SSM to represent a normal
variation in anatomical shape using high-fidelity FE models of
the lumbar vertebrae.
It is true for both subject-specific and probabilistic FE models
of the lumbar spine that automation is a key to their effective
application, and they present similar technical challenges in this
context. One of the most difficult tasks in the automatic model
generation lies in fitting a template model to the geometry of
a new specimen. There are also many different hard and soft
tissue structures that must be properly placed relative to each
other in the overall FE mesh. These tasks typically rely on the
use of a set of landmarks that identify important features of the
geometry. A rich set of landmarks facilitates various options
for morphing template geometry, and makes it much easier to
define soft tissue attachments and contact surfaces. Although
subject-specific models can be created independently with different meshing and landmark identification strategies used for
each specimen, a consistent automated method offers the potential of substantial time savings. Also, probabilistic FE models
based on an SSM require the use of a consistent reliable method
for the landmark detection in order to ensure correspondence of
landmark points across specimens used to form a training set.
Many studies have examined this problem of landmark identification and correspondence, especially in the context of SSM
creation. Several global methods have been developed to register points from a template to a target specimen. However, global
methods do not strictly account for local variations in geometry, and final evaluation of landmark correspondence is difficult

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

[10]. Some correspondence methods have been evaluated by
comparing automated methods to manual landmark selection
or known points on simple shapes [11]–[14]. Manual methods
have been used for some SSMs, but for large point sets or 3-D
shapes the reliability and repeatability of these methods is poor
[11]. We posit that the ideal method for establishing landmark
correspondence is to use an automated approach to identify
landmark points based on a mixture of global and local geometry interrogation. Most published SSMs of bones use different
custom methods with varying levels of automation to enforce
point correspondence [1], [15]–[22].
In the lumbar spine, several studies have attempted to establish repeatable methods of identifying specific landmarks.
Sugisaki et al. [23] developed a method to automatically identify
lumbar pedicle centers. Otsuka et al. [24] developed a method
to automatically identify facet surfaces and Simon et al. [25]
used that method to measure facet joint spacing. Peloquin et al.
[26] developed an SSM of the L3–L4 intervertebral disc. Rasoulian et al. [21] developed a method of creating SSMs using
automated segmentation for the L2 vertebra and later developed
what they stated was the first SSM of the L1–L5 lumbar spine
[27]. The Rasoulian SSM was intended for clinical use, which
typically implies lesser requirements for mesh resolution and/or
accuracy, so it is unknown if the model is suitable for probabilistic FE modeling of lumbar spine biomechanics. Ibragimov
et al. [28] and Korez et al. [29] also published automated segmentation methods for the lumbar spine but have not applied
their methods to FE modeling.
The goals of this study were to develop and evaluate an automated process for the construction of subject-specific FE models
of the lumbar spine. A method for the automated landmark identification was developed to ensure node correspondence across
FE meshes of multiple specimens in order to facilitate later
SSM creation and probabilistic analysis including anatomical
shape variation. The automated algorithm was designed to accept L1–L5 bone geometry segmented from CT scans, and produce subject-specific FE models with no manual intervention.
The algorithm was evaluated for the geometric accuracy around
critical FE features, such as soft tissue attachments and facet
contact surfaces, it was tested for robustness over a range of
different lumbar shapes, sizes, and levels (i.e., L1–L5), and it
was evaluated for standard element quality metrics. The planned
workflow is shown in Fig. 1.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. FE Model Details
The proposed method for developing subject-specific and
probabilistic FE models of the lumbar spine was intended to
be relatively general so that it can be adapted to different model
applications, mesh topologies, element formulations, and FE
codes. Due to the large number of models that can be created
with this automated method, a highly efficient model was desirable to reduce run times. For this reason, the initial version
of the automated method has been designed to create relatively
simple and efficient FE models with rigid bones, rigid endplates,
and ligaments meshed with 1-D structural elements. While these

Fig. 1.

Subject-specific FE model work flow.

Fig. 2. Subject-specific FE model showing the supraspinous ligament (SSL),
interspinous ligament (ISL), inter-transverse ligament (ITL), posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL) and anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL).

models are certainly not appropriate for all applications, similar
FE models have been published and validated for situations with
relatively low loads [30]–[34].
A subject-specific FE model of the lumbar spine was identified and adapted for use as a template FE model for this study
[32] (see Fig. 2). The FE model was created for Abaqus/Expicit
(Simulia, Providence, RI, USA) and represents the full human
lumbar spine L1–L5. The model uses rigid shell elements for
the bones (7470 elements per bone) and deformable hexagonal
elements for the annulus fibrosis of the discs (3108 elements
per disc). The nucleus pulposus is represented with a fluid-filled
cavity using quadrilateral shell elements (2154 elements per
disc). The facet cartilage is modeled with hexagonal elements
that are defined as rigid, using a frictionless contact defined by
a pressure-overclosure relationship [32], [35] (864 elements for
each section of superior cartilage and 336 elements for each section of inferior cartilage). The ligamentum flavum, suprapinous,
interspinous, and intertransverse ligaments are represented using parallel sets of nonlinear and tension-only connector elements. The anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL) and posterior
longitudinal ligament (PLL) are represented with sets of nonlinear and tension-only connector elements in series and parallel.
The ligament endpoints, superior, and inferior surfaces of the
discs, and interior surface of the cartilage elements are all rigidly
fixed to the bones where they attach.

CAMPBELL AND PETRELLA: AUTOMATED METHOD FOR LANDMARK IDENTIFICATION AND FINITE-ELEMENT MODELING

2711

Fig. 3. Initial vertebra orientation. Anterior-posterior (A-P), medial-lateral
(M-L), Superior (S).

B. Automated Landmark-Identification Method
The automated landmark-identification method was developed using a custom MATLAB script (The Mathworks, Inc.,
Natick, MA, USA). The script was original with the exception
of a few publically available modules [36]–[39]. The purpose
of the program was to accept as input the segmented CT geometry of each bone in a lumbar spine specimen, and identify all
necessary landmarks for creation of a subject-specific FE model
using the FE architecture described above: all ligament attachment points, endplate and spinous process borders, and facet
contact surfaces. The same program was used for each lumbar
vertebra (L1–L5). The program takes approximately 15 min to
run for each bone (75 min for L1–L5).
The automated landmark identification method consists of
nine steps: 1) Initial orientation, 2) Endplate borders, 3) Pedicle
isthmuses, 4) ISB reference frame, 5) Intertransverse ligament
insertions, 6) Ligamentum flavum insertions, 7) Facet surfaces,
8) Spinous process, 9) Supraspinous and interspinous ligament
insertions. Each step is briefly described below. A video showing
an example of the landmark identification method can be found
among the online supplementary materials.
1) Initial Orientation: The program begins by determining
the basic orientation of the vertebra bone (see Fig. 3). Four cross
sections were taken using the points furthest from the centroid
of the bone. The vertebral body was identified by the area of its
cross section and used to define the general anterior–posterior
(A–P) direction. Similarly, the relatively small areas of the transverse process sections were used to define the medial–lateral
(M–L) direction. The general superior–inferior (S–I) direction
was determined by the cross product of the A–P and M–L vectors. The superior (S) direction was determined by comparing
the centroid of the vertebral body to the most inferior point on
the spinous process cross section (see Fig. 3 right).
2) Endplate Borders: The endplate borders are identified to
help position the discs, and the ALL and PLL ligaments. The
borders are found based on the slope of the bone surface relative
to the superior axis (S). An average slope is used to smooth-out
local irregularities in the bones. Points are identified every 1 mm
around the perimeter of the endplate. Points near the pedicles
on the superior endplate are skipped because the slope is often
too flat to identify a border in that region. Once the endplate
borders have been identified, the points are resampled to place
a consistent number of uniformly spaced landmarks for every
specimen, enabling correspondence (see Fig. 4).

Fig. 4. Vertebra demonstrating the (a) ISB reference frame, (b) intertransverse ligament insertions, (c) the superior ligamentum flavum ligament
insertions, (d) vector connecting the centers of the left and right pedicle isthmuses. (points red, resampled points blue, ligament insertions green, section
cuts green).

3) Pedicle Isthmuses: The isthmuses of the left and right
pedicles are identified to construct the International Society
of Biomechanics (ISB)-recommended reference frame [40] for
each vertebra. The isthmus of each pedicle is identified by determining the narrowest part of the pedicle, following the method
described by Sugisaki et al. [23].
4) ISB-Recommended Reference Frame: The ISB reference
frame for the vertebra is defined for each bone [see Fig. 4(a)].
The S–I axis is defined through the center points of the two
endplates. The A–P axis is defined based on the cross product
of the S–I axis and the vector from the center of the left pedicle
isthmus to the center of the right pedicle isthmus [see Fig. 4(d)].
Finally, the M–L axis is defined based on the cross product of
the A–P and S–I axes, creating an orthonormal reference frame.
5) Intertransverse Ligament Insertions: In the FE model,
the intertransverse ligaments are defined by two connector
elements above and two connector elements below the transverse process on each side of the vertebra. Therefore, four attachment points are needed on each transverse process. The four
insertion points are identified at a 45° angle from the tip of the
transverse process.
6) Ligamentum Flavum Insertions: The ligamentum flavum
runs along the posterior surface of the vertebral foramen and is
defined in the FE model using three connector elements. The
three superior attachments are uniformly spaced along the rim
of the vertebral foramen [see Fig. 4(c)]. The inferior insertions
of the ligamentum flavum are located at the base of the vertebral

2712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 6. Spinous process (points red/yellow, resampled points blue); suprapinsous and interspinous ligament insertions (green).

Fig. 5.

Superior facet surface (points red, resampled points blue, mesh yellow).

are defined by uniformly distributing them along the posterior
portions of the superior and inferior central ridges of the spinous
process.
foramen where the concave shape of the lamina transforms into
the convex shape of the spinous process.
7) Facet Surfaces: Contact surfaces are defined on the facets
in the FE model, necessitating identification of complete surfaces for all facet interactions. First, the border of each facet
surface is identified based on the average slope of the bone surface relative to the general facet orientation. Points are identified
along the facet border at 1-mm increments. The points are then
resampled to ensure correspondence. The surface of the facet is
identified using a custom meshing script based on constrained
optimization that adjusts mesh nodes to be uniformly distributed
and projected to the facet surface (see Fig. 5).
8) Spinous Process: The borders of the spinous process are
identified starting on the inferior/anterior aspect and locating
points at 1-mm increments around the process. The left and right
lateral border points are identified, where the plane tangent to
the bone surface makes a 45° angle relative to the sagittal plane.
A central ridge is identified on the bone, equidistant from the
left and right lateral border points (see Fig. 6). The border is split
into three sections: inferior, posterior, and superior. The border
points are resampled in each of the three sections. Finally, the
central ridge of the spinous process is extended anteriorly to
connect to the center insertion points of the ligamentum flavum.
9) Supraspinous and Interspinous Ligament Insertions:
One connector element is used to define each level of the
supraspinous ligament. The insertion point for the supraspinous
ligament is defined as the most posterior point along the central
ridge of the spinous process. This allows the superior and inferior aspects of the ligament to connect at the same point making
the supraspinous ligament continuous along the posterior surface of the spine, as it is in vivo. Five connector elements are
used to define each level of the interspinous ligament in the FE
model. The five insertion points for the interspinous ligament

C. Automated Subject-Specific and Probabilistic FE Assembly
The assembly of the FE model based on the automated landmark identification method involves two main steps. The first
step involves morphing a template mesh for the visualization of
a continuous bone surface connecting the landmarks and surfaces that have been identified. Second, the soft tissues including
the discs, cartilage, and ligaments are created. The code for assembly of a full L1–L5 FE model takes approximately 15 min
to run.
1) Mesh Morphing: A custom script was used to morph a
template FE mesh of a generic vertebra to the subject-specific
landmarks identified in the previous section [41]. The morphed
bone surface is rigid in the FE model, does not affect the position
of any landmarks, and is used purely for visualization.
2) Intervertebral Disc, ALL, and PLL Placement: The intervertebral discs are placed between the endplates based on the
scanned alignment. The anterior ALL and PLL are also moved
to the endplates the same way as the disc. First, a plane is fit
to each endplate that captures the A–P and M–L extents of the
endplate, as well as the orientation of a plane fit to the endplate
border. A template disc is used with planar superior and inferior
surfaces allowing them to be fit to the respective endplates. The
surfaces of the disc are scaled in the A–P and M–L directions to
fit the end plates, but the shape is not directly fit to the border of
the endplates to preserve element quality. The disc and ligament
nodes between the endplate surfaces are interpolated to form a
continuous transition between the endplates.
3) Cartilage Definition: The facet surfaces are used to define
the elements of the cartilage in the FE model. The actual location
and thickness of the cartilage cannot be determined from the CT
scan, therefore, it must be approximated from the facet surface

CAMPBELL AND PETRELLA: AUTOMATED METHOD FOR LANDMARK IDENTIFICATION AND FINITE-ELEMENT MODELING

2713

TABLE I
ELEMENT QUALITY METRICS FOR ALL 18 FULL LUMBAR SUBJECT-SPECIFIC
AUTOMATED FE MODELS
% elements
(worst)
Disc
Cartilage

Warpage
> 50

Aspect
>5

Skewness
< 0.6

Jacobian
< 0.7

Min Angle
< 20°

Max Angle
> 160°

0%
(24.1)
0.4%
(148)

0.01%
(5.7)
0.08%
(9.2)

1%
(0.88)
3%
(0.87)

0.03%
(0.67)
1%
(0.36)

0.1%
(16.2)
0.08%
(12.5)

0.1%
(164.0)
0.2%
(168.0)

of the bone. The thickness and taper of lumbar facet cartilage
surfaces have been measured experimentally and equations have
been defined to capture the behavior [42]. Lumbar facet cartilage was found to be thickest near the center and taper to zero at
the edges of the facet joint. In this study, the cartilage surfaces
comprising a single joint are defined simultaneously. First, centers of the facet contact surfaces are defined based on the center
of the overlap between the two surfaces. Next, a sphere is fit to
the facet surface to define the normal directions for extrusion
of the cartilage surface. The cartilage surface is extruded and
tapered based on the cartilage thickness equations referenced
above. Then, the gap between the two facet surfaces is evaluated and adjusted to ensure no initial penetration. However, if
there is no initial penetration, the gap is left as it is allowing
each specimen to have a different gap based on its geometry.
Finally, three layers of hexagonal elements are extruded away
from the facet surface a thickness of 2 mm.
4) Ligament Definitions: The capsular ligaments are defined
using three connector elements for each facet joint in the FE
model. Three nodes near the center of the interior surface of the
cartilage were used as the insertions for the capsular ligaments.
The remaining ligaments in the model were attached directly
between respective insertion points found during the landmark
identification process.
D. Evaluation
The processes for automated landmark identification and FE
model assembly have been evaluated for accuracy, quality, and
robustness based on the results from 18 full-lumbar specimens.
One important factor in the subject-specific FE modeling is that
how close the geometry of the FE model conforms to the actual
specimen. To evaluate accuracy, ligament insertion sites, and
all border and surface points were evaluated based on their Euclidian distance to the CT scan bone surfaces. Also, a potential
problem in fitting FE models to a subject-specific geometry is
the creation of distorted elements. The elements of the discs and
cartilage were evaluated for standard FE quality metrics. Each
hexagonal element was evaluated in Hypermesh (Altair Engineering, Troy, MI, USA) for warpage, aspect ratio, skewnesss,
jacobian, minimum angle, and maximum angle. The threshold
criteria for the mesh quality metrics (see Table I) were determined based on experience and a comparison to other spine FE
models in the literatures [2], [5], [32], and [43]. For robustness,
the automated methods were used on 90 bones, 18 full-lumbar

Fig. 7. Examples of the results from the automated landmark identification
method for seven specimens in order from L1 (top) to L5 (bottom).

specimens, to determine how they function on a variety of bone
sizes and shapes.
III. RESULTS
A. Accuracy
To evaluate accuracy, ligament insertion sites, and all border
and surface points were evaluated based on their distance to
the source bone surface. All such points were located on the
surface of the source bone (Euclidian node to surface distance
<1e-5 mm).
B. Quality
Element quality was evaluated using established guidelines
(see Table I). The mesh quality metrics are shown for the 18
automatically created subject-specific FE models. The metrics
are reported separately for the disc and cartilage parts.
C. Robustness
The feature extraction method was used on 90 bones from
18 full-lumbar specimens. The algorithm executed reliably on
a variety of bone sizes and shapes including both healthy and
degenerated specimens (see Figs. 7 and 8).
IV. DISCUSSION
An automated method has been developed to extract landmarks of lumbar vertebrae for use in the creation of subjectspecific and probabilistic FE models. The method locates
landmarks precisely and consistently on the surface of bones
with varied shapes and sizes. Automated creation of FE models
produces complete FE models ready for simulation with element
quality, similar to manual modeling techniques.
The automated landmark-identification method presented in
this study located points of interest on the bone surface within
1e-5 mm. This accuracy is an improvement over previously
reported subject-specific mesh morphing techniques [2], which
reported a mean node to surface distance of 0.3 mm and a

2714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Examples of two of the 18 full lumbar FE models produced from the
automated landmark identification method.

maximum node to surface distance of 6.2 mm. Previous methods
have also reported some of the largest distances at the articular
facets. The current method produces models with high fidelity
in the articular facets so that the contact surfaces are specific
and accurate to the specimens being modeled.
The element quality produced using the FE automation methods in this study is comparable to other FE models of the lumbar
spine using manual or automated techniques [2], [5], [32], [43].
The original subject-specific FE model used as a template had
similar mesh quality to the automated models that were produced. The intervertebral disc elements in the automated models were slightly worse in all metrics compared to the template
model. This was expected since the FE automation transforms
the template disc to fit into the disc space for the subject-specific
models. However, the cartilage element quality was better in the
automated models versus the template model for most metrics
(skewnesss, jacobian, minimum angle, and maximum angle).
There are limitations to the current methods. First, the automation is setup to work with a specific template FE model.
However, the methods have been designed to be adaptable to
other applications, mesh topologies, element formulations, and
FE codes. For example, the current ligaments are broken up
into parallel connector elements based on their locations in the
template model. For applications studying mechanics within
the ligament, solid continuum elements would be more appropriate [44]. While additional attachment points would need to
be identified, the current method could be extended for that
application.
The automated methods presented are specifically focused on
producing FE models for use with relatively low loads. Many
applications, including those involving high lumbar spine loads
require deformable bones and endplates [45]. For such applications, the current method would need to be extended to achieve
high fidelity to the bone surface in all areas. The current methods

of soft tissue landmark identification are applicable, but the bone
mesh morphing algorithm would need to be replaced or supplemented by a global morphing method, such as coherent point
drift [46]. The full volume CT data would also need to be incorporated and used to differentiate cortical and cancellous bone.
Another limitation of the current method is that the intervertebral discs are not subject-specific discs based on medical image
data, but rather are transformed discs fit to the endplates of the
subject. The current method produces discs of subject-specific
size and orientation, but the details of shape and relative proportion of annulus volume to nucleus are based on the general
template. Peloquin et al. [26] recently published a statistical
shape model for lumbar disc geometry. Perhaps with a linked
CT (bone geometry) and MRI (disc geometry) dataset this limitation could be overcome and subject-specific disc geometry
could be incorporated into the workflow. The ligaments and
facet cartilage are similarly based on the geometry of the bone
surface rather than actual measurement of the soft tissues. A
linked CT and MRI dataset may also be useful in overcoming
this limitation.
The automated techniques used in this study maintain the
alignment from the CT scan, while maintaining the scanned
alignment ensures the soft tissues are placed in a physically realistic location, it does not account for any stress on the soft tissues
at the time of the scan. This is a common problem in subjectspecific modeling. Incorporating a CT dataset with subjects in
known, consistent, and physiologically representative positions
may allow for more consistent modeling and alignment.
The template model [32] was originally created for use in
Abaqus/Explicit with first-order reduced integration elements in
the annulus. The goal of our modeling strategy was to develop
automation methods with a computationally efficient model for
lumbar range of motion, disc pressure, and facet force, in order to
facilitate later probabilistic studies requiring many simulations.
In this context, the reduced computational cost of first-order
reduced integration elements is nontrivial and saves valuable
solution time. Although this element does not suffer from significant shear locking [47], it can suffer from hourglass effects
(deformation modes that produce zero-strain energy). We have,
however, found the default hourglass control added by Abaqus
to be effective for ensuring robust solutions.
Future work must focus on verification and validation of the
automated FE models presented in this paper. A general mesh
convergence study is an important model verification step to
ensure that mesh density is sufficient to accurately capture gradients in important field variables (e.g., displacement, strain,
pressure). In FE models of engineering systems, it is common
to seek mesh convergence on key outcome metrics at the 5% or
even 2% level [48], meaning that outcome metrics do not change
by more than 2% with additional mesh refinement. Mesh convergence results have not been widely reported for FE models
of the lumbar spine, but Ayturk et al. [49] reported mesh convergence for lumbar range of motion and strain energy density with
changes below approximately 5%. The focus of this study was
the development of automation methods to adapt the existing
template FE model [32] to arbitrary subject-specific geometry,
and mesh convergence was considered outside the scope of this

CAMPBELL AND PETRELLA: AUTOMATED METHOD FOR LANDMARK IDENTIFICATION AND FINITE-ELEMENT MODELING

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
Fig. 9.

Probabilistic FE model work flow.

[9]
[10]

study. However, a detailed mesh convergence study is part of our
ongoing research on this topic and will be reported separately.
A subject-specific validation is necessary to compare the mechanics of an automatically created subject-specific FE model
to experimental testing of the same subject. A population of
FE models, such as the 18 created in this study, may also be
compared against typical corridors associated with biomechanical metrics (i.e., range of motion, facet forces, disc pressure)
reported in the literature [49]. To the authors’ knowledge, validation of a population of lumbar spine FE models has not been
previously reported.
The training set of automatically identified landmarks produced by our algorithm may also be used to create and evaluate
an SSM of lumbar spine geometry. Such an SSM may be used to
produce probabilistic FE models with normal anatomical variation to facilitate preclinical evaluation of orthopedic implants
and procedures in silico. A notable challenge associated with
any subject-specific FE model, including those created by our
automated algorithm, is the assignment of material properties,
which are difficult or impossible to measure in vivo. The advantage of probabilistic simulation is that a range of material
parameters may be considered in the model, allowing one to
establish the bounds of expected outcome metrics. A typical
probabilistic simulation workflow enabled by our algorithm is
illustrated in Fig. 9.

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]

V. CONCLUSION
This study produced 18 subject-specific full lumbar spine
FE models based on automated landmark identification of 90
lumbar vertebrae. The subject-specific FE models were produced with good accuracy, quality, and robustness. This new
method represents an improvement over manual and semiautomated methods previously reported, but FE model validation is
a critical ongoing step to prove the clinical applicability of this
modeling approach.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Sarkalkan et al., “Statistical shape and appearance models of bones,”
Bone, vol. 60, pp. 129–140, 2014.
[2] N. Lalonde et al., “Method to geometrically personalize a detailed finiteelement model of the spine,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 7,
pp. 2014–2021, Jul. 2013.
[3] B. Weisse et al., “Determination of the translational and rotational stiffnesses of an L4–L5 functional spinal unit using a specimen-specific finite-

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

2715

element model,” J. Mech. Behavior Biomed. Mater., vol. 13, pp. 45–61,
2012.
S. Wang et al., “In vivo loads in the lumbar L3–L4 disc during a weight
lifting extension,” Clinical Biomech., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 155–160, 2014.
Y. Dai and G. L. Niebur, “A semiautomated method for hexahedral
mesh construction of human vertebrae from CT-scans,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 599–606, 2009.
I. T. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis. 2nd Ed. New York, NY, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 2002.
L. I. Smith, A Tutorial on Principal Components Analysis. Ithaca, NY,
USA: Cornell Univ. Press, 2002.
I. Dryden and K. V. Marida, Statistical Shape Analysis. Chichester, West
Sussex, U.K.: Wiley, 1998.
F. Niemeyer et al., “Geometry strongly influences the response of numerical models of the lumbar spine—A probabilistic finite-element analysis,”
J. Biomech., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 1414–1423, 2012.
T. Heimann and H. Meinzer, “Statistical shape models for 3-D medical image segmentation: A review,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 543–563, 2009.
M. A. Styner et al., “Evaluation of 3-D correspondence methods for
model building,” in Information Processing in Medical Imaging, Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, pp. 63–75, 2003.
I. A. Sigal et al., “Mesh-morphing algorithms for specimen-specific finiteelement modeling,” J. Biomech., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 1381–1389, Jan. 2008.
K. Subburaj et al., “Automated identification of anatomical landmarks
on 3-D bone models reconstructed from CT scan images,” Comput. Med.
Imag. Graph., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 359–68, Jul. 2009.
M. E. De Oliveira et al., “An image-based method to automatically propagate bony landmarks: Application to computational spine biomechanics,”
Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 18, no. 14, pp. 1535–1542,
2015.
L. B. Querol et al., “Statistical finite-element model for bone shape
and biomechanical properties,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.Assisted Intervention Conf., 2006, pp. 405–411.
R. Bryan et al., “Use of a statistical model of the whole femur in a
large scale, multimodel study of femoral neck fracture risk,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 42, no. 13, pp. 2171–2176, 2009.
M. A. Baldwin et al., “Development of subject-specific and statistical shape models of the knee using an efficient segmentation and
mesh-morphing approach,” Comput. Methods Program. Biomed., vol. 97,
no. 3, pp. 232–240, Mar. 2010.
P. D. Nicolella and T. L. Bredbenner, “Development of a parametric finiteelement model of the proximal femur using statistical shape and density
modeling,” Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng., vol. 15, no. 2,
pp. 101–110, 2012.
Z. Zhu and G. Li, “Construction of 3-D human distal femoral surface
models using a 3-D statistical deformable model,” J. Biomech., vol. 44,
no. 13, pp. 2362–2368, 2011.
C. Rao et al., “A statistical finite-element model of the knee accounting
for shape and alignment variability,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 1450–1456, 2013.
A. Rasoulian et al., “Groupwise registration of point sets for statistical
shape models,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 2025–2034,
Nov. 2012.
N. Baka et al., “Evaluation of automated statistical shape model based
knee kinematics from biplane fluoroscopy,” J. Biomech., vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 122–129, 2014.
K. Sugisaki et al., “In vivo 3-D morphometric analysis of the lumbar
pedicle isthmus,” Spine, vol. 34, no. 24, pp. 2599–2604, Nov. 2009.
Y. Otsuka et al., “In vivo measurement of lumbar facet joint area in
asymptomatic and chronic low back pain subjects,” Spine, vol. 35, no. 8,
pp. 924–928, 2010.
P. Simon et al., “In vivo topographic analysis of lumbar facet,” Spine,
vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 1058–1064, 2012.
J. M. Peloquin et al., “Human L3–L4 intervertebral disc mean 3-D shape,
modes of variation, and their relationship to degeneration,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 2452–2459, 2014.
A. Rasoulian et al., “Lumbar spine segmentation using a statistical multivertebrae anatomical shape + pose model,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1890–1900, Oct. 2013.
B. Ibragimov et al., “Shape representation for efficient landmark-based
segmentation in 3-D,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 861–874,
Apr. 2014.
R. Korez et al., “A framework for automated spine and vertebrae
interpolation-based detection and model-based segmentation,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., to be published.

2716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

[30] J. Cegoñino et al., “A constitutive model for the annulus of human
intervertebral disc: Implications for developing a degeneration model and
its influence on lumbar spine functioning,” J. Appl. Math., vol. 2014,
pp. 1–15, 2014.
[31] M. Dreischarf et al., “Comparison of eight published static finite-element
models of the intact lumbar spine: Predictive power of models improves
when combined together,” J. Biomech., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1757–1766,
2014.
[32] M. Rao, “Explicit finite-element modeling of the human lumbar spine,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Eng. Comp. Sci., Univ. Denver, Denver, CO,
USA, 2012.
[33] V. Moramarco et al., “An accurate validation of a computational model of
a human lumbosacral segment,” J. Biomech., vol. 43, pp. 334–342, 2010.
[34] J. P. Little et al., “Nonlinear finite-element analysis of anular lesions in
the L4/5 intervertebral disc,” J. Biomech., vol. 40, pp. 2744–2751, 2007.
[35] M. Rao et al., “Efficient probabilistic finite-element modeling for evaluation of spinal mechanics,” presented at the 55th Annu. Meet. Orthopaedic
Research Society, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2009.
[36] J. Burkhardt, “STLA” Free Software Foundation, 2007.
[37] E. Johnson, “STL Read” The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA, 2011.
[38] D.-J. Kroon, “Mouse3D” The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA, 2010.
[39] P. Bergström, “Iterative Closest Point Method,” The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA, 2007.
[40] G. Wu et al., “ISB recommendation on definitions of joint coordinate
system of various joints for the reporting of human joint motion—Part I:
Ankle, hip, and spine,” J. Biomech., vol. 35, pp. 543–548, Aug. 2002.
[41] J. Q. Campbell et al., “Optimization of an automated mesh morphing
algorithm for lumbar vertebrae,” presented at the Annu. Meet. Orthopaedic
Research Society, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2012.
[42] D. J. Woldtvedt et al., “Finite-element lumbar spine facet contact
parameter predictions are affected by the cartilage thickness distribution and initial joint gap size,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 133, no. 6,
pp. 061009-1–061009-7, 2011.
[43] P. Hadagali, “Subject-specific finite-element modeling of the adolescent
thoracic spine for scoliosis research,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Biomed. Eng.,
Drexel Univ., Philidelphia, PA, USA, pp. 79–96, 2014.
[44] Z. Xiao et al., “A nonlinear finite-element model of human L4/L5 lumbar
spinal segment with 3-D solid element ligaments,” Theoretical Appl. Mech.
Lett., vol. 064001, no. 1, 2011.
[45] H. Schmidt et al., “What have we learned from finite-element model studies of lumbar intervertebral discs in the past four decades?,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 46, no. 14, pp. 2342–2355, 2013.
[46] A. Myronenko and X. Song, “Point set registration: Coherent point drift,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intel., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2262–2275,
Dec. 2010.
[47] O. C. Zienkiewicz and R. L. Taylor, The Finite ElementFinite-Element
Method. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1989.

[48] A. Tsouknidas et al., “The effect of kyphoplasty parameters on the dynamic load transfer within the lumbar spine considering the response of a
bio-realistic spine segment” Clinical Biomech., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 949–955,
2013.
[49] U. M. Ayturk and C. M. Puttlitz, “Parametric convergence sensitivity and
validation of a finite-element model of the human lumbar spine,” Comput.
Methods Biomech. biomed. Eng., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 695–705, 2011.

J. Quinn Campbell received the B.A. degree
in physics from the Colorado College, Colorado
Springs, CO, USA, in 1999, and the M.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, in 2001. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering (biomechanics) at the Colorado School of Mines,
Golden, CO.
He is currently a Senior Biomechanical Engineer
with Vector Scientific, Inc., Golden, CO. His primary
work and research interests include injury biomechanics related to automotive, industrial/occupational, and sport/recreational
accidents.

Anthony J. Petrella received the Ph.D. degree in
mechanical engineering from the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 2000.
He worked for DePuy Orthopaedics from 2000 until 2006 where he managed the computational biomechanics research group, providing analytical support
for new product development teams in hip, knee,
shoulder, ankle, and small joint replacement. In 2006,
he joined the Faculty of the Colorado School of
Mines, Department of Mechanical Engineering, and
he directs the Computational Biomechanics Group
(CBG). CBG research topics include finite element and shape modeling in the
spine, and the development of multiscale modeling techniques to relate tissue
level metrics to whole body biomechanics.

