IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

111

Chronic In Vivo Evaluation of PEDOT/CNT
for Stable Neural Recordings
Takashi D. Y. Kozai∗ , Kasey Catt, Zhanhong Du, Kyounghwan Na, Onnop Srivannavit, Razi-ul M. Haque,
John Seymour, Kensall D. Wise, Fellow, IEEE, Euisik Yoon, and Xinyan Tracy Cui∗

Abstract—Objective: Subcellular-sized chronically implanted
recording electrodes have demonstrated significant improvement
in single unit (SU) yield over larger recording probes. Additional
work expands on this initial success by combining the subcellular fiber-like lattice structures with the design space versatility
of silicon microfabrication to further improve the signal-to-noise
ratio, density of electrodes, and stability of recorded units over
months to years. However, ultrasmall microelectrodes present
very high impedance, which must be lowered for SU recordings. While poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) doped
with polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) coating have demonstrated great
success in acute to early-chronic studies for lowering the electrode impedance, concern exists over long-term stability. Here, we
demonstrate a new blend of PEDOT doped with carboxyl functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which shows
dramatic improvement over the traditional PEDOT/PSS formula.
Methods: Lattice style subcellular electrode arrays were fabricated
using previously established method. PEDOT was polymerized
with carboxylic acid functionalized carbon nanotubes onto highimpedance (8.0 ± 0.1 MΩ: M ± S.E.) 250-μm2 gold recording sites.
Results: PEDOT/CNT-coated subcellular electrodes demonstrated
significant improvement in chronic spike recording stability over
four months compared to PEDOT/PSS recording sites. Conclusion: These results demonstrate great promise for subcellular-sized
recording and stimulation electrodes and long-term stability. Significance: This project uses leading-edge biomaterials to develop
chronic neural probes that are small (subcellular) with excellent
electrical properties for stable long-term recordings. High-density
ultrasmall electrodes combined with advanced electrode surface
modification are likely to make significant contributions to the development of long-term (permanent), high quality, and selective
neural interfaces.
Index Terms—Brain–computer interface, conductive polymer,
multielectrode array, neural interface, neuroprosthetics.

Manuscript received January 17, 2015; revised June 4, 2015 and May 4, 2015;
accepted June 9, 2015. Date of publication June 9, 2015; date of current version
December 17, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ T. D. Y. Kozai is with the Department of Bioengineering, McGowan Institute of Regenerative Medicine, and Center for the Neural Basis for Cognition,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA (e-mail: tdk18@pitt.edu)
K. Catt, Z. Du, with the University of Pittsburgh.
K. Na, J. Seymour, K. D. Wise, and E. Yoon are with the University of
Michigan.
O. Srivannavit is with ePack, Inc.
Razi-un Haque is with Structured Microsystems LLC.
∗ X. T. Cui is with the Department of Bioengineering, McGowan Institute of
Regenerative Medicine, and Center for the Neural Basis for Cognition, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA (e-mail: xic11@pitt.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2445713

I. INTRODUCTION
NTRACORTICAL microelectrodes allow direct readout of
brain signals. These devices are critical front-end components for the advancement of basic neuroscience knowledge including our understanding of behavior, decision making, memory, plasticity, neural circuitry, connectivity, neurological diseases, and brain injuries [1], [2]. For chronic studies that examine training or learning, it is important that the system remains
stable in order to identify that the neurological changes were
due to neuroplasticity instead of an implant-induced reactive tissue response. Microelectrode arrays have also been employed
in human tetraplegia patients to restore the functional motor
control [3], [4]. The performance of these neural prosthetic system hinges largely on the ability of the device to record within
quality, stability, and longevity requirements. The fundamental
challenge is to develop advanced materials that will enable neural interface devices to remain functional and stable for as long
as needed in the neural tissue.
Intracortical microelectrodes must be surgically implanted
into the brain tissue. This insertion causes blood-brain barrier
injury, which triggers a cascade of injury response pathways
that lead to glial scarring and neural degeneration around the
implanted electrodes [5]–[7]. While the insertion injury cannot
be eliminated, studies have shown that subcellular-sized ultrasmall lattices elicit significantly less glial scarring and neuronal
loss [8]. Functionalized subcellular-sized carbon–fiber-based
electrodes similarly showed reduce inflammatory response and
significantly improved single-unit (SU) recording performance
compared to silicon electrodes [9]. Recent, two-photon studies
have also demonstrated reduced tissue strain around subcellularsized electrodes due to the reduced volumetric tissue displacement resulting from insertion [10]. These findings point to size
as one key factor for improving chronic recording performance
[11] (see review [5] for additional factors).
Reducing the implant size and recording site size, however,
leads to an increase in impedance [9], [12]. While smaller
recording sites improve the discrimination of SU waveform of
the nearest neuron from other nearby action potential, the increased impedance leads to a decrease in the signal amplitude
and increase in the noise floor. This makes the discrimination
of action potentials from high-amplitude noise increasingly difficult. To address these issues, conductive polymers have been
employed to reduce the impedance of small high-impedance
recording sites [9], [12]–[17]. These conductive polymers improve the charge transfer properties of the electrode–electrolyte
interface in part by increasing the electrochemical surface area,
while maintaining the geometric surface area [18].

I

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Several conductive polymers with good tissue biocompatibility properties exist, such as polypyrrole and polyaniline [18],
among which PEDOT remains the most stable conductive polymer available for implantable devices. Still, the stability of
PEDOT is heavily dependent on the dopant or counterion, concentration, ratio, and deposition parameters [18]. One way to
further improve the stability of PEDOT is to modify the dopant.
Carbon nanotubes are highly stable and intrinsically conductive
dopants that improve the electrochemical stability of PEDOT
beyond the stability of PEDOT/PSS, even under electrical stimulation [19], [20]. One concern of PEDOT/CNT is the biocompatibility of the coating; particularly, if loose CNTs are shed
from the coating. However, early chronic in vivo studies have
indicated good biocompatibility of the coating, even with extended electrical stimulation [21].
Here, we explore the use of carbon-nanotube-doped PEDOT
for chronic neural recording on novel ultrasmall silicon lattice
electrodes. For the CNT to act as a counterion during electrochemical deposition, it was necessary for the CNTs to be
negatively charged. This is in contrast to noncharged CNTs
that are passively entrapped into PEDOT/PSS during deposition
(PEDOT/PSS:CNT) [22], [23]. CNTs were functionalized with
negatively charged carboxylic acid using acid treatment and sonication [24]. The negatively charged CNTs replaced the need for
PSS codopant and allows for greater CNT incorporation into the
electrochemically deposited film. PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x was
electrochemically deposited onto small high-impedance recording sites. These devices were implanted at least 12 weeks in
mice primary visual cortex. The results showed PEDOT/CNT(COOH)x coated recording sites dramatically outperformed PEDOT/PSS recording sites after eight weeks.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Silicon Probe Fabrication
A custom 3.6 mm 2 × 4 design was desired for these experiments so photolithographically defined neural probes were
manufactured for this purpose using a slight modification to
a well-defined silicon microfabrication process [25]. Silicon
substrates were defined using boron doping and diffusion. The
trace material was polysilicon, and the electrode material was
Au because of its known compatibility with PEDOT electrodeposition [12]. Each site area was 250 μm2 or 18 μm in diameter.
Intershank distance was 500 μm from centerline to centerline.
Each lattice strut was 15 μm wide and each shank was 55 μm
wide and 3.6 mm long. The first recording site was 850 μm
from the tip and three other sites were spaced at 116 μm. Windows in the lattices were 94 μm long and 25 μm wide every
116 μm. Recording sites with initial impedance values greater
than 130 MΩ were considered open circuit due to poor wire
bonding contacts to the print circuit board and removed from
the study prior to insertion.
B. Conductive Polymer Deposition
For PEDOT/PSS (N = 21 sites), 0.1-M PSS (Acros Organics: 70 000 MW) and 0.01-M EDOT (Bayer) was dissolved

Fig. 1. Dual shank silicon neural probe was fabricated using deep boron
doping, polysilicon interconnects, and evaporated Au microelectrodes. In each
dual shank probe, one shank had an open lattice design and the other was solid,
both having identical electrode layouts (inset).

in a Millipore-filtered diH2 0 overnight on a stir plate without
shaking at 4 °C. Electrochemical deposition was conducted in
galvanostatic mode at 500 pA for 500 s using a platinum foil
counterelectrode and a Ag/AgCl reference electrode.
CNTs were functionalized prior to deposition on the probes.
The CNTs were functionalized with carboxylic acid groups by
mixing 200 mg of multiwalled carbon nanotubes into 25 ml of
concentrated nitric acid and 75-ml concentrated sulfuric acid.
This solution was sonicated for 2 h, and, then, vigorously stirred
overnight at room temperature. The solution was then ultracentrifuged at 16 k · r/min for 1 h at 4 °C and the solute was poured
off for pH test. Precipitate CNT-(COOH)x s were resuspended
in Millipore-filtered diH2O and the ultracentrifugation process
was repeated until the removed solution became pH neutral.
Samples were then dried at 60 °C.
For PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x deposition (n = 15 sites), 1 mg
of CNT-(COOH)x was resuspended in 1 ml of diH2O by sonication for 10 min. EDOT was added to this solution to a concentration of 0.02 M. Electrochemical deposition was conducted
in galvanostatic mode at 500 pA for 500 s using a platinum
foil counterelectrode and a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Electrodes for chronic implantation were ethylene oxide sterilized
at least one week prior to electrode surgery. Samples for the
SEM were imaged using a JSM 6330F SEM (JEOL, Japan) at
an accelerating voltage of 3 kV. Working distance was adjusted
automatically to allow for optimal image quality (see Fig. 2).
C. Surgical Implant Procedure
Surgical implant was conducted as extensively described in a
previous publication [1]. Briefly, a coated array was implanted
unilaterally into the left primary monocular visual cortex (V1m:
+1 mm lambda, +1.5 mm midline) of five male C57BL/6J mice
under 1.5% isoflurane. Arrays were inserted at ∼2 mm/s using
a stereotaxic manipulator such that the top recording sites were
at a depth of 500 μm. Local field potential and current source
density (CSD) were used to validate that the electrode sites were
implanted into layers IV and V [1]. The silicon device and the
craniotomy were sealed carefully with silicone (Kwik-sil) and

KOZAI et al.: CHRONIC In Vivo EVALUATION OF PEDOT/CNT FOR STABLE NEURAL RECORDINGS

113

methods [29], [30]. Possible spikes were detected using a fixed
negative threshold value of 3.5 SD. Offline spike sorting was
carried out using a custom MATLAB script modified from previously published methods [9], [31].
The SU signal quality was defined as signal-to-noise amplitude ratio (SNAR), and was calculated as the peak-to-peak
amplitude of the mean waveform of the cluster divided by twice
the standard deviation of the noise:
SU SNAR = μSU−pp /2σNoise

(1)

where μSU−pp is the mean peak-to-peak amplitude of the waveform snippets, and σNoise is the standard deviation of the spike
data stream after all waveform snippets have been removed. If
no SU was detected, SNAR was considered to be 0. This was
done to prevent misleading over characterization of “AVERAGE
SNR” by ignoring or removing “failed” recording sites during
averaging. Only channels exhibiting sortable SU spikes with
SNR > 2 were analyzed. Candidate SU with SNR between 2 and
3 were manually confirmed or excluded by examining the combination of waveform shape, autocorrelogram, peak threshold
crossing offset, and peristimulus time histogram (PSTH) with
50-ms bins. Candidate units with SNR below 2 were discarded,
and candidate units with SNR greater than 3 were manually
confirmed by examining the waveform shape.
For MU analysis, all spikes crossing the 3.5 SD threshold
were used [32]. MU signal-to-noise firing rate ratio (SNFRR)
was defined as the average firing rate in a 550-ms bin of the
“ON” state minus the average firing rate of the “OFF” state in
a 550-ms bin after a 50-ms latency delay following the trigger
divided by the average standard deviation of both the “ON” and
“OFF” state
Fig. 2. Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) PEDOT/PSS coated
recording sites, and (b) PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x coated recording sites.

a headcap was created using UV-cured dental cement (Pentron
Clinical, Orange, CA, USA). A 5-mg/kg ketofen was administered daily for three days as a postoperative analgesic. All
animal care and procedures were performed under the approval
of the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee and in accordance with regulations specified by
the Division of Laboratory Animal Resources.
D. Neural Recording and Analysis
Electrophysiological recording, SU analysis, and multiunit
(MU) analysis were conducted as extensively described in a previous publication (see Fig. 3) [1]. Briefly, spontaneous recording
was conducted in a dark room. Visual stimuli was presented using the MATLAB-based Psychophysics toolbox [26]–[28] on
a 24 LCD (V243H, Acer. Xizhi, New Taipei City, Taiwan),
while the animal was under isoflurane anesthesia. Solid black
and white bar gratings were presented drifting in a perpendicular direction and synchronized with the recording system (RX7,
Tucker-Davis Technologies, Alachua, FL, USA) at 24 414 Hz.
The spike data stream was further preprocessed using published

MU SNFRRON:OFF =

1
2

μon − μoﬀ
(σon + σoﬀ )

(2)

where μon and μoﬀ are the mean MU firing rate of the “ON”
and “OFF” state, respectively, while σon and σoﬀ are the standard deviation of firing rates during the “ON” or “OFF” state,
respectively. Two-sided Welch’s T-test with the assumption of
unequal variance and a p-value < 0.05 was conducted between
“ON” and “OFF” firing rates. If no significant multiunit was
detected, MU amplitude and SNFRR were considered to be 0.
This was done to prevent misleading over characterization of
“AVERAGE SNR” by ignoring or removing “failed” recording
sites during averaging.
While SU signal strength can be quantified as the average
voltage amplitude of the largest sorted SU, threshold-crossing
events which include MU were a mixture of possible SUs with
various amplitudes. Therefore, MU signal strength of the largest
reliable MU amplitude was estimated using the quality metric
defined as
MU Amplitude = μM U−pp + 2σM U−pp

(3)

where μM U−pp and σM U−pp are the mean peak-to-peak amplitude of and standard deviation of all of the waveform snippets,
respectively. That is, the strength of the MU signal is defined
as the average peak-to-peak MU amplitude plus two standard

114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 3. Example chronic spike recordings. (a), (b) Raw spike stream (300–5000 Hz) from PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x sites (a) and PEDOT/PSS sites (b) over time.
Insets show isolated SU waveform in a 1.2-ms window. (c), (d) PSTH (50-ms bins) of visually evoked threshold crossings from PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x sites (a)
and PEDOT/PSS sites (b) over time. Drifting gratings (mov) were displayed (on) from 0 for 1 s followed by 1 s of black screen (off).

deviations of the standard deviation of all MU peak-to-peak
amplitude.
E. Impedance Measurements
Electrochemical impedance was measured immediately after
each neural recording session. While under anesthesia, the implanted array was connected to an Autolab potentiostat using a
16 channel multiplexer. Impedance was measured for each of
the eight channels using a 10-mV RMS sine wave from 10 Hz to
32 kHz, employing a 15 multisine paradigm to shorten the time
required for measurement. In this study, the 1-kHz impedance
is reported unless indicated otherwise.
III. RESULTS
PEDOT with different counterions were electrochemically
deposited onto gold recording sites with a mean 1-kHz
impedance of 7958 ± 112 kΩ. PEDOT/PSS reduced the 1-kHz
impedance to 97.1 ± 1.1 kΩ, while PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x
reduced it to 90.3 ± 8.1 kΩ. SEM revealed the PEDOT/CNT(COOH)x had a distinct and dense nanotube matrix structure that
was significantly more porous than PEDOT/PSS. The coated
electrodes were chronically implanted into the visual cortex of
mice for SU and MU anlaysis.

A. Spike Recording Performance
The chronic SU and MU recording performance were evaluated in the visual cortex of mice (see Fig. 3). Neural activity in
the visual cortex was driven by stimulating the contralateral eye
with drifting solid gratings.
The SU yield and MU yield started at similar values for
both PEDOT/PSS and PEDOT/CNT [see Fig. 4(a) and (b)].
While the SU yield for PEDOT/CNT coated sites held steady
at around 50% throughout the implant, the SU yield on the
PEDOT/PSS recording sites began dramatically decreased after
the first month. Interestingly, the SU and MU yield for the
PEDOT/CNT recording sites were identical. This indicates that
PEDOT/CNT sites were able to detect clean SU waveforms
on all recording sites detecting visually evoked neural activity.
This, in turn, suggests good recording properties for isolating
SUs from distant background units. In contrast, the PEDOT/PSS
showed slightly better MU yield than SU yield. However, the
MU yield of PEDOT/PSS also decreased dramatically after the
first 1–2 months.
SU SNAR, SU amplitude, and MU amplitude were similar
on the day of surgery [see Fig. 4(c)–(f)]. For PEDOT/CNT, SU
SNAR was initially 3.0 ± 0.6 and SU amplitude was 78.3 ±
15.2 μV, while for PEDOT/PSS they were 2.1 ± 0.4 and SU
amplitude was 50.6 ± 11.2 μV. Interestingly, on the day of the

KOZAI et al.: CHRONIC In Vivo EVALUATION OF PEDOT/CNT FOR STABLE NEURAL RECORDINGS

115

Fig. 4. Chronic spike recording performance of PEDOT/CNT-(COOH)x (black) and PEDOT/PSS (blue) electrode sites. (a) SU yield. (b) MU yield. (c) SU
SNARfor the largest isolated SU waveform. (d) Visually evoked MUSNFRR . (e) Average amplitude of the largest SU waveform on each channel (solid line). (f)
Average MU amplitude (solid line). (e), (f) dashed line indicates the noise floor. ∗ indicates significant difference of SNR or Amplitude (p < 0.05). # indicates
significant difference in the noise floor (p < 0.05). Note: If no SU or MU were detected, SNR = 0 and amplitude = 0 μV. Average SU SNAR and SU amplitude
may be lower than the noise floor if large number of recording sites had SNR = 0 and amplitude = 0 μV. As previously published, this was done to prevent
misleading over characterization of “AVERAGE SNR” by ignoring or removing “failed” recording sites during averaging.

surgery, MU SNFRR was significantly better for PEDOT/PSS
at 0.47 ± 0.08 compared to 0.16 ± 0.03 for PEDOT/CNT.
For the first 42 days, PEDOT/PSS performed similarly to previously published results [9], [13] and statistically similarly
to PEDOT/CNT. However, 7–8 weeks after implantation, the
performance of PEDOT/PSS recording sites are significantly
(p < 0.05) lower than the PEDOT/CNT sites. While the original study was intended for 12 weeks (84 days), PEDOT/CNT
recordings were extended due to its continuously strong recording performance.

Fig. 5. 1-kHz impedance of PEDOT/PSS (cyan) and PEDOT/CNT (black).
∗ indicates significant difference (p < 0.05). Note: –4 day time point indicates
uncoated Au electrode and –2 day time point indicates coated electrodes prior
to surgery.

B. Chronic Impedance
The impedance of PEDOT/CNT recordings sites steadily increased for the first three months, then stabilized (see Fig. 5). In
contrast, PEDOT/PSS recording sites increased for the first two
weeks, then decreased over the next two weeks before steadily
increasing (see Fig. 5). Most interesting is that during day 7 and
day 14, when the impedance of PEDOT/PSS was greater than
PEDOT/CNT, the noise floor of PEDOT/PSS were significantly
lower than PEDOT/CNT (p < 0.05). There was no trending
difference in the noise floor during the second month, while
PEDOT/CNT had a lower noise floor than PEDOT/PSS during

the third month. It should be noted that while the impedance
and the noise floor may provide supplemental information, our
previous data show that they are poor predictors of recording
performance [1], [10], [32].
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study, two PEDOT blends were compared for chronic
recordings; the more commonly used PEDOT/PSS (PSS MW
70 000 Da) and PEDOT/CNT. Both blends were deposited

116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

under galvanostatic mode with the same current level and total
deposition charge. All devices were implanted into the same
anatomical coordinates including depth and the recording sites
were confirmed to remain in layers IV and V throughout the
duration of the study using CSD. The chronic recording performance of PEDOT/PSS remains comparable for the first 5–6
weeks, which are supported by previous early chronic studies
[9], [13]. Although the acute insertion injury related inflammation stabilizes in the first few weeks, the chronic tissue response
continues to evolve for many months [10]. In fact, chronically
implanted PEDOT/CNT coated Au recording sites significantly
out preformed PEDOT/PSS recording sites after 7–8 weeks following implantation.
Interestingly, the 1-kHz impedance of the PEDOT/PSS increased over the first couple of weeks, then decreased before
steadily increasing. When the recording performance began to
significantly degrade, the impedance value was 988 ± 121 kΩ.
In contrast, PEDOT/CNT steadily increased, up to 2511 ± 67 kΩ
but the increase in impedance did not dramatically impact
recording performance. As discussed in previous studies, the 1kHz impedance magnitude does not linearly correlate with quality of recording. The higher quality and longer lasting recording
from the PEDOT/CNT may be a result of the better tissue integration of the nanofibrous and porous sites with the host tissue.
The intimate integration leads to close proximity between the
neuron and the recording sites. The initial more rapid increase of
the impedance of PEDOT/PSS suggests higher degree of inflammatory tissue reaction, which could lead to reduced neuronal
density around the PEDOT/PSS sites. The impedance of the PEDOT/CNT steadily increase over time until around ten weeks,
the reason for this increase is not known but may be a result of
protein and tissue filling into the pores of the PEDOT/CNT film,
which reduces the effective surface area. In another study, when
we were able to retrieve the PEDOT/CNT coated implants, such
phenomenon was observed (Data not shown). On the other hand,
PEDOT/PSS’s sharp impedance increase and decrease at acute
time suggest a more aggressive cellular tissue response. The
more steady increase of the impedance after three weeks may
be a result of fouling or degradation of the mechanical/chemical
stability.
However, additional research is necessary to determine if the
significant differences in performance is due to the coating’s
impact on changes in material property. More detailed equivalent circuit analysis may help to test these hypotheses. Previous
histological study demonstrated that prolonged electrical stimulation through PEDOT:CNT coated electrodes did not lead to
significant differences in the quantitative histology [21]. This
suggests the coating did not exacerbate the reactive tissue response, for example, through the shedding of loose CNT during
stimulation. It is expected that the passive recording through
the coating will have reduced inflammation compared to when
electrically stimulated [18]. However, it should be noted that
while impedance and postmortem histology may supplement
recording data, they are poor predictors of recording quality
[10]. Therefore, PEDOT/PSS and PEDOT/CNT coatings were
compared across SU and functional evoked MU recording performance metrics. Particularly, the ability to record visually

evoked MU firing rate changes suggest that the neurons being
recorded remain integrated in the primary visual neural circuit
and are relatively healthy. While additional research is needed
to better understand in vivo failure mechanisms of conductive
polymers, opportunities still exist for improving their chronic in
vivo stability.
The center and edge recording sites were also compared.
However, neither a significant difference nor even a trending
difference was observed. While additional research may be necessary, it is possible that at small lattice dimensions (< 55 × 15
μm), there is a minimal impact on recording site location. While
other groups have compared recording performances of different devices in the literature [33]–[36], additional research is
necessary to compare recording performance of these devices
to PEDOT/CNT coated commercially available devices. To percisely compare recording performance across devices, visually
evoked chronic recording performance must be collected in the
primary monocular visual cortex of mice at layers IV and V over
six months with PEDOT/CNT coated devices. This data are not
currently available from the literature. These are, however, beyond the scope of this study of comparing chronic recording
performance of PEDOT/CNT and PEDOT/PSS electrode sites,
which showed significant differences after 7–8 weeks postimplantation.
PEDOT has gained substantial popularity for improving the
electrical property of implantable devices. It is relatively simple to polymerize under a wide range of deposition parameters, concentrations, electrode size, and electrode shape. However, the wide range of PEDOT polymerization also results in a
wide range of electrical and mechanical stabilities. Furthermore,
EDOT is an organic liquid, and the method used to dissolve it
into water impacts its effective concentration during deposition (e.g., stirring for 8 h versus vortexing for 10 min). Poor
understanding of how these variables impact PEDOT stability
has led to the concern that PEDOT cannot be electrically stable
longitudinally in vivo.
To date, PEDOT remains the most stable conductive polymer
available for implantable devices. These results demonstrate that
the stability of PEDOT can be improved by tuning the dopant
or counterion. Further optimization of concentration, ratio, and
deposition parameters, such as chemical deposition or electrochemical deposition may improve the PEDOT stability [18].
For example, electrochemical deposition can also be altered by
using potentiostatic or galvanostatic mode. Current density or
charge density and total deposition charge can also influence the
thickness and stability of the coating.
Carbon has nearly an order of magnitude higher capacitive
charge transfer capacity, as well as over 8 orders of magnitude greater resistance than traditional metals, which makes
the electrode site resilient to damage from Faradaic charge
transfer [37]. This property has previously been shown to improve the electrode material against electrical stimulation [19],
[20]. In addition, carbon has been shown to possess photoelectric/photothermal neural stimulation properties [38]. With
CNTs, these properties can also be fine tuned. CNTs come
in a wide variety of lengths, outer diameter, inner diameter,
(n, m) index, dopants, number of walls (e.g., single-walled,

KOZAI et al.: CHRONIC In Vivo EVALUATION OF PEDOT/CNT FOR STABLE NEURAL RECORDINGS

double-walled, triple-walled, multiwalled), and whether the
ends of the tubes are opened or closed. The (n, m) index orientation (i.e., the orientation of the graphene honeycomb in the tube)
can alter the bandgap of the CNT [e.g., metallic (n = m), quasimetallic (n − m = 3X, where X is an integer), semiconducting
(others)].
In order to achieve a high density of CNTs in the PEDOT matrix, it was necessary to add negatively charges to the CNTs [19].
This was done using strong acid treatments and sonication to
add carboxylic acid functional groups to the CNTs. The resulting PEDOT structure was a dense lattice matrix structure held
in place by the PEDOT conductive polymer. The ultrastucture
of the negatively charged CNT incorporated PEDOT was much
more porous and contained higher density of CNTs than the PEDOT/PSS with neutral CNT diffused PEDOT/PSS+CNT [22],
[23]. Furthermore, hollow CNTs can be functionalized with surface chemistry or employed as a reservoir for controlled-release
local drug delivery [39].
V. CONCLUSION
Emerging research points to subcellular-sized devices as significantly improve chronic electrophysiology recording performance. As the microelectrodes get smaller, recording sites also
need to become smaller. Smaller recording sites, further improve
the ability to isolate SU waveforms from distant neurons, but
tend to result in high electrical impedance. PEDOT has gained
rapid popularity as an electrode site coating to improve electrical
properties of the site with many classes of implantable devices
due to its ease of use. The rapid adoption of this technology
without careful calibration of deposition parameter to optimize
stability for each electrode type and size has exacerbated the
concern that PEDOT is inherently unstable and cannot be used
for chronic applications. Here, we demonstrate that the stability of PEDOT can be reinforced using CNTs to significantly
improve chronic recording performance after 50 days postimplant. CNTs further add functionality to implantable devices, including the capacity for drug delivery. The enhanced-recording
performance demonstrates promising results for improving conductive polymer coated sites for implantable devices. Finally,
PEDOT/CNT coatings are not limited to ultrasmall electrodes,
but may be applied to a broad electrode design space including
microwire, Michigan, and Utah Arrays.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
For the microfabrication work, authors would like to thank
the LNF staff members for their support and the use of the
Lurie Nanofabrication Facility at the University of Michigan.
SEM was conducted at the University of Pittsburgh Center for
Biological Imaging.

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

REFERENCES
[1] T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “Comprehensive chronic laminar single-unit, multiunit, and local field potential recording performance with planar single
shank electrode arrays,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 242, pp. 15–40, 2015.
[2] A. L. Vazquez et al., “Neural and hemodynamic responses elicited by
forelimb- and photo-stimulation in channelrhodopsin-2 mice: Insights

[25]
[26]
[27]

117

into the hemodynamic point spread function,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 24,
pp. 2908–2919, Jun. 12, 2013.
J. L. Collinger et al., “High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an
individual with tetraplegia,” Lancet, vol. 381, no. 9866, pp. 557–64, Dec.
13, 2012.
L. R. Hochberg et al., “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using
a neurally controlled robotic arm,” Nature, vol. 485, pp. 372–5, May 17,
2012.
T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “Brain tissue responses to neural implants impact signal sensitivity and intervention strategies,” ACS Chem. Neurosci.,
vol. 6, pp. 48–67, 2015.
T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “In vivo two photon microscopy reveals immediate
microglial reaction to implantation of microelectrode through extension
of processes,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 9, art. no. 066001, 2012.
T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “Reduction of neurovascular damage resulting from
microelectrode insertion into the cerebral cortex using in vivo two-photon
mapping,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 7, art. no. 046011, Aug. 2010.
J. P. Seymour and D. R. Kipke, “Neural probe design for reduced tissue
encapsulation in CNS,” Biomaterials, vol. 28, pp. 3594–3607, Sep. 2007.
T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “Ultrasmall implantable composite microelectrodes with bioactive surfaces for chronic neural interfaces,” Nature Mater.,
vol. 11, pp. 1065–73, Dec. 2012.
T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “Effects of caspase-1 knockout on chronic neural recording quality and longevity: Insight into cellular and molecular mechanisms of the reactive tissue response,” Biomaterials, vol. 35,
pp. 9620–9634, 2014.
C. L. Kolarcik et al., “Elastomeric and soft conducting microwires for
implantable neural interfaces,” Soft Matter, vol. 11, pp. 4847–4861, 2015.
K. A. Ludwig et al., “Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) polymer coatings facilitate smaller neural recording electrodes,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 8, art. no. 014001, Feb. 2011.
K. A. Ludwig et al., “Chronic neural recordings using silicon
microelectrode arrays electrochemically deposited with a poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) film,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 3, pp. 59–70,
Mar. 2006.
X. Cui and D. C. Martin, “Electrochemical deposition and characterization
of poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene) on neural microelectrode arrays,”
Sens. Actuators B, Chem., vol. 89, pp. 92–102, 2003
X. Cui and D. C. Martin, “Fuzzy gold electrodes for lowering impedance
and improving adhesion with electrodeposited conducting polymer films,”
Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 103, pp. 384–394, 2003.
X. Y. Cui et al., “Electrochemical deposition and characterization of conducting polymer polypyrrole/PSS on multichannel neural probes,” Sens.
Actuators A, Phys., vol. 93, pp. 8–18, Aug. 25, 2001.
P. R. Patel et al., “Insertion of linear 8.4 μm diameter 16 channel carbon
fiber electrode arrays for single unit recordings,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 12,
art. no. 046009, 2015.
T. Kozai et al., “Nanostructured coatings for improved charge delivery to
neurons,” in Nanotechnology and Neuroscience: Nano-Electronic, Photonic and Mechanical Neuronal Interfacing, M. D. Vittorio, L. Martiradonna, and J. Assad, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2014,
pp. 71–134.
X. Luo et al., “Highly stable carbon nanotube doped poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene) for chronic neural stimulation,” Biomaterials,
vol. 32, pp. 5551–5557, Aug. 2011.
X. T. Cui and D. D. Zhou, “Poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) for chronic
neural stimulation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 15,
no. 4, pp. 502–8, Dec. 2007.
C. L. Kolarcik et al., “Evaluation of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/
carbon nanotube neural electrode coatings for stimulation in the dorsal
root ganglion,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 12, art. no. 016008, 2015.
H. S. Mandal et al., “Improving the performance of poly(3,4ethylenedioxythiophene) for brain–machine interface applications,” Acta
Biomater., vol. 10, pp. 2446–2454, 2014.
R. Gerwig et al., “PEDOT-CNT composite microelectrodes for recording
and electrostimulation applications: Fabrication, morphology, and electrical properties,” Front. Neuroeng., vol. 5, art. no. 00008, 2012.
H. Hiura et al., “Opening and purification of carbon nanotubes in high
yields,” Adv. Mater., vol. 7, pp. 275–276, 1995.
B. Qing and K. D. Wise, “Single-unit neural recording with active microelectrode arrays,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 911–920,
Aug. 2001.
D. H. Brainard, “The psychophysics toolbox,” Spatial Vis., vol. 10,
pp. 433–6, 1997.
D. G. Pelli, “The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies,” Spatial Vis., vol. 10, pp. 437–42, 1997.

118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

[28] M. Kleiner, D. Brainard, and D. Pelli. (2007). “What’s snewin
Psychtoolbox-3?” in Perception (Alezzo), 36 EVCP Abstract Supplement.
[29] K. A. Ludwig et al., “Using a common average reference to improve
cortical neuron recordings from microelectrode arrays,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 101, pp. 1679–89, Mar. 2009.
[30] D. A. Wagenaar and S. M. Potter, “Real-time multi-channel stimulus
artifact suppression by local curve fitting,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 120,
pp. 113–20, Oct. 30, 2002.
[31] M. S. Fee et al., “Automatic sorting of multiple unit neuronal signals
in the presence of anisotropic and non-Gaussian variability,” J. Neurosci.
Methods, vol. 69, pp. 175–88, Nov. 1996.
[32] T. D. Y. Kozai et al., “Mechanical failure modes of chronically implanted
planar silicon-based neural probes for laminar recording,” Biomaterials,
vol. 37, pp. 25–39, 2015.
[33] M. P. Ward et al., “Toward a comparison of microelectrodes for acute and
chronic recordings,” Brain Res., vol. 1282, pp. 183–200, Jul. 28, 2009.
[34] A. Prasad et al., “Abiotic-biotic characterization of Pt/Ir microelectrode
arrays in chronic implants,” Front. Neuroengineering, vol. 7, art. no. 2,
2014.
[35] V. Sankar et al., “Electrode impedance analysis of chronic tungsten microwire neural implants: understanding abiotic vs. biotic contributions,”
Front. Neuroeng., vol. 7, art. no. 13, 2014.
[36] L. Karumbaiah et al., “Relationship between intracortical electrode design
and chronic recording function,” Biomaterials, vol. 34, pp. 8061–8074,
Nov. 2013.
[37] C. Cannizzaro et al., “Practical aspects of cardiac tissue engineering
with electrical stimulation,” in Tissue Engineering, vol. 140, H. Hauser
and M. Fussenegger, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Humana Press, 2007,
pp. 291–307.
[38] T. D. Y. Kozai and A. L. Vazquez, “Photoelectric artefact from optogenetics and imaging on microelectrodes and bioelectronics: New challenges
and opportunities,” J. Mater. Chem. B, vol. 3, pp. 4965–4978, 2015.
[39] X. Luo et al., “Carbon nanotube nanoreservior for controlled release of
anti-inflammatory dexamethasone,” Biomaterials, vol. 32, pp. 6316–23,
Sep. 2011.

Takashi D. Y. Kozai received the B.A. (magna cum
laude) degree with distinction in molecular, cellular,
and developmental biology, and another B.A. degree
with distinction in biochemistry from the University
of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA, both in 2005, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA, in 2007 and 2011, respectively.
From 2007 to 2009, he cofounded Fontis Biotechnologies, a medical device startup for transdermal
macromolecular drug delivery. From 2011 to 2013,
he was a Postdoctoral Associate Researcher with the Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, where in 2013, he was
appointed as a Research Assistant Professor. His primary research interests
include the elucidating molecular and cellular pathways of brain injuries and
diseases, implantable medical devices, biomaterials, and neurotechnology.

Kasey Catt received the B.S.E. degree in bioengineering from the Pennsylvania State University, State
College, PA, USA, in 2010. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
His current research interest includes the use of
conductive polymer composites as coatings for improved performance of implantable devices.

Zhanhong Du was born in Xi’an, China, in 1988.
He received the B.S. degree in biological sciences
from the University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China, in 2009. In 2009, he joined the
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, as a Ph.D. candidate.
His current research interests include conducting
polymers, multielectrode arrays, and cortical neural
networks.

Kyounghwan Na received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering and the M.S. degree in electrical
engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea, in 2005 and 2007, respectively. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA.
From 2007 to 2011, he was with the Korea Institute of Science and Technology. His research interest
includes silicon-based microfabricated neural probe.

Onnop Srivannavit received the B.S. degree in
chemical technology and the M.S. degree in petrochemical technology from Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand, in 1992 and 1995 respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in chemical engineering from
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in
2002.
He was a Research Engineer with the University of
Michigan from 2002 to 2012. He is currently a Lead
Engineer at ePack, Ann Arbor. His research interests
include the development of microelectromechanical
systems and microfluidic devices for biomedical and environmental applications.

Razi-ul M. Haque received the B.S.E. degree in
electrical engineering and computer engineering,
the M.S.E. degree in electrical engineering, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering: Circuits
and microsystems from the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 2004, 2005, and 2011,
respectively .
Since 2001, he has been working on a variety of
microelectromechanical systems from microfluidic
devices for DNA analysis to a highly integrated and
compact microsystem for in vivo continuous monitoring. During his postdoctoral work with the University of Michigan, he explored
neural probe designs that reduced neural tissue damage by minimizing silicon area. He is currently the President and CEO with Structured Microsystems
LLC, Ann Arbor, a spinoff from the University of Michigan that is specialized in
microsystem design and especially on products based on the proprietary glassin-silicon reflow process that he developed during his graduate work. His main
research interests include implantable BioMEMS and novel microfabrication
techniques that enable new microsystems for interdisciplinary solutions.

KOZAI et al.: CHRONIC In Vivo EVALUATION OF PEDOT/CNT FOR STABLE NEURAL RECORDINGS

John Seymour received the B.S.(Hons.) degree in
engineering physics from Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA, in 1996, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in biomedical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 2004 and
2009, respectively.
He was with NeuroNexus, a neurotechnology
firm, from 2009 to 2013. He is currently a Senior
Research Fellow at the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Michigan. His research
interests include MEMS, electrophysiological sensors, implantable medical devices, optical stimulation tools, and advanced
packaging.

Kensall D. Wise (S’61–M’69–SM’83–F’86–LF’07)
received the B.S.E.E. degree with highest distinction
from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in
1963, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA, in 1964 and 1969, respectively.
From 1963 to 1965 and from 1972 to 1974,
he was a Member of the Technical Staff with Bell
Telephone Laboratories, where his work focused on
the exploratory development of integrated electronics
for use in telephone communications. From 1965 to
1972, he was a Research Assistant, and, then, a Research Associate and Lecturer
with Stanford, working on the development of micromachined silicon sensors.
In 1974, he joined the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, where he is
currently the William Gould Dow Distinguished University Professor Emeritus
of electrical engineering and computer science and the Professor Emeritus of
biomedical engineering.
Dr. Wise was the General Chairman of the IEEE Solid-State Sensor Conference (Hilton Head) in 1984 and was the Technical Program Chairman in
1985 and General Chairman in 1997 of the IEEE International Conference on
Solid-State Sensors, Actuators, and Microsystems. He received the 1990 Paul
Rappaport Award from the IEEE Electron Devices Society, the 1995 Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award from the University of Michigan, the 1996
Columbus Prize from the Christopher Columbus Fellowship Foundation, the
1997 SRC Aristotle Award, and the 1999 IEEE Solid-State Circuits Technical
Field Award. He held the 2007 Henry Russel Lectureship at the University of
Michigan. He is a Fellow of the AIMBE and a Member of the United States
National Academy of Engineering.

119

Euisik Yoon received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
electronics engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1982 and 1984, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in
1990.
From 1990 to 1994, he was with the Fairchild
Research Center of the National Semiconductor Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA, where he involved in
researching deep submicron CMOS integration and
advanced gate dielectrics. From 1994 to 1996, he was
a Member of the Technical Staff with Silicon Graphics Inc., Mountain View,
CA, where he worked on the design of the MIPS microprocessor R4300i and the
RCP 3-D graphic coprocessor. He took faculty positions with the Department
of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea, from 1996 to 2005, and with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA, from
2005 to 2008, respectively. During the academic year of 2000 to 2001, he was
a Visiting Faculty with Agilent Laboratory, Palo Alto, CA. In 2008, he joined
the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of
Michigan, where he is a Professor and is currently the Director of the Lurie
Nanofabrication Facility. His research interests include MEMS, integrated microsystems, and VLSI circuit design.

Xinyan Tracy Cui was born in Beijing, China, in
1971. She received the B.E. degree in polymer materials and chemical engineering and the M.S. degree
in biophysics from Tsinghua University, Beijing, in
1994 and 1997, respectively. She then received the
Ph.D. degree in macromolecular science and engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, in 2002.
In 2003, she joined the Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, as an Assistant Professor, and became a full
Professor in 2015. Her research interests include neural engineering with special focuses on neural electrode–tissue interface, neural tissue engineering, CNS
drug delivery, and biosensor. Specific projects include: 1) Biomimetic surface
coatings for neural microelectrode arrays to improve chronic neural recording
and stimulation stability, reliability, and longevity; 2) Micropatterning of biochemical, surface chemical, and electrical cues on electrode arrays for neural
network study; 3) Controlled drug delivery and biochemical sensing in nervous
system; 4) Control of neural stem cell growth and differentiation via surface and
electrical cues.
Dr. Cui is an Associate Editor of the Journal of Materials Chemistry B.
She received the Wallace Coulter Foundation Early Career Award in 2005, the
National Science Foundation Career Award in 2008, and the Carnegie Science
Award Emerging Female Scientist in 2013.

