IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

1375

Anatomically Informed Metrics
for Connectivity-Based Cortical Parcellation
From Diffusion MRI
Rosalia L. Tungaraza, Sonya H. Mehta, David R. Haynor, and Thomas J. Grabowski

Abstract—Connectivity information derived from diffusion MRI
can be used to parcellate the cerebral cortex into anatomically and
functionally meaningful subdivisions. Acquisition and processing
parameters can significantly affect parcellation results, and there
is no consensus on best practice protocols. We propose a novel
approach for evaluating parcellation based on measuring the degree to which parcellation conforms to known principles of brain
organization, specifically cortical field homogeneity and interhemispheric homology. The proposed metrics are well behaved on morphologically generated whole-brain parcels, where they correctly
identify contralateral homologies and give higher scores to anatomically versus arbitrarily generated parcellations. The measures
show that individual cortical fields have characteristic connectivity
profiles that are compact and separable, and that the topological
arrangement of such fields is strongly conserved between hemispheres and individuals. The proposed metrics can be used to evaluate the quality of parcellations at the subject and group levels and
to improve acquisition and data processing for connectivity-based
cortical parcellation.
Index Terms—Cerebral cortex, cortical parcellation, Davies–
Bouldin, diffusion weighted imaging, earth mover’s distance, topological distance, tractography.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE primate cerebral cortex is comprised of a mosaic of
anatomic fields occupying contiguous regions of cortex
[1]. Each cortical field is believed to have a distinct cytoarchitecture, myeloarchitecture, neurotransmitter receptor architecture, and pattern of connectivity that differentiate it from neighboring fields. Cortical fields may function as neurophysiologic
units [2]. The ability to accurately and reliably delineate cortical
fields in vivo would be fundamentally useful for studying neuroanatomical variation and the organization of brain function in
humans. Recent work has demonstrated the feasibility of using

T

Manuscript received December 21, 2014; revised May 9, 2015; accepted June
2, 2015. Date of publication June 12, 2015; date of current version July 23, 2015.
This work was supported by the U.S. National Institutes of Health under Grant
RC4 NS073008.
R. L. Tungaraza was with the Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA. She is now with ARAZOO, New York, NY
10022 USA (e-mail: rltungar@gmail.com).
S. H. Mehta is with the Department of Psychology, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: sonya.maus@gmail.com).
D. R. Haynor is with the Department of Radiology, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: haynor@uw.edu).
T. J. Grabowski is with the Departments of Radiology and Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: tgrabow@uw.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2444917

diffusion MRI (dMRI) to segment the human cortex into units
based on patterns of estimated anatomical connectivity to other
brain regions [3]–[16].
Cortical field structure and its relationship to connectivity has
been worked out most clearly in experimental animals, and particularly in the primate visual cortex [17], [18]. Studies of higher
order association regions in the human brain have appeared in
recent years, but the extent to which these regions may also
be differentiated and defined by connectivity is incompletely
known.
One human association region that has been parcellated with
more than one modality is the inferior parietal lobule (IPL). It
has been divided based on receptor distribution [19], cytoarchitectonics [20], anatomical connectivity (dMRI) [14]–[16], [21],
and functional connectivity (rsfMRI) [22]. The histologic approach subdivides the IPL into seven regions, while a receptorbased approach suggests dividing the IPL into three subregions
[19]. Parcellations using dMRI and rsfMRI result in three to
seven subregions [3], [11], [14]–[16] depending on the processing pipeline used and/or level of granularity assumed.
Connectivity-based parcellation is influenced by diffusion image acquisition and postprocessing methods [23]. There is as yet
no consensus on a “best practice” workflow and no gold standard for evaluating the truth of dMRI parcellation per subject,
in vivo (see [24] or more discussion on this issue). Aside from
comparing parcellation across modalities, approaches used to
evaluate the quality of dMRI parcellation have included evaluating reproducibility across independent acquisition sessions,
and consistency in number and location of parcels across different subjects [12].
Here, we propose a complementary approach to parcellation
evaluation that is based on known principles of brain organization, specifically interhemispheric anatomic homology and
cortical field anatomic homogeneity. Cortical homology states
that the two hemispheres of the normal human brain possess the
same inventory of cortical regions, in similar positions, and that
the same is true for distinct human subjects. Cortical homology
is a well-established principle that is observable in many contexts. Examples include the Brodmann cytoarchitectonic parcellation [25], parcellations based on genetic information [26]
and rsfMRI [27], and the receptor-architectonic and cytoarchitectonic parcellations of the human IPL and other regions [19],
[20]. Note that interhemispheric homology does not imply an expectation that the hemispheres are mirror images of each other,
because there are variations in cortical folding and in the size

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1376

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

and shape of individual fields. Despite these first-order differences, the topological arrangement of each pair of homologs
across the two hemispheres is generally preserved (e.g., as in
[20, Fig. 14]). Thus, a valid parcellation process, conducted independently in two hemispheres, should result in homologous
parcellations.
In addition to connectivity-defined parcels having counterparts in the other hemisphere, parcellations across hemispheres
should produce the same topological arrangement of homologous regions. In the work reported here, we develop and evaluate
a metric which tests whether segmentation of cortex by connectivity profiles fulfills this expectation.
Finally, we expect that the anatomic connectivity of homologous regions will be more similar than the connectivity patterns
of regions that are not homologs. Some prior evidence from
dMRI is available. A study by Caspers et al. [28] used the Jülich
probabilistic cytoarchitectonic parcellation of the human IPL to
investigate the anatomic connectivity pattern of five IPL subregions (PFt, PF, PFm, PGa, and PGp). The study computed
probabilistic fiber tracks using these subregions mapped onto
the brains of 40 healthy humans. They found that the connectivity profiles (also called “fingerprints”) of homologous regions
were qualitatively more similar compared to nonhomologous
regions [28], and though not evaluated specifically, the relative
locations of homologs with respect to their physical neighbors
also appeared similar in the results.
We employ three quantitative measures that collectively capture the degree of homology across dMRI-parcellations: Earth
mover’s distance (EMD), topological distance (TpD) and the
Davies–Bouldin index (DB). EMD [29]–[31] has been used in
computer vision for image similarity and retrieval and is adapted
here to match homologous regions on the basis of connectivity.
We devised the TpD metric specifically to measure the similarity of the topological arrangement of putative homologous
brain areas between hemispheres and across subjects. DB [32]
is commonly used in studies of clustering as a measure of cluster
homogeneity. These three measures can be used in conjunction,
in addition to other metrics outlined above for validating dMRI
parcellations in vivo, and have the advantage of allowing within
subject/acquisition assessment.
We used three approaches.to evaluate the proposed metrics.
1) First, we explored their behavior in coarse whole-brain parcellations in which boundaries were defined by subject-specific
macroscopic anatomical landmarks. We assigned betweenhemisphere homologs by minimizing EMD on the parcel-wise
tractograms and then tested whether the topological arrangement of the regions so assigned was preserved, measured by
TpD. Performance was compared to arbitrary parcellations. 2)
Second, we evaluated a five-region dMRI parcellation of the
human IPL. We chose the IPL because it is relatively artifact
free in dMRI, has an available cytoarchitectonic gold standard,
and is part of association cortex where folding pattern specifics
are variable, making it impossible to parcellate on the basis of
morphology alone. Again, the fundamental test was whether
homologous parcels, as assigned by EMD, had a similar topological arrangement, assessed by TpD, compared to arbitrary

parcellations. Finally, 3) we evaluated the performance of the
metrics after dMRI-based parcellation of IPL across different
human individuals.
The organization of this paper is as follows: in Section II,
we describe our methodology for computing the connectivitydriven EMD, TpD, and DB measures, and evaluating the utility
of these measures both within and across subjects. Section III
presents our results. Section IV contains the discussion and our
conclusions are presented in Section V. A preliminary version
of this work was reported in [33].
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Acquisition
dMRI data were acquired on a Siemens TIM Trio 3T scanner, and consisted of high angular resolution dMRI with 64
unique diffusion directions, with a b-value of 1000 mm/s2 ,
2-mm isotropic voxels, and whole-brain coverage. Each acquisition had one baseline image with no gradients applied. We
also obtained high-resolution T1-weighted images with an MPRAGE pulse sequence with 1-mm isotropic resolution. There
were 19 healthy participants (ten males and nine females, age
range 21–53 years). Subjects gave informed consent and participated in accordance with the University of Iowa institutional
review board guidelines.
B. Data Processing
1) Structural Image Processing: We processed each subject’s high-resolution T1-weighted MP-RAGE image with
FreeSurfer’s “recon-all” pipeline [34], [35], yielding tissuesegmented images, cortical surface reconstructions, and cortical
anatomic segmentation according to the Desikan–Killiany [36]
and Destrieux atlases [37]. For each subject, we identified a subcortical mask, consisting of voxels 2 mm subjacent to the cortical
gray-white matter interface as defined by FreeSurfer; and a tractography mask containing all subcortical voxels, the brain stem,
and the cerebellum. We identified the IPL seed region mask for
probabilistic tractography as all voxels in the subcortical mask
subjacent to cortex in the following Destrieux atlas regions: the
angular gyrus, supramarginal gyrus, and intermedius primus
(Jensen) sulcus. All three mask images were mapped to the diffusion weighted image space on a subject-specific basis using
a non-linear registration algorithm implemented in the FMRIB
Software Library (FSL) [38].
2) Diffusion Data Processing: All diffusion-weighted images were corrected for bulk head motion and eddy current
distortions using tools from FSL [38]. The fiber orientation
distribution was then estimated for each subject using the constrained spherical deconvolution method implemented in the
MRtrix software package [39]–[41]. The maximum spherical
harmonics degree (lmax) was 8. We inferred connectivity between our seed voxels and all other white matter voxels using
the probabilistic streamline algorithm implemented in MRtrix.
For each seed voxel, we generated 5000 streamlines and set all
the other tracking parameters to their default values. For each set

TUNGARAZA et al.: ANATOMICALLY INFORMED METRICS FOR CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL PARCELLATION FROM DIFFUSION MRI

of tracks computed from a seed voxel, we created a streamline
density map based on the fraction of tracks entering each target
voxel (see step 7 below).
3) Parcellation of the IPL Seed Region: We created two types
of parcellations for each IPL: the parcellation of interest, based
on the probabilistic tractograms described above, and a set of
arbitrary (“random”) parcellations created by random seeding
and region growing, ignoring connectivity information. There
is as yet no consensus on how many subregions the human IPL
should be divided into when using dMRI. We chose to divide
each IPL seed region into five clusters because this level of parcel
granularity has been successfully used by others to segment the
IPL and perform further analysis on it using dMRI [11], [28].
a) Generation of random parcellations: We generated 100
random parcellations of each IPL using Zalesky’s MATLAB
function for random node generation (http://andrewzalesky.
com/software.html/) to produce random clusters that were approximately equal in size to those obtained from the dMRIbased parcellations. Beginning from five randomly generated
seeds, the algorithm grew the region of each cluster voxel-byvoxel, subject to the following rules: 1) a voxel is assigned to
an existing cluster that maximizes the contact area between the
voxel and the chosen cluster; 2) a voxel cannot be assigned to a
cluster with which it shares no contact area; 3) if two or more
clusters are equally strong candidates based on contact, the cluster whose center of mass is closest to the voxel is chosen; and
4) any further ties between clusters are broken randomly. This
process was repeated until all IPL voxels had been assigned to
exactly one cluster [42].
b) Generation of connectivity-defined parcellations: We
used the affinity propagation (AP) clustering algorithm described in [43] to divide the IPL seed region. AP has been
successfully used for connectivity-based cortex parcellation of
the inferior frontal gyrus together with the precentral gyrus in
[8]. While AP outperforms other clustering algorithms in many
applications, there are many alternative algorithms, and we did
not perform an exhaustive comparison. We used AP to cluster
the tractograms of each IPL seed region into five clusters as
follows: 1) we constructed an N × N matrix M of correlations
between the tractograms of all N voxels in the IPL seed region;
and 2) using M as a similarity matrix, the AP method identified
five voxels from the set of all voxels in the IPL seed region
as cluster exemplars. Each of the remaining voxels was then
assigned to the most similar exemplar.
4) Cluster Quality Evaluation Using the DB Index: We assessed the quality of the resulting segmentation for each type of
parcellation and for each IPL independently. We used the DB
index [32] to assess the extent to which the resulting clusters are
compact (i.e., voxel-level tractograms within the same cluster
have high intracluster similarity) and separable (i.e., voxel-level
tractograms from different clusters have low similarity). There
are other similar cluster validation measures that could also be
used (refer to [32] for an overview). DB is given by the formula:
1
maxi= j
n i=1
n

DB =



αi + αj
d (ci , cj )


(1)

1377

where n is the number of clusters, ci and cj are the centroids
of clusters i and j, respectively, αi and αj are the average
distances between all elements in clusters i and j , respectively,
and d (ci , cj ) is the distance between cluster ci and cj , defined
as the average distance between tractograms in the two clusters.
We computed the DB for each hemisphere independently and
then averaged the score from both hemispheres to obtain the DB
score for a given parcellation.
5) Calculating Connectivity Profiles for Whole-Brain
Anatomic Parcellation: We created a connectivity profile from
each Desikan–Killiany atlas region to the 34 ipsilateral regions
using probabilistic fiber tracking. All MRtrix parameters were
kept at default values except the number of tracks to be generated, where we used 10 000 tracks. We normalized each tractogram by the total number of tracks that reached any of the 35
target regions. The result was a 35 × 35 matrix for each hemisphere, in which each row represented the connectivity profile
(“fingerprint”) of a given Desikan–Killany atlas region.
6) Quantifying Homology in Whole-Brain Parcellation: We
identified pairs of homologous parcels from the whole-brain
parcellations between hemispheres by minimizing the average
pairwise EMD of their connectivity profiles.
EMD is a metric used to quantify the dissimilarity between
two histograms [29]. Compared to a simple sum-of-squares difference between two histograms, the EMD allows for the possibility that some pairs of bins (regions in this case) are more
similar than others (as measured by a between-bins “ground
distance,” d). It measures the minimum total cost of redistributing the probability mass within one histogram so as to match
the other, where the cost per unit of mass moved from one bin
to another is given by the ground distance between the two
bins. In our application of the metric, we seek to quantify the
dissimilarity between the connectivity fingerprints of two brain
regions. For the ground distance matrix D, we used the Jeffreydivergencedistance between
  two regionsl and r, defined as:

lk
k
dlr = k lk × log a k + rk × log ar kk where ak = l k +r
2 ,
and k indexes the connectivity fingerprint bins, i.e., the other
regions. If l and r have identical tractograms, d will be 0. Once
the ground distance between bins has been defined, the EMD
is based on solving a linear programming problem [29]; this is
done for each pair of regions. A low value of EMD implies that
the connectivity pattern of two brain regions is similar. After
the EMD has been computed between every pair of regions, the
assignment algorithm was used to compute the optimal pairing
of subregions across the hemispheres [44].
7) Calculating Connectivity Profiles for IPL ConnectivityBased Parcellation: We created connectivity profiles for the
five regions of each IPL as follows. For each subject, we performed probabilistic fiber tracking from each IPL region to the
75 cortical regions of FreeSurfer’s Destrieux atlas ipsilateral to
the seed. We used the Destrieux atlas, rather than the Desikan–
Killiany atlas, because of its finer anatomic resolution and because it tends to separate sulcal from gyral regions, a distinction
often accompanied by differences in cytoarchitecture. We rejected fiber tracks that started and ended in the same region. We
randomly seeded 10 000 tracks from each region, keeping all

1378

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

other MRtrix parameters at their default values. Clustering was
performed using the AP algorithm, and the connectivity profile
was computed for each cluster by normalizing the cluster’s tractogram by the total number of tracks that reached any of the 75
target regions. The product was a 5 × 75 matrix, one per IPL, in
which each row is the normalized connectivity profile (“fingerprint”) of a given cluster. Optimal connection-based homology
between contralateral IPLs was then established using the EMD
as described above for whole-brain parcellation.
8) Measuring Conservation of Subregion Topology Using the
TpD: Once a correspondence between left and right brain homologs was defined, we projected the parcel labels from the
subcortical seed voxels to the cortex using Freesurfer. We relabeled all clusters in the two contralateral parcellations such that
each left region had the same cluster label as its homologous
(computed as described above) right hemisphere region. We
computed an N × N topology matrix for each IPL/hemisphere,
where N is the total number of subregions. The (i, j) entry of
this matrix was the number of voxels from region i that are spatially in contact (26-nearest neighbor) with voxels from region j.
We then normalize each row to sum to 1. The TpD between the
left and right IPL/hemisphere is defined as the cosine distance
of the two normalized matrices after vectorizing them. The TpD
score ranges from 0 to 1. A score close to 0 suggests that two
IPLs or hemispheres have similar topology, while a score closer
to 1 indicates they have maximally dissimilar topology.
9) Cross-Subject Homology Assignment: We also evaluated
the utility of the connectivity-driven EMD for identification of
homologous IPL regions across subjects. We did this for each
hemisphere independently in three steps: 1) pooling together
the parcel-level connectivity fingerprints of all subjects across
that hemisphere; 2) identifying five exemplar connectivity fingerprints from the pooled connectivity fingerprints using AP
clustering, which we term the group exemplars; and 3) using
the EMD-based approach described above in step 6 to assign
each subject’s set of parcel-level connectivity fingerprints to the
group exemplar that was most similar to it.
10) Visualization of Homologous Parcellations: For display
purposes, after EMD was used to identify homologs across
hemispheres, we labeled each pair of homologous regions with
a unique index and an associated RGB color. For cross-subject
analysis of the IPL, we used the AP algorithm to jointly cluster
all 38 IPLs into five clusters, each with a groupwise exemplar,
as explained in step 8. Then, we labeled each cluster in an individual subject with the index and color of the group exemplar
to which its connectivity profile was most closely matched.

III. RESULTS
A. Metrics Correctly Demonstrate That Connections in the
Two Hemispheres Are Very Similar, at a Coarse Scale
The connectivity among 35 cortical regions in the Desikan–
Killiany atlas was analyzed using the proposed measures. We
compared results to those generated by EMD-based assignment
of “homology” in random parcellations (see Fig. 1). Both EMD
and TpD scores were much lower for true parcellations and
both metrics cleanly separate the Desikan–Killiany parcellations

Fig. 1. Pairwise EMD and TpD scores for all 19 subjects (blue circles:
Desikan–Killiany parcellation, green diamonds: random parcellation). The three
circled subjects with higher TpD scores are discussed in text and Fig. 3.

from the random parcellations. Just as importantly, homology
assignments based on connectivity similarity reflected the true
anatomic labels (see Fig. 2). Further, TpD clearly shows similar topological relations between homologously connected portions of the brain, reinforcing the idea that EMD is tapping
into the brain’s biological structure. In other words, both EMD
and TpD demonstrate that connections in the two hemispheres
are very similar, and that connectivity information is sufficient
to identify anatomically homologous regions at the scale of
conventional regional brain atlases. The sole and specific exception was that the connectivity profiles of the medial orbitofrontal cortex and the frontal pole (FP) exchanged labels
across hemispheres in three subjects (S3, S6, and S11, see bottom panel). We believe this error is due to the well-known
magnetic field inhomogeneity-related artifacts affecting diffusion imaging in the orbitofrontal cortex, which lies immediately
above the frontal sinus.
Though EMD was also generally matched the random parcels
(see Fig. 2) to contralateral parcels in similar locations, these
parcellations generated higher EMD values than the true parcellations, presumably because random parcellations violate field
boundaries, and much higher TpD values.
Finally, the three subjects with a (single) reversed pair of
anatomic labels were separated from those with entirely correct
labels by their TpD scores (see Fig. 1, circled data points),
demonstrating that the TpD metric is a potentially sensitive
measure of individual parcellation quality.
B. Metrics Find Consistent Structure in the Connectivity of
IPL Regions, Within and Across Normal Individuals
We parcellated the IPL regions of the 19 subjects based
on dMRI, assigned homologies on the basis of EMD, and

TUNGARAZA et al.: ANATOMICALLY INFORMED METRICS FOR CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL PARCELLATION FROM DIFFUSION MRI

1379

Fig. 3. Average DB versus Average TpD + EMD for the IPL parcellations
(blue circles: dMRI-based; green diamonds: random). Encircled: Ten subjects
in the extreme favorable corner of the metric space.
Fig. 2. (Top panel) Whole-brain parcellations of two subjects (S15 and S17)
whose homologous Desikan–Killiany regions are matched perfectly across
hemispheres based on diffusion data. (Middle panel) Random parcellations for
the same subjects showing ROIs matched to similar anatomic locations across
the two hemispheres, but did not respect major morphological boundaries, e.g.,
superior temporal sulcus. (Bottom panel) Erroneous homology assignment of
Desikan–Killiany parcels for the three subjects (S11, S3, and S6) circled in
Fig. 2 for whom the combined EMD and TpD scores were unfavorable relative
to the other 15 subjects. In all three cases, the mismatched ROIs were the FP
(white arrows on S3) and Medial Orbital Frontal regions (white arrows on S6
and S11).

assessed the EMD, TpD, and average DB measures. We found
that the variables EMD and TpD were highly correlated.
We, therefore, summed EMD and TpD scores to produce a
score that estimated the degree to which an IPL parcellation resulted in homologous clusters and plotted this score
and DB for the 19 connectivity-based parcellations and the
1900 random parcellations. The results (see Fig. 3) clearly
distinguish connectivity-based and random parcellations. The
1900 random parcellations of the 19 subjects generated mean
and standard deviations of the EMD, TpD, and average DB
scores of 0.24 ± 0.05, 0.22 ± 0.13, and 2.00 ± 0.15, respectively (crosshairs in Fig. 3). The instances of connectivity-based
parcellations concentrate in the favorable corner of the plot, and
a cluster of 10 of the 19 subjects outperforms virtually all random parcellations, with scores in the lower 10% of scores for
each measure. Visual inspection of the parcellations in these
subjects show that homologous parcellations assigned by EMD
had similar topological arrangements (see Fig. 4).
Finally, in the remaining nine subjects whose metric scores
did not cluster toward the origin in Fig. 3 (blue dots not circled),
inspection of the parcellations (see Fig. 4, middle column) confirms departures in topology across hemispheres. For example:
1) the blue cluster in the left hemisphere of S3 is divided by
the yellow cluster; 2) the green and yellow clusters of S5 are
in contact in the left hemisphere but not the right; and 3) the

Fig. 4. Homology assignments of five IPL parcels between hemispheres. Left
column: six of the ten subjects encircled in Fig. 4, whose TpD+EMD and average DB scores were highly favorable. Middle column: six of the remaining nine
subjects whose TpD+EMD and average DB scores less favorable (see text for
discussion). Right column: Representative random parcellations, (corresponding to same subjects as left column). Homologs are color coded, with different
coding schemes across subjects.

red and green clusters of S13 have inverted positions across
hemispheres.
C. Cross-Subject Homolog Identification Using EMD
Homology assigned by EMD and parcel-level connectivity fingerprints (step 8, above) also successfully matched the

1380

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

Fig. 5. Within-hemisphere, between-subject homology assignment of the IPL
based on dMRI-based parcellation of the left hemisphere. Subjects are arranged
row-wise ranked by EMD score with respect to the group prototype (top row
most similar to prototype). Homologous regions have the same color.

same-side hemispheres of different subjects. Fig. 5 depicts results for the left hemispheres. It shows a consensus anterior to
posterior topological arrangement of parcels, corresponding to
the colors: green, blue, red, brown, and yellow. All but 3 subjects (S7, S19, and S11) adhered to this pattern. For S19 and
S11, the yellow and brown clustered were exchanged, while S7
exchanged the red and blue clusters. There was also a consensus topological arrangement of homologous parcels for the right
hemisphere (not shown), but fewer (11 of 19) subjects fully adhered to the pattern. Studies in more subjects will be required
in order to know if this variability is real or reflects limitations
of dMRI-based parcellation.
IV. DISCUSSION
Absent a “ground truth” for evaluating subject-specific dMRI
parcellation in vivo, we pursued an alternative strategy of joint
consideration of measures that operationalize known principles
of brain organization, namely interhemispheric anatomic homology, topological similarity across individuals, and homogeneity and spatial contiguity of cortical fields. We suggest that
the degree of consistency with these principles is a valuable
assessment of parcellation quality.
We present three complementary measures. EMD expresses
how well the parcel-level connectivity profiles of regions in one
hemisphere can be made to map onto those of an independently
segmented (contralateral or different subject) hemisphere. TpD
evaluates the degree to which the EMD-driven solution produces
topologically similar parcellations across hemispheres and subjects. Finally, DB expresses how homogeneous and separable
the connectivity profiles are in the parcellation.
A. EMD, TpD, and DB Metrics Find Consistent Biological
Structure in dMRI Cortical Connectivity
The proposed metrics were face valid and well-behaved
on an anatomically-driven whole-brain parcellation, perfectly

distinguishing them from random parcellations. The EMDdriven solution correctly recovered anatomic homologies, except for a few failures in a specific region (orbitofrontal cortex)
known to be artifact-prone in our dataset, which did not use
phase-reversed acquisition techniques. The same local failures
were also reflected in higher TpD scores, underscoring the utility
of the metrics in identifying good-quality parcellations.
We then evaluated performance on these metrics for finegrained parcellation of an association region (IPL) with variable surface anatomy, based entirely on the dMRI data. The
dMRI-based parcellations generated parcels that were more similar across hemispheres than random parcellations. The parcels
matched in this way had the same topological arrangement, as
measured by TpD, even though the matching approach imposed
no such constraint.
The IPL parcellations that emerged were notable for two
other reasons. First, the clusters that emerged were spatially
contiguous, though no spatial constraints were incorporated
in the processing and clustering algorithm we used for dMRI
connectivity-based parcellation. (As noted in Methodology, only
the random parcels are spatially contiguous by design.) Second,
there was a high correlation of the EMD and TpD scores for
individual subjects. This need not necessarily have been the
case, since EMD depends only on connectivity and TpD only
on topology. In other words, when two opposite hemisphere IPL
parcellations are matched so as to minimize EMD, the homologous regions will be arranged spatially in the same way. These
emergent relationships are evidence that consistent biological
structure is present in cortical connectivity, and, specifically,
that specific profiles of connectivity identify individual contiguous patches of cortex, within which the profiles are relatively
homogenous.
Analogously, we produced homologous parcellations across
different subjects. Homology was assigned purely on the basis
of the diffusion information and did not explicitly incorporate
morphological or stereotactic coordinate information. A canonical parcellation was obtained for the IPL in almost all subjects,
strongly suggesting that different individuals have a similarly
arranged set of IPL subregions with similar connectivity profiles, further supporting the fundamental biological validity of
our approach.
B. Using the Proposed Metrics to Evaluate Individual
Parcellation and Parcellation Workflow
Our workflow performed well on most subjects, but better
on some datasets than others. The proposed metrics appeared
to be sensitive to these cases. In the coarse anatomic parcellations, the three (incorrect) anatomic label exchanges resulted in
increased TpD values. In the IPL segmentations, the diffusionsegmented parcellations that had higher EMD and TpD values
also displayed violations of anatomic homology. We suggest
the metric variability indicates shortcomings of the workflow or
data quality, as opposed to the metrics themselves.
Our purpose was to demonstrate the utility of our measures
in identifying better parcellations, and we used one of a number
of conceivable image processing pipelines to segment the IPL.

TUNGARAZA et al.: ANATOMICALLY INFORMED METRICS FOR CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL PARCELLATION FROM DIFFUSION MRI

dMRI segmentation results are likely influenced by the technical
details of acquisition and processing, such as: 1) the number of
unique diffusion gradient directions, 2) the b-value(s), 3) voxel
size, 4) methods for removing data artifacts, correcting for eddy
current distortions and subject motion, 5) model for diffusivity in
each voxel (e.g., tensor, fiber orientation distribution function,
etc.), 6) definition of seed and target regions, 7) tractography
approach and implementation (deterministic or probabilistic), 8)
the values of free parameters for tractography such as minimum
fiber length, number of fibers to initiate tractography with and,
the criteria for terminating tracks, 9) the tractogram clustering
approach, and 10) the granularity of parcellation. Each variation
can potentially affect the resulting parcellation [23], and there
is as yet no consensus on a “best practice” workflow.
The measures presented here, in combination, can be used
to evaluate and guide the development of best practices for
connectivity-based cortical parcellation. We expect that improved quality of diffusion data and/or processing will improve
the separation between diffusion-segmented and randomly segmented data sets and reduce the topological variation among
resultant IPL parcellations. In this formulation, a parcellation is
applied independently to each subject, and a good parcellation
approach is one that optimizes these metrics across the group.
Whether diffusion-based and other in vivo-defined cortical
fields (e.g., by resting state fMRI [27], [45]–[47], fMRI metaanalysis [48], or myelin content [49]) coincide with those defined ex vivo by histologic structure [19], [20], [25] is an ongoing focus of work. Preliminary comparisons of the parcellations
obtained using these different modalities have shown both similarities and mismatches in terms of the location, boundaries, and
level of granularity of the segmented regions. These measures
presented here are complementary to these and other approaches
to appraising parcellation, such as reproducibility across sessions/subjects, or convergence with task or resting fMRI, and
have the virtue of being independent of other imaging modalities
or MRI acquisition sequences.

1381

at the level of the anatomical atlases we used, which consist of
large regions that, in reality, comprise multiple more homogeneous subregions, as we see in the IPL.
Second, a perfect parcellation would not be expected to have
perfect EMD and TpD scores because anatomic morphology
and connectivity probably have, inherently, some degree of
hemispheric asymmetry. For instance, the human cerebral hemispheres are known to have significant functional asymmetry.
While this is best known in the case of language-related regions,
it is also known to be the case in other domains such as attentional processing, object recognition, and others [50], [51]. Yet
despite a well-established degree of functional lateralization in
the human brain, there exists remarkable structural symmetry, at
the macroscopic level [52]–[54]. It is likely that these functional
differences are reflected in quantitative differences in the relative strength of fiber connections among cortical fields, which
nonetheless remain homologous across the two hemispheres.
For example, there are between-hemisphere differences in the
size of the arcuate fasciculus [55]–[57] in fiber-tracked connections in the temporoparietal junction [58]. These differences
may be a matter of degree rather than tract destination, and it
is likely, and experimentally testable, that homologous regions
have a more similar connectivity profile than nonhomologous
regions, even for components of functionally lateralized systems. Consistent with this idea, our metrics were well behaved
on whole cortex coarse morphologic parcellations.
Finally, the metrics will not detect systematic bias that preserves and/or promotes consistency across hemispheres, e.g.,
signal dropout along similar regions of both hemispheres. This
might result in parcellations that do not reflect cortical fields,
while still exhibiting strong correspondences across the two
hemispheres. Both limitations can be overcome through the
concurrent use of other evaluation criteria and/or use of data
that attenuates systematic biases in homology (e.g., right-left
phase encoding of dMRI during acquisition).
V. CONCLUSION

C. Limitations of the Proposed Metrics
The measures have several limitations: First, the optimization
of metric values is only approximate with respect to accurate
identification of cortical fields. Our decision to confine analysis
to the IPL may have resulted in variable inclusion of cortical fields at the temporoparieto-occipital junction, which is not
anchored by an invariant landmark, and where the FreeSurfer
morphologic parcellation consequently probably varied with respect to cortical field boundaries, potentially introducing seed
voxels belong to adjacent fields. This would not be a problem
for whole-brain parcellation, which was beyond the scope of the
current work. Similarly, an inherent contributor of variability in
DB is the fact that we defined cortical targets via morphologically defined areas, and there is known to be variability of cortical field boundaries with respect to cortical folding features.
Finally, the fact that DB, a measure of cluster homogeneity, was
not uniformly lower for “true” parcellations than in random parcellations probably reflects residual connectional heterogeneity

We demonstrate the use of three complementary metrics
rooted in experimentally based knowledge about cortical structure and homology, for assessing the quality of cortical parcellation. Analysis of these measures strongly supports the notion
that individual cortical fields have characteristic connectivity
profiles that are compact and separable, and that the topological arrangement of such fields is strongly conserved between
hemispheres and individuals.
These metrics can be used for quality control of individual
parcellations and to guide improvements in acquisition, reconstruction, and/or clustering approaches for dMRI data. They are
complementary to, rather than exclusive of, other approaches.
We believe that this work contributes to the development
MRI-based approaches capable of detecting, and rendering scientifically accessible the structure of brain systems supporting
cognition and behavior. Connectivity-based cortical parcellation
makes possible the segmentation of the mesoscale cortical units
(“cortical fields”) on anatomic grounds in individual subjects

1382

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, JULY 2015

and can be a powerful adjunct to multimodal cognitive neuroscience studies of brain-behavior relations and interindividual
differences.
REFERENCES
[1] P. E. Roland and K. Zilles, “Structural divisions and functional fields in
the human cerebral cortex,” Brain Res. Rev., vol. 26, nos. 2/3, pp. 87–105,
May 1998.
[2] R. E. Passingham, K. E. Klaas, and R. Kötter, “The anatomical basis of
functional localization in the cortex,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 3, no. 8,
pp. 606–616, 2002.
[3] E. Wang, R. F. Tungaraza, D. R. Haynor, and T. J. Grabowski,
“Multi-subject connectivity-based parcellation of the human IPL using Gaussian mixture models and hidden Markov random fields,” in
Proc. Int. Symp. Biomed. Imaging, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2013,
pp. 520–523.
[4] P. Roca, D. Riviére, P. Guevara, C. Poupon, and J-F. Mangin,
“Tractography-based parcellation of the cortex using a spatially-informed
dimension reduction of the connectivity matrix,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Medical Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, London, U.K., 2009,
pp. 935–942.
[5] A. Crippa, L. Cerliani, L. Nanetti, and J. Roerdink, “Heuristics for
connectivity-based brain parcellation of SMA/pre-SMA through forcedirected graph layout,” NeuroImage, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 2176–2184,
Feb. 2011.
[6] M. Perrin, Y. Cointepas, A. Cachia, C. Poupon, B. Thirion, D. Riviére,
P. Cathier, V. E. Kouby, A. Constantinesco, D. Le Bihan, J.-F. Mangin, “Connectivity-based parcellation of the cortical mantle using q-ball
diffusion imaging,” Int. J. Biomed. Imaging, vol. 2008, pp. 368–406,
2008.
[7] V. Tomassini, S. Jbabdi, J. C. Klein, T. Behrens, C. Pozzilli, P. M. Mathers, M. Rushworth, and H. Johansen-Berg, “Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human lateral premotor cortex identifies dorsal and ventral subregions with anatomical and functional specializations,” J. Neurosci., vol. 27, no. 38, pp. 10259–10269,
Sep. 2007.
[8] N. S. Gorbach, C. Schütte, C. Melzer, M. Goldau, O. Sujazow, J. Jitsev,
T. Douglas, and M. Tittgemeyer, “Hierarchical information-based clustering for connectivity-based cortex parcellation,” Frontiers Neuroinformatics, vol. 5, p. 18, 2011.
[9] A. Anwander, M. Tittgemeyer, D. von Cramon, A. Friederici, and
T. Knösche, “Connectivity-based parcellation of broca’s area,” Cerebral
Cortex, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 816–825, Apr. 2007.
[10] J. C. Klein, T. Behrens, M. D. Robson, C. E. Mackay, D. J. Higham,
and H. Johansen-Berg, “Connectivity-based parcellation of human cortex
using diffusion MRI: Establishing reproducibility, validity and observer
independence in BA 44/45 and SMA/pre-SMA,” NeuroImage, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 204–211, Jan. 2007.
[11] R. B. Mars, S. Jbabdi, J. Sallet, J. X. O’Reilly, P. L. Croxson, E. Olivier,
M. P. Noonan, C. Bergmann, A. S. Mitchell, M. G. Baxter,
T. Behrens, D. Johansen-Berg, V. Tomassini, K. L. Miller, and
M. Rushworth, “Diffusion-weighted imaging tractography-based parcellation of the human parietal cortex and comparison with human and
macaque resting-state functional connectivity,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31,
no. 11, pp. 4087–4100, Mar. 2011.
[12] S. Jbabdi, M. W. Woolrich, and T. Behrens, “Multiple-subjects
connectivity-based parcellation using hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture models,” NeuroImage, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 373–384, Jan. 2009.
[13] T. Behrens, J. C. Klein, S. Jbabdi, and H. Johansen-Berg, “Connectivitybased parcellation of gray matter,” in Diffusion MRI: Theory, Methods,
and Applications, D. K. Jones, Ed. London U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press,
2011, pp. 409–424.
[14] B. Soran, X. Zhiyong, R. Tungaraza, L. Su-In, L. Shapiro, and
T. Grabowski, “Parcellation of human inferior parietal lobule based on
diffusion MRI,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc.,
2012, pp. 3219–3222.
[15] J. Wang, L. Fan, Y. Liu, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, C. Yu, and T. Jiang,
“Tractography-based parcellation of the human left inferior parietal lobule,” NeuroImage, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 641–652, Nov. 2012.
[16] R. F. Tungaraza, J. J. Howbert, S. H. Mehta, D. R. Haynor, L. G. Shaprio,
and T. J. Grabowski, “Identifying the structural architecture of the human
inferior parietal lobule using diffusion MRI,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Biomed.
Imaging, Barcelona, Spain, 2012, pp. 506–509.

[17] D. J. Felleman and D. C. Van Essen, “Distributed hierarchical processing
in the primate cerebral cortex,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–47,
1991.
[18] D. C. Van Essen, J. W. Lewis, H. A. Drury, N. Hadjikhani, R. Tottell,
M. Bakircioglu, and M. I. Miller, “Mapping visual cortex in monkeys
and humans using surface-based atlases,” Vision Res., vol. 41, nos. 10/11,
pp. 1359–1378, 2001.
[19] S. Caspers, A. Schleicher, M. Bacha-Trams, N. Palomero-Gallagher,
K. Amunts, and K. Zilles, “Organization of the human inferior parietal
lobule based on receptor architectonics,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1–14, Mar. 2012.
[20] S. Caspers, S. Geyer, A. Schleicher, H. Mohlberg, K. Amunts, and
K. Zilles, “The human inferior parietal cortex: Cytoarchitectonic parcellation and interindividual variability,” NeuroImage, vol. 33, no, 2,
pp. 430–448, Nov. 2006.
[21] S. Caspers, K. Zilles, and S. N. Eickhoff, “Connectivity of human inferior
parietal lobule assessed by diffusion tensor imaging reveals similarities to
connectivity patterns in macaques,” Society for Neuroscience Abstracts,
2009.
[22] S. M. Nelson, A. L. Cohen, J. D. Power, G. S. Wig, F. M. Miezin, M. E.
Wheeler, K. Velanova, D. I. Donaldson, J. S. Phillips, B. L. Schlaggar,
and S. E. Peterson, “A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal
cortex,” Neuron, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 156–170, Jul. 2010.
[23] T. Blumensath, S. Jbabdi, M. F. Glasser, D. C. van Essen, K. Ugurbil,
T. Behrens, and S. Smith, “Spatially constrained hierarchical parcellation
of the brain with resting-state fMRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 76, pp. 313–324,
Aug. 2013.
[24] D. C. Van Essen and M. F. Glasser, “In vivo architectonics:
A cortico-centric perspective.” NeuroImage, vol. 93, pp. 157–164,
Jun. 2013.
[25] K. Brodmann, Localisation in the Cerebral Cortex, L. J. Garey, Ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2006.
[26] C. H. Chen, E. Gutierrez, W. Thompson, N. S. Panizzon, T. L. Jernigan, L. T. Eyler, C. Fennema-Notestine, A. J. Jak, M. C. Neale, C.
E. Franz, M. J. Lyons, M. D. Grant, B. Fischl, L. J. Seidman, M. T.
Tsuang, W. S. Kremen, and A. M. Dale, “Hierarchical genetic organization of human cortical surface area,” Science, vol. 335, pp. 1634–1636,
Mar. 2012.
[27] B. T. T. Yeo, F. M. Krienen J. Sepulcre, M. R.Sabuncu D. Lashkari, M.
Hollinshead, J. L. Roffman, J. W. Smoller, L. Zöllei, J. R. Polimeni, B.
Fischl, H. Liu, and R. L. Buckner, “The organization of the human cerebral
cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity,” J. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 1125–1165, Sep. 2011.
[28] S. Caspers, S. B. Eickhoff, T. Rick, A. von Kapri, T. Kuhlen, R. Huang,
N. J. Shah, and K. Zilles, “Probabilistic fibre tract analysis of cytoarchitectonically defined human inferior parietal lobule areas reveals similarities
to macaques,” NeuroImage, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 362–380, Sep. 2011.
[29] Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, and L. J. Guibas, “The earth movers distance as
a metric for image retrieval.” Int. J. Comp. Vision, vol. 40, pp. 99–121,
2000.
[30] Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, and L. J. Guibas, “A metric for distributions with
applications to image databases,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vision,
Mumbai, India, 1998, pp. 59–66.
[31] O. Pele and M. Werman, “Fast and robust earth mover’s distances,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Computer Vision, Kyoto, Japan, 2009, pp. 460–467.
[32] (2014, Nov.). Cluster Analysis, Wikipedia. [Online]. Available:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluster_analysis
[33] R. Tungaraza, S. Mehta, and T. Grabowski, “Homology and topology
based metrics for evaluating cortical parcellations generated using diffusion MRI,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. Annu. Conf., 2014,
pp. 1022–1025.
[34] A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, and M. Sereno, “Cortical surface-based analysis
I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction,” NeuroImage, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 179–194, Feb. 1999.
[35] B. Fischl, M. I. Sereno, and A. M. Dale, “Cortical surface-based analysis.
II: Inflation, flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system,” NeuroImage, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 195–207, Feb. 1999.
[36] R. S. Desikan, F. Ségonne, B. Fisch, B. T. Quinn, B. C. Dickerson,
D. Blacker, R. L. Buckner, A. M. Dale, R. P Maguire, B. T. Hyman,
M. S. Albert, and R. J. Killiany, “An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions
of interest,” NeuroImage, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 968–980, Jul. 2006.
[37] C. Destrieux, “Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci
using standard anatomical nomenclature,” NeuroImage, vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 1–15, Oct. 2010.

TUNGARAZA et al.: ANATOMICALLY INFORMED METRICS FOR CONNECTIVITY-BASED CORTICAL PARCELLATION FROM DIFFUSION MRI

[38] S. M. Smith, M. Jenkinson, M. W. Woolrich, C. F. Beckmann,
T. E. Behrens, H. Johansen-Berg, P. R. Bannister, M. De Luca, I. Drobnjak,
D. E. Flitney, R. K. Niazy, J. Saunders, J. Vickers, Y. Zhang, N. De Stefano,
J. M. Brady, and P. M. Matthews, “Advances in functional and structural
MR image analysis and implementation as FSL,” Neuroimage, vol. 23,
pp. 208–219, 2004.
[39] J. D. Tournier, F. Calamante, and A. Connelly, “Robust determination of
the fibre orientation distribution in diffusion MRI: Non-negativity constrained super-resolved spherical deconvolution,” Brain Res., vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 1459–1472, May 2007.
[40] J. D. Tournier, F. Calamante, D. G. Gadian, and A. Connelly, “Direct estimation of the fiber orientation density function from diffusion-weighted
MRI data using spherical deconvolution,” NeuroImage, vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1176–85, Nov. 2004.
[41] J. D Tournier, F. Calamante, and A. Connelly, “MRtrix: Diffusion tractography in crossing fiber regions,” Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol., vol. 22,
pp. 53–66, 2012.
[42] A. Zalesky, A. Fornito, I. H. Harding, L. Cocchi, M. Yüce, C. Pantelis,
and E. T. Bullmore, “Whole-brain anatomical networks: Does the choice
of nodes matter?” NeuroImage, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 970–983, Apr. 2010.
[43] B. J. Frey and D. Dueck, “Clustering by passing messages between data
points,” Science, vol. 315, pp. 972–976, Feb. 2007.
[44] J. Munkres, “Algorithms for the assignment and transportation problems,”
J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 32–38, Mar. 1957.
[45] R. Saxe, M. Brett, and N. Kanwisher, “Divide and conquer: A defense of
functional localizers,” in Foundational Issues in Human Brain Mapping,
S. J. Hanson and M. Bunzl, Eds. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2010,
pp. 25–42.
[46] R. Saxe, M. Brett, and N. Kanwisher, “Divide and conquer: A defense of
functional localizers,” NeuroImage, vol. 30, pp. 1088–1096, 2006.
[47] A. L. Cohen, D. A. Fair, N. U. Dosenbach, F. M. Miezin, D. Dierker,
D. C. Van Essen, B. L. Schlaggar, and S. E. Petersen, “Defining functional
areas in individual human brains using resting functional connectivity
MRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 45–57, May 2008.
[48] S. B. Eickhoff, D. Bzdok, A. R. Laird, C. Roski, S. Caspers, K. Zilles,
and P. T. Fox, “Co-activation patterns distinguish cortical modules, their
connectivity and functional differentiation,” NeuroImage, vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 938–949, Aug. 2011.
[49] M. F. Glasser and D. C. Van Essen, “Mapping human cortical areas in
vivo based on myelin content as revealed by T1- and T2-weighted MRI,”
J. Neurosci., vol. 31, pp. 11597–11616, Aug. 2011.

1383

[50] M.-M. Mesulam, Principles of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology, 2nd
ed., London U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2000.
[51] H. Damasio and A. R. Damasio, Lesion Analysis in Neuropsychology.
London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1989.
[52] H. J. Jo, Ziad S. Saad, Stephen J. Gotts, Alex Martin, and
Robert W. Cox, “Quantifying agreement between anatomical and functional interhemispheric correspondences in the resting brain,” PloS ONE,
vol. 7, p. e48847, 2012.
[53] X. N. Zuo, C. Kelly, A. Di Martino, M. Mennes, D. S. Margulies, S.
Bangaru, R. Grzadzinski, A. C. Evans, Y. F. Zang, F. X. Castellanos,
and M. P. Milham, “Growing together and growing apart: regional and
sex differences in the lifespan developmental trajectories of functional
homotopy,” J. Neurosci., vol. 30, pp. 15034–15043, Nov. 2010.
[54] N. Tzourio-Mazoyer, M. Joliot, D. Marie, and B. Mazoyer, Establishing
homotopic inter-hemispheric regional correspondences via rest functional
connectivity,” Organization for Human Brain Mapping Abstracts 795,
2012.
[55] D. Qiu, L. H. Tan, W. T. Siok, K. Zhou, and P. L. Khong, “Lateralization
of the arcuate fasciculus and its differential correlation with reading ability between young learners and experienced readers: a diffusion tensor
tractography study in a Chinese cohort,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 32,
no. 12, pp. 2054–2063, Dec. 2011.
[56] M. Catani and M. Mesulam, “The arcuate fasciculus and the disconnection theme in language and aphasia: History and current state,” Cortex,
vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 953–961, Sep. 2008.
[57] M. F. Glasser and J. K. Rilling, “DTI tractography of the human brain’s
language pathways,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 2471–2482,
Nov. 2008.
[58] A. Kucyi, M. Moayedi, I. Weissman-Fogel, M. Hodaie, and K. D. Davis,
“Hemispheric asymmetry in white matter connectivity of the temporoparietal junction with the insula and prefrontal cortex,” PloS ONE, vol. 7, p.
e35589, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

