2316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Design and Evaluation of a Novel Fixation
Mechanism for a Transcatheter Pacemaker
Michael D. Eggen∗ , Member, IEEE, Vladimir Grubac, and Matthew D. Bonner

Abstract—Goal: The purpose of this paper was to evaluate a nitinol tine fixation design for a transcatheter pacemaker in order to
determine if the tines could be easily deployed and safely removed
from the myocardium, enable low, stable pacing thresholds, and
minimize the potential for dislodgment. Methods: The penetration
properties of 13 human hearts were compared to the deployment
and fixation energy of the tines to determine if the tines could be
easily deployed and removed from the myocardium. The safety
factor for dislodgement was calculated by comparing the kinetic
energy of the device to the fixation energy of the tines. The fixation stability was tested in 113 chronic implants across 89 animals
via pacing threshold measurements or evidence of dislodgement
at necropsy. Results: Based on the tine fixation and tissue energy
analysis, the tines can easily penetrate the heart. The tines can be
safely removed from the myocardium based on the increased tine
surface area during retraction. There were no dislodgements observed in the animals and the mean pacing threshold at implant
was 0.59 +/− 0.21 V and at termination was 0.65 +/− 0.36 V. The
safety factor for dislodgement was determined to be 15X during
simulated exercise conditions. Conclusion: The nitinol tine fixation
design enabled the implant of a self-contained pacemaker within
the right ventricle and was effective in meeting the design requirements. Significance: This fixation technology provides a novel solution to enable the attachment of a transcatheter pacemaker directly
within the heart.
Index Terms—Fixation, leadless pacemaker, leadless pacing,
nitinol tines, penetration energy, transcatheter pacing, transcatheter pacemaker.

I. INTRODUCTION
RANSCATHETER pacemakers (or leadless pacemakers)
offer several advantages over traditional leaded systems,
including: elimination of the subcutaneous pocket and pocket
related complications (i.e., pocket infection, pocket hematoma)
and elimination of lead-related complications (i.e., lead fracture, lead dislodgement). Because of these potential benefits,
we have developed the MicraTM Transcatheter Pacing System
(TPS, not available for sale, currently under clinical investigation), which is a self-contained, full featured VVIR pacemaker
that is designed to be percutaneously delivered to the right ventricle (RV) via the femoral vein [1]. As such, the pacemaker is
0.8 cc, 1.76 g, 25.9-mm long, and 6.7 mm in diameter. Although
the idea of a self-contained intracardiac pacemaker has existed

T

Manuscript received March 31, 2015; revised May 29, 2015; accepted June 16,
2015. Date of current version August 18, 2015. Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ M. D. Eggen is with Medtronic Cardiac Rhythm and Heart Failure, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: michael.d.eggen@medtronic.com).
V. Grubac and M.D. Bonner are with Medtronic Cardiac Rhythm and Heart
Failure.
This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 23 MB).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2449320

Fig. 1. TPS fixation procedure: The delivery system is navigated to the RV
and tip pressure applied to the myocardium via the delivery system (a). The
device cup is retracted and the tines begin to tent, and subsequently, penetrate
the myocardium (b). Tines are partially deployed in the myocardium as the cup
is further retracted (c). Tines are fully deployed in the myocardium and the
device cup is completely retracted, leaving the tether attached to the device (d).

since the 1970s [2], the miniaturization and fixation technology
has only recently become available to make this concept a reality.
One new challenge for this transcatheter pacing system was
the development of a novel fixation mechanism needed to attach the pacing capsule to the heart. The fixation mechanism
that we developed (FlexFixTM Tines) for this device consists
of four, self-expanding, nitinol tines (see Fig. 1). Furthermore,
these tines were designed to fulfill the following four basic requirements:
1) tines must be easily deployable into the myocardium;
2) tines must be easily removed with minimal damage to the
myocardium, in order to facilitate device repositioning,
retrieval and extraction;
3) tines must hold the electrode in stable contact with the
myocardium in order to maintain low, stable pacing
thresholds;
4) tines must minimize the potential for dislodgement.
II. FIXATION MECHANISM DESCRIPTION
The fixation mechanism for the Micra consists of four
self-expanding nitinol tines that are loaded in the device cup on
the distal end delivery catheter prior to implant [see Fig. 1 (a)].
During the implant procedure, the catheter is navigated to the
RV, tip pressure is applied [see Fig. 1 (a)], and the device cup
is manually retracted via a sliding button [see Fig. 1 (b)–(d)]
causing the tines to self-expand into the myocardium. More
specifically, when the device cup is retracted, the release of

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

EGGEN et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A NOVEL FIXATION MECHANISM FOR A TRANSCATHETER PACEMAKER

Fig. 2. Illustration of the straight section of the tine–tissue interface during
initial penetration of the endocardial surface. A force is applied to the tine tip,
which displaces the tissue (tenting) and generates pressure (a and b). As the tine
moves forward and the tissue continues to displace, the pressure increases to the
point at which the tine penetrates the tissue (c). Once the tissue is penetrated,
the pressure is relieved and the tissue returns to its native position (d).

the spring energy stored in the tines in combination with the
applied tip pressure results in forward pressure causing the tines
to initially penetrate the endocardium, and subsequently, push
through the myocardium to return very close to their original
shape. In the deployed state, the tines are designed to hold the
steroid eluting electrode (2.5-mm2 CapSure Sense, positioned
in the center of the distal end of the pacing capsule) in close
contact with the myocardium in order to maintain low, stable
pacing thresholds, and to minimize the risk of dislodgement.
The CapSure sense is a steroid eluting (Dexamethasone
acetate), Platinum/Iridium electrode with a porous Titanium
Nitride coating and a 2.5-mm2 surface area.
III. METHODS
A. Tissue Penetration Testing
In order for a tine to penetrate the myocardium (requirement
#1), not only does the tine have to exert a force greater than
the peak force required to penetrate the tissue, but the tine must
also displace the tissue a given distance in order to generate this
required peak force. In other words, the tine must “tent” the
tissue prior to penetration, as further illustrated in Fig. 2, which
illustrates the straight section of the tine–tissue interface during
initial penetration of the endocardial surface. Therefore, the penetration requirement was approached as an energy requirement,
defined by maximum force and maximum displacement. With
respect to tine penetration, the goal was to maximize the ability
of the tines to penetrate the endocardial surface during implant
to assure fixation, and to minimize penetration of the epicardial
surface, in order to minimize tine perforation into the pericardial
space. Therefore, the penetration properties of both the endocardial surface and epicardial surface of human hearts were tested.
In order to determine the required energy needed to safely
penetrate the human ventricular myocardium, the tissue penetration properties of the RV were characterized in 13 fresh human
hearts, which were obtained within 24 h of cross-clamp time and
stored using cold preservation via a donor network (The International Institute for the Advancement of Medicine, Edison, NJ,
USA) after Institutional Review Board approval and informed

2317

consent. The median age of the donor hearts were 66 years,
with a range of 56–76 years. In addition, five of the donor hearts
had a history of cardiac disease reported: 1) valve regurgitation,
2) heart murmur, 3) aortic valve replacement and atrial fibrillation with heart failure, 4) coronary artery disease and myocardial
infarction with multiple stents, and 5) chronic heart failure with
hypertension. The penetration characteristics of the endocardial
surface were tested by moving a penetrator (having the substantially equivalent effective surface area of the tine tip) with a
constant speed of 120 mm/min, in a quasi-static fashion, toward
the endocardium of the tissue sample from within the RV until
the sample was penetrated. The speed of the penetration testing
was chosen to be quasi-static in order to ensure consistent results without dynamic effects [3]. The penetration properties of
the epicardial surface were tested in the same manner, except
the penetrator was moved toward the epicardium of the tissue
sample, from the outside surface of the heart. The epicardial
surface penetrations were tested from the outside surface of the
heart in order to isolate the epicardial tissue properties from any
boundary effects, as an artificial backing material had to be used
underneath in order to physically support the sample. The tissue
samples were tested at room temperature and kept moist with
saline. Although the tine also has a curved section in the design, a
straight penetrator was used to penetrate the tissue for the benchtop test. This was done to simulate the straight section of the
tine that interfaces with tissue upon initial penetration, and also
served to isolate the tissue properties; the flexible curved area of
the tine design serves to store the energy required to cause the
straight section to penetrate the endocardium upon deployment.
A total of 286 endocardial penetrations and 275 epicardial
penetrations were randomly distributed in the apical, septal,
outflow tract, and freewall regions of the RV. The force and
displacement of the penetrator were continuously recorded for
the duration of the test. After the data were collected, the force–
displacement curve was integrated for each test in order to determine the total energy required to penetrate the tissue.
In order to determine if the tine could safely be removed from
the myocardium without damaging tissue after implant (requirement #2), the penetration properties of the heart with a much
larger surface area penetrator must be known. Although the system is designed to provide countertraction via the device cup
when repositioning and removing the pacing capsule, we wanted
to ensure that pulling out the tines without countertraction would
not cause trauma to the tissue. When pulling out the tine without
countertraction, approximately half of the inside flat area of the
tine resists the retraction force, which is approximately 26 times
more surface area than the tip of the tine penetrating tissue during initial deployment as illustrated in Fig. 3. Therefore, the
relationship between penetration energy and surface area was
determined using similar recording of force and displacement
at 120 mm/min with various penetrator surface areas, except
using a man-made tissue replicator (The Chamberlain Group,
Great Barrington, MA, USA). The tissue penetration energy at
a surface area equivalent to the inside surface area of the tine
(see Fig. 3) was compared to the holding energy of the tines
upon retraction to determine if the tines would damage tissue
upon retraction. In other words, it was assumed that if the tine

2318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Zoom view of the distal end of the device after deployment. The surface
area of the portion of the tine embedded in the myocardium is highlighted in
red. The tine tip that penetrates the myocardium upon deployment of the device
is shown in green. The surface area of the shaded red area is 26 times the area
of the tine tip shaded in green.

holding energy was less than the energy required to penetrate
the tissue with the equivalent surface area of the inside of the
tine (see Fig. 3), the tissue would not be penetrated or damaged
when the tines are retracted from the heart simply by pulling
the device out of the myocardium via the tether; rather the tines
would flex and unfold rather than tear tissue.
B. Tine Energy Characterization
In order to determine if the tines could safely penetrate the
myocardium during implant, and minimize dislodgment due
to in vivo heart motion, it was necessary to characterize the
spring energy of the tines during the implant procedure (deployment penetration energy), and after deployment (tine holding energy or retraction energy). The holding and deployment
energy characteristics of the nitinol tines were determined by
retracting and deploying the TPS through the delivery catheter
in a full cycle test at room temperature at a constant speed
of 120 mm/min, while continuously measuring force and displacement. The force–displacement curves were integrated to
determine the deployment energy of the tines, and holding energy of the tines (retraction test), using a total of 95 samples.
Since each TPS sample contained a total of four tines, the energy
results for a single tine were obtained by dividing the energy
results by four. As such, the tine energy during deployment and
retraction was compared to the penetration energy results from
the tissue testing in order to determine if the tines could safely
penetrate and be removed from the myocardium (requirements
#1 and #2). Also, the tine holding energy was compared to the
measured in vivo kinetic energy of the device to determine the
safety factor for dislodgement (requirement #4).
C. Chronic Animal Study and Determination of the Safety
Factor for Dislodgment
This is a metaanalysis of a group of animal studies that were
performed to characterize various aspects of the TPS including;
safety, pacing performance, rate response, and tine reliability.
For this study, only the data pertaining to the fixation stability

Fig. 4. Micra implanted at the RV apex of a swine mode with the tether
attached (a). Magnified view of the fixation (“pull and hold) test showing deflection of two of the tines indicated by the arrows (b).

and device acceleration (used to calculate the safety factor for
dislodgement) are reported.
A total of 113 devices with tine fixation were implanted in
89 animals, consisting of 20 Micro Yucatan swine and 69 sheep,
with median implant duration of 12 weeks (range 6–91 weeks).
The devices were implanted in both the right ventricular apex
(RVA, n = 77 devices) and right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT,
n = 36 devices) positions via a jugular approach and the number
of tines engaged in tissue was determined by doing a “pull and
hold” test under fluoroscopy. Pulling on a tether (placed through
the lumens of the delivery catheter) that was attached to the
device created tension on tines that would deflect the tines that
were embedded in the tissue and this deflection could be seen on
a fluoroscopic cine (see Fig. 4). Tines not engaged in the tissue
would not deflect during the test. The devices were repositioned
if fewer than two tines were engaged in the tissue. Retracting the
tines back into the delivery cup for repositioning did not cause
any permanent deformation of the tines. The live deployment of
the pacemaker in the swine RV can be seen Online Supplemental Video 1. Pacing thresholds (at 0.2–0.27 ms) were measured
in 67 devices (10 swine, 57 sheep) that were electrically active,
where the remaining 46 devices were mechanical emulators.
The stability of the fixation mechanism was determined by analyzing the chronic pacing threshold changes, and any evidence
of dislodgement (requirements #3 and #4). More specifically,
changes in the chronic pacing threshold were determined by
subtracting the threshold at implant from the final threshold at
termination. The pacing threshold was used as the electrical
parameter to determine electrode stability because the pacing
threshold nonlinearly increases as the electrode is separated
from viable tissue within a range of millimeters. In contrast,
the sensed R-wave is more sensitive to electrode spacing and
angle to the depolarizing wave front and depends mainly on the

EGGEN et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A NOVEL FIXATION MECHANISM FOR A TRANSCATHETER PACEMAKER

2319

Fig. 5. Tine penetration test for a single tissue sample as penetrated from the endocardial surface. The test setup is shown in (a) and the resulting force–displacement
relationship is shown in (b) where the green area represents the area integrated to determine penetration energy.

viability of approximately 1 or 2 cm3 of myocardium immediately under the tip electrode [4]–[5]. Device dislodgment was
determined by analyzing the pacing threshold trend, fluoroscopy
images at implant and termination, and by gross necropsy. In
a subset of ten Micro Yucatan swine, cardiac tissue around
the Micra was fixed in formalin, sectioned, and stained with
Masson’s Trichrome to characterize the fibrotic tissue surrounding the tine tracts. These studies were approved by an
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Medtronic
facility, and every aspect of this study conformed to the Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
In order to determine the safety factor for dislodgment, the
holding energy for a single tine, and two tines was compared to
the calculated in vivo kinetic energy (KE) of the device (requirement #4). First, the acceleration of the device was determined
by placing a three-axis accelerometer in a TPS mechanical emulator and recording the peak-to-peak endocardial acceleration
in an awake sheep at rest, and in an anesthetized sheep during
a dobutamine challenge (12-μg/kg/min infusion). The peak acceleration data used for the rest condition were the maximum
acceleration observed from a total of four awake sheep in the
study, and the dobutamine challenge data were the maximum
observed from a single anesthetized sheep. Next, the KE was
calculated by integrating the acceleration versus time trend during the largest acceleration impulse to derive the velocity and
by using the formula
KE = (mass∗ velocity2 )/2.

(1)

It was assumed that the acceleration of the device was a good
estimate of the endocardial acceleration. Therefore, for the device energy calculation, the maximum acceleration trace of the
three-axis accelerometer was used as a worst-case endocardial
acceleration use condition. In other words, it was assumed that
potential device implants could be oriented such that this maximum acceleration would act along the long axis of the device,
opposing the tine holding forces.
IV. RESULTS
A. Tissue Penetration Testing
An example of the force–displacement relationship for a
single tine penetration of the endocardial surface is shown in

Fig. 6. Example showing a tine retraction test. The shaded area represents the
area integrated to determine the tine retraction/holding energy.

Fig. 5. Due to the proprietary nature of the study, the force
and displacement values have been normalized in the data
plots, and the mean force and displacement values are not
shown. It was found that the mean energy, peak force, and
peak displacement required to penetrate the heart from the epicardial surface was greater than the energy required to penetrate the endocardial surface. More specifically, the mean energy required to penetrate the epicardial surface (with 95%
confidence intervals for the mean) was 2.99 E-03 J (2.35 E03, 3.49 E-03), or approximately four times the mean energy required to penetrate the endocardial surface 7.98 E-04 J
(5.44 E-04, 1.05 E-03). The mean peak force required to penetrate the epicardial surface was 2.8 times greater than the mean
peak force required to penetrate the endocardial surface.
B. Tine Energy Characterization
An example graph of a tine retraction test is shown in Fig. 6.
The graph shows the normalized retraction force versus the
displacement of the tester, where the shaded area represents the
region that was integrated to determine the retraction energy.
The retraction energy for this example test was 2.54 E-03 for a
single tine. Overall, the mean retraction energy for a single tine
(with standard deviation) was 2.919E-03 +/− 2.822E-04 J for
all 95 samples.
An example graph of a tine deployment test is shown in Fig. 7.
The graph shows the normalized deployment force versus the
displacement of the tester, where the shaded area represents the
region that was integrated to determine the deployment energy.

2320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 7. Example showing a tine deployment test. The shaded area represents
the area integrated to determine the tine deployment energy.

The deployment energy for this example test was 7.44E-04 for
a single tine. Overall, the mean deployment energy for a single
tine (with standard deviation) was 9.722E-04 +/− 1.369E-04
J for all 95 samples. The deployment energy was less than the
retraction energy due to the superelastic hysteresis in the nitinol
material, which reduces the energy storage efficiency [6]. This
also resulted in the deployment and retraction curves having
different peaks and valleys.
When evaluating the effectiveness of the tine to penetrate the
endocardial surface to ensure fixation, it should be noted that the
mean tested energy during deployment (9.722E-04) was greater
than the mean tested energy required to penetrate the endocardial surface (7.98 E-04 J). Therefore, on average, the tines will
effectively penetrate the myocardium for proper fixation. Also,
the mean deployment energy was less than the energy required to
penetrate the epicardial surface (2.99 E-03 J), which reduces the
potential risk of tine perforation of the epicardial surface. However, it should be noted that risk of epicardial perforation of the
tines will depend on many factors (i.e., wall thickness, trabeculation within the heart, implant position) and this potential risk
could not be determined in this study.
When multiple penetrators varying in surface area were tested
using a silicone tissue replicator, it was found that the penetration
energy (Joules) linearly increased (R2 = 0.99) with respect to
surface area (mm2 ) of the penetrator, where
Penetration Energy = 0.0063∗ surface area + 0.0004.

Fig. 8.

Chronic pacing threshold trend shown with standard deviation.

Fig. 9.

Histogram of chronic pacing threshold changes.

(2)

Based on this linear relationship, and a 26 times surface area
difference between the tip of the tine interacting with tissue during deployment, and the tine area interacting with tissue during
retraction, it would require a minimum of 26 times the energy
to penetrate/tear the tissue during retraction than deployment.
Therefore, there is an approximate safety factor of 26X with respect to tearing tissue when pulling out the tines without using
the cup for counter traction. A video showing the tines pulled
from the right ventricular myocardium of a human donor heart
is shown in Online Supplemental Video 2.
C. Chronic Animal Study and Determination of the Safety
Factor for Dislodgment
No dislodgements were observed in any of the 113 transcatheter pacemakers implanted, as confirmed by gross necropsy
and fluoro image analysis. The median number of tines engaged

Fig. 10. Masson’s Trichrome stained section of tissue surrounding the transcatheter pacemaker implant.

in tissue at implant was 2 (min = 1, max = 4). In addition, the
mean pacing threshold at implant was 0.59 +/– 0.21 V and at
termination was 0.65 +/– 0.36 V. A summary of the chronic
mean pacing threshold trend and pacing threshold changes are
shown in Figs. 8 and 9, respectively. As shown in the histogram,
only five animals had pacing threshold increases >0.5 V, and
only one animal had a pacing threshold increase >1 V. Overall, the pacing thresholds were low and stable. The average
maximal thickness of fibrotic tissue around the tine tracts was
1.06 +/– 0.41 mm. An example histology image is shown in
Fig. 10. The relatively small amount of tissue measured surrounding the tines, and the low and stable chronic pacing thresholds indicate that the fixation mechanism and the electrode tissue

EGGEN et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A NOVEL FIXATION MECHANISM FOR A TRANSCATHETER PACEMAKER

Fig. 11. Example trace of the three-axis accelerometer during the maximum
observed resting condition for a complete cardiac cycle.

interface are stable. Also, the fixation mechanism is separated
from the electrode such that the fibrotic tissue surrounding the
tines does not interfere with the ability of the electrode to pace
viable tissue.
Sample traces from the raw accelerometer signals during rest
are shown in Fig. 11. It was found that the maximum peak
to peak acceleration was 5.41 g at rest, and a maximum of
9.15 g during a 12-μg/kg/min dobutamine infusion, where the
impulse times during these peak contractions were 0.0121 and
0.0123 ms, respectively. These acceleration values and impulse
times were subsequently used to calculate the device velocity,
and resulting device KE, where the device KE was 6.50 E-05 J
at rest and 3.34 E-04 J during the dobutamine challenge. The
safety factor for dislodgment was calculated as the tine holding
energy divided by the device kinetic energy, where 2.55 E-03 J
was used as the holding energy of a single tine, which was the
minimum design specification derived from the distribution of
the tine retraction test data. Overall, the estimate for the safety
factor was relatively high, as for a single tine engaged in tissue, there is an estimated 39X safety factor for dislodgement
at rest and a 8X safety factor during simulated exercise conditions (dobutamine challenge). For two tines engaged in tissue,
which would provide twice the holding energy, there is an estimated 79X safety factor for dislodgement at rest, and a 15X
safety factor during exercise conditions. Although there is a high
margin of safety for dislodgment based on these analyses, two
tines are required to engage the tissue at implant for fixation
redundancy.
V. DISCUSSION
Transvenous pacing leads implanted endocardially in the RA
and RV have traditionally used two basic types of fixation mechanisms, either passive fixation polymer tines or active fixation
helixes [7]. Although both types of fixation mechanisms have
been successfully implemented in pacing lead designs across
multiple manufacturers, it was unclear whether these designs
could be upsized to accommodate a 20 French transcatheter
pacemaker design and meet the necessary pacing, fixation, and
safety requirements. Also, it must be considered that there

2321

is a reported 0.7% [8] to 5.6% [9] rate of lead dislodgment,
with the majority occurring acutely [10]. Although the mechanisms of lead dislodgement cannot always be identified, some
dislodgements occur due to tension applied by the lead body on
the pacing electrode when the lead is not properly anchored. On
the contrary, the lead body can also aid in fixation via constant
light pressure, which can ensure the electrode is held against
viable tissue. In contrast with pacing leads, the transcatheter
pacemaker has no lead body, and the entire device mass (1.76 g)
moves with the heart wall, thereby creating a new set of use
conditions for this TPS technology. Because of these differences in loading conditions, and the spring type behavior of
the tines during deployment and retrieval, the mechanics of the
fixation mechanism could not be analyzed in the same manner
as current pacing leads. It should be noted that some promising early results have been reported with a leadless pacemaker
containing a helix-type fixation in 33 patients [11] with a different length/diameter profile than the Micra; however it is too
early to elucidate any meaningful comparisons to the tine fixation technology with such early data.
In addition, traditional RA and RV pacing leads pace very
close to the site of fixation, i.e., for an active fixation lead, the
pacing electrode (helix) also serves as the fixation mechanism
in most cases. As such, the implantation of active fixation leads
is associated with a current of injury, where the pacing threshold
is initially higher immediately after implant due to acute local
insult to the tissue and is significantly reduced over time [12],
[13]. In order to sufficiently separate the fixation mechanism
from the pacing electrode to maintain low, stable thresholds and
minimize dislodgment for dynamic use conditions, active fixation nitinol tines were used for this design. Due to its quite novel
nature, the tine design was evaluated via preclinical bench-top
and in vivo animal studies in this study in order to demonstrate:
1) the tines are easily deployable into the myocardium, 2) tines
are easily removed without damaging the myocardium, 3) tines
hold the electrode in stable contact with the myocardium maintaining low, stable pacing thresholds, and 4) tines minimize the
potential for dislodgement. Based on the preliminary results
presented here, the tine design can sufficiently penetrate the endocardial surface of the human heart in order to assure adequate
fixation. And, once the tines are engaged in tissue, the electrode
tissue interface and pacing thresholds are stable and there is a
low probability of device dislodgment. Minimizing the risk of
dislodgement becomes increasingly important as a dislodged
transcatheter pacemaker could potentially be mobile (causing
embolization) and more difficult to recapture in comparison to a
pacing lead, which is typically anchored subcutaneously within
a suturing sleeve. Also, in the event that the device needs to
be acutely repositioned or chronically extracted, the tines will
deflect and pull out of the tissue while minimizing tearing of the
myocardium.
Although the use of animals and bench-top testing was thoroughly utilized in this study, the true safety profile of the tine
design must be evaluated in a clinical study, and some limitations are noted. One limitation in assessing the safety factor
for dislodgment for rest and exercise conditions was that it was
difficult to obtain human data in the format needed to do such

2322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

calculations (i.e., acceleration versus time traces). In previously
published work, peak endocardial acceleration was investigated
in humans as a method to use for rate response in pacing systems
[14]–[18]. While these data were published, the digital signal
was not available for integration, the leads only had a single axis
accelerometer, and the endocardial acceleration measured via
the sensor in the lead may not represent the acceleration of the
endocardium with an implanted TPS. Therefore, the time versus
acceleration signals that were collected in sheep using a threeaxis accelerometer were used to determine the dislodgement
safety factor for rest and exercise conditions. As a comparison,
the published endocardial acceleration values range from ∼0.24
to 1.1 g at rest and ∼0.65 to 3.7 g during exercise [14]–[18].
From the data collected in sheep, the maximum peak-to-peak
acceleration was 9.15 g during a 12-μg/kg/min dobutamine infusion, and a maximum of 5.41 g at rest. Noting the limitations
to the published data discussed previously, the data used from
the sheep measurements in this study would yield a conservative
estimate of the dislodgement safety factor in humans.
Another limitation in this study was the availability of fresh
human hearts available for study. Here, 13 fresh human hearts,
obtained within 24 h of cross-clamp time and stored using cold
preservation were used to characterize the penetration characteristics of the human heart to aid in designing the fixation
mechanism. With 13 hearts tested, it was difficult to obtain and
test any outliers. For example, pericardial effusion, a sign of
cardiac perforation, occurs at a rate of approximately 1.2% with
traditional pacing leads, where the strongest predictor for pericardial effusion was the use of oral steroids [19]. Weaker predictors included right ventricular systolic pressure, use of helical
screw ventricular leads, body mass index <20, and older age
[19]. This implies that the tissue properties of the myocardium
can be quite variable and patient specific. With the hearts that
were collected here, we focused on testing hearts that would
represent the appropriate age of pacemaker patients, but could
not elucidate variables that may weaken the heart wall such as
chronic oral steroids. Also, because of this variability in tissue
properties, the tines may not always penetrate the myocardium
using only the spring energy stored in the tines. If a situation is
encountered where the tines do not penetrate the myocardium
(i.e., if the tine encounters scar tissue), tip pressure can be applied to aid in penetration of the tines, which will result in an
increase in deployment energy (and force).
The mean pacing thresholds in this study were low and stable,
with a maximum increase of 1.38 V observed for one sheep as
shown in the histogram (see Fig. 9). For this animal, the final
measured pacing threshold was 1.88 V at 0.24 ms at 91 weeks,
which would still allow an adequate safety margin relative to
the maximum output of the device (5 V). This single animal
also skewed the pacing threshold trend beginning at 38 weeks
as shown in Fig. 8, as only three animals were followed between
weeks 38–91. No unusual observations at the implant site were
observed for this animal. In addition, although there were no
dislodgments observed in any of the 113 implants, it should be
noted that the human heart is highly trabeculated in comparison
with sheep and pig hearts [20]. It is unclear if the dislodgement
rate will be similar in the human heart, although the initial

experience in man for the first 140 patients implanted with the
Micra TPS demonstrated good fixation, and low, stable pacing
thresholds with no dislodgements [21].
More specifically, for 60 of these patients that were followed
for at least three months, the mean pacing capture threshold
decreased from 0.57+/– 0.31 V at implant to 0.51+/– 0.22 V at
three months with no increase in threshold between these two
time points [21]. The collection of devices shown in this study
comprises a variety of tine designs from quite stiff to quite soft.
The changes in threshold over time for some of the animals were
mostly found in the early devices with the softest tines.
For simplification, the tests developed in this study assumed
the delivery cup would be perpendicular to the surface of the
heart during tine deployment. However, the design is not limited
to such situations. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the tines are deployed at
an angle as the cup is retracted: therefore, as long as the end of the
device cup is surrounded by tissue (i.e., the RVA location within
the heart) or perpendicular to tissue, the tines will penetrate.
Also, the delivery catheter is deflectable and can be oriented
such that the tip of the catheter can be perpendicular to multiple
implant locations within the heart such as RVOT and septal
positions. Accordingly, the heart walls are flexible, and applying
tip pressure to the heart wall prior to deployment will allow some
conformation of the myocardium around the tip of the catheter.
Also, in the trabeculated human heart, it is possible that the tines
could engage trabeculae surrounding the device, also aiding in
fixation. The RVA and RVOT placements in the animal hearts
have shown some of the implant flexibility in this regard.
Because of the variation in the placement of the Micra within
the heart, the exposure of the tips of the tines within the blood
pool after deployment will be variable based on implant location; for example, in the RVOT, the deployment is more similar
to the case in Fig. 3 where the device is deployed against a flat
surface and the tine tips are exposed. In the apex, which is more
shaped like a cone, the tines will penetrate at an angle to the
heart wall, and can be completely embedded in the myocardium
as shown in Fig. 10. Both of these scenarios were tested in vivo,
and the percentage of tine exposure within the blood pool did
not affect any of the measured performance metrics as outlined
in this paper.
In this study, the thickness of the RV wall was not measured,
as the tissue penetration properties of the endocardium and epicardium were used to design the tines to ensure penetration
of the endocardial surface for good fixation, and to minimize
perforation of the epicardial surface. In other words, the penetration of the heart by the tines is not displacement controlled,
but bounded by the energy differences between the layers of the
heart. If a scenario is encountered where the deployment energy
is higher than the energy required penetrate the epicardial surface (for epicardial penetration energies at the lower outlying tail
of the distribution), the thickness of the heart wall relative to the
tine length will have an impact on the probability that a tine may
penetrate the epicardial surface. However, these situations could
not be evaluated using the simplified bench-top testing methods
and relatively small human heart sample size in this study.
Other limitations of the bench-top testing were: 1) the effects
of the contraction of the heart wall against the catheter/tine tip

EGGEN et al.: DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF A NOVEL FIXATION MECHANISM FOR A TRANSCATHETER PACEMAKER

with respect to the penetration energy could not be determined,
2) the tests could not account for varying angles between the
tine tip and the heart wall, 3) the tests were conducted at room
temperature rather than at body temperature, and 4) the benchtop tests were run in a quasi-static fashion because the speed
of the deployment could vary based on implanter technique and
experience. Because of these limitations, the functionality of
the tine design was also tested in vivo. Although the bench-top
testing carried multiple assumptions and limitations, the in vivo
animal testing and the early results of the human clinical trial
show promise that the methods used in this study were sufficient
to fulfill the design requirement goals
Although the tines have been designed to be flexible in order
to facilitate removal, it is unclear how easily the device can be
chronically extracted. However, it is also unclear of the necessity for chronic extraction of the device with only early human
data, where no retrievals or extractions were necessary [21].
Early extraction work in sheep has shown the device can be
safely removed after 18 months [22]. Only after these types of
pacemakers become more widely utilized, can the true need for
extraction for such a small device be elucidated.
VI. CONCLUSION
Overall, based on preclinical work and early reports in man
using this technology, this novel fixation mechanism is promising to provide a safe and effective method to attach the TPS to
the right ventricular myocardium. Based on penetration testing
of human hearts and energy analysis of the fixation mechanism,
the tines are easily deployable into the myocardium, and can
be easily removed without damaging the myocardium. In addition, the fixation provides low stable chronic thresholds and no
dislodgements have been observed in 113 implants across 89
animals, with a high estimated safety margin for dislodgement
based on endocardial acceleration. The long-term performance
of this fixation mechanism in humans will need to be studied in
order to confirm the preclinical results reported here. Although
not evaluated here, the fixation technology could be applied to
other devices attached within the RV such as pressure sensors
or other monitoring devices.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank T. Sheldon, V. Nikolski,
and E. Williams for implementation of the accelerometer in the
Micra design and for design of the animal studies, K. Hilpisch
for data collection and analysis, J. Kuhn, M. Campbell, C. Wilson, W. Baxter, K. Rys, and T. Anderson for contributing to
various aspects of the tine design, Dr. N. Barka and Dr. L. Lentz
for implanting the devices in animals and managing the surgical
aspects of the acute and chronic procedures, R. Goff for human
heart data collection, J. Bertram for study management, and Dr.
B. Rose for histological analysis of tissues.

2323

REFERENCES
[1] M. D. Eggen et al., Multimodal imaging of a transcatheter pacemaker
implantation within a reanimated human heart. Heart Rhythm, vol. 11,
pp. 2331–2331, Dec. 2014.
[2] J. W. Spickler et al., “Totally self-contained intracardiac pacemaker,”
J. Electrocardiol., vol. 3, no. 3–4, pp. 325–31, 1970.
[3] T. C. Gasser et al., “Failure mechanisms of ventricular tissue due to deep
penetration,” J. Biomech., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 626–33, 2009.
[4] W. Irnich, “The electrode myocardial interface,” Clin. Progress Electrophysiol. Pacing, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 338–47, 1985.
[5] K.A. Ellenbogen, N.G. Kay, C. Lau, and B.L. Wilkoff, “Sensing and detection,” in Clinical Cardiac Pacing, Defibrillation, and Resynchronization
Therapy, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Saunders, 2007, p. 76
[6] T. Duerig et al., “An overview of nitinol medical applications,” Mater. Sci.
Eng., vol. A273–A275, pp. 149–60, 1999.
[7] L. J. Mulligan et al., “Electro-physiological solutions for cardiac disease,”
in Biomedical Technology and Devices, J. E. Moore and D.J. Maitland,
Eds. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2013, pp. 555–68.
[8] K. A. Ellenbogen et al., “Complications arising after implantation of DDD
pacemakers: The MOST experience,” Amer. J. cardiol., vol. 92, no. 6,
pp. 740–741, 2003.
[9] S. J. Connolly et al., “Effects of physiologic pacing versus ventricular
pacing on the risk of stroke and death due to cardiovascular causes Canadian trial of physiologic pacing investigators,” The New England J. Med.,
vol. 342, no. 19, pp. 1385–91, 2000.
[10] E. O. Udo et al., “Incidence and predictors of short- and long-term complications in pacemaker therapy: The Followpace study,” Heart Rhythm,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 728–35, 2012.
[11] V. Y. Reddy et al., “Permanent leadless cardiac pacing: Results of the
LEADLESS trial,” Circulation, vol. 129, no. 14, pp. 1466–71, 2014.
[12] D. P. Redfearn et al., “Current of injury predicts acute performance of
catheter-delivered active fixation pacing leads,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 1438–1444, 2007.
[13] S. J. Saxonhouse et al., “Current of injury predicts adequate active lead
fixation in permanent pacemaker/defibrillation leads,” J. Amer. College
Cardiol., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 412–417, 2005.
[14] J. Clementy, “Dual chamber rate responsive pacing system driven by
contractility: Final assessment after 1-year follow-up. The European PEA
Clinical Investigation Group, Pacing and Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 21,
no. 11(Pt 2), pp. 2192–2197, 1998.
[15] J. Clementy et al., “Validation by serial standardized testing of a new
rate-responsive pacemaker sensor based on variations in myocardial contractility,” Europace, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 124–31, 2001.
[16] A. Erol-Yilmaz et al., “Direct comparison of a contractility and activity
pacemaker sensor during treadmill exercise testing,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1493–1499, 2004.
[17] H. Langenfeld et al., “Peak endocardial acceleration-based clinical testing
of the “BEST” DDDR pacemaker. European PEA Clinical Investigation
Group,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 21, no. 11 (Pt 2), pp. 2187–2191,
1998.
[18] A. F. Rickards et al., “An implantable intracardiac accelerometer for monitoring myocardial contractility. The Multicenter PEA Study Group,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 19, no. 12 (Pt 1), pp. 2066–2071, 1996.
[19] S. Mahapatra et al., “Incidence and predictors of cardiac perforation after
permanent pacemaker placement,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 907–
911, 2005.
[20] A. J. Hill and P. A. Iaizzo. “Comparative cardiac anatomy,” Handbook of
Cardiac Anatomy, Physiology, and Devices, P A. Iaizzo Ed., 2nd ed. New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 87–108.
[21] P. Ritter et al., “Early performance of a miniaturized leadless pacemaker: The micra transcatheter pacing study,” Eur. Heart J., Jun. 4, 2015,
pii: ehv214. [Epub ahead of print].
[22] M. D. Bonner et al., “Extraction of the Micra transcatheter pacemaker
system,” presented at the Heart Rhythm Soc. Conf., San Francisco, CA,
USA, 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

