2776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

METEOR: An Enterprise Health Informatics
Environment to Support Evidence-Based Medicine
Mamta Puppala, Tiancheng He, Shenyi Chen, Richard Ogunti, Xiaohui Yu, Fuhai Li, Robert Jackson,
and Stephen T. C. Wong∗

Abstract—Goal: The aim of this paper is to propose the design
and implementation of next-generation enterprise analytics platform developed at the Houston Methodist Hospital (HMH) system
to meet the market and regulatory needs of the healthcare industry.
Methods: For this goal, we developed an integrated clinical informatics environment, i.e., Methodist environment for translational
enhancement and outcomes research (METEOR). The framework
of METEOR consists of two components: the enterprise data
warehouse (EDW) and a software intelligence and analytics (SIA)
layer for enabling a wide range of clinical decision support systems
that can be used directly by outcomes researchers and clinical
investigators to facilitate data access for the purposes of hypothesis testing, cohort identification, data mining, risk prediction, and
clinical research training. Results: Data and usability analysis were
performed on METEOR components as a preliminary evaluation,
which successfully demonstrated that METEOR addresses significant niches in the clinical informatics area, and provides a powerful
means for data integration and efficient access in supporting clinical and translational research. Conclusion: METEOR EDW and
informatics applications improved outcomes, enabled coordinated
care, and support health analytics and clinical research at HMH.
Significance: The twin pressures of cost containment in the healthcare market and new federal regulations and policies have led to
the prioritization of the meaningful use of electronic health records
in the United States. EDW and SIA layers on top of EDW are becoming an essential strategic tool to healthcare institutions and
integrated delivery networks in order to support evidence-based
medicine at the enterprise level.
Index Terms—Clinical data warehouse, cohort identification,
natural language processing (NLP), outcomes research, readmission risk, smartphone health app.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE clinicians and researchers at the Houston Methodist
Hospital (HMH) system use multiple data sources to acquire the data for research and quality improvement purposes
as no single infrastructure or database exists that could provide them with ease the data required for their research. The
HMH system is a home to seven hospitals and operates approximately nine major categories of clinical databases. Current

T

Manuscript received December 2, 2014; revised April 27, 2015 and June
17, 2015; accepted June 21, 2015. Date of publication June 26, 2015; date of
current version November 20, 2015. This work was supported by the John S
Dunn Research Foundation, TT and WF Chao Center for BRAIN, and Houston
Methodist Research Institute. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. Puppala, T. He, S. Chen, R. Ogunti, X. Yu, and F. Li are with Houston
Methodist Hospital Research Institute.
R. Jackson is with Houston Methodist Hospital.
∗ S. T. C. Wong is with the Department of Systems Medicine and Bioengineering, Houston Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030
USA (e-mail: STWong@houstonmethodist.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2450181

methods of obtaining data from all these locations and vendors
for preparatory-to-research questions often involves laborious
time-consuming manual extracts and cleansing of data for specific projects. It is recognized that the current process is cumbersome, costly, and time consuming and adds no intrinsic value to
the research being undertaken. This leads investigators to spend
a lot of unproductive time in negotiating and waiting for data
instead of conducting the research. Worse, the data ultimately
delivered often are incomplete, depending on the understanding
and knowledge of the person retrieving the data. In many institutions, a “gray market” for data could develop, as researchers find
unofficial workarounds to obtain data they need for their work.
This “gray market” approach could lead to compliance and security risks, as isolated silos of patient data evolve in different
parts of the healthcare organization without formal oversight for
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
and Institutional Review Board (IRB) compliance, and outside
of the processes for protecting data from misuse or breach. HMH
researchers need access to vast pools of patient data to develop
and test their scientific hypotheses, so the making of a solitary
integrated data system would provide a huge opportunity for
an expanded number of biomedical research projects, including
large-scale projects.
To date, a couple of systems are usable directly by the researchers, the best of which is the Informatics for Integrating
Biology and the Bedside (i2b2). The i2b2 was developed at the
Massachusetts General Hospital in conjunction with the Harvard
Medical School with the research funding of the National Institutes of Health. It provides a relational database management
system with customized and highly flexible database schema
that enables the integration of diverse clinical and administrative
data from different information sources across the healthcare enterprise [1], [2]. The point of i2b2 is to provide a productive and
cost-effective approach to identify patients for different types
of clinical and translational research [3], and to take the data
that we have been gathering as a major aspect of routine care
and gain from it. It provides access to users to build queries
to make a clinical profile and construct a study cohort based
on EMR data by stringing series of search elements together.
Nevertheless, i2b2 has its own limitations [4]. It cannot provide
any data beyond the number of patients matching the search
criteria and is incapable of running time-based queries, e.g.,
number of admissions in a month or events that happen before
and after a clinical event or a laboratory result within a certain
time period. It is also incapable of tasks, such as sample tracking, clinical trials, study administration, and real-time alerts.
Undoubtedly, even with the most recent integration of natural

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PUPPALA et al.: METEOR: AN ENTERPRISE HEALTH INFORMATICS ENVIRONMENT TO SUPPORT EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE

Fig. 1.

2777

Information workflow of METEOR for clinical and outcomes studies.

language processing (NLP) into i2b2 [5], it is difficult to imagine
that the complete case control building process could be finished
consequently without the critical restructuring of clinical data
inputs format.
With these limitations, issues and challenges in mind and the
mandate of the hospital board to transform HMH into a leading
academic medical center, the clinical informatics division within
the Department of Systems Medicine and Bioengineering at the
Houston Methodist developed an integrated clinical informatics
environment, i.e., Methodist environment for translational enhancement and outcomes research (METEOR), which was built
as an extension on the top of i2b2 as a basis to facilitate sharing and reuse of patient data [6]. METEOR provides a solution
that handles any type of data queries and has an ability to process the free clinical texts. In collaboration with the HMH IT,
METEOR gathers, cleanses, and maps the data from multiple
sources to one central secured archive for online analytic processing and outcome studies [7], [8]. METEOR was designed
and developed as a platform that allows the HMH system to
improve rather than just to report on performance and to provide a reliable and coherent platform for developing a broad
range of novel clinical solutions at the software intelligence
and analytics (SIA) layer to support the practice of evidencebased medicine at the enterprise level. The informatics tools
built on the top of the METEOR data warehouse framework can
be used directly by outcomes researchers and clinical investigators to facilitate data access for the purposes of hypothesis
testing, cohort identification, data mining, risk prediction, and
clinical research training [9]–[11]. METEOR data warehouse
provide data access that contain records dating back to January
1, 2006, with over 2 million unique patients and over 10 million
unique patient encounters that encompass a range of diverse
heterogeneous data, e.g., demographics, pathologies, imaging,

laboratory tests, physical examinations, comorbidities, and
treatment regimens, seen in a patient population, as well as financial and administrative information [12]. METEOR could
inevitably prompt decreased healthcare costs and enhanced
treatments for disease, increase the efficacy of new medical
technologies, and eventually enhance patient satisfaction.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
As data are collected from all the locations of the HMH system for centralized data warehousing, the aim of METEOR is to
provide a uniform secured yet flexible information environment
for supporting clinical and outcomes research by integrating,
categorizing, and analyzing vast amounts of clinical, demographic, genomics, imaging, administrative, and financial data
from the entire hospital system as well as external and internal research databases (see Fig. 1) [13], [14]. The framework
of METEOR consists of two components: the enterprise data
warehouse and a SIA layer for enabling a wide range of clinical
decision support (CDS) systems.
A. Data Warehouse
The back-end database of METEOR expands on the i2b2 Sschema with different visual analytics, presentation logic, and
query interfaces created for different groups of users, e.g., physicians and caregivers, hospital administrators and executives,
power users such as biostatisticians, and automated report generation for outcomes and clinical research purposes. The clinical
informatics team solicited user requirements from physicians
such that the user requirements drive functional requirements
for implementation and evaluation. As stated above, the physicians and the academic investigators require vast pools of patient information to advancing science and/or medical practice.

2778

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

An individual patient record usually consists of multiple binary
(e.g., gender), categorical (e.g., race), and continuous (e.g., age)
attributes at a given time point, time-lapse information (e.g.,
multiple blood pressure reads during a patient’s stay in the hospital), and nonalphanumeric data (e.g., free text and images).
Like other scientists, clinical investigators participate in thorough review work before continuing with a research project that
may take years to finish.
The development of METEOR data warehouse required several steps. Initial activities included seeking technical and administrative support, concluding which data elements were desired, and learning how and where the data were stored in each
hospital’s information systems. Each clinical department (e.g.,
medical records, laboratory, and pharmacy) at HMH stored data
in a separate database server. Obtaining information about each
database’s architecture, such as data dictionary and documentation about the database tables’ relationships, was essential for
understanding the data and for extracting relevant variables into
METEOR enterprise data warehouse. METEOR data warehouse
continues to be developed and implemented in phases with the
close collaboration with HMH IT. Hospital IT maintains the
data repository and its software applications in each phase of
production, while the METEOR team continues to work on the
next phase of development.
B. CDS Applications at the SIA Layer
CDS tools are the front-end informatics and analytics tools
that include web and desktop access, smart phone interface, and
sensor monitoring. CDS systems include information retrieval,
alerting systems, suggestion systems, and prediction models
[15]. METEOR allows effective integration and management of
multiple data types to apply biostatistics and machine learning
for evidence-based decision supports. In this paper, we present
three clinical solution applications in the SIA layer of the METEOR framework, namely, we: 1) established and implemented
METEOR point of delivery (mPOD), a real-time interaction tool
that is used to query and collect population health data and provide clinical and comparative effectiveness data; 2) created and
implemented MOTTE (Methodist hospital text teaser), a tool for
collecting and analyzing data from free clinical texts for clinical
and outcomes research purposes; and 3) developed readmission
risk estimator (READMIT), a smartphone app that applies data
mining and analytics techniques on the centralized database to
predict patients with high risks of readmission. These applications under two CDS categories at the SIA layer of METEOR
are illustrated here.
1) Category 1 (Information Retrieval): Data mining is meant
to extract the hidden knowledge in the data and to reduce
the overall cost of research and healthcare. The objective
of the first application for mPOD is to be directly used by
clinical investigators for the purpose of data exploration
to simplify the process of using existing clinical data for
potential hypothesis and preliminary research cohort discovery. The second application is the application of NLP
techniques that will allow researchers to efficiently search
through patients’ medical reports, laboratory results, and

Fig. 2.

mPOD dashboard view.

any other records. The free text reports are manually written by the physicians and the clinical information can be
extracted by reading these reports. Due to the big data clinical reports in the METEOR warehouse, it is a challenge to
screen and extract all patients’ clinical information from
the large number of reports without automated methods.
Therefore, we developed an NLP module to assist in extracting this information from free text reports.
2) Category 2 (Prediction Models): Prediction models are the
most evident and straightforward targets for applying data
mining algorithms. We illustrated this with another CDS
application, READMIT, which is used to analyze both retrospective and real-time clinical data in METEOR to stratify readmission risk of patients. Most of these readmissions seem attributable to medical issues different from
those responsible for the initial admission. READMIT is
developed to predict a patient’s readmission rate based
on their medical record using support vector machine
(SVM) methods.
1) METEOR Point of Delivery: Tools for querying data have
usually been text based [16], even though graphical interfaces
have been pursued [17]. mPOD is the web-enabled query interface being developed on top of the METEOR EDW to enable
investigators and physicians to quickly search for entire patient
populations at the HMH system and identify patient cohorts for
clinical trials or outcome studies. In order to support hypothesis
generation and testing and cohort identification, the key challenge is an interface that greatly accelerates access to relevant
data sets: past queries should be quickly recallable; new queries
should be easily constructible; existing queries should be readily
modifiable.
The mPOD application include features to support HIPAA
compliance, full audit trails, access control and privileges, integration with the institutional LDAP server, and a dashboard
(see Fig. 2) displaying population statistics of data in METEOR.
The query interface of mPOD is shown in Fig. 3. The row of
criteria button items is the “vocabulary” of the database. Even
though the underlying structure of the database places the items
in completely different tables and structures, to the user everything appears to be just another item to be selected from the
criteria list. Once the criteria are selected, the user is able to add
constraints for the items. If an item is associated with a value,
like a laboratory test, then a selection could be made to define

PUPPALA et al.: METEOR: AN ENTERPRISE HEALTH INFORMATICS ENVIRONMENT TO SUPPORT EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE

Fig. 3.

2779

mPOD Query builder interface.

the value. The value allows for “No value,” meaning all tests are
considered valid, a flag selection option from the performing lab
to identify “high/low/abnormal/normal” value, or an inequality
number, which allows the user to specify tests greater than, less
than, or in between specified values.
When the query is run, aggregate numbers on the patient
population matching the query criteria are returned in the results
section of the page. Typically, results are limited to counts and
aggregate statistics until the user achieves a sense of which
direction to pursue further. We obfuscate the results somewhat to
prevent any possibility that a single individual may be identified
through the interface. Once a set of patients is obtained with
the query tool and the user is satisfied, they match the general
characteristics required for their research study, the individual
patients may be identified, provided the IRB has approved the
study. The identified list of patients is delivered to the researchers
in the format required by them that includes all electronic data
for those patients.
To support the simple visual model, as well as the identification and distribution of patient data, a three-tier software
architecture was employed. The user interface was developed
using Java Server Faces, the middle layer was developed in Java
[18] on top of spring framework, and a Microsoft SQL 2008
database is queried and managed in standard SQL.
2) Methodist Hospital Text Teaser: Extraction of cancerrelated parameters from pathology reports is essential for many
clinical studies; however, researchers and cancer registrars generally depend on manual extraction of information, a time intensive and costly process. However, no reliable commercial
software exists with customized workflow and application logic

to fill our needs. Thus, we developed an NLP-based tool MOTTE
to extract and structure the data in pathology reports automatically to support our clinical solution applications. Such a tool
can search and retrieve specific clinical information from free
text reports archived in METEOR enterprise data warehouse.
Pathology reports were collected associated with breast biopsies that were referred for evaluation of cancer prognosis. Normally, different clinical information belongs to specific sections
of the report. Hence, we first determine the general structure
of the reports and recognize the data required from each section of the report. Then, MOTTE was applied to search and
retrieve specific clinical parameters from the specific section of
the report.
The NLP-based method contains five processing steps, i.e.,
tokenization, stemming, stop words removal, vector space modeling, and similarity calculation [19], [20]. Fig. 4 illustrates the
flowchart of the NLP method. The first step involves tokenization that translates to turning each clinical text report into a
stream of tokens. We used the following Bayesian model in this
processing step:
P (t|s) =

P (t)
1
P (t ∩ s)
=
=
P (s)
P (t)P (m)
P (m)

(1)

where t is the processed token, s is the input sentence, and
m is the marks to be removed from the sentence. Obviously,
a sentence s is combined by the token t and removed marks
m, i.e., P (s) = P (t)P (m). In our method, m represents all
punctuations and capitalizations in the text reports. We defined
a token t as a string of alphanumeric characters surrounded by
white space. The second step adopted was stemming. In the

2780

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Flowchart of METEOR NLP method for extracting information from free text clinical reports.

reports, one word always has different grammatical forms, and
we only use the word’s ground form in our method. For each
token t, we used the following stem class model to remove the
phase affixes and other lexical components and then refreshed
the remaining stem as the new token
P (w|t) =



P (wi |t)

(2)

w i ∈E (w )

where E(w) is the scope of grammatical forms for word wi , and
w is a ground form of a token t. For example, we converted the
words diagnosing, diagnoses, and diagnosed into diagnose. We
also transferred the verbs, such as was or are, into the ground
form, i.e., be.
The third step involves removing the stop words. The stop
words in our method are words that do not carry any useful
information for the text report analysis, such as the, this, which,
etc. Most stop words are conjunctions, pronouns, or prepositions. Hence,
P (B|w) = P (w) /P (X)

(3)

where X is the stop word and B is the word for the next step.
We defined a list of stop words according to the published
NLP works [21], [22], and then used the list for removing the
stop words.
The next processing step adopted was the modeling of all
tokens in a high-dimensional vector space. We defined each
token as a dimension of the vector space and the frequency of
each token occurring in each sentence as the position along the
axis in the vector space. Hence, each token has different axis
positions for different sentences. The similarity between the
requested clinical information and the sentence is measured in
terms of distances in this vector space.
The similarity measure computing is the final step in the
METEOR NLP method. We set up a series of clinical information items according to the requirements of physicians
and researchers and then calculate the similarity between an
information item and each sentence. The similarity measure
is Jaccard similarity coefficient [23], and the highest Jaccard

similarity coefficient is searched throughout all sentences as
Jm ax (A) = arg

max

i=1,2,...,n

|A ∩ Bi |
|A ∪ Bi |

(4)

Here, A is the clinical information and Bi is the ith sentence
from the processed text. The total number of sentences in the
processed text is n. For example, one of our clinical information
items is “complex cystic mass,” and in the free text report, the
sentence “there is a new complex cystic mass with internal
septations” contains the highest Jaccard similarity coefficient.
This mean we can set a positive finding in the result.
By exploring the language used in the pathology reports and
developing a query strategy, we extracted cancer-related parameters, and then collaborated with the Houston Methodist
Cancer Center at HMH by using extracted data for breast cancer
risk assessment. Such assessment is to create a risk estimate
score that allows a clinician to stratify the patients by developing a more refined threshold for biopsy and safely reduce
false-positive biopsies.
3) Readmission Risk Estimator: The goal of READMIT application is to establish the relationship between readmission
risks of the patient λ with the medical information v of patient’s
record after initial admission. Therefore, given N training sample pairs {(vi , λi )} , i = 1, . . . , N , the relationship between
medical information vi of ith patient and the retrospective readmission risk λi needs to be established. In this paper, we employ
the ridge regression method with the least squares support vector
machine (LSSVM) model. Given the known patients’ readmission risk λi , i = 1, . . . , N and those of medical information
vi , the goal is to estimate the readmission risk assessment function, i.e., λi = θ(vi ) + ei where e is a random process with
zero mean and standard deviation 2ε . Because the elements of λi
are independent from each other in the patient space, we can use
the LSSVM model to estimate each element of λi . Denoting λ
as one element of λ from a patient, we can estimate it using
λ = uT φ(v) + b

(5)

where φ() denotes a potential mapping function. u is the weights
and b is the shifting values. The regularized cost function of the

PUPPALA et al.: METEOR: AN ENTERPRISE HEALTH INFORMATICS ENVIRONMENT TO SUPPORT EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE


and we only need to define a kernel function () of
medical information. The typical radial basis function kernel (vi , vj ) =
exp(−vi − vj 2 /σ 2 ) is used in our study, where σ denotes
the bandwidth of the kernel. After solving (8), we get α and
b, and the element of readmission risk λ can be calculated for
given medical information v

TABLE I
SAMPLE OUTCOME STUDIES SUPPORTED BY METEOR
Study

Sample Size
(# of patients)

Impact

Timeline
(weeks)

Studying Early
clearance versus
persistence of de
novo donor-specific
antibodies following
lung transplantation

479

Support costeffective care
delivery in Lung
transplantation

2

Studying diet
advancement in postoperative bariatric
patients

2715

Support evidence
of early versus late
feeding in bariatric
patients

3

Cardiovascular
surgery glycemic
assessment review:
a six year
retrospective
analysis (Cv-SuGAR
study)

5645

Quality
improvement for
the critically ill
patients

3

Incidence of MDS in
patients with solid
organ transplantation

6342

4

Review of factor X
levels and bleeding
risk in patients with
amyloidosis

411

Assessed the
significance of
MDS in posttransplant patients
Better
understanding of
risk factors
impacting survival

Identification of
factors impacting
clinical outcomes
and cost
effectiveness in
acute myeloid
leukemia patients

1141

2781

λ=

N


αi



(v, vi ) + b.

(9)

i=1

Improved costeffective delivery
of healthcare
services in
Leukemia patients

We implemented the model in the READMIT application tool
so that the real-time clinical data in METEOR then can be used
for stratifying readmission risk of patients.
III. RESULTS
Usability analysis was performed as a preliminary evaluation
of METEOR components. Table I listed the examples of the
patient outcomes research studies supported by the METEOR
EDW. Another common use of the EDW is to support hospital
quality improvement efforts.

2

A. METEOR Point of Delivery

4

LSSVM is given by [24]
min ξ(u, e) = 12 uT u +

u.b.e

γ
2

N


ei 2

i=1

s.t.λi = uT φ (vi ) + b + ei ,

(6)

i = 1, . . . , N

where γ is referred to as the regularization constant. This optimization actually corresponds to a ridge regression in feature space. The Lagrangian method is utilized to solve the
constrained optimization problem, and hence, the new cost
function becomes
ζ (u, b, e; α) = ξ (u, e) −

N


αi (uT φ (vi ) + b + ei − λi )

i=1

(7)
with αi as the Lagrange multipliers. According to [24], the
conditions for optimality are equivalent to the following of the
linear equation:


 

b
0
0
1TN
=
(8)
α
Λ
1N Ω + γ −1 IN
where Λ = [λ1 , . . . , λN ]T is the vector formed by the N
T
N
samples
 of an element of vector λ, 1N = [1, . . . , 1] ∈ R ,
Ω = (vi , vj ) = φ(vi )φ(vj ) ∀i, j = 1, . . . , N with as the
positive definite kernel function. Notice that because of the kernel trick, the feature mapping φ() is never defined explicitly,

The mPOD enables investigators and physicians to quickly
search for entire patient populations at the HMH system and
identify patient cohorts for clinical trials or outcome studies.
In order to understand if the query tool could indeed be used
successfully by novice users, a usability analysis of the tool was
performed. All queries submitted to the database are saved and,
thus, can be analyzed.
Upon analyzing the 30 selected research data requests, it was
observed that about 43% (13) of these data requests could be
completed using the mPOD alone, without demanding any significant changes to the ontology. About 67% (17) of the data
requests needed actual patient data in addition to the counts.
Frequently requested data elements were demographics, visit
details (visit age, visit type, or length of stay), procedures, diagnoses, medications, and laboratory tests.
An example of a data request is provided here. In a proposed
erectile dysfunction clinical study, the following inclusion and
exclusion criteria were queried in mPOD to yield a cohort of
patients that met the strict set of requirements to participate
in the study. Inclusion criteria were Male: Age 35–65 years;
diabetes (ICD 9 code: 250.0∗); A1C > 6.5; BMI > 30; and
prior diagnosis of organic impotence (ICD 9 code: 607.84).
The criteria that excluded patients from being a part of the
cohort include history of any of the following: coronary artery
disease including myocardial infarction (ICD 9 codes: 401.0–
405.99); cardiac arrhythmias (ICD 9 codes: 427.0–427.9); and
current use of any of the following medications: Propranolol,
Sildenafil citrate, Vardenafil, Tadalafil. All the aforementioned
data requests were fulfilled using the mPOD alone.
Amongst the data requests that could not be fulfilled with
the mPOD without major modifications, eight cases had one
or more precise criteria (for example, data from the outpatients
database, specific service lines, etc.), and some had one or more
temporal criteria that could not be created using the mPOD

2782

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

User interface of METEOR NLP application (MOTTE).

alone. Such query criteria often required pre- or postprocessing
of data to answer the research questions. During the sample data
requests analysis, it was also discovered that 48% (14) of these
requests required some type of preprocessing of the data, 59%
(17) required some postprocessing, and 29% (9) of the requests
required both the processing in order to fulfill the data request.
Some requests included calculated fields, and other requests
required additional attributes in order to accommodate one or
more complex inclusion and exclusion criteria.
B. Methodist Hospital Text Teaser

Fig. 6.

Percentages of types of breast cancer patients.

To validate the tool, 670 breast cancer candidate patients’
biopsy reports were used in the application. For the data extraction, the physicians provided a list of key words from the clinical
information required to extract cancer patients. All items from
the key words list were used to compute the similarity measure
with the sentences. By comparing the results using our method
and physicians’ manual method, a threshold 0.4 for similarity
measure was set as an optimal value; if the maximal Jaccard
similarity coefficient was greater than 0.4, then we determined
that the item from clinical information table was positive in the
text report. Moreover, the threshold 0.4 is the optimal value for
all reports in our experience; the users normally do not need
to change the threshold when using MOTTE for other types of
reports.

We implemented our framework in Microsoft Visual Studio
2010 environment. All of the programs were performed on an
Intel workstation with Quad Core 3.5 GHz CPU and 16 GB
memory running Windows 7. We used Java to program our
method and developed a web interface for the application. Fig. 5
shows the interface of MOTTE. The time consumption was 3 h
for retrieving all information. To ensure effectiveness, the results
of MOTTE were monitored by the physicians and compared
with the physicians’ manual results.
Fig. 6 shows the types of all 670 breast cancer candidate
patients grouped by MOTTE. According to the physicians’ requirements, we categorized the breast cancer candidate patients
into four types, which are Benign, Atypia, Lobular Carcinoma in
situ (LCIS), Ductal Carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and Carcinoma.

PUPPALA et al.: METEOR: AN ENTERPRISE HEALTH INFORMATICS ENVIRONMENT TO SUPPORT EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE

Fig. 7.

2783

Statistical results of mammogram density findings.

With our method, we found 33 cases to be benign, 4 patients to
be Atypia, 0 cases to be LCIS, 55 cases to be DCIS, and 503
cases to be Carcinoma. Accurately and promptly figuring out
carcinoma patients is the main purpose for the MOTTE utilization, so the physicians helped us to find the carcinoma patients
from the biopsy reports manually as validation.
Using the manual method, the percentage of the carcinoma
patients from all cancer candidate patients is 77.9%, and the percentage using MOTTE is 75.1%. Overall, an acceptable range
of accuracy was obtained for extracting the carcinoma patients
using MOTTE.
Armed with these results, we also help the physicians to complete the data analysis for assisting the cancer risk assessment.
Fig. 7 shows the percentages of each type of mammogram density from the carcinoma patients. From the results, the physicians
can conclude the relationship between the mammogram density
and risk of breast cancer.

Fig. 8.

Interface of READMIT.

Fig. 9.

Average prediction accuracy.

C. Readmission Risk Estimator
The READMIT application is a smartphone app that uses the
SVM method and learns from patient information stored in the
clinical data warehouse or electronic medical record [25], [26].
The medical information for training the SVM model include
1) length of stay in hospital, 2) number of comorbid diagnosis
present on admission, 3) emergency as portal for admission, and
4) the severity of admit illness. These four variables were identified that were significant (p < 0.05) in predicting readmission.
Fig. 8 shows the user interface of READMIT. The users need
to fill the four major features into the application, and click on
the “check risk” button. Based on the values provided, the application calculates a percentage. If it is below 0.5, it is low risk,
otherwise, high risk of readmission. Fig. 9 shows the average
prediction accuracy by using our application tool. Currently, the
accuracy of readmission prediction of the threefold cross validation is about 70.9%. According to the feedback of physicians,
this accuracy is acceptable. READMIT app is now under satisfaction evaluation and will be published in the App stores with
secured password access.
IV. DISCUSSION
Clinical and translational research requires the integration of
clinicopathologic, biospecimen, phenotypic and molecular data

across multiple data platforms. It is also critical to make these
data usable whenever required. Enterprise data warehousing,
as an important component of health informatics, provides
a powerful means for data integration and efficient access
in supporting clinical and translational research. METEOR
takes a top-down “Enterprise” approach with open specialized functions and applications [10]. It addresses significant
niches in the clinical informatics area, for example, providing
researchers and clinicians with sufficient access to clinical
data to enable study design and cohort selection, while
reducing many of the common concerns and patient privacy
risks.
The web query interface is frequently recognized as a bottleneck to evaluate the efficiency of different investments and
revolutions in clinical research [1]–[3], [13]. User-centered design process [27] and agile development [14] methodologies
are used for the development of query interface. Currently, very

2784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

few interfaces are in use directly by the investigators [4], [17].
Features of query interface design that facilitate its use by investigators include efficient query construction, obtaining counts
in real time, query sharing and reuse, and data exploration.
The goal of mPOD is to develop a powerful interface that is
simple, usable, and intuitive and also to serve as an online informatics tool by investigators and physicians to facilitate data
access for the purposes of cohort identification, screening, data
mining, clinical research training, case-control comparison, and
longitudinal studies.
Current NLP techniques, including compound recognition,
stemming, part-of-speech tagging, word sense disambiguation,
chunking, decompounding, etc., have been used in information
retrieval. In this application, we implemented an NLP module
MOTTE in the METEOR SIA layer for specific free text information retrieval. To accurately obtain the clinical results, a vector space model is applied, while the similarity measure between
the text report and clinical information is calculated. Using the
patient data in our METEOR electronic data warehouse, we can
quantitatively compare our method with the physicians’ manual
method. All retrieval results were included in the clinical statistical analysis and aid the physicians or researchers to assess the
cancer risk of the patients. The ongoing work is to incorporate
MOTTE for assessing the disease risk of any patient on the fly
on a smartphone app.
Hospital readmissions still continue to be a critical issue
as a result of substantial financial penalties, quality of care,
and reputations at stake for hospitals based on their ability
to keep readmissions at an acceptable level. The focus on
readmission risk assessment tools may not be abating soon and
yet for all the resources spent on developing and implementing
these disparate models, readmission rates have barely reduced.
The reasons why patients come back to hospitals shortly
after discharge are complex. Although current research has
demonstrated the effort of predicting risk of readmission in
silos, those solutions are mostly not applicable to design intervention strategies for personalized risk management. Creating
and implementing a readmissions reduction strategy should
be a top priority for any hospital that is not measuring up in
this area.
A successful strategy for reducing readmissions will involve
identifying at-risk patients for readmission, bridging the gap in
transition care planning, tracking at-risk patients with deviceenabled real-time notification of care providers, and monitoring
performance improvements as a result of these efforts. The right
clinical analytics application can help hospitals harvest the right
data, turn these data to a source of wisdom to transform clinical
care workflows, and measure the precise quality and impacts of
all of these activities.
V. CONCLUSION
METEOR is designed to help physicians, investigators, and
researchers across the healthcare enterprise in their efforts to
meet the complex demands and opportunities of this big data
era of healthcare while pursuing ongoing efforts to improve efficiency and cost-effectiveness of healthcare delivery and achieve

a higher level of patient satisfaction. The Houston Methodist
investigators and clinical researchers are satisfied with the
services provided by the METEOR as evident by submissions
and publications of various abstracts in clinical conferences,
submissions, or preparation for submissions of many clinical
journal manuscripts, as well as research grant and clinical trial
applications using the data provided by METEOR. The presented SIA apps of METEOR are awaiting IRB approval for feasibility studies and clinical evaluation. The modular and scalable
framework of METEOR ensures a flexible and scalable platform
to develop a broad range of sophisticated clinical solution applications beyond traditional reporting for quality, compliance,
and finance purposes, and enhances the power of investigators
and clinicians in medical practice and outcomes research
as well as hospital administrators in operational efficiency
and process reengineering. The integration of mobile health
applications systematically into the METEOR data warehouse
via its SIA layer would extend the capability of the hospitals in
providing coordinated care beyond hospital walls and enriching
their healthcare IT services to both the patients and physicians.
In addition, the powerful data gathering and analytics provided
by intelligent and integrative information environments such
as METEOR cannot only improve clinical operations but
also enrich its care offerings and level of patient satisfaction
by embedding data smartness into the services that patients
receive.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the participation of a large
number of their physician and hospital IT colleagues across the
HMH system in the design and implementation of METEOR.
They would also like to thank J. Mancuso for his discussion and
proofreading of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. N. Murphy et al., “Architecture of the open-source clinical research
chart from informatics for integrating biology and the bedside,” Proc.
AMIA Annu. Symp., vol. 2007, pp. 548–552, 2007.
[2] G. M. Weber et al., “The shared health research information network
(SHRINE): A prototype federated query tool for clinical data repositories,”
J. Amer. Med. Informat. Assoc., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 624–630, 2009.
[3] S. N. Murphy et al. “Integration of clinical and genetic data in the i2b2
architecture,” Proc. AMIA Annu. Symp., vol. 1, p. 1040, 2006.
[4] E. K. Johnson et al., “Use of the i2b2 research query tool to conduct a
matched case-control clinical research study: Advantages, disadvantages
and methodological considerations,” BMC Med. Res. Methodol., vol. 14,
no. 1, p. 16, 2014.
[5] D. T. Heinze et al., “Medical i2b2 NLP smoking challenge: The Alife system architecture and methodology,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc.,
vol. 15, pp. 40–43, 2008.
[6] S. N. Murphy et al., “Serving the enterprise and beyond with informatics
for integrating biology and the bedside (i2b2),” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc.,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 124–130, 2010.
[7] T. R. Sahama and P. R. Croll, “A data warehouse architecture for clinical data warehousing,” in Proc. 5th Aust. Symp. ACSW Front, vol. 68,
pp. 227–232, 2007.
[8] C. S. Ledbetter et al., “Toward best practice: Leveraging the electronic
patient record as a clinical data warehouse,” J. Healthcare Inform. Manag.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 119–132, 2001.
[9] G. D. Kennedy, “Enterprise informatics: Key to precision medicine, scientific breakthroughs, and competitive advantage,” Remedy Informatics,
pp. 2–16, 2013.

PUPPALA et al.: METEOR: AN ENTERPRISE HEALTH INFORMATICS ENVIRONMENT TO SUPPORT EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE

[10] E. A. Zerhouni, “US biomedical research: Basic, translational, and clinical
sciences,” JAMA, vol. 294, no. 11, pp. 1352–1358, 2005.
[11] E. A. Zerhouni, “Clinical research at a crossroads: The NIH roadmap,”
J. Invest. Med., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 171–173, 2006.
[12] S. T. C. Wong et al., “Design and applications of a multimodality image
data warehouse framework,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 239–254, 2002.
[13] C. Radu et al., “Cross-trial query system for cancer clinical trials,” Innovations and Advanced Techniques in Computer and Information Sciences
and Engineering, 2007, pp. 385–390.
[14] J. Highsmith et al., “Agile software development: The business of innovation,” Computer, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 120–127, 2001.
[15] E. S. Berner, “Clinical decision support systems: State of the art,” AHRQ
Pub., 09-0069-EF, pp. 4–26, Jun. 2009.
[16] D. J. Nigrin and I. S. Kohane, “Data mining by clinicians,” Proc. AMIA
Symp., pp. 957–961, 1998.
[17] F. Banhart and H. Klaeren, “A graphical query generator for clinical
research databases,” Methods Inform. Med., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 328–339,
1995.
[18] D. Bales. (2002). Java Programming With Oracle JDBC. [Online]. Available: www.java.com
[19] N. Indurkhya and F. J. Damerau, Handbook of Natural Language
Processing, 2nd ed. Computational Linguistics, 2011, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 395–397.
[20] A. Abbasi et al., “Social media analytics for smart health,” IEEE Intell.
Syst., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 64–67, Mar./Apr. 2014.
[21] P. Runeson et al., “Detection of duplicate defect reports using natural language processing,” in Proc. IEEE. 29th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., May 2007,
pp. 499–510.
[22] A. A. Thomas et al., “Extracting data from electronic medical records:
Validation of a natural language processing program to assess prostate
biopsy results,” World J. Urology, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 99–103,
2014.
[23] L. Ohno-Machado et al., “Natural language processing: Algorithms and
tools to extract computable information from EHRs and from the biomedical literature,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 805–805,
2013.
[24] S. An et al., “Fast cross-validation algorithms for least squares support
vector machine and kernel ridge regression,” Pattern Recog., vol. 40,
no. 8, pp. 2154–2162, 2007.
[25] Y. Mao Yong et al., “Multiclass cancer classification by using fuzzy support vector machine and binary decision tree with gene selection,” BioMed
Res. Int., vol. 2005, no. 2, pp. 160–171, 2005.
[26] M. Wang et al., “Novel cell segmentation and online SVM for cell cycle
phase identification in automated microscopy,” Bioinformatics, vol. 24,
no. 1, pp. 94–101, 2008.
[27] D. D. McCracken et al., User-centered Website Development: A HumanComputer Interaction Approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: PrenticeHall, 2004, pp. 1–305.

Mamta Puppala received the B.Com. degree from
Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh,
India, and the M.S. degree in computer applications
from Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur, Andhra
Pradesh, India.
From 2002 to 2012, she held various positions
within the software industry as Support Analyst, Subject Matter Expert and lead roles, and has extensive experience in IT application development. Since
2012, she has been a part of clinical informatics team
at Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston,
TX, USA, and is currently working as a Sr. Applications Analyst. Her current
focus is to provide informatics support to clinicians and researchers of Houston
Methodist Hospital. Her research interests include information analysis, system
analysis, big data analytics design, database design, requirements gathering and
consensus building, and development and implementation of web and mobile
applications.

2785

Tiancheng He received the Ph.D. degree in signal
and information processing from Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China, in 2010.
From 2011 to 2013, he carried out his postdoctoral research of the interventional guidance systems
for lung cancer diagnosis, staging, and treatment in
the Department of Systems Medicine and Bioengineering, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill
Cornell Medical College of Cornell University. Since
2014, he has been working as a Research Informatics
Developer at Houston Methodist Hospital focused on
the development of complex clinical application systems, computational algorithms for radiology image computing, and big data analytics design.

Shenyi Chen received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science from Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China.
Since 2011, he has been a Research Informatics Developer at the Houston Methodist Research
Institute. His research experience is in artificial Intelligence. His research interests include data mining, computer-aided drug discovery, and machine
learning.

Richard Ogunti received the M.D. degree from the
University of Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria, and the Master’s
degree in Public Health from the University of Texas,
Houston, TX, USA.
Since 2014, he has been with Houston Methodist
Research Institute. His research interests include the
real-time application of big-data analytics in the delivery of evidence-based precise clinical care.

Xiaohui Yu received the M.S. degree in computer
science from Liaoning University, Jinzhou, China, in
2007.
From 2007 to 2008, he was at TechFaith Wireless Communication Company, Hangzhou, China,
as a Software Engineer and worked on the development of the embedded web browser. From 2008
to 2013, he was at Nokia Siemens Networks Company, Hangzhou, China, as a Senior Software Engineer. He worked on the telecommunications software
development. Since 2014, he has been with Houston
Methodist Research Institute as an Application Analyst and focuses on the development of HealthCare mobile applications for the Houston Methodist Hospital.

Fuhai Li received the Ph.D. degree in applied mathematics from Peking University, Beijing, China, and
did predoctoral and postdoctoral training in bioinformatics at Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA, and Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, TX, USA.
He is an Assistant Professor in the Department
of Systems Medicine and Bioengineering, Houston
Methodist Research Institute. His research interest
include addressing technical and computational challenges in solving disease problems, including precision medicine, biomarker identification, drug repositioning, drug combination
discovery.

2786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Robert Jackson received the B.A. and M.A. degrees
from the University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA, and
the M.D. degree from the University of Texas, Galveston, TX, USA. He completed his Internal Medicine
Residency, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX, USA.
He is currently with Houston Methodist Hospital, Texas Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA. He
is actively involved in teaching, research, and clinical practice both at Baylor College of Medicine and
Houston Methodist Hospital. He is the ImmediatePast Governor of the Texas Chapter of the American College of Physicians
(ACP) Southern Region. He was the president of the Houston Methodist Hospital Medical staff and was the Chairman of Quality and Utilization Review. He
is the Medical Director of the Methodist Physicians. Alliance for Quality. He is
a Professor of Clinical Medicine of the Weill Cornell Medical College and an
Associate Professor of Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine.

Stephen T. C. Wong received the B. Eng. (Hons.)
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Lehigh University, and senior executive education from Stanford
University, Graduate School of Business, Columbia
Business University, New York, NY, USA, and MIT
Sloan School of Management.
He is a Specialist in systems biology, bioinformatics, medical imaging, and drug repositioning. He
has three decades of research and executive experience in academic medicine and healthcare industries. He is currently the Chief
Research Information Officer and the Chief of Medical Physics at the Houston Methodist Hospital, the Founding Chairman of the Department of Systems
Medicine and Bioengineering, Houston Methodist Research Institute at Texas
Medical Center. He holds the John S. Dunn Presidential Distinguished Chair
at Houston Methodist Hospital and serves as the Associate Director of Translational Research at Houston Methodist Cancer Center. He is a Professor of
Radiology, Neurosciences, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY, USA.

