IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

67

Combined Single Neuron Unit Activity and Local
Field Potential Oscillations in a Human Visual
Recognition Memory Task
Michal T. Kucewicz∗ †, B. Michael Berry†, Mark R. Bower, Jan Cimbalnik, Vojtech Svehlik,
S. Matt Stead, and Gregory A. Worrell

Abstract— Goal: Activities of neuronal networks range from action potential firing of individual neurons, coordinated oscillations
of local neuronal assemblies, and distributed neural populations.
Here, we describe recordings using hybrid electrodes, containing
both micro- and clinical macroelectrodes, to simultaneously sample both large-scale network oscillations and single neuron spiking
activity in the medial temporal lobe structures of human subjects
during a visual recognition memory task. We quantify and compare
single neuron unit activity (SUA) with high-frequency macrofield
oscillations (HFOs) for decoding visual images. Results: SUA and
HFOs were recorded using hybrid electrodes containing both micro and macroelectrode contacts, implanted in patients with focal
epilepsy. Decoding of image properties in different task trials was
performed, analyzing SUA and HFO as point processes to capture the dynamics of neurons and their assemblies at different
spatiotemporal scales, ranging from submillisecond discharges of
single units to fast oscillations across large neuronal populations.
Results highlight the limitations and potential complementary use
of SUA and HFOs for decoding of general image properties. Conclusion: The dynamics of SUA and HFOs can be used to explore a
wide range of neuronal assembly activities engaged in human memory processing. Significance: Hybrid electrodes provide a technological bridge for exploring multiscale activity, spanning individual
neurons, their assemblies, and large-scale population activity reflected in local field potentials. Analysis of SUA and HFO dynamics
as point processes provides a potentially useful signal processing
method for exploring the neuronal correlates operating at different
spatial scales.
Index Terms—Cognition, cognitive processing, gamma oscillations, high-frequency oscillations, hybrid electrodes, intracranial
recordings, large-scale electrophysiology, neuronal assemblies, ripple oscillations.

Manuscript received February 15, 2015; revised June 11, 2015; accepted
June 19, 2015. Date of publication June 19, 2015; date of current version
December 17, 2015. This work was supported by the National Institute of Health
under Grant R01–NS63039 and Grant U24 -NS063930, IGA MZCR NT/115365, European Regional Development Fund—Project FNUSA-ICRC (No. CZ.
1.05/1.1.100/02.0123), European Social Fund and the State Budget of the Czech
Republic—Project ICRC Human Bridge—Support of Study Stays of Czech
Researchers Abroad III: Young Talent Incubator (CZ. 1.07/2.3.00/20.0239),
and the RAM project (Restore Active Memories) of the Defense Advanced
Research Project Agency. Asterisk indicates corresponding author. Daggers
indicate co-first authorship.
∗† M. T. Kucewicz, is with the Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester MN 55905 USA (e-mail: kucewicz.michal@mayo.edu).
J. Cimbalnik and V. Svehlik are with the International Clinical Research
Center, St. Anne’s University Hospital, Brno 656 91, Czech Republic.
† B. M. Berry, M. R. Bower, S. M. Stead, and G. A. Worrell are with the
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2451596

I. INTRODUCTION
NE of the greatest challenges of modern neuroscience is to
develop technologies that will be able to record both local
and widespread activity of distributed, but connected neuronal
networks. These activities span a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. Beginning from action potentials of single neurons
fired within a timeframe of 1 ms and ending on slow-wave oscillations generated by large-scale neuronal populations across
thalamocortical circuits, there are several orders of magnitude
separating the different levels of brain architecture and dynamics. Current neurotechnologies probe a limited range of this vast
scale—it is estimated that local field potentia (LFP) recorded
on a microelectrode (∼40 μm) probes the activity of approximately 1,000 neurons generating LFP, and can be used to isolate
spiking of single units (SUA) in its high-frequency spectral components [1], [2], [10], [11]. On the other hand, macroelectrode
electrocorticogram (ECoG) recorded with clinical macroelectrodes (∼1–10 mm) probe aggregate fields produced by approximately 1,000,000 neurons, and even more for electroencephalogram (EEG) recorded from the scalp [10]. Human intracranial
recordings with clinical macroelectrodes can be supplemented
with research microcontacts in a hybrid-electrode design, as a
bundle of wires at the tip of an electrode and as a cluster of contacts along its shaft. The optimal recording scales for probing
neuronal network activities underlying complex brain functions
like memory and cognition are not clearly defined—spiking of
single neurons, oscillations of selected neuronal assemblies, or
distributed neural populations are all of potential importance,
but investigations across the different spatiotemporal scales are
limited [9], [14].
Large-scale electrophysiology offers an approach to address
the challenges of simultaneous recording of single neurons,
small neuronal assemblies, and distributed neuronal networks.
Instead of looking at either, the microscale of LFP and SUA,
or the macroscale of ECoG/EEG alone, one can rather probe
a wider scale through simultaneous micro and macroelectrode
recordings [12], [27]. Animal vertebrate and invertebrate studies
have been performed using multiple microelectrodes, bundled
together as independent tetrodes or arranged geometrically on
a probe over extended volumes of the brain and its different
structures, to study neuronal networks [2]–[6]. For example,
multielectrode arrays have been used to probe multisite network oscillations and their underlying neuronal activity [5],
[7], [8]. Analogous techniques have been used in human intracranial recordings to sample the processes generating brain

O

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

68

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

network activities across a wide range of spatiotemporal scales
that extends even further to macrofield oscillations of ECoG or
even scalp EEG [19]. Examples include hybrid depth electrodes
with clusters of microcontacts spaced between macrocontacts
or analogous surface epidural electrode grids—both capable of
mapping field oscillations and the underlying neuronal activities [12], [14], [22]. These electrodes are different from highdensity microcontact probes [4], [5], which do not record from
the larger macrofield EEG sampled by clinical macroelectrodes.
We hypothesize that recording macroscale oscillations together
with microscale single unit firing will provide further insight
into functioning of distributed neuronal networks in cognitive
processes.
Here, we explored this hypothesis using hybrid depth electrodes containing micro and clinical macroelectrodes, intracranially implanted in the medial temporal lobe of patients with
focal epilepsy, who performed a simple visual recognition memory task. The purpose of this study was to explore SUA and LFP
recorded from micro and macroelectrode signals, and compare
the relative ability to decode memorized stimuli from International Affective Picture Set (IAPS; [15]). Our choice of task
stimuli and recording technology was guided by recently established directives for the brain mapping projects, to employ
stimuli from naturalistic environments and sample brain signals
with high spatiotemporal resolution [16]. Hence, this paper focused on microscale spiking of single neurons and macroscale
ECoG oscillations of neuronal assemblies during encoding of
visual images.
Studies of single unit activity in human cognition have shed
light on fundamental mechanisms of how particular stimuli are
represented and stored on the level of individual neurons [17].
It has been proposed that single neurons can underlie very specific and abstract item representations or concepts and, thus, may
form the building blocks for human declarative memory [18],
[19], but recent work points to sparsely distributed neuronal
populations [20], [21] as the substrate of encoded information.
The relationship between sparsely distributed encoding assemblies and larger network activity in humans remains an active
area of animal research, but has received limited exploration in
human studies.
Neuronal assemblies are known to coordinate their activities
into synchronous oscillations, and high-frequency oscillations
(HFOs) provide a well-studied example of a network activity generated by neuronal assemblies that can be recorded in
the field potential on the micro- and the macroscale, and have
been implicated in pathophysiology of epilepsy and in cognition
[14], [22]–[24]. The relationship between HFOs and neuronal
assemblies underlying specific memory representations in humans have received less attention, likely, mainly due to a gap
between human studies of microscale SUA and macroscale LFP
and ECoG network oscillations.
HFO offer a possible link between the micro and the
macroscales. Traditionally, network oscillations were studied
within the limits of delta and gamma EEG frequency bands
between 1–125 Hz, and the single unit activities were filtered
in a high-bandpass between 600–6000 Hz, leaving a substantial stretch of unchartered spectrum in between. More recently,

HFOs in the 50–500 Hz range have been proposed to serve as
a biomarker of neuronal ensemble activity that could bridge
across the vast scales used by different neuroimaging technologies [23].
Human studies of cognitive processing have primarily utilized
either microelectrodes to record SUA/LFP or macroelectrodes
to record ECoG. In this study, we directly compared SUA and
HFO signals recorded on micro and macrocontacts of the same
hybrid electrodes with overlapping fields. We first describe a
new methodological approach to transform the two signals to a
common reference process, i.e., the HFO dynamics are treated
as a point process in order to apply analysis techniques used
for SUA to HFOs. Simple classifier analysis was subsequently
performed to compare relative decoding capacity of the two
signals. The results suggest an optimal approach for recording
the large-scale activity of neuronal networks underlying visual
recognition memory in human medial temporal lobe structures.
II. ISOLATION OF SINGLE UNITS
Four adult patients with drug-resistant focal epilepsy (three
females) were implanted with hybrid depth electrodes containing micro- and macroelectrode platinum contacts (Adtech, Inc.)
into medial temporal lobe structures for prolonged seizure monitoring, as a part of Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board
approved study.
A. Hybrid Electrode Recordings
Clinical macrocontacts were 1 mm in diameter, and spaced
5 mm from each other with a cluster of evenly spaced 40 μm
diameter microcontacts in between (see Fig. 1). Each electrode
contained 24–32 microcontacts clustered in between 3–7 macrocontacts (AdTech, Inc.). Impedance readings were checked following the electrode explantation, and ranged from 50–150 kΩ
and 300–600 kΩ for macro and microelectrodes, respectively.
Locations of the implanted contact sites were identified in the
hippocampus, amygdala, and the surrounding parahippocampal
neocortex (see Fig. 1) using coregistered brain images of preoperative MRI and postoperative high-resolution CT. The scans
were coregistered to a Talairach brain atlas, and the derived coordinates were mapped onto Mayo 3-D Brain Atlas using Analyze software (Analyze Direct, Inc.) A 3-D model of electrode
localization was reconstructed within MRIcroGL brain imaging software (McCausland Center for Brain Imaging) using a
transparent brain template ch256. Electrode coordinates were
translated into coordinate system of the 3-D brain modeling
software.
Electrophysiological signals were sampled at 32 kHz using
Digital Lynx acquisition system (Neuralynx, Inc.) and bandpass filtered in 600–6000 Hz and 0.1–1000 Hz ranges for micro
and macroelectrode recordings, respectively (Butterworth filters, third order). A subgaleal or mastoid electrode was used
as the recording reference. Signals were continuously acquired
from up to 128 channels over multiple days. Data were compressed in multiscale electrophysiology data format .mef [25],
and streamed for storage and analysis from patient rooms to data
servers.

KUCEWICZ et al.: COMBINED SUA AND LFP OSCILLATIONS IN A HUMAN VISUAL RECOGNITION MEMORY TASK

Fig. 1. Intracranial patient recordings with hybrid depth electrodes. Electrodes
were implanted into the medial temporal lobe structures using a posterior approach, as depicted on the brain schematic, for prolonged monitoring to capture
the patients habitual seizures. The schematic shows the experimental setup with
a portable laptop used for cognitive tasks during recordings. Each electrode contained 24–32 microcontacts clustered in between 3–7 macrocontacts, illustrated
on the electrode diagram in the middle. Reconstructed localization of all microcontact clusters (blue balls) within and around the hippocampi (yellow) and
amygdala (red) is visualized in a transparent brain model on the right. Bottom
diagram shows a zoomed view of the tip of a hybrid electrode surrounded by
neurons, contributing to the macrocontact field potential (light blue cells inside
the greater rainbow circle), and single neurons detected by individual microcontacts (purple cells inside the smaller rainbow circles). Notice the difference
between the micro and macrosampling fields.

During the data acquisition, implanted patients performed
a visual recognition memory task with International Affective
Picture Set (IAPS) of protected unique photographs showing
neutral and emotionally charged photographs (Lang et al. 1997).
Patients were asked to remember a set of 80 IAPS images for
the subsequent recognition stage 24 h later, when the same 80
encoded images were mixed with 60 novel ones for a recognition test. Task events were synchronized with the electrophysiological recordings through a parallel input port using transistortransistor logic electrical pulses (Digital Lynx, Neuralynx, Inc.).
The task was run in Presentation software (Neuro Behavioral
Systems, Inc.), which additionally logged the time of patient’s
behavioral responses on the task laptop.
B. Detection and Clustering of Single Units
Only recordings from the task were used in this study, averaging approximately 1 h of total duration for each stage.

69

Action potentials were detected and clustered based on firing
properties and waveform using a semiautomated approach, as
described previously [26], [27]. Briefly, the filtered microcontact recordings were first divided into 60 s segments before
detecting action potentials at a threshold of 3.0 SD, above voltage mean of each segment. Detections of amplitude higher than
1 mV were immediately discarded and excluded from the segment’s mean estimate for action potential detection threshold.
Detections were assigned a timestamp at the point of threshold
crossing. Waveforms of all detections were collected beginning
from six samples before the threshold crossing to 25 samples
after to give a total of 32 samples around the detection time
(1 ms).
All detections from a given microcontact recording were subsequently fed into semiautomatic clustering routine [28]. First,
waveform features of all detections were calculated using MATLAB written toolbox for single unit clustering (MClust, D. Redish). The features included peak amplitude, waveform energy,
first derivative of waveform energy, and waveform principal
component value, which were used for an automatic clustering
algorithm (Klustakwik, K. Harris) within the MClust toolbox.
The algorithm used the default two features of waveform energy
and its derivative to cluster and assign every detected waveform
to one candidate single unit, based on consistent clustering in
the feature space (see Fig. 2). Spike clustering, using the other
features of waveform peak and first-principal component value,
was also verified by plotting spike clusters of candidate units in
the feature space for post-hoc merging or rejection. After this
first inspection stage, the candidate clusters went through visual
inspection in MClust to reject clusters, which did not show consistent action potential waveforms and peak amplitude values, or
had more than 2% of detections with interspike interval below
2 ms, corresponding to detections within the action potential
refractory period of SUA (see Fig. 2).
This approach combines the power of automatic clustering
algorithms with a supervision of manual visual inspection to
ensure a maximum yield of true single units [28]. A similar
semiautomatic approach using the same clustering methods and
features was applied to patient intracranial recordings by others
[27], [29].
In addition, L-ratio and isolation distance were applied as
measures of cluster quality [30] commonly used in rodent
studies, but only recently introduced to human single unit
recordings [27].
C. Single Unit Yields
In total 279 single units were isolated from seven recording
sessions, averaging approximately 40 units per session (minimum of 23 and maximum of 61). Within any one patient, there
were on average 1.2 single units isolated per microcontact. Mean
firing rate from all units isolated was 1.1 Hz with less than 0.2%
of action potentials in the refractory period (interspike interval
< 2 ms), and 1.9% of action potentials fired in bursts (interspike
interval > 4 and < 16 ms). All of the recorded units showed
consistent action potential waveforms and interspike interval
distributions typical of SUA (see Fig. 2). All 279 single unit

70

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Clustering of single units. Example of three single units isolated on one microcontact—each unit having a different average waveform, plotted in the top
left corner. All putative action potential detections from this recording are plotted in the feature space of waveform energy, waveform first-principal component
(middle left), waveform first derivative of energy, and detection time (bottom left)—blue, green, and orange dots are detections assigned to the isolated units.
Properties of the three units are summarized in three columns on the right with the corresponding color-coded plots of the average waveforms (top), interspike
interval distributions (middle; red line marks the refractory period of 2 ms from the preceding action potential), and waveform peak amplitude across the whole
recording session. Notice consistently different and nonoverlapping firing properties of the isolated units.

clusters showed L-ratio < 0.1 and isolation distance > 1.0 [27].
Most of the electrodes showing spiking activity yielded only
one unit detection, which mitigates the common issues related
to cluster separation, and augments the resultant values of the
cluster quality measures used in this paper [30].

III. HFOS AS POINT PROCESSES
In order to compare the macroelectrode signal with the microelectrode SUA, pairs of macrocontacts surrounding microcontacts were analyzed as a bipolar montage (i.e., the signal of
one macroelectrode was subtracted from that of the other); thus,
“matching” macros to surrounded micros (see Fig. 1). In effect,
each macrocontacts bipolar montage was centered over a cluster of its corresponding microcontacts. The bipolar montage had
additional advantage of removing any confounds from the common reference signal. All of the derived signals were visually
inspected for occurrence of well-documented muscle artifacts
associated with grimacing, chewing, ocular movements, and microsaccades [31]–[33], as described in our previous work [24].
Only segments of data from the task trials were used in this analysis, and any segments showing 60-Hz line noise, epileptiform
spikes, or the aforementioned muscle artifacts were discarded.
Signals from macrocontacts localized in the clinically determined seizure onset zone were not used in this study.

A. Detection of HFOs
HFO were detected using a Hilbert transform-based method,
as previously reported [24], (see Fig. 3). Here, the discrete time
series is transformed into an analytic signal, where the real
part is the original signal, and the imaginary part is the Hilbert
transform of the original, x(t):

x(t)2 + x̂(t)2
e(t) =
 ∞
f (x) dx
1
g(y) = H [f (x)] = P V
π
−∞ x − y
 ∞
g (y) dy
1
−1
.
f (x) = H [g (y)] = − P V
π
−∞ y − x
The data segments were bandpass filtered (Butterworth, third
order) for every 1-Hz band step from 50 to 500 Hz. Then, the
filtered-data frequency bands were independently z-scored to
obtain power-change estimate and plotted together on a time–
frequency spectrogram [24], [34], [35]. Incidences of significantly increased power on the resultant spectrograms were determined by transforming the time–frequency power changes
into a series of binary values, where “1” signified a threshold
of greater than 3.0 z-score. Only detections with minimum of
one complete cycle above the threshold were included in the
analysis (see Fig. 3). The threshold was set at the same value as

KUCEWICZ et al.: COMBINED SUA AND LFP OSCILLATIONS IN A HUMAN VISUAL RECOGNITION MEMORY TASK

71

Fig. 3. Transformation of continuous HFO signals to point processes. Example of a gamma, ripple, and fast ripple HFO detections recorded on one macrocontact
in prefrontal cortex. Red boxes highlight the three detections in the filtered recording traces (top), and their corresponding power changes in the spectrogram
(middle). Black dots indicate all HFOs detected in this signal, which are also marked in the raster plot (bottom) broken down into gamma, ripple, and fast ripple
point processes. Notice the discrete duration and frequency signature of each HFO detection that was used to transform it into point-process detections at the time
of peak power.

in the previous studies [24], [35], and matched the one used for
spike detections.
Duration of each detected HFO event was estimated between
two local minima surrounding the detected peak in the power
envelope. Peak frequency, onset latency from image presentation, and the peak z-score amplitude were also determined.
HFO detections were divided into three frequency bands: high
gamma (50–125 Hz), ripple (125–250 Hz), and fast ripple (250–
500 Hz), based on their peak-amplitude frequency. As described
previously, the gamma, ripple, and fast ripple HFO detections
showed distinct frequency peak and discrete duration, lasting on
average 20 ms [24].
B. HFOs as Unit Activity
The process described above condensed a continuous signal
containing oscillations to a point process defined at the time of
peak amplitude of each oscillation (see Fig. 3). This approach
assumes that HFOs are distinct entities with discrete durations,

as shown in the previous work [24]. An alternative would be to
convert single unit spiking to continuous signals, as performed
in the analysis of beta oscillations in parkinsonian patients [36].
The latter approach of converting spikes into a continuous signal
reference frame is superior for the analysis of synchrony and
phase alignment [37], especially in case of slower oscillations
with cycles longer than the fast gamma rhythms. Conversion to
a point process is more appropriate for fast network oscillations
of discrete phenomena, like HFOs at the cost of losing their
phase information.
This study focused on the analysis of firing rate responses
to different images; high gamma, ripple, and fast ripple HFOs
were treated in the same way as SUA. They were first filtered in
the continuous signal of the recording, and then transformed to
isolated points of zero duration, like action potentials. Instead
of being assigned to individual units, though, such point HFOs
were classified to the three frequency bands—all of them below
the SUA frequency range of 600–6000 Hz. In effect, this transform enables the activity of individual neurons sampled on a

72

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 4. Decoding of task images based on HFO and SUA trial responses. (a) Gamma, ripple, and fast ripple HFO responses recorded on one example macrocontact
are shown in the first three columns, respectively, and three different single unit responses recorded on matched microcontacts of the same electrode are shown
in the last three columns. The top row detection matrices mark counts per 1 s bin aligned to image ON and OFF times (green and red lines) on consecutive trials
with negatively (black bar), neutrally (gray bar), and positively (white) charged images. Average counts are summarized below as firing rates. The middle row
bar plots quantify mean responses in first three bins following image ON as z-scores on the same trials. The bottom bar diagrams indicate means ranks from
statistical comparison of HFO and SUA responses on the three color-coded trial types (∗–p < 0.05 level). (b) Summary plots of the overall normalized firing rate
responses to image presentation of all HFO (left; 32 macrocontacts) and all SUA (right; 123 single units) detections binned every 1 s (dashed line in the left plot
indicates the SUA curve for comparison). (c) Proportion of all HFO macrocontacts (left) and all microcontact single units (right) that were successfully used to
decode different trial types based on image valence, novelty, rating, accuracy, and confidence (p<0.05). Red line marks false-positive probability rate based on
the statistical threshold for significance. Notice that 12–32% of HFO signals showed successful decoding of trial images, compared to approximately 5% of SUA
signals.

microscale, to be directly compared with the network oscillations sampled on a macroscale.
Therefore, one can apply the analysis methods used for SUA
to the macroscale recordings of HFOs. Fig. 4(b) summarizes
all gamma, ripple, and fast ripple oscillations (right panel) and
firing rate responses of all single units, recorded in the task (left
panel). Responses were inversely proportional to the frequency
bands in which a given activity was initially sampled—the highest change in the rate was observed for the gamma HFOs with
almost 100% increase, following image presentation, contrasted
by the lowest 2% increase in SUA [see Fig. 3(b)]. This example of a simple analysis of event-triggered rate changes opens
up possibilities for more elaborate single unit analysis of firing
patterns and correlations that can be applied to high-frequency
network discharges. For the analysis of single unit phase-locking
to specific oscillations, the alternative approach of converting
spikes into a continuous signal would be recommended [36],
[37]. In addition, the analysis of phase synchrony would re-

quire increased yields of single units that can only be acquired
with new high-density microelectrode recordings. This analysis
was not possible in this study, due to limited number of single
units isolated per microelectrode, and a short duration of HFOs
(approx. 20 ms on average) in the context of a mean firing rate
of a spike every 1000 ms.
IV. DECODING OF TASK IMAGES
In the task, patients were first presented with 80 IAPS images
on a laptop screen, and were asked to rate the affective charge
of each picture and remember it for the subsequent recognition
test [24], [35]. In every trial, an image was displayed for 6 s
followed by 2 s of blank screen and prompt screen to rate the
image (valence). The recognition trials were analogous—the 80
encoded images mixed with 60 novel ones were also presented
each for 6 s followed by 2 s of blank screen, and then a screen
prompt asking the patient to indicate whether the image was

KUCEWICZ et al.: COMBINED SUA AND LFP OSCILLATIONS IN A HUMAN VISUAL RECOGNITION MEMORY TASK

73

“old” or “new” (novelty) by pressing a labeled key. The key press
triggered a second question asking the subject to rate their level
of confidence in their recognition rating (confidence). Patient’s
accuracy of recognition (accuracy) and valence rating of the
images (rating) was also assessed.
A. Firing Rate Responses
A direct comparison between the SUA and HFOs point
process signals described above (i.e., the “matching macros”)
are shown in Fig. 4(a), top panel. Gamma, ripple, and fast
ripple HFO responses in the task, from an example patient
recording session, are summarized in the first three columns
of Fig. 4(a), together with the three isolated SUA responses
in the fourth, fifth, and sixth columns. Task responses were
first binned across all 140 task trials of the recognition stage,
from 5 s before image presentation ON (green line) to 6 sec
after image presentation OFF (red line). Trials in Fig. 4 were
grouped according to the valence of presented images: negative
(black), neutral (gray), and positive (white). Trial-averaged
counts of HFOs and SUA revealed differences in the mean
baseline counts and the relative amplitude of peak responses to
image presentation [see Fig. 4(a)].
B. Decoding Trials Based on Image Properties
The responses to images were quantified and normalized for
each trial as z-scores of mean count from the first three bins
following image ON, divided by mean count from the first four
bins before image ON. We used the z-scored normalized HFO
and SUA responses to test whether they can be used to classify
trials with different images. In Fig. 4 example, the HFO and
SUA trial responses were lined up according to the valence of
the presented images; HFO firing rate responses were greater
on the trials with emotionally charged images than with neutral
images (Kruskal–Wallis test, p<0.05; MATLAB, Mathworks,
Inc.)—in this case, these were significant for all three HFO
classes, but none of the matched microcontact SUA responses
[see Fig. 4(a)].
We summarized all of gamma, ripple, and fast ripple macroelectrode HFOs that discriminated trials with different images
(Kruskal–Wallis test, p<0.05), finding that from approximately
12 to 32% of their total proportion successfully decoded trial
images based on their valence or novelty [see Fig. 4(c), left
panel]. In contrast, there were only 3% to 6% of all SUA
that successfully decoded trials (Kruskal–Wallis test, p<0.05)
based on valence, novelty, rating, accuracy, or confidence [see
Fig. 4(c), right panel], which corresponds with the statistical
threshold level of false-positive rate in the test. Our results show
that macroscale HFOs sampled from large neuronal populations are better suited to decode general image properties than
microscale SUA of individual neurons. One plausible explanation for this finding is the sparse and distributed nature of single
unit representations of memorized stimuli, which has been recently demonstrated in humans [20], [21]. Nevertheless, the
sparsely distributed neuronal assemblies can still be sampled
on a macroscale using HFOs as potential biomarkers of their
coordinated activity [22].

Fig. 5. Decoding of image novelty using multiple parallel SUA and HFO
trains. Example of a classifier analysis that can predict trial images in distinct
task phases in one patient recording, using nine left-hippocampal single units
(top left), eight right-parahippocampal single units (top right), the three HFO
bands in the matched hippocampal macrocontact (bottom left), and matched
parahippocampal macrocontact (bottom right). Predictions were calculated using linear discriminant analysis classifier using cross validation to estimate the
out-of-sample prediction error, as compared to a statistical model [41]. Predictions are aligned to image ON and OFF times (green and red lines), and the
question prompt about image recognition (dashed green line). Gray area marks
the 95% confidence interval, and the red arrows point to peaks of significant
prediction.

C. Hypothetical Limits for Macro- and Microscale Decoding
Neither HFOs nor SUA signals were found to consistently
respond and, thus, decode specific images across the two-task
stages (data not shown). Given that the macrocontact recordings sample signals generated by up to 1,000,000 neurons [10],
including HFO discharges from multiple different neuronal assemblies, it may not be possible to retrieve more detailed information at this spatiotemporal scale. Single units recorded on the
microscale, on the other hand, have been proposed to underlie
specific stimuli representations through mechanisms of sparse
coding [38]. The idea is that a small set of neurons connected
together into functional assemblies would encode a particular
stimulus, as opposed to larger neuronal populations envisaged
in a distributed coding view. Sparse encoding by neuronal assemblies, originally suggested in the theories of [19], [39], [40],
was more recently demonstrated in human memory-recognition
tasks [20], [21]. This paper was more assessing categorical representation of the image in the Quiroga-based task, not recognition in the same way as Wixted. The authors of that study
found that only a small proportion of single units could be used
to classify trials based on stimulus novelty. Furthermore, any
one particular stimulus elicited responses in more than one unit,
and there were few stimuli that would elicit response in just one
single unit.
Based on the previous work and the SUA results of this study,
it is hypothesized that multiple single units are necessary to decode specific stimuli and their properties. Therefore, we used all
single units isolated in a given structure of one example recording session to try and predict image valence at specific phases of
the task (see Fig. 5). By combining eight parallel SUA trains in

74

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

the hippocampus or nine trains in the parahippocampal cortex
into Linear Discriminant Analysis [41], image valence could be
predicted shortly following presentation time (see Fig. 5, top
panel; signal above the 95% confidence interval). These results
would hypothetically be enhanced by increasing the number
of microelectrodes added to the analysis. In contrast, combining the gamma, ripple, and fast ripple HFO bands from the
matched macroelectrode did not predict image valence. None
of the macrocontacts used in this study showed any advantage of
pooling across multiple HFO bands to predict image novelty or
valence (signal below 95% confidence interval; data not shown).
In the case of the clinical macroelectrodes, it is not possible to
add any more into the analysis due to the large contact size
and spacing in different brain structures. It would, however, be
advantageous to add more microcontact single units clustered
together in a high-density electrode design.
It is clear that the yields of SUA used in this study with
the existing technology are not enough to decode specific images. The classifier analysis presented in Fig. 5 is provided to
suggest a general analytical approach to human memory decoding, which could be tested using new high-density single unit
recordings [4], [12], [14]. These analytical approaches applied
to large-scale recordings from combined micro- and macrocontact hybrid electrodes are proposed to guide the development of
innovative neurotechnologies.

V. CONCLUSION
Action potential firing of single neurons and coordinated oscillations of their networks comprise fundamental processes in
cognitive functions, which have been mainly studied independently in humans using micro or macroelectrodes with limited
understanding of the relationship between the two signals. Network oscillations in the fast frequency ranges can effectively
bridge the microscale of individual neurons with the macroscale
interactions of neuronal assemblies. Hybrid electrode recordings provide the resolution of single cells in a spatial context of
aggregate fields produced by a large population of surrounding
neurons (∼106 ) generating the LFP.
The two scales, i.e., SUA and HFO LFP, can be compared
within a common analysis approach for point processes, which
has been widely utilized for SUA. For instance, densely sampled field-potential recordings of theta oscillations in the rat hippocampus were shown to encode animal’s position, as robustly
as sparse populations of place cells [42]. Our results suggest that
both single units and field oscillations can be used to decode
complementary information about visual stimuli. Applied with
tasks, using naturalistic stimuli and high-density hybrid technologies for recording and stimulation, this methodological
approach may prove useful for the development of emerging
recording technologies [16].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the referees of this work from
the Young Investigator Award competition on BRAIN Grand
Challenges meeting in Washington, DC, USA, for their valuable

comments, Dr. A. D. Redish from the University of Minnesota
for programming assistance in adapting MClust algorithms for
the patient single unit data, and C. Nelson and K. Crockett for
technical and administrative assistance for this work. This work
was done in collaboration with Dr. F. Meyer, Dr. J. Van Gompel,
and Dr. R. Marsh, from the Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo
Clinic.
REFERENCES
[1] D. A. Henze et al., “Intracellular features predicted by extracellular recordings in the hippocampus in vivo,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 84, pp. 390–400,
Jul. 2000.
[2] G. Buzsaki, “Large-scale recording of neuronal ensembles,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 7, pp. 446–451, May 2004.
[3] A. Bansal et al., “Relationships among low frequency local field potentials,
spiking activity, and three-dimensional reach and grasp kinematics in
primary motor and ventral premotor cortices,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 105,
pp. 1603–1619, Jan. 2011.
[4] J. Viventi et al., “Flexible, foldable, actively multiplexed high density
electrode array for mapping brain activity in vivo,” Nature Neurosci.,
vol. 14, pp. 1599–1605, Nov. 2011.
[5] D. Khodagholy et al., “NeuroGrid: Recording action potentials from the
surface of the brain,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 18, pp. 310–315, Feb. 2015.
[6] W. R. Patterson et al., “A microelectrode / microelectronic hybrid device
for brain implantable neuroprosthesis applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1845–1853, Oct. 2004.
[7] K. C. Daly et al., “Detailed characterization of local field potential oscillations and their relationship with spike timing in the antennal lobe of the
moth Manduca sexta,” Front Neuroeng., vol. 4, pp. 12, Oct. 2011.
[8] T. A. Christensen et al., “Multiunit recordings reveal context-dependent
modulation of synchrony in odor-specific neural ensembles,” Nature Neurosci., vol. 3, pp. 927–931, Sep. 2000.
[9] M. Le Van Quyen et al., “Analysis of dynamic brain oscillations: Methodological advances,” Trends Neurosci., vol. 30, pp. 365–73, Jun. 2007.
[10] P. L. Nunez and R. Srinivasan, Electric Fields of the Brain: The Neurophysics of EEG. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2006.
[11] S. Katzner et al., “Local origin of field potentials in visual cortex,” Neuron,
vol. 61, pp. 35–41, Jan. 2009.
[12] M. T. Kucewicz et al., “Simultaneous micro- and macro-electrode recordings,” in Invasive Recordings From the Epileptic Brain, 1st ed., S. Lhatoo,
P. Kahane, and H. Luders, Eds. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2015.
[13] G. Buzsaki et al., “The origin of extracellular fields and currents – EEG,
EcoG, LFP, and spikes,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 13, pp. 407–420, May
2012.
[14] G. A. Worrell et al., “Recording and analysis techniques for highfrequency oscillations,” Prog. Neurobiol., vol. 98, pp. 265–278, Sep. 2012.
[15] P. J. Lang and M. M. Bradley, “International affective picture system
(IAPS): Technical manual and affective ratings,” Gainsville, FL, USA:
Univ. of Florida, 1999.
[16] B. He et al., “Grand challenges in mapping the human brain: NSF workshop report,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 2983–2992,
Nov. 2013.
[17] I. Fried et al., Single Neuron Studies of the Human Brain: Probing Cognition. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2014.
[18] R. Q. Quiroga, “Concept cells: The building blocks of declarative memory
functions,” Nature Rev. Neurosci., vol. 13, pp. 587–597, Jul. 2012.
[19] J. Konorski, Integrative Activity of the Brain. Chicago, IL, USA: Univ. of
Chicago Press, 1967.
[20] J. T. Wixted et al., “Sparse and distributed coding of episodic memory
in neurons of the human hippocampus,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 111,
pp. 9621–9626, Jul. 2014.
[21] B. Valdez et al., “Distributed representation of visual objects by single
neurons in the human brain,” J. Neurosci., vol. 35, pp. 5180–5186, Apr.
2015.
[22] G. Buzsaki and F. Silva, “High frequency oscillations in the intact brain,”
Prog. Neurobiol., vol. 98, pp. 241–249, Sep. 2012.
[23] J. P. Lachaux et al., “High-frequency neural activity and human cognition:
past, present and possible future of intracranial EEG research,” Prog.
Neurobiol., vol. 98, pp. 279–301, Sep. 2012.
[24] M. T. Kucewicz et al., “High frequency oscillations are associated with
cognitive processing in human recognition memory,” Brain, vol. 137,
pp. 2231–2244, Aug. 2014.

KUCEWICZ et al.: COMBINED SUA AND LFP OSCILLATIONS IN A HUMAN VISUAL RECOGNITION MEMORY TASK

[25] B. H. Brinkmann et al., “Large-scale electrophysiology: Acquisition, compression, encryption, and storage of big data,” J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 180, pp. 185–192, May 2009.
[26] M. R. Bower et al., “Spatiotemporal neuronal correlates of seizure generation in focal epilepsy,” Epilepsia, vol. 53, pp. 807–816, May 2012.
[27] M. R. Bower et al., “Evidence for consolidation of neuronal assemblies
after seizures in humans,” J. Neurosci., vol. 35, pp.999–1010, Jan. 2015.
[28] K. D. Harris et al., “Accuracy of tetrode spike separation as determined
by simultaneous intracellular and extracellular measurements” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 84, pp. 401–414, Jul. 2000.
[29] C. Alvarado-Rojas et al., “Single-unit activities during epileptic discharges
in the human hippocampal formation,” Front Comput. Neurosci., vol. 7,
p. 140, Oct. 2013.
[30] K. D. Schmitzer-Torbert et al., “Quantitative measures of cluster quality
for use in extracellular recordings,” Neuroscience, vol. 131, pp. 1–11, Jan.
2005.
[31] S. Yuval-Greenberg et al., “Transient induced gamma-band response
in EEG as a manifestation of miniature saccades,” Neuron, vol. 58,
pp. 429–441, May 2008.
[32] K. Jerbi et al., “Task-related gamma-band dynamics from an intracerebral
perspective: Review and implications for surface EEG and MEG,” Human
Brain Mapping, vol. 30, pp. 1758–1771, Jun. 2009.
[33] C. K. Kovach et al., “Manifestation of ocular-muscle EMG contamination
in human intracranial recordings,” Neuroimage, vol. 54, pp. 213–233, Jan.
2011.
[34] R. T. Canolty et al., “High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in human neocortex,” Science, vol. 313, pp. 1626–1628, Sep. 2006.

75

[35] J. Y. Matsumoto et al., “Network oscillations modulate interictal epileptiform spike rate during human memory,” Brain, vol. 136, pp. 2444–2456,
Aug. 2013.
[36] C. Park et al., “Fine temporal structure of beta oscillations synchronization
in subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurophysiol. vol. 103,
pp. 2707–2716, May 2010.
[37] J. M. Hurtado et al., “Statistical method for detection of phase-locking
episodes in neural oscillations,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 91, pp. 1883–1898,
Apr. 2004.
[38] R. Q. Quiroga et al., “Sparse but not ‘grandmother-cell’ coding in the
medial temporal lobe,” Trends Cognitive Sci., vol. 12, pp. 87–91, Mar.
2008.
[39] D. O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory.
Montreal, Canada: Wiley, 1949.
[40] H. B. Barlow, “Single units and sensation: A neuron doctrine for perceptual
psychology?,” Perception, vol. 1, pp. 371–394, 1972.
[41] T. Hastie et al., “Linear methods for classification,” in The Elements of
Statistical Learning, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009, ch. 4,
sec. 3, pp. 106–118.
[42] G. Agarwal et al., “Spatially distributed local fields in the hippocampus
encode rat position,” Science, vol. 344, pp. 626–630, May 2014.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

