IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

2899

Feasibility Study of Respiratory Motion Modeling
Based Correction for MRI-Guided Intracardiac
Interventional Procedures
Robert Xu∗ , Prashant Athavale, Philippa Krahn, Kevan Anderson, Jennifer Barry, Labonny Biswas,
Venkat Ramanan, Nicolas Yak, Mihaela Pop, and Graham A. Wright

Abstract—Goal: The purpose of this study is to improve the
accuracy of interventional catheter guidance during intracardiac
procedures. Specifically, the use of preprocedural magnetic resonance roadmap images for interventional guidance has limited
anatomical accuracy due to intraprocedural respiratory motion
of the heart. Therefore, we propose to build a novel respiratory
motion model to compensate for this motion-induced error during
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-guided procedures. Methods:
We acquire 2-D real-time free-breathing images to characterize the
respiratory motion, and build a smooth motion model via registration of 3-D prior roadmap images to the real-time images within a
novel principal axes frame of reference. The model is subsequently
used to correct the interventional catheter positions with respect
to the anatomy of the heart. Results: We demonstrate that the proposed modeling framework can lead to smoother motion models,
and potentially lead to more accurate motion estimates. Specifically, MRI-guided intracardiac ablations were performed in six
preclinical animal experiments. Then, from retrospective analysis,
the proposed motion modeling technique showed the potential to
achieve a 27% improvement in ablation targeting accuracy. Conclusion: The feasibility of a respiratory motion model-based correction framework has been successfully demonstrated. Significance:
The improvement in ablation accuracy may lead to significant improvements in success rate and patient outcomes for MRI-guided
intracardiac procedures.
Index Terms—Electrophysiology, intracardiac interventions,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), respiratory motion modeling.

I. INTRODUCTION
NTRACARDIAC interventional procedures are traditionally performed under X-ray fluoroscopy imaging guidance.
However, recently there has been an increased interest in using
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as an alternative to guide
intracardiac procedures [1]–[5], due to its excellent soft tissue

I

Manuscript received March 11, 2015; revised June 11, 2015; accepted June
29, 2015. Date of publication June 30, 2015; date of current version November
20, 2015. This work was supported by GE Healthcare, Canadian Institute of
Health Research Operating Grant MOP-93531, and the Federal Development
Agency of Canada. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
* R. Xu is with the Physical Sciences Platform and Schulich Heart Research
Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada,
and also with the Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada (e-mail: robert.xu@mail.utoronto.ca).
P. Athavale is with the University of Toronto.
P. Krahn, M. Pop, and G. A. Wright are with the Sunnybrook Research
Instituteand also with the University of Toronto.
K. Anderson, J. Barry, L. Biswas, V. Ramanan, and N. Yak are with the
Sunnybrook Research Institute.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2451517

contrast and lack of ionizing radiation. Nevertheless, a major
challenge with MRI guidance for cardiovascular interventions
is the inherent tradeoff between spatial and temporal resolution
of the different acquisition schemes. On one hand, real-time 2-D
magnetic resonance (MR) sequences can acquire images quickly
and capture the cardiac and respiratory motions of the heart
during an intervention [1]–[3]. However, the improved temporal resolution is achieved at the expense of image quality and
volumetric coverage. On the other hand, prior high-resolution
roadmaps can be acquired before the interventional procedure
and be used for intraprocedural guidance [6]–[8], but accurate alignment with the underlying cardiac anatomy during the
procedure can be compromised by cardiac and respiratory motions. Therefore, interventional guidance using stationary prior
roadmap images is not ideal for mobile chest organs such as the
heart.
Image-based registration methods [9]–[12] have been
proposed to address the limitations of motion-induced misalignment between the intraprocedural anatomic targets and prior
roadmap images. These algorithms correct for the misalignments via registration of the prior 3-D CT or MR roadmap
volumes to real-time intraprocedural images acquired through
echocardiography, X-ray, or real-time MR sequences. However,
image-based registration tends to involve highly nonconvex and
computationally expensive optimization methods. Thus, realtime registration during cardiovascular interventions remains a
significant challenge.
Alternatively, motion modeling based approaches [5], [13]–
[17] have been proposed to correct for the motion-induced
misalignment. This is a more computationally efficient approach to motion correction compared to performing imagebased registrations during the intervention. Moreover, the
modeling approach can also regularize the motion estimates,
which may have discontinuities resulting from the imagebased estimates alone. Specifically, King et al. [14] proposed a subject-specific technique for correcting respiratory motion during cardiac catheterization procedures. Their
method performs a preprocedure MRI scan to acquire freebreathing dynamic images of the subject that were also cardiac gated to late diastole. Throughout the dynamic imaging
sequence, respiratory navigators were used to track the displacement of the diaphragm, which represents the respiratory
surrogate data. Subsequently, the dynamic images were registered to a prior high-resolution reference MR roadmap, followed
by a curve fitting procedure to model each registration parameter

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

as a function of the navigator value. During the interventional
procedure, movement of the diaphragm was tracked using live
fluoroscopic images, and the displacement was used as a surrogate value to estimate the motion derived from the previously generated motion model. Finally, the motion correction
was applied to the MR roadmap image, which was overlaid
on the intraprocedural X-ray images. Similarly, Peressutti et al.
[16] also used a preprocedural MRI scan to derive the motion
model. However, their motion estimation framework is based
on a Bayesian approach, which allows motion estimates to deviate from the prior motion model by incorporating intraprocedural imaging data. Although excellent motion correction was
achieved in the above studies, one potential drawback of these
approaches is that the surrogate data used to build the motion
model (e.g., MRI navigator echo) differs from the surrogate
(e.g., diaphragm tracking in X-ray fluoroscopy [14]) that was
used to apply the motion estimate during the procedure. Furthermore, additional intermodality system registrations between
MRI to X-ray [13], [14] and MRI to echocardiography [15], [16]
were required before motion correction could be applied in the
reference frame of the intraprocedural imaging modality.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to build and apply a subject-specific respiratory motion model within a single
MR-guided interventional framework. We use a novel modeling technique, which incorporates high-temporal resolution
real-time imaging data to facilitate a more accurate model of
respiratory motion as a function of respiratory phase. The realtime data support the use of smooth motion models given the
physical constraints associated with respiratory motion. The
proposed technique also uses an anatomically relevant frame of
reference (FOR) based on principal axes to improve the smoothness of the parametric functions describing the motion. Within
this FOR, we verify that we can potentially generate more accurate motion estimates, which could lead to safer procedures.
In particular, we test the application of motion correction in the
context of MRI-guided ablation in the left ventricle (LV), which
involves guiding an interventional catheter into the LV and applying radio frequency (RF) energy to ablate tissue within the
cardiac chamber. A preliminary version of this paper has been
reported in [18].
II. METHODS
A. Image Acquisition
Cardiac MR images from six pig studies were acquired with
a GE 1.5T Optima MR450w scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) using the manufacturer’s 5-in surface coil. Two
separate image acquisition protocols were used to obtain the images for this study. For each pig, a preprocedural high-resolution
scan was performed first to acquire prior roadmap images, followed by a low-resolution real-time acquisition during the same
session. Both datasets were acquired before the insertion of an
interventional catheter.
1) High-Resolution Roadmap Acquisition: The prior
roadmap image consists of 3-D volumetric data acquired
with the multislice 2-D cardiac-multiphase (cine)-balanced
steady-state free precession (SSFP) (GE FIESTA) sequence.

The roadmap image encompassed the entire heart of the subject.
Standard clinical prescriptions of slices parallel to the short axis
(SAX) and long axis (LAX) of the heart were used. A typical
range of 10–12 slices and 5–6 slices were acquired to cover
the entire LV in the SAX and LAX directions, respectively.
Both the SAX and LAX stack prior images were used during
visual guidance of the interventional catheter, but only the SAX
images were used for deriving the motion model. For each
slice, the pig’s breathing was mechanically suspended at end
expiration (EE) for approximately 20 s, while the GE FIESTA
pulse sequence was used to acquire cine images that were
retrospectively gated to middiastole. Only the images from the
middiastolic cardiac phase were used for the experiments in
this study. The typical acquisition parameters were: flip angle
= 45◦ , TR = 4.8 ms, TE = 1.8 ms, field of view (FOV) = 240
mm, inplane resolution = 1.35×1.35 mm2 , and slice thickness
= 8 mm.
2) Low-Resolution Real Time Acquisition: A fast spiral balanced SSFP sequence (HeartVista Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA)
was used to acquire the 2-D images in real time. The typical
acquisition parameters were: effective frames per second (fps)
= 30, flip angle = 60◦ , TR = 5.6 ms, TE = 0.8 ms, FOV = 240
mm, and spatial resolution = 2.35 × 2.35 × 8 mm3 . This set
of data was acquired during a free-breathing scan. In addition,
synchronized physiological data such as cardiac and respiratory
gating information were also recorded using the electrocardiogram (ECG) trigger and respiratory bellows, respectively. The
real-time images were then retrospectively gated to remove images that were not in middiastole. Furthermore, the geometrical
location and orientation of the acquired real-time images were
identical to the midslice prescriptions from the high-resolution
SAX stack.
B. Respiratory Motion Modeling
The pipeline for building a subject-specific rigid-body motion model is illustrated in Fig. 1. Free-breathing real-time images were acquired simultaneously along with the respiratory
surrogate data (i.e., respiratory bellows) to characterize the respiratory motion. All real-time images were also retrospectively
gated to middiastole to match the cardiac phase of the prior
roadmap volume. Subsequently, the real-time images were registered with the reference roadmap using the registration method
presented in our earlier work [11]. This is a 3-D to 2-D imagebased registration algorithm, which aligns the input images by
matching prominent edges that are detected at various scale representations of the original images. The registration was posed
as an optimization problem as follows:


(1)
w = arg min D(f [w], gs )
w

where f represents the prior roadmap image, gs represents
the real-time free-breathing image with respiratory surrogate
value s, and w : R3 → R3 is a geometric transformation.
The distance measure D used was the normalized gradient
field defined in [19], and the downhill simplex method [20]
with multiple starting points was used to perform the optimization to achieve the best estimate. Each of the recovered

XU et al.: RESPIRATORY MOTION MODELING BASED CORRECTION FOR MRI-GUIDED INTRACARDIAC INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES

2901

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the motion modeling pipeline. Real-time 2-D free-breathing images of each swine are registered to a corresponding EE 3-D prior
volume. All images are cardiac gated and acquired along with synchronized respiratory physiology data. Image registration was used to extract motion parameters
consisting of rotations and translations along the user-defined x-, y-, z-axes. Each parameter was then fitted as a linear function of the physiology data to produce a
subject-specific respiratory motion model φ.

transform parameters in w := θx , θy , θz , tx , ty , tz  consisting
of rotations and translations along the user-defined x, y, z
axes were then fitted as a linear function of the respiratory
surrogate data s to generate the motion correspondence model
φ(s). Specifically, for L real-time images gs i , i = 1, . . . , L,
there were L corresponding recovered motion vectors wi :=
θx , θy , θz , tx , ty , tz i , i = 1, . . . , L. Then, the motion model
φ(s) = θx (s), θy (s), θz (s), tx (s), ty (s), tz (s) was derived by
performing a curve fitting procedure to map each translation and
rotation parameter as a function of s, the respiratory bellows signal. Robust fitting was achieved using an iteratively reweighted
least-squares algorithm [21].
A subsequent vector of motion parameter estimates M could
be generated via
M = φ(si ),

(2)

where si is the input respiratory bellows value, reflecting the
respiratory position, and φ is the previously built motion model.
Motion parameter estimates M define the rotation and translations needed to align the prior roadmap image to the real-time
image. Note that any bulk motion observed between the prior and
real-time image in the same cardiac and respiratory phase was
subtracted from the model, constraining the motion estimates to
zero when the value of si corresponds to the respiratory phase
(i.e., EE) of the prior roadmap image.

The novel 2-D–3-D image-based registration and modeling
technique described in this section permits the alignment of
3-D prior roadmaps with real-time images that are inherently
2-D and have excellent temporal resolution. The high temporal
resolution of the acquired real-time images is important for
characterizing the respiratory motion of the heart, since it is
able to capture images of the heart at numerous time points
during the respiratory cycle. This is also critical for deriving an
accurate motion correspondence model, which should have a
sufficient number of data points for the curve fitting procedure
to represent the inherently smooth respiratory motion.
C. Modeling Using Principal Axes Registration
For comparison, we also propose to use an anatomically relevant FOR based on principal axes of the object of interest
[22] to build the motion model presented in Section II-B. In
particular, the principal axes of the LV were extracted and the
motion parameters consisting of rotations and translations were
applied along the principal axes, rather than the standard imaging axes centered on the imaging volume. In this study, the
standard imaging axes are with respect to the LV, due to the
operator-defined double-oblique plane prescription. The x-axis
is along the direction of the septal wall to lateral wall, y-axis
is along the direction of the anterior wall to inferior wall, and
z-axis refers to the direction of LV base to apex. In contrast, the
proposed principal axes refer to the major and minor axes of the

2902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. Principal axes of a geometric volume. The endocardial border of the LV from the basal slice to the apical slice is segmented from a multislice SAX scan
of a porcine heart shown in the left most column. Subsequently, the contours are used to generate a volume of interest, and the corresponding basis e 1 , e 2 , e 3 
for the principal axes of the volume are computed. The directions of the principal axes are shown in both a side view and a top–down view. Furthermore, the origin
of the axes is defined at the center of mass C of the geometric volume rather than the center O of the imaging volume.

LV endocardial volume, passing through the volume’s center of
mass. The motivation for using this anatomically relevant FOR
is that we believe a smoother motion model may be obtained,
which should be a more accurate representation of the underlying physical motion, as described by the linearly independent
functions of the motion parameter estimates.
Prior to extraction of the principal axes from the LV, one
must first segment the endocardial border of the LV to generate a corresponding volume of interest. This segmentation
was performed manually by an expert, but a fast segmentation can also be achieved automatically using the method in
[23]. Next, we took the origin of the coordinate system to
be at the center of mass of the volume of interest. That is
xo , yo , zo  = mean(x, y, z), where x, y, z are the coordinates of each individual image voxel belonging to the volume
of interest.
Transformation to the center of mass coordinate system was
performed by the standard formula






x , y , z  = x, y, z − xo , yo , zo .

(3)

Then, we computed the moments of inertia [22] as follows:

Ixx =
mi (yi2 + zi2 )
(4)
i

Iy y =



mi (zi2 + x2
i )

(5)

2
mi (x2
i + yi )

(6)

i

Iz z =



Iz x = Ixz = −



mi zi xi .

(9)

i

This allowed us to define the moment of inertia tensor [22]
⎞
⎛
Ixx Ixy Ixz
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎜
(10)
I = ⎜ Iy x Iy y Iy z ⎟
⎟.
⎠
⎝
Iz x Iz y Iz z
The principal axes are defined as the orientations in which the
moment of inertia tensor is diagonal [22]. For a given inertial tensor with nonzero off-diagonal elements relative to the
current x, y, z set coordinates, we could diagonalize the moment of inertia tensor to find the principal axes. This involves
solving for principal axes as the solution to the eigenfunction
problem [22]
I · ei = λi ei
(I − λi 1) · ei = 0

(11)

where ei are unit vectors that point along the directions of the
principal axes of the segmented volume, and λi are the corresponding principal moments. The subsequent motion modeling
uses the center of mass of the volume as the origin and the basis
e1 , e2 , e3  as the FOR for applying rotations and translations.
As an example, the computed principal axes for a segmented
left ventricular volume is illustrated in Fig. 2.

i

where mi is the mass at voxel i, which we set to 1 for all the
voxels of interest, and Ixx , Iy y , Iz z represent the moments of
inertia about the x , y  , z  axes, respectively. We also computed
the products of inertia [22] as

Ixy = Iy x = −
mi xi yi
(7)
i

Iy z = Iz y = −


i

mi yi zi

(8)

D. Simulation Experiment
The validation of the proposed modeling framework was first
performed in a simulation experiment. Specifically, we evaluated the utility of motion modeling tailored to the expected
motion FOR within a controlled environment. First, we built a
virtual cardiac phantom by using segmented LV contours from
one of our porcine imaging studies. Specifically, the segmented
endocardial borders of the LV in the SAX slice direction were
combined to generate a 3-D volume V0 , as shown in the left

XU et al.: RESPIRATORY MOTION MODELING BASED CORRECTION FOR MRI-GUIDED INTRACARDIAC INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES

Fig. 3. Simulated displaced cardiac phantoms. The original cardiac phantom
V 0 is transformed in the principal axes FOR to obtain 20 transformed volumes,
where V 1 = V 0 [w 1 ], . . . , V 2 0 = V 0 [w 2 0 ]. The transformations {w i } are divided into equal linear increments. Each volume also has an associated artificial
surrogate value si , where s0 = 0 corresponds to EE and s2 0 = 1 corresponds to
EI. These phantoms were subsequently used in the simulation motion modeling
experiment.

column of Fig. 3. Each voxel was assigned an intensity value of
1, if it was inside the 3-D volume, and 0 otherwise. Next, we
compute the center of mass and the principal axes of this cardiac
phantom as described in Section II-C. Using this FOR, we generated a known transformation1 wf := θe 1 , θe 2 , θe 3 , te 1 , te 2 , te 3 
with motion parameter values that correspond to the magnitude of respiratory motions from the same porcine study. This
final transformation was split into 20 intermediate transformations {wi |i = 1, . . . , 20}, where wi = wf × (i/20). These
known transformations were then applied to the phantom V0 to
generate intermediate volumes {Vi |i = 1, . . . , 20}, simulating
artificial respiratory movement throughout a respiratory cycle.
Each volume was also assigned an artificial respiratory surrogate value si ∈ [0, 1], with s0 = 0 and s20 = 1 representing EE
and end-inspiration (EI) points in the respiratory cycle, respectively, (see Fig. 3). A linear model was chosen to simulate the
respiratory motion of the heart, since it has been shown in previous studies [24], [25] that the displacement of the heart is
approximately linear with respect to an appropriate respiratory
surrogate, such as the displacement of the diaphragm. We also
assume the rotations around the LV center of mass and the principal axes to be small and approximately linear with respect to
the respiratory surrogate.
Given the EE reference volume V0 and the 20 simulated volumes {Vi }, we then built motion models in both the principal
axes and the standard imaging axes to compare the efficacy of
the two modeling approaches. For the standard axes FOR, the
rotations and translations were applied along the x, y, z axes
1 For the simulation experiment w := 2.8 ◦ , 4.7 ◦ , −9.3 ◦ , −4.8 mm, −4.8
f
mm, 13.6 mm.

2903

Fig. 4. Distal end of the interventional catheter. There are two embedded
microreceiver coils that can be tracked in real time during the intervention via
the projection tracking technique [27]. Since the distal portion of the catheter
is rigid, the location of the distal tip can be estimated by noting its physical
location relative to the tracked microcoils.

with the origin at the center of the imaging volume. The motion
parameters in each model were derived by registering the phantom V0 to each of the transformed volumes {Vi } via (1) and
minimizing the sum of squared distance (SSD) between each
pair of volumes. The distance metric SSD is defined as
2
1 
f (x) − g(x)
SSD(f, g) =
(12)
N x
where N is the number of overlapping voxels between volumes
f and g. SSD was chosen as the registration metric here since the
input images are simply binary volumes. Subsequently, the extracted motion parameters were fitted as a linear function of the
artificial respiratory surrogate s. Two motion correspondence
models φpr i (s) and φstd (s) were derived for the principal and
standard imaging axes, respectively. The smoothness of each
model was then evaluated by computing the root-mean-squared
error (RMSE) between the extracted motion parameter values
and the fitted linear model curves. For evaluation of each model’s
accuracy, we used the motion estimates from both models with
a given surrogate si , and computed the SSD between the motion model estimated volume V0 [φ(si )] and the corresponding
known ground truth volume Vi , where φ was either φpri or φstd .
We also performed an additional simulation experiment using
the reverse approach, where the simulated motion transformation was applied to the phantom in the standard axes FOR. Subsequently, we derived two motion correspondence models for
the principal and standard imaging axes as before, and evaluated
the smoothness and accuracy of the two models.
E. Preclinical Experiment
The aim of the preclinical experiment was to test the feasibility of using a motion model to retrospectively correct for

2904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 5. Vurtigo software interface. This is a typical guidance visualization view that the interventional operator sees during the preclinical experiment. Left-hand
side presents visualization options. Two windows on the right display the SAX and LAX roadmap images for interventional guidance. The distal end of the
real-time tracked interventional catheter is overlaid on the roadmap images. The physical characteristics of the tracked catheter mirror the ablation catheter shown
in Fig. 4

motion and improve the targeting accuracy of intracardiac ablation procedures. Particularly, MRI-guided catheter ablations
were performed in the LVs of six healthy swine.
For each preclinical study, initial multislice 3-D roadmap
volumes were acquired using the high-resolution imaging sequence described in Section II-A, while the animal was mechanically ventilated and breath-held at EE. Immediately after
the prior roadmap acquisition, low-resolution SAX real-time
images were acquired to characterize the motion of the heart
during free breathing, along with synchronized physiology data
representing cardiac and respiratory phase. Specifically, the cardiac physiology data were acquired from the ECG, while the
respiratory physiology data were obtained from the respiratory
bellows. The bellows signal was obtained continuously without disrupting the real-time image acquisition, and it has been
shown to be a suitable alternative to navigator tracking of the
diaphragm [26]. Therefore, we also assumed the motion parameter estimates to be approximately linear with respect to the
respiratory bellows.
Subsequently, under 3-D prior roadmap guidance, an MR
compatible and actively tracked catheter (Imricor Medical Systems, Burnsville, MN, USA) was placed into the LV, while the
distal tip position of the catheter was continuously tracked in real
time along with synchronized cardiac and respiratory physiol-

ogy data. Specifically, there are two microcoils embedded near
the distal tip of the catheter, whose positions can be tracked
using the projection tracking technique described in [27], and
the tip position is calculated via a relative offset (see Fig. 4).
The catheter was active tracked at 66 fps, with 1.17 × 1.17 ×
1.17 mm3 isotropic resolution. The size of the catheter used
was 9 French, or 3 mm in diameter. Custom visualization and
interventional guidance software Vurtigo (www.vurtigo.ca) [28]
developed in our lab was used to display both the prior SAX and
LAX roadmap images, as well as the real-time tracked catheter
(see Fig. 5). With the aid of prior roadmap visualization and
real-time tracking, the catheter was maneuvered to a location
along the LV wall. Once good contact was confirmed, an RF ablation was performed with a power setting of 30 W for 30–60 s.
The anatomical location of the lesion was confirmed with a
postablation contrast-enhanced imaging acquisition [29].
After the ablation study, we retrospectively calculated the distance between the tracked catheter positions and the observed
lesion location. We also generated a respiratory motion model
based on the registration of cardiac-gated 3-D prior roadmap
to the 2-D free-breathing real-time images via the pipeline illustrated in Fig. 1. Both the prior roadmap and the real-time
images were retrospectively gated to the same cardiac phase.
The specific respiratory motion model was then used to correct

XU et al.: RESPIRATORY MOTION MODELING BASED CORRECTION FOR MRI-GUIDED INTRACARDIAC INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES

2905

Fig. 6. Preclinical experiment evaluation setup. The real-time images with corresponding respiratory surrogate and the prior roadmap image are acquired prior
to the RF ablation. This information is used to generate a respiratory motion model. The prior roadmap is also used to guide the tracked catheter during the
ablation process. The catheter position is tracked during ablation along with respiratory surrogate data. For the given respiratory surrogate data, the position of the
catheter can be retrospectively corrected by the respiratory motion model. Finally, the corrected catheter position is compared to the ground truth lesion position
as evaluated by a postablation imaging scan.

the erroneous catheter tracked positions relative to the heart wall
based on their corresponding physiology data. In particular, the
catheter tracking points were also gated to the same cardiac
phase as the previously acquired images, and for a given respiratory surrogate value s, a motion model estimate M = φ(s)
was used to retrospectively correct the catheter tracked positions
recorded during the ablations. Note that any bulk shift observed
between the prior roadmap image and the lesion characterization
image acquired during the same cardiac and respiratory phase
was also removed from the catheter tracking position in addition
to application of the respiratory motion model correction. Bulk
offset Mb was computed via registration of the prior image with
the postablation lesion image using (1). Specifically, we applied
the motion correction based on the model estimate M to the
tracked catheter position, followed by the bulk correction Mb .
Finally, the distances between the corrected catheter tracking
position and the lesion locations were computed. To this end,
both principal axes and standard axes models were built and
evaluated for each preclinical study. In the case of the principal axes model, the LV of the swine from the high-resolution
roadmap image was segmented, and the corresponding center of
mass and principal axes were computed from the segmented LV
volume as before. The overall evaluation setup for the preclinical
experiment is illustrated in Fig. 6.
F. Statistical Analysis
In this study, the paired t-test was used to evaluate the statistical significance of differences between the results of various
motion model fitting and correction schemes. Values of p < 0.05
were considered statistically significant. All calculations were
performed using the MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA)
Statistics Toolbox.

III. RESULTS
A. Simulation Experiment Results
The extracted motion parameters and their corresponding linear model fitting curves derived from the standard and principal
axes are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. Qualitatively, it
is observed that the derived fitting curves from the principal
axes model are very well aligned with the extracted motion parameters, whereas the fitting curves derived from the standard
axes model deviate significantly from the data. Quantitatively,
the RMSE values for each motion parameter fit belonging to
the principal and standard models are shown in Table I. The
goodness-of-fit measures are consistent with qualitative inspection, and lower RMSE values were obtained for the rotation and
translation motion parameter fits in the principal axes modeling
FOR. This is expected as the coordinate system used for applying the known transformations to the cardiac phantom coincides
with the coordinate system that was used in building the principal axes motion model. This demonstrates that the selection of a
proper FOR for the motion model is important for appropriately
characterizing the underlying motion.
Since smoothness of the motion model does not necessarily
equate to registration accuracy, we further evaluated the individual model accuracy separately. Specifically, for the given
reference EE cardiac phantom volume V0 and the series of transformed phantoms {Vi } with corresponding respiratory surrogate
si , we first compute SSD (V0 , Vi ) between each pair of volumes
without any motion model correction. As the respiratory surrogate value approaches 1 (i.e., artificial EI), the corresponding volume Vi becomes further misaligned with respect to the
reference V0 . This is reflected in higher SSD values as seen
in Fig. 9(a). Next, we apply motion model-based correction

2906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 7. Standard imaging axes model fitting curves. The rotations and translations parameters θx , θy , θz , tx , ty , tz  are extracted via registration of the reference
cardiac phantom to the displaced phantoms in the standard axes FOR. Each individual parameter is then robustly fitted as a linear function of the artificial respiratory
surrogate s. Corresponding positions of artificial EE and EI are labeled on the respiratory surrogate axis.

Fig. 8. Principal axes model fitting curves. The rotations and translations parameters θe 1 , θe 2 , θe 3 , te 1 , te 2 , te 3  are extracted via registration of the reference
cardiac phantom to the displaced phantoms in the principal axes FOR. Each individual parameter is then robustly fitted as a linear function of the artificial
respiratory surrogate s. Corresponding positions of artificial EE and EI are labeled on the respiratory surrogate axis.
TABLE I
SIMULATED MOTION PARAMETER FITTING EVALUATION IN TERMS OF RMSE FOR THE PRINCIPAL AXES AND STANDARD IMAGING AXES MODELS
Motion Parameters
Model

θ e 1 (θ x )

θ e 2 (θ y )

θ e 3 (θ z )

t e 1 (t x )

t e 2 (t y )

t e 3 (t z )

Standard Modeling Fit Error
Principal Modeling Fit Error

0.049 ◦
0.035 ◦

0.536 ◦
0.025 ◦

2.721 ◦
0.314 ◦

0.819 mm
0.038 mm

0.520 mm
0.058 mm

0.108 mm
0.054 mm

XU et al.: RESPIRATORY MOTION MODELING BASED CORRECTION FOR MRI-GUIDED INTRACARDIAC INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES

2907

Fig. 9. Motion modeling correction accuracy. (a) SSD values between the reference phantom cardiac volume V 0 and the 20 transformed volumes {V i } are
plotted. The reference volume corresponds to s = 0, so the SSD value increases as the surrogate approaches 1. (b) SSD values are shown after motion model-based
correction were applied to the reference volume for a given artificial respiratory surrogate and the principal or standard motion model. In both plots the artificial
EE and EI are marked on the respiratory surrogate axis.

to V0 with the respiratory surrogate si as input, and compute
SSD (V0 [φ(si )], Vi ), where φ is either φpri or φstd depending on
whether the principal or the standard model was used respectively. It is observed in Fig. 9(b) that the motion model using
the correct principal axes was able to achieve better registration
accuracy (i.e., lower SSD values) compared to motion modeling
with standard imaging axes (p < 0.01). This demonstrates that
the use of a proper FOR for deriving the motion model could
potentially impact the overall registration accuracy.
Similar results were achieved in the reverse scenario. In the
case where the simulated transformations were applied in the
standard axes FOR, the fitting and registration accuracy achieved
with the standard axes model outperformed the principal axes
model. This further supports the importance of using a proper
FOR for representing the true underlying motion and for achieving optimal registrations.
B. Preclinical Experiment Results
Based on the imaging studies performed during the six preclinical experiments, we built a standard axes motion model and
a principal axes model for each swine. The smoothnesses of the
motion models were evaluated by measuring the goodness of fit
for each motion parameter in both models. This is summarized
in Table II, where lower mean RMSE values were achieved in
five of six motion parameter fits for the principal axes model,
four of which were statistically significant as evaluated by the
paired t-test (p < 0.05).
To evaluate the motion model correction accuracy, a total
of nine ablation lesions were created in the LV of six healthy
swine. The tracking data recorded during the ablations were
retrospectively gated to the middiastolic phase, matching the
gated prior and real-time images used for building the respiratory motion model. Subsequently, we measured the distance

between tracked catheter tip positions at various respiratory
phases acquired during the 30–60 s ablation for each swine (N
= 184 across nine ablation lesions in six pigs) and the position
of the lesion in the postablation imaging scan. The mean error discrepancy between the uncorrected catheter tip positions
and the lesions was 5.44 ± 1.70 mm. Applying a bulk offset
correction observed between the prior and lesion image to the
catheter position reduced the error to 5.06 ± 1.61 mm. In addition, respiratory motion models built with the real time and
prior roadmap images were used to retrospectively correct the
catheter tip position after bulk offset correction. The discrepancies between the mean corrected catheter position and the lesions
were 4.40 ± 1.65 mm and 3.97 ± 1.67 mm for the standard and
principal axes motion models, respectively. This represented a
mean accuracy increase of 19.1% and 27.0%, respectively (see
Table III). Using the paired t-test, we found that lower position
error was achieved with the principal axes modeling correction
compared to the standard axes model approach (p < 0.01), bulk
offset correction (p < 0.01), as well as the reference no motion
correction (p < 0.01).
An example of the catheter tip position correction is visualized in Fig. 10. Specifically, the tracked catheter tip position
shown in Fig. 10(a) has a discrepancy with the created lesion
location in the contrast-enhanced postablation image. The discrepancy is reduced after the proposed motion model correction
is applied to the erroneously tracked tip position. The same
lesion is also shown in gross pathology in Fig. 10(b).
IV. DISCUSSIONS
A. Modeling FOR
In the previous sections, we demonstrated that the choice of
FOR for building a motion model could potentially impact the
motion correction accuracy. This was clearly evident in one of

2908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

TABLE II
PRECLINICAL MOTION PARAMETER FITTING EVALUATION IN TERMS OF RMSE FOR THE PRINCIPAL AXES AND STANDARD IMAGING AXES MODELS
Motion Parameters
Model

θ e 1 (θ x )

θ e 2 (θ y )

Standard Modeling Fit Error
Principal Modeling Fit Error

∗

0.426 ± 0.207 ◦
0.276 ± 0.133 ◦

0.420 ± 0.395 ◦
0.397 ± 0.236 ◦

θ e 3 (θ z )
1.818 ± 1.038 ◦
1.491 ± 0.983 ◦

∗

t e 1 (t x )

t e 2 (t y )

0.781 ± 0.429 mm
0.622 ± 0.400 mm

0.575 ± 0.158 mm
0.608 ± 0.199 mm

∗

t e 3 (t z )
0.273 ± 0.212 mm
0.214 ± 0.160 mm

∗

Mean ± Standard deviation RMSE values are shown for six porcine studies. Lower RMSE values that are statistically significant (p < 0.05) as evaluated by the paired t-test are
indicated (∗).

the scenarios from the simulation experiment, where we built
two motion models with one aligned with the FOR (i.e., principal axes of the cardiac phantom) in which the known transformations were applied, and another using the standard imaging
FOR. It was observed that improved motion fitting curves and
improved motion correction accuracy were achieved with the
principal axes approach. This is expected, since the extracted
motion parameters from the principal axes of the anatomic phantom mirror the true underlying motion. For the standard motion
model, the extracted rotations and translations were recovered
along the standard imaging x, y, z axes, which are offset from
the true motion axes. As a result, a combination of rotations
and translations in the imaging axes may have been needed to
recover an otherwise simple rotation or translation in the true underlying motion axes. This could have resulted in noisier motion
estimates that reduced the goodness of fit of the individual fitted
curves as evidenced in Fig. 7. This reduction in the smoothness
of the fitting curve may also have led to a reduction in motion
modeling accuracy as shown in Fig. 9.
In the preclinical experiments, the ground truth FOR for the
motion of the LV is not known. Therefore, the center of mass
and the principal axes derived from the segmented LV is an
anatomically relevant FOR that represents a good, but not necessarily ideal, estimate of the underlying motion axes. As a
result, although the motion correction accuracy for the principal
axes model showed improvement over the standard axes model
(see Table III), the smoothness of the principal axes model fits
only showed statistically significant improvements in four of
the six motion parameters (see Table II). Moreover, the order of
magnitude of the positional errors found in Table III is higher
than the order of magnitude of fitting errors found in Table II.
This is expected, since the errors shown in Table III are a combination of the fitting error as well as the residual error from the
image registration process. Nevertheless, the smoother principal
axes motion model was able to achieve more accurate motion
correction results due to the improved goodness of fit.
B. Targeting Accuracy
The sizes of the RF ablations lesions that were achieved in
our preclinical experiments ranged from 6.5 to 11.5 mm in
diameter. Assuming that we require at least a targeting accuracy
of half the diameter of the lesion to be able to ablate the center
of our intended target, then the targeting error should be in
the range of 3.25 to 5.75 mm. From a clinical perspective, the
targeting error likely needs to be closer to the lower end of
that spectrum such that smaller lesions can be generated to

TABLE III
POSITIONAL ERROR BETWEEN N = 184 TRACKED CATHETER COORDINATES
AND LESION LOCATIONS BEFORE AND AFTER MOTION MODELING
CORRECTION IS APPLIED
Model

Position Error (mm)

Improvement (%)

No Motion Correction
Bulk Motion Correction
Standard Axes Model
Principal Axes Model

5.44 ± 1.70
5.06 ± 1.61
4.40 ± 1.65
3.97 ± 1.67

6.8
19.1
27.0

Mean ± Standard deviation for the position error and percentage improvement over no motion correction are shown.

minimize damage to the surrounding healthy tissue, while still
encompassing the intended target. In this study, we showed that
the proposed motion model correction schemes can advance
toward that clinical objective.
C. Catheter Tracking-Based Motion Characterization
As an alternative to the image-based derivation of respiratory
motion, one could also characterize the motion by placing a
second catheter within the coronary sinus, and monitoring its
movements. The movements of the catheter would then be used
as a surrogate to represent the motion of the LV. The use of
catheter tracking to characterize motion has been presented in
[30] and [31]. However, one potential drawback of these approaches is that the catheter within the coronary branch may
not move in perfect synchrony with the LV. Specifically, there
could be a slight discrepancy between the motion of the LV and
the perceived motion of the coronary catheter, if the catheter
moves within the coronary branch. Therefore, we decided to
use real-time imaging to characterize the respiratory motion in
this study.
D. Computational Times
Currently, the image registration time for aligning the prior
roadmap to the real-time image (i.e., solving (1)) requires approximately 40 s using a MATLAB implementation, running on
an Apple MacBook Pro with 8 GB of memory and 2.66 GHz Intel Core i7 processor. For deriving a motion model, we typically
acquire 135 middiastolic images. Since each image registration requires 40 s, aligning the prior roadmap to each real-time
image requires a total of approximately 135 × 40 s = 1.5 h.
The subsequent curve fitting procedure to generate the motion
model φ(s) requires an average of 6.5 ± 3.4 ms. Generating a
motion estimate, when given an input respiratory surrogate and

XU et al.: RESPIRATORY MOTION MODELING BASED CORRECTION FOR MRI-GUIDED INTRACARDIAC INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES

2909

Fig. 10. Ablation position correction. (a) Contrast-enhanced IR-SSFP image showing the created lesion. Red arrow points to the location of an erroneous
real-time tracked catheter tip position during RF ablation. Yellow arrow points to the actual anatomical location of the created lesion. A green arrow points to the
corrected catheter position after motion model was applied to the erroneously tracked position. (b) Same lesion is shown in gross pathology at the approximate
SAX slice location, after the animal was sacrificed.

the previous motion model, is very fast and requires an average
of 5.9 ± 1.2 μs. Therefore, once the motion model is built, the
motion correction estimate can be obtained sufficiently fast for
real-time applications.
E. Limitations and Future Work
Due to the long time required to build a motion model, the currently proposed method cannot be incorporated into the workflow of a prospective motion correction ablation study. As a
result, the motion corrections to the MR-guided ablations were
evaluated in a retrospective feasibility study. However, we are
working on a GPU implementation for the optimization problem
presented in (1), which will significantly speed up the overall
motion model building process. This should reduce the overall
motion model building time from hours to minutes. The motion model itself can also be limited because it is built upon a
3-D prior dataset and real-time free-breathing images acquired
at the start of the experiment, while the catheter tracking and
guidance for the ablation occurs after the images have been
acquired. Specifically, the average time elapsed between the
motion model imaging and the catheter ablations is 26.5 ± 10.5
min, while the average time elapsed between the catheter ablation and end of lesion characterization imaging is 81.8 ± 10.2
min. However, we tried to minimize the bulk motion induced
errors from our analysis retrospectively. Another potential limitation to the building of the motion model is that the individual motion estimates are obtained via registration of 3-D prior
roadmaps to single slice 2-D free-breathing real-time images.
Due to the thickness of the slice prescriptions, the registration
accuracy in the through-plane direction can be limited, which
could lead to inaccuracies in the motion model. In the future, we
wish to explore the option of acquiring data in both orthogonal
SAX and LAX real-time imaging planes, and perform registra-

tion between the prior roadmaps and the multiplane real-time
2-D images to obtain more accurate motion models.
Finally, respiratory motion of the animals was artificially controlled in these experiments and, therefore, remained consistent
throughout the study. In patients, if their breathing are not mechanically controlled, variations in breathing patterns and respiratory drift over time will reduce the accuracy of the motion
model. This is due to the fact that the model is derived from
images acquired at the beginning of the procedure, which may
represent a breathing pattern that differs from the intraprocedural breathing pattern. These errors would need to be mitigated via intermittent updates to the respiratory motion model.
Specifically, real-time imaging will need to be interleaved along
with the catheter tracking during the procedure. Moreover, when
changes in breathing pattern or respiratory drift are detected via
monitoring of the respiratory physiology signal, a rebuild or a
fast update to the respiratory motion model will be required.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the use of a respiratory motion modeling framework to improve MRI-guided intracardiac procedures has been
successfully demonstrated. In particular, we have described a
novel approach based on using an anatomically relevant FOR
to build a subject-specific motion model. In both the simulation and preclinical experiments, we showed that the proposed
approach was able to generate smoother motion models that better describe the underlying motion, which also led to improved
motion estimation accuracy. In the context of preclinical MRIguided ablations, we showed retrospectively that the proposed
method can potentially reduce mean ablation targeting errors
from 5.44 ± 1.70 mm to 3.97 ± 1.67 mm. Future work will
focus on exploring the potential of the model to prospectively

2910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

correct for motion and improve the targeting accuracy during
MRI-guided intracardiac procedures.
REFERENCES
[1] A. C. Lardo, “Real-time magnetic resonance imaging: Diagnostic and
interventional applications,” Pediatr. Cardiol., vol. 21, pp. 80–98, 2000.
[2] A. J. Dick et al., “Magnetic resonance fluoroscopy allows targeted delivery
of mesenchymal stem cells to infarct borders in swine,” Circulation, vol.
108, pp. 2899–2904, 2003.
[3] B. A. Hoffmann et al., “Interactive real-time mapping and catheter ablation of the cavotricuspid isthmus guided by magnetic resonance imaging
in a porcine model,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 31, pp. 450–456, 2010.
[4] A. Kolandaivelu et al., “Cardiovascular magnetic resonance guided electrophysiology studies,” J. Cardiovasc. Magn. Reson., vol. 11, 2009.
[5] Y. Ma et al., “Clinical evaluation of respiratory motion compensation for
anatomical roadmap guided cardiac electrophysiology procedures,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 122–131, Jan. 2012.
[6] V. Y. Reddy et al., “Integration of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
with three-dimensional electroanatomic mapping to guide left ventricular
catheter manipulation: Feasibility in a porcine model of healed myocardial
infarction,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 44, pp. 2202–2213, 2004.
[7] Z. J. Malchano et al., “Integration of cardiac CT/MR imaging with threedimensional electroanatomical mapping to guide catheter manipulation in
the left atrium: Implications for catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation,” J.
Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 17, pp. 1221–1229, 2006.
[8] S. R. Dukkipati et al., “Electroanatomic mapping of the left ventricle in a
porcine model of chronic myocardial infarction with magnetic resonance
based catheter tracking,” Circulation, vol. 118, pp. 853–862, 2008.
[9] R. Smolı́ková-Wachowiak et al., “Registration of two-dimensional cardiac images to preprocedural three-dimensional images for interventional
applications,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 22, pp. 219–228, 2005.
[10] X. Huang et al., “Rapid dynamic image registration of the beating heart
for diagnosis and surgical navigation,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28,
no. 11, pp. 1802–1814, Nov. 2009.
[11] R. Xu et al., “Multiscale registration of real-time and prior MRI data for
image-guided cardiac interventions,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61,
no. 10, pp. 2621–2631, Oct. 2014.
[12] P. Markelj et al., “A review of 3D/2D registration methods for imageguided interventions,” Med. Imag. Anal., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 642–661,
2012.
[13] A. P. King et al., “An adaptive and predictive respiratory motion model for
image-guided interventions: Theory and first clinical application,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 2020–2032, Dec. 2009.
[14] A. P. King et al., “A subject-specific technique for respiratory motion correction in image-guided cardiac catheterisation procedures,” Med. Imag.
Anal., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 419–431, 2009.
[15] A. P. King et al., “Respiratory motion correction for image-guided cardiac
interventions using 3-D echocardiography,” Med. Imag. Anal., vol. 14, no.
1, pp. 21–29, 2010.

[16] D. Peressutti et al., “A novel bayesian respiratory motion model to estimate and resolve uncertainty in image-guided cardiac interventions,”
Med. Imag. Anal., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 488–502, 2013.
[17] J. R. McClelland et al., “Respiratory motion models: A review,” Med.
Imag. Anal., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 19–42, 2013.
[18] R. Xu et al., “Respiratory motion model based correction for improving the targeting accuracy of MRI-guided intracardiac electrophysiology
procedures,” J. Cardiovasc. Magn. Reson., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–3, 2015.
[19] E. Haber and J. Modersitzki, “Beyond mutual information: A simple and
robust alternative,” in Bildverarbeitung für die Medizin, H. Meinzer, H.
Handels, A. Horsch, and T. Tolxdorff, Eds. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 2005, pp. 350–354.
[20] J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, “A simplex method for function minimization,”
Computer J., vol. 7, pp. 308–313, 1965.
[21] P. W. Holland and R. E. Welsch, “Robust regression using iteratively
reweighted least-squares,” Commun. Stat.-Theory Methods, vol. 6, no. 9,
pp. 813–827, 1977.
[22] G. R. Fowles and G. L. Cassiday, Analytical Mechanics, 7th ed. Toronto,
ON, Canada: Thomson Books, 2005, ch. 9, pp. 361–390.
[23] Y. Lu et al., “Segmentation of left ventricle in cardiac cine MRI: An
automatic image-driven method,” in Functional Imaging and Modeling of
the Heart. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 339–347.
[24] Y. Wang et al., “Respiratory motion of the heart: Kinematics and the
implications for the spatial resolution in coronary imaging,” Magn. Reson.
Med., vol. 33, pp. 713–719, 1995.
[25] K. Nehrke et al., “Free-breathing cardiac mr imaging: Study of implications of respiratory motion-initial results,” Radiology, vol. 220, pp.
810–815, 2001.
[26] C. Santelli et al., “Respiratory bellows revisited for motion compensation:
Preliminary experience for cardiovascular MR,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol.
65, no. 4, pp. 1097–1102, 2011.
[27] C. L. Dumoulin et al., “Real-time position monitoring of invasive devices
using magnetic resonance,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 29, pp. 411–415,
1993.
[28] P. E. Radau et al., “Vurtigo: Visualization platform for real-time, MRIguided cardiac electroanatomic mapping,” in Statistical Atlases and Computational Models of the Heart. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag,
2011, pp. 244–253.
[29] J. Detsky et al., “Inversion-recovery-prepared SSFP for cardiac-phaseresolved delayed-enhancement MRI,” Magn. Reson. Med., vol. 58, no. 2,
pp. 365–372, 2007.
[30] Y. Ma et al., “Real-time respiratory motion correction for cardiac electrophysiology procedures using image-based coronary sinus catheter tracking,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2010, pp. 391–399.
[31] E. J. Schmidt et al., “3D coronary motion tracking in swine models with
MR tracking catheters,” J. Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 86–98,
2009.
Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

