IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

2941

Toward Intraoperative Breast Endomicroscopy
With a Novel Surface-Scanning Device
Siyang Zuo∗ , Michael Hughes, Carlo Seneci, Tou Pin Chang, and Guang-Zhong Yang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—New optical biopsy methods such as confocal endomicroscopy represent a promising tool for breast conserving surgery,
allowing real-time assessment of tumor margins. However, it remains difficult to scan over a large surface area because of the
small field-of-view. This paper presents a novel robotic instrument
to perform automated scanning with a fiber bundle endomicroscope probe to expand the effective imaging area. The device uses a
rigid concentric tube scanning mechanism to facilitate large-area
mosaicking. It has a compact design with a diameter of 6 mm,
incorporating a central channel with a diameter of 3 mm for passing through a fiber bundle probe. A bespoke bearing, an inflated
balloon, and a passive linear structure are used to control image
rotation and ensure consistent tool–tissue contact. Experimental
results show that the device is able to scan a spiral trajectory over
a large hemispherical surface. Detailed performance evaluation
was performed and the bending angle ranges from –90° to 90° with
high repeatability and minimal rotational hysteresis errors. The
device has also been validated with breast phantom and ex vivo
human breast tissue, demonstrating the potential clinical value of
the system.
Index Terms—Breast conserving surgery (BCS), confocal endomicroscopy, image mosaicking, mechanical design, surgical
robot.

I. INTRODUCTION
REAST cancer is the most common type of cancer in
women and is the second leading cause of cancer deaths
among women in the United States and Europe [1]. Breast conserving surgery (BCS) is an operation that involves the excision
of the tumor with a surrounding margin of healthy breast tissue
(approximately 2–5 mm) while leaving the remainder of the
breast intact [2]. It is well recognized that the margin status of
the excised tissue is the strongest predictor for tumor recurrence
following BCS [3]. If tumor cells are found on the edges of
excised tissues (positive margins), these patients will require a
reoperation [3]. National data from England and Wales highlight
that a significant proportion of patients with invasive (18%) and
noninvasive breast cancer (28%) require reoperation following
failed attempts at BCS [4]. Reoperations will inevitably lead
to unnecessary anxiety, poor cosmesis, and are cost inefficient.

B

Manuscript received July 28, 2014; revised March 25, 2015 and May 29,
2015; accepted July 9, 2015. Date of publication July 31, 2015; date of current
version November 20, 2015. This work was supported by the Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council under Grant EP/IO27769/1: SMART
Endomicroscopy. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ S. Zuo is with the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: s.zuo@imperial.ac.uk).
M. Hughes, C. Seneci, T. P. Chang, and G. Z. Yang are with the Hamlyn
Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College London.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2455597

However, there is increasing evidence that almost 50% of patients that underwent reoperations did not have any evidence of
residual tumor cells in the reexcision specimens which suggests
that a significant proportion of these patients might have been
overtreated [5]. Currently, the adequacy of BCS relies on the
predictive value of the postoperative histological assessment of
the margin of excised tissues and yet the residual in situ disease
burden is not known. The value of direct intraoperative assessment of the cavity wall has yet to be investigated, arguably due to
the lack of imaging technologies suitable for cavity deployment.
Confocal endomicroscopy has the technical advantage and
physical properties to provide high-resolution, real-time, in vivo,
and in situ imaging at cellular and subcellular levels. Over the
last decade, it has found promising applications in the gastrointestinal tract, most notably during endoscopic surveillance
of Barrett’s esophagus [6], assessment of indeterminate biliary
strictures [7], and in the lung [8]. Utilizing intravenous fluorescein [6]–[8] or topical acriflavine [9], [10] as the contrast
agent, real-time confocal endomicroscopic image acquisition of
in vivo tissue morphology is achieved through the process of
optical sectioning which involves point-by-point illumination
of the tissue surface using a rapidly scanning laser. Given the
difficulties of miniaturizing devices for high-speed laser scanning, an optical fiber bundle (confocal miniprobe) is used to
relay the light source, typically a 488-nm wavelength blue laser,
to the tissue surface and the resulting emissions from fluorescing tissues are collected between 500 and 650 nm and focused
through a pinhole to block out-of-focus light. With the advent
of high-speed laser scanning units, confocal endomicroscopic
images are displayed live on a display screen during image acquisition, thus allowing real-time clinical decisions to be made
[6]–[8].
Thus far, bench-top confocal microscopes have been shown
to have the ability to image breast cancer morphology and may
have a role in imaging resection margins of excised tissues [11].
However, in situ imaging of breast cavity walls created during
BCS warrants considerable miniaturization to allow insertion of
the microscope through a small 3–4 cm skin incision and for
deployment against the walls of the breast cavity. Evidently, the
benefits of miniaturization for initial endoscopically driven clinical applications could potentially be extrapolated to intraoperative use within a surgically created cavity. Recent work by Chang
et al. reported that morphological architecture of neoplastic and
nonneoplastic breast tissues were readily visualized using confocal endomicroscopy [12]. This ex vivo study on acriflavinestained human breast tissues demonstrated that the presence
of hypercellularity and haphazard arrangement of morphological architecture correlated well with common pathognomonic
features of breast cancer seen on conventional histology.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Additionally, surgeons were shown to be able to differentiate neoplastic from nonneoplastic morphology with accuracies
equivalent to that of pathologists [13]. These intriguing results
warrant validation in intraoperative in situ studies whereby the
clinical impact of confocal endomicroscopy is evaluated based
on its ability to identify residual cancer cells left in situ on the
breast cavity walls, thereby guiding operative decision making
during BCS based on real-time cavity scanning. It is envisaged
that the presence of cancer cells detected in situ would allow
further removal of the corresponding breast cavity wall during
the same operation, whereas its absence reassures the surgeon
that complete removal of cancer cells was achieved.
In practice, the deployment of confocal miniprobes for largearea tissue surface scanning presents unique challenges pertaining to precision, accuracy, and economy of movement. Currently, the field-of-view of images obtained is less than 1 mm in
diameter and this could be as low as 0.3 mm in diameter when
high-resolution confocal miniprobes are used. It is unequivocal that the information obtained from a static miniprobe will
not be truly representative of the corresponding cavity wall as
adjacently placed cancer cells could easily be missed if they
are not brought to the surgeon’s view. A potential solution to
this is to increase the field-of-view obtained by stitching adjacent image frames as the probe is moved across the tissue
surface, a technique known as mosaicking [14], [15]. However,
in practice, this is often difficult to achieve due to the surgeon’s
hand tremor, tissue surface deformation, and the patient’s respiratory movements. This is further compounded by the relatively large tissue surface area that needs to be assessed, which
is a time-consuming process and inevitably induces fatigue to
the surgeon. Moreover, this could lengthen the operation time,
which in turn increases the risk of anesthetic complications to
the patient and reduces operating theatre productivity.
These inherent limitations are well-recognized and have motivated the development of several mechanical scanning devices
to facilitate smooth and consistent translation of the miniprobe
tip against the tissue surface. An articulated robot for manipulation of biophotonics probes was first developed by Noonan
et al. for intraoperative integration of laparoscopic instruments
[16]. Rosa et al. developed a scanning device using hydraulic
microballoons [17], and a conic structure was developed by
Erden et al. [18]. A cooperative robotic arm (KUKA Roboter
GmbH, Augsburg, Germany) has also been used to generate a
three-dimensional (3-D) map of the tissue [19]. However, the
target of [17] and [18] were applications for which the scanning
device must remain very compact. As a result, only relatively
small areas of tissue could be mosaicked. Although large-area
mosaics were achieved by [19] and [20], this study is difficult
to adapt to clinical use due to the complex robotic arm used.
This motivates the development of a novel scanning device
adapted to address the unique challenges during intraoperative
image acquisition in the breast cavity, with a specific emphasis on enhanced precision, accuracy, and efficiency of probe-tip
movement. To that end, a preliminary scanning device prototype
was developed [21], where all parts of the bending unit were fabricated by a direct metal laser sintering technology. However, it
was noted that the sintering technology was not precise enough

for gear fabrication, thus, a more precise processing technology
needed be adopted. Moreover, inadvertent rotation occurred because the two-dimensional (2-D) motion of the scanner required
rotation of the distal tip in the previous prototype [21], which
resulted in an accumulation of errors during mosaicking. Furthermore, better control algorithms, which can maintain a stable
tangential velocity at the tip for large-area spiral scans, needed
to be tested on ex vivo human breast tissue for further evaluation.
The aim of the study reported here was to develop a large-area
scanning device equipped with a robotized scanning tip to enable
safe, efficient, and accurate scanning of the breast cavity. Many
existing robotic devices, including the da Vinci surgical instruments, incorporate multi degree-of-freedom (DOF) motion at
the tip with wire-driven mechanisms [22]–[24]. While the wiredriven mechanism allows miniaturization of multi-DOF structures, problems of friction, wearing and extension are practical
difficulties to consider.
Alternatively, linkage-driven mechanisms can be considered
[25], [26]. Although they provide a strong force to the target,
backlash may be caused due to repeated use. In particular, it
is difficult to satisfy the durability requirement while achieving
miniaturization of the linkage.
Spring-shaped shape memory alloy (SMA) fabricated by laser
profiling on a superelastic nitinol tube can also be used to
improve the bending performance [27]. For SMA, insulation
against electric leakage and heat generation needs to be treated
carefully for safety. In practice, it is also difficult to achieve a
small bending radius and apply a strong force to the target. In the
case of tendon-driven nitinol tubes, the demerits of wire extension and wearing should be considered. To address the snapping
problem in a flexible concentric tube robot, Kim et al. designed
groove patterns on superelastic nitinol tubes [28].
Another possible drive mechanism is to use rotational joints
with bevel gears such as in [29] and [30]. The gear-driven mechanism makes it easy to achieve multi-DOFs together with miniaturization. However, the traditional gear-driven mechanisms often result in an increase in the number of parts. Furthermore, it
is particularly difficult to reduce the backlash when there are a
large number of gears.
In this study, we propose a simple and compact device, using
a specially designed gear-based rigid concentric tube scanning
mechanism to achieve increased robustness, accuracy, and durability. It is envisaged that this scanning device would be inserted
through the incision created during BCS and deployed against
the cavity walls to allow for smooth and seamless image acquisition over a large tissue surface area, thus allowing high-quality
image mosaics to be created (see Fig. 1). We also show how,
in principle, an inflatable balloon can be used to help smooth
the tissue surface, making it sufficiently regular for microscopic
scanning.
The main design features of the device include the mechatronic design of the device, a rigid concentric tube architecture
allowing the driver source to be placed outside of the body to
facilitate device miniaturization, and a simple, ergonomic design for clinical deployment. In the rest of this paper, detailed
design considerations and mechanical performance analysis of
the scanning structure are provided. Results from ex vivo breast

ZUO et al.: TOWARD INTRAOPERATIVE BREAST ENDOMICROSCOPY WITH A NOVEL SURFACE-SCANNING DEVICE

2943

Fig. 3. (a) Scanning space of the scanner tip with bending and rotating motions. The scanning space is a large and hemispherical. (b) Relationship of tip
bending angle θ, tip frame length H, and radial position h.
Fig. 1. Concept of the system with an inflated balloon and a fiber bundle
endomicroscope during BCS for breast cancer.

Fig. 2. Configuration of the scanning mechanism, transforming rotational
motion of the inner and outer tubes to tip scan motion.

cancer tissue experiments are demonstrated, demonstrating the
capabilities of the device for large-area endomicroscopy imaging and mosaicking.

Fig. 4. Prototype of the scanning device showing (a) image of the scanner, (b)
distal end showing dimensions, and (c) details of the driver unit with rotation
gear, brushless DC-servomotors, gear head and Hall effect sensor.

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Scanning Mechanism
The proposed scanning device has the ability to scan a number
of trajectories by combining bending and rotating motion of the
tip. The scanning structure is illustrated in Fig. 2, in which the
spur gear and rotation gear are in contact to enable a bending
motion. The inner tube and outer tube are coaxially arranged and
are able to rotate independently. This structure provides −90°
to +90° bending on one axis, and 360° of rotation on a second
axis.
The scanning motion is driven by rotating the inner and outer
tubes as detailed in Fig. 2. In the proposed mechanical design,
the inner tube rotation angle α, the outer tube rotation angle β,
and the tip bending angle θ are related by the following equation:
θ=

R
(β − α)
r

(1)

where the lengths R and r are indicated in Fig. 2. Combination of
the rotational and bending motions provides the hemispherical
workspace shown in Fig. 3(a). A spiral trajectory can be achieved
by rotating the inner and outer tubes simultaneously at different
angular velocities. The radial position h in xy dimensions can
be represented between the tip frame length H (Fig. 2) and tip

bending angle θ (see Fig. 2), such that


R
(β − α) .
h = Hsin
r

(2)

In our design, R/r is 1, and the resulting relationship betweenθ,
H, and h is shown in Fig. 3(b).
The rotation angle around the center of the xy plane is given
by β. Hence, a suitable variation of h and β leads to a spiral
trajectory for the tip.
B. Scanning Prototype
The proposed scanning prototype is 6 mm in diameter, incorporating a central hollow channel 3 mm in diameter, as shown
in Fig. 4(a) and (b). In this configuration, the distal end has a 1DOF bending and a 1-DOF rotating mechanism. The device has
a length of 85 mm, while the bending tip has a length of 20 mm.
The prototype is equipped with a 3-mm diameter central channel, through which the endomicroscope probe can be deployed.
A setup tube, which fits concentrically around the device tip, is
used to adjust the starting point of the scanning, making sure it
begins with a straight tip. A bearing structure is fixed to the tip

2944

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 6.

Fig. 5. Prototype with balloon attachment: (a) image of the scanning tip and
(b) Passive linear structure.

frame with embedded steel balls which rotate during scanning.
Combined with the inherent stiffness of the probe, this prevents
the endomicroscope probe from rotating around its axis during
scanning.
The scanning structure was fabricated from stainless steel,
while the bearing cap and set up tube were rapid prototyped
(VeroBlackPlus, Objet Geometries Ltd., Israel). To minimize
the friction during rotation, there is a 1 mm clearance between
the inner and outer tubes. The ends of the tubes are held by coaxially mounted rotation gears in the driver unit to maintain this
clearance during rotation. Hence, the friction between the tubes
is very low, allowing smooth rotational motion transmission and
spiral scanning. Backlash is reduced by a spring (see Spring 2
in Fig. 4 enlarged view) in the driver unit, which engages the
rotation gear shaft against the spur gear link.
In case of passing a commercial endomicroscopy probe (Cellvizio UHD Miniprobe) through the channel, the passive linear
structure is located posterior to the driver unit (see Fig. 4 enlarged view). It works well since the probe itself has an inherent
stiffness. It consists of a slider, a spring (labeled Spring 1), and a
slide guider. The endomicroscope probe is fixed onto the slider,
and the spring structure ensures consistent contact between the
tip of the device and the tissue. The inner diameter of the bespoke bearing structure fits to the outer diameter of the probe tip
precisely. The probe can easily be separated from this structure
for cleaning.
C. Balloon Mechanism
To achieve the balloon scanning, a balloon inflation system
was developed. The urethane balloon was a medical balloon
with inflated diameter of 30–50 mm and a wall thickness of
0.02 mm [see Fig. 5(a)]. The balloon was fixed on a guide tube,
and the scanning device was inserted into the guide tube (8 mm
in outer diameter) during scanning. There is a 1 mm clearance
between the guide tube and the scanning tip. A heat shrink
tube was used to seal the cap between the guide tube and the
scanning device. A highly flexible leached fiber bundle (Schott)
was inserted into the channel and fixed on the linear structure
at the distal end for allowing the full scanning range to be used
[see Fig. 5(b). Because the linear structure in Fig. 4 enlarged
view is easy to be separated, we can change the position of
the linear structure depending on probe types. The scanning

Inner tube rotation control.

device is connected to a microdiaphragm air pump (8018 Gt,
Namiki Precision Jewel Co., Ltd, Japan). There is an inner spacer
inserted into the working channel to seal the inner space from air
leakage. The inner pressure of the balloon was 170 kPa during
the scanning.
D. Drive Unit
The size of the drive unit is 75mm × 90mm × 55 mm, and
the total weight of the scanning device is 324 g, thus making it
suitable for use as a handheld device. For cleaning and sterilization purposes, the rigid concentric tube structure part can easily
be separated from the driver unit. The inner and outer tubes are
placed concentrically, and driven by two high-resolution brushless dc-servomotors equipped with gear heads and Hall effect
sensors (1226 E 012 B K1855, Faulhaber SA, Germany) [see
Fig. 4(c)]. The rotational angles of the tube are detected by Hall
effect sensors for the purposes of feedback control. A standard
computer calculates rotational displacements of the inner and
outer tubes from inputted target angles. The control diagram of
inner tube rotation is shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, αt and P (αt ) are
the input angle and function from input angle to the target rotational displacement of the inner tube, Xt and Xf are the target
rotational displacement of the inner tube and current rotational
displacement of the inner tube, Δx and S(Δx) are the differential rotational displacement of the inner tube and function from
the differential rotational displacement to output voltage, and V
and αf are the output voltage and rotational angle of inner tube,
respectively. The independent control process of the outer tube
rotation is the same as for the inner tube rotation.
We recorded and displayed the actual signal output of the
motors, including the rotation speed, the rotation angle, the
effective scan speed, and the radial position. These data could
be used to assist with the assembling of mosaics in future.
E. Control Algorithms and Trajectory
We developed a custom user interface to control the prototype
from a standard PC. Once the scan parameters are entered, the
device can scan the target surface automatically.
A spiral trajectory is an effective means of covering a scan
area [19] and so was adopted here. For spiral scanning, the parameters include the tangential velocity of the probe Vtangential ,
and the loop spacing in the radial direction, Δh. The parameters
R and r are shown in Fig. 2. Vtangential is given by
Vtangential =

Hsin (θt ) Wm 2t
μ

(3)

ZUO et al.: TOWARD INTRAOPERATIVE BREAST ENDOMICROSCOPY WITH A NOVEL SURFACE-SCANNING DEVICE

Fig. 7. (a) Co-ordinates for spherical spiral and (b) mosaic envelope area that
the device can scan over in a given time for values of the loop spacing Δh
between 0.24 and 1 mm.

where μ is the gear reduction ratio and Wm 2t is the angular
velocity of Motor 2. Here, we have made the approximation
that the tangential velocity is dominated by the rotational, rather
than the bending, motion.
The spherical spiral with equal spacing between turns has two
parameters: the radius of the sphere rsphere and the number of
turns N [see Fig. 7(a)]. The equation of the spherical helix in
spherical coordinates is given by [31]

2945

Fig. 8. Optical layout of the laser scanning confocal endomicroscopy system.
MO = microscope objective. APD = avalanche photodiode.

The relationship between mosaic envelope area, time, and
loop spacing are illustrated in Fig. 7(b). Note that the field-ofview of the probe is 0.24 mm, so that if the spacing between
spiral loops is set at 0.24 mm, then, the loops of the spiral will
just touch.
F. Visualization and Mosaicking

rsphere = H
θt = cos−1




βt
−1
πN

(4)
0 ≤ βt ≤ 2N π.

(5)

We note that the length Lt of a spiral can be calculated by
 δt 
π
Lt =
(6)
H 1 + (N π)2 sin4 θt dθt 0 ≤ δt ≤ .
2
0
The spacing between loops Δh is given by (7). The loop
spacing is a geodesic distance between the loops of the spiral
trajectory on the sphere [see Fig. 7(a)]
Δh =

πH
.
N

(7)

The length of the spiral Lt achievable in a given time t is
related to the imaging frame rate F and the required fractional
overlap between successive image frames to allow image stitching Δp by (8)
Lt = Δp · F · t.

(8)

Empirically, it was found that a shift of 40 μm between images, and hence, an overlap of 200 μm for a 240-μm fieldof-view, was necessary to ensure consistent mosaicking. Given
the imaging frame rate of 10 frames/s, a maximum acceptable
tangential velocity of 0.4 mm/s was selected.
The mosaic envelope area, and to a good approximation the
equivalent spiral, is given by (9). This approximate formula can
be derived by considering integral to sum the circles’ circumferences of the sphere
 2π  δ t
 δt
2
2
H sin (θt ) dβt dθt = 2πH
sin(θt )dθt
St =
0

0

= 2πH (1 − cosδt )
2

0

π
0 ≤ δt ≤ .
2

(9)

The endomicroscopy system used to test the scanning device was an in-house laser scanning and detection system. For
the imaging probe, we used both a fiber bundle and lens assembly from a commercial endomicroscopy system (Cellvizio UHD
Miniprobe, Mauna Kea Technologies, France) and a 17000 core,
8-μm core-spacing bare leached fiber bundle (Schott) with a 1mm diameter. The imaging system is shown in Fig. 8. This
custom acquisition system allows a combination of imaging,
mosaicking, and scanner control for real-time use. The system
was illuminated by a 488 nm, 50-mW laser (Vortran Stradus),
which was reflected off a dichroic mirror (Thorlabs MD498) into
a laser scanning system. The laser scanning system comprised
a galvo scanning mirror (Thorlabs GVS011) and a resonant
scanning mirror (Cambridge Technologies CRS), which provided the slow and fast axis laser scanning, respectively. Both
mirrors were imaged onto the rear focal plane of a 20X microscope objective by a pair of telescopes. The proximal end of the
fiber bundle was placed at the focus of the microscope objective, resulting in a 2-D laser raster scanning pattern across the
bundle. This was transferred to the tissue by the bundle and a
distal microobjective. The time-average power to the tissue was
approximately 5 mW.
Fluorescence signal returning from the tissue travelled back
along the fiber bundle and was descanned. It was then transmitted by the dichroic mirror and a 500-nm-long pass filter
(Thorlabs FEL0500) and focused through a 15-micron pinhole
by a 20X microscope objective. A second 20X objective focused
light that had passed through the pinhole onto an avalanche photodiode. A signal from the photodiode was digitized by a high
speed, 12-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC) board (National
Instruments National Instruments PCI-5105).
Drive signals for the scanning mirrors were generated by an
input/output board (National Instruments PCI-6366). For the
galvo scanner, which generated the slow axis of the raster scan,

2946

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 9. Results of 2-DOFs scanning characteristic test showing relationship between target angles and actual bending and rotating angles. (a) 1-DOF bending
mechanism with, (b) setup of the bending experiment, (c) 1-DOF rotating mechanism, and (d) setup of the rotating experiment.

the drive signal was a voltage ramp. The resonant scanner, which
generated the fast axis, was free-running at a frequency of 8 kHz,
and it was only necessary to control the scan amplitude via a
voltage signal. The ADC formed 2-D images frames using synchronization pulses from the resonant scanner for the start of
each line and from its internal clock for the start of each frame.
The start of the ramp of the galvo scan was synchronized with
the start of each frame acquisition via a digital trigger from
the ADC. The system was controlled by a Labview program,
which also reconstructed images based on the data acquired
from the ADC board. Raw images had a Gaussian filter applied
to remove the fiber core pattern and a background subtracted to
remove the fluorescence signal from the fiber bundle. Processed
and auto-contrasted images were displayed live to the user at
10 frames/s, and both processed and raw images were saved to
disk after being converted to 8 bits per pixel. To validate the
scanning approach and demonstrate the potential to reconstruct
large-area scans, an offline, cross-correlation based mosaicking
algorithm in MATLAB was used. From each 670-pixel diameter
image, we extracted a rectangular subimage, 250 pixels wide.
The normalized 2-D cross correlation was then computed between this template and the previous image. The position of the
peak of the cross correlation was taken to be the shift between
the two images. To create the mosaic, each image was inserted
into the mosaic with the correct shift relative to the previous
image, overwriting any existing pixel values.
III. RESULTS
A. Mechanical Performance Evaluation
For performance evaluation, we examined bending and rotating characteristics of the 2-DOF scanning mechanism and
generated power at the tip of the scanning distal end. These
measurements were made initially with no imaging probe
inserted.
Repeatability measurements were performed, unloaded over
five trials, measuring actual bending and rotating angles against
the target angles. For the assessment of the bending performance, measurements were made in four parts: (a) bending

TABLE I
RESULTS OF REPEATABILITY MEASUREMENT IN EACH BENDING MECHANISM
Measurement item

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Bending range (°)

0 to 90.05

Repeatability (°)
Tip positioning
accuracy (mm)
Hysteresis error (°)

0.72
0.25

90.05 to
−0.41
0.68
0.23

−0.41 to
−90.97
0.73
0.25

−90.97 to
−0.61
0.80
0.28

1.58 ± 0.44

TABLE II
RESULTS OF REPEATABILITY MEASUREMENT IN ROTATING MECHANISM
Measurement item
One circle rotational range (°)
Repeatability (°)
Tip positioning accuracy (mm)
Hysteresis error (°)

(e)

(f)

0 to 359.67
359.67 to −0.65
0.4
0.42
0.13
0.14
0.51 ± 0.04

from 0° to +90°, (b) returning to 0°, (c) bending from 0° to
−90°, and (d) returning again to 0°. The bending angles were
measured by a digital camera that had a resolution of 4272 ×
2848 pixels, which was equivalent to a resolution of 0.05 mm
at the imaging plane. The camera was setup to image the tip
as shown in Fig. 9(b). The accuracy of the camera image was
checked by capturing a regular grid image (pitch 0.05 mm) before the experiments. The maximum errors on x-axis and y-axis
were smaller than one pixel (0.05 mm), thus, the accuracy was
sufficient to evaluate the bending angle of the scanning tip.
The measured hysteresis curve with the maximum differences between the experimental and theoretical values is shown
in Fig. 9(a), and the measured values of bending range, bending
repeatability error (standard deviation), tip positioning accuracy
(calculated by the tip length and repeatability error), and hysteresis error are presented in Table I. We also tested in detail the
rotating performance. The scanning device was first rotated (e)
from 0 to 360°, and then (f) returned to 0° [see Fig. 9(c) and
Table II]. The measurement setup is shown in Fig. 9(d).

ZUO et al.: TOWARD INTRAOPERATIVE BREAST ENDOMICROSCOPY WITH A NOVEL SURFACE-SCANNING DEVICE

TABLE III
GENERATED POWER AND TORQUE AT THE TIP
DOF

Direction (°)

Power [N]

Torque [N·mm]

Bending
Rotating (Bending 45°)

−90 to 90
−360 to 360

0.9
2.1

19.8
46.2

Tip positioning accuracy was used to evaluate the dispersion
of the tip position in a one-way trip (see, a–f in Fig. 9). In addition, the hysteresis error was used to evaluate the repeatability
between bending back and forth (from a to b, from c to d, and
from e to f in Fig. 9).
Finally, we examined the generated powers and torques using
a digital force gauge. These results are shown in Table III.
B. Trajectory Performance Evaluation
The workspace and trajectory of the tip were evaluated by
an NDI Aurora electromagnetic tracking system (NDI Corp.,
USA). A mini electromagnetic sensor with 6 DOFs (2.5-mm
diameter × 2 m in length, the sensor itself is 11 mm in length)
was inserted into the channel of the scanning device to measure
the tip position. We performed the spiral scans four times. We
chose one set of data randomly to evaluate the workspace and
trajectory. A Kalman filter was used to smooth EM data and
hence reduce noise. Here, we used a constant velocity model
as the state equation. The state vector includes the location and
velocity. The workspace and trajectory of a full spiral scan are
shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b).
Fig. 10(c)–(f) shows the target and actual x, y, z, and radial positions, while the spiral trajectory is shown in Fig. 10(h), both for
the target value and the value calculated from the read-out of the
motor positions. In Fig 10(g), the tangential velocity of the scanner tip is plotted. This demonstrates that the tip velocity can be
controlled to maintain a constant speed set at 0.4 mm/s for these
experiments. The confocal probe (Cellvizio UHD Miniprobe)
was inserted into the working channel of the scanning device
during this evaluation. The EM probe was concentrically fixed
by a tube connector at the scanning tip with the cable running
in the opposite direction to the confocal probe (i.e., it did not
run through the device’s probe channel). In Fig. 10(c) and (d),
the amplitude [see the radial position in Fig. 10(f)] of the cosine
and sine functions were increased, leading to a corresponding
increase in the tip velocity noise. This is reflected in the noise
value changing on the vertical scale with time. For this dataset,
the spacing between each loop of the spiral was set to be 1 mm.
C. Breast Phantom Experiments
We confirmed the ability of the system to obtain consistent
images with an inflated balloon using a silicon breast phantom
[see Fig. 11(a) and (b)]. The breast phantom was designed for use
in training of surgeons to conduct wide local excision of breast
tumors, and had previously been used for this purpose, leaving a
realistically sized cavity. The cavity was lined with tissue paper
stained with acriflavine to allow imaging and mosaicking, since

2947

the phantom did not have sufficient features at a microscope
scale. For this experiment, we used a leached imaging bundle. This bundle is highly flexible, allowing the full-scanning
range to be used, but has a low-intrinsic resolution due to its
large fiber-core spacing of 8 μm, and the lack of distal objective. The working distance is also suboptimal, with the optimal
image plane lying exactly on the surface of the bundle, and so
some of the available depth of field was taken up by the balloon
wall thickness. We performed long linear scans across the hemisphere (bending range: −70° to +70°). The results show that
the probe could maintain almost constant tissue contact when
scanning over large distances of up to 48 mm. [see Fig. 11(c)
and (d)]. Because the balloon is not a perfect spherical shape,
there is a risk of loss of contact in some places [see Fig. 11(e)].
Fig. 11(f) shows a circular scan, demonstrating that in practice it is possible to maintain good contact for a 360° scan. We
used a mosaicking algorithm that checks for rotations as well as
translation [21].
D. Ex Vivo Breast Cancer Tissue Experiments
We evaluated the ability of the scanning system to obtain
consistent ex vivo images on freshly excised, acriflavine-stained
human breast cancer tissues. For this study, the Cellvizio UHD
microprobe was used so as to provide sufficient resolution and an
optimized working distance, but with the disadvantage that the
imaging range is limited due to its stiffness. All subjects gave
prior written informed consent, and Human Tissue Authority
license and ethics approval was obtained from Imperial College
Tissue Bank (R12047 and R12047 a). For these experiments,
the balloon was not necessary to flatten the tissue. However, to
simulate its presence, a transparent disposable drape (Clinicon,
Bristol, U.K.) was fixed onto a support window, as shown in
Fig. 12(a). The scanning device and support window were held
by passive arms.
First, we scanned a sample of normal breast fatty tissue. For
this test, linear scans were performed by controlling only the
bending motor. Fig. 12(b) shows a mosaic of a linear scan which
is approximately 5 mm in length. A large number of polygonalshaped, dark-colored cells with thin hyperfluorescent borders
depict the typical appearances of fat cells in Fig. 12(b). Then,
we scanned the breast cancer tissues. A mosaic of a linear scan
is given in Fig. 12(c). In Fig. 12(c), disorganized architecture
with hypercellularity and haphazard arrangement of cells can
be observed. Fig. 12(d) shows a mosaic created from a spiral
scan which is approximately 2.2 mm in diameter. The spacing
between spiral loops is set at 0.24 mm which makes the loops
of the spiral just touch. There are small gaps between the loops
of the spiral. One reason for this was that the probe was not
positioned vertically when scanning started. As the tip of the
device is pressed onto the target tissue, there is a residual bending
due to a small backlash of the gear. The other cause of the gaps
is likely to be the combination of mosaicking errors, positioning
errors, and deformation of the scanned surface. Nevertheless, the
creation of the large-image mosaics enables global appreciation
of the tissue characteristics. In Fig. 12(d), two large areas of
hypercellular foci (clusters of hyperfluorescent dots) can be seen

2948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 10. Trajectory of a sample scan measured: (a) working space of the tip, (b) 3-D trajectory of spiral scan, (c) x position, (d) y position, (e) z position, (f) radial
position of the spiral, (g) linear velocity of the tip of the device, and (h) comparison of the spiral trajectory generated by the motor output and the theoretical spiral.

in the center and left of the mosaic. In addition, the background
architecture on the upper left and right quadrant appeared to be
haphazard with cells seen to be loosely dispersed throughout
the breast connective tissue.

Fig. 12(e) shows a second scan, with the spacing between
loops of the spiral set to 1 mm. Note that the diameter of the
spiral is approximately 5.2 mm. We observed that the gaps between the spirals get slightly larger in the outer branches during a

ZUO et al.: TOWARD INTRAOPERATIVE BREAST ENDOMICROSCOPY WITH A NOVEL SURFACE-SCANNING DEVICE

Fig. 11. Breast phantom experiment: (a) scanning tip with balloon and probe,
(b) Setup, (c) and (d) linear mosaics: (c) and (d) were vertically placed and
covered a length of 48 mm, (e) position of circle scan tests, (f) circle scans at
corner of the flat and curve surface, and (g) co-ordinates for the scanning tip.

2949

Fig. 12. Human breast tissue mosaic images: (a) setup, (b) linear mosaic of
human breast fat, (c) linear mosaic of human breast cancer, (d) human breast
cancer: spiral mosaic result which makes the loops of the spiral just touch, and
(e) human breast cancer: large-area spiral without overlap.

IV. DISCUSSION

large spiral scan. The main cause is likely to be the positioning
errors of the tip. On the magnified insets of Fig 12(e), morphological constituents of the human breast such as fibrous tissues
and adipocytes are readily visualized. The former is represented
by fine, grey, and linear strands of collagen fibers on a relatively
acellular background, whereas the latter is depicted as darkcolored, polygonal-shaped cells with thin well-defined bright
borders. Clusters of hyperfluorescent dots can be seen in between adipocytes and fibrous tissues.
The performance of the probe bearing was analyzed by calculating the average rotation between consecutive frames of
500 images during a spiral scan acquisition. The rotation was
estimated by taking the radon transform of each pair of images to obtain a sinogram, followed by finding the peak of the
normalized cross-correlation between the two sinograms. The
average rotation was (0.1 ± 0.1)°, confirming that there was no
net rotation above random jitter.

In this paper, a large-area scanning device has been developed for breast endomicroscopy. The mechanical design and
motor control allow the tip of the device to scan a spiral trajectory and maintain a constant tip velocity. The bending range
(−90.97° to 90.05°) was slightly over ±90°. The cause of this
was the overrun of the inner tube. However, this difference was
small, and a larger maximum bending range has adverse effect on the performance of the device. The range for a single
rotation varies from −0.65° to 359.67°. For a spiral scan, the
device rotates continuously, so the scanning performance is determined by the bending and rotating accuracy rather than the
range values. Overall, the scanning device achieved high scanning repeatability with 0.73° for the bending motion and 0.41°
for the rotational motion on average, and high accuracy with
0.25 mm for bending motion and 0.13 mm for rotational motion
at the tip, respectively. The field-of-view of commercial fiber
bundle probes is between 0.24 and 1 mm in diameter. The positioning accuracy should be acceptable for scanning with fiber
bundles for which the field-of-view is over 0.5 mm in diameter.

2950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

For miniprobes with a field-of-view of less than 0.5 mm, there
is a possibility for small gaps to occur between the loops of the
spiral due to positioning inaccuracies. Nevertheless, this still
allows visualization of a large area and should be satisfactory
for diagnosis purpose.
The rotation gear was specially designed and fabricated by
Micro-EDM, while the spur gear part was manufactured by wirecut EDM. These processing methods achieve high precision
for the gears, thus allowing smaller bending hysteresis error
and higher repeatability. The extension and deformation of the
engagement parts were minimized by increasing the thickness of
the rotation gear. The backlash was minimized to an acceptable
level by pushing the rotation gear against the spur gear during
scanning. Furthermore, backlash often occurs when changing
the rotational direction of the gears. Although the hysteresis
of the scanning device is fairly large, it can only affect the
trajectories, which move back and forth in bending motion.
There is only one way bending [see process (a) or (c) in Section
III-A] during spiral scanning, which results in backlash.
The starting position of the scan was not always exactly at
the desired center of the spiral due to a small initial bending
of the tip. Prior to each scan, we adjusted the motors to ensure
a straight condition using a setup tube, and then initialized the
motors. However, as there was a small gap between the setup
tube and scanning tip, there was sometime still a small initial
bend. Additionally, if the scanning tip touched the target tissue
with a large force, the tip could bend slightly from the center by
the reactive force. Both of these effects could have led to a “hole”
in the center of the mosaic. The mosaics suggest that the initial
tip positioning error is larger than the 0.25 mm repeatability
we measured in general (although this may partly be explained
due to deformation of the tissue rather than inaccuracies in the
scanning.) One solution to this problem may be to adopt a more
precise setup tube and to avoid an unnecessarily large contact
force between the tip and the tissue at the beginning of the scan.
The endomicroscopy probe can obtain stable images when the
probe tip contact force is between 0.1 and 0.5 N [32], [33].
The bending and rotating forces, which were 0.9 and 2.1 N,
respectively, were sufficient in order to carry out a spiral scan.
Most breast cancers are detected early due to screening mammography, and hence, the average size of the tumor is generally
small (between 1–2 cm). Provided there is no distant spread,
BCS is generally performed to remove the tumor in its entirety
with a surrounding cuff of normal tissue. The actual size of the
specimen removed is variable and this could range between 4
and 8 cm in larger sized breasts. These correspond to a similar sized breast cavity and we therefore chose a 4-cm diameter
cavity as an arbitrary starting point to test the feasibility of using the device. A smaller sized cavity provides a more realistic
test of the robustness and accuracy of the device. Furthermore,
increments to the radius could be tailored according to clinical
needs and this can be modified accordingly for our prototype
device.
In this study, we have presented detailed results of workspace
and trajectory evaluation using an NDI Aurora EM tracking
system, with a 6-DOF probe. The results indicate that the distal

end can cover a smooth large spiral trajectory in the 3-D space. It
is worth noting that the Aurora sensor itself has certain stiffness.
To generate high-quality images from tissue, we used a Cellvizio UHD Miniprobe which has a minimum bending radius
of the order of 70 mm. With this probe, the bearing structure
prevents rotation, making the mosaicking process simpler and
more accurate. This allowed us to obtain high-quality mosaics
using a simple and fast normalized cross-correlation algorithm,
as we did not need to consider rotations.
To avoid damaging the Cellvizio UHD Miniprobe, we did not
attempt a full hemispherical scan test with this probe. However,
a full-sized scan was demonstrated using a leached imaging
bundle inside a breast phantom, and using an inflatable balloon
to provide a smooth surface to scan over. Further work will
be needed to enhance the resolution of this type of probe by
incorporating a distal objective. A side effect of using this type
of bundle is that it is much less stiff, so the bearing structure is
no longer effective in preventing the fiber from rotating during
rotational scanning. The mosaicking algorithm will therefore
need to check for rotations, as well as translations, between
images.
Nevertheless, these experiments showed that the probe could
maintain tissue contact when moving over a large bending range
of −70° to +70°, covering a total length of 48 mm. The working
distance of the passive linear structure was 3 mm which means
that the scanning tip hemispherical diameter could be varied
by approximately 6 mm. Therefore, a range of differently sized
balloons could be used to suit the size of the cavity. To deal with
larger variation, several removable scanning tips with different
lengths could be customized. The rupture of the balloon should
be possible problem during scanning. However, because the air
pressure is 170 kPa which is a low pressure, the tissues around
the scanning device will not be damaged even in the event of air
leakage. Actually, the air leakage problem has not occurred in
the breast phantom experiment.
In all the experiments conducted, it was possible to control the
trajectory and the velocity of the distal end accurately. A hemispherical scanning area with a radius of 20 mm is considerably
larger than for previously reported endomicroscopy scanning
devices. It took almost 20 s to reach the targeted tangential velocity of 0.4 mm/s; this time can be minimized by controlling
the angular velocity of Motor 2 in the beginning. As shown by
the ex vivo breast cancer tissue experiments, endomicroscopy
image acquisition was feasible at this speed. After the first 20 s,
the actual motor output matches the theoretical value. The spiral trajectory generated from the motor output follows the ideal
spiral path very well, meaning the time delay of 20 s has little
influence on the spiral trajectory. At present, the waiting time
for existing methods of assessing tumor margins such as frozen
section can be as long as 40 min. Intraoperative specimen X-ray
may take as little as 5–10 min but it has a low accuracy. The
ability to obtain information on cavity margins within a minute
of commencement of imaging is certainly well within the acceptable limits of the operation time and highly justified if it is
proven to be an accurate method of ruling out the presence of
residual tumor deposits in the cavity.

ZUO et al.: TOWARD INTRAOPERATIVE BREAST ENDOMICROSCOPY WITH A NOVEL SURFACE-SCANNING DEVICE

In the ex vivo human tissue evaluation, the device was shown
to be able to scan the tissue stably. It is evident that the construction of panoramic scenes through the creation of large-area
tissue mosaics has enabled more morphological features to be
visualized in a single field-of-view while providing the microscopic means of visualizing carcinomatous foci. In practice,
it is often difficult to obtain high-quality interpretable images
consistently due to the presence of tissue deformation and surgeon’s hand tremor even on a uniformly flat tissue surface. The
ergonomic challenges vastly restrict its true clinical potential
which we believe includes provision of real-time in situ oncological information of global cavity margins intraoperatively.
The scanning device has shown strong potential for solving
these ergonomic challenges in BCS.
Deformation of the tissue plays an important role in endomicroscopy and is a significant limiting factor in the generation of
large mosaics. To an extent this problem is unavoidable, as any
contact based imaging method will result in tissue deformation
if the probe is driven across the tissue. Previously, Rosa et al.
[20] have used a cooperative robotic arm to generate a mosaic
with consideration of tissue deformation, suggesting there may
be some scope to preemptively adjust the trajectory of the scan
to account for deformation. This remains a topic for further research. Correction of distortions due to tissue deformation may
also be achieved using a more sophisticated mosaicking algorithm which does not assume rigid transformations [34]. These
algorithms are unlikely to be suitable for real-time image reconstruction [35] but could be used for retrospective analysis.
However, development of such algorithms is not the focus of this
paper. In this study, we attempted to minimize tissue deformation by imaging the tissue through a thin plastic membrane held
in place by the supporting arm. Imaging through the membrane
was possible because the probe has a finite working distance,
and, indeed, image quality through the membrane was comparable to image quality without membrane. This membrane
appeared to help stabilize the tissue to some extent, limiting
deformation. Selection of an optimum material and thickness,
and a comparison of the mosaicking performance compared to
direct probe-on-tissue scanning, will require further studies.
We also showed how, in principle, this membrane could be
replaced by an inflatable balloon for in vivo studies. In future,
this could include an automated balloon shaping mechanism
using pressure control to allow a precise fit to the size of the
cavity. Since a pressurized balloon would tend to smooth out the
walls of the cavity, the scanning device would be better able to
make stable tissue contact even with very irregular cavities. In
the case of using the device as a handheld instrument, maintaining a proper optical contact during the scanning becomes more
challenging. In this case, a tightly fitting balloon might tend to
reduce motion artifacts during the scan, including those due to
breathing or other patient motion, as the device would simply
move with the patient.
Because it has a small number of parts, the proposed scanning
device would be easy to manufacture, assemble, and maintain.
The special design of the spur and rotation gears allows the
scanning device to achieve a large inner diameter (i.e., working
channel) with a small outer diameter. Our design is different

2951

from the other rotational joints mechanism using bevel gears
such as [29] and [30]. In particular, because of the size and
shape restrictions of bevel gears, the mechanisms in [29] and
[30] make it difficult to achieve a small outer diameter with a
large channel.
Studies in [18] aimed to generate a mosaic under 3 mm2
in area without any gaps. Our scanning device is able to scan
both overlapping trajectories in a focused area (under 3 mm2 )
and nonoverlap trajectories in a large hemispherical area (under
20 mm in radius). Depending on the clinical need, it may be
preferable to create a small mosaic focusing on user-specified
points of interest guided by the surgeon’s clinical judgment or
intraoperative specimen radiography. On the other hand, if we
want to rule out the presence of cancer cells on several cavity
walls, a large mosaic will be more useful.
It is worth noting that the overall time to acquire a mosaic is
limited by the frame rate of the imaging system. If the scanner
is to find a place in the clinical workflow, then it is essential
that the time taken to achieve a scan is minimized. Hence, when
large-area coverage is required, a sparse mosaic (i.e., one with
gaps between the arms of the spiral) may be preferable. We have
demonstrated that both large sparse mosaics and small continuous mosaics can be accommodated by our proposed mechanical
design and control system.
It should be noted that the scanning device itself does not provide global positional information. However, by using optical
tracking systems or intraoperative imaging (such as ultrasound),
it could be possible to measure the position of the device. Combined with information from the motors, this would then allow
calculation of the tip position in the 3-D space, and hence would
provide the position of a mosaic. The aim for future trials is a
3-D reconstruction technology that gives both imaging and positional information to the surgeon.
The process of scanning a large surface area will generate
long and continuous mosaics. While it increases the amount
of information visualized for image interpretation, it requires
an automated mechanism that allows abnormal images detected
at multiple locations to be spatially located accurately without
interrupting the scanning process—a task that induces fatigue
and is almost impossible to achieve manually with precision.
Given that the cavity surface is often uneven, multiple adjustments to the direction and contact forces between the probe
tip and the tissue surface are also required to achieve uninterrupted and continuous scanning. Our scanning device is an economical, robust, and intelligent platform to generate accurate
spatio–temporal localization in real time to aid intraoperative
decision making. The suitable combination of inner and outer
tubes with gear-bending mechanism realized accurate scanning
(especially spiral scanning motion) and a larger scanning range.
With regard to the practical application of the scanning device,
the simple mechanical design will make commercial manufacturing straightforward.
V. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a practical scanning device that can cover a large field-of-view in confocal

2952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

endomicroscopy, specifically for use during breast endomicroscopy. This device can scan over a large spherical surface
by bending and rotating the tip with highly repeatable positioning accuracy. We have shown the creation of a mosaic over
a substantial portion of the scanning workspace, demonstrating
the potential to provide a large field-of-view for “optical biopsy.”
In ex vivo human cancer tissue evaluation, the scanning device
enables speedy and efficient large area imaging. We further
showed how the device can be used with an inflatable balloon
to allow scanning over very large arcs. These results demonstrate the potential clinical value of the device to improve the
prospects for intraoperative cavity margin evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Ferlay et al., “Estimates of the cancer incidence and mortality in Europe
in 2006,” Ann. Oncol., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 581–592, 2007.
[2] G. F. Schwartz et al., “Consensus conference on breast conservation,” J.
Amer. Coll Surg., vol. 203, pp. 198–207, 2006.
[3] S. E. Singletary, “Surgical margins in patients with early-stage breast
cancer treated with breast conservation therapy,” Amer. J. Surg. vol. 184,
pp. 383–393, 2002.
[4] R. Jeevan et al., “Reoperation rates after breast conserving surgery for
breast cancer among women in England: Retrospective study of hospital episode statistics,” Brit. Med. J., vol. 345, art. no. e4505, 2012, doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e4505
[5] D. Cao et al., “Separate cavity margin sampling at the time of initial breast
lumpectomy significantly reduces the need for reexcisions,” Amer. J. Surg.
Pathol., vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 1625–1632, 2005.
[6] P. Sharma et al., “Real-time increased detection of neoplastic tissue in Barrett’s esophagus with probe-based confocal laser endomicroscopy: final
results of an international multicenter, prospective, randomized, controlled
trial,” Gastrointest. Endosc., vol. 74, pp. 465–472, 2011.
[7] C. S. Loeser et al., “Confocal endomicroscopic examination of malignant biliary strictures and histologic correlation with lymphatics,” J. Clin.
Gastroenterol., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 246–252, 2011.
[8] R. C. Newton et al., “Imaging parenchymal lung diseases with confocal
endomicroscopy,” Respiratory Med., vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 127–137, 2012.
[9] R. Kiesslich et al., “Confocal laser endoscopy for diagnosing intraepithelial neoplasias and colorectal cancer in vivo,” Gastroenterology, vol. 127,
no. 3, pp. 706–713, 2004.
[10] C. Q. Li et al., “Effects on confocal laser endomicroscopy image quality
by different acriflavine concentrations,” J. Interv. Gastroenterol., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 59–63, 2011.
[11] M. T. Tilli et al., “Real-time imaging and characterization of human
breast tissue by reflectance confocal microscopy,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 12,
no. 5, art. no. 051901, 2007, doi: 10.1117/1.2799187
[12] T. P. Chang et al., “Imaging of breast cancer morphology using probebased confocal laser endomicroscopy: Towards a novel imaging tool for
real-time intra-operative cavity scanning,” Eur. J. Surg. Oncol., vol. 39,
art. no. S80, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2013.07.106
[13] T. P. Chang et al., “Novel classification to facilitate recognition of breast
cancer morphology on confocal endomicroscopy,” Eur. J. Surg. Oncol.,
vol. 40, no. 5, art. no. 631, 2014, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.
2014.02.073
[14] T. Vercauteren et al., “Robust mosaicing with correction of motion distortions and tissue deformations for in vivo fibered microscopy,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 10, pp. 673–692, 2006.
[15] J. Mahé et al., “A Viterbi approach to topology inference for large scale endomicroscopy video mosaicing,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput.Assist. Intervention, 2013, pp. 404–411.

[16] D. P. Noonan et al., “Laser-induced fluorescence and reflected white light
imaging for robot-assisted MIS,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 56,
no. 3, pp. 889–892, Mar. 2009.
[17] B. Rosa et al., “Laparoscopic optical biopsies: In vivo robotized mosaicing
with probe-based confocal endomicroscopy,” presented at the IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot Syst., San Francisco, CA, USA, Sep. 25–30, 2011.
[18] M. S. Erden et al., “Conic-Spiraleur: A miniature distal scanner for confocal microlaparoscope,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. PP19,
no. 6, pp. 1786–1798, Dec. 2013.
[19] P. Giataganas et al., “Cooperative in situ microscopic scanning and simultaneous tissue surface reconstruction using a compliant robotic manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013, pp. 5378–5383.
[20] B. Rosa et al., “Building large mosaics of confocal endomicroscopic
images using visual servoing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 4,
pp. 1041–1049, Nov. 2012.
[21] S. Zuo et al., “Development of a large area scanner for intraoperative
breast endomicroscopy,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2014,
pp. 3524–3530.
[22] P. Dario et al., “A novel mechatronic tool for computer-assisted
arthroscopy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 15–28, Mar. 2000.
[23] S. Zuo et al., “Variable stiffness outer sheath with “Dragon skin” structure
and negative pneumatic shape-locking,” Int. J. Comput. Assisted Radiol.
Surg., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[24] J. Shang et al., “An articulated universal joint based flexible access robot
for minimally invasive surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2011, pp. 1147–1152.
[25] J. Peirs et al., “A miniature manipulator for integration in a self-propelling
endoscope,” Sens. Actuators A, vol. 92, pp. 343–349, 2001.
[26] H. Yamashita et al., “Multi-slider linkage mechanism for endoscopic forceps manipulator,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2003,
pp. 2577–2582.
[27] A. T. Tung et al., “Laser-machined shape memory alloy actuators for active
catheters,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 439–446,
Aug. 2007.
[28] J. S. Kim et al., “Toward a solution to the snapping problem in a concentrictube continuum robot: Grooved tubes with anisotropy,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., 2014, pp. 5871–5876.
[29] M. Piccigallo et al., “Design of a novel bimanual robotic system for singleport laparoscopy,” Mechatronics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 871–878, 2010.
[30] M. Niccolini et al., “Real-time control architecture of a novel single-port
laparoscopy bimanual robot (SPRINT),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., 2012, pp. 3395–3400.
[31] A. Safaai-Jazi and J. C. Cardoso, “Radiation characteristics of a spherical helical antenna,” Inst. Elect. Eng. Proc. Microw. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 143, pp. 7–12, 1996.
[32] W. Latt et al., “A hand-held instrument to maintain steady tissue contact
during probe-based confocal laser endomicroscopy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 2694–2703, Jul. 2011.
[33] R. C. Newton et al., “Probe tip contact force and bowel distension affect crypt morphology during confocal endomicroscopy,” Gut, vol. 60,
pp. A12–A13, 2011.
[34] T. Vercauteren et al., “Robust mosaicing with correction of motion distortions and tissue deformations for in vivo fibered microscopy,” Med. Image
Anal., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 673–692, 2006.
[35] T. Vercauteren et al., “Real time autonomous video image registration
for endomicroscopy: Fighting the compromises,” in Proc. Biomed. Opt.,
2008, art. no. 68610 C, doi: 10.1117/12.763089

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

