300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Locomotion Analysis of an Inchworm-Like Capsule
Robot in the Intestinal Tract
Jinyang Gao∗ and Guozheng Yan

Abstract—Goal: Inchworm-like locomotion is one of the most
common and effective approaches for exploring the intestinal tract.
Here, we present a locomotion analysis for a typical inchworm-like
capsule robot, which is composed of a locomotion unit and some
functional modules that are installed at both ends. The locomotion unit consists of two clampers at both ends and an extensor at
midsection, and the functional modules include the camera, microtools for diagnosis or therapy, etc. Methods: By taking into account
the intestinal deformation induced by the robot’s action in every
continuous locomotion step, a locomotion model correlating the
locomotion efficiency with the design parameters (i.e., the periodic stroke, the lengths of the clampers, extensor, and functional
modules) was built. Results: Ex vivo experiments were conducted to
validate the proposed model, and the experimental results basically
agreed to the theoretical ones predicted by the model. Conclusion:
The proposed locomotion model is effective in guiding the selection
of the design parameters for improving the locomotion efficiency.
Significance: The inchworm-like capsule robot with higher locomotion efficiency will enable a more efficient diagnosis and therapy
process for the intestinal tract.
Index Terms—Inchworm-like capsule robot, intestinal deformation, locomotion analysis, locomotion efficiency.

I. INTRODUCTION
APSULE endoscope provides an ideal noninvasive diagnosis solution to gastrointestinal diseases. However,
currently available clinical products, e.g., PillCam, MiroCam,
Olympus, etc., are passively propelled by intestinal peristalsis,
which results in low diagnostic specificity, so they are mostly
used only as auxiliary inspecting devices [1]. Capsule robot (CR)
with the capability of active locomotion integrates specific diagnostic or therapeutic functionality and has been considered
as a promising device to replace the conventional endoscopy
[2]–[4].
Current CRs could be roughly classified into two types, depending on their target organs. Magnetically driven CRs focus on gastric endoscopy because a 3-D motion is required,
and the friction between the moving CRs and a stomach wall
could be minimized to a negligible level by drinking a lot of
water [5], [6]. On the other hand, CRs that integrate onboard

C

Manuscript received January 28, 2015; accepted July 9, 2015. Date of publication July 14, 2015; date of current version January 16, 2016. This work was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Contract
31170968 and by the Shanghai Scientific Project under Contract 14Z111220025.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ J. Gao is with the Department of Instrument Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: gjy.1001@
163.com).
G. Yan is with the Shanghai Jiaotong University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2456103

locomotion units target intestinal endoscopy because a strong
propulsive force is needed to overcome friction in the collapsed
intestines.
A lot of CRs with onboard locomotion units have emerged
during the past decades [7]–[18]. The legged CRs [7], [8] normally adopt two motors to actuate two sets of superelastic legs
to enable two-way locomotion, and the two motors need to be
powered simultaneously for a period of time in a full gait cycle,
which necessitates a high peak power output for the onboard
power source. The inductive-coupling-based wireless power receiver (WPR) could output continuous electric power and has
been proven to be an effective and promising onboard power
source [9], while the high peak power requirement of the legged
CRs will increase difficulty in its design and implementation.
The paddle-type CR [10], which has multiple legs that are actuated by a linear actuator and two mobile cylinders, is a one-way
device, in spite of its high velocity of 17 cm/min in the colon. The
tank-like CRs [11], [12], actuated by one motor and equipped
with symmetrical caterpillars around their bodies, have an advantage of minimizing tissue damage, while their abilities in
resisting intestinal peristalsis for a stable holding still need further validation. The spiral CR [13] adopts a motor to rotate
a spiral-shaped body to generate a propulsion force, and the
vibratory-based CR [9] utilizes a centripetal force generated by
a vibratory motor to counteract external frictional force. However, both these two CRs cannot resist intestinal peristalsis. The
inchworm-like CRs [14]–[18], which simulate locomotion by
alternately clamping intestinal wall with clampers and extending bodies with middle extensors, are very suitable for exploring
the intestinal tract because they could travel in both directions,
and the clampers also could hold the devices at specific intestinal
areas stably and enhance visualization by dilating collapsed or
folded intestinal tissue. Existing inchworm-like CRs are mainly
for colonoscopy and include the tether devices [14], [15] and the
tetherless ones [16]–[18]. The former normally refer to the semiautonomous devices that need external air source; hence, have
a limitation of short travel distance in the intestinal tract due
to the friction between the tether and the intestinal wall. The
latter, on the other hand, normally integrate a WPR to power
three motors in turn. Although more space is occupied by the
three motors compared to the legged CRs that are functionally
comparable with them, the in-turn powering manner simplifies
control and lowers peak power requirement for the WPR.
We hope that the application of the tetherless inchworm-like
CRs could be extended to the small intestine; thus, in addition to
essential reduction in size, a high locomotion efficiency is also
expected for the reason that a physician’s presence is required
throughout the entire procedure to control the locomotion of the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GAO AND YAN: LOCOMOTION ANALYSIS OF AN INCHWORM-LIKE CR IN THE INTESTINAL TRACT

CR and to activate the diagnostic or therapeutic functionality
opportunely. In addition, the tissue sampled in the small intestine
for the diagnosis of pathologies must be analyzed within 1–2 h
[4]. Therefore, a locomotion analysis aiming at improving the
locomotion efficiency is necessary.
Several studies to date have presented locomotion analysis for
the inchworm-like CRs. Dario et al. first correlated the biomechanical model of colon tissue with the robot’s locomotion by
analyzing the elongating and retracting phases in an independent manner [14], [19]. Kwon et al. modeled a cumulative stroke
loss and considered the difference between the kinetic and static
friction [20]. A series of significant studies have been done by
Zarrouk et al. They derived the locomotion efficiency as a function of the friction coefficients, external forces, and local or
structural tangential compliance [20]–[23]. However, the locomotion unit was the only analysis object in these studies, i.e.,
two clampers at both ends and an extensor at midsection. In
fact, some functional modules that are installed at both ends
of the locomotion unit, e.g., the camera, printed circuit boards
(PCBs) for wireless communication and control, microtools for
bleeding treatment [24] or tissue sampling [25], etc., also exert
influence on locomotion.
Differently from the locomotion analysis presented in the literature, the CR being analyzed in our study is composed of
not only the locomotion unit but also the functional modules installed at its both ends. We select the periodic stroke, the lengths
of the clampers, extensor, and functional modules as design parameters, and correlate which with the locomotion efficiency
by taking into account the intestinal deformation caused by the
moving CR in every continuous locomotion step. Thus, our
analysis will inform us how to select these design parameters,
especially the lengths of the functional modules, to improve the
locomotion efficiency. In addition, the moving CR will deform
the intestinal tissue in contact with and adjacent to it, this phenomenon is considered in our analysis and is served as the basis
for creating our analysis.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates on
the building of the locomotion model, Section III presents the
analysis results obtained from the proposed model and gives the
experimental validation, and Section IV concludes the paper.
II. LOCOMOTION MODEL
A. General Description of a Typical Inchworm-Like CR
The CAD design of a typical inchworm-like CR with inspection function is shown in Fig. 1, whose retracted length is contributed by the front and rear clampers, extensor, and functional
modules including the front segment (i.e., the camera module)
and the rear segment (i.e., the PCBs for wireless communication
and control). The front and rear clampers are identical and can
anchor the CR at specific intestinal areas by expanding their
legs against the intestinal wall. The extensor includes three blue
brush DC motors and corresponding green planetary gear reducers, which are used to drive the front and rear clampers, and the
black lead screw and nut, respectively. The DC motors used to
drive the front clamper is connected to the nut, by which axial
elongation and retraction is achieved. In addition, the hollow

301

Fig. 1. CAD design showing of a typical inchworm-like CR with inspection
function.
TABLE I
DEFINITIONS OF DESIGN PARAMETERS AND VARIABLES USED IN ANALYSIS
Symbol

Lf , Lr , Lf c ,
Lr c , Lm , LT

Meaning
Design Parameters
Lengths of the front segment, rear segment, front clamper, rear
clamper, middle extensor, and the periodic stroke, respectively. (see
Fig. 1.)
Variables

τ
λ, ε, χ, z

N
F
f
μe
μr

Axial Lagrangian stress
Axial deformation ratio, which is defined as the ratio between the
axial lengths of the deformed and undeformed intestinal tissue.
These four symbols denote the stretched, compressed (or folded),
uncertain, and undeformed ratios, respectively.
Normal force
Axial force generated by the deformed intestinal tissue
Coulomb friction force
Coulomb friction coefficient related to elongation
Coulomb friction coefficient related to retraction

cylinder space around the extensor has been exploited to design
a WPR.
B. Symbol Definition
The design parameters and the main variables used in the locomotion analysis are defined in Table I. Note that in the analysis
below and in Fig. 2, the superscripts of the axial deformation
ratios indicate the locomotion steps in which the deformation
ratios form.
C. Assumptions
A few assumptions are made to simplify the locomotion analysis, which are as follows
1) The intestinal deformation caused by the moving CR has
finite length. This assumption is based on a phenomenon
that the moving CR will deform the intestinal tissue in
contact with and adjacent to it. We assume that the deformed adjacent tissue has finite length, and, therefore,
this assumption is made.
2) Axial frictional resistance that the CR encounters when
the extensor elongates or retracts could be depicted by the
Coulomb friction model. This is because, although the
frictional resistance in the intestinal tract is also related
to environment resistance and viscous friction [26], the
Coulomb friction still serves as a main contribution to the
total frictional resistance [27], [28].

302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

4) The intestinal tissue is soft enough so that no resisting
force generates when it is compressed axially. Thus, only
the axial force generated by the stretched intestinal tissue
exerts influence on the locomotion.
5) Each intestinal deformation exerted by the CR keeps a
short duration so that the stress relaxation is insignificant.
Therefore, a hyperelastic model is sufficient to describe
the stress–strain relation of the intestinal tissue.
6) The intestinal tract is in the axial direction. This assumption makes an approximation for the intestinal tract, which
has many slopes in its natural state. We make this assumption because the axial analysis is sufficient to observe the
influence of the design parameters on the locomotion.
D. Locomotion Analysis
Locomotion efficiency is employed to characterize the locomotion performance of the inchworm-like CR, which is defined
as η = Lnet /LT , where Lnet , specifically in our analysis, is
defined as the effective displacement of the rear-most point of
the CR relative to the intestinal wall in a cycle, and LT is the
periodic stroke. Fig. 2 shows the detailed deformation states of
the intestinal tissue corresponding to different segments of the
CR in every locomotion step in the first cycle, which is very
useful for understanding the analysis below. Note that in Fig. 2,
Pr m and Pf represent the rear-most and front-most points of
the CR, respectively; the front segment, front clamper, middle
extensor, rear clamper, and rear segment are simplified to five
rounded rectangles with lengths of Lf , Lf c , Lm , Lr c , and Lr ,
respectively.
1) First Cycle: Initial State: The CR is introduced into the
intestinal tract in a fully retracting state, i.e., the front and rear
clampers retract their legs and the extensor retracts the length
of the CR to a minimum.
Step (a1): The rear clamper anchors. No intestinal deformation generates.
Step (b1): The extensor elongates, which stretches the tissue
between the rear clamper and the front segment. From assumption 1, that intestinal deformation has finite length, the adjacent
tissue on both sides of the CR will be compressed or folded.
The formed stretched ratio λb1 and compressed ratio εb1 could
be expressed as, respectively,

Fig. 2. Detailed deformation states of the intestinal tissue corresponding to
different segments of the inchworm-like CR in every step in the first cycle.
Intestinal tissue is denoted with a rectangular strip, and its deformation states
are distinguished by gray levels and filled patterns of the rectangular strips. The
anchoring is indicated with the protrudent straight lines of the front and rear
clampers. The slipping of the intestinal tissue relative to the CR is indicated
with a line having double arrows on one end, and the direction of the arrow
indicates the slipping direction.

3) Anchoring force is large enough so that the expanded
clamper will not slip relative to the intestinal wall. Axial
intestinal deformation induced by anchoring is not considered because it is usually small and will disappear when
anchoring is cancelled.

Lb1
ds

b1
λb1 = Lb1
ds /Lu s

(1)

b1
εb1 = Lb1
d /Lu

(2)

(= Lm + LT + Lf c + Lf ) is the length of the
where
stretched tissue, Lb1
u s is the undeformed length of the stretched
tissue and it is larger than the summation of Lf , Lf c , and Lm
because the front-most point Pf will slip forward relative to the
intestinal wall (or the intestinal wall will slip backward relative
to the point Pf ) during the elongation, Lb1
d is the length of the
adjacent tissue in the compressed state, Lb1
u is the undeformed
length of the adjacent tissue in the compressed state. From assumption 3, that anchoring force is large enough and axial intestinal deformation induced by anchoring is not considered,
tissue Lr c holds the undeformed state, and from assumption
4, that no resisting force generates when the intestinal tissue

GAO AND YAN: LOCOMOTION ANALYSIS OF AN INCHWORM-LIKE CR IN THE INTESTINAL TRACT

is compressed, the rear adjacent tissue in the compressed state
will not affect the deformation of tissue Lr , so tissue Lr will
holds the undeformed state as in step (a1). Obviously, within the
finite length of intestinal deformation, the length increasing to
the stretched tissue is equal to the length decreasing to the compressed tissue, and when we further assume that the deformation
of the adjacent tissue on both sides of the CR is symmetric, we
have
b1
b1
b1
Lb1
ds − Lu s = 2(Lu − Ld ).

(3)

We also note that the CR retreats a bit from step (a1) to (b1),
which is caused by the backward frictional resistance exerted by
the intestinal tract when the extensor elongates. This retreating
also accounts for the forming of the compressed tissue that is
adjacent to rear end of the CR.
The stretched ratio λb1 could be obtained from the axial equilibrium analysis to the stretched tissue having a length of Lb1
ds ,
i.e., the moving front segment and front clamper exert a forward
friction f b1 on the stretched tissue, and this friction is balanced
by the axial force F b1 generated by the stretched tissue itself
F b1 = f b1

(4a)

F b1 = Aτ (λb1 )

(4b)

f b1 = μe N b1

(4c)

where A is the cross-sectional area of the intestinal tract, τ is the
Lagrangian stress and is directly related to the stretched ratio
λb1 of the stretched tissue, μe is the Coulomb friction coefficient
related to the extensor’s elongation, and N b1 is the normal force
between the intestinal wall and the moving front segment and
front clamper.
Step (c1): The front clamper anchors and lifts the tissue in
contact with the front segment. Thus, normal force N c1 between
the intestinal wall and the front segment is almost equal to zero
and so does the friction force f c1
N c1 → 0
(f

c1

→ 0)  F

(5a)
c1

b1

=F .

(5b)

Then, the tissue Lf in the stretched state will drag the front
adjacent tissue Lb1
d in the compressed state (as the two-way
dotted arrow indicates), which leads to an uncertain ratio χc1
b1
b1
b1
χc1 = (Lf + Lb1
d )/(Lf /λ + Ld /ε ).

(6)

Here, χc1 implies two deformation cases but they do not affect
the subsequent analysis.
Step (d1): The rear clamper retracts, tissue Lm and LT in the
stretched state will drag tissue Lr and Lr c in the undeformed
state, which results in a weaker stretched ratio λd1 . However,
λd1 does not affect the subsequent analysis.
Step (e1): The extensor retracts. This step could be equivalently divided into two stages.
Stage 1: The rear adjacent tissue Lb1
d in the compressed state,
and
tissue Lf in the uncertain
and the front adjacent tissue Lb1
d
state, all restore the undeformed state. In this stage, the rearmost point Pr m does not slip relative to the intestinal wall; thus,

303

brings the first stroke loss
b1
b1
b1
c1
Lcycle1
loss1 = Ld (1/ε − 1) + (Ld + Lf )(1/χ − 1).

(7)

When (6) substitutes (7), and make a simplification, the first
stroke loss could be rewritten as
b1
b1
b1
Lcycle1
loss1 = 2Lu (1 − ε ) + Lf (1/λ − 1).

(8)

Stage 2: The extensor further retracts until the rear adjacent
tissue is stretched to the critical limit, after which the rearmost point Pr m begins to slip forward relative to the intestinal
wall, which means an effective displacement. The normal force
between the front segment and the intestinal wall is negligibly
small because the front clamper could lift the tissue in contact
with the front segment. Therefore, here, we assume that the
front adjacent tissue includes the tissue that is in contact with
the front segment, and it will achieve the same stretched state
as the rear adjacent tissue. We use Le1
d to denote the length of
the adjacent tissue in the stretched state, and whose undeformed
length is denoted with Le1
u , then stroke loss in this stage could
be expressed as
e1
e1
e1 e1
Lcycle1
− 1)
loss2 = 2(Ld − Lu ) = 2Lu (λ

(9)

e1
where λe1 (= Le1
d /Lu ) is the stretched ratio of the adjacent tissue. It could be obtained from axial equilibrium analysis to the
rear adjacent tissue, i.e., the moving rear segment, rear clamper,
and extensor exert a forward friction f e1 on the rear adjacent
tissue, and this friction is balanced by the axial force F e1 generated by the rear adjacent tissue itself

F e1 = f e1
F

e1

(10a)
e1

= Aτ (λ )

f e1 = μr N e1

(10b)
(10c)

where A is the cross-sectional area of the intestinal tract, τ is
the Lagrangian stress, μr is the Coulomb friction coefficient
related to the extensor’s retraction, and N e1 is the normal force
between the intestinal wall and the moving rear segment, rear
clamper, and extensor.
From assumption 1, that the intestinal deformation has finite
length, the length increasing to the adjacent tissue and tissue
Lf c in the stretched state is equal to the length decreasing to
the tissue Lr , Lr c , and Lm in the compressed state, so the
compressed ratio εe1 could be calculated as
εe1 = (Lr + Lr c + Lm )/[Lr + Lr c + Lm
e1
b1
+ 2Le1
d (1 − 1/λ ) + Lf c (1 − 1/λ )].

(11)

Step (f1): Rear clamper anchors and lifts the tissue in contact
with the rear segment. Thus, normal force N f 1 between the
intestinal wall and the rear segment is almost equal to zero and
so does the friction forcef f 1 . Similar to the analysis in step
(c1), the rear adjacent tissue Le1
d in the stretched state will drag
the tissue Lr in a compressed state, during which the rear-most
point Pr m will slip forward relative to the intestinal wall, thus
brings a stroke gain. This dragging will lead to an uncertain ratio
χf 1 (as the two-way dotted arrow indicates)
e1
e1
χf 1 = (Le1
+ Lr /εe1 ).
d + Lr )/(Ld /λ

(12)

304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 3. Two possible deformations of the rear adjacent tissue L ed 1 and tissue
L r may form in step (f1).

Here, χf 1 implies two deformation cases as Fig. 3 shows.
e1
e1
− 1), the rear adCase 1: When Le1
d (1 − 1/λ ) > Lr (1/ε
e1
jacent tissue Ld and tissue Lr will achieve a uniform stretched
state with a stretched ratio λf 1 , which is equal to χf 1 . The stroke
gain in this case could be expressed as
e1
− 1/λf 1 ).
Lcycle1
gain−cs1 = Lr (1/ε

(13)

e1
e1
Case 2: When Le1
− 1), the rear add (1 − 1/λ ) < Lr (1/ε
e1
jacent tissue Ld achieves the undeformed state, and the tissue
Lr achieves a weaker compressed state with a compressed ratio
εf 1
e1
εf 1 = Lr /[Lr /εe1 − Le1
d (1 − 1/λ )].

(14)

Stroke gain in this case is
e1
e1
e1 e1
Lcycle1
− 1).
gain−cs2 = Ld (1 − 1/λ ) = Lu (λ

So the stroke gain in step (f1) could be expressed as
 cycle1
Lgain−cs1 , for case 1
cycle1
Lgain =
.
Lcycle1
gain−cs2 , for case 2

(15)

Fig. 4. Detailed deformation states of the intestinal tissue corresponding to
different segments of the inchworm-like CR in step (b2). Two deformation cases
in this step correspond to two possible initial deformations of tissue L r that have
been formed in step (f1).

Lr , computation for the elongation related stroke loss could be
classified into two cases (as shown in Fig. 4):
e1
e1
− 1), tissue Lr
Case 1: When Le1
d (1 − 1/λ ) > Lr (1/ε
f1
has an initial stretched ratio of λ . It will achieve the undeformed state by dragging the rear adjacent tissue when the
extensor elongates, during which, the rear-most point Pr m will
slip backward relative to the intestinal wall, which generates an
extra stroke loss
f1
Lextra
loss = Lr (1 − 1/λ ).

(16)

Locomotion analysis for the first cycle has now been conducted. Equation (8) indicates that the stroke loss in Stage 1
of step (e1) is related to the extensor’s elongation in step (b1),
and (9) indicates that the stroke loss in Stage 2 of step (e1) is
related to the extensor’s retraction in step (e1). This is consistent
with the stroke loss analysis in the literature [14], [21]. However, because our analysis objective also includes the front and
rear segments, an extra stroke gain happens in step (f1). The
locomotion efficiency in the first cycle could be calculated as
/LT
η cycle1 = Lcycle1
net

(17a)

cycle1
cycle1
= LT − Lcycle1
Lcycle1
net
loss1 − Lloss2 + Lgain

(17b)

is the effective displacement in the first cycle.
where Lcycle1
net
2) Second Cycle: Follow step (f1) in the first cycle, the CR
retracts its front clamper in step (a2), i.e., the first step of the
second cycle, in which the pose of the CR is identical to that
in step (a1). The locomotion analysis for the second cycle is
similar to the first one. Here, we only focus on the steps related
to stroke loss and gain, i.e., steps (b2), (e2), and (f2).
Step (b2): Differently from step (b1) that the initial states
of tissue Lr c and tissue Lr are both undeformed; in step (b2),
tissue Lr c has an initial compressed deformation formed in
step (e1) [see Fig. 2(e1)] and tissue Lr has two possible initial
deformations (stretched or compressed) formed in step (f1) (see
Fig. 3). Corresponding to the two possible deformations of tissue

(18)

Tissue Lr c is in the compressed state with a compressed ratio
of εe1 . Thus, the compressed ratio of the adjacent tissue could
be expressed as
b2
b2
εb2
cs1 = Ld−cs1 /Lu

= 1−

b2
e1
− 1)
Lb2
ds (1 − 1/λ ) − Lr c (1/ε
2Lb2
u

(19)

where Lb2
d−cs1 is the length of the adjacent tissue in the compressed state, Lb2
u is the undeformed length of the adjacent tissue
b2
and it is assumed to be equal to Lb1
u , Lds (= Lf + Lf c + LT +
Lm ) is the length of the stretched tissue, and λb2 is the stretched
ratio of the stretched tissue and is equal to λb1 .
Refer to (8), the stroke loss in this case is
extra
b2
b2
b2
Lcycle2
loss1−cs1 = Lloss + 2Lu (1 − εcs1 ) + Lf (1/λ − 1).
(20)
e1
e1
(1
−
1/λ
)
<
L
(1/ε
−
1),
tissue
Lr
Case 2: When Le1
r
d
has an initial compressed ratio of εf 1 , and tissue Lr c has an
initial compressed ratio of εe1 . When the extensor elongates,
they both hold the initial deformations. Thus, the compressed
ratio of the adjacent tissue could be expressed as

εbc 2s 2 = Lbd2−c s 2 /Lbu2
= 1−

Lbd2s (1 − 1/λb 2 ) − Lr c (1/εe 1 − 1) − Lr (1/εf 1 − 1)
2Lbu2
(21)

GAO AND YAN: LOCOMOTION ANALYSIS OF AN INCHWORM-LIKE CR IN THE INTESTINAL TRACT

305

Normal force Ni could be calculated as
Ni = Niunit Lcontact

Fig. 5. (a) Normal force between the intestinal tract and the CR is generated
by the gravity of the intestinal tract G i , the gravity of the CR G r , and the
compression from the abdominal fat C . (b) Computation of the normal force
N r based on moment equilibrium.

where Lb2
d−cs2 is the length of the adjacent tissue in the comb2
b2
have been defined in Case 1.
pressed state, Lb2
u , Lds , and λ
The rear-most point Pr m remains static relative to the intestinal
wall. Refer to (8), the stroke loss in this case is
b2
b2
b2
Lcycle2
loss1−cs2 = 2Lu (1 − εcs2 ) + Lf (1/λ − 1).

So the stroke loss in step (b2) could be expressed as
⎧ cycle2
⎨ Lloss1−cs1 , for case 1
Lcycle2
=
.
loss1
⎩ cycle2
Lloss1−cs2 , for case 2

(22)

(23)

Step (e2) and (f2): The deformation states of the tissue in
contact with and adjacent to the CR are identical to those in the
first cycle. Thus, the stroke loss and gain related to these two
steps are also identical to those in the first cycle
cycle1
cycle2
cycle1
Lcycle2
loss2 = Lloss2 , Lgain = Lgain .

(24)

Then, the locomotion efficiency for the second cycle is
η

cycle2

Lcycle2
net

=

Lcycle2
/LT
net

= LT −

Lcycle2
loss1

−

Lcycle2
loss2

+

Lcycle2
gain

(25b)

is the effective displacement in the second cycle.
where Lcycle2
net
In fact, the deformation states of the intestinal tissue in contact
with and adjacent to the CR in an arbitrary cycle (the first
cycle excepted) are identical to those in the second cycle, so the
locomotion efficiency for the ith cycle is
⎧
⎨ η cycle1 ,
for i = 1
i
η =
.
(26)
⎩ η cycle2 , for i = 2, 3, 4, . . .
III. ANALYSIS AND VALIDATION OF THE LOCOMOTION MODEL
A. Model Parameters Setting
1) Computation of Normal Force: As shown in Fig. 5(a), the
diameter of the CR is smaller than that of the intestinal tract, so
the total normal force N is contributed by the normal forces Ni ,
Nr , and Nc , which are generated by the gravity of the intestinal
tract Gi , the gravity of the CR Gr , and the compression from
the abdominal fat C, respectively,
N = Ni + N r + N c .

where Niunit (= ρi Ag, where ρi ≈ 103 kg/m3 is the density of
the intestinal tissue, A is the cross-sectional area of the intestinal tract, and g is the gravitational acceleration) is the normal
force per unit length generated by the gravity of the intestinal
tract and is smaller than 1 × 10−3 N/mm when the diameter
of the small intestine is small than 28.3 mm [29]. Lcontact is
the contact length between the moving parts of the CR and the
intestinal tract. When the extensor elongates [see Fig. 2(b1)],
the moving parts are the front segment and front clamper,
so Lcontact = Lf + Lf c ; and when the extensor retracts [see
Fig. 2(e1)], Lcontact = Lr + Lr c + Lm − Llift , where Llift is
the length of the intestinal tissue lifted by the front clamper and
its value is about 5.5 mm [30].
Normal force Nr could be derived from moment equilibrium
analysis. As shown in Fig. 5(b), when the extensor elongates, the
point Pr c of the rear clamper can be seen as a fulcrum. Assume
that the mass distribution of the CR is uniform along with its
length direction, Nr can be derived as
Nr =

Gr (Lm + LT + Lf c + Lf − Lr − Lr c )
2(Lm + LT + Lf c + Lf )

(27)

(29)

where Gr (= Gr unit × Ltot , where Gr unit is the gravity of the
CR per unit length and it is equal to 8.82 × 10−3 N/mm for the
employed CR prototype presented latter, and Ltot is the total
retracted length of the CR) is the gravity of the CR. When the
extensor retracts, Nr could be derived similarly.
Normal force Nc is also proportional to the contact length
between the moving parts of the CR and the intestinal tract
Nc = Ncunit Lcontact

(25a)

(28)

(30)

where Ncunit is the normal force per unit length generated by the
compression of the abdominal fat. It is in an order of magnitude
of 10 × 10−3 N/mm in the literature [31], [32].
Note that the computation of Niunit neglects the difference
between the top and bottom intestinal tissue [see Fig. 5(a)], and
the computed Niunit is the upper limit of the actual one. This
computation, however, is advisable because Niunit is about onetenth of Niunit , hence its influence on the total normal force is
very small.
2) Intestinal Parameters: The intestinal samples employed
for experimental validation have roughly 20-mm inner diameter
and 22-mm outer diameter, with which the normal force per unit
length generated by the gravity of the intestinal tract could be
computed out as Niunit = 0.65 × 10−3 N/mm. These intestinal
samples were excised from a pig weighing about 125 kg, and
were stored in a refrigerated physiological saline to preserve
their biomechanical properties before the testing. To avoid the
effects of the tissue degradation over time in the air, the employed intestinal sample will be replaced with a new one every
20 min in the testing.
The Coulomb friction coefficients when the extensor elongates and retracts were measured as μe = 0.72 and μr = 0.38,
respectively. μe is larger than μr because when the extensor

306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Measuring principle of the Coulomb friction coefficients μ e and μ r .
μ e is related to the extensor’s elongation and μ r is related to the retraction. (a)
Measuring μ e . (b) Measuring μ r .

elongates, the moving front segment will suffer an extra environment resistance exerted by the collapsed tissue in front of it [26].
Fig. 6 shows the measuring principle; a force gauge installed at
a linear guide was used to drag the cylindrical dummy that had
been placed in the intestinal tract, then by dividing the measured
dragging force by the normal force estimated with (27)–(30),
the Coulomb friction coefficient was obtained. Note that when
measuring μr , a clamper dummy is needed to be placed about
15 mm in front of the cylindrical dummy to cancel the environment resistance. Detailed descriptions about the cylindrical and
clamper dummies, and the experimental platform could refer to
our recent study [33].
3) Stress–Strain Constitutive Model: The hyperelastic model
and the corresponding fitted mechanical parameters in [34] are
selected to describe the stress–strain constitutive relationship
of the intestinal tissue. Note that the second Piola–Kirchhoff
stress in [34] needs to multiply a stretched ratio to obtain the
Lagrangian stress in the present analysis, with the assumption
that the shear stress is negligibly small.
4) Length Selection of the Adjacent Tissue: Our analysis assumes that the adjacent tissue deformed by the moving CR has
finite length, which is denoted with Lb1
u when the extensor elongates [step (b1)] and is denoted with Le1
u when the extensor
retracts [step (e1)]. Based on the above locomotion analysis, a
e1
calculation concerning the selection of Lb1
u and Lu has been
conducted in advance, and we find that the locomotion effie1
ciency is unrelated to Lb1
u and inversely proportional to Lu .
b1
e1
Therefore, Lu could be casually selected, while Lu must be
carefully selected. As (9) indicates, Le1
u is proportional to the
retraction related stroke loss, which is seriously affected by the
degree of freedom of the intestinal tract under the influence
of the external environment (e.g., the linkage of the mesentery
and the compression from the abdominal fat). Commonly, a
smaller Le1
u should be selected when the intestinal tract is seriously restricted, while a larger Le1
u should be selected when it
is relatively free.
B. Experimental Setup
1) Inchworm-Like Prototype: Fig. 7(a) presents an inchw
orm-like prototype, which has a 14-mm diameter and a
40-mm retracted length, with an inspection function. Each segment of this prototype is identical to those defined in Fig. 1.
Compared to the tetherless inchworm-like CRs presented in the
literature [16]–[18], the presented prototype has three improvements. First, its size has been reduced as much as possible to
fit in the small intestine, which has a smaller lumen diameter

Fig. 7. (a) Fabricated prototype with inspection function. (b) Locomotion unit
and the hollow copper cylinders for simulating the functional modules installed
at both ends of the locomotion unit.

and more physiologic curves compared to the colon. Second,
the clampers feature a compact axial length of 2.75 mm, a large
expanding diameter ranging from 14 to 31 mm, and a low risk
of tissue becoming trapped in the mechanism due to the closed
hinges formed by each pair of arc-shaped legs. Third, the WPR
is hollow cylinder like and could improve the space utilization
of the locomotion unit. Despite these improvements, further size
reduction is necessary to facilitate its oral introduction and enhance its ability to approach physiologic curves. In addition, the
upper left shows two white shells made of ABS plastic, which
are used to seal the copper shield shell housing the PCBs and
the middle extensor.
To observe the influence of the design parameters on the
locomotion efficiency, especially the lengths of the functional
modules, the locomotion unit with a tail power wire and several hollow copper cylinders for simulating the functional modules are employed in the testing as shown in Fig. 7(b). The
locomotion unit has a 24.9-mm retracted length and its design parameters are Lf c = Lr c = 2.75 mm, LT = 14.5 mm,
Lm = 19.4 mm The lengths of the copper cylinders are 3, 6,
9, 12, and 15 mm, respectively.
2) Displacement Measurement Platform: The effective displacement of the CR in every cycle is obtained by measuring the
displacement of the power wire of the CR as shown in Fig. 8.
A triangular label is fixed on the power wire, and the power
wire is placed in a straight groove machined on the surface of a
white plastic plate. The depth and width of the groove are both

GAO AND YAN: LOCOMOTION ANALYSIS OF AN INCHWORM-LIKE CR IN THE INTESTINAL TRACT

307

Fig. 8. Experimental setups for measuring the effective displacement of the
CR in every cycle.

Fig. 9. Experimental and theoretical effective displacements with number of
cycles when the periodic stroke is 14.5, 10, and 6 mm, respectively.

a bit larger than the diameter of the power wire, thus ensuring
the power wire moves in a straight line. Also, the power wire
is a bit rigid, so the effective displacement when the CR moves
backward can also be measured. One end of the intestinal tract
that introduces the CR is dilated with a circular tube to avoid
excessive friction. The intestinal tract is placed between two
water filled bags. The upper one is used to simulate the compression from the abdominal fat, while the lower one offers a
relatively free support to the intestinal tract, thus avoiding an
excessive restriction from a stiff support plate. The upper bag
weighs about 200 g and covers about 200-mm-long parts of the
intestinal tract; thus the normal force per unit length generated
by the compression from the abdominal fat could be estimated
as Ncunit =10 × 10−3 N/mm. The length of the adjacent tissue
when the extensor retracts is selected as Le1
u = 32 mm, a value
that has been verified suitable to reflect the degree of freedom
of the intestinal tract between the two bags by extensive comparisons between the measured effective displacements and the
predicted ones in advance.

Fig. 10. Enlarged view of the theoretical effective displacements in the first
and second cycles when the periodic stroke is 14.5 mm.

C. Displacement With Number of Cycles
The displacement of the CR with number of cycles was measured to validate the proposed model. In this testing, the periodic
stroke was set to 14.5, 10, and 6 mm by fixing a rigid rope with
a given length between the front clamper and the front end of
the extensor.
Fig. 9 shows the experimental results, together with the theoretical curves calculated by the proposed model. The experimental results reflect the overall displacement of the CR in a
cycle, while the theoretical curves reflect in detail the displacement of the rear-most point of the CR relative to the intestinal
wall in every step. A good agreement has been shown when the
number of cycles is smaller than 5, manifesting the effectiveness
of the proposed model in predicting the effective displacement.
However, an increasing discrepancy appears when the number
of cycles increases, which is caused by the friction between
the power wire and the intestinal wall. The CR with a longer
periodic stroke travels a longer distance for a given number of
cycles, and suffers a larger friction, so the discrepancy is more
apparent when the periodic stroke is 14.5 mm. To rule out the

friction influence, the number of cycles is limited to five in the
subsequent testing. The periodic stroke does play an important
role in enhancing locomotion; when the periodic strokes are
14.5, 10, and 6 mm, the effective displacements within five cycles are averaged as 9.9, 5.7, and 2.1 mm, and correspond to
locomotion efficiencies of 0.68, 0.57, and 0.35, respectively.
An enlarged view of the theoretical effective displacements in
the first and second cycles is shown in Fig. 10 (LT = 14.5 mm).
Below the horizontal axis, the time points are determined by the
action speed of the CR: the expanding or retracting time of the
clampers is 0.5 s; the elongating or retracting time of the extensor is 1.8 s when LT = 14.5 mm, which corresponds to a
8-mm/s translational speed of the nut. The total effective displacement in the first cycle (about 10 mm) is a bit smaller than
that in the second cycle (about 10.5 mm), manifesting that the
intestinal deformation formed in the first cycle is beneficial to
the subsequent locomotion. With the model parameters given
above, deformation Case 1 in step (b2) will happen, so an extra
stroke loss [see (18)] forms. However, this stroke loss is negligibly small, about 0.17 mm from the theoretical analysis, so a
distinguishable drop is not observed.
D. Locomotion Efficiency Affected by Design Parameters
The changing of the locomotion efficiency with the design parameters is predicted in Fig. 11(a), where the starting values of
the design parameters are Lf = 6 mm, Lf c = Lr c = 2.75 mm,
LT = 14.5 mm, Lm = 19.4 mm, and Lr = 9 mm. The locomotion efficiency is positively related to LT , basically unrelated to Lr c and Lr , and negatively related to Lf , Lf c , and Lm .

308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 11. Influence of different design parameters on: (a) locomotion efficiency, (b) the extensor’s elongation related stroke loss, (c) the extensor’s retraction
related stroke loss, and (d) the stroke gain. The horizontal axis represents the length increment relative to the starting values of the design parameters.

Note that the increase of the locomotion efficiency with LT
slows down gradually because the elongation related stroke loss
Lcycle2
loss1 also increases with LT as shown in Fig. 11(b).
Fig. 11(b)–(d) shows the changing of the stroke loss and
gain with the design parameters and are helpful to understand
Fig. 11(a). Fig. 11(b) indicates that the stroke loss Lcycle2
loss1 is
not only positively related to the lengths of the moving parts
(i.e., Lf and Lf c ) when the extensor elongates, but also to the
length of the extensor Lm and the periodic stroke LT . Fig. 11(c)
indicates that the stroke loss Lcycle2
loss2 is only positively related
to the lengths of the moving parts (i.e., Lr , Lr c , Lm ) when the
extensor retracts. Fig. 11(d) indicates that the stroke gain Lcycle2
gain
is only positively related to the length of the rear segment Lr .
Although Fig. 11(b) and (c) also indicates the method of reduccycle2
ing Lcycle2
loss1 or Lloss2 by increasing certain design parameters,
the other stroke loss will increase (e.g., increase Lr c could decycle2
crease Lcycle2
loss1 but increase Lloss1 ). Therefore, the selection
of the design parameters must refer to the efficiency curves in
Fig. 11(a) that comprehensively consider the stroke loss and
gain in a cycle.
The above mentioned efficiency refers to the forward efficiency. Analysis of the backward efficiency has also been conducted, which is positively related to LT , basically unrelated Lf
and Lf c , and negatively related to Lr , Lr c , and Lm , respectively.
From the above analysis results concerning the forward and
backward efficiencies, we can obtain the design rules as follows. When designing a locomotion unit, the periodic stroke
LT should be maximized, and the lengths of the front clamper
Lf c , rear clamper Lr c , and extensor Lm should be reduced as

much as possible, which are consistent with those in the literature [14], [19]. As for the functional modules, they should be
tried to be installed to the rear end of the locomotion unit to
improve the forward efficiency, and meanwhile, the backward
efficiency is lowered. Here, we give priority to the forward efficiency because the CR will navigate in the forward direction
most of the time in the intestinal tract, and navigate in the backward direction only when missing suspicious lesions or getting
stuck. The influence of the functional modules on both the forward and backward efficiencies is studied for the first time,
whose experimental validation is given below.
We assume that the functional modules have a 15-mm total
length, and complying with which, the hollow copper cylinders
shown in Fig. 7(b) could create six combinations of Lf and
Lr as shown below the horizontal axis in Fig. 12. For each
combination, the CR advanced in one direction for five cycles,
and then returned. The effective displacements in every cycle
in both directions were recorded to calculate the forward and
backward efficiencies. Both the experimental and theoretical
results are presented in Fig. 12. The experimental efficiencies
are basically agreed to the theoretical ones except in two cases
the forward efficiency, when Lf = 0 mm, Lr = 15 mm; and the
backward efficiency, when Lf = 15 mm, Lr = 0 mm. These
disagreements could be explained as follows. Take the forward
efficiency as an example and refer to Fig. 2(f1): when Lr is small,
the friction between the rear segment and the intestinal wall is
negligibly small because the intestinal tissue in contact with the
rear segment could be lifted by the expanded rear clamper, thus
ensuring a stroke gain; as Lr increases, the friction becomes

GAO AND YAN: LOCOMOTION ANALYSIS OF AN INCHWORM-LIKE CR IN THE INTESTINAL TRACT

Fig. 12. Forward and backward efficiencies under different combinations of
L f and L r when the total length of the functional modules is 15 mm.

significant, which decreases or even cancels the stroke gain,
and, consequently, the forward efficiency is lowered. To ensure
that the stroke gain happens, Lr should be below a limit, which,
we infer, is in a range of 9–12 mm for our prototype.
From Fig. 12, the best combination for a higher forward efficiency is Lf = 3 mm and Lr = 12 mm; and under which, the
forward efficiency is 6.28% higher than the backward efficiency.
An interesting finding from Fig. 12 is that the overall efficiency
(i.e., the average of the forward and backward efficiencies) holds
almost 0.7 for each combination, which indicates that the improvement of the locomotion efficiency in one direction must
sacrifice that in another direction. The overall efficiency of the
locomotion unit only is measured about 0.78. Thus, the functional modules with a 15-mm total length lower the overall
efficiency by 10.26%.
IV. CONCLUSION
A locomotion model correlating the locomotion efficiency
and the design parameters of the CR (i.e., the periodic stroke and
the axial lengths of the clampers, middle extensor, and functional
modules at both ends), together with its experimental validation,
has been presented in this paper. The consistency between the
experimental results and the theoretical ones predicted by the
model indicates not only the accuracy of the model but that the
assumptions for building it are reasonable. The design rules for
the locomotion unit derived from the model are maximizing the
periodic stroke and decreasing the axial lengths of the clampers
and extensor properly, which are consistent with those in the
literature [14], [19]. The influence of the functional modules at
both ends on the locomotion efficiency is studied for the first
time, which could be summarized as: the functional modules
with a given length will lower the overall efficiency of the CR
to a certain value; and the forward efficiency is higher than
the backward one when functional module with a longer length
is installed to the rear end. This conclusion is meaningful for
designing a more efficient inchworm-like CR that navigates in
the forward direction most of the time.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Westerhof et al., “Risk factors for incomplete small-bowel capsule
endoscopy,” Gastrointestinal Endosc., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 74–80, Jan. 2009.

309

[2] A. Moglia et al., “Wireless capsule endoscopy: From diagnostic devices
to multipurpose robotic systems,” Biomed. Microdevices, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 235–243, Apr. 2007.
[3] A. Moglia et al., “Capsule endoscopy: Progress update and challenges
ahead,” Nature Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., vol. 6, pp. 353–361, Jun.
2009.
[4] G. Ciuti et al., “Capsule endoscopy: From current achievements to open
challenges,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 4, pp. 59–72, Oct. 2011.
[5] G. Lien et al., “Magnetic control system targeted for capsule endoscopic
operations in the stomach-design, fabrication, and in vitro and ex vivo
evaluations,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 2068–2079,
Jul. 2012.
[6] S. Yim and M. Sitti, “Design and rolling locomotion of a magnetically
actuated soft capsule endoscope,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 183–194, Feb. 2012.
[7] P. Valdastri et al., “A new mechanism for mesoscale legged locomotion
in compliant tubular environments,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 1047–1057, Oct. 2009.
[8] M. Quirini et al., “Feasibility proof of a legged locomotion
capsule for the GI tract,” Gastrointestinal Endosc., vol. 67,
no. 7, pp. 1153–1158, Jun. 2008.
[9] R. Carta et al., “A multi-coil inductive powering system for an endoscopic capsule with vibratory actuation,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys.,
vol. 172, no. 1, pp. 253–258, Dec. 2011.
[10] H. M. Kim et al., “Active locomotion of a paddling-based capsule endoscope in an in vitro and in vivo experiment,” Gastrointestinal Endosc., vol.
72, no. 2, pp. 381–387, Aug. 2010.
[11] L. J. Sliker et al., “Surgical evaluation of a novel tethered robotic capsule
endoscope using micro-patterned treads,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 26, no. 10,
pp. 2862–2869, Oct. 2012.
[12] D. Kim et al., “A self-propelled robotic colonoscope using elastic caterpillars,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Robot., 2013, pp. 1–4.
[13] Y. T. Kim and D. E. Kim, “Novel propelling mechanisms based on
frictional interaction for endoscope robot,” Adv. Tribol., vol. 53, no. 2,
pp. 203–211, Jan. 2010.
[14] P. Dario et al., “Modeling and experimental validation of the locomotion
of endoscopic robots in the colon,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 23, nos. 4/5,
pp. 549–556, Apr. 2004.
[15] H. Park et al., “A robotic colonscope with long stroke and reliable leg
clamping,” Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1461–1466,
Aug. 2012.
[16] P. Gao et al., “A robotic endoscope based on minimally invasive locomotion and wireless techniques for human colon,” Int. J. Med. Robot.
Comput. Assisted Surg., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 256–267, Sep. 2011.
[17] W. Lin et al., “Design of a wireless anchoring and extending micro robot
system for gastrointestinal tract,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assisted
Surg., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 167–179, Jun. 2013.
[18] W. Chen et al., “A wireless capsule robot with spiral legs for human
intestine,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assisted Surg., vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 147–161, Jun. 2014.
[19] D. Accoto et al., “Analysis and development of locomotion devices for
the gastrointestinal tract,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, no. 6,
pp. 613–616, Aug. 2002.
[20] J. Kwon et al., “Evaluation of the critical stroke of an earthworm-like
robot for capsule endoscopes,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. H, vol. 221, no. 4,
pp. 397–405, Apr. 2007.
[21] D. Zarrouk et al., “Analysis of wormlike robotic locomotion on compliant
surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 301–309, Feb.
2011.
[22] D. Zarrouk and M. Shoham, “Analysis and design of one degree of freedom
worm robots for locomotion on rigid and compliant terrain,” J. Mech. Des.,
vol. 134, no. 2, pp. 021010.1–021010.9, Feb. 2012.
[23] D. Zarrouk et al., “Conditions for worm-robot locomotion in a flexible environment: Theory and experiments,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1057–1067, Apr. 2012.
[24] P. Valdastri et al., “Wireless therapeutic endoscopic capsule: In vivo experiment,” Endoscopy, vol. 40, pp. 979–982, 2008.
[25] S. Park et al., “A novel microactuator for microbiopsy in capsular endoscopes,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 18, no. 2, p. 025032-1–025032-9,
Feb. 2008.
[26] C. Zhang et al., “Modeling of velocity-dependent frictional resistance of a
capsule robot inside an intestine,” Tribol. Lett., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 295–301,
Aug. 2012.
[27] J. S. Kim et al., “Experimental investigation of frictional and viscoelastic properties of intestine for microendoscope application,” Tribol. Lett.,
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 143–149, May. 2006.

310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

[28] K. Wang et al., “Research on measurement and modeling of the gastro
intestine’s frictional characteristics,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 015803.1–015803.6, 2009.
[29] Y. Huang. Numerical Value of Human Anatomy. Beijing, China: People’s
Medical Publishing House Co., Ltd., 2002, p. 151.
[30] C. Stefanini et al., “Modeling and experiments on a legged microrobot locomotion in a tubular, compliant and slippery environment,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 25, nos. 5/6, pp. 551–560, May 2006.
[31] M. Simi et al., “Design, fabrication and testing of a capsule with hybrid locomotion for gastrointestinal tract exploration,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatronics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 170–180, Apr. 2010.
[32] M. D. Jensen et al., “Measurement of abdominal and visceral fat with
computed tomography and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry,” Amer. J.
Clin. Nutrition, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 274–278, Feb. 1995.
[33] S. He et al., “Frictional and viscous characteristics of an expandingextending robotic endoscope in the intestinal environment,” Tribol. Lett.,
vol. 58, no. 36, pp. 1–10, Apr. 2015.
[34] P. Ciarletta et al., “Hyperelastic model of anisotropic fiber reinforcements
within intestinal walls for applications in medical robotics,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1279–1288, Oct. 2009.

Jinyang Gao was born in Shanxi, China, on October
1, 1990. He received the B.S. degree from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Sichuan, China, in 2012. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Instrument Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include gastrointestinal
biomechanics, wireless capsule endoscopes, and inductive power transmission.

Guozheng Yan was born in Hunan, China, on June
3, 1961. He received the Ph.D. degree from the Jilin
University of Technology, Jilin, China, in 1993.
In 1995, he became a Postdoctoral Fellow at the
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Jiangsu, China, in 1995. In 1997, he became a Professor at the Department of Instrument Science and
Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include biomedical electronics, microsensor, microelectromechanical
system, and instrument engineering.

