2920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Multi-GPU Accelerated Admittance Method for
High-Resolution Human Exposure Evaluation
Zubiao Xiong, Member, IEEE, Shi Feng, Richard Kautz, Sandeep Chandra, Nevin Altunyurt,
and Ji Chen∗ , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Objective: A multi-graphics processing unit (GPU) accelerated admittance method solver is presented for solving the
induced electric field in high-resolution anatomical models of human body when exposed to external low-frequency magnetic fields.
Methods: In the solver, the anatomical model is discretized as a
three-dimensional network of admittances. The conjugate orthogonal conjugate gradient (COCG) iterative algorithm is employed
to take advantage of the symmetric property of the complex-valued
linear system of equations. Compared against the widely used biconjugate gradient stabilized method, the COCG algorithm can
reduce the solving time by 3.5 times and reduce the storage requirement by about 40%. The iterative algorithm is then accelerated further by using multiple NVIDIA GPUs. The computations
and data transfers between GPUs are overlapped in time by using
asynchronous concurrent execution design. The communication
overhead is well hidden so that the acceleration is nearly linear
with the number of GPU cards. Results: Numerical examples show
that our GPU implementation running on four NVIDIA Tesla K20c
cards can reach 90 times faster than the CPU implementation running on eight CPU cores (two Intel Xeon E5-2603 processors).
Conclusion: The implemented solver is able to solve large dimensional problems efficiently. A whole adult body discretized in 1-mm
resolution can be solved in just several minutes. Significance: The
high efficiency achieved makes it practical to investigate human
exposure involving a large number of cases with a high resolution
that meets the requirements of international dosimetry guidelines.
Index Terms—Admittance method, CUDA, low-frequency electromagnetic exposure, multi-GPU, numerical dosimetry.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE constantly increasing use of electromagnetic devices
(e.g., wireless power transfer system [1], and transcranial magnetic stimulation [2]) in our society raises public concerns over the potential adverse health effects produced by
low-frequency electric and magnetic fields. It has been well
recognized that strong electric fields cause stimulation of neural
and muscle tissue, retinal phosphenes, as well as cardiac fibrillation [3], [4]. These concerns have led to great strides in the
area of human exposure evaluation in the last few decades.
Historically, simple models such as spheroids, ellipsoids, or
circular cylinders were used to approximate the human body.

T

Manuscript received December 5, 2014; revised April 29, 2015 and June
19, 2015; accepted June 27, 2015. Date of publication July 8, 2015; date of
current version November 20, 2015. This work was supported by the Ford
Motor Company. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Z. Xiong and S. Feng are with the University of Houston.
R. Kautz, S. Chandra, and N. Altunyurt are with the Ford Motor Company.
∗ J. Chen is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204 USA (e-mail: jchen18@uh.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2453169

Currently, more realistic heterogeneous models with anatomical
details and numerous tissues have been developed by computer
segmentation of data from magnetic resonance (MR) images
[5]–[8], which can give more detailed information for the electromagnetic exposure effects. In order to reveal small anatomical
details such as nerves, a high resolution is required for model
discretization. The International Commission on Non-Ionizing
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) recommends an averaging volume of 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 for determining the induced electric field
[3], which implies discretizing the human body into elements
of a size not larger than 2 mm. It has also been suggested that
the averaging volume for the induced electric field should be
approximately 1 mm3 in most nerve tissue [9]. Therefore, a resolution of 1 mm is often recommended in practical applications.
Various computational methods have been proposed to numerically evaluate internal electric fields induced in these highresolution anatomical models. Initially, the impedance method
(IM) was used [10], [11], in which the human body is represented by a three-dimensional (3-D) impedance network. A
modification was proposed recently to deal with the singularity
of the linear system of IM and hence improved the numerical
convergence [12]. Another widely used method is the scalar potential finite-difference method (SPFD) [13], [14]. The equation
for the electric field is transformed into a scalar potential form,
which is then discretized by using finite-difference scheme. The
SPFD is more efficient since it solves scalar quantities while
the IM is a vector method. However, the finite-difference approximation may suffer from large error for a very localized
source within a short distance from the body. A newer variation
named as scalar potential finite element method (SPFE) [15]
discretizes the scalar potential equation by using the Galerkin
finite-element method and linear nodal basis functions on a
rectilinear grid. This method has been implemented in the commercial package SEMCAD-X V14.8 (Schmid & Partner Engineering AG, Switzerland) [16], [17], however the contribution
of displacement currents was ignored. The quasi-static finitedifference time-domain (FDTD) method has also been used
for evaluating human interactions with low-frequency external
electric and magnetic fields [18], [19]. It is more suitable for
time-domain analysis. One of its limitations is that it is only applicable when either the conduction current or the displacement
current dominates the other [20].
All of these methods except the quasi-static FDTD belong
to frequency domain methods, involving a linear system of
equations. Although the coefficient matrices differ in these approaches, they are all symmetric and highly sparse. Iterative
algorithms are usually more suitable than direct algorithms for

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XIONG et al.: MULTI-GPU ACCELERATED ADMITTANCE METHOD FOR HIGH-RESOLUTION HUMAN EXPOSURE EVALUATION

solving them due to the large number of unknowns. It was
reported that the successive over-relaxation (SOR) algorithm
[11] and biconjugate gradient stabilized (BiCGSTAB) algorithm
[21] were successfully applied for the IM, whereas the SPFD
method and SPFE method usually utilizes the conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm for solving real-valued symmetric linear
systems of equations when displacement currents are neglected.
Geometric multigrid was recently used for the SPFE method
[22], for which a significant speedup over the conventional SOR
algorithm was observed [23]. The contribution of displacement
currents can be taken into account in a straightforward way
by introducing a complex-valued permittivity. For the resulting
complex-valued system of equations, the CG algorithm is not
suitable anymore, while SOR, BiCGSTAB, and multigrid are
still applicable. However, none of them have exploited the symmetric property of the complex-valued coefficient matrix. Thus,
there is a possibility to improve the iterative convergence by
making use of the symmetry.
Iterative solvers for linear systems can be accelerated by parallel multicore platforms. The NIVIDA Tesla graphics processing unit (GPU) product family is one of several available processors that feature a large number of cores aiming parallel
computing. For intensive and massive computations, GPUs are
often vastly superior to architectures like multicore CPUs. It becomes feasible for high-resolution evaluation of induced electric
fields, which might involve tens of millions of unknowns. Although it was reported that the uniform magnetic field exposure
of a 1-mm whole-body model could be solved in about 10 min
[23], it is not a general situation. A smoothing procedure was
applied to reduce the contrast of tissue conductivities that possibly dramatically reduced the convergence time in that study.
It is questionable because the physical properties of realistic
anatomies were modified [24]. A more reliable measurement is
84 min for calculating a 1.5-mm whole-body model on a cluster
consisting of 24 compute nodes equipped with 3.2-GHz Intel
Xeon processors [25]. The calculation time for 1-mm grid resolution can be much longer. It is worthwhile to accelerate the
calculation with the aid of GPU processing, especially if many
cases involving difference models or positions are required for
investigation.
This study will introduce a multi-GPU accelerated approach
for calculating the induced electric fields in a human body
exposed to external magnetic fields. The proposed numerical
method is referred as admittance method, which discretizes the
human body as a 3-D network of admittances. It can be understood as an equivalent circuit formulation of the SPFD method
with a small distinction, as shown in Section II. The selection
of an optimal iterative algorithm for solving the resulted linear
system of equations will be discussed in Section III. Section IV
gives the parallel implementation of the iterative algorithm in a
multi-GPU platform. Section V validates the proposed approach
by using simple models with analytic solutions, as well as evaluates the performance of the corresponding implementation. We
summarize the conclusions in Section VI. The major contributions of this paper include: 1) A particular iterative algorithm is
employed to reduce both the memory space requirement and the
solving time; 2) Implementing the algorithm on multi-GPU plat-

2921

forms further accelerates the running performance drastically.
It is worth mentioning that the application of the accelerating
techniques developed in this study is not limited to human exposure dosimetry. They can be applied to many other problems
involving large-scale linear system of equations as well.
II. MATHEMATICAL MODEL
When exposed to time-varying electric and magnetic fields,
induced electric fields and currents can be generated inside the
human body. The distribution of the induced electric field is
related to the electrical properties of the various organs and
tissues. For low-frequency magnetic field exposure, the major
interaction mechanism between the biological body and the
external magnetic field is the Faraday induction. It is assumed
that the body does not significantly perturb the external magnetic
field. This assumption can be made because biological bodies
are nonmagnetic in nature and the scattered magnetic fields
are also low. This is widely accepted for frequencies up to 10
MHz [11], [26]–[28]. With this assumption, we could write the
electric field induced in the tissues as
E = −jωA0 − ∇φ

(1)

where A0 is the vector potential of the external magnetic field
(B0 = ∇ × A0 ), ω is the angular frequency of operation, and
φ is the total electric scalar potential.
The biological body is represented by voxels with tissue assigned in each voxel. The frequency-dependent tissue properties
(conductivity and permittivity) are parameterized by the commonly used 4-Cole-Cole dispersion model [29]–[31]. Using the
voxel representation, a 3-D network of admittances can be developed. The network nodes are placed at the vertices of the
voxels, and lumped circuit elements are placed along the edges
of the voxels. The admittance on each edge is derived from the
conductivity and the permittivity averaged over the four neighboring voxels to that particular edge, which is
S
(2)
L
where L is the length of the edge, S is the area of voxel face
normal to the edge, and σ̄ and ¯ are the averaged conductivity
and permittivity of the edge, respectively.
Besides the lumped admittance modeled on each edge, a voltage source is introduced into the network to model the electromotive force induced by the external magnetic field. Taking an
integration of the electric field along each edge, the voltage drop
on the corresponding lumped edge element is given by

E · dl = ξ + (φ− − φ+ )
(3)
V =
Y = (σ̄ + jω¯
)

L

where φ− and φ+ denote the electric potentials at the start point
and the end point of the edge, respectively. The first term ξ in
(3) is just the electromotive source term

A0 · dl.
(4)
ξ = −jω
L

This electromotive source term is modeled as a voltage source
on each edge. The final equivalent circuit model including

2922

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

(

+1)
( -1

( -1 )

(
( +1

)

( +1 )

)

(

Fig. 1.

)

-1)

Illustration of the equivalent circuit model.

lumped admittances and voltage sources is illustrated in Fig. 1.
For clarification, there should exist circuit elements even on the
outermost edges. They are not shown in Fig. 1 in order to keep
the figure clear. The boundary of the circuit network is the interface between the body and the air. The displacement currents in
the air are negligible compared to the currents inside the body
because the admittance of the air is much smaller than that of
the body. The direction of the current on each edge is defined as
from the start point of the edge to the end point of the edge. According to Kirchhoff’s current law, the summation of currents
at a point is zero. Thus, for an arbitrary node (i, j, k) inside the
body we should have
y
y
x
x
z
z
+ Ii,j,k
− Ii,j
−Ii−1,j,k
−1,k + Ii,j,k − Ii,j,k −1 + Ii,j,k = 0.
(5)
By applying the Ohms law I = Y V and substituting (3) into it,
we can rewrite (5) in terms of the electric potential
y
y
x
x
z
z
+ Yi,j,k
+ Yi,j
(Yi−1,j,k
−1,k + Yi,j,k + Yi,j,k −1 + Yi,j,k )φi,j,k

III. ITERATIVE ALGORITHM
Assuming the body model is discretized with N nodes. The
full set of equations can be arranged in matrix form as
YΦ = Γ

(7)

with Φ being the N × 1 vector of unknown electric potentials,
Γ being the N × 1 vector of the right hand side term of (6), and
Y being the N × N matrix of coefficients in the left-hand side
of (6). It can be easily shown that Y is symmetric. Also for each
row of Y, we have

yii = −
yij
(8)
j = i

where yij is the element in the ith row and jth column of matrix
Y. Since any row or column of the matrix sums to zero, there
must exist an eigenvalue equal to zero. Thus Y is singular.
A. Without Displacement Currents

y
x
z
− Yi−1,j,k
φi−1,j,k − Yi,j
−1,k φi,j −1,k − Yi,j,k −1 φi,j,k −1
y
x
z
− Yi,j,k
φi+1,j,k − Yi,j,k
φi,j +1,k − Yi,j,k
φi,j,k +1
y
x
x
x
z
z
= Yi−1,j,k
ξi−1,j,k
+ Yi,j
−1,k ξi,j −1,k + Yi,j,k −1 ξi,j,k −1
y
y
x
x
z
z
− Yi,j,k
ξi,j,k
− Yi,j,k
ξi,j,k
− Yi,j,k
ξi,j,k
.

the displacement current contribution. The material permittivity
is usually neglected in the SPFD method based on an assumption
that the displacement currents are much smaller than conduction
currents. However, this assumption is not always accurate. In
some applications such as magnetic stimulation of spine [32],
and numerical dosimetry at extremely low frequencies [33] or
above 1 MHz [34], the contribution of displacement currents is
relevant. Therefore, the material permittivity is kept as a switchable option in our method.
The second difference is the electromotive source term. In
the SPFD method, It is calculated as ξ = −jωA0 |L /2 L, where
A0 |L /2 denotes the magnetic vector potential projected onto the
edge and evaluated at the edge center [13]. Our method takes
a path integral instead, which is more accurate in the case of a
very localized source with a short distance from the body.
Another distinctive advantage of our admittance method is
that new electrical components can be arbitrarily included in
the circuit to account for electromagnetic effects. This feature
is valuable to model complex bioelectrical behaviors and electromagnetic interference in implanted medical devices, which
may be described in terms of lumped circuital elements.

(6)

Similar equations can be derived for the nodes on the bodyair interface, except that the currents from the air edges are set
as zero. The full set of equations can then be solved by using
iterative methods to obtain the electric potential at each node.
After that, we can calculate the electric field via (1). Particularly,
we can calculate the electric fields at edge centers by applying
finite-difference scheme to (1) first, and then interpolate them to
voxel centers by averaging four edge values for each direction.
The proposed admittance method leads to a linear system of
equations similar to the SPFD method [13], but also including

If the displacement currents inside the body are negligible, the
coefficient matrix Y is reduced to a real-valued matrix, which
is exactly the same as in the SPFD method. In this case, we can
separate the system of equations into real and imaginary parts
as
YΦre = Γre

(9a)

YΦim = Γim

(9b)

where the subscripts re and im denote the real part and the imaginary part, respectively. The resulting two separated systems of
equations are both real valued, which is easier to solve than
a complex system. Especially, if the external magnetic field is
in-phase everywhere, only one real-valued system of equations
needs to be solved by making an appropriate projection.
Iterative methods are often useful for linear problems involving millions of variables, where direct methods would be

XIONG et al.: MULTI-GPU ACCELERATED ADMITTANCE METHOD FOR HIGH-RESOLUTION HUMAN EXPOSURE EVALUATION

prohibitively expensive even with the best available computing power. However, the singularity of the system may leads
to divergence of iterative algorithms. In order to avoid possible
divergence, the singularity of the system is usually removed by
various means, e.g., fixing the value of the electric potential on
one predefined node [17], or adding an equation requiring that
the electric potential have zero mean [14]. Then, the resulting
nonsingular system, which is symmetric positive definite, can
be solved by the CG algorithm [35].
Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that the removal of singularity is not always the best option. It was shown that the modified system converges noticeably slower than the original singular system (both systems are solved with CG) for a Poisson’s
equation with Neumann boundary condition [36]. Fortunately,
the CG algorithm can be safely applied for a consistent singular
system if its eigenvalues are all nonnegative [36].Our problem
just belongs to this kind of situation. Let D(yii , j = i |yij |) be
the
 closed disc (Gershgorin disc) centered at yii with radius
j = i |yij | in the complex plane for i = 1, . . . , N . According
to Gershgorins circle theorem [37], each eigenvalue of Y lies
within at least one of these Gershgorin discs. Moreover, the
eigenvalues of Y are all real because Y is real symmetric. Thus,
the confining areas of eigenvalues can shrink from Gershgorin
discs to regions on the real axis. By using (8) and applying the
fact that the diagonal entries are positive and the off-diagonal entries are nonpositive, the confining regions are actually [0, 2yii ]
for i = 1, . . . , N , which implies each eigenvalue must be not
smaller than zero.
B. With Displacement Currents Considered
If we do not neglect displacement currents inside the body,
the coefficient matrix Y is a symmetric complex-valued matrix.
The CG algorithm is not suitable here because the matrix is not
self-adjoint. The generalized minimal residual algorithm, which
is also based on the orthogonalization of the Krylov vectors,
can be used to solve such complex-valued systems. However,
the amount of storage and some vector operations required per
iteration rises linearly with the iteration count [38]. For a largedimension problem, the cost will rapidly become prohibitive.
The other kinds of iterative algorithms based on a biorthogonalization procedure, such as BiCG, CGS, and BiCGSTAB,
are also applicable [38]. But all of them require two matrixvector product operations per iteration, which approximately
doubles the amount of work. Another less known algorithm,
conjugate orthogonal conjugate gradient (COCG) method [39],
was proposed to exploit the symmetric property of a complexvalued matrix. It is much similar to the classical CG method,
except that the standard Hermitian inner product (x, y) = xH y
is replaced by (x∗ , y) = xT y. The COCG algorithm has only
one matrix-vector product operation per iteration, so that takes
only half the calculation time required by those BiCG-like algorithms. Besides, the memory space requirement can be highly
reduced as well due to fewer intermediate vector variables allocated during the iterations. This advantage of COCG algorithm
is important to GPU acceleration since the memory capacity of
GPUs is usually very limited. A comparison between COCG

Fig. 2.

2923

Preconditioned COCG algorithm.

algorithm and BiCGSTAB algorithm applying in our problem
will be demonstrated in Section V-C.
There is no solid proof showing that the COCG algorithm
can be safely applied to singular problems. The possible breakdown due to singularity may be circumvented by a look-ahead
strategy [40] or an easier but less efficient restart procedure.
However, our experiments demonstrated that the COCG algorithm converged very well for our problem and no breakdown
has occurred. As a matter of fact, the original singular system
converges even faster than the nonsingular system constructed
from prescribing the electric potential at one node, if both are
solved by the COCG algorithm. Therefore, the original singular
system is used in the following study. The convergence rate of
the COCG algorithm can be further improved by using preconditioning techniques. Considering the complexity of multi-GPU
implementation and the memory consumption, the diagonal preconditioner is applied. The pseudocode for the preconditioned
COCG algorithm is shown in Fig. 2. It is easy to see that the
COCG algorithm is equivalent to CG algorithm when the linear
system is real valued. Therefore, we can also apply the COCG
algorithm to our real-valued problem that does not account for
displacement currents.
IV. MULTI-GPU ACCELERATION
The total memory capacity in a single GPU device is limited,
and may be not sufficient for a large-scale problem. For example,
at least 9.2 gigabytes (GB) memory space is required to get a
solution for an adult male model employed in Section V, if
the model is discretized to 1-mm cubes. And this actually has
already taken benefit from the COCG algorithm presented in
the last section. More widely used BiCGSTAB algorithm needs
about 14.5-GB memory space, as shown in Section V. In such
a situation, one GPU might not be able to hold all the data

2924

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 3. Illustration of the domain decomposition of human body for a 4-GPU
platform.

(NVIDIA Tesla K20c we used has 5-GB memory capacity). In
order to handle large-dimension problem, domain partitioning
could be applied to spread work across more than one GPU.
An additional benefit is that the computing speed can increase
further by parallelizing multiple GPUs.
A. Domain Decomposition
The decomposition scheme of the discretized domain strongly
affects the communication overhead between two or more
GPUs. As the computation of each element depends on the
values of its neighbors, each GPU has to exchange the data on
interfaces with the other GPUs. In order to decrease the amount
of the exchanging data, it is important to make the interface area
as small as possible. Decomposing our problem domain along
the longest axis of the body (let us say the top-to-bottom axis)
is an easy and efficient way. The body is sliced perpendicular
to the longest axis of the body first. Each slice is a 2-D tiling of
the equivalent model shown in Fig. 1. Then, successive slices
are grouped into multiple sets according to the number of available GPUs. For simplicity, it is assumed that every unit in the
multi-GPU platform is identical. In order to balance the work
load on each unit, we shift the cutting slices along the axis so
that the number of elements (nonair nodes) in each subdomain
is almost equal. An illustration of decomposing the human body
for a 4-GPU platform is shown in Fig. 3.
The sparse matrix-vector multiplication (SpMV) is one of
the most compute-intensive components of sparse iterative linear solvers. Considering the coupling on the boundary slices
between adjacent subdomains, we represent each subdomain
by its inner bulk, top boundary, and bottom boundary. Let the
subscript n denote the n th subdomain, and the superscripts t,
i, and b denote the top, the inner, and the bottom slices, respectively. Then, a matrix vector multiplication y = Ax can be
rewritten as in Fig. 4 by using the domain decomposition. Each
GPU takes charge of the computation for one subdomain. The
vectors are split and distributed on multiple GPUs. The matrix
is decomposed as well. The solid and dashed boxes in Fig. 4
show how the components of the vectors and the matrix are
stored in different GPUs separately. It is worth noting that, the
boundary slices in each subdomain, as shown in the overlapped
areas of the vector x in Fig. 4, must be transferred to the neighbor GPUs. For convenient access, we keep a redundant copy
of the bottom boundary of the upper subdomain and the top

Fig. 4. Illustration of the storage layout for a matrix-vector multiplication on
a multi-GPU platform.

boundary of the lower subdomain in each corresponding GPU.
Since each node only couples with its direct neighbors in the
admittance method, the nonzero components of the coefficient
matrix are concentrated near the diagonal line. Besides, each
submatrix corresponding to a nonzero component is also highly
sparse. They can be presented by sparse matrix formats to reduce storage requirement and speed up the computation. Those
zero submatrices are ignored because they do not contribute to
the multiplication result.
B. Overlapping Computation and Data Exchange
After the domain decomposition, each GPU n needs to perform the following tasks in order to complete the matrix-vector
multiplication:
1) send its bottom boundary data to GPU n + 1, and receive
the bottom boundary data of the upper subdomain from
GPU n − 1;
2) send its top boundary data to GPU n − 1, and receive
the top boundary data of the lower subdomain from GPU
n + 1;
3) compute in its subdomain including the inner bulk and the
boundaries.
A high level of concurrency is needed to take full advantage
of the computing power of the multi-GPU platforms. A simple
approach could be to exchange data first and then perform the
computations on multiple GPUs concurrently once all transfers
are finished. This strategy works but possibly with poor performance since the communication and the computation are carried
out one after the other. Luckily, the CUDA framework (parallel computing platform and programming model invented by
NVIDIA) offers a technique called streams to execute a computing kernel, while a data transfer is running. A stream is a
sequence of commands that execute in order. Different streams,
on the other hand, may execute their commands concurrently
[41]. By using two streams in each GPU, we can overlap the
boundary data exchanges and the computation of the internal
data. The first stream, named as internal stream, launches the
kernel for computing the internal data inside the corresponding subdomain. Since the CUDA kernel launch is designed as
asynchronous, control is immediately returned to the host thread

XIONG et al.: MULTI-GPU ACCELERATED ADMITTANCE METHOD FOR HIGH-RESOLUTION HUMAN EXPOSURE EVALUATION

Fig. 5.

Illustration of asynchronous concurrent execution on each GPU.

2925

Fig. 6. Comparison of the induced electric field strength between the proposed
solver and the analytic solution for the two-layered cylinder exposed to an axial
uniform magnetic field at 1 MHz. (E AM and E true denote the solution from the
proposed solver and the analytic solution of the induced electric field strength,
respectively.)

before the GPU has completed the requested task. Then, we start
the asynchronous data exchanges with two neighboring GPUs
in the second stream, named as boundary stream, hence the
data transfers and the computation kernel of internal data overlap. The computation of the boundary coupling effect, i.e., the
b,t
b
t
product of At,b
n ,n −1 xn −1 and An ,n +1 xn +1 , follows the data exchanges in the boundary stream. Some CUDA-enabled GPUs of
compute capability 2.0 and higher can execute multiple kernels
concurrently. Even the different computation kernels in internal
stream and boundary stream may possibly overlap as well, although it is not a necessity. Fig. 5 shows an illustration of the
asynchronous concurrent execution approach proposed in this
section.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Validation
Our solver was implemented by utilizing the COCG algorithm and the multi-GPU acceleration technique presented
in the previous sections. The NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit 6.5
was used for GPU programming. The GPU code was compiled by the NVIDIA CUDA Compiler with flag -gencode
arch=compute_20,code=sm_20. For CUDA kernel configuration, the thread block is one-dimensional and its size is fixed
to 256. We also implemented a CPU version of the code as
the reference for performance comparison. The only difference
between GPU code and CPU code is the way of parallelization of some kernel calculation functions. The CPU code was
parallelized by using OpenMP. Double precision floating point
arithmetic was used for both versions, since single precision is
not sufficient to characterize changes due to high contrast of
electric parameters in various human tissues. During the validation tests, we compared the results from GPU code against
that from CPU code. We observed slightly different convergence
properties of the iterative procedure. We believe it is caused by
the difference on floating point accuracy between GPU and CPU
[42]. Actually, the convergence trends are quite similar in our
experiments. For the case of an adult male model discretized to
1-mm cubes, the number of iterations has only around 2% deviation to meet a same stopping criterion rk 2 /b2 < 10−8 .

Fig. 7. Comparison of convergence rate between the original singular system
and the modified nonsingular system for the two-layered cylinder exposed to an
axial uniform magnetic field at 1 MHz.

The resulted solutions agree with each other to at least six significant digits. Therefore, we will show the results of GPU code
only in the following, except in the comparison of computing
performance.
In order to validate our solver, a two-layered cylinder model
exposed to a uniform axial magnetic field is used for comparing
our admittance method against the analytical solution. The interior layer has a radius of 11.5 cm with a relative permittivity
of 2000 and a conductivity of 0.42 S/m. The outer layer is 4.5
cm thick with a relative permittivity of 50 and a conductivity of
0.01 S/m. For this particular geometry, an analytical solution is
available under the quasi-static assumption [10]. The strength of
the incident magnetic field is 1 G. The frequency is 1 MHz. The
COCG algorithm with diagonal preconditioner is used to solve
the corresponding linear system. The iteration stops when the
relative residual norm, defined as rk 2 /b2 for each iteration
k, drops below 10−8 . In Fig. 6, we show the relative difference between the induced electric field strength calculated from

2926

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. Illustration of (a) induced electric field strength and (b) total current density strength inside the Duke model exposed to a uniform front-to-back magnetic
field at a frequency of 100 kHz. The field strengths are normalized to the external magnetic field strength and shown on a logarithmic scale. The view slices are
picked at the position of the induced electric field peak. (a) Normalized strength of induced electric field (V · m −1 · T −1 ). (b) Normalized strength of induced
current density (A · m −2 · T −1 ).

our code and the analytic solution. The difference was plotted
against the distance from the cylinder center for three various
voxel sizes: 4, 2, and 1 mm, respectively. It can be observed
that the results obtained by our admittance method agree very
well with the analytical solution at 1-mm resolution. The error
is below 0.6% in general, except at the boundaries of layers.
The large error at the boundaries is due to the high contrast of
electric parameters. We can also see that the accuracy increases
significantly with the resolution of the grid. The error peak drops
from about 7% for 4- and 2-mm resolutions to 1.7% for 1-mm
resolution.
The comparison of convergence rate between the original
singular system and the modified nonsingular system for the
two-layered cylinder model is shown in Fig. 7. The nonsingular system is generated by fixing the electric potential on one
predefined node as zero and deleting this node from the set of

unknowns. We use COCG algorithm with diagonal preconditioner to solve both two systems. The relative residual norm is
used for indicating the convergence history. The computational
cost is measured by the number of matrix vector multiplications.
As one can see, in the beginning, the residual errors decrease
at similar rates. But such error for the modified nonsingular
system increases after around 400 iterations. The original singular system converges more regularly and significantly faster.
The displacement currents are neglected in this comparison. Including displacement currents in the calculation gives similar
convergence rates for this cylinder model. We also performed
comparisons by using more complicated human body models,
which are not shown here due to limited space. The original
singular system behaves better for each case. It suggests that
the removal of singularity as utilized in [13] and [17] is not
necessary.

XIONG et al.: MULTI-GPU ACCELERATED ADMITTANCE METHOD FOR HIGH-RESOLUTION HUMAN EXPOSURE EVALUATION

2927

TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE SPARSE LINEAR SYSTEM FOR DUKE MODEL
DISCRETIZED AT TWO DIFFERENT GRID RESOLUTIONS

# of grid cells
# of unknowns (excluding air nodes)
# of nonzero entries in coefficient matrix

2-mm Grid

1-mm Grid

34 275 267
8 863 088
61 370 614

274 861 170
69 576 234
484 348 110

B. Example of Induced Fields in Human Body
To demonstrate the capability of our developed solver for
large-scale problems, we have applied it to the calculation of
the induced fields inside a high-resolution anatomically realistic male adult model named as Duke. This model is a part
of the Virtual Family project [5] based on high-resolution MR
images of healthy volunteers. The model was reconstructed as
3-D CAD objects with high-fidelity anatomical detail and can
be meshed at arbitrary resolutions without loss of small features. More than 80 different tissue types are included in this
model. The dielectric property values of tissues are obtained
from the IT’IS database of tissue properties [43]. The effect of
tissue anisotropy is not considered. The model is discretized
uniformly in mesh size of 1 mm. The applied magnetic field exposure is uniform, polarized in the front-to-back direction. The
COCG algorithm with diagonal preconditioner is used to solve
the equations iteratively until the residual error drops below
10−8 .
Fig. 8 shows the slice views of the induced electric field
strength and the total current density strength normalized to the
external magnetic field strength at a frequency of 100 kHz. The
view slices are picked at the position of the induced electric
field peak. As we can see, the induced currents flows primarily
in a loop path that is perpendicular to the polarization direction
of the applied magnetic field, whereas the induced electric field
distribution shows local contractions in some body contact areas, such as armpits, inner thighs. Those local peaks of electric
field may be a physical consequence of the sharp variation of
tissue conductivities. For a front-to-back magnetic field exposure, the loop paths of induced currents may pass through some
body contact areas. These contact areas have a high-low-high
conductivity profile occurring between the skin and the adjacent
tissues (e.g., muscle or subcutaneous fat). Such a conductivity
profile behaves like a capacitor and, thus, causes a localized
electric field concentration in the middle skin tissue.
C. Performance Measurements
In the performance measurements, the Duke model is employed, with two different resolutions considered here: 2 and 1
mm. The number of grid cells, the number of unknowns of the
corresponding linear system (excluding the nodes in the air),
and the number of nonzero entries in the coefficient matrix are
counted for two resolutions, respectively, and shown in Table I.
The experiments were conducted on a Dell PowerEdge T620
server, with two Intel Xeon E5-2603 processors (1.8 GHz, four
cores), 32 GB of main memory, and four NVIDIA Tesla K20c
GPUs (2496 cores, 706 MHz, 5-GB memory). Tesla K20c sup-

Fig. 9.

Multi-GPU acceleration measurements for SpVM.

ports double precision floating point arithmetic that our solver
requires. Each GPU is installed in a PCI Express (PCIe) 2.0 x16
interface that features a maximum bandwidth of 8 GB/s. The
data are exchanged between GPUs via PCIe links directly.
The multi-GPU acceleration of SpMV was measured up to
four K20c GPUs. The SpMV kernel function was executed 100
times for each hardware configuration, and the computation time
was averaged over 100 times to serve as the measurement. For
the hardware configuration of four GPUs, the run time of the
SpMV kernel is 1.75, 2.25, 12.4, and 17.2 ms for four various
testing cases: 2-mm resolution without displacement currents,
2-mm resolution with displacement currents, 1-mm resolution
without displacement currents, and 1-mm resolution with displacement currents, respectively. Then, the CPU computation
time (measured by using all eight available CPU cores with
OpenMP parallelization) was used as a reference for the comparison of speed up ratio. As shown in Fig. 9, using four K20c
GPUs can obtain about 70–90 times speed up over the one that
uses all eight CPU cores. Compared against using only one CPU
core, using four K20c GPUs is 350–430 times faster. The performance improvement is almost linearly with the number of
GPUs. The computing costs per GPU decrease along with the
number of GPUs, while the communication costs do not change
much. If the data exchange cannot be entirely overlapped by the
internal computation, we would not get linear scaling performance. Therefore, the almost linearly scaling results shown in
Fig. 9 can prove that our strategy of hiding data exchange cost
behind concurrent computation works very well. In addition, it
is worth mentioning that the performance cannot scale arbitrarily. Once the internal computation costs per GPU decreases to
the level of communication costs, the multi-GPU scaling degrades. We can observe this phenomenon for the cases of 2-mm
discretization in Fig. 9. The multi-GPU acceleration scales better for finer resolutions (or larger problems). For clarification,
Fig. 9 shows measurements for SpMV operation only, not for the
whole iterative algorithm. Since more intermediate vector variables are needed to complete the iteration procedure, the whole
iterative algorithm cannot be launched on one single Tesla K20c
GPU for some high-resolution cases. However, the SpMV operation is the most compute-intensive component of the iterative

2928

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED SOLVER AND THE SEMCAD-X
MAGNETO QUASI-STATIC SOLVER (THE MAXIMUM DIFFERENCE OF THE
SOLVED ELECTRIC FIELD STRENGTH NORMALIZED TO THE MAXIMUM
ELECTRIC FIELD VALUE IS 1.2 × 10 −6 FOR 2-MM RESOLUTION AND
1.6 × 10 −5 FOR 1-MM RESOLUTION, RESPECTIVELY)

Duke, 2-mm res.
Duke, 1-mm res.

Fig. 10. Comparison between COCG algorithm and BiCGSTAB algorithm
for solving Duke model discretized at a resolution of 1 mm.

algorithms for our problem. Its performance measurements can
mostly reflect the multi-GPU scaling performance of iterative
algorithms.
The advantage of the COCG algorithm over the BiCGSTAB
algorithm is demonstrated by using the Duke model exposed
to a uniform front-to-back magnetic field with consideration of
the displacement currents. The grid resolution is 1 mm and the
frequency is 100 kHz. Both algorithms are preconditioned with
the diagonal preconditioner, and launched on four K20c GPUs.
As we can see in Fig. 10, the residual error of COCG has more
fluctuation but its overall convergence rate is much faster than
BiCGSTAB. Also, the memory space requirement is about 40%
less. This is because BiCGSTAB needs more intermediate data
arrays resident in memory during iteration.
Another comparison is made between our solver and the
magneto quasi-static solver in the commercial software package SEMCAD-X (V14.8.4, Schmid & Partner Engineering AG,
Switzerland). Although SEMCAD-X solver is claimed to use
finite-element method [16], [17], it calculates the solution on
a rectilinear grid actually, which is similar to our solver. This
makes the accuracies of two solvers highly comparable when
the same resolution of the grid is used. In this comparison, both
solvers are used to solve a problem in which the Duke model
is exposed to a uniform front-to-back magnetic field at the frequency of 100 kHz. The stopping criterion of iterations is set
to eight orders of magnitude reduction of the relative residual
norm for both tools. The displacement currents are neglected
for the comparison since SEMCAD-X does not account for it.
The calculation results from the two solvers match very well
with each other. The difference on the magnitude of the solved
electric field was checked voxel by voxel inside the human body.
The maximum relative difference (normalized to the maximum
electric field value) is 1.2 × 10−6 for 2-mm resolution, and
1.6 × 10−5 for 1-mm resolution, respectively. The agreement
between the two tools is also verified at several other frequencies. At this level of accuracy, we can compare the computing
performance of the two tools without prejudice. In our solver,
the COCG algorithm with the diagonal preconditioner is em-

SEMCAD-X

This study

32.7 min
6.43 h

68.1 s
4.55 min

ployed and launched on four K20c GPUs. The SEMCAD-X
Magneto Quasi-Static Solver cannot utilize GPU acceleration.
Thus, it runs on two E5-2603 processors (eight cores in total).
The solving time is compared in Table II. Our multi-GPU accelerated method is about 85 times faster than the SEMCAD-X
solver for the 1-mm discretization with the specific computer
setting described earlier. Besides the superiority on computing
performance against the SEMCAD-X solver, our solver has two
more advantages: 1) The effect of displacement currents can be
taken into account. 2) Incident magnetic fields having spatially
varying phase in addition to amplitude can be handled.
D. Exposure Compliance Assessment
ICNIRP has defined basic restrictions on the electric field
induced in the human body for the frequency range from 1 Hz to
10 MHz in 2010 guidelines [3]. In order to satisfy requirements
for a sound biological basis and computational constraints, it is
recommended to determine the induced electric field as a vector
average of the electric field in a small contiguous tissue volume
of 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 . As a general rule stated by ICNIRP 2010, the
averaging volume should not extend the boundary of the tissue
except for tissues such as the retina and skin, which are too thin
to cover the whole averaging cube. For the skin, it may extend
to the subcutaneous tissue. For the retina, the tissues in front
and behind it may be included [3].
The applied averaging scheme is based on summing up the
contribution of each voxel within the averaging cube of 2 × 2
× 2 mm3 as follows:

n En Vn
Eavg = 
(10)
n Vn
where En is the electric field located at the center of the nth
voxel, and Vn is the volume of the nth voxel within the averaging
cube. For the outermost voxels, Vn is the portion of that voxel
within the averaging cube. To comply with the general rule of
averaging stated by ICNIRP 2010, the voxels belonging to a
tissue other than the tissue of the target voxel are excluded from
the averaging. The exceptions such as skin and retina are also
considered. The averaged electric field is computed for each
voxel by moving the averaging cube from one voxel center to
another. Besides the spatial averaging, the 99th percentile value
of the induced field of a specific tissue is designated as the
relevant value to be compared against the basis restriction in the
ICNIRP 2010 guidelines [3]. In this study, the 99th percentile
value is chosen among the averaged electric field values for each
tissue.

XIONG et al.: MULTI-GPU ACCELERATED ADMITTANCE METHOD FOR HIGH-RESOLUTION HUMAN EXPOSURE EVALUATION

Reference levels for exposure to external time varying magnetic fields are also provided, which are expected to be conservative or ensure compliance with the basic restrictions under
all exposure conditions. The induced electric field strength depends on the orientation of the external magnetic field to the
body. Generally, a uniform field aligned from the front to the
back of the body produces greatest induced fields. For a given
magnetic field strength and orientation, higher induced fields are
expected for larger body models, as their body cross section is
larger. As a worst scenario, the exposure of the male adult model
Duke to a uniform front-to-back magnetic field is evaluated. A
uniform grid size of 1 mm is applied to discretize the whole
body. The displacement current contribution is considered. The
evaluation is performed at 17 frequency points from 1 Hz to 10
MHz. The strength of the external magnetic field is set to the
reference levels for general public exposure suggested in the
ICNIRP 2010 guidelines [3]. Three electric field quantities are
computed for each tissue: the peak value of the strength of the
electric field at voxel centers Emax , the peak value of the strength
of the 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 -averaged electric field Eavg,max , and the
99th percentile value of the strength of the averaged electric
field Eavg,99th . These extracted quantities are then grouped into
two sets for central nerve system (CNS) tissues and peripheral
nervous system (PNS) tissues. The maximum values are singled out for two sets respectively and compared with the basic
restrictions, as shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b).
The Eavg,99th,max values agree well with the published data
at 50 and 60 Hz [16] within 5% differences. Those differences
can be possibly caused by the grid resolution of discretization.
The Eavg,99th,max values are compliant with the ICNIRP 2010
basic restrictions for both CNS tissues and PNS tissues, as expected. However, it should be noted that the 99th percentile
value is a somewhat arbitrary choice from the biological point
of view. Actually, it may undesirably neglect local hot spots of
the induced electric field occurring in a small tissue region [16],
[17]. In our observation, a large difference between Eavg,max
and Eavg,99th,max for PNS tissues is up to a ratio of around 6, as
shown in Fig. 11(b). As we mentioned before, the cause of the
high peak values appears to be the high tissue contrast in places,
where skin-to-skin contact supports a current loop. This raises
our concerns about the potentially excessive filtering effect of
the 99th percentile approach. Similar underestimations using the
99th percentile rule were observed by other researchers. A 40%
underestimation of the maximum induced electric field has been
demonstrated for a multilayered sphere subjected to a localized
magnetic field exposure [44], in which an in-house FEM solver
was employed. Another research reported huge differences up
to a factor of 110 between Eavg,max and Eavg,99th,max of PNS
tissues for a female child model Roberta under various exposure circumstances [45], which used the FDTD solver in the
simulation platform SEMCAD-X. Our tool is exhibiting the potentially underestimating behavior of 99th percentile approach
that is correlated with other tools.
The Eavg,max values are observed to be compliant with the ICNIRP 2010 basic restrictions for CNS tissues, but not for PNS
tissues. If it is good practice to use Eavg,max as the relevant value
for compliance assessment instead of Eavg,99th to preserve physical peaks, our results would indicate that the reference levels

2929

Fig. 11. ICNIRP 2010 basic restrictions for general public exposure and the
peak values of the electric field induced in Duke exposed to uniform front-toback magnetic fields at the general public reference levels. (a) CNS tissues. (b)
PNS tissues.

given by ICNIRP 2010 guidelines are not always conservative.
The data should be considered by those developing dosimetry
standards.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed an admittance method accelerated on multi-GPU platforms for solving high-resolution
magnetic induction problem of human body. In the implementation, an iterative algorithm named as COCG aiming to solve
symmetric complex linear system is utilized. It was shown to
converge faster and consume less memory space than the widely
used BiCGSTAB algorithm. The multi-GPU acceleration is realized by using domain decomposition approach. Nearly, linear
speedup ratio is achieved by overlapping the computations and
data transfers.
The implemented solver has been used to calculate the induced electric field in a male adult body exposed to a uniform
magnetic field with a spatial resolution of 1 mm, including
consideration of complex tissue parameters. A solution can be

2930

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

obtained in just several minutes. Our solver can also handle incident magnetic fields having spatially varying phase in addition
to amplitude. This is especially valuable to those applications
involving complicated electromagnetic circumstances.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Sunohara et al., “Analysis of in situ electric field and specific absorption
rate in human models for wireless power transfer system with induction
coupling,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 59, no. 14, pp. 3721–3735, Jul. 2014.
[2] N. J. Tachas and T. Samaras, “The effect of head and coil modeling
for the calculation of induced electric field during transcranial magnetic
stimulation,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 167–171, Jul. 2014.
[3] ICNIRP, “Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electric and
magnetic fields (1 Hz to 100 kHz),” Health Physi., vol. 99, no. 6,
pp. 818–836, Dec. 2010.
[4] T. W. Dawson et al., “Pacemaker interference and low-frequency electric induction in humans by external fields and electrodes,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 1211–1218, Sep. 2000.
[5] A. Christ et al., “The virtual family–development of surface-based anatomical models of two adults and two children for dosimetric simulations,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. N23–N38, Jan. 2010.
[6] B. Zhang et al., “CNMAN: A Chinese adult male voxel phantom constructed from color photographs of a visible anatomical data set,” Radiation Protection Dosimetry, vol. 124, no. 2, pp. 130–136, 2007.
[7] P. Dimbylow, “Development of pregnant female, hybrid voxelmathematical models and their application to the dosimetry of applied
magnetic and electric fields at 50 Hz,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 51, no. 10,
pp. 2383–2394, May 2006.
[8] V. Spitzer et al., “The visible human male: A technical report,” J. Amer.
Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 118–130, 1996.
[9] J. G. Jefferys, “Experimental neurobiology of epilepsies,” Current Opinion Neurol., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 113–122, 1994.
[10] O. P. Gandhi et al., “Impedence method for calculation of power deposition
patterns in magnetically induced hyperthermia,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. BE-31, no. 10, pp. 644–651, Oct. 1984.
[11] N. Orcutt and O. P. Gandhi, “A 3-D impedance method to calculate power
deposition in biological bodies subjected to time varying magnetic fields,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 577–583, Aug. 1988.
[12] N. De Geeter et al., “An efficient 3-D eddy-current solver using an independent impedance method for transcranial magnetic stimulation,” IEEE
Transa. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 310–320, Feb. 2011.
[13] T. W. Dawson et al., “Comparison of magnetically induced ELF fields
in humans computed by FDTD and scalar potential FD codes,” Appl.
Comput. Electromagn. Soc. J., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 63–71, 1996.
[14] T. W. Dawson and M. A. Stuchly, “Analytic validation of a threedimensional scalar-potential finite-difference code for low-frequency
magnetic induction,” Appl. Comput. Electromagn. Soc. J., vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 72–81, 1996.
[15] S. Ilvonen and I. Laakso, “Computational estimation of magnetically induced electric fields in a rotating head,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 341–351, Jan. 2009.
[16] J. F. Bakker et al., “Children and adults exposed to low-frequency magnetic fields at the ICNIRP reference levels: Theoretical assessment of the
induced electric fields,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1815–1829,
Apr. 2012.
[17] X.-L. Chen et al., “Analysis of human brain exposure to low-frequency
magnetic fields: A numerical assessment of spatially averaged electric
fields and exposure limits,” Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 375–
384, Jul. 2013.
[18] J. De Moerloose et al., “Application of the finite difference time domain algorithm to quasi-static field analysis,” Radio Sci., vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 329–341, Mar. 1997.
[19] H.-J. Song et al., “Induced current calculation in detailed 3-D adult and
child model for the wireless power transfer frequency range,” IEEE Trans.
Magn., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 1041–1044, Feb. 2014.
[20] M. E. Potter et al., “Low frequency finite difference time domain (FDTD)
for modeling of induced fields in humans close to line sources,” J. Comput.
Phys., vol. 162, no. 1, pp. 82–103, Jul. 2000.
[21] H. Wang et al., “An efficient impedance method for induced field evaluation based on a stabilized bi-conjugate gradient algorithm,” Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 53, no. 22, pp. 6363–6375, Nov. 2008.

[22] I. Laakso and A. Hirata, “Fast multigrid-based computation of the induced
electric field for transcranial magnetic stimulation,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 57, no. 23, pp. 7753–7765, Dec. 2012.
[23] I. Laakso and A. Hirata, “Improving the computational speed and reducing
the staircasing error for simulations of human exposure to low frequency
magnetic fields,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Electromagn. Compat., Sep. 2012,
pp. 1–4.
[24] V. D. Santis et al., “Issues of ICNIRP guidelines when determining compliance with LF exposure limits,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Electromagn. Compat.,
2012, pp. 2010–2013.
[25] A. Barchanski et al., “Large-scale calculation of low-frequency-induced
currents in high-resolution human body models,” IEEE Trans. Magn.,
vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1693–1696, Apr. 2007.
[26] A. Christ et al., “Evaluation of wireless resonant power transfer systems
with human electromagnetic exposure limits,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn.
Compat., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 265–274, Apr. 2013.
[27] S. W. Park et al., “Calculation errors of the electric field induced in a
human body under quasi-static approximation conditions,” IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2153–2160, May 2013.
[28] P. J. Dimbylow, “Induced current densities from low-frequency magnetic
fields in a 2 mm resolution, anatomically realistic model of the body,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 221–230, Feb. 1998.
[29] C. Gabriel et al., “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: I. Literature survey,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2231–2249, Nov.
1996.
[30] S. Gabriel et al., “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: II. Measurements in the frequency range 10 Hz to 20 GHz,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2251–2269, Nov. 1996.
[31] S. Gabriel et al., “The dielectric properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2271–2293, Nov. 1996.
[32] K. G. Efthimiadis et al., “Magnetic stimulation of the spine: The role of
tissues and their modelling,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2541–
2553, May 2010.
[33] A. Barchanski et al., “Impact of the displacement current on low-frequency
electromagnetic fields computed using high-resolution anatomy models,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 50, no. 19, pp. N243–N249, Oct. 2005.
[34] K. H. Chan et al., “Corrigendum: Computational dosimetry for grounded
and ungrounded human models due to contact current,” Phys. Med. Biol.,
vol. 58, no. 15, pp. 5153–5172, Jul. 2013.
[35] R. Barrett et al., Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems: Building
Blocks for Iterative Methods, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM,
Jan. 1994.
[36] H. A. van der Vorst, Iterative Krylov Methods for Large Linear Systems.
West Nyack, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[37] G. H. Golub and C. F. V. Loan, Matrix computations, 4th ed. Baltimore,
MD, USA: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 2013.
[38] Y. Saad, Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2003.
[39] H. A. van der Vorst and J. B. M. Melissen, “A Petrov-Galerkin type method
for solving Axk=b, where A is symmetric complex,” IEEE Trans. Magn.,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 706–708, Mar. 1990.
[40] R. W. Freund et al., “An implementation of the look-ahead Lanczos algorithm for non-Hermitian matrices,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 14, no. I,
pp. 137–158, 1993.
[41] NVIDIA. (2014). CUDA C programming guide [Online]. Available:
http://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/
[42] M. Leeser et al., “OpenCL floating point software on heterogeneous architecturesportable or not,” in Proc. Workshop Numerical Softw. Verification,
pp. 1–7, 2012.
[43] P. A. Hasgall et al. (2012). ITIS Database for thermal and electromagnetic parameters of biological tissues [Online]. Available:
www.itis.ethz.ch/database
[44] I. Laakso and A. Hirata, “Corrigendum: Reducing the staircasing error in
computational dosimetry of low-frequency electromagnetic fields,” Phys.
Med. Biol., vol. 57, no. 15, pp. 5057–5057, Aug. 2012.
[45] G. Schmid et al., “The role of skin conductivity in a low frequency exposure assessment for peripheral nerve tissue according to the ICNIRP 2010
guidelines,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 58, no. 13, pp. 4703–4716, Jul. 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

