IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

2931

Chest-Worn Health Monitor Based on a Bistatic
Self-Injection-Locked Radar
Fu-Kang Wang∗ , Member, IEEE, You-Rung Chou, Yen-Chen Chiu, and Tzyy-Sheng Horng, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents wearable health monitors that
are based on continuous-wave Doppler radar technology. To
achieve low complexity, low power consumption, and simultaneous wireless transmission of Doppler information, the radar architecture is bistatic with a self-injection-locked oscillator (SILO)
tag and an injection-locked oscillator (ILO)-based frequency demodulator. In experiments with a prototype that was operated in
the medical body area network and the industrial scientific and
medical bands from 2.36 to 2.484 GHz, the SILO tag is attached
to the chest of a subject to transform the movement of the chest
due to cardiopulmonary activity and body exercise into a transmitted frequency-modulated wave. The tag consumes a very low
power of 4.4 mW. The ILO-based frequency demodulator, located
30 cm from the subject, receives and processes this wave to yield
the waveform that is associated with the movement of the chest.
Following further digital signal processing, the cardiopulmonary
activity and body exercise are displayed as time-frequency spectrograms. Promisingly, the experimental results that are presented
in this paper reveal that the proposed health monitor has high potential to integrate a cardiopulmonary sensor, a pedometer, and a
wireless transmission device on a single radar platform.
Index Terms—Bistatic self-injection-locked (SIL) radar, cardiopulmonary sensor, Doppler continuous-wave radar, pedometer, time-frequency spectrogram, wearable health monitor, wireless
transmission.

I. INTRODUCTION
OR a long time, cardiopulmonary monitoring has been an
important means of evaluating exercise intensity. The monitored heart rate variability (HRV) can be used to enhance the
exercise performance and to prevent exercise-induced oxidative
stress and muscle damage [1]. HRV information is commonly
used in the diagnosis and treatment of autonomic imbalance and
cardiovascular disease [2]. Wearable devices have gained great
popularity in healthcare contexts owing to their effectiveness in
the long-term monitoring of human posture and physiological
parameters [3], [4]. However, most currently available solutions integrate a wireless device with several sensors such as an
accelerometer, an oxygen saturation meter, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) monitor [5], resulting in high complexity and

F

Manuscript received January 28, 2015; revised April 2, 2015; accepted June
26, 2015. Date of publication July 8, 2015; date of current version November
20, 2015. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Science and
Technology, Taiwan, under Grant MOST 103-2221-E-110-013-MY3 and Grant
MOST 103-2221-E-110-016-MY2. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ F.-K. Wang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan (e-mail: d983010020@student.
nsysu.edu.tw).
Y.-R. Chou, Y.-C. Chiu, and T.-S. Horng are with the National Sun Yat-Sen
University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2453255

high power consumption. Furthermore, these sensors must be
in contact with the skin so they cannot be worn on clothes.
Doppler radars were developed decades ago for noncontact
cardiopulmonary monitoring [6]–[8]. They have great potential as wearable health monitoring devices because they use
radio waves that easily penetrate clothes. The two major classes
of Doppler radars are pulse radars and continuous-wave (CW)
radars. A pulse radar transmits a stream of short radio frequency
(RF) pulses, and determines the motion of a target by measuring the delay taken to receive the pulses that are reflected from
the target in relation to their round-trip propagation time. A
monostatic pulse radar uses the same antenna for transmitting
and receiving. However, it cannot receive in the period of pulse
transmission. This limitation creates a blind interval that restricts
the short-range detection of Doppler signals and causes difficulties in its application to wearable radar monitors. A CW radar
continuously transmits a RF signal, and its receiver is always
on to detect the reflected signal. Therefore, no blind interval
exists. However, its major shortcoming is the need to isolate the
transmitted (Tx) from the received (Rx) signals using either a
circulator or separate Tx and Rx antennas. Hence, reducing the
size and cost of integration of CW radars for wearable applications encounters significant challenges.
Recently, the authors proposed a self-injection-locked (SIL)
radar for motion detection. In its basic operation, an oscillator
transmits a CW signal, which is partly reflected by a moving
target and subsequently injected into the same oscillator to form
an SIL state. The Doppler shifts that are associated with the motion of the target can be extracted by frequency-demodulating
the output signal of the oscillator. This radar has been verified
to exhibit high sensitivity with low complexity [9], and its sensitivity is highly resistant to Tx–Rx coupling, so the radar can
be operated with a single antenna [10]. Additionally, the SIL
radar can be made bistatic by spatially separating it into two
parts—an SIL oscillator (SILO) and a frequency demodulator,
each of which has its own antenna. These parts form a basic
building block of a wearable monitoring system [11], [12].
Despite the superior performance of the SIL radar, movement
of the body critically affects the accuracy of the monitoring of
the cardiopulmonary signals. Currently used CW radar-based
cardiopulmonary monitors that cancel the effects of random
body motion include a dual-frequency radar [13], a radar with a
camera [14], and two radars that are placed in the front and rear
of the body [10], [15] or up and down in front of the body [16].
However, all of these monitors are based on stationary radar
systems, and therefore, may not be wearable. Although, the
empirical mode decomposition method has been demonstrated
to remove artifacts that arise from the motion of the monitor
in the extraction of the heart rate [17], [18], the accuracy of
the results thus obtained depends on the characteristics of the
motion of the monitor.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2932

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 3.

Block diagram of the SILO tag.

Fig. 4.

Block diagram of the ILO-based frequency demodulator.

Wearable health monitor with wireless connection to mobile gadgets.

intensities, to be distinguished from each other accurately and
reliably.
II. BISTATIC SIL RADAR

Fig. 2. Proposed wearable Doppler radar health monitors using a SILO tag
and an ILO-based frequency demodulator.

This paper develops economic low-power wearable devices
for tracking health and fitness. As shown in Fig. 1, a chestworn health monitor provides information concerning respiration and heart rates, exercise intensity, and the effect thereof
on heart rate. Additionally, automatic wireless connection to
nearby mobile gadgets does not add excessive power consumption overhead. As depicted in Fig. 2, the system consists of two
main components—a SILO tag attached to the chest of the subject and an injection-locked oscillator (ILO)-based frequency
demodulator that can be simply designed as part of the RF circuitry in a mobile gadget. Theoretically, the Doppler signal that
is generated by the movement of the chest frequency -modulates
the signal of the SILO tag, which is then transmitted with an
RF carrier. The ILO-based frequency demodulator at the far end
retrieves the Doppler signals using a frequency discrimination
technique. Time-frequency analysis [19]–[21] and a moving average filter [22] in the digital signal processing (DSP) procedure
enable the two concurrent chest motions, cardiopulmonary motion and motion due to body exercise, which have very different

Unlike the conventional bistatic CW radar with a separate
transmitter and receiver, the proposed SIL-based CW radar is
bistatic in the sense that the modulator and the demodulator
are separated. In the system shown in Fig. 2, the SILO tag
and the ILO-based receiving circuit serve as the Doppler frequency modulator and demodulator, respectively. With reference to Figs. 3 and 4, when the SILO tag receives an echo signal
Sin j (t), the SILO outputs a signal Sout (t), whose frequency is
modulated with the Doppler information due to the injection of
the echo signal. Consequently, the waves that are emitted and
received by the antenna of the SILO tag contain the Doppler
information. Therefore, the ILO-based frequency demodulator
can receive the signal Sout (t) wirelessly via its own antenna to
allow the demodulation of the Doppler information at flexible
locations. This is a very unique feature of the bistatic SIL radar.
The two separate parts of the system described above operate
according to the following principles.
A. SILO Tag
As shown in Fig. 3, the SILO tag uses a single antenna to
transmit the CW output signal toward the subject and to receive the reflected Doppler signal without the need to isolate
the signals from each other. Assume that the SILO has an inherent oscillation frequency ωosc , constant oscillation amplitude
Eosc , and a tank quality factor Qtank . When a Doppler-reflected
signal with amplitude Ein j is injected into the SILO, the instantaneous voltage-controlled oscillator output frequency ωout (t)

WANG et al.: CHEST-WORN HEALTH MONITOR BASED ON A BISTATIC SELF-INJECTION-LOCKED RADAR

(1)



2ωosc R
−Q(t)
≈ ωosc τIL − ωLR,tag τIL sin
B(t) = tan
I(t)
c


2ωosc R
2ωosc ωLR,tag τIL
cos
Δx(t),
(5)
−
c
c

(2)

where I(t) and Q(t) are low-pass filtered baseband I and Q signals, respectively. The time delay τI L is estimated as

can be obtained using Adler’s equation [23]
ωout (t) = ωosc − ωLR,tag sin α(t)

−1

where
ωLR,tag =

ωosc
Einj
·
2Qtank Eosc

is the locking range that is associated with the SILO. In (1),
α(t) equals the propagation phase delay between the transmitted
signal and the injected signal, which is given by
α (t) =

2ωosc
(R + Δx (t))
c

2933

(3)

where R represents the distance from the tag to the chest;
Δx(t) = xt (t) − xc (t) is the relative instantaneous displacement between the tag and the chest, and c denotes the speed
of light. When the body is stationary, Δx(t) is caused by cardiopulmonary motion. However, when the body moves, Δx(t)
needs to add a displacement to account for the inertia of the
SILO tag. Owing to the elasticity of clothes, the proposed radar
system acts as an accelerometer to detect such a displacement as
a measure of body acceleration. As a result, Δx(t) is expressed
as
m
Δx (t) = xv (t) + ab (t)
(4)
ks
where xv (t) denotes the chest displacement due to respiration
and heartbeat, m is the mass of the SILO tag, ks represents the
spring constant of clothes, and ab (t) is the acceleration of the
body.
From (1) and (3), Δx(t) can be determined by frequencydemodulating the SILO output signal. Moreover, the reflection
from the antenna with coefficient Γa can be regarded as stationary clutter with a constant phase delay α0 ; accordingly, its effect
on the SIL radar is to cause a small constant frequency shift
equal to ωL R ,tag sinα0 in the SILO, rather than a serious dc offset in the baseband, which commonly occurs in a conventional
CW radar. This fact explains why the SIL radar requires only a
single antenna for simultaneous transmission and reception. As
discussed further below, the frequency offset that is caused by
antenna reflection does not influence the baseband processing
of Doppler signals by an ILO-based frequency demodulator.
B. ILO-Based Frequency Demodulator
The ILO-based frequency demodulator, displayed in Fig. 4,
is constructed from a low-noise amplifier (LNA), an ILO
with a dedicated injection terminal, a pair of in-phase (I) and
quadrature-phase (Q) mixers, and two low-pass filters (LPFs).
The Doppler-modulated signals that are emitted from the SILO
tag are captured by the Rx antenna and amplified by the LNA.
Then, the output signals from the LNA are fed into the RF
terminals of the IQ mixers and the injection terminal of the
ILO that enters an injection-locked state after it receives the
injected signals. The ILO functions as a band-pass amplifier
with a time delay τIL , and with the IQ mixers, it performs frequency discrimination using an unwrapped arctangent method.
Mathematically, the demodulator output is given by [11]

τI L = 

1
ωL R ,R x 2 − Δωosc 2

(6)

where ωLR,Rx is the locking range that is associated with the
ILO, and Δωosc is the frequency difference between the inherent
ILO frequency and the frequency of the injection signal. Obviously, the information of chest motion Δx(t) can be extracted
from the ac component in (5). Notably, since the ILO output signal is locked to the frequency of the Doppler-modulated signal,
the problem of the aforementioned frequency shift in the SILO
due to stationary clutter is solved.
It is worth mentioning that the demodulator shown in Fig. 4 is
very similar to a quadrature receiver in a wireless communication system, except that the local oscillator is an ILO rather than
a phase-locked oscillator. Therefore, it can be implemented using semiconductor technology as a standalone IC, or integrated
into a wireless communication IC. Moreover, there are two ways
to improve the communication distance between the tag and the
demodulator. One is to increase the output power of the tag, but
doing so shortens the battery life and may cause interference
with other wireless devices. The other is to enhance the sensitivity of the demodulator by simply increasing the gain of the
LNA, which is preferred in this application.
III. DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING
A. Time-Frequency Spectrogram
Joint time-frequency analysis (JTFA) can reveal signal characteristics in both time and frequency domains, yielding a twodimensional representation of the signal. This technique is appropriate for processing signals with indeterminate future behavior or with time-variant frequencies, such as speech, image,
and medical signals. The short-time Fourier transform (STFT)
is widely applied in the JTFA of vital signs and motion signals
[24]–[28] whose frequencies do not dramatically change, owing
to its low computational complexity and absence of cross-term
interference [20].
The sliding window function is utilized to perform the Fourier
transform in a particular period, and the STFT is then defined
as
 ∞
B (τ )w (t − τ ) e−j 2π f τ dτ
(7)
STFT (t, f ) =
−∞

where w is the window function. Furthermore, the spectrogram
is the magnitude of the STFT squared
SP (t, f ) = |STFT (t, f )|2 .

(8)

The window length influences the resolution of both time and
frequency. Generally, a longer window is required to distinguish
more effectively signals with similar frequencies; however, an
irregular signal is then more likely to become too strong and

2934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

possibly destroy the harmonic pattern [24]. This fact explains
why a shorter window (such as 0.25 s [25] or 0.4 s [28]) is favored for analyzing motion whereas a longer window is favored
for examining vital signs (such as 5 s [24] or 8 s [26]). Moreover, the overlap between window lengths, which can reduce
the edge aliasing in the spectrogram, should be increased (such
as to 39% [24] or 50% [28]) to favor the detection of violent
motions. Notably, the dynamic range of a conventional motion
sensor is limited, and to the best of the authors’ knowledge,
no literature exists on the use of a spectrogram to display the
motion associated with exercise and cardiopulmonary activities
at the same time.
In this paper, a Kaiser window of sufficient window length and
overlap is adopted in the STFT-based spectrogram of the body
motion and cardiopulmonary signals that were detected using
the proposed bistatic SIL radar system. The various signals in
the spectrogram can be individually emphasized by applying the
moving average filter that is described in the following section.

Fig. 5. Attenuation responses of the moving average filters with 3, 5, and 11
iterations.

B. Moving Average Filter
The moving average filter operates by averaging a number of
points from the input signal to produce each point in the output
signal. Mathematically, [22]
Bk [i] =

N −1
1 
Bk −1 [i + j]
N j =0

(9)

where Bk −1 [ ] and Bk [ ] are the input and output signals in
the kth iteration, and N is the number of points that are used in
the averaging. Equation (9) is a low-pass moving average filter.
Differently, this paper uses a band-pass moving average filter as
given below:
Bk [i] = Bk −1 [i] −

N −1
1 
Bk −1 [i + j].
N j =0

The frequency response of (10) can be derived as

k
sin(N πf Δt)
hk (f ) = 1 −
N sin(πf Δt)

(10)

(11)

where Δt is the sampling time interval. This frequency response
yields a maximum value at


3
2
1
N≈
−
.
(12)
·
2 3π 2
f0 Δt
Notably, in approximation (12), f0 is the frequency of a specific signal of interest. The suppression of signals of other frequencies can be enhanced by increasing the number of iterations
k.
Substituting (12) into (11) and assuming f Δt  1 allows
us to plot the attenuation responses of the moving average filters with 3, 5, and 11 iterations as function of the normalized
frequency f /f0 in Fig. 5. These filters are for later use in the
experiments of Section IV, providing a greater attenuation in
low stopband than in high stopband. Moreover, their stopband
attenuation increases with the number of iteration k, but at the
cost of computation time and memory.
Unlike preprocessing approaches in previous studies, such as
QRST wave cancellation for the ECG wave [24], feature classification [25], the application of a circular autocovariance filter

Fig. 6. Experimental setup of the proposed wearable Doppler radar health
monitors. (a) Experimental site. (b) Chest-worn SILO tag.

[26], the use of a cascaded integrator-comb filter and a decimator [27], and the step recognition algorithm [28], the moving
average filter is characterized by the ease of implementation,
its ability to remove a dc-offset effect, and its ability to emphasize the desired signal. In this paper, the moving average
filter is utilized to demonstrate for the first time how to distinguish between the cardiopulmonary and physical activities
in the time-frequency spectrogram of radar-detected signals, as
will be described in the next section.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 6(a) presents an experimental setup for the proposed
health monitoring system that operates in the 2.36–2.484 GHz
MBAN and ISM bands. A SILO tag is attached to the chest
area on the front of the sleeveless shirt of subject under test
(SUT), as shown in Fig. 6(b). An ILO-based frequency demodulator with an Rx antenna receives and demodulates this signal.
The distance between the SILO tag and the ILO-based frequency demodulator is approximately 30 cm. A digital storage
oscilloscope (DSO) is then utilized to digitize the baseband
quadrature signals for further processing of the time-frequency
spectrograms. The sampling rate of the DSO was set to 20 Hz.
The SILO tag, which was implemented using hybrid circuits,
delivered an RF power of –5.2 dBm at a low power consumption
of only 4.4 mW. In this paper, four experiments were conducted
in the following scenarios.

WANG et al.: CHEST-WORN HEALTH MONITOR BASED ON A BISTATIC SELF-INJECTION-LOCKED RADAR

Fig. 8.

2935

STFT-based spectrogram of Fig. 7(b).

Fig. 7. Processing of the measured baseband I and Q signals in Experiment
A. (a) Polar trajectory. (b) Arctangent output.

A. Standing With Fidgeting
In the first experiment, the respiration and heart rates of the
SUT were monitored as the SUT stood still and breathed normally. Fig. 7(a) and (b) plots the polar trajectory and arctangent
of the measured I and Q signals. In Fig. 7(a), the magnitude
and phase range from 0.087 to 0.106 V and from 2.3° to 20.6°,
respectively, mainly because of the movement of the chest that
was caused by cardiopulmonary activity. The calculated rootmean-square (RMS) amplitude of the arctangent output shown
in Fig. 7(b) is 4.4°, and it can be used as an indicator of intensity of physical activity. In Fig. 7(b), the irregular fluctuation
in the period between 32 and 38 s results from the fidgeting of
the SUT, producing some artifacts in the Fourier-transformed
spectra, degrading the quality of the obtained cardiopulmonary
information. To combat this effect, a time-frequency spectrogram of the arctangent output was computed using a Kaiser
window with a length of 400 points, a sampling rate of 20 Hz
over an interval of 20 s, and a side lobe attenuation of 40 dB.
Notably, the window length was chosen as a tradeoff between
frequency and time resolution. The window overlap length was
set to 398 points to smoothly continue the frequency lines in the
spectrogram.
Fig. 8 shows the spectrogram of Fig. 7(b) using STFT with
the dc offset removed. The recognizable frequency lines from
bottom to top are associated with the fundamental (0.31 Hz),
second harmonic (0.62 Hz), and third harmonic (0.93 Hz) of the
respiration signal, and the heartbeat signal (1.25 Hz). In Fig. 8,
the respiration fundamental frequency line is diffused between
28 and 40 s because of the fidgeting artifacts. A larger window
overlap has been empirically observed to correspond to a longer
period of diffusion.
To enhance the sharpness and contrast of the fundamental
respiration and heartbeat frequency lines in the spectrogram,

Fig. 9. Renormalized spectrograms with three-iteration moving average filtering to enhance the cardiopulmonary information. (a) Spectrogram with highlighted respiration frequency line at 0.31 Hz. (b) Spectrogram with highlighted
heartbeat frequency line at 1.25 Hz.

the arctangent output is preprocessed by applying the proposed
moving average filter at the respiration fundamental and heartbeat frequency, respectively. The number of iteration used in
this filter for monitoring the health of a stationary SUT is three.
Fig. 9(a) and (b) shows the renormalized spectrograms with
moving average filtering to enhance the respiration fundamental
and heartbeat frequency lines at 0.31 and 1.25 Hz, respectively.
Both of these frequency lines are clearly highlighted in their
respective spectrograms, and a breathing rate of 18.6 beats/min
and a heart rate of 75 beats/min are identified over a duration of
40 s.

2936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 11.

Fig. 10. Processing of the measured baseband I and Q signals in Experiment
B. (a) Pola trajectoy. (b) Arctangent output.

In short, although fidgeting produces some artifacts that commonly cause diffusion of the frequency lines to be captured
for cardiopulmonary information, the presented time-frequency
spectrograms, based on the prefiltered arctangent output data,
effectively reduce the interference of the fidgeting artifacts and
even mutual interference among various targeted signals, providing more accurate and reliable cardiopulmonary information.
Nonetheless, some momentary motion may cause the frequencies of interest to overlap and hard to extract. This phenomenon
can be improved based on the autocorrelation concept by using a
spectral product approach, as shown in our previous work [11],
but at the expense of more computation time and memory.
B. Walking With Deep Breathing
The second experiment concerns the monitoring of the health
of the SUT when walking in place and breathing deeply.
Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows the baseband IQ processing results,
including the polar trajectory and arctangent output. The trajectory in Fig. 10(a) has a magnitude and phase that range from
0.129 to 0.204 V and from −18.2° to 33.4°, respectively. The
obtained RMS magnitude of the arctangent output shown in
Fig. 10(b) is 8.4°. To find more distinguishable frequencies related to the physiological and physical activities of an exercising
SUT, the window and overlap lengths are changed to 1000 and
998 points, respectively, to increase the frequency resolution at
the cost of decreased time resolution in computing the spectrograms. The same window conditions are applied in the next two
experiments for the same SUT doing different exercises. It is
worthwhile to note that the polar trajectory of the baseband IQ
signals can be used to judge whether the SUT is doing exercise
or not.
In the spectrogram in Fig. 11, the respiration fundamental
and harmonic frequency lines up to the fifth harmonic can be
seen clearly at up to five multiples of 0.21 Hz, because the SUT

STFT-based spectrogram of Fig. 10(b).

took deep breaths during the walking exercise. In addition to
the respiration fundamental and harmonic frequency lines, the
heartbeat frequency line is observed at 1.39 Hz. The frequency
lines at 1.19 and 2.38 Hz correspond to half and the full frequency of the signal that is associated with walking. Since the
walking motion causes one side of the chest to move forward and
then backward as each pair of consecutive steps is taken, and the
other side of the chest to move in the opposite direction, the half
and full frequencies associated with walking are actually the
fundamental and second harmonic frequencies of this periodic
chest movement that occurs during the walking exercise.
Before the moving average filters are utilized to highlight
the targeted respiration fundamental, heartbeat and walking rate
frequency lines, the most critical task is to distinguish these frequency lines from the others in Fig. 11, as follows. Empirically,
a higher harmonic frequency line of respiration or a half-rate
frequency line of walking may be close to the heartbeat frequency line. Therefore, the respiration fundamental frequency
line is identified in the first step because doing so is crucial to
identify the respiration harmonic frequency lines. Notably, the
respiration fundamental component can be identified by its having the largest amplitude in the low-frequency range, which is,
say, 0.1–0.75 Hz in this experiment.
In the next step, the full-frequency line of walking is identified
by its having the largest signal amplitude in the high-frequency
range, which is, say, 1.75–5 Hz in this experiment. Based on this
knowledge, the half-rate frequency line of walking can be identified in the spectrogram. Finally, the heartbeat frequency line is
identified by finding the signal with the largest amplitude in the
range of 0.75–1.75 Hz, with the respiration harmonic signals
and the signal at half of the walking rate excluded. Furthermore,
since the heart rate changed continuously during the exercise, the
heart rate of the standing SUT that was measured in Experiment
A can also be used to recognize the heartbeat frequency line in
a spectrogram that is obtained while the SUT is doing exercise.
In this experiment for monitoring the health of a walking
SUT, a five-iteration moving average filter is utilized to improve
the sharpness and contrast of the frequency lines at 0.21, 1.39,
and 2.38 Hz to highlight the respiration fundamental, heartbeat
and full walking rate signals in a renormalized spectrogram, as
shown in Fig. 12(a), (b), and (c), respectively. This figure clearly
reveals a respiration rate of 12.6 beats/min, a heart rate of 83.4
beats/min, and a walking rate of 142.8 steps/min.

WANG et al.: CHEST-WORN HEALTH MONITOR BASED ON A BISTATIC SELF-INJECTION-LOCKED RADAR

2937

Fig. 13. Processing of the measured baseband I and Q signals in Experiment
C. (a) Polar trajectory. (b) Arctangent output.

Fig. 14.
Fig. 12. Renormalized spectrograms with five-iteration moving average filtering to enhance the cardiopulmonary and exercise information. (a) Spectrogram
with highlighted respiration frequency line at 0.21 Hz. (b) Spectrogram with
highlighted full walking-rate frequency line at 2.38 Hz. (c) Spectrogram with
highlighted heartbeat frequency line at 1.39 Hz.

C. Jogging With Rapid Breath
In the third experiment, health monitoring was carried out
while the SUT was jogging in place and breathing rapidly.
Fig. 13(a) and (b) plots the polar trajectory and arctangent output
that are obtained from the measured baseband I and Q signals.
The ranges of magnitude and phase in the trajectory plot of
Fig. 13(a) are from 0.009 to 0.215 V and from 52° to 84.2°,
respectively, and these are markedly wider than those in the previous two experiments because the intensity of motion is greater
in this experiment. The arctangent plot of Fig. 13(b) yields an
RMS magnitude of 20.1°. Moreover, in Fig. 13(b), the waveform changes very rapidly from 75 to 125 s because the subject

STFT-based spectrogram of Fig. 13 (b).

stumbles in this period. Fig. 14 presents the spectrogram that
is obtained from Fig. 13(b), and some frequency artifacts are
observed in the period in which the SUT stumbled.
Following the previous filtering procedure, the respiration
fundamental and full jogging rate signals are identified by having the largest signal amplitude in the frequency ranges of 0.1–
0.75 Hz and 1.75–5 Hz, respectively; their frequencies are 0.35
and 4.63 Hz, respectively. Since the frequency artifacts that are
caused by the stumble appear only briefly, the heartbeat signal
is identified as associated with a time-continuous 1.54 Hz frequency line in the range of 0.75–1.75 Hz. For monitoring the
health of an SUT doing sports such as jogging and fitness, an 11iteration moving average filter is applied to the spectrograms.
With its help, a respiration rate of 21 beats/min, a heart rate
of 92.4 beats/min, and a jogging step rate of 277.8 steps/min
are clearly determined from the renormalized spectrograms, as
shown in Fig. 15(a)–(c).

2938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

Fig. 16. Processing of the measured baseband I and Q signals in Experiment
D. (a) Polar trajectory. (b) Arctangent output.

Fig. 17.

Fig. 15. Renormalized spectrograms with 11-iteration moving average filtering to enhance the cardiopulmonary and exercise information. (a) Spectrogram
with highlighted respiration frequency line at 0.35 Hz. (b) Spectrogram with
highlighted full jogging-rate frequency line at 4.63 Hz. (c) Spectrogram with
highlighted heartbeat frequency line at 1.54 Hz.

D. Walking With Gasping
In this experiment, the SUT walked in place to cool down
after finishing the jogging exercise. Fig. 16(a) and (b) displays
the corresponding polar trajectory and arctangent plots. The
magnitude and phase of the IQ trajectory range from 0.053 to
0.146 V and from −12.8° to 33.2°, respectively, which are close
to those in Experiment B because both experiments involved
walking. The RMS magnitude estimated from the arctangent
data of Fig. 16(b) is 5.5°. Fig. 17 shows the STFT-based spectrogram that is obtained from Fig. 16(b), which is the most perturbed spectrogram of any in this study, because of the gasping.
Abnormally rapid respiration was observed during this experi-

STFT-based spectrogram of Fig. 16(b).

ment. The gasping caused the higher respiration harmonics to
interfere significantly with the heartbeat frequency line. Moreover, the half rate of walking is quite close to the heartbeat
frequency, increasing the difficulty of identifying the heartbeat
frequency line in Fig. 17.
Fig. 18(a) and (b) displays the renormalized spectrograms
with the application of moving average filtering to enhance the
respiration fundamental frequency line that starts at 0.43 Hz
and the full walking-rate frequency line that starts at 1.86 Hz.
The search of Fig. 17 for the heartbeat frequency within the
frequency range 0.75–1.75 Hz yields four candidate starting
frequencies −0.93, 1.26, 1.4, and 1.5 Hz. The frequencies 0.93
and 1.29 Hz are excluded because the former is half of the frequency of walking and the latter is the third harmonic frequency
of respiration. The frequency 1.5 Hz is also unacceptable
because it is very close to the heartbeat frequency that was
observed in the jogging exercise in Experiment C. As a result,
Fig. 18(c) exhibits the renormalized spectrogram with moving
average filtering to highlight the expected heartbeat frequency

WANG et al.: CHEST-WORN HEALTH MONITOR BASED ON A BISTATIC SELF-INJECTION-LOCKED RADAR

2939

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF MONITORING RESULTS AMONG DIFFERENT EXPERIMENTS
Exp.

Respiration rate

Heart rate

Step rate

RMS amplitude

A
B
C
D

18.6 beats/min
12.6 beats/min
21 beats/min
25.8 beats/min

75 beats/min
83.4 beats/min
92.4 beats/min
84–78 beats/min

0 steps/min
142.8 steps/min
277.8 steps/min
111.6 steps/min

4.4°
8.4°
20.1°
5.5°

also the most difficult to obtain. However, since the heart rate
depends on the intensity of exercise as indicated by the RMS
amplitude, it can be continuously tracked by machine learning methods owing to this dependence. Therefore, the proposed
radar platform has great potential to provide increasingly effective and reliable cardiopulmonary monitoring during exercise in
the near future.
V. CONCLUSION
Based on a bistatic radar architecture that uses injection locking techniques to modulate and demodulate Doppler signals at
separate locations, the proposed radar system has great potential
for use in wearable devices with health monitoring functions.
In the experiments that were carried out herein, a chest-worn
SILO tag was used to frequency-modulate, with low power consumption, Doppler signals that were generated by chest motion.
An ILO-based frequency demodulator was dedicated to retrieve
wirelessly the Doppler signals. Subsequent JTFA and moving
average filtering of the detected Doppler signals enabled the system to establish spectrograms that emphasized various signals.
Therefore, the system can monitor respiration and heartbeat as
well as a wide range of physical activities, such as fidgeting,
walking, and jogging.
REFERENCES

Fig. 18. Renormalized spectrograms with 11-iteration moving average filtering to enhance the cardiopulmonary and exercise information. (a) Spectrogram
with highlighted respiration frequency line at 0.43 Hz. (b) Spectrogram with
highlighted full walking-rate frequency line at 1.86 Hz. (c) Spectrogram with
highlighted heartbeat frequency line within 1.3–1.4 Hz.

line starting at 1.4 Hz. This figure reveals that the heartbeat
frequency falls slowly from 1.4 to 1.3 Hz during the period of
measurement because the SUT is engaged in a cooling-down
exercise. Staying with the same choice in Experiment C, all
moving average filters in this experiment are iterated 11 times.
Fig. 18(a)–(c) provides the following important information; a
respiration rate of 25.8 beats/min, a drop in the heart rate from
84 to 78 beats/min, and a walking rate of 111.6 steps/min.
Table I summarizes the rates of respiration, heartbeat, and
walking or jogging that were monitored in the above experiments. The heart rate is the most important information but

[1] J. Achten and A. E. Jeukendrup, “Heart rate monitoring,” Sports Med.,
vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 517–538, Jun. 2003.
[2] J. F. Thayer et al., “The relationship of autonomic imbalance, heart rate
variability and cardiovascular disease risk factors,” Int. J. Cardiology,
vol. 141, no. 2, pp. 122–131, May 2010.
[3] Y.-L. Zheng et al., “Unobtrusive sensing and wearable devices for health
informatics,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1538–1554,
May 2014.
[4] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable sensorbased systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2010.
[5] W.-Y. Chung et al., “A wireless sensor network compatible wearable Uhealthcare monitoring system using integrated ECG, accelerometer and
SpO2 ,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Vancouver, BC, Canada, Aug. 2008, pp. 1529–1532.
[6] Ø. Aardal and J. Hammerstad, “Medical radar literature overview,”
Norwegian Defence Res. Establishment, Kjeller, Norway, FFI-rapport
2010/00958, 2010.
[7] C. Gu et al., “Accurate respiration measurement using DC-coupled
continuous-wave radar sensor for motion-adaptive cancer radiotherapy,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3117–3123, Nov. 2012.
[8] C. Li et al., “A review on recent advances in Doppler radar sensors for
noncontact healthcare monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech.,
vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2046–2060, May 2013.
[9] F.-K. Wang et al., “A novel vital-sign sensor based on a self-injectionlocked oscillator,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 58, no. 12,
pp. 4112–4120, Dec. 2010.
[10] F.-K. Wang et al., “Single-antenna Doppler radar using self and mutual injection locking for vital sign detection with random body movement cancellation,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 59, no. 12,
pp. 3577–3587, Dec. 2011.

2940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2015

[11] F.-K. Wang et al., “Concurrent vital sign and position sensing of multiple individuals using self-injection-locked tags and injection-locked I/Q
receivers with arctangent demodulation,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 4689–4699, Dec. 2013.
[12] Y.-C. Chiu et al., “Wearable Doppler radar health monitor with gesture
control,” in Proc. Asia-Pacific Microw. Conf., Sendai, Japan, Nov. 2014,
pp. 944–946.
[13] J. H. Oum et al., “Two frequency radar sensor for non-contact vital signal
monitor,” in Proc. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Atlanta, GA,
USA, Jun. 2008, pp. 919–922.
[14] C. Gu et al., “A hybrid radar-camera sensing system with phase compensation for random body movement cancellation in Doppler vital
sign detection,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 61, no. 12,
pp. 4678–4688, Dec. 2013.
[15] C. Li and J. Lin, “Random body movement cancellation in Doppler radar
vital sign detection,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 56, no. 12,
pp. 3143–3152, Dec. 2008.
[16] R. Fletcher and J. Han, “Low-cost differential front-end for Doppler radar
vital sign monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig.,
Boston, MA, USA, Jun. 2009, pp. 1325–1328.
[17] I. Mostafanezhad et al., “Cancellation of unwanted Doppler radar sensor
motion using empirical mode decomposition,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 13,
no. 5, pp. 1897–1904, May 2013.
[18] W. Hu et al., “Noncontact accurate measurement of cardiopulmonary
activity using a compact quadrature Doppler radar sensor,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 725–735, Mar. 2014.
[19] L. Cohen, “The short-time Fourier transform,” in Time-Frequency Analysis, 1st ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1995, pp. 93–110.
[20] S. Qian and D. Chen, “Joint time-frequency analysis,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 52–67, Mar. 1999.
[21] B. Y. Su et al., “Doppler radar fall activity detection using the wavelet
transform,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 865–875, Feb.
2015.
[22] S. W. Smith, “Moving average filters,” in The Scientist and Engineer’s
Guide to Digital Signal Processing, 1st ed. San Diego, CA, USA: California Technical Pub, 1997, pp. 277–284.
[23] R. Adler, “A study of locking phenomena in oscillators,” Proc. IRE,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 351–357, Jun. 1946.
[24] M. Stridh et al., “Sequential characterization of atrial tachyarrhythmias
based on ECG time-frequency analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 100–114, Jan. 2004.
[25] Y. Kim and H. Ling, “Human activity classification based on microDoppler signatures using a support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1328–1337, May 2009.
[26] S. Bakhtiari et al., “Compact millimeter-wave sensor for remote monitoring of vital signs,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 61, no. 3,
pp. 830–841, Mar. 2012.
[27] Y. Wang et al., “CW and pulse-Doppler radar processing based on FPGA
for human sensing applications,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 3097–4007, May 2013.
[28] F. Wang et al., “Quantitative gait measurement with pulse-Doppler radar
for passive in-home gait assessment,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61,
no. 9, pp. 2034–2043, Sep. 2014.

Fu-Kang Wang (S’10–M’13) was born in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, May 15, 1985. He received the B.S.E.E.,
M.S.E.E., and Ph.D. degrees from the National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, in 2007,
2009, and 2013, respectively.
In 2013, he served in the R.O.C. Military Police
as a Communication Officer. After the compulsory
service, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow.
Since 2015, he has been visiting the Department of
Wearable Health Monitoring, Interuniversity Micro-Electronics Center, Leuven,
Belgium. He holds five U.S. Patents about radar systems. His research interest
includes RF sensing techniques.
Dr. Wang received the National Sun Yat-Sen University Outstanding Doctoral Dissertation Award in 2013. He also received the Postdoctoral Research
Abroad Program granted by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan.

You-Rung Chou was born in Tainan, Taiwan, on August 26, 1991. He received the B.S.E.E. degree from
the National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei,
Taiwan, in 2013. He is currently working toward the
M.S. degree in electrical engineering, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
His research interests include wireless sensing
technologies and their biomedical applications.

Yen-Chen Chiu was born in Taoyuan, Taiwan, in
October 30, 1989. He received the B.S.E.E. and
M.S.E.E. degrees from National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, in 2012 and 2014,
respectively.
His research interest includes the Doppler radar
for sensing the hand gesture and vital signs.

Tzyy-Sheng Horng (S’88–M’92–SM’05) was born
in Taichung, Taiwan, on December 7, 1963. He received the B.S.E.E. degree from National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1985, and the M.S.E.E.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of California
at Los Angeles, in 1990 and 1992, respectively.
Since August 1992, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Sun YatSen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, where he was
the Director of the Telecommunication Research and
Development Center (2003–2008) and the Director
of the Institute of Communications Engineering (2004–2007), and where he
is currently a Distinguished Professor. He has authored or coauthored more
than 200 technical publications published in refereed journals and conferences
proceedings, mostly in IEEE publications. He holds more than ten patents. His
research interests include RF and microwave ICs and components, RF signal
integrity for wireless system-in-package, digitally assisted RF technologies, and
green radios for cognitive sensors and Doppler radars.
Dr. Horng has served on several Technical Program Committees of international conferences including the International Association of Science and
Technology for Development International Conference on Wireless and Optical
Communications, the IEEE Region 10 International Technical Conference, the
IEEE International Workshop on Electrical Design of Advanced Packaging and
Systems, the Asia-Pacific Microwave Conference, the IEEE Radio and Wireless
Symposium, and the
Electronic Components and Technology Conference. He has also served on
the Project Review Board in the Programs of Communications Engineering and
Microelectronics Engineering, National Science Council, Taiwan. He received
the 1996 Young Scientist Award presented by the International Union of Radio Science, the 1998 Industry-Education Cooperation Award presented by the
Ministry of Education, Taiwan, and the 2010 Distinguished Electrical Engineer
Award presented by the Chinese Institute of Electrical Engineering, Kaohsiung
Branch, Taiwan. Recently, he received the 2011 Advanced Semiconductor Engineering, Inc., Chair Professorship and the 2012 Outstanding Research Award
at the National Sun Yat-Sen University. He is the Founder Chair of the IEEE
MTT-S Tainan Chapter, and currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, and a Member of the IEEE
MTT-S Technical Committee MTT-10 and MTT-20.

