278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Cutaneous Feedback of Fingertip Deformation and
Vibration for Palpation in Robotic Surgery
Claudio Pacchierotti∗ , Student Member, IEEE, Domenico Prattichizzo, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Katherine J. Kuchenbecker, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Despite its expected clinical benefits, current teleoperated surgical robots do not provide the surgeon with haptic
feedback largely because grounded forces can destabilize the
system’s closed-loop controller. This paper presents an alternative
approach that enables the surgeon to feel fingertip contact
deformations and vibrations while guaranteeing the teleoperator’s
stability. We implemented our cutaneous feedback solution on
an Intuitive Surgical da Vinci Standard robot by mounting a
SynTouch BioTac tactile sensor to the distal end of a surgical
instrument and a custom cutaneous display to the corresponding
master controller. As the user probes the remote environment, the
contact deformations, dc pressure, and ac pressure (vibrations)
sensed by the BioTac are directly mapped to input commands for
the cutaneous device’s motors using a model-free algorithm based
on look-up tables. The cutaneous display continually moves, tilts,
and vibrates a flat plate at the operator’s fingertip to optimally
reproduce the tactile sensations experienced by the BioTac. We
tested the proposed approach by having eighteen subjects use
the augmented da Vinci robot to palpate a heart model with no
haptic feedback, only deformation feedback, and deformation plus
vibration feedback. Fingertip deformation feedback significantly
improved palpation performance by reducing the task completion
time, the pressure exerted on the heart model, and the subject’s
absolute error in detecting the orientation of the embedded
plastic stick. Vibration feedback significantly improved palpation
performance only for the seven subjects who dragged the BioTac
across the model, rather than pressing straight into it.
Index Terms—Force feedback, haptic interfaces, medical
robotics, surgery, tactile sensors.

I. INTRODUCTION
ELEOROBOTIC surgical systems involve a slave robot,
which interacts with the patient, and a master console, operated by the human surgeon. The slave robot reproduces the
hand movements of the surgeon, who in turn needs to observe
the operative environment with which the robot is interacting. If

T

Manuscript received February 13, 2015; revised May 13, 2015; accepted July
9, 2015. Date of publication July 13, 2015; date of current version January 16,
2016. This work was supported by the European Union Seventh Framework
Programme FP7/2007-2013 under Grant n◦ 601165 of the Project “WEARHAP
- WEARable HAPtics for humans and robots.” Asterisk indicates corresponding
author.
∗ C. Pacchierotti is with the Department of Information Engineering and Mathematics, University of Siena, Siena 53100, Italy, and with the Department of
Advanced Robotics, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova 16163, Italy, and
also with the Departments of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics and Computer and Information Science, GRASP Laboratory, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: pacchierotti@dii.unisi.it).
D. Prattichizzo is with the University of Siena and with the Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia.
K. J. Kuchenbecker is with the University of Pennsylvania.
This paper contains supplementary material available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 179 MB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2455932

the surgeon receives sufficient information about the slave system and the operative environment, he or she will feel present at
the operative site, a condition commonly referred to as telepresence [1], [2]. The strength of the telepresence illusion depends
on the type and quality of information that flows from the operating table to the surgeon. Visual feedback is already available in
commercial robotic surgery systems (e.g., the Intuitive Surgical
da Vinci Si), but current surgical robots have very limited haptic
feedback. This omission is mainly due to the negative effect
that haptic force feedback has on the stability of the teleoperation loop; outputting grounded forces with the master console
can lead to undesired oscillations of the system, which interfere
with the surgery and may be dangerous for the patient [3], [4].
However, haptic feedback is still widely believed to be valuable for teleoperated surgical procedures [5]–[9]. It has been
shown to enhance surgeon performance in a wide range of applications including microneedle positioning [10], telerobotic
catheter insertion [11], suturing simulation [12], cardiothoracic
procedures [13], and cell injection [14]. Its benefits typically
include increased manipulation accuracy, increased perception
accuracy, decreased completion time, and decreased peak and
mean force applied to the remote environment [15]–[20], [4].
Given the expected benefits of haptic feedback and the challenges of stable implementation, many researchers have turned
to sensory substitution techniques, wherein force information is
presented via an alternative feedback channel, such as vibrotactile [21], auditory [22], or visual cues [23]. Because no haptic
forces are displayed to the operating surgeon, sensory substitution techniques make teleoperation systems intrinsically stable [4], [18], [20]. However, although the stability of the system
is guaranteed, the provided stimuli differ substantially from the
ones being substituted (e.g., a beep sound instead of force feedback). Therefore, sensory substitution often shows performance
inferior to that achieved with unaltered force feedback [4], [20].
Cutaneous feedback has recently received great attention
from researchers looking for an alternative to sensory substitution of force feedback. Cutaneous stimuli are detected by
mechanoreceptors in the skin, enabling humans to recognize
the local properties of objects such as shape, edges, and texture.
Cutaneous perception for exploration and manipulation principally relies on measures of the location, intensity, direction,
and timing of contact forces on the fingertips [24], [25]. Delivering this type of haptic cues to the surgeon’s skin has been
proved to convey rich information and does not affect the stability of the teleoperation system [4], [20], [26]. Many cutaneous
feedback techniques for teleoperation have been presented in
the literature, exploiting the different types of cutaneous stimuli that mechanoreceptors in the skin can detect. For example,

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PACCHIEROTTI et al.: CUTANEOUS FEEDBACK OF FINGERTIP DEFORMATION AND VIBRATION FOR PALPATION IN ROBOTIC SURGERY

279

Fig. 1. System setup. A BioTac tactile sensor (left) measures contact deformations and vibrations at the operating table, and a custom cutaneous feedback device
(right) applies those deformations and vibrations to the surgeon’s fingertip. The BioTac is attached to a da Vinci slave tool, and the cutaneous feedback device is
attached to the robot’s corresponding master controller. The BioTac follows the motions of the operator’s finger.

Prattichizzo et al. [4] showed that cutaneous feedback provided
by a moving platform is more effective than sensory substitution via visual feedback in a needle insertion task, and Meli
et al. [20] found the same type of cutaneous feedback more
effective than sensory substitution via either visual or auditory
feedback in a pick-and-place task similar to the da Vinci Skills
Simulator’s Pegboard task. Similar to the moving platforms
mentioned above, pneumatic balloon-based systems are another
popular approach to relaying contact force via cutaneous feedback. King et al. [27], [28] developed a modular pneumatic
cutaneous feedback system to improve the performance of the
da Vinci surgical system. The system includes piezoresistive
force sensors mounted on the gripping surfaces of a robotic tool
and two pneumatic balloon-array tactile displays mounted on the
robot’s master console. More recently, Li et al. [29] extended
this approach to three fingers, presenting a compact pneumatic
system for robot-assisted palpation. It simulates tissue stiffness
by changing the pressure in three balloons placed on the index,
middle, and ring fingers. Stanley and Okamura [30] combined
pneumatics and particle jamming to simultaneously control the
shape and mechanical properties of a cutaneous display. The system includes a hollow silicone membrane molded into an array
of thin cells. Each cell is filled with coffee grounds such that adjusting the vacuum level in any individual cell rapidly switches it
between flexible and rigid states. Li et al. [31] used granular jamming stiffness feedback actuators for simulating multifingered
tissue palpation procedures in traditional and in robot-assisted
minimally invasive surgery. Soft tissue stiffness is simulated by
changing the stiffness property of the actuator during palpation.
Another line of research has focused on cutaneous feedback of
tactile vibrations, which are caused by changes in the slave endeffector’s contact state. Kontarinis and Howe presented the first
evidence of the benefits of this approach [32]. The system created by McMahan et al. [26] for the Intuitive da Vinci robot lets
the surgeon feel left and right instrument vibrations in real time
without destabilizing the closed-loop controller. 114 surgeons
and nonsurgeons tested this system in dry-lab manipulation
tasks and expressed a significant preference for the inclusion of
cutaneous feedback of instrument vibrations [33]. Prattichizzo
et al. call this overall approach sensory subtraction, in contrast to

sensory substitution, as it subtracts the destabilizing kinesthetic
part of the haptic interaction to leave only cutaneous cues.
Inspired by the success of sensory subtraction, this paper
presents a novel cutaneous feedback system for the da Vinci
surgical robot, as shown in Fig. 1. It provides cutaneous feedback
of fingertip contact deformation and vibration to the surgeon
while guaranteeing the stability and safety of the controller. The
system is composed of a BioTac tactile sensor, mounted to one of
the robot’s slave tools, and a custom cutaneous display, attached
to the corresponding master controller. Contact deformations
and vibrations sensed by the BioTac are directly mapped to input
commands for the cutaneous device’s motors using a model-free
algorithm based on look-up tables. To our knowledge, a BioTac
sensor has not previously been added to a surgical robot, nor
have fingertip deformations and vibrations been combined. A
preliminary version of the deformation part of the algorithm was
presented in [34], and an evaluation of its fidelity at rendering
prerecorded contacts with a planar surface was presented in [35].
This paper significantly extends our prior work by adding
sensing and actuation of vibrations, incorporating the system
into a da Vinci robot, and testing the utility of the provided
cutaneous cues in a clinically relevant palpation task. Because
palpation technology is not yet commercially available, robotic
minimally invasive systems are currently being used in procedures that can be completed without palpation. However, being
able to palpate the patient’s tissue during surgery would enable
the operating surgeon to feel exactly where tumors are located
and to therefore tailor the surgery to the patient’s current disease
state, trying to remove all of the cancer while sparing as much
of the patient’s healthy tissue as possible. In this way, palpation
could enable surgeons to deliver better care in procedures they
are already performing robotically, and it could also broaden the
range of operations that can be done with a minimally invasive
robotic surgical system.
Section II presents the system we created, and Section III describes the algorithm that maps the deformations and vibrations
registered by the tactile sensor to the input commands for the
cutaneous device’s motors. Section IV describes the experiment
that we ran to evaluate the presented system, wherein human
subjects palpated a simulated tissue model. Sections V and VI

280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Fingertip sensing and actuation. (a) Contact forces deform the BioTac’s
skin and conductive fluid, changing the impedances of 19 electrodes distributed
over the surface of the rigid core. Vibrations in the skin propagate through
the fluid and are detected by the hydro-acoustic pressure sensor, which also
measures the fluid’s dc pressure. (b) Cutaneous feedback device includes three
servo motors on a frame fixed to the back of the user’s finger. Three cables
with concentric springs suspend a flat mobile platform holding one vibrotactile
motor beneath the fingertip. By controlling the cable lengths, the servos move
the mobile platform in 3-D space to apply contact deformations to the fingertip,
while the vibrotactile motor conveys fingertip vibrations.

present and discuss the results of this experiment, respectively.
We conclude the study in Section VII and discuss avenues for
future work in Section VIII.
II. HAPTIC SENSING AND ACTUATION
The SynTouch BioTac tactile sensor mimics the physical
properties and sensory capabilities of the human fingertip [36].
As shown in the left panel of Figs. 1 and 2(a), it consists of
three complementary sensing systems (deformation, internal
fluid pressure, and temperature) integrated into a single package. Contact forces deform the elastic skin and the underlying conductive fluid, changing the impedances of 19 electrodes
distributed over the surface of the rigid core. The dc pressure
of the conductive fluid is measured by a hydro-acoustic pressure sensor, which also detects the ac pressure changes caused
by transient contacts such as textures. The BioTac can register
changes in its fluid pressure as small as 37 Pa and changes in
vibrations as small as 0.4 Pa. As shown in Fig. 1, we attached
the BioTac sensor to a da Vinci Standard electrocautery spatula
tool through a custom plastic fingernail that replaces the nail
provided by the BioTac’s manufacturer. We selected the electrocautery spatula tool solely for its flat shape; we did not use
its cautery function. While this sensing arrangement is bulky

and nonsterilizable, it could be redesigned and miniaturized for
use in minimally invasive robotic surgery if the information it
provides was found to benefit the surgeon; see [37] and Section
VIII for ideas on updating the BioTac for surgical use.
The cutaneous display employed in this study is shown in
the right panel of Figs. 1 and 2(b). It is an augmented version
of the 3-DOF fingertip device presented in [19]. The device
frame houses three servo motors and is rigidly clamped to the
tip of the two-fingered grasping interface of the right da Vinci
master controller. The operator’s thumb and middle finger are
inserted into the da Vinci straps, and the operator’s index finger
is placed inside the cutaneous feedback device, which fastens
with a strap between the PIP and DIP joints. Foam covered
with a thin layer of adhesive cushions the back of the fingertip
and further immobilizes it within the device. A mobile platform
holding one vibrotactile motor is suspended beneath the operator’s fingertip by three cables. Compression springs around the
cables hold the mobile platform in a reference configuration
away from the fingertip. By controlling the cable lengths, the
servos orient and translate the mobile platform in 3-D space to
apply planar deformations to the fingertip, while the vibrotactile
motor conveys fingertip vibrations. In some configurations, the
platform does not contact the fingertip, enabling the device to
portray the making and breaking of contact in a manner similar
to the Contact Location Display [38]. The servo motors used in
our prototype are Sub-Micro Servo 3.7 g motors (Pololu Corporation, USA), which are position controlled and can each exert
up to 39 N·mm torque. Our vibrotactile motor is a Forcereactor
short-vibration feedback motor (Alps Electric, Japan). A brief
video showing the device can be found at http://goo.gl/orylg2.
While this actuation arrangement is quite bulky, it could be redesigned and miniaturized taking into account ergonomic and
comfort factors [39]–[42].
III. MAPPING SENSED DATA TO MOTOR COMMANDS
Our goal is to enable the user to perceive, through the fingertip
cutaneous device, the deformations and vibrations experienced
by the BioTac as it interacts with the operative environment during a clinically relevant task such as palpation. In other words,
we aim to find a good many-to-few mapping between the rich
sensory information measured by the BioTac and the limited
actuation capabilities of the fingertip cutaneous device. This
problem of mapping cutaneous readings to cutaneous actuation
pertains to any such feedback system, not just our particular
prototype, so we developed a general solution.
Because our focus is on sensing deformations and vibrations, we consider the 19 electrode impedance readings, the
dc output of the hydro-acoustic pressure sensor, and the ac
output of the same pressure sensor. The BioTac registers the
electrode data and dc pressure at 100 Hz and the ac pressure
at 2200 Hz. All of these quantities are sensed with a precision of 12 bits. Let sd (j) ∈ Sd = {(sd,1 (j), . . . , sd,20 (j)) ∈
Z20 : 0 ≤ sd,i (j) ≤ 4095} be a vector containing the electrode
and dc pressure values sensed at instant j. Let sv (k) ∈ Sv =
{sv (k) ∈ Z : 0 ≤ sv (k) ≤ 4095} be the ac pressure sensed
at instant k. In contrast, our cutaneous feedback device uses

PACCHIEROTTI et al.: CUTANEOUS FEEDBACK OF FINGERTIP DEFORMATION AND VIBRATION FOR PALPATION IN ROBOTIC SURGERY

281

Fig. 3. Mapping algorithm. The BioTac registers a tactile sensation [sd sv ]T at the remote environment. Function νd (·) looks for the eight closest points
contained in Sd , ∗ , recorded during data collection. These points are then mapped by μ d (·) to their corresponding motor angle triplets. Function ϕ d (·) averages
those points to find the angle triplet md to be actuated by the servos. Once the platform configuration is defined, function νv (·) looks for the closest platform
configuration contained in Mv , ∗ , recorded during data collection, and retrieves the corresponding vibration transfer function. Finally, ζv (·) filters the vibrations
sensed by the BioTac accordingly.

three position-controlled motors and one vibrotactile motor. Let md (j) ∈ Md = {(md,1 (j), md,2 (j), md,3 (j)) ∈ R3 :
30◦ ≤ md,i (j) < 200◦ } be a vector containing the commanded
angles for the three position-controlled motors at instant
j, and mv (k) ∈ Mv = {mv (k) ∈ R : −1 ≤ mv (k) ≤ 1} the
commanded signal for the vibrotactile motor at instant k. Note
that we are neglecting quantization in the motor position outputs for simplicity. To simplify the notation further, the sampling
time indices j and k will be omitted from now on.
As summarized in Fig. 3, we developed a reliable way to map
a given BioTac sensation, defined by sd and sv , to a congruent configuration of the mobile platform md and signal for the
vibrotactile motor mv . Rather than attempting to create an accurate mechanical model of the actuation and sensing systems from
first principles, we solved this problem with a data-driven approach that uses look-up tables of fingertip deformation recordings versus motor commands and vibration recordings versus
motor commands. Specifically, we placed the BioTac inside the
cutaneous device and tested how the motion of the mobile platform affects the fingertip deformation and vibration readings, as
described in Section III-A. During teleoperation these recorded
data are used to map contact deformations sensed by the BioTac
to input commands for the cutaneous device’s servo motors, as
detailed in Section III-B. Finally, Section III-C explains how
vibrations sensed by the BioTac are mapped to input commands
for the cutaneous device’s vibrotactile motor.
A. Data Collection
As shown in Fig. 4, the BioTac was placed between the foam
and the mobile platform, in the same way a human user would
wear the device [compare with Fig. 2(b)], but with the cables
lengthened to accommodate the custom nail. We then moved the
mobile platform to a wide range of configurations and recorded
the effect of each of these configurations on the BioTac, saving
both the commanded servo motor angles md,∗ and the resulting
effect on the tactile sensor’s electrodes and dc pressure sd,∗ .
◦
◦
)3 = 39304
Using a moderate step size of 5◦ yields ( 200 5−30
◦
unique platform configurations. The platform was held in each
configuration for 0.2 s, and the values gathered by the BioTac
were arithmetically averaged. The mechanical coupling between
the platform and the fingerpad changes dramatically over the
workspace of the device. To understand how different platform

Fig. 4. Data collection. The BioTac was placed inside the cutaneous feedback
device, and the platform was moved to 39304 different configurations. Servo
motor inputs md,∗ and the resulting effect on the tactile sensor’s electrodes
and dc pressure sd,∗ were recorded. For 4913 of these configurations, we also
played a two-second-long swept sine wave (1–1000 Hz) through the vibrotactile
motor and registered its effect on the BioTac’s pressure sensor sv , ∗ (ac signals).

configurations affect the way the BioTac feels vibrations, we
also played a two-second-long swept sine wave (1–1000 Hz)
through the vibrotactile motor and registered its effect on the
BioTac’s ac pressure signal sv ,∗ . Due to their long duration,
the swept-sinusoid tests were conducted at a subset of the configurations listed above, using a step size of 10◦ , which yields
◦
◦
( 20010−30
)3 = 4913 unique platform configurations. Data col◦
lection lasted approximately 22 h.
The collected data define a look-up table of the fingertip
deformations caused by motion of the mobile platform, and it
enables us to evaluate the mapping function
μd : Sd,∗ → Md,∗
μd (sd,∗ ) = md,∗

(1)

which links the BioTac’s electrode and dc pressure readings to
the corresponding tested servo motor inputs. Set Md,∗ ⊂ Md
contains all the angle triplets actuated during data collection,
and Sd,∗ ⊂ Sd contains all the resulting sensed values registered
by the BioTac. Moreover, for the 4913 platform configurations
tested with the swept sine wave, we were also able to estimate the
transfer function between the vibrations sensed by the BioTac
and the swept sine wave played through the vibrotactile motor;

282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

this fitting was performed with the MATLAB function tfest,
and each transfer function contained six poles and six zeros.
We were then again able to define a look-up table of vibration
recordings versus motion of the mobile platform and evaluate
the mapping function
μv : Mv ,∗ → R14
μv (mv,∗ ) = cv

(2)

B. From the BioTac to the Servo Motors
Given its 12-bit resolution, the BioTac can sense up to 409620
(∼ 1.77 × 1072 ) different contact sensations through its electrodes and pressure sensor. However, our data collection tested
only 39 304 different platform configurations, which inevitably
yields a mapping function μd (·) that is defined for only a small
subset of all the possible tactile sensations the BioTac can experience. For this reason, we cannot simply deploy the sensor
in a random remote environment and expect its sensed points to
be in the domain of our mapping function. Unfortunately, this
problem cannot be fixed by reducing the angle step size during
data collection. The shape of the platform and the limited degrees of freedom of the device will always couple the behavior
of neighboring electrodes, so many tactile inputs that the BioTac
can sense cannot be reached with the given device.
We thus need a function that maps a generic sensed point
sd ∈ Sd to one in our mapping function’s domain Sd,∗ . We
address this problem by looking for the n-points in our domain
closest to the sensed one, thus defining

sd,∗,1

⎤⎞

⎡

μd (sd,∗,1 )

⎤

⎜⎢
⎥⎟ ⎢
⎥
⎜⎢ sd,∗,2 ⎥⎟ ⎢ μd (sd,∗,2 ) ⎥
⎜⎢
⎥⎟ ⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥⎟ ⎢
⎥
μd ( s d,∗ ) = μd ⎜
⎜⎢ .. ⎥⎟ = ⎢
⎥
..
⎜⎢ . ⎥⎟ ⎢
⎥
.
⎝⎣
⎦⎠ ⎣
⎦
μd (sd,∗,n )
sd,∗,n
⎡
⎤
md,∗,1
⎢
⎥
⎢ md,∗,2 ⎥
⎢
⎥ 
⎥ = md,∗ .
= ⎢
⎢
⎥
..
⎢
⎥
.
⎣
⎦
md,∗,n

(4)



Finally, we can average md,∗ ∈ Mnd,∗ to a single angle triplet
for the servo motors as
ϕd : Mnd,∗ → Md
⎛⎡

md,∗,1

⎤⎞

⎜⎢
⎥⎟
⎜⎢ md,∗,2 ⎥⎟
⎜⎢
⎥⎟
⎢
⎥⎟ = md
ϕd (md,∗ ) = ϕd ⎜
⎜⎢
⎥⎟
..
⎜⎢
⎥⎟
.
⎝⎣
⎦⎠
md,∗,n


(5)

considering a simple inverse squared distance mean that weights
angle triplets according to the inverse squared distance between
the corresponding point in Sd,∗ and the one sensed by the BioTac [35]. Vector md ∈ Md is our final command for the servo
motors at this time step.
C. From the BioTac to the Vibrotactile Motor

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥ 
⎥ = s d,∗
⎥
⎥
⎦

n
→ Mnd,∗
μd : Sd,∗
⎛⎡



which links each of the 4913 tested platform configurations
mv,∗ to the corresponding transfer function’s fourteen coefficients cv . Set Mv ,∗ ⊂ Md,∗ contains the angle triplets tested
with the swept sine wave during data collection.

n
νd : Sd → Sd,∗
⎡
sd,∗,1
⎢
⎢ sd,∗,2
⎢
νd (sd ) = ⎢
⎢ ..
⎢ .
⎣

We can now map the n points retrieved by νd (·) to their
corresponding motor angle triplets from data collection

(3)

sd,∗,n
as the function that maps a generic point sd ∈ Sd , sensed by
the BioTac, to the n closest ones in Sd,∗ . We implemented the
nearest point search using the approximate nearest neighbor
C++ library by Mount and Arya [43]. We use n = 8 because
we previously found that retrieving the eight closest points provides a good tradeoff between tactile output performance and
computational load [35]. Distances were calculated using the
20-dimensional Euclidean distance metric. To evenly weight
the twenty elements of the sensed data when computing the distance, we divided each component of sd,∗ by the corresponding
standard deviation observed during data collection, so that the
standard deviation of each component of the vectors in Sd,∗
becomes 1. The same operation was applied to sd at run time.

Data collection also tested how 4913 different platform configurations affect the transmission of vibrations from the vibrotactile motor to the BioTac’s ac pressure sensor. This data
collection set Mv ,∗ is much smaller than Md , the set that contains the designated input for the servo motor md . Similar to the
methods of Section III-B, we address this problem by looking
for the platform configuration in Mv ,∗ that is closest to md , and
thus define
νv : Md → Mv ,∗
νv (md ) = mv,∗

(6)

as the function that maps a generic platform configuration md
to the closest one tested with the swept sine wave.
We can now retrieve the corresponding transfer function’s
coefficients, as defined in (2), and filter the vibration waveform
sensed by the BioTac accordingly
ζv : (Sv , R14 ) → Mv
ζv (sv , cv ) = ζv (sv , μv (mv,∗ )) = mv .

(7)

PACCHIEROTTI et al.: CUTANEOUS FEEDBACK OF FINGERTIP DEFORMATION AND VIBRATION FOR PALPATION IN ROBOTIC SURGERY

Fig. 5. Experimental setup. The cutaneous feedback device is attached to the
robot’s right master controller, and the BioTac to the corresponding da Vinci
tool, so that the BioTac mimics the motion and orientation of the operator’s
index finger. The remote environment is composed of a simulated heart soft
tissue model with a plastic stick embedded at 1.5 mm from the surface. The
orientation of the stick changes randomly at each repetition of the task. (a)
Remote environment. (b) Master console.

Fig. 6. Simulated heart tissue model. The overall diameter and thickness of
the model are 60 and 15 mm, respectively. A 4-mm diameter plastic stick is
embedded at a depth of 1.5 mm from the surface to mimic a calcified artery. (a)
Top view. (b) Side view.

This function filters the BioTac’s sensed vibration to create a
command suitable for the vibrotactile motor, taking into account how the present platform configuration affects the way
vibrations propagate from the motor to the sensor. We filtered
the signal using a floating-point implementation of an IIR filter [44]. Value mv is our command for the vibrotactile motor at
this time step.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We evaluated the described haptic system by having human
subjects carry out a palpation task using our augmented da
Vinci robot. Figs. 1 and 5 show the experimental setup. The cutaneous feedback device is attached to the robot’s right master
controller, and the BioTac to the corresponding da Vinci tool,
so that the BioTac follows the motion of the operator’s index
finger. The master and slave attachments are constructed so that
the orientation of the BioTac always matches the orientation
of the operator’s index finger. The remote environment is composed of a simulated heart tissue model made from Ecoflex 0010
(Smooth-On Inc., USA) and brown dye. As shown in Fig. 6, a
plastic stick with a circular cross section is embedded into the

283

tissue model at 1.5 mm from the surface to simulate the presence
of a calcified artery, following the methods of [45]. The stick
is not visible from the outside. To minimize the utility of any
incidental visual cues, the study used three identical copies of
this heart model that were interchanged between trials.
Eighteen participants took part in the experiment, including
seven women and 11 men. Five of them had previous experience with haptic interfaces. None of the participants reported
any deficiencies in their visual or haptic perception abilities,
and all of them were right-hand dominant. The experimenter
explained the procedures and spent about three minutes adjusting the setup to be comfortable before the subject began the
experiment. Each subject then spent about two minutes practicing controlling the BioTac through the master console. Subjects
consented to participate in this study under the University of
Pennsylvania’s Institutional Review Board protocol #820386.
The task consisted of exploring the tissue model to try to
detect the orientation of the hidden plastic stick. As shown in
Fig. 5, the tissue model was placed on a rounded plastic base with
36 ticks. The ticks indicate the 18 possible orientations of the
hidden stick, reporting angles from 0◦ to 180◦ , with a step size of
10◦ . Subjects were asked to explore the tissue model and tell the
experimenter the orientation of the stick. The task started when
the BioTac touched the tissue model for the first time and ended
when the subject told the experimenter the estimated orientation.
Each participant performed twelve trials of the palpation task,
with four repetitions for each of the following three feedback
conditions:
1) Condition N: no haptic feedback;
2) Condition S: cutaneous feedback of fingertip deformation
provided by the servo motors;
3) Condition SV: cutaneous feedback of fingertip deformation provided by the servo motors plus cutaneous feedback
of fingertip vibration by the vibrotactile motor.
In condition N, the servo and vibrotactile motors were not
active, and the mobile platform was always in contact with the
subject’s fingertip. In condition S, the servo motors moved the
mobile platform as described in Section III-B, and the vibrotactile motor was not active. In condition SV, the servo motors
moved the mobile platform as in condition S, and the vibrotactile motor provided vibrations as described in Section III-C.
The subject was always able to see the operative environment
through the standard stereoscopic monitor of the da Vinci system. The orientation of the stick was fully randomized across
trials, so that all eighteen possible orientations were tested exactly twelve times and no subject tested the same orientation
twice.
The subject performed all four repetitions of a single feedback condition as a block, and the order of the conditions was
randomized to test all six possible combinations exactly three
times. At the end of each condition, the subject was asked to
rate, on two sliders going from 0 to 10, “how easy was it to
detect the orientation of the plastic stick?” and “how confident
were you in detecting the orientation of the plastic stick?” A
score of 0 meant “very difficult” or “not at all confident,” and a
score of 10 meant “very easy” or “very confident.” At the end of
the experiment, the subject was asked to choose which feedback

284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 7. Experimental results. Absolute orientation error, completion time, and RMS pressure for conditions providing no force feedback (N), cutaneous feedback
by the servo motors (S), and cutaneous feedback by the servo and vibrotactile motors (SV) are plotted (mean and standard deviation). Lower values of these metrics
indicate higher performances in completing the palpation task. P-values of post-hoc group comparisons are reported when statistically different. (a) Absolute
orientation error. (b) Completion time. (c) RMS pressure.

conditions were the most and least effective at enabling detection of the plastic stick’s orientation. A video of the experiment
can be downloaded from http://goo.gl/yrSxa3.
V. RESULTS
To evaluate the subject’s performance under each of the considered feedback conditions, we evaluated: 1) the absolute error in detecting the orientation of the plastic stick, 2) the task
completion time, and 3) the root mean square (RMS) pressure
exerted by the BioTac on the tissue model. A null value of these
three metrics denotes the best performance. Data resulting from
different repetitions of the same condition, performed by the
same subject, were averaged before comparison with data from
the other conditions.
Fig. 7(a) shows the absolute orientation error results for the
three experimental conditions. The collected data passed the
Shapiro–Wilk normality test. Mauchly’s test of sphericity indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated
[χ2 (2) = 6.245, p = 0.044]. A repeated-measures ANOVA
with a Greenhouse–Geisser correction showed a statistically
significant difference between the means of the three feedback
conditions (F1.512,25.696 = 33.890, p < 0.001, a = 0.05). Posthoc analysis (Games–Howell post-hoc test) revealed statistically
significant differences between conditions N and S (p < 0.001)
and between N and SV (p < 0.001). In both cases the errors
were lower with haptic feedback.
Fig. 7(b) shows the completion time results. The collected
data passed the Shapiro–Wilk normality test and Mauchly’s
test of sphericity. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed a statistically significant difference between the means of the three
feedback conditions (F2,34 = 9.342, p = 0.001, a = 0.05). Posthoc analysis (Games–Howell post-hoc test) revealed statistically
significant differences between conditions N and S (p = 0.019)
and between N and SV (p = 0.002). Completion time was lower
with haptic feedback.
Fig. 7(c) shows the RMS pressure exerted by the BioTac
on the tissue model, registered through its dc pressure sensor. The collected data passed the Shapiro–Wilk normality test.
Mauchly’s test of sphericity indicated that the assumption of
sphericity had been violated [χ2 (2) = 9.120, p = 0.010]. A
repeated-measures ANOVA with a Greenhouse–Geisser correction showed a statistically significant difference between

Fig. 8. Experimental results. Preference ratings for the question “How easy
was it to detect the orientation of the plastic stick?” are plotted (mean and
standard deviation). P-values of post-hoc group comparisons are reported when
statistically different. (a) How easy was it to detect the orientation of the plastic
stick? (b) How confident were you in detecting the orientation of the plastic
stick?

the means of the three feedback conditions (F1.394,23.702 =
6.908, p = 0.009, a = 0.05). Post-hoc analysis (Games–Howell
post-hoc test) revealed statistically significant differences between conditions N and S (p = 0.030) and between N and SV
(p = 0.038). Exerted pressure was lower with haptic feedback.
Finally, we analyzed the ratings given by the subjects at the
end of each feedback condition. Fig. 8 shows the ratings that the
three feedback conditions received for the first question (“how
easy”). The second question (“how confident”) showed similar
results (N: 3.45, S: 7.13, SV: 7.71). All of the data passed the
Shapiro–Wilk normality test and Mauchly’s test of sphericity.
A repeated-measures ANOVA showed a statistically significant
difference between the means of the three feedback conditions
for both questions (“how easy,” F2,34 = 52.460, p < 0.001,
a = 0.05; “how confident,” F2,34 = 50.517, p < 0.001, a =
0.05). Post-hoc analysis (Games–Howell post-hoc test) revealed
statistically significant differences between conditions N and S
(p < 0.001) and between N and SV (p < 0.001) for both questions, with haptic feedback earning higher ratings. The conditions providing cutaneous feedback were also preferred in the
postexperimental questionnaire. Eleven subjects chose condition SV as the most effective feedback condition, six subjects
chose condition S, and only one chose condition N. All but one
considered condition N to be the least effective at enabling detection of the orientation of the plastic stick. The outlier subject
who chose condition N as the preferred condition mentioned
that he/she considered the cutaneous cues to be somewhat distracting. This subject started the experiment with condition N.

PACCHIEROTTI et al.: CUTANEOUS FEEDBACK OF FINGERTIP DEFORMATION AND VIBRATION FOR PALPATION IN ROBOTIC SURGERY

Fig. 9. Experimental result for the dragging strategy. Absolute orientation
error and preference ratings for the question “How easy was it to detect the
orientation of the plastic stick?” are plotted (mean and standard deviation),
considering only the data from the seven subjects who used the dragging strategy.
P-values of post-hoc group comparisons are reported when the differences are
statistically significant. (a) Absolute orientation error. (b) Preference ratings.

VI. DISCUSSION
Adding cutaneous feedback significantly improved palpation
task performance in all of the considered metrics. Moreover,
conditions providing cutaneous feedback were highly preferred
by the subjects. These results confirm the value of cutaneous
feedback in teleoperation and support the validity of the described approach. Interestingly, we did not find any significant
differences between the two conditions providing cutaneous
feedback, S and SV. Adding vibrations thus did not seem to
improve subject performance of the given task.
We believe that this unexpected result stems from the way
subjects explored the tissue model. We noticed two different
strategies being used during the experiment. Referring to the
classification of hand exploratory movements described by Lederman and Klatzky [46], we can describe the first strategy
as a “pressure” exploratory movement and the second one as
a combination of the “pressure” and the “lateral motion” exploratory movements. We will refer to them as the “pressure
strategy” and the “dragging strategy,” respectively. A video
showing these two exploratory strategies can be downloaded
from http://goo.gl/gkdBHc. Eleven subjects used the pressure
strategy, and seven used the dragging strategy.
To understand how different strategies affected the performance of the palpation task, we performed a statistical analysis
considering only the seven subjects who used the dragging strategy. Fig. 9 shows the absolute orientation error and the mean
preference ratings for the three feedback conditions considering only these seven subjects. All of the collected data passed
the Shapiro–Wilk normality test. Mauchly’s test of sphericity indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated in the orientation error data [χ2 (2) = 7.608, p = 0.022].
A repeated-measures ANOVA showed a statistically significant

285

difference between the means of the three feedback modalities
in all of the considered metrics (orientation error, F1.123,6.735 =
18.891, p = 0.003, a = 0.05; completion time, F2,12 = 8.291,
p = 0.005, a = 0.05; RMS pressure, F2,12 = 11.935, p = 0.001,
a = 0.05). Post-hoc analysis (Games–Howell post-hoc test) revealed statistically significant differences in all metrics between
conditions N and S (orientation error, p = 0.021; completion
time, p = 0.013; RMS pressure, p = 0.015) and between N and
SV (orientation error, p = 0.011; completion time, p = 0.017;
RMS pressure, p = 0.023). Conditions S and SV were found
to be statistically different only in the orientation error metric (p = 0.025), with lower errors occurring when vibrotactile
feedback was provided.
Finally, we analyzed the ratings given by the seven dragging
subjects at the end of each feedback condition. All of the data
passed the Shapiro–Wilk normality test and Mauchly’s test of
sphericity. A repeated-measures ANOVA showed a statistically
significant difference between the means of the three feedback
conditions for both questions (“how easy,” F2,12 = 46.790, p <
0.001, a = 0.05; “how confident,” F2,12 = 37.266, p < 0.001, a
= 0.05). Post hoc analysis with Bonferroni adjustments revealed
statistically significant difference between conditions N and S
(“how easy,” p = 0.009; “how confident,” p = 0.008), and N
and SV (p < 0.001) for both questions. Conditions S and SV
were found to be statistically different in one of the questions
(“how easy,” p = 0.009), with condition SV perceived to be
easier. Furthermore, all seven subjects who used the dragging
strategy found condition SV to be the most effective at letting
them detect the orientation of the plastic stick.
Unlike subjects who used the pressure strategy, the seven
subjects who used the dragging strategy were able to take advantage of the vibrotactile feedback provided by our system to
improve their detection of the orientation of the hidden plastic stick. These results can be explained by considering that
the vibrotactile feedback may have helped subjects detect the
ac pressure transient that occurs when the BioTac moves laterally over an embedded object, a phenomenon documented by
other researchers [37]. On the other hand, most of the vibrations
generated during the pressure strategy most likely pertained to
making and breaking contact with the tissue surface, which is
also rendered by the platform’s motion, and probably provided
little information about the orientation of the hidden stick.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a novel cutaneous approach to providing
haptic feedback for palpation in robot-assisted surgery. The haptic system is composed of a BioTac tactile sensor, in charge of
registering fingertip deformations and vibrations at the operating
table, and a custom cutaneous feedback device, in charge of applying those deformations and vibrations to the surgeon’s fingertip. The BioTac is attached to a da Vinci tool, and the cutaneous
device is attached to the robot’s corresponding master controller.
Contact deformations and vibrations sensed by the BioTac are
directly mapped to input commands for the cutaneous device’s
motors using a model-free algorithm that centers on data collected while the BioTac is inside the cutaneous device. Because

286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

no grounded kinesthetic forces are provided to the operator, this
haptic feedback approach is inherently stable.
We evaluated the proposed approach in a palpation task using the da Vinci surgical robot. Eighteen subjects were asked
to detect the orientation of a plastic stick embedded in a simulated heart tissue model. Providing cutaneous feedback of fingertip deformation significantly improved the task performance in
terms of absolute error in detecting the orientation of the plastic
stick, completion time, and pressure exerted on the tissue model.
Subjects who used a dragging strategy achieved even better results with cutaneous feedback of fingertip vibrations. Subjects
also highly preferred conditions providing cutaneous feedback
over the one without any haptic feedback.
VIII. FUTURE WORK
In the future, we plan to run a new human subject study enrolling both novices and experienced da Vinci surgeons. This
study will let us better understand the importance of cutaneous
stimuli at various levels of surgical experience, in addition to
its role in the surgeon’s learning process. Moreover, we plan
to evaluate the proposed rendering approach in other surgeryrelated tasks, such as suturing and blunt dissection, and to study
the possible perceptual interactions between cutaneous feedback of contact deformation and vibration. We also intend to
modify the cutaneous feedback device to use continuous rotation servos, add a force sensor on the platform, and make its
overall design and form factor smaller and more comfortable.
The new servos would enable the device to reach a larger range
of platform orientations, and the force sensor would enable us
to automatically recalibrate the algorithm for different fingertip
sizes, improving the quality of the tactile rendering across individuals. We will also test whether palpation sensations could
be conveyed more effectively using alternative mobile platform
designs, such as ones that include pneumatic balloons or other
nonrigid elements.
Finally, we intend to investigate the practical translational
aspects of the proposed cutaneous system. The BioTac sensor
cannot be used during surgery in its current form. It is too large
to fit through a keyhole incision, it has exposed electrical connections, and it is not sterilizable. A modified version of the
BioTac suitable for surgery would need to be small enough to
be inserted through a trocar. The back of the sensor would need
to include features that would enable it to be held by or attached
to a surgical instrument. The electrical connections between the
sensor and the cord would need to be redesigned to electrically
insulate all wires and connections. Furthermore, a sterilization
method would need to be developed to thoroughly disinfect the
cord and the core part of the BioTac between patients; while
the standard approach of steam sterilization would damage the
plastic and the electronics, a BioTac could probably be sterilized
using ethylene oxide gas or another low-temperature sterilization technique. The external rubber skin and the saline solution
with which the skin is filled could both be made sterile and disposable. Despite these required improvements to the sensor, the
presented cutaneous rendering algorithm is quite general, and it
should work in any scenario where similar sensing and actuation

systems can be employed. Any modification to the sensor aimed
at improving its applicability in surgery would thus not require
any major change in the rendering algorithm and experimental
protocol.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank I. McMahon and J. Koehn
for helping set up the BioTac sensing system, P. Shirsat for
helping build the cutaneous device, A. Block for helping create
the tissue models, and Intuitive Surgical, Inc., for donating the
da Vinci Standard.
REFERENCES
[1] T. B. Sheridan, “Telerobotics,” Automatica, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 487–507,
1989.
[2] T. B. Sheridan, Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1992.
[3] N. Diolaiti et al., “Stability of haptic rendering: Discretization, quantization, time delay, and Coulomb effects,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 256–268, Apr. 2006.
[4] D. Prattichizzo et al., “Cutaneous force feedback as a sensory subtraction
technique in haptics,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 289–300,
Jan. 2012.
[5] A. M. Okamura, “Methods for haptic feedback in teleoperated robotassisted surgery,” Ind. Robot: Int. J., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 499–508, 2004.
[6] A. M. Okamura, “Haptic feedback in robot-assisted minimally invasive
surgery,” Current Opinion Urology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 102–107, 2009.
[7] E. Westebring-Van Der Putten et al., “Haptics in minimally invasive
surgery-a review,” Minimally Invasive Therapy Allied Technol., vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 3–16, 2008.
[8] O. Van der Meijden and M. Schijven, “The value of haptic feedback
in conventional and robot-assisted minimal invasive surgery and virtual
reality training: A current review,” Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 23, no. 6,
pp. 1180–1190, 2009.
[9] A. Wedmid et al., “Future perspectives in robotic surgery,” BJU Int.,
vol. 108, no. 6b, pp. 1028–1036, 2011.
[10] S. E. Salcudean et al., “Performance measurement in scaled teleoperation
for microsurgery,” in Proc. 1st Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Virtual Reality
Robot. Med. Medial Robot. Comput.-Assisted Surg., 1997, pp. 789–798.
[11] A. Kazi, “Operator performance in surgical telemanipulation,” Presence:
Teleoperators Virtual Environ., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 495–510, 2001.
[12] L. Moody et al., “Objective surgical performance evaluation based on
haptic feedback,” Stud. Health Technol. Inf., vol. 85, pp. 304–310, 2002.
[13] C. W. Kennedy et al., “A novel approach to robotic cardiac surgery using
haptics and vision,” Cardiovascular Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 15–22, 2002.
[14] A. Pillarisetti et al., “Evaluating the effect of force feedback in cell injection,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 322–331, Jul.
2007.
[15] B. Hannaford et al., “Performance evaluation of a six-axis generalized
force-reflecting teleoperator,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 620–633, May/Jun. 1991.
[16] M. J. Massimino and T. B. Sheridan, “Teleoperator performance with
varying force and visual feedback,” Human Factors: J. Human Factors
Ergonom. Soc., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 145–157, 1994.
[17] C. R. Wagner et al., “The role of force feedback in surgery: Analysis of
blunt dissection,” in Proc. 10th Symp. Haptic Interfaces Virtual Environ.
Teleoperator Syst., 2002, pp. 68–74.
[18] D. Prattichizzo et al., “Using a fingertip tactile device to substitute kinesthetic feedback in haptic interaction,” in Proc. Haptics: Generating Perceiving Tangible Sensations Conf., 2010, pp. 125–130.
[19] C. Pacchierotti et al., “Two finger grasping simulation with cutaneous
and kinesthetic force feedback,” in Proc. Haptics: Perception, Devices,
Mobility, Commun., 2012, pp. 373–382.
[20] L. Meli et al., “Sensory subtraction in robot-assisted surgery: Fingertip
skin deformation feedback to ensure safety and improve transparency in
bimanual haptic interaction,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 4,
pp. 1318–1327, Apr. 2014.
[21] R. E. Schoonmaker and C. G. L. Cao, “Vibrotactile force feedback system
for minimally invasive surgical procedures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst.,
Man Cybern., 2006, pp. 2464–2469.

PACCHIEROTTI et al.: CUTANEOUS FEEDBACK OF FINGERTIP DEFORMATION AND VIBRATION FOR PALPATION IN ROBOTIC SURGERY

[22] W. B. Griffin et al., “Feedback strategies for telemanipulation with shared
control of object handling forces,” Presence: Teleoperators Virtual Environ., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 720–731, 2005.
[23] M. Kitagawa et al., “Effect of sensory substitution on suture-manipulation
forces for robotic surgical systems,” J. Thoracic Cardiovascular Surg.,
vol. 129, no. 1, pp. 151–158, 2005.
[24] I. Birznieks et al., “Encoding of direction of fingertip forces by human
tactile afferents,” J. Neurosci., vol. 21, no. 20, pp. 8222–8237, 2001.
[25] K. O. Johnson, “The roles and functions of cutaneous mechanoreceptors,”
Current Opinion Neurobiol., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 455–461, 2001.
[26] W. McMahan et al., “Tool contact acceleration feedback for telerobotic
surgery,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 210–220, May/Jun. 2011.
[27] C.-H. King et al., “Tactile feedback induces reduced grasping force in
robot-assisted surgery,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 103–110,
Apr.–Jun. 2009.
[28] C.-H. King et al., “A multielement tactile feedback system for robotassisted minimally invasive surgery,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 0052–0056, Jan.–Mar. 2009.
[29] M. Li et al., “Haptics for multi-fingered palpation,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., 2013, pp. 4184–4189.
[30] A. Stanley and A. Okamura, “Controllable surface haptics via particle
jamming and pneumatics,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 20–30,
Jan.–Mar. 2015.
[31] M. Li et al., “Multi-fingered haptic palpation utilizing granular jamming stiffness feedback actuators,” Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 23, no. 9,
p. 095007, 2014.
[32] D. A. Kontarinis and R. D. Howe, “Tactile display of vibratory information in teleoperation and virtual environments,” Presence: Teleoperators
Virtual Environ., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 387–402, 1995.
[33] J. K. Koehn and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Surgeons and non-surgeons prefer
haptic feedback of instrument vibrations during robotic surgery,” Surgical
Endoscopy, pp. 1–14, 2014.
[34] C. Pacchierotti, D. Prattichizzo, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “A data-driven
approach to remote tactile interaction: From a BioTac sensor to any fingertip cutaneous device,” in Proc. Eurohaptics, 2014, pp. 418–424.
[35] C. Pacchierotti et al., “Displaying sensed tactile cues with a fingertip
haptic device,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, art. no. 7124519, to be published,
2015.
[36] N. Wettels and G. E. Loeb, “Haptic feature extraction from a biomimetic
tactile sensor: Force, contact location and curvature,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Biomimetics, 2011, pp. 2471–2478.
[37] M. S. Arian et al., “Using the BioTac as a tumor localization tool,” in
Proc. IEEE Haptics Symp., Feb. 2014, pp. 443–448.
[38] W. R. Provancher et al., “Contact location display for haptic perception of curvature and object motion,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 24, no. 9,
pp. 691–702, Sep. 2005.
[39] L. Wauben et al., “Application of ergonomic guidelines during minimally
invasive surgery: A questionnaire survey of 284 surgeons,” Surgical Endoscopy Other Interventional Tech., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1268–1274, 2006.
[40] E. H. Lawson et al., “Postural ergonomics during robotic and laparoscopic
gastric bypass surgery: A pilot project,” J. Robotic Surgery, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 61–67, 2007.
[41] D. Prattichizzo et al., “Towards wearability in fingertip haptics: A 3-dof
wearable device for cutaneous force feedback,” IEEE Trans. Haptics,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 506–516, Oct.–Dec. 2013.
[42] C. Pacchierotti et al., “Improving transparency in teleoperation by means
of cutaneous tactile force feedback,” ACM Trans. Appl. Perception,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 4:1–4:16, 2014.
[43] D. M. Mount and S. Arya. (2010). ANN: A library for approximate
nearest neighbor searching [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.umd.edu/
mount/ANN/
[44] A. V. Oppenheim et al., Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-hall, 1989.
[45] T. Yamamoto et al., “Tissue property estimation and graphical display
for teleoperated robot-assisted surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., 2009, pp. 4239–4245.
[46] S. J. Lederman and R. L. Klatzky, “Hand movements: A window
into haptic object recognition,” Cognitive Psychology, vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 342–368, 1987.

287

Claudio Pacchierotti (S’12) received the B.S., M.S.,
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Siena,
Siena, Italy, in 2009, 2011, and 2014, respectively.
He was an exchange student at the Karlstad University, Sweden, in 2010. He spent the first seven
months of 2014 visiting the Penn Haptics Group, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA, which is
part of the General Robotics, Automation, Sensing,
and Perception Laboratory. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Department of Advanced
Robotics, Italian Institute of Technology, Genova,
Italy. His research deals with robotics and haptics, focusing on cutaneous force
feedback techniques, wearable devices, and haptics for robotic surgery.
Dr. Pacchierotti received the 2014 EuroHaptics Best Ph.D. Thesis Award for
the best doctoral thesis in the field of haptics.

Domenico Prattichizzo (S’93–M’95–SM’14) received the Ph.D. degree in robotics and automation
from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 1995.
Since 2002, he is an Associate Professor of
robotics at the University of Siena, Siena, Italy, and
since 2009 he is a Scientific Consultant at Istituto Italiano di Tecnoloogia, Genova, Italy. In 1994, he was a
Visiting Scientist at the MIT AI Lab. Research interests are in haptics, grasping, visual servoing, mobile
robotics and geometric control. He is currently the
Coordinator of the IP collaborative project “WEARable HAPtics for Humans and Robots” (WEARHAP).
Dr. Prattichizzo, since 2014, is an Associate Editor of Frontiers of Biomedical
Robotics. From 2007 to 2013, he has been Associate Editor in Chief of the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS. From 2003 to 2007, he has been Associate Editor
of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
CONTROL SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGIES. He has been Chair of the Italian Chapter of
the IEEE RAS (2006–2010), awarded with the IEEE 2009 Chapter of the Year
Award.

Katherine J. Kuchenbecker (S’04–M’06) received
the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA, in 2000, 2002, and 2006, respectively.
She completed a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship at the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,
USA, in 2006–2007. She is currently an Associate
Professor in mechanical engineering and applied mechanics at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Her research centers on the design
and control of haptic interfaces and robotic systems,
and she directs the Penn Haptics Group, which is part of the General Robotics,
Automation, Sensing, and Perception Laboratory.
Dr. Kuchenbecker was the recipient of the 2009 National Science Foundation
CAREER Award, the 2008 and 2011 Citations for Meritorious Service as a Reviewer for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HAPTICS, and the 2012 IEEE Robotics
and Automation Society Academic Early Career Award. She is cochairing the
IEEE Haptics Symposium in 2016 and 2018, and she is presently a cochair of
the IEEE RAS Technical Committee on Haptics.

