IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

311

CMOS-Compatible Silicon-Nanowire-Based Coulter
Counter for Cell Enumeration
Yu Chen∗ , Jinhong Guo, Hamidullah Muhammad, Yuejun Kang, and Sunil K. Ary

Abstract—A silicon-nanowire-based Coulter counter has been
designed and fabricated for particle/cell enumeration. The silicon nanowire was fabricated in a fully complementary metal–
oxide–semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible process and used as
a field effect transistor (FET) device. The Coulter counter device worked on the principle of potential change detection introduced by the passing of microparticles/cells through a sensing
channel. Device uniformity was confirmed by scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. Current–
voltage measurement showed the high sensitivity of the nanowire
FET device to the surface potential change. The results revealed
that the silicon-nanowire-based Coulter counter can differentiate polystyrene beads with diameters of 8 and 15 μm. Michigan
Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) cells have been successfully counted
to validate the device. A fully CMOS-compatible fabrication process can help the device integration and facilitate the development
of sensor arrays for high throughput application. With appropriate sample preparation steps, it is also possible to expand the work
to applications such as rare-cells detection.
Index Terms—Cell counting, Coulter counter, field effect transistor, microfluidics, silicon nanowire.

I. INTRODUCTION
INCE the 19th century, blood counts of various types (white
blood cells, red blood cells, platelets, etc.) have been used
for clinical purposes [1]. Abnormally high or low counts of
each type of cell/platelet may indicate the presence of certain
diseases. The result of such a count provides the patient’s general health status and can be used for the better treatment of patient illness [2]. For example, the circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
may represent the tumor population that is most likely to develop overt metastases. The number of CTCs gives a surrogate
through which the tumor’s genetic and phenotypic status can be
evaluated through a relatively noninvasive procedure [3]. Conventionally, a hemocytometer, which uses counting chambers
that hold diluted blood and divide it with grid lines to calculate red blood cells and white blood cells, is most commonly
used for cell counting. Counting cells using a hemocytometer

S

Manuscript received February 16, 2015; revised June 5, 2015; accepted July
9, 2015. Date of publication July 16, 2015; date of current version January 16,
2016. The authors would like to thank The Agency for Science, Technology,
and Research, Joint Council Office, Career Development Award under Grant
1 330 2FG 062. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ Y. Chen is with the Institute of Microelectronics, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore 117685 (e-mail: cheny1@ime.a-star.edu.sg).
J. Guo is with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China.
H. Muhammad and S. K. Ary are with the Institute of Microelectronics,
Agency for Science, Technology, and Research.
Y. Kang is with the Nanyang Technological University.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2456190

is fast and the cost is low. However, manual counting is laborintensive, time consuming, and also subject to human errors
due to the limited number of cells counted under a microscope
[4]. The flow cytometer has become the gold standard for clinical hematologic assays after half a century of development [5].
In flow cytometry, cells flow in a narrow stream in front of
a laser beam and light scattered from the cells is detected for
cell counting and analysis. The flow cytometer has been used
to analyze the shape of the cells and their internal and external
structures. However, the flow cytometer is sophisticated and expensive. Another common method of cell counting is based on
electrical resistance measurement [6], [7], which is known as
the Coulter counter concept. This is based on the fact that the
blood cells show greater electrical resistance compared with the
plasma where the blood cells have settled.
Recently, silicon-nanowire-based sensing devices have been
reported for highly sensitive detection of ions and biomolecules
[8]–[11]. Silicon-nanowire-based sensors utilize the field effect
of the silicon for sensitive measurement. When the charged
particles or molecules are attached to the surface of the silicon nanowire, a potential change of the nanowire surface is
induced, which can accumulate or deplete the charge carrier of
the nanowire device and, thus, change the conductance of the
nanowire. Due to the high surface-to-volume ratio and other
unique characteristics of the silicon nanowire, the device shows
great sensitivity and fast response time as a biosensor.
Using the Coulter counter concept, we are reporting on a system using silicon nanowire for the particle/cell counting. Silicon
nanowire has been used as a highly sensitive FET device for the
detection of the potential change produced by the presence of
microparticles/cells. The device was calibrated by microbeads
of different sizes, and CTCs (MCF-7) were used as a model to
show the capability of the device for cell counting. Because of
the compatibility with the CMOS process, a silicon nanowire array can be easily fabricated for high throughput application. The
potential-based Coulter counter can solve the interference problem of the conventional Coulter counter when multiple channels
are used [12], [13].
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Silicon Nanowire Fabrication
A silicon-nanowire FET device can be fabricated by either
the “top down” or the “bottom up” method. In the “bottom up”
method, nanowires are first grown in a furnace and then poured
onto the substrate. The metal line electrodes are then defined
using the lithography process. As the nanowire device needs to
operate in a buffer solution, the electrodes need to be passivated

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

of the nitride hard mask, the device was coated with 10 nm of
Al2 O3 by atomic layer deposition (ALD) [see Fig. 1(e)]. Then,
the wafer was coated with 200 nm of SiO2 by plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), and the two sides of the
nanowire (source and drain) were exposed for the doping and
metal contact [see Fig. 1(f)]. Aluminum was deposited on the
wafer and lithography and etching processes were used to pattern the metal line [see Fig. 1(g)]. Finally, the silicon oxide on
the sensing area of the nanowire was etched and exposed by
reactive ion etching (RIE) [see Fig. 1(h)]. Because of the high
etching selectivity of SiO2 /Al2 O3 , when low etching power was
used, the etching process was stopped at Al2 O3 with minimal
overetching (less than 2 nm). The remaining Al2 O3 served as
the gate oxide layer for the FET sensor device.
Silicon-nanowire fabrication was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fig. 1(i) shows the SEM image of the fabricated nanowires. The total length of the nanowires is 18 μm,
whereas only 10 μm is exposed as the sensing area. There are
five nanowires in each bundle and they are at a distance of
500 nm from each other. Only the nanowire in the center is
activated (connected to the source drain electrodes), whereas
the other four are dummy wires to ensure device uniformity.
The cross section of the nanowire is shown in Fig. 1(j). It is
clear from the figure that nanowires in a trapezoidal shape are
consistent and uniform with a bottom width of around 90 nm.
B. Microfluidic Channel Fabrication
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of a silicon nanowire FET sensor. (b) Device layer of SOI wafer was thinned down to 30 nm. (c) Photolithography and photoresist trimming were used to define the nanowire structure after
nitride deposition. (d) Tetra-Methyl Ammonium Hydroxide etching was used
to etch the nanowire. (e) Al2 O3 was coated on nanowire using ALD. (f) Two
sides of nanowire (source and drain) were exposed after nitride passivation. (g)
Aluminum was deposited and patterned by photolithography and etching. (h)
The sensing area was exposed by RIE. (i) SEM picture of the nanowire FET
sensor. (j) TEM of the cross section of a single nanowire.

to ensure the stability of the device. It is difficult to realize mass
production using such “bottom up” method. Here we describe
a “top down” method, where a fully CMOS compatible process
is used for the fabrication of a silicon nanowire FET device
(see Fig. 1). A silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer (Soitec, p-type,
resistivity = 14 − 19 Ω · cm) with a device layer of 70 nm
was oxidized and etched by HF (1:100). The device layer was
thinned down to be around 30 nm [see Fig. 1(b)]. Low pressure
chemical vapor deposition was used to coat silicon nitride as
a hard mask for later fabrication, and photolithography (Nikon
Stepper S203B) was used to define the nanowire structure. The
width of the photoresist mask was around 180 nm, and then it
was trimmed to around 100 nm by an AMAT P5000 etching system (He-O2 :40 sccm + N2 : 20 sccm, pressure: 30 mτ , power:
40 W) [see Fig. 1(c)]. Silicon nitride was etched to form the
hard mask for TMAH (Tetra-Methyl Ammonium Hydroxide)
etching (25% at 50 °C) of silicon and the photo resist (PR) was
stripped away [see Fig. 1(d)]. After TMAH etching and removal

The microfluidic channel is fabricated following the typical
soft lithography fabrication method. First, photolithography is
used to make the SU8 mold (SU-8, 25 Microchem, MA, USA)
on silicon wafer. After soft and hard baking, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning, MI, USA) and curing
agent in a volume ratio of 10:1 were mixed well, cast onto the
SU8 mold, and baked at 80 °C for 2 h. Finally, the PDMS replica
was peeled off the mold and bonded with the silicon-nanowire
chip after plasma O2 activation for 1 min at a power of 70 W
using a plasma asher. The microfluidic channel was aligned such
that the nanowire FET sensor was located right on the left of
the microsensing channel. The chip was then baked at 70 °C
for 24 h to improve the bonding strength between the PDMS
and silicon-nanowire chip. The sensing channel (smaller central
microchannel) of the PDMS chamber is designed to be 30 μm
wide and 100 μm long. The bigger microchannels on two sides
of the small microchannel are designed to be 800 μm wide and
5 mm long, whereas the PDMS channel is 30 μm in height.
C. Theoretical Calculation
The concept of the Coulter counter is demonstrated in Fig. 2.
The fluidic channel includes three sections: The sensing channel
(small central microchannel with resistance R0 ) and two bigger
microchannels (with resistance RL and RR ) on two sides of
the sensing channel. Electrical voltages are applied from the
inlet and the outlet (VL and VR ). The nanowire FET device
is located right next to the sensing channel [see Fig. 2(a)] to
measure the potential change. When nonconductive particles are

CHEN et al.: CMOS-COMPATIBLE SILICON-NANOWIRE-BASED COULTER COUNTER FOR CELL ENUMERATION

313

potential Vg can be expressed as
Vg = VR + (VL − VR ) ·

Reﬀ
RL + Reﬀ

where Reﬀ = RR + R0 . When the nonconductive particle/cell
is passing through the sensing channel, the resistance of the
sensing channel changes to R0 + ΔR and, thus, Reﬀ is changed
to RR + R0 + ΔR. The potential Vg can be expressed as
Reﬀ + ΔR
.
RL + Reﬀ + ΔR
Therefore, the potential change introduced by the passing of
the cell can be calculated as
ΔR
ΔVg = (VL − VR )
·δ
Reﬀ
where
Vg = VR + (VL − VR ) ·

δ=

(1

RL
Reff
+ RReLf f )2

.

5000
:
In our fluidic channel design, RL : R0 : RR = 800×30
5000
5
1
5
: 800×30 = 24 : 9 : 24 ; thus, RL : R = RL : (R0 +
23
RR ) == 15
72 : 72 = 15 : 23. So, RL /Reﬀ = 1/1.533 and δ =
0.24. When VL − VR = 1 V, the change in potential introduced
by one 10-μm particle is around 3.9 mV. This potential change
can be captured by the nanowire resistance measurement. Also,
the sensitivity limit can be further tuned by the potential applied
to the left and right sides of the microchannel.
100
30×30

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 2. Coulter counter with nanowire FET device. (a) PDMS microsensing
channel R 0 with 100-μm length, 30-μm width, and 30-μm height is located
between two bigger channels R L and R R . (b) Beads/cells can flow through the
microchannel and detected by the nanowire FET device. (c) The picture of the
measurement setup for the nanowire Coulter device.

occupying the big microchannel RL and RR , as the volume ratio
of the particle and fluidics channel is small, the total resistance
Rtotal = RL + R0 + RR change is negligible [see Fig. 2(b)].
However, when the particles are occupying the sensing channel
R0 , the total resistance Rtotal is not negligible because the
volume ratio of the particle and the sensing channel is large.
The current change is proportional to the ratio of the volume
of the cell and sensing channel, which is in proportion to the
conductance change introduced by the nonconductive cell in
conductive buffer [14]
ΔI =

(VL − VR ) ΔR
(VL − VR )
(VL − VR )
=
−
.
Rtotal
Rtotal + ΔR
Rtotal Rtotal

Here, we assume that the resistance change ΔR is much
smaller than the resistance of the whole channel Rtotal .
For the potential-based Coulter counter that we proposed, instead of measuring the current passing from left to the right,
we can also measure the potential right next to the central microchannel R0 using a silicon nanowire [see Fig. 2(b)], and the

The nanowire FET device was characterized by I–Vg measurement. The measurement setup shown in Fig. 3(c), where
nanowire conductance was measured using the Agilent semiconductor analyzer B1500A, and two reference electrodes were
injected at the inlet and outlet of the fluidics chamber. PBS buffer
(10 mM, with 138 mM of NaCl, pH 7.4) was first introduced
into the fluidic chamber, and only one electrode (Ag/AgCl pellet,
A-M system, 550008) from the left side was connected to the
power source (Vg = VL ), while VR was floated, and the potential of the gate of silicon nanowire was determined by VL .
In Fig. 3(a), the electrical current through the nanowire was
recorded when the gate voltage was scanned from +1 to − 0.2 V
(black line for linear scale and green line for log scale). The field
effect can be seen clearly with negligible hysteresis. The silicon nanowire is slightly p-doped and the FET is operated at the
depletion region. When a positive voltage is applied to the solution gate, the positive charge carriers of the p-type silicon are
depleted and the source drain current decreases [15]. Further,
when VL was floated and VR was connected to the power source
(Vg = VR ), almost identical I–V characteristics (black dots and
red lines) were observed [see Fig. 3(b)], as the potential across
the whole fluidic channel was the same. The real-time measurement of the current through the nanowire with constant gate
voltage clearly reveals the nanowire current sensitivity to the
applied gate voltage [see Fig. 3(c)]. The leakage current to the
reference gate electrode is negligible, as a noise current at the
level of ±50 pA was observed instead of a potential-dependent

314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 4. (a) Optical image of the microchannel with the silicon nanowire device. (b) Real-time measurement of the nanowire current when microbeads of
different sizes (8, 15, and 20 μm) are driven through the microchannel. (c) The
conductance change as a function of beads volume. (d) Normalized MCF-7 cell
diameter extracted from the electrical measurement.

Fig. 3. Electrical characteristics of nanowire FET device. (a) I–Vg characteristics when the single reference gate voltage (V g = V L ) is varied. (b) I–Vg
comparison when V g = V L (black dots) and V g = V R (red line). (c) Real-time
measurement of the nanowire current at different reference gate voltages.

current (data not shown). This confirmed a conformal coating
of Al2 O3 on the silicon nanowire. When VL and VR are connected to different potentials, as described previously in Section
II-C, there is a gradient of electrical potential across the fluidics
channel, and the surface potential of silicon nanowire can be
determined by VL and VR , as well as the resistance ratio of the
microfluidics channels.
Polystyrene microbeads of three different sizes (8, 15, and
20 μm) were used to characterize and validate the devicecounting capability. The microfluidic channel was first incubated by PBS buffer with 5% BSA (bovine serum albumin), and
then the solution with the microbeads was driven through the
channel [see Fig. 4(a)] from the left side inlet at a flow rate of
around 50 nL/min. Fig. 4(b) show the real-time current measurement of the nanowire, where VL = 1 V and VR = 0 V. The
passing of big microbeads (15 μm) introduces a large change
in current (around 800 pA), whereas small microbeads (8 μm)

introduce a small change in the current (around 130 pA). From
Fig. 4(b) and (c), the peak conductance change is approximately
in linear with the particular size, and the change in peak conductance from 8-μm beads is small in comparison with the peak
from 15-μm beads. As the conductance change is proportional
to the particle volume, the size of unknown cells/particles can
be estimated by comparison with the signal of the beads [see
Fig. 4(c)]. When two beads were passing through the central
microchannel continuously with a short-time interval, a potential drop with a double peak was observed (data not shown).
This implies that a higher sampling rate is needed to identify
particles at high flow rate or high concentration.
Recently, the importance of knowing the number of CTCs
present in blood for cancer diagnosis and treatment has generated interest due to their clinical implication [16], [17]. CTCs
shed into the vasculature from a primary tumor and circulate in
the bloodstream. The presence of CTCs in the blood can trigger
the subsequent growth of additional tumors in distant organs by
metastasis and is the major reason for cancer-related deaths and,
thus, CTC detection and counting are critical for cancer management. Here, we use MCF-7 as a model cell to validate our
Coulter counter device. MCF-7 cells were spiked in the PBS at a
concentration of around 6.6 × 104 cells/ml. The flow rate used
is 10 μl/min. The change in conductance of silicon nanowire
when MCF-7 cells were driven through the microfluidic channel was recorded. By comparing the results of Figs. 3(c) and
4(c), the nanowire conductance change is approximately proportional to the gate voltage change when the voltage change
is small (for a 20-μm bead, the gate voltage change is around
30 mV). The gate voltage change is proportional to the volume
of the cell/bead passing through. Thus, we can extract and normalize the MCF7 cell size as showed in Fig. 4(d). The results
clearly indicate that the device can be used for cell counting.
The current prototype is based on the size difference of the
particles/cells and there is no specificity, which means it cannot
differentiate particles/cells of the same sizes. For example, some

CHEN et al.: CMOS-COMPATIBLE SILICON-NANOWIRE-BASED COULTER COUNTER FOR CELL ENUMERATION

big white blood cells have a similar size to the CTCs and, thus,
the device cannot be used directly for clinical samples. In order
to realize selective detection and counting of cells such as CTCs
in blood, two possible approaches may be adopted during the
sample preparation step: 1) Depletion of all white blood cells
before counting, or 2) increasing the effective size of target
cancer cells by selective conjugating microbeads [18], [19].
IV. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, a silicon-nanowire FET device was fabricated
using a CMOS-compatible process. The nanowire is operated
as a highly sensitive potential sensor for the particle counting
using the potential-based Coulter counter concept. The counting capability was validated using microbeads as well as the
cancer cell MCF-7. The advantage of such a counting device
is that it has the potential to improve on the low throughput of
the conventional Coulter counter device with a multiple-sensor
array.
REFERENCES
[1] M. R. Verso, “The evolution of blood counting techniques,” History Med.,
vol. 8, pp. 149–158, 1962.
[2] X. Cheng, Y. S. Liu et al., “Cell detection and counting through cell
lysate impedance spectroscopy in microfluidic devices,” Lab Chip, vol. 7,
pp. 746–755, 2007.
[3] P. B. Patrizia and L. B. Naoual, “Circulating tumor cells (CTC) detection:
Clinical impact and future directions,” Cancer Lett., vol. 253, pp. 180–204,
2007.
[4] D. S. Lin, F. Y. Huang et al., “Urinary tract infection in febrile infants
younger than eight weeks of age,” Pediatric Infectious Disease J., vol. 19,
pp. 223–227, 2000.
[5] E. Racila, D. Euhus et al., “Detection and characterization of carcinoma
cells in the blood,” Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 8, pp. 4589–4594, 1998.

315

[6] W. Asghar, Y. Wan et al., “Electrical fingerprinting, 3D profiling and
detection of tumor cells with solid-state micropores,” Lab Chip, vol. 13,
pp. 2345–2352, 2013.
[7] Y. N. Wang, Y. Kang et al., “On-chip counting the number and the percentage of CD4+T lymphocytes,” Lab Chip, vol. 2, pp. 309–315, 2008.
[8] Y. Cui, Q. Wei et al., “Nanowire nanosensors for highly sensitive and
selective detection of biological and chemical species,” Science, vol. 293,
pp. 1289–1292, 2001.
[9] E. Stern, J. F. Klemic et al., “Label-free immunodetection with CMOScompatible semiconducting nanowires,” Nature, vol. 445, pp. 519–522,
2007.
[10] Y. Chen, X. Wang et al., “Silicon-based nanoelectronic field-effect pH
sensor with local gate control,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 89, p. 223512, 2006.
[11] N. Jokilaakso, E. Salm et al., “Ultra-localized single cell electroporation
using silicon nanowires,” Lab Chip, vol. 13, pp. 336–339, 2013.
[12] M. Sridhar, D. Xu et al., “Experimental characterization of a metal-oxidesemiconductor field-effect transistor-based Coulter counter,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 103, p. 10471, 2008.
[13] J. Kim et al., “Potentiometric multichannel cytometer microchip for highthroughput microdispersion analysis,” Anal. Chem., vol. 85, pp. 362–368,
2013.
[14] W. H. Coulter, “High speed automatic blood cell counter and cell size
analyzer,” in Proc. Nat. Elect. Conf., 1956, vol. 12, p. 1034.
[15] S. Chen, N. Jokilaakso et al., “A two-terminal silicon nanoribbon fieldeffect pH sensor,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 97, p. 264102, 2010.
[16] M. Cristofanilli, G. T. Budd et al., “Circulating tumor cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic breast cancer,” New England J. Med.,
vol. 8, pp. 781–791, 2004.
[17] Y. Chen, C. C. Wang et al., “CMOS high density electrical impedance
biosensor array for tumor cell detection,” Sens. Actuators B, Chem.,
vol. 173, pp. 903–907, 2012.
[18] J. Chung, H. Shao et al., “Microfluidic cell sorter (μfcs) for on chip
capture and analysis of single cells, advanced healthcare materials” Adv.
Healthcare Mater., vol. 1, pp. 432–436, 2012.
[19] M. S. Kim, T. S. Sim et al., “SSA-MOA: A novel CTC isolation platform
using selective size amplification and a multi-obstacle architecture filter,”
Lab Chip, vol. 12, pp. 2874–2880, 2012.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

