372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Investigation of the Capture of Magnetic
Particles From High-Viscosity Fluids
Using Permanent Magnets
Alexandra Garraud∗ , Member, IEEE, Camilo Velez, Member, IEEE, Yash Shah, Nicolas Garraud, Member, IEEE,
Bettina Kozissnik, Elena G. Yarmola, Kyle D. Allen, Jon Dobson, and David P. Arnold, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: This paper investigates the practicality of using a small, permanent magnet to capture magnetic particles out
of high-viscosity biological fluids, such as synovial fluid. Methods:
Numerical simulations are used to predict the trajectory of magnetic particles toward the permanent magnet. The simulations are
used to determine a “collection volume” with a time-dependent
size and shape, which determines the number of particles that can
be captured from the fluid in a given amount of time. Results: The
viscosity of the fluid strongly influences the velocity of the magnetic
particles toward the magnet, hence, the collection volume after a
given time. In regards to the design of the magnet, the overall size is
shown to most strongly influence the collection volume in comparison to the magnet shape or aspect ratio. Conclusion: Numerical
results showed good agreement with in vitro experimental magnetic
collection results. Significance: In the long term, this paper aims
to facilitate optimization of the collection of magnetic particle–
biomarker conjugates from high-viscosity biological fluids without
the need to remove the fluid from a patient.
Index Terms—Biomagnetics, high-viscosity biological fluids,
magnetic forces, magnetic particles, osteoarthritis.

I. INTRODUCTION
IAGNOSING medical diseases often requires the sampling of biological fluids such as urine, saliva, and blood.
However, not all biological fluids are as straightforward to obtain as these fluids. Moreover, sampling the presence or concentration of a target molecule at a particular location within
a biological fluid may yield a better means to diagnose local
disease activity. As an example, there are a multitude of molecular biomarkers that are known to correlate with osteoarthritis
(OA) disease progression [1], and several research initiatives
have focused in analysis of these molecular biomarkers in urine
and serum. However, the associated levels of OA biomarkers
are not specific enough to accurately diagnose OA [1]. In situ
measurement of OA biomarkers directly within a diseased joint

D

Manuscript received January 22, 2015; revised April 27, 2015 and June
29, 2015; accepted July 9, 2015. Date of publication July 20, 2015; date of
current version January 16, 2016. This work was supported in parts by the
NIH / National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
(Grant R21AR064402–01A1.), a startup grant from the Division of Sponsored
Research, University of Florida, and a University of Florida Opportunity Seed
Fund.. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ A. Garraud is with the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 USA
(e-mail: agarraud@ ufl.edu).
C. Velez, Y. Shah, N. Garraud, B. Kozissnik, E. G. Yarmola, K. D. Allen, J.
Dobson and D. P. Arnold are with the University of Florida.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2458783

could address this problem [2]; however, the synovial fluid has
a high viscosity and can be difficult to aspirate from a joint, a
problem known in medicine as a dry tap [3]. The main challenge
is how to reliably extract the OA biomarkers from the highly
viscous synovial fluid in a reasonable time (< 1 h) for clinical
applications.
Similar challenges exist across medicine, such as difficulties
in extracting fluid from around the root of a tooth for biofilm
analysis [4], potential increases in sensitivity and specificity
from sampling mucous fluid in local or complex infections, a
potential to reduce the risks of amniotic fluid embolism and
other complications during amniocentesis by reducing the fluid
lost during sampling [5], or providing alternate means to sample
cerebrospinal spinal fluid [6].
The motivating hypothesis underlying the development of
the platform technology we describe here is that biomarkers
may be collected from highly viscous biological fluids by injecting magnetic particles that are functionalized to bind with
biomarker molecules within the fluid, and then, collecting these
particle–biomarker conjugates from the fluid via a permanent
magnet. If successful, this approach could allow for a more reliable collection of biomarkers from highly viscous biological
fluid or complex anatomical locations without the removal of
the fluid from the body, as discussed further in Section II-A. The
primary objective of the work presented here is to investigate
the physical feasibility of the collection of magnetic particles in
highly viscous fluid with a permanent magnet in vitro, building
on the preliminary results presented in [7] and [8]. A secondary
objective of this paper is to present and validate a multiphysics
modeling approach for simulating the magnetic capture process.
In the long term, this paper aims to provide guidelines for the
development of magnetic capture techniques for the collection
of magnetic particle–biomarker conjugates directly from synovial fluid or other in vivo target fluid. Therefore, any biosafety
concerns for future in vivo applications will be investigated in
future publications.
Section II describes the general method and the materials
used in this paper. In Section III, the numerical modeling is
introduced, followed by the numerical analysis of collection
volume as a function of permanent magnet geometry and fluid
viscosity. In Section IV, two different sets of in vitro experiments
are conducted using mixtures of water and glycerol to mimic the
viscosity ranges of synovial fluid seen in OA, and these results
are used to validate the numerical modeling. Conclusions are
provided in Section V.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GARRAUD et al.: INVESTIGATION OF THE CAPTURE OF MAGNETIC PARTICLES FROM HIGH-VISCOSITY FLUIDS

373

Fig. 2. (a) SEM image of a magnetic particle, (b) optical image of the cylindrical magnet mounted on the soft magnetic rod and (c) magnetization curves used
during simulations. Magnet and rod measured by VSM, and magnetic particles
measured by SQUID. Inset: zoom-in to the low applied magnetic field region
of the magnetization curves of the microparticles and the rod.

Fig. 1. Conceptual diagram of the magnetic particle-based technique to capture biomarkers from a biological fluid: (a) presence of biomarkers in the fluid
at an unknown concentration, (b) injection of the functionalized superparamagnetic particles into the fluid, (c) binding of biomarkers to the conjugated
particles, (d) collection of the conjugates using a permanent magnet, (e) release
from the magnetic particles and analysis of the biomarkers.

Concerning the OA diagnosis, the first phenomenon has already been described in vitro and post mortem by magnetically
collecting CTX-II (C-telopeptide of type II collagen), an OA
biomarker, representing a separate investigation by itself [7].
In this paper, the focus is on the physical proof-of-concept of
the capture of the magnetic particles in order to optimize their
magnetic collection in multiple biological fluids, focusing more
on high-viscosity fluids.
B. Materials for Magnetic Collection

II. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A. Magnetic Capture Diagnosis Method
The proposed magnetic capture technique for the early diagnosis is described in Fig. 1 [7]. To begin, it is assumed that
biomarkers are present in a biological fluid at an unknown, yet
disease-related, concentration [see Fig. 1(a)]. The first step consists of adding functionalized magnetic particles to the fluid
[see Fig. 1(b)] and waiting for their binding to the biomarkers to
reach equilibrium [see Fig. 1(c)]. A permanent magnet is then
inserted into the fluid space via a cannula to collect a portion
of the magnetic particle–biomarker conjugates from the fluid
[see Fig. 1(d)]. After removal from the joint space, biomarkers
are released from the particles on the permanent magnet via a
temperature increase, enzymatic digestion, or other means for
further analysis [see Fig. 1(e)]. Both the number of magnetic
particles and biomarkers has to be established to accurately estimate the biomarkers presence in the fluid space [7]. Note that
during in vivo studies, any uncollected conjugates would remain
in the fluid space or be cleared through circulation or lymphatic
system.
The biomarker collection depends on two phenomena: the
biomarker binding to the magnetic particle surface, and the
subsequent magnetic particle collection by a permanent magnet.

1) Magnetic Particles: For the proof-of-concept presented
in this study, Fe3 O4 superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) are embedded in a nonmagnetic polystyrene
matrix with fluorescent dye, resulting in micron-size magnetic
particles with superparamagnetic properties (Corpuscular C-PS1058COOH). For terminology convenience, the polystyrene /
magnetic nanoparticle composite bead is thereafter called the
“magnetic particle.” It should be noted that SPIONs are currently
used as FDA-approved clinical MRI contrast-enhancement
agents [9], and that magnetic nano- and microparticles are
increasingly used for biomedical applications such as drug
and gene delivery, remote actuation of cell surface receptors,
cell targeting, and magnetophoretic cell separation [10]–[12].
These technologies rely on the superparamagnetic properties
of the nanoparticles, having no remanent magnetization in the
absence of an external magnetic field. Therefore, no agglomeration due to interparticle magnetic interactions is expected when
they are in suspension.
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the dried
particles is presented in Fig. 2(a). The monodispersity of the
particles is confirmed by a dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurement. The average hydrodynamic diameter is found to be
779 nm. The magnetic properties of the particles are measured
with a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)

374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

magnetometer, and the resulting magnetization curve is presented in Fig. 2(c): these magnetic particles are predominantly
superparamagnetic, exhibiting a small coercivity. The magnetization curve is fit with the Langevin equation [13] to estimate
the nanoparticle diameter: 8.5 ± 1.5 nm.
2) Permanent Magnet: The collection of magnetic particles
relies on the attractive magnetic forces from the magnetic field
source, here a permanent magnet. The magnetic force on a
particle is proportional to the magnetic field gradient created by
the permanent magnet, as will be explained in Section III-A.
Hence, to maximize the capture of particles from a fluid, the
capture magnet should create a large magnetic field gradient
over a large volume. Furthermore, the total physical magnet
size must be constrained in order to facilitate insertion via a
small incision or cannula for in vivo applications and to fit into
the joint volume. Indeed, the amount of synovial fluid available
in a joint is relatively small: ∼3 mL in OA human knees [14],
∼25 μL in rat knees, and only ∼1 μL in mouse knees.
In the new experiments presented in this paper, the capture
magnet structure is a cylindrical, grade N52, Nd–Fe–B permanent magnet (Super Magnet Man D0110), 0.93 mm in diameter
and 0.97 mm in length, magnetized along the axis and covered
by a ∼20-μm thick trilayer of nickel/copper/nickel to prevent
oxidation. A picture of the permanent magnet, mounted on a soft
ferromagnetic rod for easier handling during the experiments,
is provided in Fig. 2(b). The magnetic properties are measured
using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) (ADE Technologies EV9) with a maximum applied field of ±1800 kA/m.
The magnetic hysteresis curve of the permanent magnet (hard
magnetic material) is presented in Fig. 2(c), showing an intrinsic coercivity of 980 kA/m (μ0 Hc = 1.23 T) and a remanent
magnetization of 915 kA/m (μ0 Mr = 1.15 T). The kink at low
applied fields is attributed to the presence of the soft-magnetic
protective layer. Since the soft magnetic rod contributes to the
magnetic collection, the magnetization curve of the soft magnetic material is also measured by a VSM and considered in
the following numerical simulations. The magnetic hysteresis
curve of the soft magnetic rod is presented in Fig. 2(c), showing
a saturation magnetization of 1710 kA/m (μ0 Ms = 2.15 T) and
a relative magnetic permeability of μr = 25.
III. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
A. Numerical Model of the Magnetic Collection
The numerical simulations are carried out in a 2-D axisymmetric configuration, in the cylindrical coordinate system
 z). Two forces acting on a particle are considered in this
(r, φ,
study: the magnetic force Fm and the Stokes’ drag force Fd .
The magnetic force is expressed as [15], [16]
 B

Fm = (m
 · ∇)

(1)

 is an
where m
 is the magnetic moment of the particle and B
external magnetic flux density, defined by its amplitude, B, and
its orientation θ = arctan (Bz /Br )

 

cos θ
Br

B=B
=
.
(2)
sin θ
Bz

Fig. 3. Simulation description: (a) axisymmetric representation of the simulation, (b) B-field distribution map and H-field streamlines, (c) magnetic force
distribution and particle tracing trajectories, (d) time-of-flight contours. The
area represented here is a zoom-in of the entire area that is being simulated.

The direction of the particle magnetization is assumed to be
the same as the direction of the B-field. Therefore, the particle
magnetization m
 is defined as


cos θ
m
 = V M (H)
(3)
sin θ
where M (H) is the particle magnetization as a function of the
H-field [refer to Fig. 2(c)] and V is the volume of the particle.
Hence, the magnetic force is given by
⎡
⎤
∂Br
∂Br
⎢ cos θ ∂r + sin θ ∂z ⎥
⎥.
Fm = V M (H) ⎢
(4)
⎣
∂Bz
∂Bz ⎦
cos θ
+ sin θ
∂r
∂z
The drag force is calculated using [17]
Fd = −6πηrm p v

(5)

where η is the fluid viscosity, rm p is the hydrodynamic radius
of the particle, and v is the velocity of the particle.
The force balance is given by
Fm + Fd = mp a

(6)

where mp is the mass of the particle and a is the particle acceleration. Since the mass of the particle is small and it experiences
a small acceleration, the inertia term (right-hand side term of
force balance) is negligible. Therefore, the velocity of a magnetic particle is found as
v =

1
Fm .
6πη rm p

(7)

With these base equations, simulations are performed in
COMSOL Multiphysics as shown in Fig. 3(a). The permanent
magnet provides the source of the B-field, shown in Fig. 3(b).
Using (4), the magnetic force distribution is deduced, as presented in Fig. 3(c).
From the magnetic force map, the trajectories of the particles
at different positions are calculated using the particle tracing
module in COMSOL. Simulation results confirm the inertia
term in (6) is negligible compared to the other forces. From

GARRAUD et al.: INVESTIGATION OF THE CAPTURE OF MAGNETIC PARTICLES FROM HIGH-VISCOSITY FLUIDS

Fig. 4. Collection volume at different collection times (CV1 2 s , CV1 2 0 s ,
CV1 2 0 0 s ) versus permanent magnet volume. Right axis is the number of collected particles for a concentration of 1-million particles per microliter.

Fig. 5. Collection volume at different collection times (CV1 2 s , CV1 2 0 s ,
CV1 2 0 0 s ) versus aspect ratio of the permanent magnet. Right axis is the number
of collected particles for a concentration of 1-million particles per microliter.

this, the time taken by particles to travel from any point in the
space to the surface of the magnet (time-of-flight) is determined.
Particle trajectories and time-of-flight contours are presented
in Fig. 3(c) and Fig. 3(d), respectively. The volume of space
within a time-of-flight contour—excluding the volume occupied
by the magnet and rod—corresponds to a collection volume
of magnetic particles. The collection volume expands in time
(denoted CVt , where the subscript t denotes the time) and is
used as a figure of merit to compare the influence of different
system variations (magnetic geometry, fluid viscosity, etc.).
B. Influence of Geometry
The influence of the magnet size on the magnetic particle
collection is investigated by simulating the collection volume of
magnetic particles in water (η = 0.86 mPa · s) when the volume
of a cylindrical permanent magnet (length/diameter = 1.04) is
varied from 0.01 to 79 mm3 . The results from the numerical
simulations are presented in Fig. 4. As expected, the permanent magnet volume is found to have a significant influence.
After 120 s, a 79-mm3 magnet enables the collection volume
of 300 mm3 of magnetic particles, while a magnet ten times
smaller (0.79 mm3 ) collects 20 mm3 of magnetic particles. Assuming an initial concentration of 1-million particles per microliter (1 mg/mL), these volumes correspond to 300-million
particles and 20-million particles, respectively.
Other geometry parameters are investigated through their influence on the collection volume after 120 s (CV120 s ). Fig. 5
shows the influence of modifying the cylinder aspect ratio
(length to diameter) from 1:10 to 10:1, keeping a constant volume. An optimum collection volume is found for an aspect ratio

Fig. 6.

375

Time-of-flight contour for different fluid viscosities.

close to 1:1. Additional simulations (not shown) reveal that the
corner radius of the magnet has very little influence on the collection volume at 120 s. Additionally, a cylindrical magnet is
found to have a collection volume after 120 s, nearly the same
as a cone of the same volume, whatever the considered volume.
While the conical shape produces a higher magnetic gradient
in the region near the apex, in the far-field region, both magnets act as simple magnetic dipoles, and the shape is no longer
an influent design parameter. Because the cylinder is easier to
fabricate than the cone [8], it makes most sense to use a simple
cylindrical permanent magnet for the magnetic collection.
C. Influence of Viscosity
In high-viscosity fluids, the balance between drag and magnetic force leads to low particle velocities, which in practical situations may limit the collection volume. Therefore, the influence
of viscosity is of critical importance. To study this phenomenon,
a viscosity range was chosen to reflect the viscosity of healthy
human synovial fluid (380–1400 mPa · s) and the reduction by
an order of magnitude observed in OA-affected synovial fluid
[18]. Experiments (described in Section IV) are conducted in
mixtures of water and glycerol to mimic these viscosity ranges.
A first study focuses on the influence of the viscosity on the
time-of-flight. The results are given in Fig. 6, considering a
0.66-mm3 cylindrical permanent magnet. The viscosity variation shows significant practical impact on the time-of-flight. A
particle located 1 mm away from the magnet reaches the surface in a matter of seconds when in water (0.86 mPa · s), but the
same particle track may require 1 000 s when in glycerol (770
mPa · s). A linear relationship between the time-of-flight and the
viscosity is found, as expected from (7).
A second study investigates the influence of viscosity on the
collection volume of magnetic particles depending on the collection time. The results are reported in Fig. 7. The equivalent
number of collected magnetic particles, for an initial concentration of 1-million particles per microliter (1 mg/mL), is presented
in the right axis of the graph. For experimental quantification
of the number of collected particles, the quantity must exceed
the threshold limit (∼ 105 particles) of the Synergy 2 MultiMode Microplate Reader (see Section IV-B). The simulations
show that ∼120 000 particles can be collected after 120 s in a
fluid with the viscosity of a healthy-knee synovial fluid. More
particles would be collected for an OA-affected joint (lower

376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 7. Collection volume versus viscosity, depending on the collection time.
Right axis is the number of collected particles for a concentration of 1-million
particles per microliter. Highlighted zone represent the synovial fluid viscosity
range from OA patients to healthy patients.
TABLE I
RANGE OF VISCOSITY DEPENDING OF THE GLYCEROL TO WATER RATIO,
AT 300 K
Fluid mix (1 mL)
100 % Glycerol – 0 % Water
75 % Glycerol – 25 % Water
50 % Glycerol – 50 % Water
0 % Glycerol – 100 % Water

Fig. 8. Example of two particle trajectories, in water (2-s long), tracked with
the DLTdv5 MATLAB package. The image contrast is enhanced for an easier
location of the magnet surface. The lines represent the COMSOL simulation
results of particle tracking.

η (mPa · s)
770
37
6.4
0.86

viscosity). Therefore, a measurement for an OA diagnosis is
expected to be obtained within a 10-min long collection with a
static magnet.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
In this section, the numerical results obtained in Sections IIIB and III-C are compared to experimental results. The validity
of the numerical model will be demonstrated via measurements
of particle velocities for several different fluid viscosities, and
via measurement of the number of collected particles versus
time.
A. Particle Tracing Experiments
In order to experimentally measure the velocity of the magnetic particles during capture, the particle motion is recorded
by a fluorescence camera on a microscopic platform. Fluids of
varying viscosity are produced by a variable ratio of glycerol to
water (see Table I), corresponding to the viscosity range shown
previously in Fig. 6. Note that while glycerol is a Newtonian
fluid [19], it is used to mimic the viscosity of the synovial fluid,
a shear-thinning fluid, hence, non-Newtonian [20], [21]. The
drag force equation can be re-formulated to assume the change
of viscosity with the applied shear rate [19], [22], [23]. However, the range of velocity found for the highest-viscosity case
will give us the lower bound value to be expected while in the
synovial fluid.
The experimental protocol is as follows: a 0.4-mL volume of
the magnetic particles (stock concentration of 10 mg/mL) are
first homogeneously mixed in a 1-mL volume of the fluid of
interest, and a 0.4-mL droplet of this mix is placed on a Petri
dish and imaged with a fluorescence microscope (EVOS Cell
Imaging System). Note that the particles are not functionalized

Fig. 9. Velocity versus particle distance from the magnet surface, depending on the viscosity. Experimental results are plotted as data points and the
simulation results are plotted as lines of matching color.

or conjugated with biomarkers. The 0.93-mm diameter, 0.97mm long (0.66 mm3 ) permanent magnet is then inserted into
the fluid, while the motion of the magnetic particles near the
magnet tip region is recorded. Video analysis is performed to
quantify the particle motion (trajectory and velocity) using a
freely available MATLAB package, DLTdv5 [8], [24]. An example of the extracted trajectories of two particles in water,
obtained from a 2-s long video, is presented in Fig. 8. A comparison with the simulated trajectories is provided, showing a
good agreement.
The deduced experimental velocities for the different mixes
are presented in Fig. 9, alongside the numerical simulations
of particles moving along a corresponding trajectory. Up to
250-μm away from the magnet surface, experimental velocities ranging from ∼0.5 to ∼800 μm/s are obtained, confirming
again that viscosity has a strong impact on the motion of the
magnetic particles. Additionally, the experimental results show
good agreement with the numerical model.
B. Particle Collection Experiments
To experimentally determine the number of collected particles, at a given time, the permanent magnet is allowed to collect particles from a volume of solution with a known particle
concentration. The number of collected particles is indirectly
deduced from the amount of uncollected particles remaining in
the solution, as explained in the following procedure.

GARRAUD et al.: INVESTIGATION OF THE CAPTURE OF MAGNETIC PARTICLES FROM HIGH-VISCOSITY FLUIDS

377

in the well, using a static magnet. However, as mentioned in
Section III-C, up to 120 s are necessary to magnetically collect
a number of particles above the threshold limit of detection in
a fluid with the viscosity of a healthy-knee synovial fluid with
a static magnet, demonstrating our proposed method of OA
diagnosis does not require fully clearing the synovial fluid of
the magnetic particle–biomarker conjugates.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 10. Simulated particle collection versus time for different fluid viscosities. Experimental results for the magnetic collection in water.

An initial volume of 4 μL of magnetic particles at a stock concentration of 10 mg/mL is put into a 15-mL Corning tube. The
particles are then sonicated twice for 2-min intervals in a Branson 1800 Ultrasonicator in order to prevent particle aggregation.
Deionized water is then added to adjust the particles to a 2 500x
dilution compared to the stock concentration of particles, i.e.,
4000 particles per microliter (concentration of 4 μg/mL). The
solution is thoroughly mixed and vortexed. Forty-two 200-μL
aliquots are subsequently transferred to a 96-well cell-culture
plate. After mixing the well with a micropipette to ensure uniform distribution of particles, a cylindrical 0.66-mm3 permanent
magnet mounted on a soft magnetic rod is placed into the center of each well. The permanent magnet rests on polycarbonate
blocks at a predetermined height to ensure the position is consistent. During each experiment, the magnet is allowed to collect
particles for 0, 0.5, 2, 15, 120- or 360 min (n = 3 per time point).
The magnet is promptly removed from the well after the magnetic collection. After the collection, 180-μL aliquots are taken
out of each well of the cell-culture plate and placed into 0.2-mL
PCR tubes. The PCR tubes sit on top of a magnetic plate for
2 h to accumulate the particles on the bottom of the PCR tube.
A volume of 175 μL is removed from the supernatant, and the
final volume is adjusted to 5 μL. The 5-μL samples in the PCR
tubes are quantified by fluorescence intensity at 530/590 nm
using a Synergy 2 Multi-Mode Microplate Reader. Six calibration samples (n = 3) are used to convert the read fluorescence
intensity data into an amount of particles information via the
interpolation of the obtained linear trend.
For practical reasons, the aforementioned experiment is only
performed in water. The collected amount of particles versus
time is reported in Fig. 10, along with the analogous numerical
model results. The experimental magnetic collection results in
water are of the same order of magnitude as the numerical
results, despite the simulations ignoring the effects of Brownian
motion, gravity, and magnetic interactions between the particles.
However, an equivalent time dependence is found for both of
them, showing ∼20 000 s (∼5.5 h) are needed to fully capture
all of the magnetic particles. Projected collection rate curves for
the range of viscosity (see Table I) are also presented in Fig. 10.
A collection time of 107 s (∼116 days) is estimated to fully
deplete the same amount of magnetic particles from glycerol

In this paper, numerical simulations have been implemented
to study the influence of several parameters on the collection of
magnetic particles in a fluid: the collecting permanent magnet
geometry as well as the effect of the viscosity on the collection
kinetics. The viscosity is shown to strongly influence the collection time of magnetic particles via a linear relationship. The
optimum permanent magnet geometry is found to be a cylindrical shape rather than a conical shape, with an aspect ratio close
to 1:1 and maximal volume (limited by the size constraints
of the joint space). Using a 0.93-mm diameter, 0.97-mm long
(0.66 mm3 ) permanent magnet, practical amount of magnetic
particles (at least 120 000 particles) is predicted to be collected
in a practical timescale (120 s) from high-viscosity Newtonian
fluids. The numerical results are supported by experimental data,
giving confidence in the numerical predictions. These data are
critical for deciding a reasonable time (e.g., 10 min) for the
collection of magnetic particle–biomarkers. In future works, efforts will focus on moving forward to synovial fluid and other
non-Newtonian fluids to further validate the magnetic collection
diagnostic tool for the detection of early-stage OA.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank L. Maldonado-Camargo for
the SQUID measurements of the magnetic particles and Pr. Carlos Rinaldi for his valuable technical discussion on the Newtonian versus non-Newtonian fluid behavior
REFERENCES
[1] J. C. Rousseau and P. Garnero, “Biological markers in osteoarthritis,”
Bone, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 265–77, Aug. 2012.
[2] V. B. Kraus, “Do biochemical markers have a role in osteoarthritis diagnosis and treatment?” Best Pract. Res. Clin. Rheumatol., vol. 20, pp. 69–80,
2006.
[3] W. N. Roberts et al., “Dry taps and what to do about them: A pictorial
essay on failed arthrocentesis of the knee,” Amer. J. Med., vol. 100, no. 4,
pp. 461–464, Apr. 1996.
[4] C. K. Hope et al., “A direct comparison between extracted tooth and filtermembrane biofilm models of endodontic irrigation using Enterococcus
faecalis,” Arch. Microbiol., vol. 192, pp. 775–781, 2010.
[5] E. R. Norwitz and B. Levy, “Noninvasive prenatal testing: The future is
now,” Rev. Obs. Gynecol., vol. 6, pp. 48–62, 2013.
[6] R. R. Gaiser, “Postdural puncture headache: A headache for the patient and a headache for the anesthesiologist,” Curr. Opin. Anaesthesiol.,
vol. 26, pp. 296–303, 2013.
[7] E. G. Yarmola et al., “Magnetic collection of joint-level osteoarthritis
biomarkers,” Osteoarthr. Cartil., vol. 21, pp. S84–S85, Apr. 2013.
[8] A. Garraud et al., “Collection of magnetic particles from synovial fluid
using Nd-Fe-B micromagnets,” in Proc. Symp. Des., Test, Integr. Packag.
MEMS/MOEMS (DTIP), 2014, pp. 97–102.
[9] M. Mahmoudi et al., “Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs): Development, surface modification and applications in chemotherapy,” Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev., vol. 63, no. 1–2, pp. 24–46, Jan. 2011.

378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

[10] Q. A. Pankhurst et al., “Applications of magnetic nanoparticles in
biomedicine,” J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., vol. 36, no. 13, pp. R167–R181,
Jul. 2003.
[11] J. Dobson, “Remote control of cellular behaviour with magnetic nanoparticles.,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 139–43, Mar. 2008.
[12] Q. A. Pankhurst et al., “Progress in applications of magnetic nanoparticles
in biomedicine,” J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., vol. 42, no. 22, art. no. 224001
(15 pages), Nov. 2009.
[13] R. Chantrell et al., “Measurements of particle size distribution parameters
in ferrofluids,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 975–977, Sep. 1978.
[14] V. B. Kraus et al., “Measurement of synovial fluid volume using urea,”
Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 1217–20, Oct. 2007.
[15] T. H. Boyer, “The force on a magnetic dipole,” Amer. J. Phys., vol. 56,
no. 8, pp. 688–692, Aug. 1988.
[16] X. Xue and E. P. Furlani, “Template-assisted nano-patterning of magnetic
core-shell particles in gradient fields,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., vol. 16,
no. 26, pp. 13306–17, Jul. 2014.
[17] H. Bruus, Theoretical Microfluidics. Lyngby, Denmark: Tech. Univ. Denmark, 2004.
[18] E. H. Jebens and M. E. Monk-Jones, “On the viscosity and pH of synovial
fluid and the pH of blood,” J. Bone Joint Surg. Br., vol. 41-B, no. 2,
pp. 388–400, May 1959.

[19] D. Rodrigue et al., “Drag on non-spherical particles in non-Newtonian
fluids,” Can. J. Chem. Eng., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 588–593, Aug. 1994.
[20] G. D. Jay et al., “The role of lubricin in the mechanical behavior of synovial
fluid,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 104, no. 15, pp. 6194–6199, Apr.
2007.
[21] J. Hron et al., “On the modeling of the synovial fluid,” Adv. Tribol.,
vol. 2010, pp. 104957–1–104957-12, 2010.
[22] R. P. Chhabra, Bubbles, Drops, and Particles in Non-Newtonian Fluids,
2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2006.
[23] M. Renaud et al., “Power-law fluid flow over a sphere: Average shear rate
and drag coefficient,” Can. J. Chem. Eng., vol. 82, no. 5, pp. 1066–1070,
2004.
[24] T. L. Hedrick, “Software techniques for two- and three-dimensional kinematic measurements of biological and biomimetic systems,” Bioinspir.
Biomim., vol. 3, no. 3, art. no. 034001 (6 pages), Sep. 2008.

Authors’ photographs and biographies are not available at the time of
publication.

