IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

2547

An Ear-Worn Vital Signs Monitor
David Da He, Eric S. Winokur∗ , Member, IEEE, and Charles G. Sodini, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a wearable vital signs monitor
at the ear. The monitor measures the electrocardiogram (ECG),
ballistocardiogram (BCG), and photoplethysmogram (PPG) to obtain pre-ejection period (PEP), stroke volume (SV), cardiac output
(CO), and pulse transit time (PTT). The ear is demonstrated as a
natural anchoring point for the integrated sensing of physiological
signals. All three signals measured can be used to obtain heart rate
(HR). Combining the ECG and BCG allows for the estimation of
the PEP, while combining the BCG and PPG allows for the measurement of PTT. Additionally, the J-wave amplitude of the BCG
is correlated with the SV and, when combined with HR, yields CO.
Results from a clinical human study on 13 subjects demonstrate
this proof-of-concept device.
Index Terms—Ballistocardiogram (BCG), blood pressure, cardiac output (CO), continuous monitoring, electrocardiogram
(ECG), heart rate (HR), photoplethysmogram (PPG), pre-ejection
period (PEP), pulse transit time (PTT), stroke volume (SV).

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIOVASCULAR disease (CVD) affects 37% of the
U.S. population and is the leading cause of death in the
U.S. [1]. Many key cardiovascular parameters including heart
rate (HR), stroke volume (SV), and the pre-ejection period (PEP)
have specific applications in the field of CVD monitoring.
HR can be used to monitor arrhythmias that contain irregular
beat intervals. An example is atrial fibrillation, which is the most
common form of cardiac arrhythmia and increases the risk of
stroke and heart failure [2]. As a measure of the heart’s pumping
ability, SV is an important parameter for congestive heart failure
(CHF) patients. The PEP can be used to evaluate ventricular
performance in CHF patients, who have an inability to decrease
the PEP upon cardiovascular demand and are characterized with
a prolonged PEP [3].
When SV is multiplied with HR, cardiac output (CO) can be
obtained, which is defined as the total volume of blood pumped
per minute. Because of the heart’s reduced pumping ability,
CHF patients exhibit decreased CO [3].
This study uses the site behind the ear as a measurement
location. Physiologically, we show that several signals can
be measured at the ear location. These signals include the

C

Manuscript received January 3, 2015; revised April 24, 2015 and June 19,
2015; accepted July 16, 2015. Date of publication July 21, 2015; date of current
version October 16, 2015. This work was sponsored by the Medical Electronic
Device Realization Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Human subject testing was conducted at the MIT Catalyst Clinical Research Center under
IRB approval #1104004449, CRC protocol #615, and Grant #UL1 RR025758.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
D. D. He and C. G. Sodini are with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
∗ E. S. Winokur is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
USA (e-mail: ewinokur@mit.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2459061

ballistocardiogram (BCG), the electrocardiogram (ECG), and
the photoplethysmogram (PPG). Mechanically, the mastoid area
behind the ear is rigid, which reduces motion artifacts compared
to peripheral locations such as the earlobe and the finger. The
ear location is discreet because a small device can be concealed
by the ear or hair. Furthermore, as demonstrated by hearing aids
and headsets, the ear acts as a natural anchor, allowing device
attachment using an ear bud instead of adhesives.
The monitor has been tested on 13 healthy subjects in a clinic
to verify measured data with clinical grade instrumentation. The
proof-of-concept monitor measures the BCG, ECG, and PPG
and estimates HR, PEP, SV, CO, and pulse transit time (PTT).
This paper is a culmination of our previous work [4]–[7], with
additional results showing a new method for obtaining SV from
head BCG. Further studies should be conducted to validate our
device on CVD patients.
II. BACKGROUND
The BCG is a noninvasive measurement of the body’s mechanical recoil to the blood ejected by the heart during systole.
Early work demonstrated that the BCG morphology offers insight into SV, the risk of heart attack, and mortality [8], [9].
Recently, there is a renewed interest in the BCG [10]–[12]. All
of these methods involve a stationary measurement device for
nonambulatory monitoring.
To avoid ECG wires from the ear-worn device to the chest, we
measure the ECG locally near the ear. The ECG near the ear is
significantly attenuated and only R-waves are visible. However,
this is sufficient for calculating the RJ interval, which is defined
as the interval between the ECG’s R-wave and the BCG’s J-wave
[13], [14] and has high correlation with the heart’s PEP [15],
[16]. PEP can be used to determine left ventricular performance
in patients with CVD such as cardiomyopathy and abnormal left
ventricular contractions [17], [18].
The PPG is generally measured at the finger to maximize
signal quality and is usually used to estimate blood oxygenation
[19]. We measure the PPG behind the ear at the mastoid above
Reid’s Baseline. Obtaining HR from the BCG, ECG, and PPG
signals can be used for redundancy error checking to ensure
high signal quality.
III. METHODS
A. Measuring the Head BCG
To sense the head BCG, we use a 14-bit low noise MEMS triaxial accelerometer (Bosch BMA180 with 150-μG/rtHz noise)
that is mounted at the ear. All BCG signals are bandpass filtered
from 1 to 10 Hz to remove the gravity contribution and higher
frequency artifacts.
Fig. 1 shows that the head BCG in the upright standing posture
exists in all three axes. The y-axis (headward-footward) is the

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 3.

Head ECG front-end circuit.

Fig. 1. Measured triaxial head BCG in the standing posture with J-waves
annotated in the y-axis data.

Fig. 4. (a) ECG measured from the chest. (b) ECG measured from the mastoid
area behind the left ear. The measurements are not simultaneous.

Fig. 2. Ensemble head BCG from 64 beats where the underlying individual
BCG waveforms are shown in gray.

dominant BCG axis because the blood volume movement is
mainly in the y-axis.
To examine the secondary BCG waves, the ensemble average
of the head BCG is created by aligning each beat’s J-wave and
then averaging the beats. As shown in Fig. 2, the H-, I-, K-, and
L-waves become visible in the ensemble average.
Because the head BCG is in the range of 10 mG, it can
only be measured in states of relative rest. However, for the
target application of long-term wearable monitoring, numerous
measurement periods exist throughout the day when the wearer
is at less than 4 mG of acceleration [16].
B. Measuring the Head ECG
To sense the ECG at the head, one electrode is placed on the
mastoid area, and the second electrode is placed on the posterior

upper middle neck. The mastoid’s bony structure and the neck’s
flat surface provide a stable electrode contact. Together, the two
electrodes measure a single-lead ECG.
Usually, a third driven-right-leg (DRL) electrode is used for
common-mode interference rejection as well as feedback to set
the DC potential of the body. However, this DRL electrode is
omitted because of the limited area near the ear. As a result, a
digital filter removes powerline interference. The ECG front-end
circuit is shown in Fig. 3.
Using AgCl gel electrodes, Fig. 4 shows ECG measurements
taken from the chest (lead II, 15 cm apart, gain of 250) and from
the left mastoid area (4 cm apart, gain of 7000).
As seen in Fig. 4, the ECG measured at the mastoid area
is in the range of 30 μVpp, which is two orders of magnitude
less than the standard chest ECG. This attenuation is due to the
pattern of the ECG field lines at the head, which yield a very
small potential difference when projected onto the mastoid lead.
Because of this attenuation, the head ECG has a poor signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) and only R-waves are immediately visible.
C. Extracting the RJ Interval
To extract the RJ interval, the simplest method is to use a peak
detection algorithm to determine the delay between the ECG’s
R-wave and the BCG’s J-wave. However, as shown in Fig. 5(a),
the BCG and the ECG signals at the head have low SNRs where
a peak detection algorithm is prone to error.

HE et al.: EAR-WORN VITAL SIGNS MONITOR

2549

Fig. 6. (Top) PPG taken from the mastoid region behind the left ear. (Bottom)
PPG taken from the finger.

Fig. 5. (a) Simultaneous time windows of the head ECG and the head BCG.
(b) Cross-correlation result showing that the highest peak’s lag index is the RJ
interval.

Instead, cross correlation is proposed as a noise tolerant
method for determining the RJ interval. This method takes advantage of the fact that both head BCG and head ECG waveforms have a similar morphology and are phase-locked to a lag
index equal to the RJ interval.
To demonstrate this, Fig. 5(b) shows a time segment of the
head ECG signal cross-correlated with a simultaneous head
BCG signal. The highest peak of the cross-correlation result
occurs when the ECG’s R-wave and the BCG’s J-wave coincide
during time-shifting. As expected, the lag index of the highest
cross-correlation peak is the RJ interval.
To reduce the amount of computation, the cross correlation
can be limited to a lag range of 0.1–0.3 s because the RJ interval
is physiologically within this range [21]. This range is shown as
the shaded region in Fig. 5(b). For example, if the time window is
8 s long, then this 0.2-s truncation allows a 97.5% computational
saving compared to a complete cross correlation. Another benefit of this truncation is that it removes nearby cross-correlation
peaks from consideration, thus improving peak confidence. In
the clinical test analysis, a window length of 8 s is chosen to
reliably extract the RJ intervals.
D. Measuring the Head PPG
PPG signals at the head are obtained with a sensor operating
in reflectance mode instead of transmission mode. In reflectance
mode, the LEDs shine light into the body, and the backscattered
light from tissue, blood, and bone is received by photodiodes

in the same plane as the LED. Several new challenges arise
in reflectance-mode PPG. First, the mechanical housing of the
sensor may not be sufficient for blocking ambient light from
the PDs; therefore, care must be taken when sampling and filtering to avoid aliasing interferers into the PPG bandwidth of
interest. Second, reflectance-mode measurements are often part
of wearable systems, which require low-power and low-voltage
operation to reduce the battery size and optimize the form factor.
To help mitigate these issues, the wearable vital signs monitor
uses a dynamic range enhancement circuit to lower the voltage
of the PPG front end and reduce the resolution requirements of
the analog-to-digital converter [7], [20].
Head PPG signals are similar to PPG signals obtained by
transmission through the finger, as shown in Fig. 6. The morphological differences are due to the vascular transmission line,
which sends the pulse from the heart to the head, compared to
the finger.
E. Device Design
The wearable device measures the BCG and the ECG at the
head and sends the data wirelessly to a computer for visualization, recording, and analysis. The device is shown in Fig. 7 and
the system block diagram is shown in Fig. 8.
The microcontroller (MSP430) continuously samples the
BCG and the ECG sensors at 155 Hz and sends the data to a
2.4-GHz low-power wireless transceiver (CC2500). The power
management circuit draws power from a single 3-V 220-mAh
lithium coin cell battery (CR2032). The computer interface consists of a CC2500 transceiver and a MSP430 microcontroller,
which sends the received data to the computer’s USB port. The
computer records, plots, and filters the BCG and the ECG data
in real time using MATLAB.
A modified hearing aid housing manufactured by Taising
Hearing Amplifier Ltd. mechanically supports the PCB’s. The
device is anchored to the ear using the attached earbud. Two
ECG electrodes are attached to the mastoid and the neck using AgCl gel electrodes. Table I contains the important system
parameters.
F. Failure Cases
The ear-worn vital signs monitor measures signals with low
SNR, such as the BCG. In order to obtain measurements that are

2550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS
Parameter
System Power
Accel noise
ECG AFE noise
PPG AFE noise

Fig. 7. Wearable measurement hardware for single-site continuous PTT measurements along the carotid artery. Figure from [7].

Fig. 8. System block diagram of the wearable vital signs monitor with arrows
indicating the signal paths.

uncorrupted, the user should be relatively sedentary. If the user
is moving, then the data are unusable. To avoid reporting erroneous data, the accelerometer could be used to detect when the
user is sedentary and then take the physiological measurements.
Previous studies have shown that users have several windows
throughout the day where acceleration is less than 4 mG [16].
Additionally, checking that all three physiological signals measure the same HR can also be used to ensure that the data are
not corrupted.
G. Human Subjects Study
Clinical testing was conducted at MIT’s Clinical Research
Center, and the protocol was approved by MIT’s Institutional

Value
30 mW (after LDO)
0.47-mG RMS
0.16-μV RMS
4.3-nA RMS

Fig. 9. Screen shot of the data collected by the wearable vital signs monitor.
From top to bottom, left to right: raw red PPG, filtered red and IR PPG, raw
ECG, filtered ECG, raw IR PPG, accelerometer X-axis, accelerometer Y-axis,
and accelerometer Z-axis.

Review Board. The protocol begins by consenting a subject,
followed by a health questionnaire to ensure the subject had
no prior cardiovascular conditions. Reference equipment was
then attached to the subject, which included a Criticare 504-US
chest ECG (lead II configuration) and finger pulse oximeter, a
Sonosite BioZ Dx impedance cardiography (ICG) machine for
measuring PEP and CO, and a Finapres Portapres for continuous
blood pressure measurements. Instrumentation was completed
when the wearable vital signs monitor was attached to the left
ear of the subject.
The test was performed on 13 healthy subjects, consisting of
ten male subjects and three female subjects. The subjects varied
from 25 years old to 63 years old (mean 39.7, std 14.2), 1.55–
1.93 m in height (mean 1.77 m, std 0.097 m), and 49.9–103 kg
in weight (mean 74.8 kg, std 12.9 kg). Fig. 9 shows a screen
shot of the wearable monitor collecting data simultaneously for
a single user.
IV. HUMAN SUBJECT STUDY RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Stroke Volume
J-wave amplitudes are extracted from 20-beat ensemble averages in the standing posture from each subject. Fig. 10 plots
J-wave amplitudes versus SVs from 13 subjects. A linearly proportional relationship between J-wave amplitudes and SVs is
observed because the BCG recoil is directly related to the mass
(or volume) of the pumped blood.

HE et al.: EAR-WORN VITAL SIGNS MONITOR

2551

Fig. 10. J-wave amplitudes (from device) versus SVs (from ICG). Each data
point is one subject.
Fig. 12. Beat-to-beat RJ interval (from device) and PEP (from ICG) among
seven subjects during 28 tilt maneuvers.

Fig. 11. Simultaneously measured RJ interval (from device) and PEP (from
ICG) during a Valsalva maneuver.

It is important to note that our study was limited to healthy
patients who did not have vessel diseases that could confound
the BCG to SV results. A larger study is required to assess the
overall BCG to SV relationship. Nevertheless, our data showed
an R2 correlation of 0.66.
B. Pre-Ejection Period
The Valsalva maneuver is designed to induce a temporary
increase in the subjects’ PEP. The RJ interval is extracted by
cross-correlating the wearable device’s BCG and ECG, while
the reference PEP is measured using the ICG machine.
Fig. 11 shows an example of measured RJ interval and PEP
from a subject who performs a Valsalva maneuver from 43 to
63 s. The decreased venous return and ventricular filling volume
during Valsalva lead to a prolonged PEP. The PEP’s increase of
30 ms corresponds to an equal increase in the RJ interval during
the strain.
It is observed that the RJ interval is always longer than the PEP
by an offset duration that is subject dependent. This is because
the opening of the aortic valve marks the end of the PEP, while
the J-wave occurs when the blood is accelerating after exiting

Fig. 13. Bland–Altman representation of the beat-to-beat RJ interval and PEP
from the same dataset used in Fig. 12.

the heart. This offset is affected by variables such as body height
and blood pressure, thus making it subject dependent.
Fig. 12 plots the beat-to-beat RJ interval versus the PEP after
removing the subject-dependent RJ interval-PEP offsets. The
data consists of 28 tilt maneuvers from seven subjects with 2258
beats. The remaining six subjects had faulty PEP measurements,
as the ICG machine was unable to detect aortic valve openings.
From the data, we observe that the RJ interval exhibits a nearly
one-to-one linear dependence on the PEP with a slope of 0.96
and an R2 value of 0.96.
A Bland–Altman representation of the data is shown in
Fig. 13, where the standard deviation in differences between
the beat-to-beat RJ interval and PEP is 9.6 ms for seven
subjects.
C. Utilizing the BCG for PTT Measurements
It has been documented that the PEP is a large error source
when estimating blood pressure from transit time measurements
[22]. Compared to measurements that use the R-wave of the

2552

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 62, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2015

ECG to the peak of the derivative of the PPG, called pulse
arrival time, PTT using the J-wave of the BCG removes the PEP
from the measurement. This increases the accuracy of PTT-toBP algorithms as the PEP is not constant and does not always
correspond appropriately to changes in pressure [7], [22].
V. CONCLUSION
This study has identified periodic head movements as a type
of BCG, which is shown to closely resemble the traditional BCG
waveform after ensemble averaging. One direct application of
the head BCG is electrode-less HR monitoring. Another application is the estimation of SV based on the BCG amplitude.
When the BCG is used in conjunction with the ECG, the RJ
interval can be extracted using cross correlation and is shown
to linearly correlate with the PEP. When the BCG is used in
conjunction with the PPG, PTT can be measured, which is theoretically correlated with blood pressure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge Prof. C. Stultz (MIT),
Prof. R. Mark (MIT), and Prof. T. Heldt (MIT) for their valuable
physiological discussions and T. O’Dwyer (Analog Devices)
for his insight. The authors would also like to thank nurses C.
Ricciardi and I. Horvitz for their assistance with the clinical test.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Heidenreich et al., “Forecasting the future of cardiovascular disease in
the united states: A policy statement from the American Heart Association,” Circulation, vol. 123, pp. 933–944, 2011.
[2] J. Waktare, “Atrial fibrillation,” Circulation, vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 14–16,
2002.
[3] A. Weissler et al., “Systolic time intervals in heart failure in man,” Circulation, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 149–159, 1968.
[4] D. D. He et al., “The ear as a location for wearable vital signs monitoring,”
in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 31–Sep. 4, 2010,
pp. 6389–6392.
[5] D. D. He et al., “A continuous, wearable, and wireless heart monitor using
head ballistocardiogram (BCG) and head electrocardiogram (ECG),” in
Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., Aug. 30–Sep. 3, 2011,
pp. 4729–4732.
[6] D. D. He et al., “An ear-worn continuous ballistocardiogram (BCG) sensor
for cardiovascular monitoring,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc., Aug. 28–Sep. 1, 2012, pp. 5030–5033.

[7] E. Winokur et al., “A wearable vital signs monitor at the ear for continuous
heart rate and pulse transit time measurements,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012, pp. 2724–2727.
[8] H. Mandelbaum and R. Mandelbaum, “Studies utilizing the portable electromagnetic ballistocardiograph: IV. The clinical significance of serial
ballistocardiograms following acute myocardial infarction,” Circulation,
vol. 7, pp. 910–915, 1953.
[9] I. Starr and F. Wood, “Twenty-year studies with the ballistocardiograph:
The relation between the amplitude of the first record of healthy adults and
eventual mortality and morbidity from heart disease,” Circulation, vol. 23,
pp. 714–732, 1961.
[10] O. Inan et al., “Robust ballistocardiogram acquisition for home monitoring,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 169–185, 2009.
[11] K. Kim et al., “A new method for unconstrained pulse arrival time (PAT)
measurement on a chair,” J. Biomed. Eng. Res., vol. 27, pp. 83–88,
2006.
[12] G. Chung et al., “Wakefulness estimation only using ballistocardiogram:
Nonintrusive method for sleep monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Conf., 2010, pp. 2459–2462.
[13] J. Shin et al., “Non-constrained monitoring of systolic blood pressure
on a weighing scale,” Physiological Meas., vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 679–693,
2009.
[14] A. Weissler, Noninvasive Cardiology. New York, NY, USA: Grune and
Stratton, Inc., 1974.
[15] C. G. Jr et al., “The relationship of alterations in systolic time intervals
to ejection fraction in patients with cardiac disease,” Circulation, vol. 42,
pp. 455–462, 1970.
[16] M. D. Rienzo et al., “24h seismocardiogram monitoring in ambulant subjects,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., 2012, pp. 5050–5053.
[17] W. Chen and D. Gibson, “Mechanisms of prolongation of pre-ejection
period in patients with left ventricular disease,” Brit. Heart J., vol. 42,
pp. 304–310, 1979.
[18] M. Etemadi et al., “Non-invasive assessment of cardiac contractility
on a weighing scale,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., 2009,
pp. 6773–6776.
[19] J. G. Webster, Design of Pulse Oximeters (Medical Science Series). Bristol, U.K.: Inst. Phys., 1997.
[20] E. S. Winokur, T. O’Dwyer and C. G. Sodini, “A low-power, dualwavelength photoplethysmogram (PPG) SoC with static and time-varying
interferer removal,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. PP, no. 99,
pp. 1.
[21] L. Giovangrandi et al., “Preliminary results from BCG and ECG measurements in the heart failure clinic,” in Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Conf.,
San Diego, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 3780–3783.
[22] R. Payne et al., “Pulse transit time measured from the ECG: An unreliable
marker of beat-to-beat blood pressure,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 100, no. 1,
pp. 136–141, Sep. 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

