IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

97

Dysfunction of Neurovascular/Metabolic
Coupling in Chronic Focal Epilepsy
Yinchen Song, Rafael A. Torres, Sarahy Garcia, Yisel Frometa, Jihye Bae, Abhay Deshmukh, Wei-Chiang Lin,
Ying Zheng, and Jorge J. Riera∗ , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Goal: We aim to evaluate the mechanisms underlying the neurovascular/metabolic coupling in the epileptogenic cortices of rats with chronic focal epilepsy. Methods: We performed
and analyzed intracranial recordings obtained from the seizureonset zones during ictal periods on epileptic rats, and then, used
these data to fit a metabolically coupled balloon model. Normal
rats undergoing forepaw stimulation were used as control. Results: We found a significant higher contribution from high local
field potential frequency bands to the cerebral blood flow (CBF)
responses in the epileptogenic cortices during ictal neuronal activities. The hemodynamic responses associated with ictal activities
were distance-dependent with regard to the seizure focus, though
varied in profiles from those obtained from acute seizure models.
Parameters linking the CBF and relative concentration of deoxyhemoglobin to neuronal activity in the biophysical model were
significantly different between epileptic and normal rats. Conclusion: We found that the coefficient associated with the strength of
the functional hyperemic response was significantly larger in the
epileptogenic cortices, and changes in hemoglobin concentration
associated with ictal activity reflected the existence of a significantly higher baseline for oxygen metabolism in the epileptogenic
cortices. Significance: Introducing methods to estimate these physiological parameters would enhance our understanding of the neurovascular/metabolic coupling in epileptic brains and improve the
localization accuracy on irritative zones and seizure-onset zones
through neuroimaging techniques.
Index Terms—Cerebral blood flow, chronic focal epilepsy,
metabolically coupled balloon model, neurovascular/metabolic
coupling, oxygen consumption, preclinical model.

I. INTRODUCTION
ANY epileptic patients have refractory epilepsy, in
which seizures are not controlled by medications. Neurosurgery has become increasingly feasible and successful, as
seizure freedom is achieved in 50%–60% of the cases. This
surgical procedure relies upon accurate resection of the seizureonset zone. To help localize and delineate these zones during
presurgical work-up, surgeons use a range of neuroimaging
technologies, including EEG-fMRI; MRS with 1H -NAA, 11C-

M

Manuscript received February 15, 2015; revised June 15, 2015; accepted July
16, 2015. Date of publication July 16, 2015; date of current version December 17,
2015. The work of J. J. Riera was supported by Florida International University
start-up package. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
Y. Song, R. A. Torres, S. Garcia, Y. Frometa, J. Bae, A. Deshmukh, and W. C.
Lin are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International
University.
Y. Zheng is with the School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading.
∗ J. J. Riera is with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33172 USA (e-mail: jrieradi@fiu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2461496

choline; PET- with FDG (18F) & FMZ, AMT(11C) ligands,
ictal-perfusion SPECT with 99 mTc (ECD & HMPAO), and
video EEG/MEG with current source localization [1], [2]. Over
the last decade, the EEG-fMRI technique has been progressively
introduced in hospitals [3]–[6]. This technique offers good sensitivity (88%) and specificity (75%) in localizing epileptogenic
cortices in patients with focal refractory epilepsy [7]. By using
the EEG-fMRI technique, we can generate whole-brain maps of
blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) activations evoked by
interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs), which are useful to
identify irritative zones. The pathogenic relationships between
the irritative zones and the seizure-onset zones are poorly understood in focal epilepsy [8]. Nevertheless, IEDs are accepted
as specific EEG markers of interest for presurgical evaluation
of epileptic patients, because they are very frequent paroxysmal
and asymptomatic events, which are easily recorded and provide
high specificity for localizing seizure-onset zones [9].
A phenomenon known as functional hyperemia constitutes
the fundamental principle underlying the EEG-fMRI technique.
The hyperemic response is an increase in cerebral blood perfusion in any particular brain region whenever the activity of neurons in this region suddenly augments from its baseline. A variety of physiological mechanisms have been proposed to account
for the communication between neurons and their surrounding
vasculature [10]. Increase in blood perfusion causes decrease in
the relative concentration of deoxyhemoglobin ([Deoxy-Hb])
due to an augment in cerebral blood volume (CBV) at the level
of postcapillary venous. This produces an early and pronounced
overshoot in the BOLD response. A delayed undershoot in the
BOLD response is being associated with increases in the oxygen metabolism associated with the enhancement in neuronal
activity. Canonical hemodynamic response functions (HRFs)
used in most of the available software to perform BOLD signal analysis (SPM, BrainVoyager, and FSL) capture well typical over/under-shoot components in the BOLD signal. In fMRI
analysis, HRFs are convolved with the neuronal activity to create
area-dependent regressors of a general linear model.
Dysregulations in the mechanisms for neurovascular/metabolic coupling have been demonstrated to exist in
epileptogenic brain areas [11]–[16], which might lead to abnormal HRFs. For example, preictal vasoconstrictions in areas near
the epileptogenic zones have been found in these previous studies. Also, it has been shown that the hyperemic response and the
neurovascular unit are compromised during seizure episodes.
As for healthy cortical regions, direct relationships between the
gamma band of the local field potential (LFP) and the cerebral
blood flow (CBF) during ictal periods have been demonstrated.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

98

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

All these previous studies have been performed using acute
models of epilepsy, in which seizures are generated by local
application of 4-aminopyridine (4-AP) or bicuculline. Unfortunately, such local applications of epileptic promoters are not
able to induce long-term changes in the cortical microcircuits,
microvasculature, and metabolic networks that result from
seizure establishment and perpetuation. Therefore, conclusions
from such acute models should be carefully interpreted, and
will require future validations, first in chronic preclinical
models of epilepsy and later in epileptic patients. In addition,
abnormal increases in the BOLD signal undershoots, in some
cases causing an apparent negative BOLD response, have been
reported in epileptogenic cortices [17]–[20]. This phenomenon
has been associated with dysregulations in oxygen metabolisms
within epileptogenic cortices. Therefore, the HRFs must have
unique temporal profiles in chronic epileptogenic cortices.
Some methods have been developed in the past to estimate
the HRF voxel-wisely [21], [22]. However, these methods lack
appropriate sensitivity to detect the small changes in BOLD signals associated with IEDs. In our opinion, parametric methods,
such as the metabolically coupled balloon model [23], properly
adjusted to data recorded from chronic epileptogenic cortices
will definitely help increase accuracy in the fMRI analysis.
Failing to take account of the impaired neurovascular coupling
and abnormal metabolic rates in the epileptic brain might affect
seizure-onset zone localization in epileptic patients who are candidates for ablative neurosurgery, precluding EEG-fMRI use.
Dysregulations in the neurovascular/metabolic coupling
might be proportionately reflected in both IED and ictal events,
but the latter provide much better signal-to-noise ratios to quantify it. Unfortunately, IEDs are small events, which cause hemodynamic and metabolic changes difficult to be detected with
current invasive recording in animal models; i.e., laser Doppler
flowmetry (LDF) and intrinsic optical signal imaging (IOSI).
In this study, we evaluated several aspects of the neurovascular/metabolic coupling during ictal activity in chronic epileptic
rats, with emphasis on: 1) neuronal activity features underlying the functional hyperemic response, 2) heterogeneities in the
cortical microvascular organization with respect to the seizureinitiation zones, and 3) unbalance in the perfusion/metabolic
rates resulting from sustained neuronal activation, which might
be a factor for seizure establishment and perpetuation. To
that end, we used a model of chronic pharmacoresistant focal epilepsy, which consists of first creating cortical malformations by exposing rats prenatally to methylazoxymethanol
acetate (MAM) and later triggering recurrent seizures with pilocarpine. Substantial evidence indicates that this preclinical
model mimics the relevant human pathophysiology [24]. Localizing the seizure-onset zones constitutes the most challenging aspects of using a chronic preclinical model of epilepsy.
In this paper, we localized cortical irritative zones by performing brain current source imaging from scalp EEG recordings [25]. Then, we obtained invasive intracranial recordings
(electrophysiological—LFP; optical—CBF, CBV, and [DeoxyHb] through a craniotomy created on top of these irritative zones.
We introduced a strategy to determine whether these irritative
zones were focused for epileptogenic activity or not. Finally,

Fig. 1.

Illustration of metabolically coupled Balloon Model.

we used a biophysical model to evaluate possible unbalances
between the perfusion and metabolic rates during both brief and
prolonged neuronal activation periods.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Metabolically Coupled Balloon Model
The metabolically coupled balloon model (see Fig. 1) [23] is
an extension of the standard balloon model [26], which includes
modulatory effects of changes in tissue oxygenation, capillary
dynamics and variable O2 extraction fraction. A summary of
equations of the model was provided in Table I. Taking into
consideration previous reports about possible dysfunctions in
the hyperemic response and oxygen metabolism in epileptogenic cortices [11]–[16], [27] parameters ε and κ are of great
interest in our study. ε is an unknown parameter in the model
relating neuronal activity to the CBF. Hence, this parameter accounts for the actual strength of the hyperemic response. The
larger the parameter ε is, the greater the CBF for the same neural
input. κ is a scaling constant that links the neuronal activity to
the changes in oxygen consumption. The larger the parameter κ
is, the higher the oxygen consumption. Therefore, we assumed
that these two parameters might absorb important changes in the
HRF temporal profiles in epileptic cortices. In addition, the final
sign of the BOLD response will depend on the O2 consumption
rate by neurons, as indicated by the ratio
ϑ = ε/κ

(1)

with a BOLD activation for ϑ  1 and a BOLD deactivation
for ϑ  1. Therefore, fitting these two parameters (“Estimate
Parameters,” Table I) using intracranial recordings might provide a physiological interpretation for the negative BOLD signal associated with IEDs. Based on previous studies, we do
not expect significant changes in any other parameter of the
metabolically coupled balloon model (“Known Parameters,”
Table I). For those parameters, we used values reported by
Zheng et al. obtained using IOSI from rats undergoing whisker

SONG et al.: DYSFUNCTION OF NEUROVASCULAR/METABOLIC COUPLING IN CHRONIC FOCAL EPILEPSY

99

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE DYNAMICS AND STATE VARIABLES FOR THIS MODEL
Equation

ṡ = εμ − s/τ s − (f − 1)/τ f
f˙ = s 

μ ġ = (c B − g c aB )/β − 1 − κμ
ϕ/f ċ B = −c B − c aB E /In(1 − E /(1 − g )) + c aB g


ϕ/f Ė = −E + (1 − g ) 1 − (1 − ξ ) 1 / f
1/a
τ 0 v̇ = f − v
τ 0 q̇ = f E /E 0 − v ( 1 −α ) / α q

Description

Flow Inducing Signal
CBF
Tissue O2 Level
Capillary O2 Level
O2 Extraction Fraction
CBV
[Deoxy Hb]

Parameters
Known

Estimate

(τ s , τ f )
NA
(c aB , β , μ)
(c aB , ϕ)
(ξ , ϕ)
(τ 0 , α )
(τ 0 , α , E 0 )

ε
NA
κ
NA
NA
NA
NA

Physiological values and definition of parameters c aB , and g 0 and c B 0 are given in [23].
ϕ determines whether the capillary dynamics and O2 extraction fraction follow a steady-state regime or not.
parameters β and ξ are defined by the following formulas:
β = c B 0 − g 0 c aB and ξ = E 0 /(1 − g 0 ).

stimulation [23]. According to our knowledge, this biophysical
model has not been applied to explain the BOLD deactivation
effect in epilepsy.
In order to verify whether parameters ε and κ were statistically identifiable from CBF and [Deoxy-Hb] data, we performed
a simulation study. Using actual inputs u for each trial obtained
from epileptic rats, we integrated the metabolically coupled balloon model using the local linearization method with different
realizations for the observation and system noises [28]. We estimated the parameter ε using only simulated CBF data. Parameter κ was estimated using only the simulated [Deoxy-Hb] data.
Parameter estimation was performed using the methodology
proposed in Section II-F4. A total of 200 trials were performed
for each parameter. Estimated values were then compared with
actual values.
B. Animal Preparation
All experimental procedures were approved by and carried
out in full compliance with the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee at Florida International University (Approval
No. 13-065). All rats were received from Charles River Laboratories. The pharmacoresistant FCD preclinical model was
established with male Wistar rats following the protocol described previously by Colciaghi et al. [24]. In brief, this protocol includes two major steps: first, the cortical malformations
of this preclinical model were induced prenatally on Embryonic
Day 15 with two doses of MAM injections (15 mg/kg maternal body weight) 12 hours apart; second, 50 MAM-treated rats
were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with pilocarpine (PILO,
300 mg/kg) on postnatal Day 28 to induce the status epilepticus
(SE). All 50 MAM-PILO rats were monitored by four investigators (YS, RT, AD, and JJR) independently to identify the SE according to the Racine scale [24]. Rats experiencing SE received
phenobarbital (20 mg/kg) 90 min after SE onset to reduce mortality, then were hydrated subcutaneously with Lactate Ringer’s
solution and fed by the investigators to improve the survival
rate. Rats not experiencing SE were euthanized. Eventually, 13
MAM-PILO rats survived from this procedure and developed
chronic seizures. From this point on, these 13 MAM-PILO rats
will be referred to as epileptic rats. In addition, four normal

male Wistar rats (∼350 g) were used as control in this study. All
normal and epileptic rats were housed in standardized cages at
a 12 h–12 h light–dark cycle with food and water ad libitum.
Rats were anesthetized with isoflurane (5% for initial induction and then 1–2%, 1 L/min O2 , 14 PSI) during all the manipulations and surgical procedures. During the following recording
procedures (i.e., 32-channel scalp EEG and intracranial recordings), rats were anesthetized by a mixture of dexmedetomidine
hydrochloride (Dexdomitor, 0.25 mg/kg, i.p.) and low doses of
isoflurane (0.5–0.8%, 1L/min O2 , 14 PSI), which does not reduce cortical hemodynamic responses [29]–[32]. The rat body
temperature was maintained using a water-circulating heating
pad (TPZ-0510EA, Texas Scientific Instruments, LLC) with a
pump (TP700, Texas Scientific Instruments, LLC). The rat body
temperature (∼37 °C), heart rate (200–300 beats per minute)
and respiration rate (<50 breaths per minute) were monitored
continuously by PowerLab 8/35 data acquisition device and
LabChart software (ADInstruments) to assure the level of anesthesia remained stable throughout the entire experimental procedures.
C. EEG Source Imaging: Identification of Irritative Zones
1) Recording: The epileptic rat’s scalp was shaved and
cleaned with ethanol (90%) for delipidation. A 32-channel EEG
minicap specifically designed for rodents [33] was placed on
top of the epileptic rat’s scalp to record the EEG signals (PZ3,
Tucker-Davis Technology). EEG signals were amplified, filtered
(0.5-Hz high-pass, and 250-Hz low-pass), and digitized (5-kHz
sampling rate, 0.5-μV resolution).
2) IED-Related Primary Current Sources: From the averaged power of the 32-channel scalp EEG signals, IEDs, of
which temporal patterns include spikes (20–70 ms in duration,
15–50 Hz) and sharp waves (70–200 ms in duration, 5–15 Hz),
were identified by a combination of multiple band-pass/notch
filters and an autothresholding method. The IED detection
method is similar to those reported in human studies [34], [35],
as well as animal studies [25], [36]. Subsequently, spikes and
sharp waves were separated into multiple subtypes using a
series of feature extraction and classification methods described
previously [25], [36]. Each subtype of IEDs was considered

100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 2. Illustration of IED source imaging and craniotomy. (a) 32-channel
IED waveforms [Spike (up) and Sharp-wave (middle and bottom)] and EEG
topography for the initial phase latency [red vertical lines in (a)]. (b) sLORETA
inverse solution shows the source location of each type of IED. (c) Overlapping
of all major sources identified in step [(b), left] and craniotomy on the rat (right).
The black arrows [(c), right] are pointing out the locations where we inserted
the carbonfilament electrodes subcutaneously.

as a unique event. Event-related 32-channel EEG potentials
were created by averaging the EEG data time locked to the IED
onsets within corresponding window size (80-ms for spikes and
200-ms for sharp-waves) [see Fig. 2(a)]. sLORETA distributed
inverse solution was estimated from the event-related potentials
for each IED subtype [see Fig. 2(b)] using Brainstorm [37].
For each epileptic rat, the surgically accessible location for
craniotomy [see Fig. 2(c)] was determined based on the current
source locations at the initial phases of each IED subtype.
These current source locations were associated with irritative
zones. A T2-weighted MRI atlas for Wistar rats was used to
calculate the electric lead fields [38]. This atlas is defined on
the Paxinos and Watson’s coordinate system [39], facilitating
the exact demarcation of the region for the craniotomy.
D. Forepaw Stimulation on Normal Rats
Forepaw stimulation was conducted only on normal rats. For
the normal rats, the craniotomy location was on the right primary somatosensory cortex for forelimb (S1FL). Two needle
electrodes were inserted into the left forepaw of the normal rat
prior to the electrical stimulation and intracranial recordings. A
block-design paradigm consisting of ten blocks was employed.
Each block was comprised of an ON period (i.e., simulation)
and an OFF period (i.e., resting). For each rat, two different
combinations of ON and OFF periods (ON–OFF) were utilized
in the paradigm: 5–30 s (i.e., short) and 30–50 s (i.e., long). The
current stimulation was delivered by the isolated pulse stimulator (Model 2100, 110V, 60 Hz, A-M Systems) with 10-ms
pulsewidth and 2.0-mA current amplitude at 3 Hz.

diameter was performed above the area of interest (AOI, i.e.,
irritative zones for epileptic rats, S1FL for normal rats) assisted
by a digital microscope (VCR-800, HIROX). Two screws, used
as reference and ground for the electrophysiological recordings,
were attached to the skull distant to the craniotomy site. Dura
mater covering the AOI was carefully removed. Nonconductive
light-oil drops were applied to the craniotomy to protect it from
drying during intracranial recordings.
2) Electrophysiological Recordings: High-resolution intracranial electrical recordings were obtained using amplifiers
at 25 kHz (PZ2, Tucker and Davis Technologies, Inc. “TDT”)
connected by an optical fiber to a signal processing unit (RZ2,
TDT) and by a coaxial cable to a preamplifier located inside an
acute headstage. Local field potential (LFP, 0.7–170 Hz) was
extracted online using a logic/symbolic programming language
(OpenEx software, TDT). The silicon-based probe used in this
study (A16, 16-channel planar probe, NeuroNexus Technologies) consists of one linear shank with 16 recording sites (microelectrodes, 100-μm intervals). The microelectrode impedance
typically ranged within the interval 0.69–0.84 MΩ. By implanting this probe semiperpendicular to the AOI, we were able
to simultaneously record extracellular potentials from different
sites covering mainly the supragranular (0–400 μm) and granular (400–700 μm) cortical laminas of the AOI. The insertion
process was accurately monitored by a multimicromanipulator
control system (MPC-200/ROE 200/MPC-385/MPC-325 Sutter Instruments). To perform EEG recording (Animal Bio Amp,
AD Instruments) on epileptic rats, carbon-filament electrodes
(1 mm in diameter, 8 mm in length, World precision Instruments) were placed subcutaneously on top of the rat skull and
secured with cyanoacrylate adhesive (Leica Microsystem) as
shown in Fig. 2(c). Scalp EEG data was needed for IED detection and classification in different subtypes for epileptic rats,
which was achieved by using the same procedure as described
in Section II-C for the 32-channel scalp EEG recordings. EEG
recordings from normal rats during forepaw stimulation were
not required in this study.
3) Laser Doppler Flowmetry Recordings: We used a laserDoppler flowmetry system (LDF; PeriFlux 4001Master, Perimed, Sweden) to record the CBF in the AOI using a needle-type
probe (Probe 411, Perimed). The tip of the needle was placed
on top of the cortex at a 30° angle to avoid contact with the
electrophysiological probe. The LDF recording systems were
connected to the PowerLab 8/35 (PL3508/P, AD Instrument)
and data storage was performed with the LabChart Pro software.
4) Optical Imaging: With a dual-wavelength IOSI system
we developed in-house, we observed temporal variations in
the diffuse reflectance signal of the AOI at two particular
wavelengths—500 and 650 nm. The IOSI system constitutes
a noninvasive imaging device capable of capturing 7.5 frame/s
for each wavelength. The optical imaging was performed independent of the LDF recordings, and vice versa.

E. Intracranial Recording
1) Craniotomy: Rats were anesthetized and fixed to a stereotaxic apparatus. Subsequent to the removal of the skin and connective tissues on top of the skull, a craniotomy of 2−3 mm in

F. Intracranial Data Analysis
1) Preprocessing: Electrophysiological recordings were synchronized with LDF and IOSI data using external trigger signal.

SONG et al.: DYSFUNCTION OF NEUROVASCULAR/METABOLIC COUPLING IN CHRONIC FOCAL EPILEPSY

Fig. 3. Changes in the state variables of the metabolically coupled balloon
model when parameters ε and κ were varied. The parameter ε was varied from
0.4 to 0.8 (step size: 0.1) for long (a) and short (b) periods of neuronal stimulation
(κ = 0.1), and the parameter κ was varied from 0.05 to 0.3 (step size: 0.05) for
long (c) and short (d) period of neuronal stimulation (ε = 0.6).

101

consistency of the corresponding EEG profiles for each event.
If consistent, we considered the first criterion fulfilled. Secondly, IED source locations should be close to the silicon-based
microelectrode probe, which would be reflected as dipolar-like
features in volumetric current source density (CSD). To perform
CSD analysis using the LFP recordings for each IED, we used
the CSDplotter toolbox (version 0.1.1). Hence, we excluded any
epileptic rat that did not meet any of these two criteria. Evidence
has shown that the irritative zone could also be responsible for
the seizure genesis [9], [40]. Therefore, by localizing the irritative zone, it is possible that we could identify the seizure-onset
zone. From the resulting group of previous evaluation procedure, only those experiencing seizure-like activities within the
AOI during the intracranial recordings were included in the final
analysis.
3) Postprocessing: To obtain the power of LFP at different
frequency bands (i.e., delta 1–4 Hz, theta 4–8 Hz, alpha 8–
12 Hz, beta 12–25 Hz, gamma-low 25–70 Hz, and gamma-high
70–170 Hz), we performed a time–frequency analysis with a
moving window of 1000 ms and an increment of 100 ms using
the “spectrogram” function in MATLAB. In order to remove
baseline spectral components, we averaged the power for each
frequency using the 10 s outside the seizure/stimulation temporal window, and subtracted it from the entire time–frequency
power spectrum map [41]. The hemodynamic parameters, such
as total hemoglobin concentration [Hb], oxyhemoglobin concentration [Oxy-Hb] and [Deoxy-Hb], were extracted from the
IOSI data at 500 and 650 nm using the modified Beer–Lambert
law [42], [43].
Although it lacks a biophysical basis, an autoregressive model
with an exogenous source (ARX)
y t = φ0 +

p

i=1

Fig. 4. Particular realizations of the state variables of the metabolically coupled balloon model after introducing system and observation noises. Two particular durations of neuronal activation were used: (a) 30 s and (b) 5 s.

LFP and EEG were down sampled at 500 Hz. Optical imaging
data were coregistered spatially and temporally. Artifacts on
imaging data were separated and removed using PCA.
2) Evaluation Criteria for Successful IED Localization: We
employed two criteria to evaluate whether the IED source localization was accurate for each epileptic rat. First of all, IED-like
events identified from LFP recordings should also be observable
in subcutaneous EEG recordings. To detect the IEDs in LFP, we
used the autothresholding method described previously in Section II-C on the summed power through all 16 channels of the
silicon-based microelectrode probe. Then, we classified them
into multiple clusters based on their temporal profiles using the
same clustering method. For each LFP cluster, we checked the

φi yt−i +

r


ψi μt−i + εt

(2)

i=1

was applied on the intracranial data to roughly understand the
relationships between neuronal activity and hemodynamic responses, where yt could be one of the time series of CBF, [Hb],
[Oxy-Hb], and [Deoxy-Hb] (i.e., hemodynamics) that were extracted close to the microelectrode probe’s location, ut could
be one of the time series of the power of LFP at different frequency bands (i.e., neuronal activities) as exogenous source, ϕ
and ψ are coefficients for yt and ut with an order of p and r,
respectively. εt represents the instrumental error. ARX model
has been employed frequently in neuroscience research to estimate the hemodynamic response evoked by neuronal activity
[44]–[46]. It allows characterization of the relationship between
neuronal activity (i.e., input) and hemodynamic response (i.e.,
output) in terms of the impulse response function (IRF), without any prior assumptions or knowledge of other physiological
parameters. Here, ARX orders p and r were estimated using the
normalized root mean square error (NRMSE), which reflects
the goodness-of-fitting. The ARX modeling offers a straightforward approach to evaluate the contribution from different
frequency bands of the LFP to the respective hemodynamic response. The IRFs and optimal NRMSE of ARX model for each
frequency band of LFP and the corresponding hemodynamic

102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 5. Errors when estimating parameters ε (a) and κ (b). A significant linear relationship between the actual and estimated parameter are shown in the panels
on the left. The distributions of the estimated parameter for three particular values are shown in the panels on the right. For each histogram, colored/dashed lines
are used to indicate the actual value employed for each particular simulation. It can be noted that both parameters are estimated with high consistencies and low
biases. The corresponding values in the linear regressions (left) are also indicated with colored/dashed lines.

coupled balloon model, we employed the local linearization filter and the innovation approach extended for heterogeneously
sampled data, which is described in Riera et al. [47]. The instantaneous total power of LFP associated with both seizure
episodes and forepaw stimulation was used as the input ut to
the metabolically coupled balloon model. Due to limitation of
LDF and IOSI to observe vascular and metabolic changes in
deep cortical layer, the LFP power was calculated using only the
most superficial electrodes of the silicon-based microelectrode
probe. We followed the same approach described in Section A to
estimate ε and κ. ε was first estimated using the actual input ut
for each trial and the corresponding CBF observations through
the LDF technique. Subsequently, κ was estimated using the
actual input ut for each trial and the corresponding [DeoxyHb] observation through the IOSI technique. The estimated ε
and κ from epileptic and normal rats were compared using a
two-sample t-test in Minitab.

Fig. 6. Evaluation criteria for successful IED localization. (a) Each gray line
is the averaged LFP through 16 channels for the same type of IEDs (n = 7), and
the black dash line is the overall averaged LFP for this particular type of IEDs.
(b) Each gray line is the subcutaneous EEG locked to the IED events detected in
the LFP as (a) shown here. The black-dashed line is the averaged subcutaneous
EEG for this type of IED. (c) 16-channel LFP signals averaged through seven
events are shown in different color and styles. (d) CSD map shows that the brain
electrical source was very close to the silicon-based microelectrode probe, and
part of it was localized in the superficial layers.

response were compared. We also investigated the spatial dependency of [Hb], [Oxy-Hb], and [Deoxy-Hb] IRFs with regard
to the seizure-initiation locations for the epileptic rats.
4) Parameter Estimation With the Metabolically Coupled Balloon Model: To estimate parameters ε and κ in the metabolically

III. RESULTS
A. Simulations Based on Metabolically Coupled
Balloon Model
Parameter ε relates the neuronal activity to the normalized
CBF. While changing ε alone, regardless of the duration of the
neuronal stimulation, the CBF and CBV increase in amplitude
linearly (see Fig. 3(a) and (b)]. [Deoxy-Hb] decreases as we
increase the value of ε. Parameter κ reflects changes in the
O2 consumption rate associated with the neuronal activity. As
illustrated in Fig. 3(c) and (d), when varying κ alone, CBF and
CBV are not affected. However, [Deoxy-Hb] decreases as we
increase κ.

SONG et al.: DYSFUNCTION OF NEUROVASCULAR/METABOLIC COUPLING IN CHRONIC FOCAL EPILEPSY

103

Fig. 7. Coupling between CBF and neuronal activity at different frequency bands. (a) Segment of raw LFP showing a seizure (black bar) as recorded from one
superficial microelectrode in the silicon-based microelectrode probe is illustrated on the top panels. Enlarged versions (1 s) of the raw LFP for the preictal, ictal
and postictal windows are also presented in window with different colors (yellow, red, and blue). A 2-D color map shows the time–frequency composition of the
LFPs for this particular trial (middle panel). Power of LFP at different frequency bands and averaged CBF response time locked to ictal activity are shown in the
bottom panels (averaged based on nine ictal events from one of the epileptic rats). The decrease of CBF before the seizure onset, as previously reported [12], is
not visible. The increase of CBF after the seizure onset is significant (p < 0.05). (b) On the left, ARX model prediction fit at different frequency bands (based on
11 10-min recording segments from all four epileptic rats). The goodness of fitting at beta and gamma LFP frequency bands are much higher than those for other
LFP frequency bands. On the right, Fisher individual tests for differences of mean prediction fits at different LFP frequency bands were conducted pair wisely.
The values shown in the blocks are the p-value. The blocks were colored with different darkness levels to represent the significance levels. (c) Impulse response
function (IRF) at each LFP frequency band was estimated from the ARX model.

In this simulation, parameters ε and κ were varied from 0.4
to 0.8 and from 0.05 to 0.3, respectively. For each value of these
parameters, we generated 200 trials of simulated data, with
added Gaussian noise so that the signal-to-noise ratio of the
simulated data resembled the hemodynamic data obtained from
experiments. An example of the simulated data for both shortand long- duration neuronal activity are shown in Fig. 4(a) and
(b). The CBF and [Deoxy-Hb] simulated data were then used
to estimate parameters ε and κ, respectively. These parameters
were estimated with high consistency and low bias (see Fig. 5),
which indicates they are perfectly identifiable from the CBF and
[Deoxy-Hb] data.

B. Successful IED Localization in Epileptic Rats
Nine out of thirteen rats satisfied our evaluation criteria
for successful IED localization using 32-channel EEG data.
For each detected IEDs from the LFP in these nine rats [see
Fig. 6(a)], we were able to consistently observe its reflections
from the subcutaneous EEG [see Fig. 6(b)], although as expected these two signals have different temporal profiles. In
addition, the 16-channel LFP recordings from these nine rats
[see Fig. 6(c)] had different temporal profiles with different
polarities across electrodes, which indicates that the source of
this particular type of IEDs was very close to the microelectrode probe as demonstrated in the CSD analysis [see Fig. 6(d)].
Among these nine rats, four of them happened to have focal ictal

activities at the irritative-zone location (more than 5 seizures/rat
within 30 min, see Supplementary Table I). Henceforth, we will
focus on these four epileptic rats, and compare the results with
those obtained using normal rats.

C. Functional Hyperemia During Seizures
We observed significant CBF increases (P < 0.05) on top of
the irritative zones triggered by ictal LFP activities as shown in
Fig. 7(a). The CBF response did not show simultaneous increase
when the seizure initiated, but it started to increase with a certain
delay, and then, kept increasing until the end of the seizure [see
Fig. 7(a)]. It took a relatively longer time for CBF to return to
the baseline. The power spectrum of LFP at different frequency
bands varied during and after the seizure episode, some of which
showed depression in power when seizure initiated and right after the end of the seizure [see Fig. 7(a)]. However, the contributions to the CBF response from each LFP frequency band were
not equal. Beta and gamma bands had significantly higher contributions or relevance to the CBF response [see Fig. 7(b)], since
they could yield a much better fitting when used to estimate the
CBF response with the ARX model. The IRFs for the CBF at
each frequency band [see Fig. 7(c)] were also obtained, respectively. IRFs at beta and gamma bands shared similar temporal
profiles with relatively smaller standard deviations in comparison to the IRFs for other LFP frequency bands. As mentioned
in Section II, the time–frequency power for each LFP frequency

104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 8. Coupling between [Hb]-related magnitudes and neuronal activity. The seizure initiated around 260 s. (a) Raw LFP recording with three 10-s windows
showing activities before, during, and after the seizure episode. (b) Time–frequency analysis (top) and the total power spectrum (0–250 Hz, bottom) of a 10-min
LFP recording. (c) Corresponding changes in [Hb], [Oxy-Hb], and [Deoxy-Hb] within the 10-min recording were extracted from the area close to insertion location
of the silicon-based microelectrode probe. Significant variations were noticed after seizure initiation. (d) Spatial hemodynamic variations during the seizure. Image
at each column corresponds to a particular time event marked with black dashed lines in (a), (b), and (c). Images at upper and lower panels show the variations in
[Oxy-Hb] and [Deoxy-Hb], respectively.

band was obtained using only the most superficial electrodes in
the silicon-based microelectrode probe.
D. Spatiotemporal Hemodynamic Variations During Seizures
CBV and [Deoxy-Hb] are two important hemodynamic characteristics that were monitored (in 2-D images) using the IOSI
system. From our IOSI recordings, we extracted time series for
the CBV, [Oxy-Hb] and [Deoxy-Hb]. Subsequent to seizure initiation [around 260 s in Fig. 8(a)], CBV and [Oxy-Hb] started
to increase while [Deoxy-Hb] is decreasing [see Fig. 8(c)]
within the area close to the microelectrode array. We also noted
a depression in the power of LFP after the seizure episode
around 360 s. Reflections of seizures within the optical field of
view usually resembled an increase of CBV and a decrease of
[Deoxy-Hb] with an epicentric origin followed by a peripheral
propagation [see Fig. 8(d)]. Out-of-phase oscillations of [Hb]

and [Deoxy-Hb] reflected a common mechanism, i.e., decreases
in the local [Deoxy-Hb] caused by relative enlargement of vessels’ volume after perfusion.
Besides the seizure focus, we also studied the CBV, [Oxy-Hb],
and [Deoxy-Hb] responses spatially as the seizure propagated
from the focus. To that end, we used the brain area without big
vessels and selected a series of pixels at different locations along
the propagation path from the seizure focus [see Fig. 9(a)]. These
locations were separated into three geometric areas in terms of
the distance to the seizure focus, named proximal, middle, and
distal areas. CBV, [Oxy-Hb], and [Deoxy-Hb] time series from
each selected pixel were calculated within a window of 5 × 5
pixels and averaged regarding the three geometric areas. The
IRFs of CBV, [Oxy-Hb] and [Deoxy-Hb] from all these selected
pixels [see Fig. 9(b)] and from those belonging to the proximal,
middle, and distal areas [see Fig. 9(c)], respectively, were estimated as well. The amplitude of the IRFs reduced significantly

SONG et al.: DYSFUNCTION OF NEUROVASCULAR/METABOLIC COUPLING IN CHRONIC FOCAL EPILEPSY

105

Fig. 9. Spatial dependence of IRFs related to ictal activity. (a) Spatial locations
(dots) of the (5×5 pixels) areas at the proximal, middle and distal regions. (b)
IRFs of [Hb], [Oxy-Hb], and [Deoxy-Hb] obtained by pooling data from all
regions in (a). (c) IRFs of [Hb], [Oxy-Hb], and [Deoxy-Hb] obtained using only
the corresponding areas for the proximal, middle, and distal regions.

as the seizure propagated from the proximal to the distal area.
The [Deoxy-Hb] at the distal area slightly increased when the
seizure started, and then, had a rapid decrease. Similar spatialtemporal patterns in IRFs of CBV, [Oxy-Hb] and [Deoxy-Hb]
related to ictal activities were observed from all four rats.
E. Blood Perfusion Versus Metabolic Rates
Fig. 10 shows some examples of measurements obtained from
both the epileptic rats with chronic seizures and normal rats that
underwent electrical forepaw stimulation. Fig. 10(a), (b), (e),
and (f) showed examples of simultaneous electrophysiological
and LDF recording of ictal activity (a and b) and forepaw stimulation (e and f). Fig. 10(c), (d), (g), and (h) showed examples of
simultaneous electrophysiological and IOSI recordings of ictal
activity (on the seizure-initiation area, c and d) and forepaw
stimulation (g and h). Note that a slight increase in [Deoxy-Hb]
was visible at the beginning of each seizure episode; however,
a decrease at the end of the stimulus episode, as predicted by
the biophysical model for small κ values [see Fig. 3(c) and (d)],
was not clear.
We first used the LFP power (summed from 0 to 250 Hz) and
CBF for each trial of ictal activity (n = 13—long latency, and
n = 17—short latency) and each trial of forepaw stimulation
(n = 30—long latency, and n = 30—short latency) to estimate
the parameter ε, as described in Section II-F4. The variances of
the estimated ε from the epileptic cortex were much higher than
those obtained from forepaw stimulation (see Fig. 11, top panel),
reflecting larger interrat variability in the strengths of the functional hyperemic response in epileptic rats. There was no significant difference between values of ε for long and short seizure

Fig. 10. Examples of neuronal activities and the respective hemodynamic
responses for epileptic rats with different seizure durations and for normal rats
undergoing electrical forepaw stimulation. For all cases, the raw LFP and its
power (0–250 Hz) are shown on the top and middle of each panel, respectively.
Either the CBF or the [Hb]-related magnitude are shown on the bottom of each
panel. (a)–(d): Ictal activity with both short and long duration from different
epileptic rats. (e)–(h): Contralateral forepaw stimulation on normal rats with
both short and long stimulation paradigms.

duration (data not shown). Parameter ε was significantly larger
in epileptic cortices compared to normal cortices (p < 0.001).
We used individual trials of LFP power (summed from 0 to
250 Hz), CBV and [Deoxy-Hb] recording associated with both
ictal activity (epileptic rats) and forepaw stimulation (normal
rats) to estimate the κ (n = 9 for ictal activity, and n = 60 for
forepaw stimulation). In this step, we used the mean value of
the estimated parameter ε for each individual rat. We also found
larger variability in the values of parameter κ for epileptic rats,
compared to normal rats. The parameter κ was significantly
smaller in the epileptic rats (p < 0.05), which in our opinion
reflects higher baseline O2 metabolism epileptogenic areas (see
Section IV).

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 11 Estimation of ε and κ based on intracranial recordings both from
epileptic rats during seizure episodes and normal rats undergoing forepaw
stimulation. Significant differences for both parameters ε (p < 0.001) and κ
(p < 0.05) were found between epileptic rats and normal rats.

IV. DISCUSSION
A. Acute versus Chronic Model: Are the Results Comparable?
In this study, we utilized a preclinical model of chronic
epilepsy (MAM-PILO rat model) to investigate the dysfunction in neurovascular/metabolic coupling, instead of any acute
model of seizures. Rats treated with MAM-PILO have gray matter heterotopias and malformations consisting of altered cortical
lamination, and the presence of cytomegalic neurons with neurofilament overexpression, increased parvalbumin-positive puncta
and misoriented dendrites. Similar hypertrophic/dysmorphic
pyramidal neurons exist in acquired human FCD. GABAergic
terminals enveloping the dysplastic neurons and NMDA receptor complex alterations observed in these neocortical abnormalities bear similarities with those observed in humans. Together,
these features support the instrumental value of this preclinical
model to analyze the pathogenesis of IED-evoked BOLD signal
alterations in human FCD [48].
How do we reconcile our data based on chronic seizure
model with those obtained from acute ones? We compared our
results with those obtained from acute model in the following
three aspects: (1) the coupling between neuronal activity and
hyperemic response; (2) spatiotemporal hemodynamic variations with respect to the seizure focus; and (3) the unbalance in
the perfusion/metabolism rates resulting from the perpetuation
of seizures.
First, Harris et al., has shown a powerful correlation between
gamma band (25–90 Hz) and CBV response in the acute model
with 4-AP injections [13]. We demonstrated that, in addition to
the lower part of gamma band, the beta band (15–25 Hz) and
higher gamma band (70–170 Hz) have much stronger contribution to the CBF responses than other frequency bands. Our

findings might indicate that the electrophysiological basis of the
acute model might be different from the one of chronic models.
The spontaneous seizure episode consists of nonstationary fast
spiking activities [see Figs. 7(a) and 8(a)], which carries high
energy in beta and gamma bands. These gamma-band oscillations are different from those discussed in task-evoked neuronal
activities [49]. In principle, spontaneous oscillatory activities
evoked by tasks have been treated as stationary signals. Therefore, caution should be taken when comparing our results with
those from the task-evoked neuronal activities.
Second, it has been demonstrated that a center-surround phenomena exist in the acute model of seizure, of which the observations include: 1) no decrease of CBF in the focus while
a biphasic transient decrease of CBF existed in the surround
[50]; 2) a transient dip in tissue pO2 followed by an increase
in the focus while a sustained decrease of pO2 occurred in
the surround [50]; 3) increase of metabolic rate of oxygen consumption in the focus while a sustained decrease in the surround
(sometimes with a transient increase) [12]. These observations
were supported by the active blood shunting theory through
vasoconstriction in the surround to deliver oxygenated blood to
the hypermetabolic focus. However, an alternative hypothesis is
also possible to explain it, which involves a decrease in neuronal
activity in the surrounding area.
As in our studies, we observed significant spatiotemporal dynamics associated with ictal activity in terms of variations in
CBF, CBV, and [Deoxy-Hb] as well: 1) within the seizure focus, there were no preictal decreases in the CBF, and it did not
start increasing immediately after the seizure initiated; 2) We
did not see any decrease at the beginning of CBV responses in
the distal area caused by a preictal vasoconstriction as reported
in the acute models; 3) with ARX modeling, we observed an
increase in [Deoxy-Hb] from the distal area after the seizure
initiated followed by a rapid decrease afterwards, but the proximal area exhibited a sustained decrease in [Deoxy-Hb], which is
contrary to the observation from acute models. Therefore, those
hypotheses established on the basis of an acute model might not
be sufficient to be associated with the chronic seizure model,
and hence, the human epilepsy.
Third, comparing to the normal somatosensory stimulations,
the transient decrease discovered in pO2 with the acute model is
much larger (23% versus 3–4%) [50], [51]. Our findings in the
metabolically coupled balloon model showed that the chronic
seizure-onset zones had significantly higher values of ε, which is
a measure of the coupling between neuronal activity and CBF,
and lower values of κ, relating neuronal activity to [DeoxyHb], than the S1FL cortex with electrical forepaw stimulation.
These two parameters could be used as promising biomarkers
to identify epileptogenic areas in the epileptic patients with
noninvasive EEG-fMRI analysis, instead of the current invasive
techniques we used in this study.
In general, acute seizure model is a good approach to study
the neurovascular/metabolic coupling with highly controllable
seizure induction. However, it cannot incorporate some developed pathophysiological conditions that epileptic patients have.
Therefore, in order to have a close approximate to clinical
epileptogenic conditions, we should use models with chronic

SONG et al.: DYSFUNCTION OF NEUROVASCULAR/METABOLIC COUPLING IN CHRONIC FOCAL EPILEPSY

epilepsy to investigate the coupling between neuronal activity
and hemodynamic/metabolic activities. In this case, there would
be more confidence to translate the preclinical study into a clinical environment.
B. Alterations in the HRF on Epileptogenic Cortices:
Implication for the EEG-fMRI Technique.
Two parameters in the metabolically coupled balloon model
are of great interest in this study, which are ε and κ. ε relates the
neuronal activity to the variations in CBF. On the other hand,
κ links the neuronal activity to the relative changes in [DeoxyHb]. However, we were able to obtain an absolute estimation
of ε, while κ was only relatively estimated at this point. This
limitation was a consequence of using modified Beer–Lambert
law to estimate the relative changes in [Deoxy-Hb]. Therefore,
without a clear knowledge of the baseline level of [Deoxy-Hb]
for each rat, it is impossible to derive an absolute estimation of
κ with current techniques.
We have proved that these two parameters are significantly
different in the epileptogenic cortex, in comparison to the normal cortex (S1FL) undergoing forepaw stimulation. This implies that the neurovascular/metabolic coupling is altered in the
epileptogenic brain. With respect to the exact alterations in the
neurovascular/metabolic coupling, we noticed that ε is significantly higher while κ is significantly lower in the epileptogenic
cortex. High ε could be associated with the strengthened functional hyperemia during seizure activities, which has been reported in previous acute models of seizures [50]. In addition, it
has been reported in preclinical studies that epileptogenic cortex
has hypermetabolism [52], [53], as a result of which we speculate that the baseline metabolism in the epileptogenic cortex is
relatively higher in comparison to the one in the normal brain.
Therefore, even when there is an increase in metabolism induced
by the seizures, the metabolism in the epileptogenic cortex will
not increase as much as it does in the normal somatosensory cortex under stimulation, which will make the κ relatively smaller.
The following definition could be used to better understand this
conjecture κut = ΔM/M0 , with ΔM and M0 representing the
relative change in O2 metabolism and its baseline, respectively.
Therefore, a small κ might be associated with either a small
ΔM or a large M0 .
In our previous study [36], we conducted simultaneous EEGfMRI recordings on six rats of this chronic epilepsy model and
identified both positive and negative IED-evoked BOLD responses in the cortical areas using a canonical HRF [54] for
estimation in SPM8. However, we were not able to obtain good
significance with the correction for multiple comparisons. We
used FMRISTAT [55] to retrieve the real HRFs from the areas
with IED-evoked BOLD activation or deactivation and found
that they actually shared different temporal profiles, which might
explain why we could not obtain good significance with multiple
comparisons. With the Granger causality analysis, we demonstrated that the brain areas with BOLD deactivation predominantly have directed influences on the area with activation, although they were not always within the closest vicinity. Hence,
we separated these pairs of activation and deactivation with re-

107

gard to their spatial profiles and found differences between the
temporal profiles of those with negative HRFs, which might
indicate different mechanisms underlying BOLD deactivation.
IED-evoked BOLD deactivations have also been frequently reported in patients with focal epilepsy [56]–[58]. However, the
mechanism underlying it and its potential effect on localizing
irritative zones remain largely unknown.
To circumvent the potential problems with using normal
canonical HRF to estimate the BOLD response in EEG-fMRI
studies, multiple studies have demonstrated the possibilities of
alternatives. One way people have been taking to achieve this
was to perform ten separate event-related analysis with HRFs
consisting of a single gamma function peaking from –9 to 9 s
around the IED events [19], [59]. In such case, they were able to
identify BOLD responses preceding the IEDs and found it frequently in patients with focal epilepsies [59]. In addition, they
were more focal compared to the late response. Another method
available is based on independent component analysis (ICA)
without making any assumption of the profiles of HRFs [60]
and the usage of EEG spatiotemporal patterns as event-related
regressors. With parametric modeling, Storti et al. employed
F-test and ICA criteria to select the most likely model from
a pool of five parametric/generic HRFs [61]. However, Storti
et al.’s HRF models were based on parametric mathematical
models without links to actual pathophysiological mechanisms,
which is the same for the other two methods; hence, they lack
interpretation to understand the physiological basis of HRF dysregulations in focal epilepsy.
In this study, we demonstrated that we could use the metabolically coupled balloon model to estimate the parameter ε and κ
for different neuronal activities and found significant differences
between the ictal activities in epileptic rats and somatosensory
activation in normal rats. As we mentioned previously, these two
parameters could be potentially useful to delineate the epileptic
cortex from the normal one intraoperatively for epileptic patients
undergoing surgical resection. With the estimation of parameter
ε and κ, the final sign of the BOLD response will depend on the
O2 consumption rate by neurons, as indicated by the ratio in (1),
with a BOLD activation for ϑ >>1 and a BOLD deactivation
for ϑ <<1. To validate this, we are working on a new study with
simultaneous EEG-fMRI recordings to determine the irritative
zones with IED-evoked BOLD activation and deactivation. Following that, we will perform the intracranial recordings within
those areas in particular and estimate the parameter ε and κ,
respectively. Therefore, we will advance qualitatively in the use
of EEG-fMRI technique to study epileptogenesis by using an
actual biophysical model, as the one discussed in this paper. In
future studies, we will use parameters estimated here to construct a pool of potential HRFs for epileptogenic cortices.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we conducted intracranial recordings to understand the neurovascular/metabolic coupling during ictal activity
in chronic epileptic rats with the help of a metabolically coupled balloon model. We were able to detect significant hemodynamic responses (i.e., CBF, CBV, [Deoxy-Hb], and [Oxy-Hb])

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

associated with ictal activities of different durations. The
spatiotemporal-dependent IRFs of hemodynamics were found
to be different from those obtained in acute seizure models
reported by other groups, which might indicate more complicated mechanisms underlying the phenomena observed in the
chronic epilepsy model. ε and κ, two important parameters to
link neuronal activity to CBF and oxygen consumption, were
estimated from both epileptic and normal rats. There are significant differences in the values of ε and κ between the epileptic
and normal rats. Introducing methods to estimate these parameters, which reflect the underlying physiology, would enhance
our understanding of the neurovascular/metabolic coupling in
epileptic patients and improve the localization accuracy on irritative zones and seizure-onset zones through neuroimaging
techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Because rats have chronic epilepsy, their health condition is
too delicate. Therefore, the authors would like to thank FIU
veterinary H. V. Vinerean and his team for providing extra care
in this particular case.
REFERENCES
[1] H. T. Chugani, Neuroimaging in Epilepsy. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ.
Press, 2010.
[2] F. Pittau et al., “The role of functional neuroimaging in pre-surgical
epilepsy evaluation,” Front. Neurol., vol. 5, no. 31, pp. 1–16, 2014.
[3] E. Formaggio et al., “Integrating EEG and fMRI in epilepsy,” Neuroimage,
vol. 54, pp. 2719–2731, 2011.
[4] M. Hauf et al., “Localizing seizure-onset zones in presurgical evaluation
of drug-resistant epilepsy by electroencephalography/fMRI: Effectiveness
of alternative thresholding strategies,” Amer. J. Neuroradiol., vol. 33, pp.
1818–1824, 2012.
[5] N. Jette and S. Wiebe, “Update on the surgical treatment of epilepsy,”
Current Opinion Neurology, vol. 26, pp. 201–207, 2013.
[6] L. A. v. Graan et al., “Methods and utility of EEG-fMRI in epilepsy,”
Quant. Imag. Med. Surg., vol. 5, pp. 300–312, 2015.
[7] D. An et al., “Electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance
imaging responses help predict surgical outcome in focal epilepsy,”
Epilepsia, vol. 54, pp. 2184–2194, 2013.
[8] M. d. Curtis and G. Avanzini, “Interictal spikes in focal epileptogenesis,”
Progress Neurobiol., vol. 63, pp. 541–567, 2001.
[9] S. Tousseyn et al., “Correspondence between large-scale ictal and interictal epileptic networks revealed by single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and electroencephalography (EEG)–functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),” Epilepsia, vol. 56, pp. 382–392, 2015.
[10] J. J. Riera and A. Sumiyoshi, “Brain oscillations: Ideal scenery to understand the neurovascular coupling,” Current Opinion Neurology, vol. 23,
pp. 374–381, 2010.
[11] H. Ma et al., “Dynamic neurovascular coupling and uncoupling during ictal onset, propagation, and termination revealed by simultaneous in
vivo optical imaging of neural activity and local blood volume,” Cerebral
Cortex, vol. 23, pp. 885–899, 2013.
[12] M. Zhao et al., “Preictal and ictal neurovascular and metabolic coupling
surrounding a seizure focus,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, pp. 13292–13300,
2011.
[13] S. Harris et al., “Coupling between gamma-band power and cerebral
blood volume during recurrent acute neocortical seizures,” NeuroImage,
vol. 97, pp. 62–70, 2014.
[14] S. Harris et al., “Contralateral dissociation between neural activity and
cerebral blood volume during recurrent acute focal neocortical seizures,”
Epilepsia, vol. 55, pp. 1423–1430, 2014.
[15] N. Voges et al., “Modeling of the neurovascular coupling in epileptic
discharges,” Brain Topography, vol. 25, pp. 136–156, 2012.
[16] I. Vanzetta et al., “Investigation of linear coupling between single-event
blood flow responses and interictal discharges in a model of experimental
epilepsy,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 103, pp. 3139–3152, 2010.

[17] A. Salek-Haddadi et al., “Hemodynamic correlates of epileptiform discharges: An EEG-fMRI study of 63 patients with focal epilepsy,” Brain
Res., vol. 1088, pp. 148–166, 2006.
[18] E. Kobayashi et al., “Negative BOLD responses to epileptic spikes,”
Human Brain Mapping, vol. 27, pp. 488–497, 2006.
[19] R. Rathakrishnan et al., “BOLD signal changes preceding negative responses in EEG-fMRI in patients with focal epilepsy,” Epilepsia, vol. 51,
pp. 1837–1845, 2010.
[20] F. Pittau et al., “Negative BOLD response to interictal epileptic discharges
in focal epilepsy,” Brain Topography, vol. 26, pp. 627–640, 2013.
[21] Y. Lu et al., “Using voxel-specific hemodynamic response function in
EEG-fMRI data analysis,” Neuroimage, vol. 32, pp. 238–247, 2006.
[22] J. Riera et al., “fMRI activation maps based on the NN-ARx model,”
Neuroimage, vol. 23, pp. 680–697, 2004.
[23] Y. Zheng et al., “A model of the hemodynamic response and oxygen
delivery to brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 16, pp. 617–637, 2002.
[24] F. Colciaghi et al., “Status epilepticus-induced pathologic plasticity in
a rat model of focal cortical dysplasia,” Brain, vol. 134, pp. 2828–2843,
2011.
[25] J. Bae et al., “Brain source imaging in preclinical rat models of
focal epilepsy using high-resolution EEG recordings,” J. Vis. Exp.,
vol. 100, art. no. e52700, pp. 1–12, 2015.
[26] K. J. Friston et al., “Nonlinear responses in fMRI: The Balloon model,
Volterra kernels, and other hemodynamics,” NeuroImage, vol. 12, pp.
466–477, 2000.
[27] S. Harris et al., “The effects of focal epileptic activity on regional
sensory-evoked neurovascular coupling and postictal modulation of bilateral sensory processing,” J. Cerebral Blood Flow Metabolism, vol. 33,
pp. 1595–1604, 2013.
[28] R. Biscay et al., “Local linearization method for the numerical solution of stochastic differential equations,” Ann. Inst. Stat. Math.,
vol. 48, pp. 631–644, 1996.
[29] B. Bernal et al., “FMRI under sedation: what is the best choice in children?” J. Clin. Med. Res., vol. 4, pp. 363–370, 2012.
[30] E. Jonckers et al., “Functional connectivity fMRI of the rodent brain:
Comparison of functional connectivity networks in rat and mouse,” PloS
one, vol. 6, art. no. e18876, pp. 1–9, 2011.
[31] C. P. Pawela et al., “A protocol for use of medetomidine anesthesia in rats
for extended studies using task-induced BOLD contrast and resting-state
functional connectivity,” Neuroimage, vol. 46, pp. 1137–1147, 2009.
[32] F. Zhao et al., “BOLD study of stimulation-induced neural activity and
resting-state connectivity in medetomidine-sedated rat,” Neuroimage, vol.
39, pp. 248–260, 2008.
[33] J. Riera et al., “Electroencephalographic electrode unit for small animals
and measurement system using same,” US Patent, US 2013/0131461 A1,
2013.
[34] C. Pedreira et al., “Classification of EEG abnormalities in partial epilepsy
with simultaneous EEG–fMRI recordings,” NeuroImage, vol. 99, pp. 461–
476, 2014.
[35] R. Quiroga, Z. Nadasdy, and Y. Ben-Shaul, “Unsupervised spike detection and sorting with wavelets and superparamagnetic clustering,” Neural
Comput., vol. 16, pp. 1661–1687, 2004.
[36] Y. Song et al., “Distributions of irritative zones are related to individual
alterations of resting-state networks in focal epilepsy,” PLos one, vol. 10,
no. 7, art. no. e0134352, pp. 1–29, 2015.
[37] F. Tadel et al., “Brainstorm: A user-friendly application for MEG/EEG
analysis,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2011, art. no. 879716, pp. 1–13,
2011.
[38] P. A. Valdés-Hernández et al., “An in vivo MRI template set for morphometry, tissue segmentation, and fMRI localization in rats,” Front. Neuroinformat., vol. 5, no. 26, pp. 1–19, 2011.
[39] G. Paxinos and C. Waston, The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates,
6thed. San Diego, CA, USA: Academic, 2007.
[40] J. Gotman, “Epileptic networks studied with EEG-fMRI,” Epilepsia,
vol. 49, pp. 42–51, 2008.
[41] T. Ogawa et al., “Large-scale heterogeneous representation of sound
attributes in rat primary auditory cortex: From unit activity to population
dynamics,” J. Neurosci., vol. 31, pp. 14639–14653, 2011.
[42] A. K. Dunn et al., “Spatial extent of oxygen metabolism and hemodynamic
changes during functional activation of the rat somatosensory cortex,”
Neuroimage, vol. 27, pp. 279–290, 2005.
[43] M. Kohl et al., “Physical model for the spectroscopic analysis of cortical
intrinsic optical signals,” Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 45, pp. 3749–3764, 2000.
[44] P. Baraldi et al., “An ARX model-based approach to trial by trial identification of fMRI-BOLD responses,” Neuroimage, vol. 37, pp. 189–201,
2007.

SONG et al.: DYSFUNCTION OF NEUROVASCULAR/METABOLIC COUPLING IN CHRONIC FOCAL EPILEPSY

[45] R. Jolivet et al., “A benchmark test for a quantitative assessment of simple
neuron models,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 169, pp. 417–424, 2008.
[46] J. Riera et al., “Fusing EEG and fMRI based on a bottom-up model:
Inferring activation and effective connectivity in neural masses,” Philos.
Trans. Roy. Soc. London B, Biol. Sci., vol. 360, pp. 1025–1041, 2005.
[47] J. J. Riera et al., “Nonlinear local electrovascular coupling. II: From data
to neuronal masses,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 28, pp. 335–354, 2007.
[48] L. Tyvaert et al., “Different structures involved during ictal and interictal
epileptic activity in malformations of cortical development: An EEG-fMRI
study,” Brain, vol. 131, pp. 2042–2060, 2008.
[49] N. K. Logothetis et al., “Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of
the fMRI signal,” Nature, vol. 412, pp. 150–157, 2001.
[50] M. Zhao et al., “Spatiotemporal dynamics of perfusion and oximetry during ictal discharges in the rat neocortex,” J. Neurosci., vol. 29,
pp. 2814–2823, 2009.
[51] J. K. Thompson et al., “Single-neuron activity and tissue oxygenation in
the cerebral cortex,” Science, vol. 299, pp. 1070–1072, 2003.
[52] H. Choi et al., “Abnormal metabolic connectivity in the pilocarpineinduced epilepsy rat model: A multiscale network analysis based on persistent homology,” NeuroImage, vol. 99, pp. 226–236, 2014.
[53] B. Jupp et al., “Hypometabolism precedes limbic atrophy and spontaneous recurrent seizures in a rat model of TLE,” Epilepsia, vol. 53,
pp. 1233–1244, 2012.
[54] G. H. Glover, “Deconvolution of Impulse Response in Event-Related
BOLD fMRI 1,” Neuroimage, vol. 9, pp. 416–429, 1999.
[55] K. J. Worsley et al., “A general statistical analysis for fMRI data,” Neuroimage, vol. 15, pp. 1–15, 2002.
[56] F. Foschum and A. Kienle, “Broadband absorption spectroscopy of turbid
media using a dual step steady-state method,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 17,
pp. 0370091–0370097, 2012.
[57] K. Hamandi et al., “BOLD and perfusion changes during epileptic generalised spike wave activity,” Neuroimage, vol. 39, pp. 608–618, 2008.
[58] J. Jacobs et al., “Hemodynamic responses to interictal epileptiform discharges in children with symptomatic epilepsy,” Epilepsia, vol. 48, pp.
2068–2078, 2007.
[59] J. Jacobs et al., “Hemodynamic changes preceding the interictal EEG
spike in patients with focal epilepsy investigated using simultaneous EEGfMRI,” Neuroimage, vol. 45, pp. 1220–1231, 2009.
[60] R. C. Thornton et al., “Imaging haemodynamic changes related to
seizures: Comparison of EEG-based general linear model, independent
component analysis of fMRI and intracranial EEG,” Neuroimage, vol. 53,
pp. 196–205, 2010.
[61] S. Storti et al., “Modelling hemodynamic response function in epilepsy,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 124, pp. 2108–2118, 2013.

Yinchen Song received the B.E. degree in biomedical engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing,
China, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from Florida International University,
Miami, FL, USA, in 2015.
He worked as the Teaching and Research Assistant at Florida International University and Nicklaus
Children’s Hospital from 2009 to 2015. His research
interest includes neuroimaging with applications in
brain tumor and epilepsy.
Dr. Song is a member of Alpha Eta Mu Beta and
the Society for Neuroscience. He received the Young Investigator Award from
IEEE EMBS BRAIN Grand Challenges Conference in 2014.

Rafael A. Torres is currently working toward the
B.S. degree in biology at Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA.
He is an undergraduate research member of
the Neuronal Mass Dynamics Lab, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University.
Mr. Torres is an Undergraduate Member of the
Society for Neuroscience.

109

Sarahy Garcia received the B.S. degree in biology
from the Honors College, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA, in 2014.
She is currently a Research Member of the Neuronal Mass Dynamics Lab, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University.

Yisel Frometa received the Associate degree in
chemistry from Miami Dade College, Miami, FL,
USA, in 2013. She is currently working toward the
B.S. degree with a major in biology and a minor in
psychology at Florida International University, Miami.
She is an undergraduate research member of
the Neuronal Mass Dynamics Lab, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University.
Miss Frometa became a member of Phi Theta
Kappa Honor Society in 2010 and received the Dean’s List two years in a row
at Miami Dade College.
Jihye Bae received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea, in 2007, the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, USA, in 2009 and 2013, respectively.
From 2013 to 2015, she was a Postdoctoral Associate in the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA.
She is currently a Postdoctoral Associate with Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami. She investigates techniques for
biomedical signal processing with an emphasis on brain signals applied to the
development of new methods to aid patients with neuromuscular disabilities or
neurological disorders. Her research interests include adaptive signal processing, machine learning, and their applications to medicine and biology.

Abhay Deshmukh received the B.E. degree in
biotechnology from the Kolhapur Institute of Engineering, Kolhapur, India, in 2010. He is currently
working toward the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering at Florida International University, Miami,
FL, USA.
He is a Graduate Research Member of the Neuronal Mass Dynamics Lab, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University.

Wei-Chiang Lin received the B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Chung-Yuan Christian University, Taiwan, in 1989, the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
biomedical engineering from the University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in 1994 and 1997, respectively.
He worked as a Research Associate at the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA,
in 1997 and Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN,
USA, from 1997 to 2001. From 2001 to 2004, he
worked as a Research Assistant Professor at Vanderbilt University. In 2004, he joined the Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Florida International University and Nicklaus Children’s Hospital, Miami, FL,
USA, and became an Assistant Professor. In 2008, he became an Associate
Professor of the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International
University and Nicklaus Children’s Hospital. His research interests include developing nondestructive optical and mechanical technologies that can detect
disease development and tissue injuries in vivo.
Dr. Lin is a member of the American Heart Association, Optical Society of
America, and International Society for Optical Engineering.

110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Ying Zheng received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in
automatic control and systems engineering from the
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, U.K., in 1983 and
1988, respectively.
She worked as a Research Assistant at the University of Sheffield in 1986, becoming a Lecturer in
1994. In 2013, she joined the School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading, Reading, U.K., as a
Professor in Systems Engineering and Neuroscience.
Prof. Zheng is a member of the Society for Neuroscience. Her research interest includes mathematical
modeling of biological systems.

Jorge J. Riera (M’99–01) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in physics from the University of Havana, Havana, Cuba, and M.Sc. degree in biophysics
with credits from the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy and the Cuban Neuroscience Center, Havana. Part of his Ph.D. thesis was
performed during two-term CNRS fellowships at the
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris.
From 2000 to 2014, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Tokyo, Japan and the New Industry Creation Hachery
Center (NICHe), Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. He joined the Faculty at
Tohoku University School of Medicine in 2004, where he established the Neuronal Mass Dynamics laboratory for Brain Imaging in small animals. In 2012, he
joined the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA, as an Associate Professor. His research interests include
developing strategies to integrate different modalities of brain imaging for the
understanding of multicellular signaling in the neocortex. He has more than 60
peer-reviewed publications.
Dr. Riera is currently on the editorial boards of several journals and is a
member of several professional societies.

