IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

385

A Grouped Up-and-Down Method Used
for Efficacy Comparison Between Two
Different Defibrillation Waveforms
Danian Jin, Jianjie Wang, Kecheng Yang, Kaifa Wang, Weilun Quan, Ulrich Herken,
and Yongqin Li∗ , Associate Member, IEEE

Abstract—Electrical defibrillation, which consists of delivering
a therapeutic dose of the electrical current to the fibrillating heart
with the aid of a defibrillator, is still the only effective way to
treat life-threatening ventricular fibrillation (VF). However, the
efficacy of electrical therapy for terminating VF is highly dependent on the waveform applied. When new defibrillation waveforms
or techniques are developed, their efficacy needs to be accurately
evaluated and compared to those in use. A common method for
the comparison of defibrillation efficacy is to estimate and compare the individual defibrillation threshold (DFT) by constructing dose response curves or using an up-and-down method. Since
DFT is calculated by repetitive and sequential shocks, there will
be variability for each measurement and for each individual. This
creates a considerable uncertainty for paired comparison. In this
paper, a novel grouped up-and-down method is developed for the
comparison of defibrillation efficacy between two different defibrillation waveforms or techniques. The efficacy of two commonly
used biphasic defibrillation waveforms was compared in a porcine
model of cardiac arrest using the developed method. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method is more sensitive
for efficacy comparison and requires less defibrillation attempts
compared with traditional DFT methods.
Index Terms—Cardiac arrest, ventricular fibrillation (VF), defibrillation threshold (DFT), dose response curve, grouped up-anddown.

I. INTRODUCTION
ARDIAC arrest is a leading cause of death around the
world, and the most frequent initial rhythm in witnessed
cardiac arrest is ventricular fibrillation (VF) [1]–[3]. Electrical
defibrillation, which consists of delivering a therapeutic dose of
the electrical current to the fibrillating heart with the aid of a defibrillator, is still the only effective way to treat life-threatening
VF [4]. Defibrillation is accomplished by delivering a highenergy shock, which creates a large electric field throughout the
heart. The current flow between the two electrodes changes the
electrical potential across the cell membranes in the heart, terminating the rotor waves that sustain fibrillation by creating what

C

Manuscript received April 30, 2015; revised June 29, 2015; accepted July
16, 2015. Date of publication July 21, 2015; date of current version January
16, 2016. This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science
Foundation of China (NSFC81271656) and a Foundation for the Author of
National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (FANEDD201060). Asterisk
indicates corresponding author.
D. Jin, J. Wang, K. Yang, and K. Wang are with the School of Biomedical
Engineering, Third Military Medical University.
W. Quan and U. Herken are with ZOLL Medical Corporation.
∗ Y. Li is with the School of Biomedical Engineering, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China (e-mail: Leeoken@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2458976

Fig. 1. Dose response curve. Factors improving the defibrillation efficacy will
shift the curve to the left. A reduction in defibrillation efficacy will cause a shift
to the right.

are known as virtual electrodes [5]. This depolarizes a critical
mass of the heart muscle, terminates the arrhythmia, and allows
normal sinus rhythm to be reestablished.
For decades, defibrillators have used monophasic waveforms.
In the past few years, biphasic defibrillation waveforms have
become the norm for external defibrillators since biphasic technology offers improved shock efficacy with decreased risk of
shock-induced cardiac damage when compared with traditional
monophasic shocks [6]. In addition to transitioning to biphasic
waveforms, virtually all new waveforms have added some type
of impedance compensation that adjusts the waveform based
on the measured value of the patient impedance. Even though
biphasic defibrillators are more efficient than monophasic ones,
research into more efficient low-energy defibrillation is continuing [7]. As new waveforms and/or techniques are developed,
their efficacy needs to be accurately evaluated and compared to
those that are already in use.
It has been shown in both animal and clinical studies that the
probability of successful defibrillation is a function of energy,
which has a logistic or sigmoidal dose response relationship [8].
The dose response curve is therefore widely used to describe the
relationship between energy and defibrillation success. The dose
response curve can be characterized by slope, intercept, and specific points (see Fig. 1). A typical efficacy estimator, termed as
the defibrillation threshold (DFT), is the shock strength that
defibrillates in 50% of all attempts and is derived from the
dose response curve. Factors that adversely affect the success
of defibrillation will shift the curve to the right and increase
DFT. Factors improving the success of defibrillation such as improved waveforms, superior lead position, or other defibrillation

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

configurations can shift the curve to the left and therefore decrease DFT.
There are two ways to estimate the DFT when a specific
defibrillation waveform is being investigated [9]. One method is
to construct the dose response curve by logistic regression and
calculate the energy value corresponding to a 50% probability of
success [10]. To produce a dose response curve, a series shocks
are delivered with energies at a range such as 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.5,
and 2.0 times of the DFT, in a randomized order during separate
episodes of VF. Another method is to estimate the DFT using
an up-and-down method without constructing the dose response
curve, which has been described previously [11], [12]. Briefly,
shock energy is adjusted after every shock delivery depending
on shock outcome. Energy is increased after a failed shock and
decreased after a successful shock. DFT is calculated after a
sufficient number of shocks over a range of energies have been
delivered.
When paired comparisons are considered (for example, two
different waveforms or two different defibrillation configurations of a waveform), a reliable estimation of the efficacy of
defibrillation is important, but rarely determined. Previous studies performed paired comparisons by constructing the dose response curve or using an up-and-down method individually and
then comparing the calculated DFTs [13], [14]. If no difference
in DFT is observed, efficacy is regarded as equivalent. Since
DFTs are calculated by repetitive and sequential shocks, and for
each individual shock and subject, there will be variability for
each measurement. This can create a considerable inaccuracy
for paired comparison [9].
In this study, a novel grouped up-and-down method is proposed for the comparison of defibrillation efficacy between two
different defibrillation approaches, such as new waveforms, configurations, methods, or techniques. We first demonstrate that
the area between two dose response curves can be accurately
estimated with another virtually constructed curve by mathematical simulation. The procedure for the experimental implementation of the grouped up-and-down method is then illustrated.
Efficacy of two commonly used biphasic defibrillation waveforms is then compared in an adult porcine model of cardiac
arrest using the proposed method.

II. METHODS
Instead of estimating the DFT by constructing the dose response curve or using an up-and-down method individually, a
combined dose response curve is virtually created when two different waveforms or techniques are compared. The individual
DFT is then investigated based on a conventional up-and-down
method and the success rate of different waveforms or techniques is then compared.

A. Mathematical Simulation for a Grouped
Up-and-Down Method
Suppose the dose response curves of two different waveforms
can be approximately represented by the same logistic function

Fig. 2. Mathematical simulation of the grouped up-and-down method. (A)
Dose response curve of two waveforms that have different DFTs. (B) Constructed dose response curve from (A). (C) Area of shaded part illustrated in (A)
and (B) as a function of b0 . (D) Ratio of area of shaded part in (B) and (A) as
a function of b0 . (E) Dose response curve of two waveforms that have identical
DFTs. (F) Constructed dose response curve from (E).

but with different parameters [10]
f (x) =

1
1
, g(x) =
1 + ea 0 −a 1 x
1 + eb 0 −b 1 x

(1)

where a0 , b0 > 1, 0 < a1 , b1 < 1. a0 and b0 are the intercepts,
a1 and b1 are the slopes. a0 /a1 and b0 /b1 are the DFTs of the
two waveforms. The defibrillation efficacy of each waveform
can be expressed as the area under f (x) and g(x)

AUCf (x) =



+∞

f (x)dx, AUCg (x) =
0

+∞

g(x)dx. (2)
0

If one waveform is more efficient than another one, the area
under the dose response curve will be greater and the defibrillation success rate will be higher in specific energy ranges. Previous experimental studies have shown that the DFT for external
biphasic defibrillation in adult pigs ranges from 40 to 120 J. For
simplicity, we suppose waveform f (DFT = 60 joule) is more
efficient than waveform g (DFT = 120 J), and dose response
curves of the two waveforms have the same slope but different
intercepts. As an example, if we assume that a1 = b1 = 0.05,
a0 = 3, b0 = 6 [the resulting dose response curves of f (x) and

JIN et al.: GROUPED UP-AND-DOWN METHOD USED FOR EFFICACY COMPARISON

387

g(x) are plotted in Fig. 2(A)], then,
b0
a0
>
⇔ b0 > a0 , if a1 = b1 .
b1
a1

(3)

The difference in defibrillation efficacy can be expressed
as the area between AUCf (x) and AUCg (x) [shaded area,
Fig. 2(A)]
 +∞
AUCtotal f −g =
(f (x) − g(x))dx
0

(1 + eb 0 )a 1
1
ln
.
a1 b1 (1 + ea 0 )b 1

=

(4)

If a0 > 1, b0 > 1, (1 + ea 0 )  1, (1 + eb 0 )  1; then,
AUCtotal

f −g

≈

1
eb 0 a 1
b0
a0
ln a b =
−
0
1
a1 b1
e
b1
a1

(5)

and represents the difference of the compared DFTs.
When a number of shocks from two defibrillators are considered, the total probability of defibrillation success will be
PH (S = 1/x) = f (x) ∗ P (f ) + g(x) ∗ P (g)

(6)

since P (f ) and P (g) are independent. S represents the observed
binary outcome when the testing energy is x. If the numbers of
testing shocks are equivalent for f and g, i.e., P (f ) = P (g) =
0.5, the total probability will be
PH = f (x) ∗ 0.5 + g(x) ∗ 0.5.

(7)

Another dose response curve h(x), which is the average of
f (x) and g(x), can therefore be obtained as
f (x) + g(x)
.
(8)
2
As shown in Fig. 2(B), the curve of h(x) lies between f (x)
and g(x). The DFT of h(x) is between a0 /a1 and b0 /b1 , while
the curve of h(x) is nearly linear in this range.
The area between a0 /a1 and b0 /b1 for h(x) [see the shaded
area in Fig. 2(B)] is
 a 0 /a 1
AUCpart h =
h(x)dx
h(x) =

b 0 /b 1
a1 b0

1
(ea 0 + e b 1 )b 1 (2eb 0 )a 1
=
ln
.
b1 a0
2a1 b1
(2ea 0 )b 1 (eb 0 + e a 1 )a 1
As a trapezium, AUCpart
AUCpart

h

h

(9)

can also be represented as

= (PH (S = 1/x = a0 /a1 )

+ PH ( S = 1| x = b0 /b1 )) ∗ (b0 /b1 − a0 /a1 )/2. (10)
since (PH ( S = 1| x = a0 /a1 ) + PH ( S = 1| x = b0 /b1 ))/2
≈ 0.5, so
AUCpart

h

≈ 0.5 ∗ (b0 /b1 − a0 /a1 )
= 0.5 ∗ AUCtotal

f −g .

Fig. 3. Implementation of the grouped up-and-down method for comparison
of defibrillation efficacy between two different waveforms A and B.

and b1 are constant. Both AUCtotal f −g and AUCpart h are linearly correlated with b0 , while the ratio between AUCtotal f −g
and AUCpart h [see Fig. 2(D)] remains constant and is nearly
0.5. Fig. 2(E) shows two waveforms that have different slopes
(a0 = 0.1, b0 = 0.05) and intercepts (a1 = 9, b1 = 4.5) but
with identical DFTs (DFT = 90 J). In this case, the probability
of defibrillation success is higher for f (x) when energy >90
J and lower when energy <90 J. However, the area difference
between the two curves is zero since they are equally effective.
This is represented in the constructed dose response curve in
Fig. 2(F), where h(x) has an identical DFT as f (x) and g(x).
The mathematical simulation demonstrates that the area between the two dose response curves, which represents the difference in defibrillation probability between the two waveforms,
can be accurately evaluated by examining the specific area under
the constructed curve that is determined by the difference of the
DFTs of the compared waveforms. If the area is relatively small,
differences between individual waveforms will be insignificant,
and equivalent DFTs or success rates will be observed when
two defibrillation waveforms are compared. On the other hand,
if the area is relatively large, efficacy difference between the two
waveforms will be significant and a relatively high-defibrillation
success rate will be observed for the waveform that has a lower
DFT value.
B. Experimental Implementation

(11)

Fig. 2(C) shows the simulation results of AUCtotal f −g and
AUCpart h as a function of b0 (ranges from 3 to 6) when a0 , a1 ,

The flowchart for an experimental implementation of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 3. When the efficacy of two different waveforms/methods A and B are compared, the DFT is

388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 4. Difference in waveform morphology and impedance compensation
method between (A) RLB and (B) BTE waveforms.

initially estimated using a standard protocol of an up-and-down
method and serves as the initial group testing energy. A testing
group consists of 2N (N > 2 based on the study design) shocks
with a randomized order, with N shocks from method A and
N shocks from method B. The group energy is unchanged during each testing group. After the 2N shocks for each group are
tested, the aggregated group defibrillation success rate is calculated. The succeeding group testing energy can be increased or
decreased by 10%–20% depending on the current aggregated
group defibrillation success probability in order to maintain it at
approximately 50%. For example, if the grouped aggregate defibrillation success rate was <50%, the group testing energy of
the next sequence will be increased by 10%–20%. If the grouped
aggregate defibrillation success rate was >50%, the group testing energy of the next sequence will be decreased by 10%–20%.
The group testing energy will remain unchanged if the grouped
aggregate defibrillation success rate is equal to 50%. The same
grouped up-and-down testing procedure can be repeated for a
predetermined number of times on each animal. The individual
success rate or DFT is calculated, and the defibrillation efficacy
of method A and method B are then compared.
III. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
A. Experimental Methods
To evaluate the reliability and the reproducibility of the proposed method, the efficacy of two biphasic waveforms, which
have different waveform morphology and impedance compensation methods, was compared in a porcine model of cardiac arrest.
Two widely used commercial biphasic defibrillators were used
in this study. As shown in Fig. 4, defibrillator A employs rectilinear biphasic (RLB) waveform and a current-based impedance
compensation method. It uses a fixed-duration shock and adjusts
output energy by adjusting the voltage and current to compensate for differences in transthoracic impedance. Defibrillator B
employs a biphasic truncated exponential (BTE) waveform and
an energy-based impedance compensation method. It maintains
a constant output energy by increasing the initial voltage and
extending the waveform duration when transthoracic impedance
increases.
To compare the two waveforms over a wide range of
impedance distributions, a high-impedance porcine model was
used for this specific study since the transthoracic impedance of
pigs used for the experiment was about half the magnitude of

Fig. 5.
tem.

High-impedance porcine model and defibrillation data recording sys-

an adult human’s impedance. Repetitive electrical shocks will
further decrease the impedance [15]. A junction box comprised
of a defibrillation source switch and a cascade adjustable load
resistance (20–200 Ω in steps of 10 Ω), and a rescue shock button (to bypass the load resistance cascade) was placed in series
with the defibrillation pads (see Fig. 5). Instead of changing
the defibrillator’s energy settings according to the conventional
up-and-down method, the cascade load resistance was adjusted
during the experiment as the two defibrillators have discontinuous and different energy settings in the investigated energy
ranges (the energy setting is 50, 75, 100, 120, 150 and 200 J for
defibrillator A, and 50, 70, 100, 125, 150 and 200 J for defibrillator B). Both defibrillators were set to the same 200 J setting
in the experiment and the defibrillation energy that the animal
received was moved up or down by adjusting the cascade load
resistance. This setup configuration also simulated defibrillation
of patients with various impedance values using 200 J without
overdosing the animals. The equivalent pathway impedance of
the defibrillator was the summation of the cascade load resistance and the impedance of the animals. A measurement box
with a built-in high-voltage probe and current probe was connected to the junction box and the animal to record defibrillation
voltage and current waveforms.
In five domestic male pigs weighing between 32 and 38 kg,
anesthesia was initiated by intramuscular injection of ketamine
(20 mg/kg) and was continued by ear vein injection of sodium
pentobarbital (30 mg/kg). VF was electrically induced by applying a 5-mA alternate current through a pacing catheter in the
right ventricle and left untreated for 15 s. A baseline DFT was
estimated based on the standard up-and-down method with a
starting energy setting of 2 J/kg from defibrillator A and served
as the initial group testing energy. The initial cascade load resistance was then calculated and adjusted in order for the animal
to receive shock energy equal to the baseline DFT. A test group
consisted of six randomized shocks, three from defibrillator A
and three from defibrillator B at the same 200-J energy setting.
The defibrillation attempt was regarded as successful when the
electrical shock converted VF to an organized rhythm with a
mean aortic pressure of ࣙ 60 mmHg for an interval ࣙ10 s. If the
shock failed to defibrillate, a 200-J rescue shock was delivered
using the same defibrillator that delivered the failed defibrillation shock, bypassing the cascade resistance by pressing the
rescue shock push button in the junction box. A recovery period
of at least 5 min was required between each of the test shocks to
insure hemodynamic stability. The cascade resistance remained
unchanged during the six experimental shocks in each group.

JIN et al.: GROUPED UP-AND-DOWN METHOD USED FOR EFFICACY COMPARISON

389

TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS BETWEEN RLB AND BTE WAVEFORM.
Parameters

RLB Waveform

BTE waveform

P value

Pathway impedance (Ω)
Waveform duration (ms)
Energy (joule)
Peak voltage (V)
Peak current (A)
DFT (joule)
Success rate (%)

117.2 ± 38.1
10.2 ± 0.1
79.2 ± 23.8
669.6 ± 132.4
19.8 ± 4.0
65.9 ± 21.5
66.7

119.1 ± 39.0
17.5 ± 2.1
63.4 ± 21.3
525.4 ± 141.1
15.0 ± 5.1
94.9 ± 1.8
16.7

0.66
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.017
< 0.001

The aggregate defibrillation success rate of each test group was
calculated and the cascade resistance value was then adjusted
depending on the aggregate defibrillation success rate. If the
grouped aggregate defibrillation success rate was >50%, the
cascade resistance was adjusted to decrease the energy delivered
to animals by 10%–20%. If the grouped aggregate defibrillation
success rate was <50%, the cascade resistance was adjusted
to increase the energy delivered to the animals by 10%–20%.
The cascade resistance remained unchanged if the grouped aggregate defibrillation success rate was equal to 50%. The same
grouped up-and-down testing procedure was repeated ten times
on each of the five animals which resulted in a total of 60 experimental shocks for each animal, 30 from defibrillator A and
30 from defibrillator B.
The outcome of each shock was recorded. The actual voltage and current delivered to the animals were simultaneously
recorded during each shock with a high-speed USB data acquisition system (USB-6211, National Instruments, Austin, TX,
USA) and LabView software (LabView 8.2, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) at a sampling rate of 4 kHz. The energy delivered to the animals and the transthoracic impedance
of the animals were calculated and reported by the software in
real time. For each waveform, the average defibrillation success
rate and the DFT corresponding to 50% of defibrillation success
were calculated and compared. DFT was estimated based on the
up-down Bayesian method introduced by Compos et al. [11]

θ2 P (X |θ, E)P (θ) dθ
(12)
DFT = 
P (X |θ, E)P (θ) dθ
where P (X |θ, E) is the probability of observing X at testing
energy E when the true DFT values are θ. P (θ)is the prior probability density function that describes the distribution of θ in the
population for a given species, shock waveform, and electrode
configuration. θ is a two-dimensional vector with the two variables θ1 and θ2 . The variable θ2 is the DFT to be estimated and
θ1 is the reciprocal of the slope of the dose response curve at θ2 .
Data were reported in mean ± standard deviation. A standard
Chi Square test was performed for rate comparison and a Student’s t-test was performed for mean values comparison. A final
P value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
B. Experimental Results
A total of 300 testing shocks were investigated and the combined success rate was 41.7% for the two waveforms. Table I

Fig. 6. Accumulated defibrillation success rate of RLB, BTE waveform, and
the combination of the two waveforms from five animals. Each testing round included six shocks, three from RLB and three from BTE. ∗∗∗ : P<0.001 compared
with BTE.

Fig. 7. DFT of RLB and BTE waveform from five animals. Each testing round
included six shocks, three from RLB and three from BTE. ∗ :p < 0.05 compared
with BTE.

shows the experimental results and defibrillation parameters. At
the same 200-J energy settings, defibrillator A delivered more
energy, voltage, and current to the animals when the pathway
impedance varied from 48.6 to 184.3 Ω. The shock duration for
Defibrillator A was 10 ms. In defibrillator B, shock duration
ranged from 14 to 21 ms. The observed success rate was significantly higher (66.7% versus 16.7%, P < 0.001) and the DFT
was also markedly lower (65.9 ± 21.5 J versus 94.9 ± 1.8 J, P =
0.017) for the RLB waveform compared to the BTE waveform.
To identify the minimal number of tests required to have a
statistical difference for the proposed method, Fig. 6 shows the
relative success rate and the statistical results between RLB
and BTE waveforms as the number of test rounds increases.
In this specific study, two rounds of test for each waveform in
five animals already yielded a significant difference in success
rate (P < 0.001) between each waveform. In comparison, a
minimum of eight rounds were required to show a significant
difference (P < 0.05) in DFT values (see Fig. 7).
IV. DISCUSSION
A novel grouped up-and-down method is proposed for the
comparison of defibrillation efficacy between two different defibrillation waveforms. Compared with traditional approaches,
this method can evaluate the efficacy of different shock waveforms or techniques reliably and flexibly with fewer defibrillation attempts.
The development of more efficient defibrillation waveforms
created the need to compare the efficacy of specific waveforms

390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

with conventional ones. DFT, which is the minimal energy required to defibrillate the heart, has been extensively used in
defibrillation research to describe the efficacy of a defibrillation
shock [9], [12]. In experimental investigations, DFT is usually
determined either by constructing a dose response curve with the
use of mathematical models or by increasing and decreasing the
energy through an up-and-down method [16]–[20]. Although the
results of the two techniques have been shown to be equivalent
in group data, there is still no consensus on the optimal assessment procedure for defibrillation efficacy estimation [11], [17].
Mathematically derived dose response curves are commonly
used for the statistical assessment of defibrillation efficacy in
animal experiments, while the up-and-down DFT protocol has
gained favor in clinical settings. To evaluate the two methods
for determining defibrillation efficacy, Jones et al. [9] compared
the variations of the DFT obtained through an up-and-down
method to that calculated from the dose response curve in a pig
model of short-period VF. There was no statistical difference
between the groups DFT when the two different methods were
compared. The authors also found that triplicate determinations
of DFT provided a fast and reliable assessment of the ability
of defibrillation efficacy and could be applied to both animal
studies and patients.
An important but rarely determined aspect is to compare the
defibrillation efficacy of two different waveforms or two defibrillation configurations of a single waveform. Both up-and-down
and dose response curve methods have been used for the efficacy comparison between different waveforms. To investigate
the effects of phase duration on defibrillation success of dualtime constant biphasic waveforms, Shan et al. [21] reported that
the waveforms with an intermediate first phase of 5 ms yielded
the highest defibrillation success with the use of a five-step
up-and-down protocol. To evaluate the defibrillation efficacy
between two pads placements, Ristagno et al. [22] compared
the DFT through the constructed dose-response-curve and reported that the anterior–posterior placement of paediatric pads
yielded a higher success rate by lowering DFT compared to the
anterolateral position. However, controversy may arise when
different methods are used for the comparison of two waveforms. For example, Wang et al. [23] demonstrated that the
RLB waveform had a superior performance compare to BTE
for the termination of VF in terms of DFT through the construction of a dose response curve in a piglet model of VF.
But, prospective-randomized clinical trials revealed that RLB
and BTE waveforms had equivalent efficacy for the conversion
of atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm with a step-up escalating
defibrillation protocol [24]–[26].
Despite the difference in the study design and type of fibrillation, different methods that were used for the comparison may
be responsible, at least in part, for the inconsistent results. To
compare the efficacy of these two biphasic waveforms and to
overcome the limitation of using methods that were designed
for the efficacy evaluation of a specific waveform, the grouped
up-and-down method is therefore proposed in the current study.
Instead of computing DFT with the construction of a dose response curve or estimating DFT with up-and-down methods
individually, a virtual dose response curve is created and the

aggregated success rate of the two waveforms is then investigated based on the standard up-and-down method. If the
two waveforms that are investigated have identical intercepts
and slopes in the dose response curve, i.e., f (x) = g(x) or
a0 = b0 , a1 = b1 , the virtual dose response curve h(x) will be
equivalent to f (x) or g(x). The grouped up-and-down method
will essentially turn into a standard up-and-down method. On
the other hand, if the two waveforms have different intercepts
and/or slopes and AUCratio h is controlled to remain near 0.5
(i.e. a 50% defibrillation success), the values of AUCtotal f −g
and AUCpart h will be increased when the difference between
a0 /a1 and b0 /b1 is increasing. A difference in the defibrillation success rate will be observed if the DFTs of the individual
waveforms are different. The proposed method therefore has the
merit of both dose response curve and up-and-down methods.
More specifically, it addresses the variation of DFT between individual animals that is a limitation of the dose response curve
method, while also reducing the impact of DFT changes during a
sequence of shocks delivered to an animal—a frequent problem
when the standard up-and-down method is used. Furthermore,
due to these advantages of the method, a smaller number of
animals and shocks may be required to reach a conclusion.
For example, to compare the defibrillation efficacy of RLB and
BTE waveforms, Wang et al. [23] used 21 piglets and a total of
1050 shocks to investigate the DFT with the dose response curve
method. In this study, significant differences have been observed
in the success rate with a total of five pigs and 300 shocks using the grouped up-and-down method. The experimental result
was consistent with previous animals’ studies showing that with
identical energy settings and defibrillation configurations (over
a wide transthoracic impedance range), the RLB waveform was
more efficient than the BTE waveform for ventricular defibrillation. But compared to the need for 30 fibrillation episodes to
generate a dose response curve [11] and an average of seven
fibrillation episodes to determine a DFT with the standard upand-down method [9], the total number of shocks required can
be reduced and still result in a reliable comparison when two
different waveforms are studied. The proposed method therefore
has the potential to be used in both experimental and clinical
settings.
There are several limitations in this study. First, we used the
grouped up-and-down protocol in the animals study and did not
construct the dose response curves of the investigated waveforms. Second, we compared the efficacy of two waveforms
with the proposed method. However, whether the grouped upand-down model could be extent to multiple numbers of waveforms is uncertain. Third, even though many animal studies have
clearly demonstrated that the average current is a better measure
of the heart’s defibrillation requirements, we still used energy
as therapeutic dosage in the this study. Therefore, the proposed
method still needs to be validated when the current is used as
therapeutic dosage.
V. CONCLUSION
This study introduces a novel grouped up-and-down method,
which is more sensitive than traditional methods but requires

JIN et al.: GROUPED UP-AND-DOWN METHOD USED FOR EFFICACY COMPARISON

fewer defibrillation attempts for efficacy comparison when two
different defibrillation waveforms or techniques are investigated.
REFERENCES
[1] S. S. Chugh et al., “Current burden of sudden cardiac death: Multiple
source surveillance versus retrospective death certificate-based review in
a large US community,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 44, pp. 1268–1275,
2004.
[2] C. Vaillancourt and I. G. Stiell, “Cardiac arrest care and emergency medical services in Canada,” Can. J. Cardiol., vol. 20, pp. 1081–1090, 2004.
[3] J. Berdowski et al., “Global incidences of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest and
survival rates: Systematic review of 67 prospective studies,” Resuscitation,
vol. 81, pp. 1479–1487, 2010.
[4] P. S. Chen et al., “Mechanism of cardiac defibrillation: A different point
of view,” Circulation, vol. 84, pp. 913–909, 1991.
[5] D. J. Dosdall et al., “Mechanisms of defibrillation,” Annu. Rev. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 12, pp. 233–258, 2010.
[6] S. L. Higgins et al., “A comparison of biphasic and monophasic shocks for
external defibrillation,” Prehospital Emergency Care, vol. 4, pp. 305–313,
2000.
[7] C. Yin et al., “History, principle and techniques for waveform optimization
in external defibrillation,” Recent Patents Eng., vol. 6, pp. 20–30, 2012.
[8] M. Yashima et al., “On the mechanism of the probabilistic nature of
ventricular defibrillation threshold,” Amer. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.,
vol. 284, pp. H249–H255, 2003.
[9] D. L. Jones et al., “Defibrillation efficacy comparison of defibrillation
threshold versus dose-response curve determination,” Circ. Res., vol. 69,
pp. 45–51, 1991.
[10] J. M. Davy et al., “The relationship between successful defibrillation and
delivered energy in open-chest dogs: Reappraisal of the “defibrillation
threshold” concept,” Amer. Heart J., vol. 113, pp. 77–84, 1987.
[11] A. T. Compos et al., “An up-down Bayesian, defibrillation efficacy estimator,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 20, pp. 1292–1300, 1997.
[12] R. A. Malkin et al., “A four-shock Bayesian up-down estimator of the
80% effective defibrillation dose,” J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol., vol. 10,
pp. 973–980, 1999.
[13] G. H. Bardy et al., “Prospective, randomized comparison in humans of a
unipolar defibrillation system with that using an additional superior vena
cava electrode,” Circulation, vol. 89, pp. 1090–1093, 1994.
[14] R. L. Callihan et al., “Comparison of defibrillation probability of success
curves for an endocardial lead configuration with and without an inactive
epicardial patch,” J. Amer. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 25, pp. 1373–1379, 1995.

391

[15] R. G. Walker et al., “Comparison of six clinically used external defibrillators in swine,” Resuscitation, vol. 57, pp. 73–83, 2003.
[16] J. C. Schuder et al., “Defibrillation in the calf with bidirectional trapezoidal
wave shocks applied via chronically implanted epicardial electrodes,”
Trans. Amer. Soc. Artif. Intern. Organs, vol. 27, pp. 467–470, 1981.
[17] B. E. Gliner et al., “The defibrillation success rate versus energy relationship: Part I—Curve fitting and the most efficient defibrillation energy,”
Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol., vol. 13, pp. 326–338, 1990.
[18] W. J. Dixon, “The up-and-down method for small samples,” Amer. Stat.
Assoc. J., vol. 60, pp. 967–978, 1965
[19] M. F. Rattes et al., “Defibrillation threshold: A simple and quantitative estimate of the ability to defibrillate,” Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol.,
vol. 10, pp. 70–77, 1987.
[20] W. C. McDaniel and J. C. Schuder, “An up-down algorithm for estimation
of the cardiac ventricular defibrillation threshold,” Med. Instrum., vol. 22,
pp. 286–292, 1988.
[21] Y. Shan et al., “The effects of phase duration on defibrillation success of dual time constant biphasic waveforms,” Resuscitation, vol. 81,
pp. 236–241, 2010.
[22] G. Ristagno et al., “Comparison of defibrillation efficacy between two pads
placements in a pediatric porcine model of cardiac arrest,” Resuscitation,
vol. 83, pp. 755–759, 2012.
[23] J. Wang et al., “Comparison of rectilinear biphasic waveform with biphasic
truncated exponential waveform in a pediatric defibrillation model,” Crit.
Care Med., vol. 35, pp. 1961–1965, 2007.
[24] S. Neal et al., “Comparison of the efficacy and safety of two biphasic
defibrillator waveforms for the conversion of atrial fibrillation to sinus
rhythm,” Amer. J. Cardiol., vol. 92, pp. 810–814, 2003.
[25] F. Alatawi et al., “Prospective, randomized comparison of two biphasic
waveforms for the efficacy and safety of transthoracic biphasic cardioversion of atrial fibrillation,” Heart Rhythm, vol. 2, pp. 382–387, 2005.
[26] C. D. Deakin et al., “A comparison of rectilinear and truncated exponential biphasic waveforms in elective cardioversion of atrial fibrillation: A prospective randomized controlled trial,” Resuscitation, vol. 84,
pp. 286–291, 2013.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

