IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

423

Fabric-Based Wearable Dry Electrodes for Body
Surface Biopotential Recording
Murat A. Yokus and Jesse S. Jur∗

Abstract—A flexible and conformable dry electrode design on
nonwoven fabrics is examined as a sensing platform for biopotential measurements. Due to limitations of commercial wet electrodes
(e.g., shelf life, skin irritation), dry electrodes are investigated as
the potential candidates for long-term monitoring of ECG signals.
Multilayered dry electrodes are fabricated by screen printing of
Ag/AgCl conductive inks on flexible nonwoven fabrics. This study
focuses on the investigation of skin–electrode interface, form factor design, electrode body placement of printed dry electrodes for
a wearable sensing platform. ECG signals obtained with dry and
wet electrodes are comparatively studied as a function of body posture and movement. Experimental results show that skin-electrode
impedance is influenced by printed electrode area, skin–electrode
interface material, and applied pressure. The printed electrode
yields comparable ECG signals to wet electrodes, and the QRS
peak amplitude of ECG signal is dependent on printed electrode
area and electrode on body spacing. Overall, fabric-based printed
dry electrodes present an inexpensive health monitoring platform
solution for mobile wearable electronics applications by fulfilling
user comfort and wearability.
Index Terms—Biopotentials, dry electrode, electrocardiography,
screen printing, wearable biomedical sensors.

I. INTRODUCTION
NCREASE in human life standards with advancements in
electronics, telecommunications, complex computing, artificial intelligence, and notable growth in cardiovascular chronic
diseases (e.g., arrhythmia, hypertension, and angina pectoris)
have resulted in the evolution of fabric/textile-based wearable
biomedical health monitoring systems, such as WEALTHY [1],
LifeShirt [2], LifeGuard [3], which can be worn in everyday situations. This mobile and ubiquitous wearable monitoring provide
users an opportunity to track their physical activities (e.g., steps,
calorie burned) and monitor their health conditions (e.g., heart
rate, ExG, sweat, SpO2 , and body temperature). These wearable
systems are also critical in early detection of diseases, such as
sudden infant death syndrome [4] and follow-up examination
of patients who experienced a cardiovascular surgery or a pharmacological treatment. These unobtrusive wearable devices not

I

Manuscript received January 25, 2015; revised June 8, 2015; accepted July
16, 2015. Date of publication July 28, 2015; date of current version January
16, 2016. This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation
through Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Advanced Self-Powered
Systems of Integrated Sensors and Technologies under Grant EEC 1160483.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
M. A. Yokus is with the North Carolina State University.
∗ J. S. Jur is with the Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry and
Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695 USA (e-mail:
jsjur@ncsu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2462312

only increase user comfort but also decrease the dependence
to large and bulky hospital equipment especially for those who
have chronic diseases and need to be monitored continuously
for long periods of time, which eliminates high hospitalization
expenses.
Due to the dominance of heart-related issues, electrocardiogram (ECG) is a commonly studied analysis in wearable health
monitoring systems to investigate the electrical activity of heart.
The most common ECG electrode type in a hospital environment is the disposable wet electrodes due to their good signal
performance in short period of time. However, short shelf life,
skin irritation, and dermal inflammation issues, as well as conductance variation of wet electrode gels over time (i.e., distorted
signals, noise, and artifacts) limit their usage for long-term monitoring [5]. Wearable textile-based knitted [6], woven [7], and
embroidered [8] dry textile electrodes have been proposed in
the literature to enable long-term monitoring. The benefit of
textile-based electrodes is that conductive yarns or fibers can
be knitted or woven into a complete wearable sensing system. Whole garment knitting machines enable a multiconductive
yarn feeding system, which is useful for customized electrodes
on desired locations on a garment. However, these electrodes
tend to change their electrical properties upon stretching. Additionally, the rough surface texture formed by conductive yarn
loops in a garment may create skin irritation during persistent
motion and eventually result in discomfort. Moreover, carbon
nanotube-polydimethylsiloxane (CNT-PDMS) polymeric composites and Au deposited on PDMS have also been studied as
a potential flexible dry electrodes [9], [10]. CNT-loaded polymeric electrodes yield varying conductivity levels depending on
the percent filler content. Both CNT loaded and Au deposited
polymeric substrates have been designed as individual sensing
electrodes or as a wearable wristband for long-term monitoring
of physiological signals. Invasiveness (i.e., skin penetration) of
the electrode structure, complications with regard to filler dispersion in polymeric matrix, polymeric electrode integration on
wearables, necessity of expensive clean lab tools, and complex
manufacturing steps have the potential to restrain their ubiquitous utilization in current wearable monitoring systems. As
an alternative to the aforementioned electrodes, screen-printed
dry electrodes have been studied. Screen-printing methods offer
a low cost means toward functional wearable electronics. Yoo
et al. fabricated silver ink differential dry electrodes on a t-shirt
by screen printing [11]. In another study, Merritt et al. fabricated dry screen-printed active electrodes by using silver/silver
chloride (Ag/AgCl) paste and improved the performance of dry
electrodes [12]. However, the direct attachment of an active
electrode circuitry posed durability issues.

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 1. Wearable health monitoring platform being developed by ASSIST
that serves as a modular platform, deconvoluting the design of the electronic
architecture from an inexpensive fabric-based biopotential electrode system.

Another type of electrode classification is based upon change
in half-cell potential of double charge layer when current passes
electrode–electrolyte interface [13]. In polarizable electrodes,
there is no actual charge travelling across the interface. However,
ideal nonpolarizable electrodes have charge transfer across the
electrode–electrolyte interface and half-cell potential does not
change when current is applied. Nonpolarizable electrodes are
desired for recording small amplitude biosignals from body surface. Ag/AgCl electrodes have low half-cell potential and also
show similar characteristics to perfectly nonpolarizable electrodes. A comprehensive long-term study of surface-electrode
materials was performed in 0.9% NaCl solution by Hoffmann
et al. [14]. It was shown that nonpolarizable electrodes (e.g.,
Ag/AgCl, platinum black) show low-impedance values at low
frequencies compared to polarizable electrodes (e.g., silver and
platinum).
In this study, flexible and conformable dry passive electrodes
were fabricated by screen printing of Ag/AgCl on nonwoven
fabrics platforms. This study is designed to constitute the fundamental research that is required to create an inexpensive
fabric-based chest-worn wearable health-monitoring platform
(see Fig. 1) that involves multisensors for long-term monitoring
of biopotential signals as proposed by the NSF funded Nanosystems Engineering Research Center on Advanced Self-Powered
Systems of Integrated Sensors and Technologies (ASSIST). The
focus in this effort has been placed on the skin–electrode interface, electrode on body placement, and form factor design of
single dry electrodes to represent individual parts of a wearable
platform. In addition, ECG signal quality comparison was made
by incorporating triaxial accelerometer and gyroscope sensors
into our measurements, while in stationary and movement conditions. Herein, we aim to investigate the skin–electrode interface
of a custom multilayered fabric-based electrode design, as well
as determine design constraints that influence the performance
of ECG data acquisition on such a platform.
II. SKIN–ELECTRODE INTERFACE
Electrical signals, which are created by heart muscle cells and
transported to body surface via ions (i.e., Na+ , Cl− , Ca+ ), are
acquired by the placement of surface electrodes on the body.

Fig. 2. Equivalent circuitries of (a) dry and (b) wet electrodes skin–electrode
interface.

The electrodes act as a transducer by converting ionic current
within tissue to electrical current in electronic instruments. The
skin–electrode interface is represented by the equivalent circuits
presented in Fig. 2. When the electrode comes in contact with the
skin or electrolyte, a double charged layer is created (CDC ). RCT
and Ueq show the leakage resistance across CDC and electrode
potential, respectively. In Fig. 2(b), RL is the resistance of the
electrolyte for wet electrode. On the other hand, RL is used for
sweat and moisture build up in dry electrodes in Fig. 2(a). Since
dry electrodes do not utilize an ionic conductive medium, high
interface capacitance (CT ) values are present. Skin has a layered
architecture viz., stratum corneum (SC), stratum germinativum,
dermis and subcutaneous layers. The layered structure of skin
is modeled by a capacitor CS , and a resistor RS . US shows the
electrical potential created due to ion concentration difference
within the layered structure of skin. Rm represents the resistance
of dermis layer [15].
Skin-electrode impedance is important for acquisition of
high-fidelity ECG signals. High skin-electrode impedance results in low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR). Also, high skinelectrode impedance will decrease the amplitude of the signal
that is fed to the subsequent amplifier due to a loading effect,
which will result in low SNR. The major causes of the noise
in ECG are motion artifacts and common mode interference,
generated as a result of electrical potential and skin-electrode
impedance change at the skin–electrode interface [16].
III. DRY ELECTRODE FABRICATION
A. Screen Printing of Dry Electrodes
In this study, a dry electrode was fabricated on Vistamaxx propylene-based elastomeric meltblown nonwoven fabric,

YOKUS AND JUR: FABRIC-BASED WEARABLE DRY ELECTRODES FOR BODY SURFACE BIOPOTENTIAL RECORDING

Fig. 3. Multilayered structure of dry electrode. (a) Expanded view, (b) top and
side view of dry electrode models, (c) adhesive layer, (d) Ag/AgCl conductive
ink, (e) PU film layer, and (f) final dry electrode.

obtained from the Nonwovens Institute at North Carolina State
University. To strengthen the fabric mat, an in-line calendaring
(patterned heating) was performed, which primarily effects the
surface texture on one side of the fabric. The surface on the opposite side of the fabric, in contact with the belt, remains smooth
and nearly planar; ideal for reduced penetration of printed inks.
After process, the elastomeric fabric remains highly flexible and
stretchable. Creative materials Ag/AgCl (product number: 12436) medical grade electrically conductive ink was used for the
electrodes printing as it exhibits excellent adhesion to a variety
of substrates and has shown adequate resistance to flexing and
creasing.
The printing of conductive ink onto nonwoven fabric was
performed by the use of hand operated lab scale screen-printing
equipment. A CAD designed electrode shape was transferred
to an adhesive stencil by a silhoutte cameo die cutter for rapid
prototyping. The adhesive stencil was placed on 100 size screenprinting mesh, and the conductive ink was transferred onto
the nonwoven fabric by hand-held squeegee with 45° angle
at an operator-controlled pressure. By printing on the smooth
side of the nonwoven fabric, a continuous conformal coating is
achieved.
B. Multilayered Electrode Design
The multilayer dry electrode fabricated in this effort is shown
in Fig. 3. A biocompatible and reusable pressure sensitive adhesive (MA-31, 2 mil), obtained from Adhesive Research Inc., PA,
USA, lies at the bottom of nonwoven fabric. According to the
manufacturer, the pressure sensitive adhesive-passed skin irritation, cytotoxicity, and skin sensitization tests based on the requirements of ISO 10993. However, some skin types can still be
sensitive to prolonged use of adhesive, which might cause skin
irritation issues. The adhesive encircles the Ag/AgCl printed ink
area at the center. The top layer of dry electrode was encapsulated by an adhesive-backed polyurethane (PU) film (MA-31, 2
mil/4 mil polyurethane), also acquired from Adhesive Research

425

Inc. An Ag/AgCl snap sandwiches the PU film and allows for
a compatible interface to the ECG monitor used later in the
experimentation.
Three different electrode sizes were created with diameters
of 10, 20, and 30 mm. The fabricated dry electrode with 30 mm
diameter is shown in Fig. 3 in various orientations. A facile sixstep process for fabrication of the multilayered dry electrode
design is as follows.
1) Create 1-mm hole at the center of nonwoven fabric.
2) Print conductive ink on backside of fabric and cure at
70 °C for 15 min.
3) Punch 2-mm hole on PU adhesive film and fasten male
and female parts of snaps together, while keeping the PU
film in between.
4) Cut 5-mm-width circular adhesive sheet and adhere to
periphery of the printed area.
5) Mix part A and part B of CircuitWorks 2400 conductive
silver epoxy and fill out the 1-mm hole on fabric.
6) Combine PU film with fabric and cure at room temperature
for 24 h.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Dry Electrode Impedance Measurement
The impedance of the skin–electrode interface was examined by the use of a Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat. The
measurement was conducted on the left arm of a male subject.
A three-electrode measurement system was utilized, where the
counter and working electrodes carry current, and the working
and reference electrodes measure voltage. The distance between
the counterelectrode and reference electrode was set to 8 cm. The
working electrode and working sense electrodes were clipped
together, and the distance between these two electrodes and reference electrode was set to 4 cm. The 3M red dot wet electrodes
were used as reference and counterelectrodes. A screen-printed
dry electrode was connected to the working sense electrode for
impedance measurement. The signal magnitude (Vrm s ) was set
to 10 mV, and the frequency sweep was performed from 0.1 to
1000 Hz. Impedance measurements were repeated on the printed
dry electrodes with 10, 20, and 30 mm diameters. The 3M red
dot wet electrodes were used as a reference measurement. No
washing, degreasing, or abrading was performed upon the skin
surface, which is often used to decrease the total impedance by
removing poorly conductive lipid substances or top surface of
skin. The measurement was started upon the testing setup completion (∼8 min). To minimize skin-related variations (number
of sweat glands, thickness of SC, male–female physiological differences) among different subjects and test locations, the skinelectrode measurements were only tested on one subject. Therefore, subject-to-subject variations of skin-electrode impedance
are not addressed. The impedance measurements results of dry
and wet electrodes are provided in Fig. 4. The dry electrodes
had higher impedance values than wet electrodes, attributed to
the capacitive dry electrode interface as shown in Fig. 2. The
absence of conductive medium at the interface resulted in highimpedance values. As expected, the skin-electrode impedance
is observed to be inversely proportional to the printed area; with

426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Equivalent circuit parameters of skin-electrode impedance (without
pressure).

Fig. 4. Skin-electrode impedances of dry electrodes with printed area of 0.79,
3.14, and 7.07 cm2 . The commercial wet electrode (3M red dot)’s conductive
area is 3.14 cm2 .

Fig. 5. Skin-electrode impedances of dry electrodes with hydrogel at the
skin–electrode interface. A wet electrode (3M red dot) is given as reference.

higher printed areas showing lower impedance. The measured
impedance values are in the same range (1–15 MΩ for the electrode diameter of 10 to 30 mm) as in [5], [6], [9], [10], and [11].
To reduce the impedance, a biocompatible hydrogel (AG 603,
obtained from Axelgaard Manufacturing Co., Ltd., CA, USA)
was applied at the interface of skin and electrode. The printed
electrodes with an applied hydrogel showed the impedance values that are lower than the 3M red dot electrodes impedance
values (see Fig. 5). The measured impedance values were between 10–100 kΩ for the 10-, 20-, and 30-mm-diameter printed

electrodes with hydrogel. This impedance results are similar
to the embroidered dry electrodes with hydrogel in [8]. The
hydrogel improves and stabilizes the skin–electrode interface
because it improves the contact between the skin and printed
electrode (i.e., increases the contact area) [17] and also eases
the charge transfer due to presence of ions. However, the hydrogel is still vulnerable to conductance variation as dehydration
will decrease conductance over time.
It is important to note that the skin-electrode impedance measurements are susceptible to applied pressure between the electrode and the skin. To investigate the impedance change with
pressure, impedance measurements were performed with and
without the application of pressure (pressure was applied by
the use of an adjustable arm strap) on the dry electrode over a
period of 70 min. A fabricated electrode with 30-mm printed
area weighs 1.154 g, which applies 8.996-Pa (0.068 mmHg)
pressure to skin surface with the assumption of homogenous
pressure distribution. A digital force measurement tool (Chatillon DFS II) was used to evaluate the applied pressure by the
strap. The applied pressure was equal to 2 N, which was equal
to 12 mmHg for the 30-mm electrode. Pressure >30 mmHg
increased the tightness of the strap and caused discomfort. A
similar inverse pressure and impedance relation is observed in
[7]. Moreover, it is stated in [11] that mild pressure (∼20 mmHg)
is necessary for on-body electrode stability and motion artifact
minimization. No skin irritation was observed upon completion
of the test. The fabricated electrode includes a porous nonwoven
fabric, which could enable the air circulation to the skin surface.
Gamry Echem Analyst software was applied to extract the equivalent circuit model parameters of skin–electrode interface using
a single time constant model that was developed by Swanson
and Webster [18]. This model is comprised of a resistor (Rp ) in
series with a parallel connected a resistor (Ru ) and a capacitor
(Cf ). Cf indicates the electrical charge layer and Ru represents
the resistance across this capacitor. Rp is used to show the resistance of sweat and underlying tissues. Figs. 6 and 7 display the
equivalent circuit model parameters of skin–electrode interface
over time. Error bars indicate the fitting errors for Ru , Rp , and
Cf values. The difference in the capacitance versus time trend
in Figs. 6 and 7 can be explained by the change in electrode

YOKUS AND JUR: FABRIC-BASED WEARABLE DRY ELECTRODES FOR BODY SURFACE BIOPOTENTIAL RECORDING

Fig. 7.
sure).

427

Equivalent circuit parameters of skin-electrode impedance (with pres-

distance relative to body surface. Change in electrode distance
to body surface resulted in fluctuation in Cf when there was
no pressure on dry electrode (see Fig. 6). Without pressure, the
value of Cf decreased over time. An abrupt drop in capacitance
was observed as a result of local electrode movement as the
loading from the electrode attachment pulled the printed electrode away from skin and resulted in an increase in skin-printed
electrode distance. With pressure application (see Fig. 7), Cf
decreased exponentially and reached a steady state with time.
Due to the smaller electrode-skin distance and higher contact
surface area, the magnitude of Cf increased with pressure application compared to Cf magnitude in Fig. 6 (i.e., C = εA/d,
where ε is the permittivity, A is the area, and d is the distance).
By applying pressure on electrodes, the contact between the dry
electrode and skin improved, as observed by a decrease in resistance values (Rp and Ru ). The decrease in magnitude of the
resistances (Rp and Ru ) may also be attributed to sweat build
up resulting from the pressure. This is observed further by the
increasing resistance versus time in Figs. 6 and 7, which can be
explained by the closure of sweat ducts over time that lowers
the conduction through the skin layers.
B. Electrode Form Factor and Electrode Placement
The effect of electrode area and electrode on-body placement
on the ECG signal was investigated using a standard General
Electric bedside monitor (GE Dash 4000, WI, USA). It has a
gain of 1 V/mV ± 10%. Shielded cables were used between the
electrodes and the measurement equipment to decrease electromagnetic interference, which is created due to the current that
runs through the loop that is formed by the ECG equipment, cables, and the measurement subject. This induces a voltage drop
in the measurement cables. To mitigate this effect, the measurement cables were also twisted together prior to measurement to
decrease the loop area. A healthy (no history on myocardial infarction, ventricular hypertrophy) male subject (age: 25, height:
175 cm, weight: 80 kg) wore the dry electrodes for evaluation.
A three-electrode ECG measurement was performed by placing two dry electrodes on chest and third reference 3M red dot
electrode on left leg. The right dry electrode (30 mm diameter)

Fig. 8.

ECG signal strength variation with respect to electrode distance.

was placed at the center of chest, while the left dry electrode
(30 mm) was placed to the level of second rib on the chest, close
to the left arm. This region of chest was selected due to high user
compliance and less sensitivity to body movements. Lead L1 of
Einthoven’s triangle configuration was used to measure the potential difference between two fabric-based dry electrodes. The
right electrode was moved toward the left electrode in such a
way that the distance between the two dry electrodes was set to
2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 cm, while the subject was in standing position. ECG measurement was performed at each location with
a sampling rate of 240 Hz. In comparison to the prior analysis,
hydrogel was not used at the interface of the electrode and skin
during measurements and additional pressure was not applied.
The comparison of ECG signals at various electrode distances
was made upon baseline wander and noise-free ECG signals.
Signal processing of the ECG signals was performed in MATLAB software. The baseline wander in raw ECG signal was
removed by using a moving average method. Denoising of the
ECG signals was performed in the Wavelet Analysis Toolbox.
The noise in raw ECG signal was calculated by subtracting the
baseline-free denoised signal from the baseline-free noisy raw
ECG signal. Power spectral densities of the denoised ECG signal and the noise were found by using a fast Fourier transform
method. The area under the power spectral density curve is equal
to the total power. SNR of the ECG signals was calculated by
dividing the total power of denoised ECG signal by the total
power of a noise (SNR = Psignal /Pnoise ). Also, the comparison of R peak magnitude in ECG signals was made due to its
distinct presence among other P, Q, S, and T waveforms.
Fig. 8 shows the ECG signal strength variation with electrode
distance and a numerical comparison is also provided in Table I.
It was found that the R peak magnitude increased (except 4 cm)
as electrode pairs were moved away from each other. It was
maximized at an electrode distance of 8 cm, and then, started

428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ELECTRODE PAIR DISTANCES
Electrode pair
distance (cm)

R wave
peak
amplitude
(mV)

Signal power
((mV)2 )

Noise power
((mV)2 )

SNR (dB)

2 cm

247.60
(±25.10)
221.43
(±7.41)
403.32
(±18.30)
646.45
(±18.24)
570.03
(±13.97)
439.38
(±24.19)

1538.36

26.10

17.70

1125.76

17.28

18.14

4123.55

140.82

14.67

9926.17

11.85

29.23

9113.67

17.76

27.10

5418.01

315.22

12.35

4 cm
6 cm
8 cm
10 cm
12 cm

decreasing again as electrode pairs are moved even further to
12 cm. This is attributed to the difference in body surface potential distribution (i.e., body surface isopotential maps). The
isopotential map shows instant and spatial distribution of potentials on body surface at each cardiac cycle [19]. Similar surface
potential values are shown on the same contour. The body surface potential distribution in resting condition during ventricular excitation and recovery is reported elsewhere [20]. For the
R peak, the magnitude of potential difference (left arm–right
arm) on the body surface increases, and then, decreases as the
electrode is moved from the sternum closer to the left arm. This
explains the change in R peak magnitude as the left-arm dry
electrode is moved toward the right-arm dry electrode. Close
placement of right- and left-arm dry electrodes to each other
(i.e., 2 cm) may correspond to similar or close contour lines
on isopotential lines, thus yields smaller R peak magnitudes on
Lead I. Similar electrode distance versus QRS peak amplitude
relation was obtained in precordial electrode placement when
the electrode pairs were moved toward each other [21]. Also, the
R peak magnitude trend obtained in [11] matched with our results. However, the R peak magnitude in this study was slightly
higher due to larger printed area of 30 mm. Total signal power
(i.e., integral of PSD graph) demonstrates a similar trend as the
R peak amplitude. However, the total noise power varied due to
the difference of noise content in ECG signals. The electrode
pair distance of 8 cm yielded the highest SNR value of 29.23 dB
among other electrode pair distances.
A comparison of the ECG signal quality of dry electrodes
with printed diameters of 10, 20, and 30 mm, using a constant
8-cm electrode pair distance is presented in Fig. 9. As expected,
the larger electrode area, and subsequent skin contact, results
in a higher ECG amplitudes. Comparison of the electrodes with
different printed areas is provided in Table II. The comparison is
based upon denoised and baseline wander-free ECG signals of
the printed electrodes. The data show that higher printed areas
results in higher R wave peak magnitudes. This can be explained
by lower skin-electrode impedance of larger printed areas. Similar increasing trend with increasing printed area was observed
when the total area under power spectral density graph of the
denoised ECG signal was calculated. The printed electrode with

Fig. 9.

ECG signal variation with respect to printed electrode area.
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF PRINTED ELECTRODES AREAS

Electrode
diameter (mm)

10 mm
20 mm
30 mm

R wave
peak
amplitude
(mV)

Signal power
((mV)2 )

Noise power
((mV)2 )

SNR (dB)

460.47
(±22.5)
591.86
(±34.9)
630
(±28.4)

4719.80

23.01

23.11

8655.90

202.56

16.30

9473.50

12.71

28.72

30-mm printed area gave the highest SNR value. Due to the high
noise content in the ECG signal, the 20-mm printed electrode
yielded the lowest SNR value.
C. Comparison of ECG Signal Quality and Body Movement
Correlation
Finally, a comparison of ECG signals acquired by dry and
wet electrodes was performed within prescribed motions. ECG
signals were recorded for both dry and wet (3M red dot) electrodes for 15 min, while a healthy male subject (age: 25, height:
175 cm, weight: 80 kg) was sitting on a chair and also remaining in standing position. During standing position, the subject
performed 4-min front-back movement, 4-min up-down movement (kneeling down), 3-min standing still, and 4-min right-left

YOKUS AND JUR: FABRIC-BASED WEARABLE DRY ELECTRODES FOR BODY SURFACE BIOPOTENTIAL RECORDING

Fig. 10.

ECG signals of dry and wet electrodes while sitting.

stepping repeatedly at constant speed. Due to the acquisition
system’s short cables, electrode performance during walking
and running was not conducted. Also, the dry electrodes did not
give any discomfort throughout the measurement. In this analysis, the 30-mm printed fabric-based electrodes were employed,
and an electrode pair distance of 8 cm was maintained for the dry
and wet electrodes. In additional to the ECG signal acquisition,
a wearable posture detection chest strap, technology-enabled
medical precision observation [22], was worn to relate body
motion and rotation to provided triaxial acceleration and triaxial
gyroscope data with a sampling rate of 128 Hz. ECG signal acquisitions (240 Hz) were made, while the subject wore the chest
strap and dry and wet electrodes simultaneously during sitting
and moving conditions. The dry electrode and commercial wet
electrodes were not tested simultaneously on the same location
due to natural limitations of the ECG acquisition system. A
successive individual measurement procedure was followed for
dry and wet electrodes. Fig. 10 shows the ECG signals of dry
and wet electrodes as the subject sat on a chair. Dry electrode
and wet electrode ECG signals were relatively similar during
resting state, and QRS complex was still detectable. Fig. 11
displays the ECG signal comparison during movement (frontback movement). Right-left movement and up-down movement
yielded qualitatively similar ECG signals compared to frontback movement; therefore, only front-back movement results

Fig. 11.

429

ECG signals of dry and wet electrodes while moving.

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF SNR
Electrodes
Dry printed electrode
Wet electrode

Sitting

Moving

28.68 dB
26.70 dB

24.73 dB
25.77 dB

are discussed. Both dry and wet electrodes yielded comparable QRS peaks during forward-backward move. Introduction of
movement, introduced noise and baseline shifts. Similar qualitative changes on ECG signals were also observed in other dry
electrodes types [6], [9], and [10] with introduction of the movement. SNR values of dry printed and wet electrodes are given
in Table III, calculated by using the same approach as outlined
in Section IV-B. The dry electrode had slightly higher SNR
value during sitting, attributed to the larger area of dry electrode
compared to commercial wet electrode. Higher SNR dry electrodes relative to commercial electrodes was also obtained in
CNT/PDMS composite dry electrodes without movement [9].
The SNR values of the electrodes decreased due to the noise introduction with the subject is in motion. The dry electrode had
slightly less SNR value than the wet electrode due to higher noise
presence in the ECG signal. However, the adhesive surrounding
the printed area reduced the large baseline shift by immobilizing
the dry printed electrode on skin surface, enabling acquisition of

430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

less noised ECG signal. The dry electrode still demonstrates a
transient baseline changes due to the skin-electrode impedance
changes with electrode motion. This is attributed to the voltage
divider effect resulting from the amplifier input voltage changing as the skin-electrode impedance changes with respect to
the input impedance of amplifier [23]. Also, the distribution
of potentials within skin layers (Us ) and at the skin–electrode
interface (Ueq ) can change with skin stretching, electrode local movement, and body movement, which causes the motion
artifacts in ECG signals [24].
V. CONCLUSION
Printing of Ag/AgCl conductive ink on nonwoven fabric was
investigated to construct passive dry electrodes by inexpensive
and scalable screen-printing methods. The screen-printed transducer layer was then integrated into a flexible multilayered dry
electrode form to realize a complete electrode design. The layered electrode design approach included a multistick pressure
sensitive adhesive on the skin side that enabled reapplication
of the electrode and also minimized significant electrode movements on body surface.
Analysis of the dry electrode demonstrated high skinelectrode impedance values. However, the impedance of the
dry electrodes can be tuned by changing printed electrode area,
skin–electrode interface material, and applied pressure on the
electrode. Moreover, it was observed that the amplitude of ECG
signal changed with printed electrode area and placement of
electrode pairs on body surface due to location-dependent body
surface potential variation.
Dry printed electrodes and wet electrodes yielded similar
baseline shift-free ECG signals when user is not moving. While
dry printed electrode had slight baseline shift when the object
is in motion. Yet, low-cost printed dry electrodes on fabrics
are appealing for fabrication of long-term wearable multiuse
platforms due to nonexistence of electrode dehydration and skin
related issues. This study has utmost importance in designing
optimal wearable electronic platforms (wearable patches and
straps) for physiological sensing applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank T. Latif and Dr. A. Bozkurt
from the North Carolina State University for their help on
impedance measurements. They would also like to thank P.
Asare and Dr. J. Lach from the University of Virginia for their
help on ECG measurements.

[5] A. Searle and L. Kirkup, “A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulating
bioelectric recording electrodes,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 271–
283, May 2000.
[6] R. Paradiso et al., “A wearable health care system based on knitted
integrated sensors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 337–344, Sep. 2005.
[7] L. Beckmann et al., “Characterization of textile electrodes and conductors
using standardized measurement setups,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 31, no. 2,
pp. 233–247, Feb. 2010.
[8] M. M. Puurtinen et al., “Measurement of noise and impedance of
dry and wet textile electrodes, and textile electrodes with hydrogel,”
in Proc. IEEE 28th Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006,
pp. 6012–6015.
[9] H.-C. Jung et al., “CNT/PDMS Composite flexible dry electrodes for
long-term ECG monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 5,
pp. 1472–1479, May 2012.
[10] J.-Y. Baek et al., “Flexible polymeric dry electrodes for the long-term
monitoring of ECG,” Sens. Actuators Phys., vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 423–429,
May 2008.
[11] J. Yoo et al., “A wearable ECG acquisition system with compact planarfashionable circuit board-based shirt,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 897–902, Nov. 2009.
[12] C. R. Merritt et al., “Fabric-based active electrode design and fabrication for health monitoring clothing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed.,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 274–280, Mar. 2009.
[13] M. R. Neumann, “Biopotential electrodes,” in Medical Instrumentation
Application and Design, 3rd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1988,
pp. 189–201.
[14] K.-P. Hoffmann et al., “Long-term characterization of electrode materials
for surface electrodes in biopotential recording,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int.
Annu. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, vol. 1, pp. 2239–2242.
[15] J. G. Webster, Medical Instrumentation: Appliciation and Design, 3rd ed.
Wiley, 1998.
[16] M. Catrysse et al., “Towards the integration of textile sensors in a wireless
monitoring suit,” Sens. Actuators Phys., vol. 114, nos. 2/3, pp. 302–311,
Sep. 2004.
[17] E. T. McAdams et al., “Factors affecting electrode-gel-skin interface
impedance in electrical impedance tomography,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 397–408, Nov. 1996.
[18] D. K. Swanson and J. G. Webster, “A model for skin-electrode impedance,”
in Biomedical Electrode Technology—Theory and Practice. San Francisco, CA, USA: Academic, 1974, pp. 117–128.
[19] B. Taccardi et al., “Useful lessons from body surface mapping,” J. Cardiovascular Electrophysiol., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 773–786, Jul. 1998.
[20] W. T. Miller et al., “Total body surface potential mapping during exercise:
QRS-T-wave changes in normal young adults,” Circulation, vol. 62, no.
3, pp. 632–645, Sep. 1980.
[21] S. Nedios et al., “Precordial electrode placement for optimal ECG monitoring: Implications for ambulatory monitor devices and event recorders,”
J. Electrocardiol., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 669–676, Oct. 2014.
[22] A. T. Barth et al., “TEMPO 3.1: A body area sensor network platform for
continuous movement assessment,” in Proc. 6th Int. Workshop Wearable
Implantable Body Sens. Netw., 2009, pp. 71–76.
[23] G. M. Friesen et al., “A comparison of the noise sensitivity of nine QRS
detection algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 85–98,
Jan. 1990.
[24] D. Buxi et al., “Correlation between electrode-tissue impedance and
motion artifact in biopotential recordings,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 12,
no. 12, pp. 3373–3383, Dec. 2012.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Paradiso et al., “Wealthy—A wearable healthcare system: New frontier
on e-textile,” J. Telecommun. Inf. Technol., vol. 4, pp. 105–113, 2005.
[2] K. J. Heilman and S. W. Porges, “Accuracy of the LifeShirt (Vivometrics)
in the detection of cardiac rhythms,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 75, no. 3, pp.
300–305, Jul. 2007.
[3] C. W. Mundt et al., “A multiparameter wearable physiologic monitoring
system for space and terrestrial applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 382–391, Sep. 2005.
[4] J. Coosemans et al., “Integrating wireless ECG monitoring in textiles,”
Sens. Actuators Phys., vols. 130–131, pp. 48–53, Aug. 2006.

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

