1862

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

What Engineering Technology Could Do for Quality
of Life in Parkinson’s Disease: A Review of Current
Needs and Opportunities
Jonathan A. Stamford, Peter N. Schmidt, and Karl E. Friedl, Fellow, AIMBE

Abstract—Parkinson’s disease (PD) involves well-known motor
symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and altered gait,
but there are also nonlocomotory motor symptoms (e.g., changes
in handwriting and speech) and even nonmotor symptoms (e.g.,
disrupted sleep, depression) that can be measured, monitored, and
possibly better managed through activity-based monitoring technologies. This will enhance quality of life (QoL) in PD through
improved self-monitoring and also provide information that could
be shared with a healthcare provider to help better manage treatment. Until recently, nonmotor symptoms (“soft signs”) had been
generally overlooked in clinical management, yet these are of primary importance to patients and their QoL. Day-to-day variability
of the condition, the high variability in symptoms between patients,
and the isolated snapshots of a patient in periodic clinic visits make
better monitoring essential to the proper management of PD. Continuously monitored patterns of activity, social interactions, and
daily activities could provide a rich source of information on status changes, guiding self-correction and clinical management. The
same tools can be useful in earlier detection of PD and will improve clinical studies. Remote medical communications in the form
of telemedicine, sophisticated tracking of medication use, and assistive technologies that directly compensate for disease-related
challenges are examples of other near-term technology solutions to
PD problems. Ultimately, a sensor technology is not good if it is not
used. The Parkinson’s community is a sophisticated early adopter
of useful technologies and a group for which engineers can provide
near-term gratifying benefits.
Index Terms—Activity, cognition, depression, exercise, nonmotor symptoms, patient perspective, review article, sleep quality.

I. INTRODUCTION
N the first World War, Winston Churchill described the gap
between inventors and potential beneficiaries: A hiatus exists
between the inventor who knows what they could invent, if they
only knew what was wanted, and the soldiers who knew, or ought
to know, what they want and would ask for it if they only knew
how much science could do for them [1].
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) has attracted numerous engineering innovations, especially around classical signals associated

I

Manuscript received April 10, 2015; revised July 2, 2015; accepted July 28,
2015. Date of current version November 3, 2015.
J. A. Stamford is with Parkinson’s Movement, The Cure Parkinson’s Trust,
London W1U 6TU, U.K. (e-mail: jon.stamford@parkisonsmovement.com).
P. N. Schmidt is with the National Parkinson’s Foundation, Miami, FL 33131
USA (e-mail: pschmidt@parkinson.org).
K. E. Friedl is with the U.S. Army Research Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Natick, MA 01760 USA, and also with the University of California
at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 USA (e-mail: karl.friedl@nih.gov).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2464354

with movement disorders, but patients are concerned about other
symptoms that affect their quality of life (QoL). This paper describes problems of people with PD and technological solutions
that might help improve QoL.
PD is a neurological condition that has been traditionally characterized by motor symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, slowed
movement (bradykinesia), and altered gait. Research starting in
the 1950s identified the association between specific brain regions and motor function resulting in the characterization of PD
as a disease of dopamine [2]. Dopamine replacement therapies
have revolutionized outcomes of motor function, and preclinical research is currently largely focused on characterizing and
targeting effects that go beyond the dopamine system, including
a panoply of motor and nonmotor symptoms with no specific
symptom or domain obviously dominating the patient experience. Better management of many nonmotor symptoms awaits
success of these preclinical efforts [3]–[5].
With this as context for the status of Parkinson’s management,
monitoring technologies for PD patients offer the potential to
increase QoL through objective, continuous, and on demand
self-monitoring. These technologies also provide important information, which could be shared with a healthcare provider to
help better manage treatment [6]. Parkinson’s care is typically
informed by history taking based on patient recall, observation
of the patient for the duration of the encounter, and follow-up
intervals timed to sample clinically relevant change. However,
many aspects of the disease fluctuate broadly across the frequency space, from gait asymmetry (seconds) to medication
pharmacokinetic cycles (hours) to day-to-month cycles of fatigue, constipation, psychosis, and depression [7]. The high variability in symptoms between patients and the isolated snapshots
of a patient in periodic clinic visits makes better monitoring
essential to the proper management of PD. Technologies such
as remote medical communications in the form of telemedicine
[8], [9] and assistive technologies such as sophisticated tracking
of medication use can also provide near-term solutions to PD
problems.
This review outlines some of the current advances in nonlocomotory motion-based technologies and explores additional
needs and opportunities in PD.
II. QOL PROBLEMS IN PD
Parkinson’s, in common with many other long-term disabling
conditions, presents a number of general and specific challenges to the QoL of patients. These challenges inevitably have
spawned many survey instruments, which purport to quantify

2168-2194 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

STAMFORD et al.: ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY COULD DO FOR QUALITY OF LIFE IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

and numericize health-related quality of life (HRQL) in Parkinson’s. While many are validated research instruments, all are
inevitably reductionist in nature. Some are overtly generic and
broadly applicable. Others such as the 39-item Parkinson’s Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39) and the PD QoL Questionnaire
are designed specifically for Parkinson’s [10].
Standardized instruments all have flaws. First, the scoring
and assessment is often conducted by healthcare professionals
rather than the patients themselves. This induces an inevitable, if
rather comical, disconnect between the patient and their “QoL.”
One might reasonably assume that the patient was better placed
than the physician to pass judgment on the patient’s QoL.
Second, and integral to their need to standardize, the instruments work best at a population rather than individual level.
The capacity to generalize almost inevitably nullifies the scope
to personalize. At a population level, QoL instruments speak
reasonably well of the population. However, weightings given
to specific domains may help validate instruments at the population level but serve poorly as a “one size fits all” approach to
individual QoL [11].
Third, the distinction between QoL and HRQL is a largely
clinical construct. Many, if not most patients fail to recognize
the distinction. This is particularly true for Parkinson’s where
the treatment drugs can produce strange alterations in impulse
control such as punding behaviors. For instance, financial difficulties have enormous bearing on QoL but, at first sight, are not
health-related. Consider, however, that these financial difficulties might arise from Internet gambling due to inappropriately
high doses of prescribed dopamine agonist [12]. Immediately,
the perspective is different and this is now an HRQL issue.
Some health QoL instruments attempt to identify these related
factors.

A. Importance of “Soft Signs” to PD Patients
Nonmotor symptoms of PD were largely ignored by clinicians as recently as during the development of the original Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) rating scale
[13]. Approximately contemporaneously with the development
of the UPDRS, a systematic review of key disabling symptoms
identified by patients resulted in a questionnaire including indicators of clinical issues beyond motor symptoms such as speech,
depression, anxiety, psychosis, sleep quality and daytime sleepiness, cognitive impairment, and pain on the PDQ-39 [14]. The
patients surveyed also cited the impact of the disease on social
functioning, citing the importance of the impact of PD on their
ability to function in public, the impact on relationships, ability
to perform eating tasks and dressing, hygiene tasks, handwriting, and leisure activities. The final PDQ-39 questionnaire was
psychometrically optimized to ensure that each of these domains
was statistically independent.
The social functioning domains are clearly important to patient HRQL; however, they are difficult to assess during a clinical
interview, where clinicians may question the patients about difficulty eating rather than concerns about eating in public and patients may consider such issues not relevant as clinical concerns.

Fig. 1.

1863

Motor symptoms and patient QoL.

Pain in PD is not uncommon but rarely identified. In a study of
patients transitioning from a movement disorders clinic to a
palliative care program, investigators found an improvement in
HRQL largely driven by a reduction in pain [15].
With the diagnoses for many patients in their early 1950s [16],
a majority of patients are diagnosed while still at an age where
they expect to be active in the workforce. While motor impairment is cited in disability claims, for many patients, nonmotor
symptoms such as daytime sleepiness are cited as the primary
cause of disability [17].
There is good evidence that patient priorities in symptomatology do not consistently match those of the treating physician’s.
Patients often put greater emphasis on “soft signs” rather than
the more readily quantifiable and overt symptomatology [7].
For instance, in a survey conducted by Parkinson’s Movement
(http://parkinsonsmovement.com), there was little correlation
between patient-reported QoL and motor symptoms, suggesting that motor symptoms, the most visible to a physician, are
an inadequate measure upon which to base treatment decisions
(see Fig. 1).
QoL in chronic conditions correlates well with the prevalence
of mood disorders [18]. Anxiety and depression are strong negative predictors of QoL. Data from Parkinson’s Movement show
that there is an increase in multiply comorbid mood disorders
(see Fig. 2). These survey data report higher prevalence of mood
disorders than previously recognized. In part this may be due to
patients being more comfortable reporting symptoms to other
patients (in the form of the Parkinson’s Movement organization)
than to their treating physicians.
Patients often underreport symptoms, especially those of an
embarrassing or stigmatizing nature, such as problems with
bladder control. Patients are also squeamish about reporting
mood disorders for fear that this may have stigmatizing psychiatric implications. This is particularly true for hallucinations,
which are considerably underreported. In the U.K., patients who
experience hallucinations may have their driving license withdrawn, an action which itself has strong negative implications
for QoL.

1864

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

Fig. 2. Mood disorders reported in association with Parkinson’s. This is only
an approximate pictorial representation (see text for details).

The impact on patients and caregivers of the time and expense of accessing care is also an important consideration. In
developing a telemonitoring system for depressed patients, investigators realized that a 15-min clinical assessment required
patients to dedicate a half day to getting from home or work
to the clinic, parking, walking to the clinic, signing in, waiting to be seen, and then reversing the steps after the encounter
[24]. Programs offering telemedicine to the home for PD care
have shown the dramatic reduction in travel and waiting times
that can be achieved through telemedicine, reflecting the longer
average distances separating patients from the scarce clusters
of subspecialist neurologists [9]. Such “virtual house calls” are
being evaluated in a randomized controlled trial with one of
us (PS) a coinvestigator [8]. There are known risks as well as
benefits to this approach that must also be addressed, especially
patient privacy and control, data security, and remote provider
training and credentials.
C. Patient Engagement

Although patients, as a group, tend to prioritize nonmotor
symptoms over motor symptoms, the relative importance of each
symptom differs. Patients are as different in their expression
of nonsymptoms as they are in their relative predominance of
tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia. Patients with dystonia, for
instance, will report pain as a major determinant of QoL, while
those experiencing chronic fatigue may talk more about sleep
and sleep patterns. These differences are difficult to capture
in any single measure or assessment, and this emphasizes the
importance of personalization.
B. Access to Care and the Value of “Virtual House Calls”
The major problem with most current forms of clinicianbased assessment is the need for the patient to be physically
in the presence of the physician. For many mobility-impaired
patients, this presents significant logistic challenges. Stressful
journeys to the clinic can make patients seem symptomatically
worse than they really are. This is particularly so for confused
and demented patients. Conversely, many patients alter the timing of their medication or take additional tablets in order to
ensure that they arrive in good shape [19]. But whether the
patients seem worse or better, the issue is accuracy. In a brief
consultation under what are highly artificial circumstances, the
physician is likely to be misled and may consequently make inappropriate prescribing decisions. To get an accurate assessment
of patients’ health, it is best to make these assessments in the
patient’s home. Clearly, this is incompatible with most modern
medical resource allocation, but it can be elegantly addressed
using simple telemedicine [20]–[22]. Skype or other forms of
audiovisual telecommunication can be readily used to allow patients in their home to communicate with physicians in their
offices or clinics [22]. The vast majority of the standard UPDRS
assessments can be conducted under such circumstances [23].
There are substantial benefits in terms of time, but the real benefit lies in the quality of information obtained from the patient in
their natural surroundings rather than the artificial environment
of the clinic.

Patient use of technology and patient engagement in their
health status are implicitly interlinked. As a rule, the more engaged a patient is with their condition, the more likely they are
to seek technological assistance. The converse, however, is also
true. Technological solutions are unlikely to appeal to the disengaged, and there is also a technological threshold in the usage.
Confused and demented patients, as well as those struggling to
come to terms with the reality of their illness, are poor adopters
of technology no matter how well meant. This is reflected to
some extent in the poor involvement of the Parkinson’s community in clinical trials [25].
Nonetheless, the diversity of Parkinson’s symptoms and the
chronicity of the illness are, at once, a challenge to app developers and technologists and a rich field of opportunity. Necessity is
the mother of invention, and there seems little doubt that the best
solutions will be found when patients’ necessity is the driver for
that burst of inventive flair.
Patients want technology that simplifies their lives rather than
complicates. An example of this might be the Lift Labs spoon
[26], designed with a simple servo mechanism that counteracts
the patient’s tremor and allows the patient to enjoy less messy
meal times. This is an example of the technology making life
simpler but also addressing a real patient driven need rather than
a technologically driven solution.
Patients also want technology that is passive in the sense of
recording data without having to take active tests or decisions.
Clearly, some measures are more amenable to this than others.
For instance, tremor can be monitored passively and continuously without user intervention. The cognitive function, on the
other hand, requires explicit testing and is, therefore, much more
temporally invasive and intrusive. Of necessity, such measurements are also discrete rather than continuous.
It is also worth asking the question: Who does the technology
serve? Holter electrocardiographic monitoring provides data to
the physician. A personal fitness monitor provides data primarily
to the user. Patients have an entirely different relationship with
data they “own.”

STAMFORD et al.: ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY COULD DO FOR QUALITY OF LIFE IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

D. Three Important QoL Problems That Could be Addressed
by Technology
In practice, there are broadly speaking three areas where technology either could or already does provide assistance. These
are medication monitoring, symptom logging, and cognitive assessment.
Medication monitoring is an area where technology already
provides simple solutions. Parkinson’s, more than almost any
other condition, calls for precise timing of medication. There are
several apps available where medication reminders are provided
at user-set times and intervals. Many are generic, equally usable
for any chronic medication condition. Some are more specific
for Parkinson’s [27]. However, all such apps make the tacit
assumption that accurate reminders mean accurate compliance
although, in reality, there is little reason to believe that such a
close relationship holds. Many apparent medication failures are
in fact compliance failures. A better system would be one that
monitors actual ingestion of tablets. This is the real problem in
search of a solution.
Symptom logging is an area of widespread development with
many apps taking advantage of smart phone gyroscopes and accelerometers to analyze complex movement patterns and, with
the assistance of complex software solutions, to tease out tremor,
bradykinesia, dyskinesia, and gait instability therefrom [28].
These are often technically elegant and, it has to be conceded,
may be of assistance to physicians in their decision making.
However, this is also an example of technology offering solutions ahead of problems. Patients, as discussed earlier, place
far greater emphasis on nonmotor symptoms, which have been,
so far, less amenable to gyroscopic or accelerometer analysis.
There is the sense that motor dimensions of symptomatology
are given greater weight by technologists simply because the
solutions are already available.
Mood and cognition monitoring is a tough nut to crack. Although simple technological solutions for smart phones exist,
all require user intervention either to answer questions or to perform reasoning-based tasks. Such complex biological constructs
as mood and cognition are not amenable to simple technological solutions. Indeed, most such offerings are fundamentally
little more than paper exercises transferred to the smart phone
rather than solutions conceptualized for the phone. Most such
current solutions involve discrete testing at certain times of day
with the logging of the data, either manually or automatically
in some form of diary. It is worth noting some success in online monitoring of depression, where it was found that the patients most in need of care were the ones most adherent to the
system [24].
III. POTENTIAL TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS TO SOME
OF THE SOFT-SIGN (NONLOCOMOTORY) PROBLEMS
Human behavior is signaled by body movements and other
physical and physiological patterns—the so-called honest signals. Much of this is detectable body language, but more subtle
behavior may be reliably deciphered from continuous measurements using relatively simple monitors with the aid of signal analysis and pattern recognition tools. The more extreme

1865

TABLE I
NONMOTOR SYMPTOM TRACKING USING ACTIVITY MONITORING
AND OTHER MEASURES
Problem
Exercise activity
Sleep and
alertness

Feature/Marker
intensity, duration
REM, SWS
sleep movements

Fatigue
Depression
Psychosis
Cognition

memory, confusion,
executive function

Other measures

heart rate, skin
conductance
bed monitor
eye tracking
voice
instrumented home, GPS

Reference
[35]–[39]
[40]–[43]
[44]–[47]
[48]
[49]–[54]
[55], [56]
[57]

Note: REM—rapid eye movement sleep stage; SWS—slow wave sleep.

deviations in patterns associated with disease conditions may
also help to identify common features that reflect performance
fluctuations in healthy individuals with more subtle presentation. In this role, PD is a prototypical disease for activity studies that include activity-based patterns of nonmotor problems.
These nonmotor issues include mood and depression, cognitive
decline and dementia, fatigue, and various types of disordered
sleep. These have not been typically included as part of the rest
of the data analysis in research studies involving activity measurements in Parkinson’s, even though these are interrelated and
important to daily functioning for an individual with Parkinson’s
[29], [30]. From a technologist’s perspective, it is likely that
many motor and nonmotor features of PD can be stochastically
modeled using data as simple as that collected with a single
wearable sensor system involving triaxial accelerometry [31]–
[34]. Sensitivity and specificity may benefit from additional
data such as heart rate, skin conductance, or speech components
(see Table I).
Approaches to modeling, mining, and crowd sourcing behavior from complex monitoring data have been proposed [58]–
[60]. Similar techniques could be applied to PD data.
A. Importance of Purposeful Exercise in PD
Exercise can provide remarkable benefits to Parkinson’s patients, improving clinical evaluation and sustaining or even
improving HRQL, and specifically improving motor function,
mood, and cognition. This nonpharmacological benefit appears
to involve more than one mechanism including increases in
dopamine D2 receptors and BDNF secretion [61]–[64]. Walking, Tai Chi, dance, and cycling are popular forms of exercise in
Parkinson’s, but all forms of activity appear to provide benefits,
especially if they include high physical intensity, high-amplitude
motion, and cognitive challenges [65]–[71]. Monitoring technologies that quantify physical activity frequency and intensity
provide feedback to patients and care providers to establish
the individually useful exercise prescription. Data from such
monitoring will help to further define optimal exercise dosing.
Monitoring also helps to promote exercise compliance, and this
is especially important in PD because of the recognized therapeutic benefits and because of barriers to exercise not present
in the non-PD population [36], [37], [72]. Activity level is also
a marker for declining health and progression of disease, even

1866

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

in the absence of gait changes, decreasing activity levels are a
marker for the emergence of several clinically relevant symptoms such as depression [18], [38].
Many commercially available devices rely on some form of
actigraphy to provide estimates of activity in steps taken, distance traveled, or calories expended. Currently available systems and their applications to PD patients have been well
reviewed elsewhere [33]. Longitudinal monitoring of activity
in PD has revealed differences in intensity and volume of exercise without changes in frequency or duration, requiring more
than “steps counted” as a useful monitoring approach [38]. Traditional methods used by researchers to estimate energy expenditure in free living individuals (i.e., outside of a metabolism
chamber) relied on continuous heart rate monitoring [73], but
the combination of continuous heart rate and actigraphy has been
demonstrated to provide greater accuracy for energy expenditure in healthy active individuals [74]. Other novel measures
such as foot contact time can accurately assess locomotory activity and categories of activity [75]. A sensor on a necklace
was applied to quantification of daily activity and energy expenditure estimates in PD patients [35]. Interpretation of sensor
data requires specific validation with a Parkinson’s population
where altered gait, asymmetrical loss of arm swing, etc., could
conceivably change usual assumptions [76].
The useful interpretation of large continuous data streams
from activity and motion from smart shoes, other wearable monitors, and home area monitoring, is an important current focus
[31], [33]. As activity monitoring increases in the general population, the observed association between physical activity and
PD risk can also be parsed into whether exercise is protective or
diminished exercise is a result of PD onset [77].
Further development of systems involving social interaction
with peers or coaches and with real or virtual humans to motivate
regular activity could be an important tool in enhancing QoL
for PD patients [78]–[80].
B. Sleep Quantification and Implications for PD
Sleep disturbance is a disabling symptom for many PD patients, and the characterization of sleep disturbance is important
in treatment [7], [81]–[83]. There are effective therapies for
many causes of PD sleep disturbance, and rapid identification
of the specific nature of disturbance could speed beneficial therapy and prevent disability.
Methods to assess sleep quality have been offered in numerous forms including commercial activity, biometric, and sleep
actigraphy monitors. The simplest form of sleep monitoring
is a well-established wearable wrist monitor using triaxial accelerometry, with movements interpreted using simple algorithms [40]. In PD patients, this also works reasonably well
when compared to the gold standard of polysomnography in
a sleep laboratory, but some of the measures such as time for
sleep onset are complicated by the disease, and scoring algorithms need further work [41].
Inclusion of additional sensor data such as heart rate,
skin conductance, and skin temperature could be expected
to improve sleep assessments, including perhaps isolation of

important phases of sleep (e.g., slow wave sleep; REM sleep).
For example, a simple wearable device that distinguishes REM
sleep with some accuracy would be an important advance in
assessment of REM sleep behavior disorder which occurs in
one-third of PD patients and is an early predictive symptom for
PD [83].
Another aspect of sleep quality involves large body movements, measured with instrumented beds or with accelerometers
mounted on the legs or the back [44]–[46]. In PD patients compared to healthy controls, smaller and shorter axial movements
are observed, but these have not been tied to any laboratory
measures of sleep quality in these studies [45], [46].
Some patients have reported another phenomenon referred
to as “sleep benefit,” where a sleep that is perceived as restful
improves physical symptoms the next day. This effect has been
difficult to establish with questionnaire data and requires a better
practical method of objective quantification of sleep quality [84].
Sleepiness and sudden sleep onset (“sleep attacks”) have been
reported for some PD patients, and this is especially problematic
during driving [85]. Vigiliance monitoring systems to detect
onset of a sleep attack might be beneficial to PD patients but
would require high specificity and rapid response time; current
systems to assess drowsiness may be inadequate for this purpose.
Identifying poor sleep quality and characterizing other aspects of the sleep is an important goal for wearable devices
that has not yet been fully achieved but is vitally important
for effective self-monitoring. Currently, clinical labs evaluate
characteristics of sleep disorders through electromyographic,
kinemetric, and electroencephalographic measurements generally involving complex systems. Wearable systems have been
proposed to obtain continuous EEG and manage data artifacts,
and these show some promise for the future [86], [87].
C. Fatigue—A Significant But Poorly Quantified Problem
Fatigue is a separate disabling symptom reported in a majority of Parkinson’s patients, not necessarily associated with
sleep quality, cognitive impairment, or depression [10], [88],
[89]. Patients report fatigue as a key limiter in physical and social functioning [88]. Distinguishing this symptom from other
problems such as daytime sleepiness and depression through
biomonitoring is a key technological challenge [90]. Novel approaches to unobtrusive detection of changes in mental state,
perhaps including mental fatigue, are suggested by a recent
study that used key-hold times from normal interactions with a
computer keyboard to detect psychomotor impairments. These
changes were induced with testing during night time waking
(“sleep inertia”) [91].
D. Mood Disorders and Psychosis
Depressive mood is associated with lowered activity levels
[50] and disordered sleep [42], [29], and there is some evidence
that aspects of mood (depression, anxiety, mania) and psychotic
features (confusion, hallucination, delusion) affect motor presentation in PD. There is sparse-to-none data on changes in
daily patterns of activity as indicators of depressed status, yet
this seems to be an obvious target for productive activity-based

STAMFORD et al.: ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY COULD DO FOR QUALITY OF LIFE IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

monitoring research. Combined with other biological signals
such as changes in vocal acoustics, this could be extraordinarily useful. Changes in speech characteristics are themselves a
symptom of PD motor changes, but specific components have
been used to track depression severity in other patients [54].
Other techniques could evaluate mood and psychosis. Signs
from EEG, ECG, or EMG monitoring have the potential to assist with identification and may do so in conjunction with sleep
monitoring. One system (iCalm) has explored a combination of
activity, skin conductance, temperature, and photoplethysmography on wrist and foot to detect changes in autonomic activity
[56]. Another similar system (PSYCHE) has been tested in bipolar patients to detect mood transitions including hypomanic and
depressive episodes over a course of treatment [91].
Affect can also be assessed with everyday technologies. For
example, facial expressions in Parkinson’s patients are often
misunderstood because of motor changes affecting facial muscles (the “Parkinson’s mask”), but an advanced facial recognition system could conceivably learn its patient in a webcam
application and detect alterations reflecting emotional changes
[80], [92], [93].
Increasing isolation is another measureable component of depression. Socialization was monitored in one study by providing
all participants within a network of peers with smart phone software that detected and recorded proximity to other software
equipped phones, charting frequency of in person social interactions [43]. In another test of phone-based motion sensors,
developers inadvertently recorded audio data using the phone’s
microphone and analysts evaluated social interaction using the
audio data [94]. The integration of tracking of broadcast identifiers from 802.11 wifi, Bluetooth, NFC, or other wireless signature could automate identification of social interaction through
tracking interaction with other individuals’ devices, tracking frequency and duration of contact, and a count of unique devices
encountered. Many MAC addresses (wifi or NFC) or numbers
(Bluetooth) can be identified as belonging to a fixed or mobile
transmitter (e.g., access point or portable client) and in many
cases can be linked to a specific manufacturer, providing more
detailed resolution of social versus infrastructure encounters.
Treatments for depression and anxiety may include gaming therapies which are being explored for their effectiveness and lower incidence of side effects compared to
pharmacotherapy [51], [52].
E. Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia
Many aspects of cognition may be monitored effectively
through gamification of cognitive tests, with set shifting, memory, and fluency easily tested in engaging ways [95]. Such systems are being developed for a range of neurocognitive testing
applications but could be tailored to cognitive domains most affected in Parkinson’s, as that information becomes clearer [96].
Further, activity monitors may identify erratic behavior patterns
characteristic of executive dysfunction in early cognitive decline
and may compliment cognitive testing or provide insight if the
frequency of dedicated cognitive self-monitoring declines.
Specific types of activities that might be built into an engaging test system could include simple measures such as fin-

1867

ger tapping. Finger tapping has recently been defined with 29
subtest parameters, which can now be characterized in studies with Parkinson’s patients to define aspects of cognition and
motor function [97]. Impaired driving ability in Parkinson’s
is explained in part by cognitive decline [98], [99]. This can
be tested with driving simulations although PD patients with
current licenses are not likely to volunteer to have their driving assessed in research studies [99]. Driver assistance systems
with warning information about speeds and following distances
improved traffic performance of PD patients and demonstrate
the importance of simple assistive technologies for safer driving
[100].
Monitoring of ambient audio could track verbal fluency
(speech rate) and speaking levels (e.g., polysyllabic words, sentence structures) to establish baseline and track change in these
markers for cognitive status. Speech content changes over long
duration distinguish declining mental status for President Reagan compared to President Bush during their terms in office
[101]. Similar evaluations could be conducted through monitoring the frequency and characteristics of electronic communications, including e-mail, phone calls, and online social
networking.
Remembering to follow the usually complicated medication
regimes can be a problem in PD. Simple timed reminders are
helpful. Actual detection of pill intake with individual edible
bar codes or other microtags is a feasible technology that could
provide additional help to patients.
IV. BIG DATA STUDIES TECHNOLOGY
A. Previous and Current Initiatives
Data collected through the approaches identified in Section
III will rapidly achieve a scale putting it into the domain of “big
data,” which in this context would suggest very large N studies
with high enough sampling rates as to be considered effectively
continuous. Note that this does not preclude the huge importance
of small sample studies that can identify large individual effects.
The standard for large dataset studies in neuroscience was set
by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
[102], [103]. This study of 800 subjects collected longitudinal
clinical, genetic, and diverse imaging data from individuals with
Alzheimer’s disease and controls. The ADNI has been successful in identifying an imaging biomarker for Alzheimer’s. The
FDA’s tentative but positive-leaning response has inspired researchers in other diseases to consider replicating the ADNI
approach for the identification of biomarkers. The ADNI model
of public data sharing inspired the Michael J. Fox Foundation
to launch the Parkinson’s Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI)
(http://www.ppmi-info.org/) [104]. This was also based, in part,
on proof of feasibility in the establishment of an enriched cohort
to identify premotor (prodromal) biomarkers of PD in the Armyfunded Parkinson Associated Risk Syndrome Study [105]. The
PPMI, with a cohort expanded beyond the original 600 PPMI
cases and controls, is being supplemented with body-fixed
sensor data.
A different approach builds on a quality improvement model
pioneered by the Northern New England Cardiovascular Study

1868

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

Group [106] and improved upon in cystic fibrosis [107]. Using
this experimental design, the National Parkinson Foundation
launched the Parkinson’s Outcomes Project (POP). This study
is focused on patient reported outcomes and their clinical care,
with the express purpose of optimizing care [108]. The POP
study also includes mobility as an outcome and has collected
data on subjects using body-fixed sensors [109]. POP, with approximately 8000 subjects and 20 000 clinical evaluations, is
the largest clinical study of PD ever conducted. With comprehensive clinical characterization, these studies offer a different
set of benefits from the addition of monitoring technology. Split
sample approaches with a validation dataset held back enable
analyses with reduced risk of spurious findings [110].
A third initiative in Parkinson’s tests the value of wearable self-monitoring devices in improving QoL for patients
(https://www.michaeljfox.org/). This involves a collaboration
between Intel and Michael J. Fox Foundation. With patient
consent, the data are being aggregated to compare the device
data to patient diaries, medication use, and clinical observations. The device tested provides 24-h measurements of activity
but also estimates of sleep quality. The large volume of data
(300 observations/s from each patient) is managed through a
big data analytics cloud infrastructure at Intel with real time
detection of patient status. Such large-scale assessment of free
living patients using wearable monitoring could revolutionize
clinical trials. More importantly, self-monitoring technologies
could empower patients to more effectively manage their own
healthcare.
Finally, this concept has been extended into the open-source
concept in research through Apple’s Research Kit, announced in
March 2015. Research Kit is described as a “software framework
made specifically for medical research” by providing access to
sensors in the iPhone and other Apple devices [111]. It is too
early to determine the success of this effort, which will reflect
skew due to (unquantified) availability bias. Apple’s Research
Kit is being utilized in the mPower tool [112].
B. Importance of Frequency-Space Information
While machine learning will enable new insight to be drawn
from the large studies such as PPMI and POP, their low frequency of data collection will limit insight into higher frequency events, signs, and symptoms. Patient data reflects several
frequency-space domains, ranging from falls, which include
delta function-like spikes as ground contact results in rapid deceleration, through tremor, dyskinesia, and medication effects
to disease progression which is measured on scale of years
(see Table II).
Continuous data collection from sensors could record these
key events and track motor and other information to extrapolate the rate of change in features with different characteristic
periods. Such approaches could dramatically increase the insight available from studies such as PPMI and POP, identifying
some features and tracking change in other features that are
identified through clinical evaluation or testing. Although currently no kinemetric biomarkers are available to track many features, a Fourier transform approach, analyzing continuous data

TABLE II
CHARACTERISTIC PERIODS OF SEVERAL FEATURES OF PD
Feature
Falls
Tremor
Dykinesia
Medication effects
Sleep/fatigue
Hospitalization
Depression
Psychosis
Disease progression

Characteristic Period
Instantaneous to 1 s
0.25–0.5 s
1s
2–4 h
One day
Several days
Months
One to two years to develop
Years

or a frequency-level analysis of discontinuous data, could be
valuable in identifying to-date unknown associations between
monitoring data and clinically identified symptoms.
C. Challenges and Technology Needs
In large-scale characterization studies such as these “big data”
studies, clinical motion data should be collected with minimal
filtering, as the frequency-space associations with PD features
are insufficiently established. A critical need is the better characterization of these relationships. Key technology questions are
the following.
1) How can we address issues of data compression and power
requirements to create more usable sensors that still provide a sufficient level of resolution to address patient monitoring needs?
2) How effectively can unilateral measurement characterize
bilateral symptoms? Are asymmetric features different in
the frequency space depending on position of sensor?
3) Increasing evidence suggests that motor control compensation in the forebrain may result in different motor characteristics. Could frequency-space motor measurement
identify specific pathology?
4) A recent analysis has shown that not just medication effects but differences in effect between medications may
be identifiable through sensitive motor measurement. Can
this be delivered at scale?
5) How do we organize data flow so that patients have their
desired level of privacy and security controls?
6) What is the business model that will encourage device
manufacturers to provide raw data, perhaps through an
open API, to access an evolving set of algorithms?
7) How do we effectively manage genome data for personalized data interpretation?
V. CONCLUSION AND BROAD IMPLICATIONS
Parkinson’s patients want to be involved in decisions about
them. Monitoring technologies can help arm PD patients to take
greater responsibility in their own healthcare and QoL. They
may also choose to share these data with healthcare providers,
especially remotely through emerging telemedicine capabilities, and this will enable clinicians to provide better care targeting the specific needs of their individual patients. The science
that can drive development of important monitoring and other

STAMFORD et al.: ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY COULD DO FOR QUALITY OF LIFE IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

assistive technologies in PD already largely exists today and is
simply waiting for clever engineering technologists to harness
and apply to the right problems. This paper has outlined the patient perspective which includes a focus on the often overlooked
nonmotor symptoms and problems. Many of these problems can
be tracked using noninvasive technologies that have been developed to address each specific symptom (e.g., depressed mood,
inadequate restorative sleep, impaired cognition, etc.), but a
combined differential assessment of these various problems in
a single relevant disease (Parkinson’s) has not been undertaken.
The patient community will readily provide feedback on the
desirable features of such a monitoring device if it is developed,
and for the first time, the research community will be able to access data on free living populations to address earlier detection
and effectiveness and complications of treatment interventions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Disclaimers: The opinions and assertions in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official
views or policies of their institutions. Mention of any specific
commercial products, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute
or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the
authors or the organizations they represent.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Churchill, The World Crisis, vol. 4. Toronto, ON, Canada: Macmillan,
1923, p. 192.
[2] H. Ehringer and O. Hornykiewicz, “Verteilung von noradrenalin und
dopamin (3-hydroxytyramin) im Gehirn des menschen und ihr verhalten
bei erkrankungen des extrapyramidalen systems,” Klinische Wochenschrift, vol. 38, pp. 1236–1239, 1960.
[3] G. C. Cotzias, P. S. Papavasiliou, and R. Gellene, “Modification of
Parkinsonism—Chronic treatment with L-dopa,” N. Engl. J. Med.,
vol. 280, pp. 337–345, 1969.
[4] A. Y. Hung and M. A. Schwarzschild, “Treatment of Parkinson’s disease:
What’s in the non-dopaminergic pipeline?,” Neurotherapeutics, vol. 11,
pp. 34–46, 2014.
[5] M. R. Lemke, H. M. Brecht, J. Koester, P. H. Kraus, and H. Reichmann,
“Anhedonia, depression, and motor functioning in Parkinson’s disease
during treatment with pramipexole,” J. Neuropsychiat., vol. 17, pp. 214–
220, 2005.
[6] P. Wicks, J. Stamford, M. A. Grootenhuis, L. Haverman, and S. Ahmed,
“Innovations in e-health,” Qual. Life Res., vol. 23, pp. 195–203, 2014.
[7] K. R. Chaudhuri, D. G. Healy, and A. H. V. Schapira, “Non-motor
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease: Diagnosis and management,” Lancet
Neurol., vol. 5, pp. 235–245, 2006.
[8] M. A. Achey, C. A. Beck, D. B. Beran, C. M. Boyd, P. N. Schmidt, A.
W. Willis, S. S. Riggare, R. B. Simone, K. M. Biglan, and E. R. Dorsey,
“Virtual house calls for Parkinson disease (Connect.Parkinson): Study
protocol for a randomized, controlled trial,” Trials, vol. 15, p. 465, 2014.
[9] M. A. Achey, J. L. Aldred, N. Aljehani, B. R. Bloem, K. M. Biglan, P.
Chan, E. Cubo, E. R. Dorsey, C. G. Goetz, M. Guttman, A. Hassan, S.
M. Khandhar, Z. Mari, M. Spindler, C. M. Tanner, P. van den Haak, R.
Walker, J. R. Wilkinson, and the International Parkinson and Movement
Disorder Society Telemedicine Task Force, “The past, present, and future
of telemedicine for Parkinson’s disease,” Movement Disorders, vol. 29,
pp. 871–883, 2014.
[10] P. Martinez-Martin, C. Rodriguez-Blazquez, M. M. Kurtis, and
K. Chaudhuri, “The impact of non-motor symptoms on health-related
quality of life of patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Movement Disorders, vol. 26, pp. 399–406, 2011.
[11] K. R. Chaudhuri, P. Odin, A. Antonini, and P. Martinez-Martin, “Parkinson’s disease: The non-motor issues,” Parkinsonism Related Disorders,
vol. 17, pp. 717–723, 2011.

1869

[12] M. Samuel, M. Rodriguez-Oroz, A. Antonini et al., “Management of impulse control disorders in Parkinson’s disease: Controversies and future
approaches,” Movement Disorders, vol. 30, pp. 150–159, 2015.
[13] Movement Disorder Society Task Force on Rating Scales for Parkinson’s
Disease, “The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS): Status and recommendations,” Movement Disorders, vol. 18, p. 738, 2003.
[14] V. Peto, C. Jenkinson, and R. Fitzpatrick, “PDQ-39: A review of the
development, validation and application of a Parkinson’s disease quality
of life questionnaire and its associated measures,” J. Neurol., vol. 245,
pp. S10–S14, 1998.
[15] J. M. Miyasaki, J. Long, D. Mancini, E. Moro, S.H. Fox, A.E. Lang, C.
Marras, R. Chen, A. Strafella, R. Archinoff, R. Ghoche, J. Hui, Archinoff,
R. Ghoche, and J. Hui, “Palliative care for advanced Parkinson disease:
An interdisciplinary clinic and new scale, the ESAS-PD,” Parkinsonism
Related Disorders, vol. 18, pp. S6–S9, 2012.
[16] A. Hassan, S. S. Wu, P. Schmidt, I. A. Malaty, Y. F. Dai, J. M. Miyasaki,
and M. S. Okun, “What are the issues facing Parkinson’s disease patients
at ten years of disease and beyond?: Data from the NPF-QII study,”
Parkinsonism Related Disorders, vol. 18, pp. S10–S14, 2012.
[17] U. Wüllner, T. Schmitz-Hübsch, G. Antony, R. Fimmers, A. Spottke,
W. H. Oertel, G. Deuschl, T. Klockgether, and K. Eggert, “Autonomic
dysfunction in 3414 Parkinson’s disease patients enrolled in the German
Network on Parkinson’s disease (KNP eV): The effect of ageing,” Eur.
J. Neurol., vol. 14, pp. 1405–1408, 2007.
[18] D. Bega, S. S. Wu, Q. Pei, P. N. Schmidt, and T. Simuni, “Recognition
and treatment of depressive symptoms in Parkinson’s disease: The NPF
dataset,” J. Parkinson’s Dis., vol. 4, pp. 639–643, 2014.
[19] J. A. Cramer, R. D. Scheyer, and R. H. Mattson, “Compliance declines
between clinic visits,” Arch. Internal Med., vol. 150, pp. 1509–1510,
1990.
[20] V. Venkataraman, S. J. Donohue, K. M. Biglan, P. Wicks, and E. R.
Dorsey, “Virtual visits for Parkinson disease: A case series,” Neurology:
Clin. Practice, vol. 4, pp. 146–152, 2014.
[21] J. P. Hubble, R. Pahwa, D. K. Michalek, C. Thomas, and W. C. Koller,
“Interactive video conferencing: A means of providing interim care to
Parkinson’s disease patients,” Movement Disorders, vol. 8, pp. 380–382,
1993.
[22] E. R. Dorsey, V. Venkataraman, M. J. Grana, M. T. Bull, B. P. George, C.
M. Boyd, C. A. Beck, B. Rajan, A. Seidmann, and K. M. Biglan, “Randomized controlled clinical trial of “virtual house calls” for Parkinson
disease,” JAMA Neurol., vol. 70, pp. 565–570, 2013.
[23] A. Abdolahi, N. Scoglio, A. Killoran, E. R. Dorsey, and K. M. Biglan,
“Potential reliability and validity of a modified version of the unified
Parkinson’s disease rating scale that could be administered remotely,”
Parkinsonism Related Disorders, vol. 19, pp. 218–221, 2013.
[24] E. M. Hunkeler, W. A. Hargreaves, B. Fireman, J. Terdiman, J. F. Meresman, Y. Porterfield, J. Lee, R. Dea, G. E. Simon, M. S. Bauer, J. Unutzer, and C. B. Taylor, “A web-delivered care management and patient
self-management program for recurrent depression: A randomized trial,”
Psychiatr. Services, vol. 63, pp. 1063–1071, 2012.
[25] S. Chowdhury, C. C. Meunier, L. Cappelletti, and T. B. Sherer, “Improving patient participation in Parkinson’s clinical trials: The experience
of the Michael J Fox Foundation,” Clin. Invest., vol. 4, pp. 185–192,
2014.
[26] A. Pathak, J. A. Redmond, M. Allen, and K. L. Chou, “A noninvasive handheld assistive device to accommodate essential tremor: A pilot
study,” Movement Disorders, vol. 29, pp. 838–842, 2014.
[27] T. Keränen and S. Liikkanen, “Medication reminder service for mobile
phones: An open feasibility study in patients with Parkinson’s disease,”
Telemed e-Health, vol. 19, pp. 888–890, 2013.
[28] S. Das, B. Amoedo, F. De la Torre, and J. Hodgins, “Detecting Parkinson’s symptoms in uncontrolled home environments: A multiple instance
learning approach,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Int Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., San Diego, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 3688–3691.
[29] N. J. Weerkamp, G. Tissingh, P. J. E. Poels, S. U. Zuidema, M. Munneke,
R. T. C. M. Koopmans, and B. R. Bloem, “Nonmotor symptoms in
nursing home residents with Parkinson’s disease: Prevalence and effect
on quality of life,” J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 61, pp. 1714–1721, 2013.
[30] D. A. Gallagher, A. J. Lees, and A. Schrag, “What are the most important nonmotor symptoms in patients with Parkinson’s disease and
are we missing them?,” Movement Disorders, vol. 25, pp. 2493–2500,
2010.
[31] E. Fuster-Garcia, A. Bresó, J. Martı́nez-Miranda, J. Rosell-Ferrer, C.
Matheson, and J. M. Garcı́a-Gómez, “Fusing actigraphy signals for outpatient monitoring,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 23, pp. 69–80, 2015.

1870

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

[32] J. Cancela, M. Pastorino, A. T. Tzallas, M. G. Tsipouras, G. Rigas,
M. T. Arredondo, and D. I. Fotiadis, “Wearability assessment of a wearable system for Parkinson’s disease remote monitoring based on a body
area network of sensors,” Sensors, vol. 14, pp. 17235–17255, 2014.
[33] W. Maetzler, J. Domingos, K. Srulijes, J. J. Ferreira, and B. R. Bloem,
“Quantitative wearable sensors for objective assessment of Parkinson’s
disease,” Movement Disorders, vol. 28, pp. 1628–1637, 2013.
[34] S. Patel, H. Park, P. Bonato, L. Chan, and M. Rodgers, “A review of wearable sensors and systems with application in rehabilitation,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 9, p. 21, 2012.
[35] M. L. Dontje, M. H. G. de Greef, A. D. Speelman, M. van Nimwegen, W.
P. Krijnen, R. P. Stolk, Y. P. T. Kamsma, B. R. Bloem, M. Munneke, and C.
P. van der Schans, “Quantifying daily physical activity and determinants
in sedentary patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Parkinsonism Related
Disorders, vol. 19, pp. 878–882, 2013.
[36] M. van Nimwegen, A. D. Speelman, K. Smulders, S. Overeem, G. F.
Borm, F. J. G. Backx, B. R. Bloem, and M. Munneke, “Design and
baseline characteristics of the ParkFit study, a randomized controlled
trial evaluating the effectiveness of a multifaceted behavioral program to
increase physical activity in Parkinson patients,” BMC Neurol., vol. 10,
p. 70, 2010.
[37] A. D. Speelman, M. van Nimwegen, B. R. Bloem, and M. Munneke,
“Evaluation of implementation of the ParkFit program: A multifaceted
intervention aimed to promote physical activity in patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Physiotherapy, vol. 100, pp. 134–141, 2014.
[38] J. T. Cavanaugh, T. D. Ellis, G. M. Earhart, M. P. Ford, K. B. Foreman,
and L. E. Dibble, “Capturing ambulatory activity decline in Parkinson
disease,” J. Neurolog. Physical Ther., vol. 36, p. 51, 2012.
[39] K. R. Evenson, F. Wen, J. S. Metzger, and A. H. Herring, “Physical
activity and sedentary behavior patterns using accelerometry from a
national sample of United States adults,” Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act.,
vol. 12, p. 20, 2015.
[40] S. Ancoli-Israel, R. Cole, C. Alessi, M. Chambers, W. Moorcroft, and
C. Pollak, “The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and circadian
rhythms. American academy of sleep medicine review paper,” Sleep,
vol. 26, pp. 342–392, 2003.
[41] J. Maglione, L. Liu, A. B. Neikrug, T. Poon, L. Natarajan, J. Calderon, J.
A. Avanzino, J. Corey-Bloom, B. W. Palmer, J. S. Loredo, and S. AncoliIsrael, “Actigraphy for the assessment of sleep measures in Parkinson’s
disease,” Sleep, vol. 36, pp. 1209–1217, 2013.
[42] G. Jean–Louis, M. V. Mendlowicz, J. C. Gillin, M. H. Rapaport, J. R.
Kelsoe, F. Zizi, H. P. Landolt, and H. von Gizycki, “Sleep estimation
from wrist activity in patients with major depression,” Physiol. Behav.,
vol. 70, pp. 49–53, 2010.
[43] M. Butt, T. B. M. J. Ouarda, S. F. Quan, A. S. Pentland, and I. Khayal,
“Technologically sensed social exposure related to slow-wave sleep in
healthy adults,” Sleep Breath, vol. 19, pp. 255–261, 2015.
[44] A. M. Adami, M. Pavel, T. L. Hayes, A. G. Adami, and C. Singer, “A
method for classification of movements in bed,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2011, pp. 7881–7884.
[45] M. Louter, R. J. G. van Sloun, D. A. A. Pevernagie, J. B. A. M. Arends,
P. J. Cluitmans, B. R. Bloem, and S. Overeem, “Subjectively impaired
bed mobility in Parkinson disease affects sleep efficiency,” Sleep Med.,
vol. 14, pp. 668–674, 2013.
[46] M. Louter, W. Maetzler, J. Prinzen, R. C. van Lummel, M. Hobert, J.B.
Arends, B. R. Bloem, J. Streffer, D. Berg, S. Overeem, and I. LiepeltScarfone, “Accelerometer-based quantitative analysis of axial nocturnal
movements differentiates patients with Parkinson’s disease, but not highrisk individuals, from controls,” J. Neurol Neurosurg. Psychiatr., vol. 86,
pp. 32–37, 2015.
[47] D. T. Plante, “Leg actigraphy to quantify periodic limb movements of
sleep: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Sleep Med. Rev., vol. 18,
pp. 425–434, 2014.
[48] J. I. Hoff, J. J. Van Hilten, H. A. M. Middelkoop, and R. A. C.
Roos, “Fatigue in Parkinson’s disease is not associated with reduced
physical activity,” Parkinsonism Related Disorders, vol. 3, pp. 51–54,
1997.
[49] A. Korszun, E. A. Young, N. C. Engleberg, C. B. Brucksch, J. F. Greden,
and L. A. Crofford, “Use of actigraphy for monitoring sleep and activity
levels in patients with fibromyalgia and depression,” J. Psychosomatic
Res., vol. 52, pp. 439–443, 2002.
[50] J. Kim, T. Nakamura, H. Kikuchi, T. Sasaki, and Y. Yamamoto, “Covariation of depressive mood and locomotor dynamics evaluated by ecological momentary assessment in healthy humans,” PloS One, vol. 8,
p. e74979, 2013.

[51] C. V. Russoniello, K. O’Brien, and J. M. Parks, “EEG, HRV and psychological correlates while playing Bejeweled II: A randomized controlled
study,” Stud. Health Technol. Informat., vol. 144, pp. 189–192, 2009.
[52] C.V. Russoniello, M. Fish, and K. O’Brien, “The efficacy of casual
videogame play in reducing clinical depression: A randomized controlled
study,” Games Health, vol. 2, pp. 341–346, 2013.
[53] F. Assogna, F. E. Pontieri, C. Caltagirone, and G. Spalletta, “The recognition of facial emotion expressions in Parkinson’s disease,” Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol, vol. 18, pp. 835–848, 2008.
[54] J. C. Mundt, A. P. Vogel, D. E. Feltner, and W. R. Lenderking, “Vocal
acoustic biomarkers of depression severity and treatment response,” Biol.
Psychiatr., vol. 72, pp. 580–587, 2012.
[55] G. Valenza, M. Nardelli, A. Lanata, C. Gentili, G. Bertschy, R. Paradiso,
and E. P. Scilingo, “Wearable monitoring for mood recognition in bipolar
disorder based on history-dependent long-term heart rate variability analysis,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1625–1635,
Sep. 2014.
[56] R.R. Fletcher, K. Dobson, M. S. Goodwin, H. Eydgahi, O. Wilder-Smith,
D. Fernholz, Y. Kuboyama, E. B. Hedman, M. Z. Poh, and R. W. Picard,
“iCalm: Wearable sensor and network architecture for wirelessly communicating and logging autonomic activity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol.
Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 215–223, Mar. 2010.
[57] D. F. Mahoney, R. B. Purtilo, F. M. Webbe, M. Alwan, A. J. Bharucha, T.
D. Adlam, H. B. Jimison, B. Turner, S. A. Becker, and the Working Group
on Technology of the Alzheimer’s Association, “In-home monitoring of
persons with dementia: Ethical guidelines for technology research and
development,” Alzheimer’s Dementia, vol. 3, pp. 217–226, 2007.
[58] K. Bousmalis, S. Zafeiriou, L. Morency, and M. Pantic, “Infinite hidden conditional random fields for human behavior analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learning Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 170–177, Jan.
2013.
[59] M. Chatterjee, G. Stratou, S. Scherer, and L. P. Morency, “Contextbased signal descriptors of heart-rate variability for anxiety assessment,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2014,
pp. 3631–3635.
[60] S. Park, P. Shoemark, and L. P. Morency, “Toward crowdsourcing microlevel behavior annotations: The challenges of interface, training, and
generalization,” in Proc 19th Int. Conf. Intell. User Interfaces, 2014,
pp. 37–46.
[61] B. E. Fisher, Q. Li, A. Nacca, G. J. Salem, J. Song, J. Yip, J. S. Hui, M.
W. Jakowec, and G. M. Petzinger, “Treadmill exercise elevates striatal
dopamine D2 receptor binding potential in patients with early Parkinson’s
disease,” Neuroreport, vol. 24, pp. 509–514, 2013.
[62] G. Frazzitta, P. Balbi, R. Maestri, G. Bertotti, N. Boveri, and G. Pezzoli,
“The beneficial role of intensive exercise on Parkinson disease progression,” Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 92, pp. 523–532, 2013.
[63] G. Frazzitta, R. Maestri, M. F. Ghilardi et al., “Intensive rehabilitation
increases BDNF serum levels in Parkinsonian patients,” Neurorehabil.
Neural Repair, vol. 28, pp. 163–168, 2014.
[64] G. M. Petzinger, B. E. Fisher, S. McEwen, J. A. Beeler, J. P. Walsh,
and M. W. Jakowec, “Exercise-enhanced neuroplasticity targeting motor
and cognitive circuitry in Parkinson’s disease,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 12,
pp. 716–726, 2013.
[65] J. E. Ahlskog, “Does vigorous exercise have a neuroprotective effect in
Parkinson disease?,” Neurology, vol. 77, pp. 288–294, 2011.
[66] A. D. Speelman, B. P. van de Warrenburg, M. van Nimwegen, G. M.
Petzinger, M. Munneke, and B. R. Bloem, “How might physical activity
benefit patients with Parkinson disease?,” Nature Rev. Neurol., vol. 7,
pp. 528–534, 2011.
[67] Y. Yang, X. Y. Li, L. Gong, Y. L. Zhu, and Y. L. Hao, “Tai chi for
improvement of motor function, balance and gait in Parkinson’s disease:
A systematic review and meta-analysis,” PloS One, vol. 9, p. e102942,
2014.
[68] C. Fox, G. Ebersbach, L. Ramig, and S. Sapir, “LSVT LOUD and LSVT
BIG: behavioral treatment programs for speech and body movement in
Parkinson disease,” Parkinson’s Dis., vol. 2012, p. 12, 2012.
[69] G. Ebersbach, A. Ebersbach, F. Gandor, B. Wegner, J. Wissel, and
A. Kupsch, “Impact of physical exercise on reaction time in patients
with Parkinson’s disease—Data from the berlin BIG study,” Arch. Phys.
Med. Rehabil., vol. 95, pp. 996–999, 2014.
[70] D. Conradsson, N. Löfgren, H. Nero, M. Hagströmer, A. Ståhle, J. Lökk,
and E. Franzén, “The effects of highly challenging balance training in
elderly with Parkinson’s disease a randomized controlled trial,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair, vol. 29, pp. 827–836, 2015.
[71] C. J. M. Ayan, A. Cancela, A. Gutiérrez-Santiago, and I. Prieto, “Effects
of two different exercise programs on gait parameters in individuals with

STAMFORD et al.: ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY COULD DO FOR QUALITY OF LIFE IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]
[77]
[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]
[82]

[83]

[84]
[85]

[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]

Parkinson’s disease: A pilot study,” Gait Posture, vol. 39, pp. 648–651,
2014.
T. Ellis, J. K. Boudreau, T. R. DeAngelis, L. E. Brown, J. T. Cavanaugh,
G. M. Earhart, M. P. Ford, K. B. Foreman, and L. E. Dibble, “Barriers to
exercise in people with Parkinson disease,” Phys. Therapy, vol. 93, pp.
628–636, 2013.
G. B. Spurr, A. M. Prentice, P. R. Murgatroyd, G. R. Goldberg, J. C.
Reina, and N. T. Christman, “Energy expenditure from minute-by-minute
heart-rate recording: Comparison with indirect calorimetry,” Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., vol. 48, pp. 552–559, 1988.
S. Brage, N. Brage, P. W. Franks, U. Ekelund, M. Y. Wong, L. B. Andersen, K. Froberg, N. J. Wareham, “Branched equation modeling of
simultaneous accelerometry and heart rate monitoring improves estimate of directly measured physical activity energy expenditure,” J. Appl.
Physiol., vol. 96, pp. 343–351, 2004.
R. W. Hoyt, M. J. Buller, W. R. Santee, M. Yokota, P. G. Weyand,
and J. P. Delany, “Total energy expenditure estimated using foot-ground
contact pedometry,” Diab Technol. Therapeutics, vol. 6, pp. 71–81,
2004.
M. D. Lewek, R. Poole, J. Johnson, O. Halawa, and X. Huang, “Arm
swing magnitude and asymmetry during gait in the early stages of Parkinson’s disease,” Gait Posture, vol. 31, pp. 256–260, 2010.
H. Chen, S. M. Zhang, M. A. Schwarzschild, M. A. Hernan, and A. Ascherio, “Physical activity and the risk of Parkinson disease,” Neurology,
vol. 64, pp. 664–669, 2005.
F. Ofli, G. Kurillo, S. Obdrzalek, R. Bajcsy, H. Jimison, and M. Pavel,
“Design and evaluation of an interactive exercise coaching system for
older adults: Lessons learned,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., 2015,
doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2015.2391671
A. A. Rizzo, B. Lange, J. G. Buckwalter, E. Forbell, J. Kim, K. Sagae,
J. Williams, B. O. Rothbaum, J. Difede, G. Reger, T. Parsons, and P.
Kenny, “An intelligent virtual human system for providing healthcare
information and support,” Stud. Health Technol. Informat., vol. 163, pp.
503–509, 2010.
J. Gratch, N. Wang, A. Okhmatovskaia, F. Lamothe, M. Morales, R. J.
van der Werf, and L. P. Morency, “Can virtual humans be more engaging
than real ones?” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Human-Comput. Interaction,
2007, pp. 286–297.
S. Paus, H. M. Brecht, J. Köster, G. Seeger, T. Klockgether, and
U. Wüllner, “Sleep attacks, daytime sleepiness, and dopamine agonists in
Parkinson’s disease,” Movement Disorders, vol. 18, pp. 659–667, 2003.
U. Wüllner, T. Schmitz-Hübsch, G. Antony et al., “Autonomic dysfunction in 3414 Parkinson’s disease patients enrolled in the German Network
on Parkinson’s disease (KNP eV): The effect of ageing,” Eur. J. Neurol.,
vol. 14, pp. 1405–1408, 2007.
C. H. Schenck, J. Y. Montplaisir, B. Frauscher, B. Hogl, J. F. Gagnon, R.
Postuma, K. Sonka, P. Jennum, M. Partinen, I. Arnulf, V. Cochen de Cock,
Y. Dauvilliers, P. H. Luppi, A. Heidbreder, G. Mayer, F. Sixel-Döring,
C. Trenkwalder, M. Unger, P. Young, Y. K. Wing, L. Ferini-Strambi,
R. Ferri, G. Plazzi, M. Zucconi, Y. Inoue, A. Iranzo, J. Santamaria, C.
Bassetti, J. C. Möller, B. F. Boeve, Y. Y. Lai, M. Pavlova, C. Saper, P.
Schmidt, J. M. Siegel, C. Singer, E. St Louis, A. Videnovic, and W. Oertel, “Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder: devising controlled
active treatment studies for symptomatic and neuroprotective therapy—
A consensus statement from the international rapid eye movement sleep
behavior disorder study group,” Sleep Med., vol. 14, pp. 795–806, 2013.
M. M. van Gilst, M. Louter, C. R. Baumann, B. R. Bloem, and
S. Overeem, “Sleep benefit in Parkinson’s disease: Time to revive an
enigma?,” J. Parkinson’s Dis., vol. 2, pp. 167–170, 2012.
C. Meindorfner, Y. Körner, J. C. Möller, K. Stiasny-Kolster, W. H. Oertel,
and H. P. Krüger, “Driving in Parkinson’s disease: Mobility, accidents,
and sudden onset of sleep at the wheel,” Movement Disorders, vol. 20,
pp. 832–842, 2005.
A. J. Casson, D. Yates, S. Smith, J. S. Duncan, and E. Rodriguez-Villegas,
“Wearable electroencephalography,” IEEE Engineer Med. Biol. Mag,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 44–56, May/Jun. 2010.
V. Mihajlovic, B. Grundlehner, R. Vullers, and J. Penders, “Wearable,
Wireless EEG solutions in daily life applications: What are we missing?”
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 6–21, Jan. 2015.
K. Herlofson and J. P. Larsen, “The influence of fatigue on health-related
quality of life in patients with Parkinson’s disease,” Acta Neurol. Scand,
vol. 107, pp. 1–6, 2003.
M. Amboni, G. Santangelo, and P. Barone, “Depression, Apathy, Anhedonia, and fatigue in Parkinson’s disease,” in Neuropsychiatric Symptoms
of Movement Disorders. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2015, pp. 1–28.

1871

[90] W. J. Kop, A. Lyden, A. A. Berlin, K. Ambrose, C. Olsen, R. H. Gracely,
D. A. Williams, and D. J. Clauw, “Ambulatory monitoring of physical
activity and symptoms in fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome,”
Arthritis Rheum, vol. 52, pp. 296–303, 2005.
[91] L. Giancardo, A. Sanchez-Ferro, I. Butterworth, C. S. Mendoza, and
J. M. Hooker, “Psychomotor impairment detection via finger interactions with a computer keyboard during natural typing,” Sci. Rep., vol. 5,
p. 9678, 2015.
[92] T. Baltrusaitis, D. McDuff, N. Banda, M. Mahmoud, R. El Kaliouby,
P. Robinson, and R. Picard, “Real-time inference of mental states from
facial expressions and upper body gestures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Autom. Face Gesture Recog. Workshops, 2011, pp. 909–914.
[93] T. Baltrusaitis, P. Robinson, and L. Morency, “3D constrained local
model for rigid and non-rigid facial tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., 2012, pp. 2610–2617.
[94] J. Liddle, D. Ireland, S. J. McBride et al., “Measuring the lifespace of
people with Parkinson’s disease using smartphones: Proof of principle,”
JMIR mHealth uHealth, vol. 2, p. e13, 2014.
[95] S. Hagler, “Computational modeling of cognitive processes for continuous in-home assessment of cognitive performance,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Oregon Health Sci. Univ., Portland, OR, USA, 2014.
[96] M. Balzer-Geldsetzer, A. S. Costa, M. Kronenbürger et al., “Parkinson’s
disease and dementia: a longitudinal study (DEMPARK),” Neuroepidemiology, vol. 37, p. 168, 2011.
[97] D. Austin, J. McNames, K. Klein, H. Jimison, and M. Pavel, “A statistical
characterization of the finger tapping test: Modeling, estimation, and
applications,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 501–
507, Mar. 2015.
[98] A. M. Crizzle, A. M. Myers, E. A. Roy, and Q. J. Almeida, “Drivers with
Parkinson’s disease: are the symptoms of PD associated with restricted
driving practices?” J. Neurol., vol. 260, pp. 2562–2568, 2013.
[99] A. M. Crizzle, A. M. Myers, and Q. J. Almeida, “Drivers with Parkinson’s
disease: Who participates in research studies?,” Parkinsonism Related
Disorders, vol. 18, pp. 833–836, 2012.
[100] M. Dotzauer, S. R. Caljouw, D. De Waard, and W. H. Brouwer, “Longerterm effects of ADAS use on speed and headway control in drivers
diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease,” Traffic Injury Prevention, vol. 16,
pp. 10–16, 2015.
[101] V. Berisha, S. Wang, A. LaCross, and J. Liss, “Tracking discourse complexity preceding Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis: A case study comparing the press conferences of presidents ronald reagan and george herbert
walker bush,” J. Alzheimer’s Dis., vol. 45, pp. 959–963, 2015.
[102] S. G. Mueller, M. W. Weiner, L. J. Thal, R. C. Petersen, C. R. Jack, W.
Jagust, J. Q. Trojanowski, A. W. Toga, and L. Beckett, “Ways towards
an early diagnosis in Alzheimer’s disease: The Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative,” Alzheimer’s Dementia, vol. 1, pp. 55–66, 2005.
[103] G. Miller, “Alzheimer’s biomarker initiative hits its stride,” Science,
vol. 326, pp. 386–389, 2009.
[104] K. Marek, D. Jennings, S. Lasch, A. Siderowf, C. Tanner, T. Simuni, C.
Coffey, K. Kieburtz, E. Flagg, S. Chowdhury, W. Poewe, B. Mollenhauer,
T. Sherer, M. Frasier, C. Meunier, A. Rudolph, C. Casaceli, J. Seibyl, S.
Mendick, N. Schuff, Y. Zhang, A. Toga, K. Crawford, A. Ansbach, P. De
Blasio, M. Piovella, J. Trojanowski, L. Shaw, A. Singleton, K. Hawkins,
J. Eberling, D. Brooks, D. Russell, L. Leary, S. Factor, B. Sommerfeld,
P. Hogarth, E. Pighetti, K. Williams, D. Standaert, S. Guthrie, R. Hauser,
H. Delgado, J. Jankovic, C. Hunter, M. Stern, B. Tran, J. Leverenz, M.
Baca, S. Frank, C. A. Thomas, I. Richard, C. Deeley, L. Rees, F. Sprenger,
E. Lang, H. Shill, S. Obradov, H. Fernandez, A. Winters, D. Berg, K.
Gauss, D. Galasko, D. Fontaine, Z. Mari, M. Gerstenhaber, D. Brooks,
S. Malloy, P. Barone, K. Longo, T. Comery, B. Ravina, I. Grachev, K.
Gallagher, M. Collins, K. L. Widnell, S. Ostrowizki, P. Fontoura, F. LaRoche, T. Ho, J. Luthman, M. van der Brug, A. D. Reith, and P. Taylor,
“The Parkinson progression marker initiative (PPMI),” Prog. Neurobiol.,
vol. 95, pp. 629–635, 2011.
[105] D. Jennings, A. Siderowf, M. Stern, J. Seibyl, S. Eberly, D. Oakes,
K. Marek, and the PARS Investigators, “Imaging prodromal Parkinson disease: The Parkinson associated risk syndrome study,” Neurology,
vol. 4, pp. 1739–46, 2014.
[106] G. T. O’Connor, S. K. Plume, E. M. Olmstead, L. H. Coffin, J. R. Morton,
C. T. Maloney, E. R. Nowicki, J. F. Tryzelaar, F. Hernandez, L. Adrian, K.
J. Casey, D. N. Soule, C. A. S. Marrin, W. C. Nugent, D. C. Charlesworth,
R. Clough, S. Katz, B. J. Leavitt, and J. E. Wennberg, “A regional
prospective study of in-hospital mortality associated with coronary artery
bypass grafting. The Northern New England cardiovascular disease study
group,” JAMA, vol. 266, pp. 803–809, 1991.

1872

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2015

[107] A. Gawande, “The Bell curve,” The New Yorker, Dec. 6, 2004.
[108] M. S. Okun, A. Siderowf, J. G. Nutt, G. T. O’Conner, B. R. Bloem, E. M.
Olmstead, M. Guttman, T. Simuni, E. Cheng, E. V. Cohen, S. Parashos,
L. Marsh, I. A. Malaty, N. Giladi, P. Schmidt, and J. Oberdorf, “Piloting
the NPF data-driven quality improvement initiative,” Parkinson’s Related
Disorders, vol. 16, pp. 517–521, 2011.
[109] P. Schmidt, E. C. Nelson, M. Guttman et al., “The analysis of the use
of kinemetric devices to predict outcomes: Results from NPF-QII,” presented at the 19th Int. Congr. Parkinson’s Disease Movement Disorders,
San Diego, CA, USA, 2015.
[110] S. Young, S. Stanley, and A. Karr, “Deming, data and observational
studies,” Significance, vol. 8, pp. 116–120, 2011.
[111] Apple. (2015, Jul. 1). [Online]. Available: https://developer.apple.
com/researchkit/
[112] S. H. Friend, K. Kieburtz, R. Dorsey, C. Tanner, B. Bloem, and M. Little
(2015, Jul. 1). [Online]. Available: http://parkinsonmpower.org/

Jonathan A. Stamford received the B.Sc. degree
in pharmacology from the University of Bath, Bath,
U.K., 1980. He also received the D.Sc. degree.
He is a Neuroscientist with a double interest in
Parkinson’s. Following a doctoral thesis on the neurophysiology of the dopaminergic forebrain [London Hospital Medical College (LHMC)], and postdoctoral experience in the U.K. (LHMC) and the
USA (Indiana University and University of California, Riverside), he headed a research lab at Royal
London Hospital for more than a decade looking at
the effects of drugs on brain dopamine systems with particular reference to
Parkinson’s. He is the author of three academic books and more than 200 research publications and communications.
He was also diagnosed with Parkinson’s in 2006. Since 2011, he has been
strongly involved in patient advocacy. He currently works for The Cure Parkinson’s Trust and is a Director and co-Founder of Parkinson’s Movement, a global
patient advocacy collective. He was an ambassador for the 2013 World Parkinson Congress in Montréal, QC, Canada. Since diagnosis, he has also written
and published four books on living with Parkinson’s and coauthored a series of
articles on technology tools for Parkinson’s patients including: “Innovations in
e-health” in Quality of Life Research, 2014; “Smartphone-and internet-assisted
self-management and adherence tools to manage Parkinson’s disease (SMARTPD): Study protocol for a randomised controlled trial” in Trials, 2014; and
“Self-management in long term conditions using smartphones: A pilot study in
Parkinson’s disease” in the International Journal of Integrated Care, 2014. He
is a frequent invited speaker and also writes a humorous and influential weekly
blog “Slice of Life” about life with young onset Parkinson’s.

Peter N. Schmidt received the Bachelor’s degree
from Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degree from the Sibley School of
Mechanical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA, where he studied gait and balance and total
joint replacement. He completed a fellowship at the
Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY.
He joined National Parkinson’s Foundation, Miami, FL, USA, as a Chief Information Officer and
Vice President of Research and Professional Programs in June 2009, where he is responsible for the
Parkinson’s Outcomes Project (POP), a longitudinal study of Parkinson’s disease with the three aims: 1) to identify and disseminate best practices in care;
2) to identify, track, and study clinical outcome outliers; and (3) to optimize
care in order to improve the statistical power of clinical trials. With over 17 500
clinical evaluations of more than 7500 patients, POP is the largest clinical study
of Parkinson’s disease ever conducted and includes the largest set of patientreported outcome measures ever collected in a prospective study. His career has
focused on the intersection of math and medicine, addressing such problems
as engineering simulations of insults to biological systems, stochastic systems
for chronic disease management, and interoperable electronic medical records.
Along the way, he contributed to early versions of Linux, built an encryption
system for a Wall Street brokerage, and published articles on veterinary surgery,
hedging currency risk, and sector-specific characteristics of stock market valuations. He holds patents on a total knee replacement and a mobile device-based
video game.

Karl E. Friedl received the B.A. and M.A. degrees
in zoology from the University of California at Santa
Barbara (UCSB), Santa Barbara, CA, USA, and the
Ph.D. degree in biology (integrative physiology) from
the Institute of Environmental Stress, UCSB, in 1984.
He is an endocrine physiologist. From 1983 to
2013, he was a Military Officer conducting physiology research and leading medical research programs
for the U.S. Army. His last Army assignment was
as the Director of the Telemedicine and Advanced
Technology Research Center (2006–2012). He is currently a Physiology Consultant at Frederick, MD, USA; a Professor (adjunct)
at the Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco; and
a member of the Board of Directors for the Parkinson’s Action Network. His
research interests include the metabolically optimized brain, wearable biosensing/physiological models, and limits of human performance.
Dr. Friedl’s awards and honors include the French Ordre National du Mérit,
U.S. Army Legion of Merit (second OLC), Order of Military Merit, Morris K.
Udall Award for Parkinson’s Research Advocacy, Ronald and Nancy Reagan
Alzheimer’s Research Award, Diabetes Technology Society Research Leadership Award, and Outstanding Research and Development Scientist Award
(SAFMLS). He is a Fellow of the American Institute of Medical and Biological
Engineering (Class of 2013).

