IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

449

Toward Quantitative Assessment of Rheumatoid
Arthritis Using Volumetric Ultrasound
Kunlin Cao∗ , David M. Mills, Member, IEEE, Ralf G. Thiele, and Kedar A. Patwardhan

Abstract—Goal: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by
inflammation within the joint space as well as erosion or destruction
of the bone surface. We believe that volumetric (3-D) ultrasound
imaging of the joints in conjunction with automated image-analysis
tools for segmenting and quantifying the regions of interest can
lead to improved RA assessment. Methods: In this paper, we describe our proposed algorithms for segmenting 1) the 3-D bone
surface and 2) the 3-D joint capsule region. We improve and extend previous 2-D bone extraction methods to 3-D and make our
algorithm more robust to the intensity loss due to surface normals facing away from incident acoustic beams. The extracted
bone surfaces coupled with a joint-specific anatomical model are
used to initialize a coarse localization of the joint capsule region.
The joint capsule segmentation is refined iteratively utilizing a
probabilistic speckle model. Results: We apply our methods on 51
volumes from 8 subjects, and validate segmentation results with
expert annotations. We also provide the quantitative comparison of
our bone detection with magnetic resonance imaging. These automated methods have achieved average sensitivity/precision rates of
94%/93% for bone surface detection, and 87%/83% for joint capsule segmentation. Segmentations of normal and inflamed joints
are compared to demonstrate the potential of using proposed tools
to assess RA pathology at the joint level. Conclusion: The proposed
image-analysis methods showed encouraging results as compared
to expert annotations. Significance: These computer-assisted tools
can be used to help visualize 3-D anatomy in joints and help develop
quantitative measurements toward RA assessment.
Index Terms—bone surface, 3-D, image analysis, joint capsule,
musculoskeletal, rheumatoid arthritis, segmentation, synovium,
ultrasound, volumetric.

I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
HEUMATOID arthritis (RA) is one of the most common
and serious forms of arthritis. It affects about 1.5-million
Americans and may be responsible for 22% of all deaths from
arthritis and other rheumatic conditions [1]. RA of joints typically involves swelling and inflammation within the joint capsule region. Inflammation of the synovial membrane results in
synovitis, which may lead to erosion of the bony cortex. Early
detection of such changes at the joint level is essential in gaining

R

Manuscript received December 30, 2014; revised June 28, 2015; accepted July
16, 2015. Date of publication August 4, 2015; date of current version January
16, 2016. This work was supported by GE Healthcare Ultrasound Point-of-Care.
Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ K. Cao is with the GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY 12309
USA (e-mail: cao@ge.com).
D. M. Mills is with the GE Global Research Center.
K. A. Patwardhan was with the GE Global Research Center. He is now with
Samsung Research.
R. G. Thiele is with the School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Rochester Medical Center.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2463711

access to appropriate treatment as early as possible. However, it
is difficult for practitioners to objectively assess disease activity at the point-of-care (POC). In current research and clinical
practice, treatment decisions are commonly based on scores
(e.g., “DAS28” score [2], [3]), which are generated from physical examinations of affected joints to assess the tenderness and
swelling. These clinical scores cannot directly measure disease
activity at the joint level.
Conventional radiography (CR)—or X-ray has proven useful for clinicians to assess discrete bony destruction (erosions),
which are associated with the later stages of RA. Unfortunately,
CR lacks sensitivity to assess changes of synovial soft tissue
early in the course of disease. Diagnostic and therapeutic efforts
for RA are frequently directed at early disease. Accordingly,
several imaging modalities have been explored including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound (US). Both MRI
and US perform better at assessing soft tissue as well as bony
erosions than CR [5]–[7]. Compared to MRI, US has advantages
of lower cost, faster speed, and better portability, which make it
readily usable in many rheumatology POC clinics.
The conventional 2-D US is a popular POC imaging modality
for RA assessment [5]. However, 2-D US imaging is unable to
capture the underlying 3-D anatomy accurately, and it requires
extensive training and experience in order to make an objective assessment. It is also challenging to image the same 2-D
plane over multiple patient visits. 3-D US has been considered
for the assessment of musculoskeletal disease to improve operator variability. Clinical research has shown good to excellent
agreement between 2-D US and 3-D US relating to both joint
inflammation and bone erosion [8]–[10]. 3-D US has also been
shown to have lower interobserver variability than 2-D US in
the detection of inflammation in the joint, and thus, may help
operators to make objective assessment in RA multicenter studies [11]. The key advantage of 3-D US imaging is the ability
to perform volumetric quantification of inflammatory changes
in the joint [12], which adds considerable value to the precise
clinical assessment of disease activity. We believe that automated analysis and quantification of pathology-related features
in 3-D US images could improve the diagnosis and treatment
workflow for RA. This paper presents methods for automated
segmentation of bone surfaces and joint capsule regions from
3-D US scans of small finger joints. The extracted bone surfaces together with a joint-specific anatomical model provide
the basis for segmenting the joint capsule region.
B. Literature Review
Image segmentation techniques developed for medical ultrasound scans in various clinical domains have been reviewed

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

in [13]–[15]. In recent decades, much literature has been
devoted to the problem of automated bone extraction in 2-D and
3-D US images for different medical applications [16]–[26].
Several research groups have made efforts in bone contour
segmentation from US scans utilizing image intensity and gradient information. Daanen et al. [16] introduced a method for
modeling image information with a fuzzy logic process, and
delineating the osseous interface by incorporating prior knowledge of the bone appearance in US scans. Alfiansyah et al. [17]
used an active contour model to extract bone contours in US
slices, and improved the method by applying a gradient vector
flow in the narrow band around the evolved contour [18]. To
address its application in serial US image segmentation, they
obtained the initial contour for the next slice from the retrospective results of previous slices. Kowal et al. [19] presented an
automatic approach for bone contours detection in B-mode US
based on depth weighted adaptive thresholding and morphological operations. Foroughi et al. [20] used a dynamic programming
technique for bone contour segmentation based on intensity and
local gradient information in 2-D US images, which is computationally inexpensive and suitable for real-time applications.
However, these methods have mostly been applied to 2-D slices,
and therefore, are limited to cross-sectional analysis.
3-D freehand US is a common technique, which is based
on a set of 2-D cross-sectional US acquisitions. The set of US
slices together with probe’s spatial position and orientation information acquired from a sensor comprise a 3-D data. Zhang
et al. [21] proposed a direct surface extraction method from 3-D
freehand US images by fitting an approximating radial basis
function to the group of nonuniform data samples. Lopez-Perez
et al. [22] adapted and enhanced the active contour model involved in [17] to detect bone contours in freehand US slices
with irregular spacing between each other, and then, reconstruct
the 3-D bone surface from the bone contours with a tensor product B-spline approximation. A recent study used eigenanalysis
of the multiscale Hessian matrix to enhance sheet-like structures (e.g., large bone surfaces) in 3-D freehand US, and extracted bone surfaces using a singular value thresholding [23].
In practice, the inconsistent speed of freehand scanning may
lead to nonuniform bone surface resolution, and the quality of
the extracted bone surface can vary from scan to scan, as image
acquisition is heavily dependent on the operator.
Hacihaliloglu et al. [24] assessed the potential of using phase
congruency to enhance the bone visualization in volumetric US
scan acquired with a 3-D probe, and they further utilized the
local phase features to segment the bone surface [25], [26].
In general, local phase information is well suited for ultrasound
edge detection because it is invariant to changes in image brightness or contrast. However, we have observed in our experiments
that local phase based edge detection enhanced bone as well as
spurious edges equally when bone surfaces appear blurry or noticeable acoustic artifacts exist, and the algorithm takes a longer
time for edge computation in 3-D due to the multiresolution and
multiorientation filtering scheme.
Synovitis quantification through measuring the synovial volume in patients with RA has been studied using a computerassisted segmentation method with MRI scanning [27]. Our

Fig. 1. Sonographically observed anatomy of an MCP joint (derived from [4]).
The triangular region enclosed by the dash line is defined as the joint capsule
region.

previous studies have investigated the validity and feasibility of
automatic bone and joint-region (containing synovial tissues)
segmentation in volumetric US [28]. As far as we are aware,
there have been no other previous attempts to apply automated
image analysis algorithms for volumetric segmentation of the
joint space toward synovitis quantification using 3-D US.
In this paper, we propose to 1) improve and extend the method
presented in [20] for 2-D bone extraction to 3-D US volumes
and make our method more robust to the intensity loss due
to surface normals facing away from incident acoustic beams
and 2) perform automated segmentation of the joint capsule region based on the typical sono-anatomy of metacarpophalangeal
(MCP) joints [4] (illustrated in Fig. 1) and using the detected
bone location as context. The segmented bone surface and joint
capsule region can be used to help visualize the 3-D anatomy of
regions of interest in joints and help develop measures toward
RA assessment.
Our preliminary work on extracting the bone surface and joint
capsule region was described in [28]. The work presented in this
paper provides a complete description of our automated segmentation approaches. This paper extends our previous work by
describing how to preprocess the 3-D US images for bone segmentation, comparing segmentation accuracy of bone surfaces
against MRI for a reference case, and providing validation results on a wider collection of US datasets. This paper also examines the segmented structures in normal and inflamed joints—to
illustrate the potential of using computer-assisted tools to assess
RA pathology at the joint level.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II-A
introduces the data acquisition for experiments in this study.
Section II-B describes the automated 3-D bone extraction in
detail. The segmentation approach of joint capsule region is
presented in Section II-C. We demonstrate the performance of
proposed techniques using validation results on real patient data
in Section III. We cover the discussion of our current work
and future directions in Section IV, and conclude this paper in
Section V.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Data Acquisition
In order to generate preliminary data toward motivating the
use of volumetric ultrasound in RA, 51 3-D datasets of 11 joints

CAO et al.: TOWARD QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF RA USING VOLUMETRIC ULTRASOUND

451

Fig. 2. Illustration of the “triplane” view obtained from a volumetric ultrasound scan centered at the same location.

in eight subjects were obtained (four subjects with rheumatic
disease). The high-frequency 3-D US equipment was used
(Voluson-i and RSP-6-16 probe, GE Healthcare, Wauwatosa,
WI, USA). Joints examined included eight MCP joints and three
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints. We placed the patient’s hand
or foot in a waterbath when required, to align the joint capsule
region with the focal depth of the transducer. US studies were
performed by a rheumatologist certified in musculoskeletal US,
with 20 years of US experience. An example of the volumetric
ultrasound scan is shown in Fig. 2. The image spatial resolution
is 0.1 mm × 0.1 mm × 0.1 mm.

Fig. 3. Illustration of bone extraction steps on an example slice in azimuthal
xz plane. Top row: (a) B-mode US image, (b) Gaussian smoothed image, (c)
negated LoG filtered image, and (d) reflection image. Bottom row: (e) shadow
image, (f) shadow derivative image, (g) bone likelihood image, and (h) detected
bone surfaces overlaid on (a).

B. Bone Surface Extraction
Foroughi et al. [20] have shown a bone contour extraction
method on 2-D US slices. In this study, we extend the method to
3-D US volumes. The bone surface is first enhanced in the 3-D
US image using its reflection property. When the bone surface
is near perpendicular to the direction of ultrasound waves, it
generates a strong acoustic reflection that creates a bright ridge
with some thickness [29]. To model this property, the Laplacian
of Gaussian (LoG) operator is applied on the image. Negative
values of LoG output correspond with bright ridge locations.
Therefore, negative values are negated, and the rest is set to
zero. The resulting image L is added to the Gaussian smoothed
image G, providing us the reflection number R [20]
R(x, y, z) = G(x, y, z) + L(x, y, z)

(1)

where (x, y, z) represents the 3-D coordinates of a voxel in
the volume along the azimuthal, elevational, and axial axes,
respectively (illustrated in Fig. 6). A binary mask is generated
from the smoothed image G such that those voxels with intensity
values smaller than a threshold are marked as invalid and will
be neglected in subsequent processing. In our experiments, all
images are normalized to [0, 1] and the threshold is set to 0.3.
Fig. 3(a)–(d) shows an example slice (in azimuthal xz plane)
of the original US image, Gaussian smoothed image, output of
negated LoG image, and reflection image, respectively.
In addition, due to large mismatches in the acoustic
impedance at the bone interface, only a small portion of ultrasound energy passes through the bone surface, which results
in the dark area below the bone [30]. We utilize this property by
calculating the average intensity below a voxel for each imaging
beam as
z max
G (x, y, z0 )
(2)
SH(x, y, z) = z 0 =z
zmax − z + 1
where z is the index along axial (imaging) direction, zmax is the
dimension along axial direction, and SH represents the shadow

Fig. 4. Illustration of intensity drop-off as the bone curves away from the
incident acoustic beam direction. Arrow in left figure indicates areas of intensity
drop-off. θ in right figure is the angle between the surface normal and the imaging
direction.

value for each voxel, as shown in Fig. 3(e). The largest discrepancy happens near the bone surface since the shadow values
below the bone are near zero, while high intensities of the bone
region rapidly raise the shadow values around bone surface.
Shadow values change slowly above the bone because adding
a relatively larger number on a nontrivial distribution will not
change the mean obviously. The bone surface is effectively enhanced by applying a directional derivative on the shadow valued image along the axial direction. Fig. 3(f) shows the shadow
derivative image D. Note that in images R and D, values at
invalid voxel locations are set to zero. A bone likelihood image
Cbone is generated by
Cbone (x, y, z) = R(x, y, z) ∗ D(x, y, z)

(3)

which is shown in Fig. 3(g). Fig. 3(h) illustrates the detected
bone surfaces (marked in green and red) overlaid on the US
image of Fig. 3(a).
In our experiments, we noticed that at regions where the
bone surface curves away from the imaging direction, there is
intensity loss, which makes it very challenging to detect the bone
surface accurately. Fig. 4 left shows an example of such case with
intensity drop-off at the arrow pointing region. This intensity
drop-off happens because the surface normal may not lie in the
2-D slice, as illustrated in Fig. 4 right. We, therefore, utilize
implicit 3-D information afforded by the volumetric image and
propose a method to correct the intensity loss by assuming a

452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

simple model
I(x) = I  (x) · cos(θ)

(4)

where I  (x) is the incident acoustic intensity, which we want
to estimate on the bone surface point x = (x, y, z), I(x) is
the observed image intensity, and θ is the angle between
the surface normal n̂x and the imaging direction (shown in
Fig. 4 right). Here, n̂x is the implicit normal computed as:
n̂x = ∇I(x)/|∇I(x)|, where ∇I(x) denotes the 3-D gradient
vector at x. By solving (4), we obtain the intensity-corrected image I  . Considering the orientation of bone surfaces in US scans,
the intensity correction is only performed where 0◦ < θ < 75◦ .
Fig. 5(b) shows the intensity-corrected image derived from (a).
The subsequent processing steps (Gaussian smoothing, LoG filtering, calculations of reflection, shadow, and bone likelihood
images) are carried out on this corrected image I  . Fig. 5(c) and
(d) shows the bone likelihood images before and after the correction respectively. Fig. 5(e)–(h) illustrates the improvement in
bone surface extraction by applying this intensity correction.
We assume there is at most 1 pixel representing bone at
each scan line. Then, detecting the bone surface is a single
terrain surface search problem in our case. Directly applying
a greedy search method as in [20] on each individual slice of
3-D data would not capture the 3-D smoothness of the bone
surface. In this study, we use a dynamic programming approach
with a modified cost function that incorporates 3-D smoothness constraints—to find the optimal path Pz on each slice (in
azimuthal xz plane). The path consists of at most three different
regions: bony region (with bone pixels), boneless region (without bone pixels), and the jump section (jumps between bony
and boneless regions). As described in [20], an additional row
is added on each slice to represent the boneless region. If a path
passes through the addition row across some scan lines, it means
there are no bone pixels on those scan lines. The modified 3D cost function to be optimized is a linear combination of the
internal cost Eint and the external costs Eextx and Eexty .
Cost(x) = (wx + wy )Eint + (1 − wx )Eextx + (1 − wy )Eexty
(5)
where wx and wy are weighting factors on the internal cost
when processing the bone curves in the azimuthal xz plane and
elevational yz plane, respectively. In the experiments of this
study, we set wx = wy = 0.8.
Eint is the internal cost defined as one minus the bonelikelihood Cbone for the bony region and a constant otherwise.

1 − Cbone , bone region
Eint =
(6)
0.6,
otherwise.
Eextx and Eexty are the external costs that enforce smoothness
constraints
⎧
2
⎪
dPz
⎪
⎪
α
−
tan
θ
||
||
+ γx , if bony
x
xz
⎪
⎨
dx
Eextx = Jx ,
if jumping (7)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
otherwise
αx Dx 2 ,

Eext y

⎧
2
⎪
dPz
⎪
⎪
αy ||
− tan θy z || + γy ,
⎪
⎨
dy
= Jy ,
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
αy Dy 2 ,

if bony
if jumping (8)
otherwise.

The external energy terms regularize the smoothness and connectivity of the path. The derivatives of the 2-D bone contour in
the azimuthal xz and elevational yz planes are given by dPz /dx
and dPz /dy, respectively. Small negative scalars (γx and γy ) are
used to encourage larger connected bone curves by reducing the
cost. We add 3-D constraint terms tan θxz and tan θy z in Eextx
and Eexty , respectively. Here, θxz and θy z are the angles between
the incident acoustic ray and the projection of 3-D normal n̂x
on the xz and yz planes, respectively. Therefore, tan θxz and
tan θy z describe the derivatives of the actual bone curve on xz
and yz planes. We utilize the derivative information of bone
curves to guide our search direction, and constants αx and αy
weight the deviation of the first order derivatives of the searched
path from the actual path in the azimuthal plane and elevational
plane respectively. Dx and Dy correspond to the smoothness
costs in the boneless region. Jx and Jy represent the jump costs
between bony and boneless regions (refer to [20]). In our experiments, these parameters are set as αx = 0.4, γx = −0.4,
αy = 0.1, γy = −0.1, and Jx = Jy = Dx = Dy = 1.
The dynamic programming search for the best fitting bone
surface is then carried out starting from the central (azimuthal)
slice with the assumption that Eexty is zero. Once we have a bone
contour in the central slice, we can proceed with the dynamic
programming search moving away from the central slice in both
directions using the cost function specified in (5), which includes
the smoothness terms along both xz and yz planes. Note that
although the dynamic programming search proceeds slice by
slice to maintain computational efficiency, the cost function to
be minimized is designed to incorporate 3-D information. Since
we have an initial bone contour in the central slice, we can define
a smaller span of search range in neighboring slices to shorten
the running time. This search strategy is illustrated in Fig. 6.
C. Joint Capsule Region Segmentation
Once we detect the bone surface from the scan of a joint, a
joint-specific anatomical model may be used to design priors
or seeds for segmenting the joint capsule region. The capsule
region of MCP joints lies between the bones forming a joint,
which is shown in Fig. 1. Based on the sonographically observed
anatomical structure of an MCP joint [4], we design a novel
method for automatically segmenting the joint capsule region.
This method starts from setting the initial seeds for capsule
segmentation utilizing a simple anatomical model of the MCP
joint. In each azimuthal slice, we first fit a line to the bone contour using a weighted lease-squares fitting, as shown in Fig. 7(a).
This straight line intersects bone surface with two points (A and
B). Then, we find the lowest point (C) of the detected bone
contour. All voxels that lie inside the triangle ABC and above
the detected bone surface provide a coarse localization of the
joint capsule region and serve as the initial seeds for the segmentation.

CAO et al.: TOWARD QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF RA USING VOLUMETRIC ULTRASOUND

453

Fig. 7. Illustration of joint capsule region segmentation. (a) Line (marked in
blue) fitted to the bone contour using weighted least-squares intersects the bone
surface at two points (A and B). A third point (C) is given by the lowest bone
surface detection. The region inside the triangle formed by these points and
above the bone surface (red overlay) is used as an initial guess for the joint
capsule region segmentation. (b) Example slice of the Fisher–Tippett image of
σ i2 (x). (c) J-divergence image (low values imply high statistical similarity with
the initial seed region). (d) Final segmentation of the joint capsule region (red
overlay) using geodesic active contour level-sets with the gradient vector flow.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the improvement in bone surface extraction after correcting drop-off effects. (a) Original US image and (b) intensity corrected image.
Bone likelihood images (c) before and (d) after correction. Bone detections (e)
before and (f) after correction (red overlay). 3-D surface renderings (g) before
and (h) after correction (marked in green and yellow). The red arrows point to
the same region with intensity loss.

Fig. 6. Illustration of search strategy in the dynamic programming search
for bone surface. This procedure starts from central slice (with red overlay
indicating the bone contour) and proceeds search moving away from the central
slice in both directions along y-axis (slices with yellow overlays indicating
boundaries of the search range).

We apply the geodesic active contour level set framework to
further evolve the initial capsule region and obtain the segmentation. A general framework for level set evolution equation can
be described as [31]
∂φ (x, t)
= λ1 Fprop (x, t) |∇φ (x, t)|
∂t
+ λ2 Fcurv (x, t) |∇φ (x, t)|
→
−
+ λ3 F adv (x, t) · ∇φ (x, t)

(9)

where the evolved contour is represented by the zero level set
of the function φ (x, t). Here, the propagation term, curvature
term, and advection term are formed as: Fprop (x, t) = gI (x),
→
−
Fcurv (x, t) = κ(x, t)gI (x), and F adv (x, t) = ∇gI (x), respectively. gI is the speed function, and κ denotes the mean
curvature. λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 control the weights of the three
terms. In our experiments, the three weighting factors are set
as λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 1. In order to increase the capture range of
level sets, we replace the gradient field in advection term with
the gradient vector flow (GVF) field of the speed image [32]:
→
−
F adv (x, t) = GVF(gI (x)).
Usually the speed function gI decreases monotonically with
the gradient magnitude of the intensity image. However, speckle
degrades the quality of B-mode US images severely. Therefore,
reducing speckle in US scans is important for the image feature
extraction. Probabilistic modeling of speckle and feature detection in US images based on the information theory have
been derived in [33]. Here, we utilize a probabilistic speckle
model using the Fisher–Tippett distribution to extract important
gradient features. The joint capsule region is assumed to be homogeneous, and hence, we can compute a single Fisher–Tippett
reflectivity parameter σc2 for all voxels in the initial seed or
current capsule region.

(e2I (x) − 1)dx
2
σc = x∈Ω c 
(10)
2 x∈Ω c dx
where Ωc denotes the initial (or current) capsule region. The
Fisher–Tippett distribution parameter σi2 (x) is also computed
using (10) for each voxel x (denoted by suffix i) using a small
3-D patch (Ωi ) around it. Fig. 7(b) shows a slice of the Fisher–
Tippett image of σi2 (x). The Kullback–Leibler (KL) distance
(or relative entropy) is used to measure
 the difference between
two distributions p and q: D(p||q) = p(x)ln(p(x)/q(x))dx.
Since the KL distance is asymmetric, one can symmetrize the

454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

KL distance by computing the J-divergence from each Ωi to
Algorithm 1. MCP Joint Capsule Region Segmentation
Algorithm
1. Extract initial seed region based on the detected bone
surface and anatomical model of MCP joint.
2. Set current iteration k = 0. Set the initial seed region as
current seed region.
3. While k < maximum number of iterations kmax
4. Estimate a single Fisher–Tippett reflectivity
parameter σc2 for all voxels in current seed region.
5. Estimate distribution parameter of σi2 (x) for each
voxel using a small 3D patch around it.
6. Compute J-divergence map Jci measuring the
distance from each σi2 (x) to σc2 .
7. Compute speed image gI by passing Jci map through
a sigmoid filter.
8. Estimate Jci distribution inside the current seed
region; automatically select additional seeds if a
neighboring region belongs to the distribution.
9. Feed speed image and seed image into geodesic
active contour level set framework with the GVF
field; evolve current seed region and refine the joint
capsule region segmentation.
10. If the change in capsule volume < 	 or the change in
σc2 > η, where 	 and η are specified stopping criteria,
stop. Otherwise k = k + 1, current segmentation
result is served as the seed region for next iteration,
and jump to step 3.

Ωc [33]
Jci (x) =

σ2
σ 2 (x)
D(c||i) + D(i||c)
= −1 + 2 c + i 2 . (11)
2
2σi (x)
2σc

This J-divergence image [illustrated in Fig. 7(c)] is passed
through a sigmoid filter that performs an inverse intensity
mapping. This mapping produces a speed image for level set
based segmentation such that the level set will march rapidly
on the homogeneous region and will stop on the contour.
The current result from level set segmentation is served as the
initial region for next iteration of the joint capsule region refinement. Its regional distribution parameter σc2 is recalculated, and
thus, the J-divergence and speed images are updated. The Jci
distribution inside the current seed region is then estimated and
additional seed regions may be automatically selected if a region
belongs to the distribution (within 95% confidence intervals)
and lies in the neighborhood of current seed region (Hausdorff
distance <0.5 mm). The refinement procedure is stopped once
the change in σc2 is large, or the change in the capsule volume
is insignificant, or it reaches the maximum refinement iteration.
Fig. 7(d) shows the joint capsule region segmentation (marked
in red) overlaid on an US image slice.
The MCP joint capsule region segmentation algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Fig. 8. Collage of 2-D slices from 3-D bone extraction results on scans from
multiple subjects. Expert annotations (marked in red) and algorithm detections
(marked in green) are overlaid. Yellow overlay indicates a perfect match between
the two.

III. RESULTS
A. Bone Surface Extraction Accuracy
We applied the proposed bone extraction method to 51 volumes of 11 different joints. Fig. 8 shows the extracted bone surface contours (green overlay) from representative slices of some
3-D volumes. For a quantitative validation, we used expert annotations on all scans to evaluate our algorithm performance. The
expert annotations were served as the groundgtruth and marked
on three 2-D slices per volume. The groundtruth markings (red
overlay) and corresponding algorithm detections (green overlay) can be visually inspected in Fig. 8 (yellow overlay indicates
exact match between reference and the automated detection).
Segmentation accuracy and robustness were qualitatively
evaluated based on the comparison of groundtruth markings
and automated detections. We measured the average unsigned
distance of the extracted bone with respect to the expert labeling
as the detection error. For a detection tolerance of 0.5 mm, we
observed the detection sensitivity (proportion of actual positives
which are correctly identified as such) and precision (proportion
of true positives against all detected positives). These validation
results are grouped by joint and listed in Table I. The average
detection error is 0.13 mm through all cases, with 94% sensitivity and 93% precision. Of the 11 joints, there are 5 normal and
6 inflamed joints. The detection accuracy of the bone surfaces
in normal and inflamed joints are listed in the last row in Table I
(with ∼ 1% difference).
Accuracy of US bone surface segmentation in 3-D geometry is also validated against the bone surface extractions from
an MRI scan. We used a user-guided level set segmentation
scheme in Insight Toolkit (ITK)-SNAP [34] to segment the bone
structure in MRI data, and extracted the bone surfaces close
to the dorsum of the hand. Fig. 9 illustrates the bone surface
segmentations from US and MRI of the same normal subject.
Rigid registration was applied to align the segmentations from

CAO et al.: TOWARD QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF RA USING VOLUMETRIC ULTRASOUND

455

TABLE I
VALIDATION RESULTS OF BONE SURFACE EXTRACTION THROUGH 51
3-D US VOLUMES
Joint

Vol
No.

Detect. Error
(mm)

Sensitivity

Precision

1 (MCP /N)
2 (MCP /N)
3 (MCP /I)
4 (MCP /N)
5 (MCP /I)
6 (MCP /N)
7 (MCP /I)
8 (MCP /I)
9 (MTP /N)
10 (MTP /I)
11 (MTP /I)
Avg.
Avg. (N / I)

12
12
6
1
5
2
2
2
2
2
5

0.122 ± 0.022
0.097 ± 0.017
0.121 ± 0.030
0.117
0.213 ± 0.086
0.155 ± 0.001
0.093 ± 0.004
0.070 ± 0.004
0.216 ± 0.047
0.143 ± 0.012
0.123 ± 0.039
0.13
0.14 / 0.13

0.942 ± 0.050
0.983 ± 0.041
0.944 ± 0.104
0.995
0.882 ± 0.103
0.920 ± 0.047
0.995 ± 0.004
0.997 ± 0.002
0.794 ± 0.099
0.893 ± 0.023
0.953 ± 0.065
0.94
0.93 / 0.94

0.979 ± 0.014
0.973 ± 0.017
0.969 ± 0.020
0.991
0.864 ± 0.037
0.909 ± 0.012
0.983 ± 0.010
0.974 ± 0.008
0.784 ± 0.114
0.903 ± 0.043
0.940 ± 0.062
0.93
0.93 / 0.94

(N: Normal; I: Inflamed).

Fig. 9. Comparison of bone surface extractions from MRI and US scans of
the same normal subject. Bone surface extractions (marked in green and red)
from (a) MRI and (b) US scans. (c) Overlay of bone surfaces from MR (marked
in gold) and US (marked in light yellow). The mean distance between the two
segmentations is 0.09 ± 0.09 mm.

Fig. 10. Capsule segmentation results from multiple subjects. The initial seeds
(top row) and final segmentations (bottom row) are marked in green.

US and MRI. The mean distance between these two segmentations is 0.09 ± 0.09 mm.
B. Joint Capsule Region Segmentation Accuracy
Fig. 10 shows the initial seeds (top row) using our simple
anatomical prior, and the final segmentations based on the probabilistic speckle modeling (bottom row). Again, for quantitative validation, we used expert annotations from representative
slices containing the capsule region. 39 of the 51 scans from
eight joints are suitable for joint capsule identification. For each
of these 39 volumes, we obtained expert annotations of joint

Fig. 11. Collage of 2-D slices from 3-D joint capsule region segmentation
results on scans from multiple subjects. Expert annotations (marked in red) and
detections (marked in green) are overlaid. Yellow overlay indicates a perfect
match between the two.
TABLE II
VALIDATION MEASUREMENTS OF JOINT CAPSULE REGION SEGMENTATION
THROUGH 39 3-D US VOLUMES
Joint

Vol
No.

Sensitivity

Precision

1 (MCP /N)
2 (MCP /N)
3 (MCP /I)
4 (MCP /N)
5 (MCP /I)
6 (MCP /N)
7 (MCP /I)
8 (MCP /I)
9 (MTP /N)
10 (MTP /I)
11 (MTP /I)
Avg.
Avg. (N / I)

10
12
6
1
0
2
2
2
0
0
4

0.793 ± 0.098
0.832 ± 0.109
0.903 ± 0.068
0.863 ± 0.000
—
0.922 ± 0.016
0.909 ± 0.007
0.796 ± 0.123
—
—
0.911 ± 0.035
0.87
0.85 / 0.88

0.869 ± 0.059
0.785 ± 0.136
0.855 ± 0.063
0.906 ± 0.000
—
0.708 ± 0.024
0.835 ± 0.020
0.767 ± 0.199
—
—
0.890 ± 0.033
0.83
0.82 / 0.84

(N: Normal; I: Inflamed).

capsule region on three 2-D slices. The groundtruth markings
(red overlay) and corresponding algorithm detections (green
overlay) can be visually inspected as illustrated in Fig. 11 (yellow overlay indicates exact match between reference and the
automated detections). Detection sensitivity and precision were
grouped by joint and listed in Table II. The proposed algorithm
achieved average sensitivity and precision rates of about 87%
and 83%, respectively. Of the 8 joints, there are 4 normal and 4
inflamed joints. The detection accuracy of joint capsule regions
in normal and inflamed joints are listed in the last row in Table II
(with ≤ 3% difference).
The algorithm for joint capsule region segmentation is designed according to the MCP model. Since the MTP joint has
similar anatomy as the MCP, the proposed algorithm is able
to extract the joint capsule region in MTP joints (Joint #11 in
Table II).
Our algorithms were implemented using experimental nonoptimized code leveraging the ITK library [35] in C++. Using a
laptop with 8 GB of RAM, the bone extraction algorithm took
∼5 s for a 200 × 100 × 100 size volume. The run time for
joint capsule region segmentation varies on scans of joints with
and without inflammation. For normal joint scans, the algorithm
took ∼40 s to segment the joint capsule region for a 200 × 30 ×
100 size volume. For inflamed joint scans, the algorithm needs
to run for more iterations so as to segment the enlarged joint

456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 12. 3-D renderings of the extracted bone surfaces (marked in green and
yellow) from diseased subjects. Red arrows point to the bone erosion regions.

Fig. 13. Examples of bone surface and joint capsule region segmentations
from a normal joint (left column) and an inflamed joint (right column). (a) and
(b) shows the US images. (c) and (d) shows the bone (marked in orange) and
joint capsule region (marked in aqua) segmentations. (e) and (f) shows 3-D
renderings of the extracted bone surfaces (marked in yellow) and joint capsule
regions (marked in peru color).

capsule region and costs ∼155 s for a 200 × 30 × 100 size
volume.
C. Visualization of Normal and Inflamed Joints
Synovitis in joints which are affected by rheumatoid arthritis
may attack synovial joints, and cause inflammatory responses
of the capsule around the synovium. Once the inflammatory
reaction is established, the cartilage and the underlying bone
begins to disintegrate. Fig. 12 illustrates three examples of bone
erosion in inflamed joints. Fig. 13(a) and (b) shows examples
of a normal joint and an inflamed synovial joint, respectively.
Their bone and joint capsule region segmentation results and 3D renderings are shown in the second and third rows of Fig. 13.
Measurements extracted from the segmented results can be used
to quantify the shape/volume changes of the synovial joint,
which may help assess rheumatoid arthritis.
IV. DISCUSSION
Dynamic programming provides an optimal solution for curve
detection in 2-D slices, but may not give the optimal 3-D surface solution. We added a constraint term Eexty in (8) between
the bone detections in consecutive slices to help regularize the
surface shape in 3-D. The main reason we chose dynamic

programming over some global optimal solutions like graph
cuts [36] or graph search [37] methods is due to the run time.
Dynamic programming can achieve real time detection in 2-D
slices. Provided with detections on a previous slice, the shortest
path detection on the current slice is only performed in small
search range, which will further reduce the computation cost.
On the other hand, many graph-based algorithms employ a maxflow/min-cut optimization, which may be more computationally
intensive to solve the 3-D surface segmentation problem. We
have tried some global optimal solutions such as graph search
to find the bone surface which generated similar results but took
5–7 times longer.
Ultrasound is safe and widely available worldwide. The use
of ultrasound as a research and clinical imaging tool has increased steadily over the last two decades. In particular, musculoskeletal ultrasound is routinely used by a growing number of
rheumatologists in clinical practice. The goal of our study is developing computer-assisted tools to improve overall diagnostic
efficiency by enabling diagnosis at the rheumatologist’s office
and avoiding costly and time consuming referrals. This may
require some extra exam time in the rheumatology clinic, but
with fast and efficient ultrasound systems and algorithms, we
also hope to minimize this extra time. In addition, the computerassisted tools may help reduce subjectivity, which is a barrier to
the acceptance of ultrasound-based diagnosis in the clinic.
Computer-assisted tools presented here and future analysis
will also enable the correlation of serial exams and tracking
of relevant imaging biomarkers within the joint capsule region
from serial exams. Using such tools at the point of care would
enable and empower providers to achieve an objective, operator
independent assessment of the disease activity. Treatment could
be adjusted where necessary, and expensive treatment may not
be needed for other patients.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we describe automated methods for extracting
bone surfaces and segmenting the capsule region at the joint
level using 3-D ultrasound scans. The experiments presented in
this paper were designed to evaluate the performance of these
algorithms and ultimately to show the potential of using such
automated methods for RA assessment in the rheumatologist’s
clinic. The proposed methods have shown encouraging results as
compared to expert annotations. The extracted bone surface can
help visualize 3-D bone anatomy and help identify bone erosion
regions in inflamed joints. Noticeable changes were observed
through comparing size measurements between normal and inflamed joint capsule regions. These results and observations
have demonstrated the feasibility of using the proposed imageanalysis tools in volumetric ultrasound scans toward quantitative
assessment of RA. Additional validation work needs to be done
before these methods can be used in clinical practice and the
team is pursuing this through additional studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank F. Lin, N. Halmann, and
B. Jaworski for helpful discussions.

CAO et al.: TOWARD QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF RA USING VOLUMETRIC ULTRASOUND

REFERENCES
[1] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014, Mar. 17).
Arthritis-related statistics,” http://www.cdc.gov/arthritis/data_statistics/
arthritis_related_stats.htm
[2] M. L. Prevoo et al., “Modified disease activity scores that include twentyeight-joint counts. development and validation in a prospective longitudinal study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis,” Arthritis Rheumatism,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 44–48, 1995.
[3] A. K. Brown et al., “Presence of significant synovitis in rheumatoid
arthritis patients with disease-modifying antirheumatic drug-induced clinical remission: Evidence from an imaging study may explain structural
progression,” Arthritis Rheumatism, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 3761–3773,
2006.
[4] N. Boutry et al., “Metacarpophalangeal joints at US in asymptomatic volunteers and cadaveric specimens,” Radiology, vol. 232, no. 3,
pp. 716–724, 2004.
[5] R. J. Wakefield et al., “The value of sonography in the detection
of bone erosions in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A comparison
with conventional radiography,” Arthritis Rheumatism, vol. 43, no. 12,
pp. 2762–2770, 2000.
[6] M. Ostergaard and M. Szkudlarek, “Imaging in rheumatoid arthritis—
Why MRI and ultrasonography can no longer be ignored,” Scand. J.
Rheumatol., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 63–73, 2003.
[7] M. Magnani et al., “Ultrasonography detection of early bone erosions
in the metacarpophalangeal joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis,”
Clin. Exp. Rheumatol., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 743–748, 2004.
[8] J. Strunk et al., “Interobserver agreement in two- and three-dimensional
power doppler sonographic assessment of synovial vascularity during antiinflammatory treatment in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,” Ultraschall
Med., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 409–415, 2007.
[9] E. Filippucci et al., “Ultrasound imaging for the rheumatologist. XX.
Sonographic assessment of hand and wrist joint involvement in rheumatoid
arthritis: Comparison between two- and three-dimensional ultrasonography,” Clin. Exp. Rheumatol., vol. 27, pp. 197–200, 2009.
[10] E. Filippucci et al., “Hyaline cartilage involvement in patients with gout
and calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease. An ultrasound study,” Osteoarthritis Cartilage, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 178–181, 2009.
[11] E. Naredo et al., “Three dimensional volumetric ultrasonography. Does
it improve reliability of musculoskeletal ultrasound?” Clin. Exp. Rheumatol., vol. 28, pp. 79–82, 2010.
[12] T. Kang et al., “The evolution of ultrasound in rheumatology,” Therapeutic
Adv. Musculoskeletal Dis., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 399–411, 2012.
[13] J. A. Noble and D. Boukerroui, “Ultrasound image segmentation: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 987–1010, Aug. 2006.
[14] V. Shrimali et al., “Current trends in segmentation of medical ultrasound
B-mode images: A review,” IETE Techn. Rev., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 8–17,
2009.
[15] K. Saini et al., “Ultrasound imaging and image segmentation in the area
of ultrasound: A review,” Int. J. Adv. Sci. Technol., vol. 24, pp. 41–60,
2010.
[16] V. Daanen et al., “A fully automated method for the delineation of osseous interface in ultrasound images,” in Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention, LNCS 3216. Springer, 2004, pp. 549–
557.
[17] A. Alfiansyah et al., “Automatic segmentation of hip bone surface in
ultrasound images using an active contour,” Comput. Assisted Radiol.
Surg., 2006.
[18] A. Alfiansyah et al., “Deformable model for serial ultrasound images
segmentation: Application to computer assisted hip athroplasty,” in Proc.
13th Int. Conf. BioMed. Eng., 2009, pp. 1073–1076.
[19] J. Kowal et al., “Automated bone contour detection in ultrasound B-mode
images for minimally invasive registration in computer-assisted surgeryan in vitro evaluation,” Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assisted Surg., vol. 3,
no. 4, pp. 341–348, 2007.
[20] P. Foroughi et al., “Ultrasound bone segmentation using dynamic programming,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2007, pp. 2523–2526.
[21] Y. Zhang et al., “Direct surface extraction from 3D freehand ultrasound
images,” in Proc. IEEE Vis., 2002, pp. 45–52.
[22] L. Lopez-Perez et al., “Bone surface reconstruction using localized freehand ultrasound imaging,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc., 2008, pp. 2964–2967.
[23] Z. Fanti et al., “Preliminary results in large bone segmentation from 3D
freehand ultrasound,” Proc. Spie, vol. 8922, pp. 89220F-1–89220F-8,
2013.

457

[24] I. Hacihaliloglu et al., “Enhancement of bone surface visualization from
3D ultrasound based on local phase information,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason.
Symp., 2006, pp. 21–24.
[25] I. Hacihaliloglu et al., “Bone surface localization in ultrasound using image phase-based features,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 9,
pp. 1475–1487, 2009.
[26] I. Hacihaliloglu et al., “Automatic bone localization and fracture detection from volumetric ultrasound images using 3-D local phase features,”
Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 128–144, 2012.
[27] A. S. Chand et al., “Quantifying synovitis in rheumatoid arthritis using
computer-assisted manual segmentation with 3 tesla MRI scanning,” J.
Magn. Reson. Imag., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1106–1113, 2011.
[28] K. A. Patwardhan et al., “Automated bone and joint-region segmentation
in volumetric ultrasound,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2012,
pp. 1327–1330.
[29] A. K. Jain and R. H. Taylor, “Understanding bone responses in B-mode
ultrasound images and automatic bone surface extraction using a Bayesian
probabilistic framework,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 5373, pp. 131–142, 2004.
[30] D. V. Amin et al., “Ultrasound registration of the bone surface for surgical
navigation,” Comput. Aided Surg., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2003.
[31] X. Han et al., “A topology preserving level set method for geometric
deformable models,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 25,
no. 6, pp. 755–768, Jun. 2003.
[32] C. Xu and J. L. Prince, “Snakes, shapes, and gradient vector flow,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 359–369, Mar. 1998.
[33] Z. Wang et al., “Registration of ultrasound images using an informationtheoretic feature detector,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag., 2007,
pp. 736–739.
[34] P. A. Yushkevich et al., “User-guided 3D active contour segmentation of
anatomical structures: Significantly improved efficiency and reliability,”
Neuroimage, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1116–1128, 2006.
[35] L. Ibanez et al., The ITK Software Guide, 1st ed., Kitware, Inc., Clifton
Park, NY, USA, 2003.
[36] Y. Y. Boykov and M. P. Jolly, “Interactive graph cuts for optimal boundary
& region segmentation of objects in N-D images,” IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., vol. 1, 2001, pp. 105–112.
[37] Q. Song et al., “Optimal multiple surface segmentation with shape and
context priors,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 376–386, Feb.
2013.
Kunlin Cao received the B.S. degree in electronics
and information engineering from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2005, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical and computer engineering from
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA, in 2008
and 2012, respectively.
Since 2012, she has been working as a Research
Scientist at the Biomedical Image Analysis Laboratory, the GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY,
USA. She has coauthored more than 30 international
scientific publications, and has two U.S. patents. Her
research interests include multidimensional image analysis, image registration
and fusion, image segmentation, object detection and tracking, computer vision,
and functional information quantification.
David M. Mills (M’02) was born in Banner Elk, NC,
USA, in 1972. He received the B.S. degree in engineering (summa cum laude) from LeTourneau University, Longview, TX, USA, in 1994 and the Ph.D.
degree in biomedical engineering from Duke University, Durham, NC, USA, in 2000.
In 2000, he joined the Ultrasound Lab of the General Electric–Global Research Center in Niskayuna,
NY, USA, as an Engineer to continue research and
development of medical ultrasound transducers. His
research interests include the design of medical ultrasound transducers using PZFlex for simulations of both piezoelectric and
cMUT-based transducers. Another research interest include new clinical applications for ultrasound that are enabled by real-time 3D ultrasound imaging,
visualization algorithms, and customized user-interfaces to meet specific user
needs. He has also led a multiyear advanced technology program on ultrasound
drug delivery using microbubbles. He has authored several publications and
numerous conference presentations in these areas and holds more than 20 U.S.
patents related to medical ultrasound.

458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Ralf G. Thiele completed medical school in Frankfurt, Germany, in 1991 and fellowship training in
rheumatology at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH,
USA, in 2003.
He has trained first in abdominal and thyroid ultrasound starting in 1990 and later specialized in musculoskeletal ultrasound. He was certified in musculoskeletal ultrasound in 1995 in Germany (DEGUM),
and in rheumatologic ultrasound in 2013 with the
American College of Rheumatology (RhMSUS). He
joined the faculty of the University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY, USA, Allergy/Immunology and Rheumatology Division in 2006
and currently working as an Associate Professor of Medicine. His research interests include sonographic diagnosis and outcomes assessment of crystal arthritis,
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and spondyloarthropathy.
Dr. Thiele has served as Chair of the musculoskeletal section of the American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, Chair of the ultrasound task force of the
American College of Rheumatology and has developed and chaired educational
ultrasound courses at the University of Rochester, Cooper University Hospital,
the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine and the American College
of Rheumatology. He has developed imaging algorithms, practice guidelines
and certification in musculoskeletal ultrasound with the American Institute of
Ultrasound in Medicine, the Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound, OMERACT,
and the American College of Rheumatology.

Kedar A. Patwardhan received the B.E. degree in
instrumentation and control engineering from the
University of Pune, Pune, India, in 2001 and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 2004 and 2007,
respectively.
From 2007 through 2015, he was a Scientist at
the GE Global Research Center and he is currently a
Senior Chief Engineer at Samsung Research India–
Bangalore, Bengaluru, India, where he leads the research and development of next generation clinical
Ultrasound applications. He has more than ten years of experience in medical
image analysis and computer vision and regularly serves as a referee for reputed
IEEE journals and conferences in these areas. He has coauthored more than 20
peer-reviewed scientific publications as well as ten patents.

