478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Novel Optical Position Sensing for Miniaturized
Applications and Validation in a Total Artificial Heart
Benedikt A. Pelletier∗ , Yvonne M. Blaszczyk, Patrick Carstens, Gonzalo Alvarez, Felix Lamping, Marco Laumen,
Thomas Finocchiaro, and Ulrich Steinseifer

Abstract—Goal: This paper describes the development and testing of various position sensing systems (PSSs) for miniaturized
long-term applications with a focus on their validation in a total
artificial heart (TAH). After a short description of the TAH’s functioning principle, the special requirements for the PSS resulting
from the application in a TAH are investigated. Methods: Three
PSS’s were designed according to these requirements. A specially
designed test method was used to first validate each PSS for general use in a miniaturized application. This test method validated
the speed, resolution, and accuracy requirements for the PSS. In
a second step, the PSS’s were integrated in a TAH to measure its
stroke position for the drive control. In this application, further
requirements apart from miniaturization were considered. Each
PSS’s functionality in the TAH was validated in a mock circulation loop, which simulates the human circulatory system. Results:
Two of the three designed PSS’s showed satisfactory results for all
tested requirements inside the pump, whereas the third PSS did
not operate properly at full-pump capacity. The best performing
PSS was chosen for further use in the TAH. It performed up to a
beat rate of 220 b/m. Conclusion: The extensive validation resulted
in an accurate, miniature PSS for a TAH. Significance: Besides the
use in a TAH, the presented PSS’s can be employed in a wide use of
miniaturized applications. The introduced testing method allows
the validation for general miniaturized applications, e.g., linear
motor drives.
Index Terms—Artificial biological organs, blood pumps, implantable biomedical devices, position sensing.

plantable drive units, which can be realized by using hydraulic or
electromagnetic drives. To any of these drives, sensory feedback
is an essential part of drive control.
Commonly used sensor systems for the application in a TAH,
based on eddy current sensors [4] or Hall sensors [5]. In pulsatile
TAHs with hydraulic drives, pressure sensors give feedback for
the drive control [6], [7].
A different, linear, electromagnetic direct-drive concept is realized in the ReinHeart TAH, which is being developed at the
Institute for Applied Medical Engineering, Aachen, Germany
[8]. The ReinHeart is a fully implantable artificial heart system
designed with minimal wear components to ensure high durability. Thus, it is intended as a destination therapy for patients
with end-stage heart failure.
This paper investigates why optical sensors are the best choice
for a position feedback in a linear TAH drive. It further presents
the design of three miniaturized position sensing systems (PSSs)
and their integration in the ReinHeart TAH, a method for general
miniaturized PSS performance testing, and the validation in the
TAH. With slight adaptations, the PSSs are transferable to applications that show requirements similar to the ones presented
in this paper.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

I. INTRODUCTION
EART disease is the leading cause of death worldwide
[1]. Due to the shortage of donor hearts, there has been
an ongoing development of mechanical systems for circulatory
support (Ventricular Assist Devices, VADs) and heart replacement (Total Artificial Hearts, TAHs) for over 50 years.
So far, only one temporary TAH, the Syncardia TAH (SynCardia Systems Inc., Tucson, AZ, USA), received FDA and
CE approval [2]. However, its extracorporal worn pneumatic
drive impairs mobility, and thus, quality of the patient’s life
[3]. Therefore, latest research on TAHs focuses on fully im-

H

Manuscript received April 20, 2015; revised July 6, 2015; accepted July 29,
2015. Date of publication August 3, 2015; date of current version February 16,
2016. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
∗ B. A. Pelletier is with the Department of Cardiovascular Engineering,
Institute of Applied Medical Engineering, Aachen 54074, Germany (e-mail:
pelletier@ame.rwth-aachen.de).
Y. M. Blaszczyk, P. Carstens, G. Alvarez, F. Lamping, M. Laumen, T. Finocchiaro, and U. Steinseifer are with the Institute of Applied Medical Engineering.
This paper contains supplementary material available online at http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org (File size: 981 kB).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBME.2015.2463729

This section introduces important aspects for a better understanding of the ReinHeart TAH drive, and its requirements for
a miniaturized PSS. It presents the design of three PSS’s, as
well as a method for general PSS performance testing for the in
vitro validation of the individual PSS. Finally, a test method for
the validation of the PSS integrated in the ReinHeart TAH in a
mock circulation loop (MCL) is described.
A. Device Characteristics and Requirements
The central element of the ReinHeart TAH is the pump unit
[see Fig. 1 (A)], which completely replaces the failing human
heart. It includes a low-wear linear drive, which mimics the
native heart function. It is designed to function maintenancefree for at least five years. The four pole one-phase voice-coilmotor has been specially designed for the force, space, power,
and weight requirements of this application [6]. A coil bobbin
moves inside the magnetic field caused by permanent magnet
rings (see Fig. 3). Pusher plates connected to both ends of the
actor displace the membranes of the ventricles to alternately
eject the blood into the vessels.
The ReinHeart operates without implanted flow or pressure
sensors, rather with the linear actuator position as its control

0018-9294 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PELLETIER et al.: NOVEL OPTICAL POSITION SENSING FOR MINIATURIZED APPLICATIONS AND VALIDATION IN A TOTAL ARTIFICIAL

479

Fig. 3. Detailed view of the ReinHeart pump unit. The stroke is 0 –18.5 mm.
Marked area shows the maximum mounting space of 10 mm.

Fig. 1. ReinHeart TAH system (A) pump unit, (B) internal controller and
batteries, (C) TET system, (D) compliance chamber, (E) external controller
with user Interface, (F) battery pack [9].

Fig. 2. Schematics of the cascaded control loops. Each part of the control
loop is related to one part of the TAH system (User Interface, Controller, Pump
Unit).

parameter. Fig. 2 shows a schematic of the cascaded control
loops. The physiological control unit of the user interface sets
the waveform of the position signal. A separate implantable
control unit with its microcontroller and power electronics controls the TAH drive by delivering individual currents to the four
coils depending on the position of the actor. The implemented
closed-loop position controller generates reference currents for

the current controller. These reference currents are calculated
for each of the four coils at the actual position. The reference
position of the actuator is calculated from the designated beat
rate of the physiological control unit, whereas the position feedback has to come from a PSS integrated in the pump unit of the
TAH system.
Fig. 3 shows the ReinHeart pump unit with the coil bobbin
actuator embedded inside the static permanent magnet rings.
Pusher plates connected to the bobbin move the membranes of
the ventricular chambers. In doing so, an actuator movement to
the minimal position of 0 mm causes an ejection of blood into the
pulmonary vascular system (right systole), and allows a passive
filling of the left ventricle (left diastole). An actuator movement
to the maximum position of 18.5 mm causes an ejection of blood
into the systemic vascular system (left systole), and allows a
passive filling of the right ventricle (right diastole).
Due to the specific application as a TAH, the PSS design has
to meet the following requirements:
1) A fast, precise, and reliable position feedback is essential
for an efficient control of the pump unit. The control loops
implemented on the control unit require a position feedback with a frequency of at least 500 Hz. With a resolution
of at least 0.1 mm for the 18.5 mm stroke, the PSS has to
sense the position with a linear velocity of 96 mm/s [10].
This results in a corresponding beat rate of 155 b/mb/m
( = 2.6 Hz) with a resulting cardiac output of more than
7.5 l/min [8]. The highest recorded beat rate of a TAH is
250 b/m [11].
2) The mounting space is limited to an area as marked in
Fig. 3 underneath the left pusher plate. It can accommodate a semicircular printed circuit board (PCB) with a
maximum component height of less than 10 mm.
3) The PSS has to function regardless of any environmental
influences of the pump unit. The magnetic field between
the permanent magnets is up to 1.2 T, and the core temperature can reach up to 50 °C.
4) The PSS has to compensate for manufacturing tolerances
of the pump unit of at least ± 0.1 mm (at the location of
position sensing).

480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

5) A high durability and a long-term stability of five years
requires a wear-less position sensing.
B. Position Sensor Analysis
Linear position transducers are taking advantage of a variety
of different physical principles. They can further be categorized
into either absolute or incremental position sensors. Absolute
position sensors convert a physical quantity into an electrical
signal, directly proportional to the linear displacement of the
targeted object. Incremental position sensors or encoders periodically output a sinusoid or rectangular signal equivalent to an
exact displacement on a linear target. These waveforms have to
be accumulated by a decoder into a metrical position. An additional index mark on their linear targets allows absolute encoding with incremental sensors. Examples of physical principles
frequently designed into absolute position transducers and encoders are capacitive, inductive, magnetic, and optical sensors
[12]. Consequently, they vary strongly in their characteristics
and fields of application.
For the ReinHeart TAH, the high demand in durability can only be met with a contact-free sensing principle,
which rules out resistive sensing devices with a sliding wiper
assembly.
Although absolute position sensing is preferred to prevent
a position drift, only few sensors provide both: being small
enough to be integrated in the ReinHeart Pump Unit and being
sensitive to its entire stroke range, while not being affected by
the magnetic field of the drive. Unfortunately, traditional sensor
systems fail to meet these requirements. Absolute capacitive
sensors are limited to a measuring range of less than 10 mm [12].
As a rule of thumb, sensing coils of eddy current sensors need to
have twice the diameter of their measuring range, which would
be too bulky for the TAH [13]. Hall sensors would be sensitive to
the external magnetic field of the drive. The optical principle is
expected to avoid the influence of the strong magnetic field of the
drive. Optical sensors also have the advantage of miniature size
due to surface mount packaging and a digital communication
interface. When using incremental sensors, the measuring range
can be adapted with the length of the featured linear codestrip.
Since the signal strength of inductive or capacitive encoders
is very sensitive to lateral displacement with respect to their
codestrips, optical sensors provide higher tolerances regarding
the distance to their targets. Based upon these considerations,
different optical principles, as shown in Fig. 4, were investigated
for the design of a PSS: 1) optical navigation sensing, 2) optical
encoder, and 3) optical proximity sensing.
1) Optical Navigation Sensing: A miniature camera, supported by lens and light source, constantly sends surface pictures to an image acquisition system [see Fig. 4(a)]. The pixel
distance between two frames provides information on the shift
between the surface and navigation sensor.
2) Optical Encoder: Two light detection units A and B acquire the light through a periodic pattern of an encoder strip [see
Fig. 4(b)]. The linear shift between encoder unit and encoder
strip generates rectangular signals A and B with a fixed phase
shift according to the direction of movement. A quadrature encoder will decode these signals to a position signal. The optical

Fig. 4. Schematics of optical position sensing principles: (a) navigation sensing, (b) encoder, and (c) proximity sensing.

encoder requires an additional reference mark on the codestrip
to provide an absolute position signal.
3) Optical Proximity Sensing: A proximity sensor based
upon a light emitter and a light sensor delivers the information, whether an object occurs in the range of the sensor or not
[see Fig. 4(c)]. The distance R of the object can be derived from
the intensity of the light sensor signal ADC. Starting at a minimum distance R0 , the sensor signal ADC will decrease with
increasing distance R.
C. Position Sensing System Design
For each of the optical sensing principles, one PSS is designed
for the integration in the TAH and communication with the
control unit.
PSS 1 comprises a navigation sensor perpendicular to the
PCB of the pump unit. The lens of the sensor is directed at
a thin surface strip, which is fixed at the moving bobbin. The
sensor (ADNS2610 by Avago Technologies, USA) consists of
a miniature 18 × 18 pixel camera, an image processing unit,
and an SPI communication interface, which can be directly addressed by the control unit of the TAH. The navigation sensor
computes the displacement of characteristic features from two
sequentially acquired frames, and generates Δx and Δy values at
a maximum rate of 1500 frames/s, whereas only one dimension
is needed with this linear motor. As only relative displacements

PELLETIER et al.: NOVEL OPTICAL POSITION SENSING FOR MINIATURIZED APPLICATIONS AND VALIDATION IN A TOTAL ARTIFICIAL

to the last data sample are transmitted, an additional light barrier is integrated in order to get an absolute reference for each
pumping cycle. It is also positioned on the PCB, and is activated
when the coil bobbin is in its leftmost position. When integrated
into the pump unit, each PSS is individually calibrated before
initial operation.
PSS 2 is an encoder-based optical sensor system. The sensor is less complex than the navigation sensor in PSS 1, but
requires additional evaluation electronics. The reflective optical encoder (AEDR8501 by Avago Technologies, USA) needs a
special coded strip, consisting of alternately reflecting and lightabsorbing lines at a fixed density of 120 lines/cm. With double
interpolation, the sensor has a resolution of 20.6 μm. The coded
strip has a special marking at mid-stroke, which is interpreted
as an absolute reference replacing the light barrier from PSS 1.
A microcontroller with a quadrature encoder module translates
the signal of the perpendicular mounted sensor. By moving the
coil bobbin with the encoder strip from the minimum to the
maximum stroke position, the PSS is calibrated.
PSS 3 is based on an infrared proximity sensor (VCNL4020
by Vishay Intertechnology, USA) which measures the amount
of reflected light. Being mounted on an additional PCB inside
the pump unit, its IR-LED light is reflected off the back-side of
the left pusher plate. The reflected light intensity depends on the
pusher plate’s distance and, thus, the motor position. It outputs
a 16-bit value which is inversely but nonlinearly proportional to
the current distance of the pusher plate. Like PSS 2, a microcontroller with an I2C interface translates the sensor signal. An
individual calibration curve for every pump unit assigns the raw
sensor signal to an absolute position signal, which delivers the
distance from the sensor to the pusher plate.
D. Isolated PSS Validation in a Testing Machine
For the first general performance analysis, each PSS was
tested individually with a performance testing method using a
servohydraulic tensile testing machine (Amsler HC5 by Zwick
GmbH, Germany). The intended use of this tensile testing machine (TTM) was not its capability of tensile measurements,
but its precise position generation and measurement. The actuator of the TTM generated the movements, which mimicked the
movement of the coil bobbin inside the TAH. The generation
and acquisition of this position signal served as a reference for
the validation of the position sensing systems. For a stroke of
18.5 mm, the TTM provided sinusoid waveforms at a frequency
up to 6 Hz with a resolution of 1 μm. A TAH dummy consisting
of a drive unit without pump chambers included the currently
tested PSS. The actuator of the TTM held a surface strip and
encoder strip for PSS 1 and PSS 2 and a pusher plate for PSS 3
(see Fig. 5).
Thus, the strips’ and pusher plate’s movement followed the
generated position signal waveform. The PSS measured the actuator movement, and sent the measured signal to a data acquisition system. Hence, the following requirements can be validated
in this initial test setup.
1) Maximum speed (pumping frequency).
2) Position accuracy.

481

Fig. 5. Scheme of the TTM experiment for (a) PSS 1, (b) PSS 2, (c) PSS
3: TTM actuator moves the surface strip, encoder strip or pusher plate. TAH
dummy accommodates the PSS.

3) Drift of incremental sensor/accuracy of absolute reference.
4) Minimum resolution.
5) Manufacturing tolerances.
6) Function under the influence of the static magnetic field.
To emulate manufacturing tolerances, the encoder strips of
PSS 1 and PSS 2 were set to different distances from the position
sensor itself. In that setup the coil bobbin is missing. To test the
function under the influence of a static magnetic field, the TAH
dummy accommodates permanent magnets, creating a magnetic
field around the PSS (see Fig. 5).
The data acquisition of the position sensing system consisted
of the TTM, PSS, TAH-controller, and a real-time interface
(RTI) by DSpace (DS1103 by DSpace GmbH, Germany). The
latter acquired data up to 1 kHz, assuring that the maximum
sampling frequency of the PSS could be recorded. The control
unit transmitted the measured signal of the PSS via a RS232
interface and the TTM its reference position signal to an analog
BNC input of the RTI. The comparison of the reference with the
measured PSS signal showed the error rate of the PSS.
The TTM initiated the measurement at a given frequency.
The RTI was recording simultaneously. For each frequency,
three measurements with a duration of 30 s were performed.
The frequency range was 0.5–6 Hz in 0.5 Hz steps.
The distance between sensor and scale was set to the values
according to the data sheets of the sensors used in PSS 1 and
PSS 2. To judge robustness toward manufacturing tolerances of
the TAH prototypes, this distance was varied ± 0.6 mm with
0.3 mm steps from the ideal distance according to the datasheet.
These measurements were performed 3 times at 1 Hz, 2 Hz, and
3 Hz for each distance.
E. Integrated PSS Validation in a MCL
For the second performance analysis, the validation of the
PSS functioning in the ReinHeart TAH was done with a MCL.
The system was already described in [14], [15].
For this test, a complete ReinHeart TAH was used, including
the pump chambers and a TAH-controller. The TAH drive unit
itself generated the movement of the bobbin. This required a
functioning control unit reading the PSS output signal. This
control unit generated a sine wave position signal and read the
data of the PSS. The DSpace RTI acquired each position signal.

482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

Fig. 6. Exemplary reference and sensor position signal with corresponding
error curve in the TTM experiment for PSS 2 at 2 Hz.

The PSS signal was then compared with the set position of
the TAH-controller as a reference to calculate the error rate.
Additionally, a temperature sensor measured the area around
the position sensing system. Hence, the following requirements
can be validated in vitro:
1) maximum speed (pumping frequency)
2) mounting space
3) influence of the magnetic drive and temperature
The resolution and speed requirements were equal to the ones
for the TTM experiments. The maximum operating temperature
for the sensor of each PSS can be found in the corresponding
datasheet. It is 55 °C for the sensor of PSS 1 and 85 °C for the
sensors of PSS 2 and PSS 3.
The MCL was set to physiological pressures (mean aortic pressure: 100 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure: 20
mmHg, mean left atrial pressure: 10 mmHg, mean central venous pressure: 5 mmHg). These pressure settings varied depending on the set beat rate, but were identical for each PSS
at a constant beat rate. The DSpace RTI interface set the TAH
beat rate and acquired the set and actual position signal. For
each beat rate, 3 measurements with a duration of 30 s were
performed. The range was 60 b/m to 160 b/m in 20 b/m increments. Depending on the PSS performance the maximum b/m
value was set to higher values.
For both, the TTM and MCL experiments, average error and
standard deviation between different repetitions were calculated
from all 3 measurements for each frequency. The position curves
of the PSS were normalized to an amplitude of 1, using Matlab
nearest neighborhood method, to facilitate comparison. For the
mean error calculation for each frequency, the first and last 5 s
of each measurement were cut to prevent influence from starting
and stopping procedures of the TTM. The mean error was then
calculated from the absolute value of the error curves.
III. RESULTS
After a brief introduction of the error curves, the performance
of each PSS in the TTM experiment and the MCL experiment
are presented. Fig. 6 shows an exemplary 10 seconds excerpt

Fig. 7. Mean error for PSS 1 to PSS 3 at frequencies up to 6 Hz in the TTM
experiment.

of the set and PSS 2 position signal at 2 Hz frequency together
with the resulting error. The mean absolute error for that excerpt
results in 0.85%. Error peaks of up to 3% appear at the point
of return. For each PSS, the error was highest at that point. The
trend of the error curves was similar for the different PSS’s,
having the highest error at the point of return. Therefore the
The following figures refer to the mean absolute errors. For
the TTM experiment, the results for the speed requirements are
presented, followed by the resolution requirements and manufacturing tolerances. Fig. 7 shows the mean error versus frequency for all PSS of the TTM experiments. The error stays
below 3% for PSS 2 and PSS 3 up to a frequency of 6 Hz. The
error of PSS 1a stays below 3% for a frequency up to 3 Hz when
using an additional light barrier as a reference position. Without
the light barrier, the position signal of PSS 1b will drift and thus
lead to an increasing error over time. The standard deviation of
the measurements for PSS 2 and PSS 3 is low over the whole
frequency range, whereas the one of the PSS 1 measurements is
much higher for frequencies above 3 Hz.
The resolution requirement is at least 0.1 mm for the 18.5 mm
measuring range. The resolution of PSS 1 is decreasing with
increasing frequency. At the lowest frequency 0.5 Hz the resolution is 48.8 μm, at 2 Hz 50.4 μm, and at 3 Hz it is 51.7 μm.
The resolution of PSS 2 is constant at 20.9 μm for an increasing
frequency from 0.5 Hz to 6 Hz. PSS 3 shows a decreasing resolution for an increasing sensor-to-pusher-plate distance. The
resolution is 0.2 μm at 1 mm distance, 1.5 μm at 10 mm and
4.6 μm at a distance of 18 mm. However, PSS 3 can only provide
a signal with a frequency of 250 Hz. Therefore, the resolution
is reduced to 148 μm at 1 Hz, 444 μm at 3 Hz and 888 μm
at 6 Hz.
To emulate manufacturing tolerances, Fig. 8 shows the error of PSS 1 and PSS 2 for different sensor-to-scale distances.
This investigation is not possible for PSS 3 due to its sensing
principle. A negative deviation means a smaller sensor-to-scale
distance and vice versa. At a frequency of 1 Hz, the error of
PSS 1 stays below 5% for a distance deviation below 0.3 mm

PELLETIER et al.: NOVEL OPTICAL POSITION SENSING FOR MINIATURIZED APPLICATIONS AND VALIDATION IN A TOTAL ARTIFICIAL

483

IV. DISCUSSION

Fig. 8. Mean error of PSS 1 and PSS 2 for frequencies at 1 Hz, 2 and 3 Hz
versus various sensor-to-strip-distances.

Fig. 9. Mean error for PSS 1 to PSS 3 at frequencies up to 220 b/m in the
MCL experiment.

from the ideal distance. For higher frequencies, the error rises
above 17%. Distance deviations of more than 0.3 mm result in
errors above 21%. The error of PSS 2 stays constantly below
2% for the complete deviation range and up to 3 Hz. At the point
of lowest deviation (−0.45 mm), the sensor-to-scale distance is
nearly 0 mm and cannot be further decreased. Due to the low
error of PSS 2, the deviation was further increased to 1 mm.
For the MCL experiment, the PSS 1 mean error was plotted
for a beat rate from 60 b/m to 165 b/m in Fig. 9. 165 b/m is the
maximum beat rate possible for PSS 1. The error stays below
5% for a beat rate up to 135 b/m. It rapidly increases to an error
above 8% for beat rates from 135 b/m to 165 b/m. PSS 2 allows
beat rates up to 220 b/m. The error stays below 5% for up to 160
b/m and increases rapidly up to nearly 10% at 220 b/m. PSS 3
did not function for the full stroke of 18.5 mm Therefore, it was
set to 17 mm. The error stays below 5% for beat rates below 80
b/m. It constantly increases to 10% at 200 b/m.

The TTM measurements deliver performance results for a
general application as a miniaturized PSS, while the MCL measurements assess the specific application in a TAH.
Regarding the speed requirement of the TTM measurements,
PSS 2 performed best and PSS 3 performed second best, both
up to a frequency of 6 Hz (see Fig. 7). To judge the individual
PSS performance, the conversion of the PSS 3 raw signal to an
absolute position signal was done by post processing the data.
In the final application, the results might be further impaired by
the online calibration. PSS 1a performed worst for frequencies
above 3 Hz, though the error stayed below 2% for 3 Hz ( =
180 b/m). Obviously PSS 1 has reached its maximum possible
speed at 3 Hz and 18.5 mm stroke due to the limitations of
the ADNS2610 sensor. Without the light barrier as a reference,
the error due to the drift of PSS 1b is too high for the use in
the TAH. The error plot in Fig. 7 shows the results for 30 s
measurements, illustrating that the drift, and thus the error, will
increase constantly over time. Though PSS 1 does not provide
reliable position feedback for higher frequencies, all PSS are
suitable for the use in the TAH up to 150 b/m (2.5 Hz).
The frequency dependent resolution of PSS 1 is a disadvantage compared to PSS 2. After calibration, the control unit
expects a fixed number of position counts for the corresponding length in mm. As the calibration of the PSS is done for a
specific beat rate, PSS 1 will show higher errors for a variation
in beat rate. Once calibrated, PSS 2 is very robust toward frequency changes. The conversion of the PSS 3 sensor value to
the detected length in millimeter is not linear. Therefore, PSS 3
requires an individual calibration curve. The resolution of PSS
3 is dependent on the sensor-to-surface distance; which is a limitation in the detectable length of the PSS. For the requirements
of the TAH application, even the lowest resolution at the end of
the stroke is still high enough. However, when using PSS 3 for
applications with a higher detectable length, the requirements
have to be rejudged.
The required robustness regarding manufacturing tolerances
can be judged for the deviation of the sensor-to-strip-distance
for PSS 1 and PSS 2. For PSS 1, the error strongly depends
on both deviation and frequency. At 1 Hz and a deviation of
± 0.3 mm, the error stays below 2%. For higher frequencies
and distance deviations, the error becomes too high for the use
in a TAH. Thus, PSS 1 will perform well only for deviations of
less than 0.3 mm. The error of PSS 2 stayed constantly below
1.5% for the complete deviation range of -0.45–1 mm from the
ideal distance of 0.5 mm. Within that range, only a change in
frequency seems to influence the error.
For both the TTM and the MCL measurements, all PSS’s
functioned despite the presence of the magnetic field and the
heat emission of the drive. Optical sensing systems, in particular the PSS’s presented in this paper, are suitable for the use in
a linear magnetic drive. The TTM method for the validation of
the PSS is easily transferable to different requirements in measuring range and speed. Only the waveform of the set curve
needs to be adapted. Therefore, the PSS’s are also suitable
for basically any miniature position sensing application with

484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 63, NO. 3, MARCH 2016

similar requirements, e.g., a linear drive with higher stroke and
frequencies.
The TTM measurements validate only the PSS, individually.
With the mean error being 1.1% for PSS1 (PSS 2: 1%, PSS 3:
1.2%) at 150 b/m (2.5 Hz) beat rate, the PSS’s seem suitable
for the TAH at that beat rate. The MCL measurements validate
each PSS for the complete TAH system. As the PSS’s are a part
of the whole control system (see Fig. 2), in addition to the PSS’s
error the whole control system and its time constants influence
the result. In fact, at 150 b/m (2.5 Hz) beat rate, the mean error
of PSS 1 is 6.15% (PSS 2: 4.3%, PSS 3: 6.67%) for the MCL
measurements. Considering this limitation of this study, for each
PSS the same control system was used for the MCL experiments.
But, of course, the control system and servohydraulic actor of
the TTM is superior to the control system and actor of the TAH
system. Further optimization of the TAH control system may
lead to a mean error reduction.
For a sine wave set position, both systole and diastole times
are half-a-period. The physiological controller might generate
waveforms with different systole to diastole times, depending
on the right atrial pressure [16]. In that case, the slope and, thus,
the maximum speed of the set position signal is higher, so the
PSS has to detect movements above 200 b/m.
Finally, PSS 2 is the best choice for the use in a TAH. It
performed best for the speed, resolution, and manufacturing
tolerances requirements. Considering this, PSS 2 is ideal for
the use from prototype status to the final product. The fact
that PSS 2 allows higher manufacturing tolerances, may help
reduce costs of the manufacturing process, as long as it does not
impair the drive efficiency. As the reference position is detected
by a specific mark on the encoder scale, it comes without an
additional light barrier, resulting in a more compact design. To
read absolute positions, the sensor must have passed the mark
on the encoder strip. Until that moment, PSS 3 could serve
as an additional PSS, adding a back-up system for increased
functional safety in case of failure.

of 220 b/m. At 150 b/m ( = 2.5 Hz), the mean position error
was only 1% for the isolated position sensing system test and
below 4.5% for the mock loop experiment. A further reduction
of the mean error requires an improvement of the control unit
and its control algorithm.
REFERENCES

V. CONCLUSION

[1] W. H. O. (2014). The 10 leading causes of death in the world, 2000
and 2012. World Health Org. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/
[2] M. J. Slepian et al., “The Syncardia total artificial heart: In vivo, in vitro,
and computational modeling studies,” J. Biomech., vol. 46, no. 2, pp.
266–275, Jan. 2013.
[3] P. Demondion et al., “The challenge of home discharge with a total artificial heart: The la pitié salpêtrière experience,” Eur. J. Cardio-Thoracic
Surg., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 843–848, 2013.
[4] N. A. Greatrex et al., “Axial magnetic bearing development for the
BiVACOR rotary BiVAD/TAH,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 57,
no. 3, pp. 714–721, 2010.
[5] S. Weber et al., “MagScrew TAH: An update,” Amer. Soc. Artif. Intern.
Organs J., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. xxxvi–xlvi, 2005.
[6] R. D. Dowling et al., “The AbioCor implantable replacement heart,” Ann.
Thoracic Surg., vol. 75, no. 6, pp. S93–S99, Jun. 2003.
[7] P. Mohacsi and P. Leprince, “The CARMAT total artificial heart,” Eur. J.
Cardiothoracic Surg., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 933–934, Dec. 2014.
[8] B. Pelletier et al., “System overview of the fully implantable destination
therapy-ReinHeart-total artificial heart,” Eur. J. Cardiothoracic Surg., vol.
47, pp. 80–86, Sep. 2014.
[9] R. Koerfer et al., “Paving the way for destination therapy of end-stage
biventricular heart failure: The ReinHeart total artificial heart concept,”
Eur. J. Cardio-Thoracic Surg., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 935–936, 2014.
[10] T. Finocchiaro, Investigation of a Linear Drive Concept for a Fully Implantable Total Artificial Heart. Aachen, Germany: Shaker, 2013.
[11] S. Schenk et al., “MagScrew total artificial heart in vivo performance
above 200 beats per minute,” Ann. Thoracic Surg., vol. 79, no. 4,
pp. 1378–1383, Apr. 2005.
[12] D. S. Nyce, Linear Position Sensors: Theory and Application. New York,
NY, USA: Wiley, 2004.
[13] S. D. Roach, “Designing and building an eddy current position sensor,”
Sens. Mag., Sep. 1998.
[14] E. Cuenca-Navalon et al., “Design and evaluation of a hybrid mock
circulatory loop for total artificial heart testing,” Int. J. Artif. Organs,
vol. 1, no. 37, pp. 71–80, 2014.
[15] M. Laumen et al., “A novel total artificial heart for destination therapy:
In-vitro and in-vivo study,” Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, Sep. 2013.
[16] A. J. Snyder et al., “Noninvasive control of cardiac output for alternately ejecting dual-pusherplate pumps,” Artif. Organs, vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 189–194, Apr. 1992.

Three PSS were developed which meet the requirements for
the use in a TAH. They were first evaluated with a general testing
method, and then integrated in the TAH. In an MCL, the TAH
with second position sensing system performed up to a beat rate

Authors’ photographs and biographies not available at the time of publication.

